THE FAITHFVLL SHEPHERD: OR THE SHEPHERDS Faithfulness: Wherein is for the
matter largely, but for the manner, in few words, set forth the excellency and
necessity of the Ministry; A Ministers properties and duty; His entrance
into this function and charge; How to begin fitly to instruct his people;
Catechizing and Preaching; And a good plain order and method therein: Not so
as yet published.

Very profitable both for young Students, who intend the study of Theology
(herein being also declared what Arts and tongues first to be learned, what
kind of Authors to be r^^^ and books necessary in the beginning, and which
in the first place) as also for such Ministers as yet have not atteined to a
distinct order to study, write, meditate, and to preach methodically, both for
their better course in delivering the Word, and the peoples understanding in
hearing, and memory in reteining the same.

By RICHARD BERNARD, Preacher of Gods Word.

2. Tim. 2. 15. Study to show thy self approved of God, a workman that
needs not to be ashamed; ^^^uiding the word of Truth aright LONDON. Printed
by Arnold Hatfield for (...). 1687.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful his Honorable good friend M. Doctor MOVNTAGVE, Deane
of his Majesty's Chapel, R. B. wishes heartily all true happiness and
felicity for ever.
IT is the saying of him (Right Worshipful) whom God did move you once to
honor, with this selected text, Moses my servant is dead, to your great
praise, Grauis est and arduus, si quis alius ex omni Theologia, locus is, qui
est deformandis concionibus: by which (being uttered of a man of that learning
and experience) I might be somewhat afraid to attempt the publishing of this
Treatise, upon such a subject, but that I know it is acceptable to God (if we
have no greater gift to offer) to cast a mite into the Lords treasury; and I
have had also the approbation of some for my encouragement, both in the
University and country. A mite in a great treasury is small in show for
encreasement thereunto, nevertheless it is some what, though but a mite. What
I have performed in this labor for matter and method, it may by reading of it
appear: my labor has not been little, my intendement good. Whatsoever it is
(Right worshipful) I presume to offer it you, as a poor present, to testify
my humble and hearty thankfulness, for your manifold kindnesses and liberal
favors unto me. I long ago offered it to your view, in a naked shape, and first
conception, which ever since I have been better proportioning, and now have
thus clothed it as it is. If before this, I had prepared it, I had not so long
deferred off, or if my poverty could have affoorded a better testimony, as in
will I can wish, it should most gladly have gone forth, as worthily deserved,
under the honor of your name. Accept (Right Worshipful) this labor, and so
look upon it, as you have been and are wont, lovingly to accept of me: so
shall you encourage me to further endeavors, and bind me still more in all
dutiful respect, to acknowledge your professed and approved love and good will
constant toward me; and to power out my prayers to God continually for your
preservation and increase in all spiritual graces for ever. VVorsop this 16.
of June.

Your worships bounden in Christ Jesus ever, RICHARD BERNARD.

To his brethren of the Ministry, and the beloved Readers, Grace and peace.
THe Preaching of Gods word, (brethren in the Lord and beloved) an unfolding
thereof to the peoples capacity, with words of exhortation applied to the
conscience, both to inform, and reform, and where they be well, to confirm, as
it is most necessary, so is it indeed a very hard work to be performed,
though to the unskillful it seem easy: and thereupon, not a few unadvisedly
take it in hand, speaking without judgment rashly, without order
preposterously, tatching matter together without dependancie, little to the
peoples edification, and less to the honor of this holy ordinance, which by
these is made odious with many, and held rather a talk of the tongue from a
disordered affection, without knowledge, than a godly instruction rightly
disposed by settled judgment. It may be they are (...), and of a good affection
attempt this work, but withal they must be (...) having ability in wisdom
aptly to teach. Discreet understanding must go with zeal, and gravity with
sincerity: affection is headi^ without wisdom: this moderates, as the other
pricks forward: they must be linked inseparably. Knowledge alone delivers
coldly, and zeal alone, not respectively: knowledge without zeal permits
of more than is meet, by distinction: and zeal not according to knowledge
breeds but dissension. It is requisite therefore the Ministers be neither
(...) (whom pride may puff up, not yet having in a sanctified course, learned
to moderate the lusts of youth) nor (...), as yet not apt to teach, and unfit
to be overseers in a Congregation: for we must know what to teach for the
matter, and how for the manner; and so to divide the word aright to the hearers;
which is required in all that preach unto the people. And therefore to further
both these, upon these considerations duly weighed, I was encouraged to proceed
and to undergo the maleuolous censure of this envious age. First, for that I
see many do observe this order in part, though not so exactly as were to be
wished, and as it is here by precepts briefly and plainly set down, whose good
approbation I hope to find as maintenance against the rest. Secondly, for that
I have found by my own experience in teaching, both the easiness thereof to
be atteined soon unto, as also that it is a very sound and profitable way, as
I have judged hearing other, and they me, neither disliked of any that I have
heard of, who list to speak faithfully and with profit. Thirdly, for that I
having upon an occasion studied the 11. of the first of the Corinthians, from
the 23. verse to the end, I find plainly this method set down by the Apostle,
and so has it a divine and Apostolical approbation, for supposing the 23. 24.
25. verses to be as his text out of Matthew. 26. 26. 27. 28. the 26. contains
the scope, the 27. is a doctrine, 28. an use, 29. a reason to enforce it, 30.
and 31. the application of that which went before, to the present state of the
Corinthians. 32. a prevention of an objection which must follow application, as
I have declared in this treatise. 33. 34. a loving exhortation for the
conclusion, with a brief repetition of somewhat before reprehended, with a
prescribed remedy for the same. This place gave me the first and chiefest
occasion to write this treatise of preaching and method therein. Fourthly and
lastly, for that I having labored for all such both old and new which have
written of this matter, to further me, I persuaded my self that this my labor
would not be unacceptable to my brethren, as it has been to me a painful
work, wherein I have endeavored to set down much matter in very few words;
and to illustrate the manifold precepts by evident examples briefly. If in all
this I attain to my desire in any measure, I content my self: my will was to
perfect, though through disabilitie I leave the work imperfect. Nothing can be
so well done, but a want may be espied by some, or at least supposed to be
seen in the cunningest device of man; and all know, it is easier to find a
fault, than either to begin well a cunning work or rightly to finish an
imperfect labor, or to amend perfectly what is amiss. I look for carpers and
such as would find even nodum in scirpo by an envious eye in my labors. But if
some profit, those that be my friends, I bless God, though other do not
benefit: for as amici omnia amice interpretantur and in meliorem partem dubia
accipiunt, so inimici and inuidi male omnia, and peiorem in partem vel optima
torquere student. I presume not to make a rule to any, nor to tie all to one
method, but as men shall find which is the best, that let them in judgment
approve without partial affection. I desire that men's persons may not at any
time be prejudicial to their labors. Wise men in such cases do weigh in
judgment the substance, and are not with partial affection misled by
circumstance. So read and judge, as if you that read were your selves the
Authors. In a word, do as you would be done unto.

Farewell.
The Contens.
OF the necessity and excellency of the Ministry and the Word Preached.
Chap. 1 Of the lawful entrance of a Minister into the Ministry, and also
into his charge and place. Chap. 2 Of the Ministers wise and godly proceedings
in his Pastoral charge to teach his people. Chap. 3 Of Prayer before the
Sermon. Chap. 4 Of the Preface after the Prayer, and of the text of the
Scripture. Chap. 5 Of the Analysis and resolution of the text. Chap. 6 Of the
Scholies and interpretation of the words. Chap. 7 Of gathering doctrines from
the text. Chap. 8 Of the making use of the doctrine, showing what to do with
it. Chap. 9 Of application of the uses to the hearers. Chap. 10 Of prevention
of objections. Chap. 11 Of the conclusion of the whole Sermon. Chap. 12 Of such
things which are required of a Minister to perform the whole work. Chap. 13
THE FAITHFVLL SHEPHERD: Or THE SHEPHERDS Faithfulness.
CHAP. I. Of the necessity and excellency of the Ministry and the Word
preached.
WHen the World by wisdom knew 1. Cor. 1. 21.
not God in the wisdom of God, it pleased God to appoint a weak The
necessity of Preaching and Preachers.
means, in carnal judgment, even the foolishness of preaching to save his
elect: And herein ordinarily God will show his power to save all that shall be
saved. It was from the beginning Preaching and Prophesying, before the fall and
after. In Paradise God taught Adam and Eve both Law Genes. 2. 6. 17. and
Gospel, Genes. 3. 15. Before the flood, Enoch, Jude verse. 14. Noah 1. Pet. 3.
19. After the flood, to Moses, Abraham, Genes. 20. 7. and 18. 19. Isaac and
Jacob, Joseph, Psalm. 105. 22. From Moses, Jeremy says, the Lord Ier. 7. 25.
ceased not to send his servants the Prophets. And S. James witnesses that
Moses had his ordinary teachers, continued to his days, Act. 15. 21. The
Apostle S. Paul tells us, that as Christ sent out his Apostles, and gave them a
charge at his Ascension, with a promise, Matt. 28. 18. 19. So he gave gifts for
the Ministry and Preaching of the Word unto the worlds end, Ephesians. 4. 12.
Esai 66. 21. Ier. 33. 21. without the which the people perish, Proverb. 29. 18.
How can people call on him in whom they have not believed? How can they believe
of whom they have not heard? and how can they hear without a Preacher? It is
therefore very necessary, and those which should preach the same. For this
cause, by the holy spirit the Ministers of the Gospel are called Light, Salt,
Saviors, Seers, Chariots of Israel, and Horsemen thereof, Pastors, Planters,
Waterers, Builders, and Stewards, Watchmen, Soldiers, Nurses, and such like;
comparing them to such things, and callings, as are most common, and also
needful to necessary uses: that the necessity of them hereby may be
considered of, both for the Church and Commonwealth. For that is true by
experience, that men thorough the preaching of the Word conscionably, are
brought to more even civil humanity, than, by the laws of man, which may
bridle somewhat: But it is the Word only which works conscience to God, true
obedience to men, Christian love and piety: Yea the Word can work such
humiliation and subjection (for it is the power of God) and that to be
voluntarily, as it appears in the King of Nineuie, his Nobles and people, as
no power of man can work and bring them unto. Therefore should this, if men
have no better grace, even in policy be accounted necessary, and by Princes
be vpholden and maintained. Why should not therefore men covet to be in this
calling even for public good? which is not only profitable, and The
Ministry is an honorable calling.
necessary, but also withal a very honorable function, and a worthy work,
1. Tim. 5. 1. which both God himself and the woorthiest men that ever lived
took upon them. To pass over other; Solomon that most wise king, and for
regal magnificencie and power had not his peer: yet entitled himself the
Preacher. Our Savior Christ did choose to honor this calling, and performed in
his person, the office of a Preacher amongst men on earth, in all men's sight:
but refused to be a Judge, or to be made a King: though he ordained both and is
truly both. David a worthy warrior, and a valiant champion, yea a royal
King, disdained not to be a Prophet of God unto the people; yea and once
Priest-like to dance cheerely before the Ark of God in a white garment. Esaias
is held to be of the blood royal, and yet a Prophet and Teacher in Judah,
without disparagement. This is not to be understood, as spoken of honest men,
but of the unconscionable in their callings.


Some of our States and Gentry, with profane Esau contemn as he did this
calling for a mess of pottage, worldly pomp, pleasure, and profit; wish their
children any thing, worldly Lawyers, fraudulent Merchants, killing Physicians,
bloody Captains, idle loose livers, swearing ruffians, walkers on
Shooters-hill, and coursers on Salisburies plains, to maintain their riot,
rather than (as they call them) Priests. And yet this state is magnified of God
and man.

The Lord requires that his Ministers be received with double honor. To whom
does ever Christ say, but to them: He that hears you hears me, and him that
sent me. He that despises you, despises me and my father also.

Has not God set them out with honorable titles, and calls the Ministers of
God, Tit. 1. 1. Workers together with God, 2. Cor. 6. 1. Ambassadors of Christ
Jesus? 2. Cor. 5. 19. Elders? Act. 5. 20. 1. Tim. 6. Overseers? Tit. 1.
Fathers, Men of God; Friends of God; Disposers of the secrets of Gods holy
ones? Psalm. 89. 19. and 106. 16. Prophets, Angels? All titles of reverence,
honor, and pre-eminence.

Why then should any disdain (o ye sons of Nobles) to take this calling
upon you, or any of you to be male content, who have already entered hereunto,
because the proud and wicked despise you? Hear I pray you (ye Heralds of the
everliving God) may it possibly seem a small thing to be 2. Cor. 2. 15. and
10. 5.
a separated people unto God himself from the multitude of men? to be the
sweet savor of Christ in all that are saved and them that perish? to cast
down the imagination of man, and every high thought against God? to bring it
captive to the obedience of Christ?

Is it a small matter to meddle with the Secrets of God, to save souls, to
open and shut the kingdom of heaven, for and against whomsoever?

Many other callings are, as on the earth, so for the earth or earthly matters.
But this concerns the soul and heavenly things.

This calling in every part thereof enforces upon a man heavenly Meditations,
which none else does properly.

When a Minister speaks truly Gods Word, he may speak freely to all: And all
must hear him, as if God spoke, with reverence: else, it will be easier for
Sodom and Lib. 1. de ratione concionandi.
Gomorrha in the day of judgment than for that person or people, Math. 10. 14.
15. Sires ipsas, says Erasmus, iusta pensemus trutin^, nullus est rex tam
magnificus, quatenus rex est, quin sit infra dignitatem, non dicam Episcopi,
sed dicam Pastoris, quatenus est Pastor. And lest it might seem a paradox, he
proves it by comparing the matter and the scope of either calling with other:
Honor and sublimitas Episcopalis (says S. Ambrose in Pastorali) nullis poterit
comparationibu^ adaequari. Si Regum fulgori compares and principum diademati,
long erit inferior comparatio, quam si plumb^ metallum ad auri fulgorem
compares. And again a little after in the same book he says; Nihil in seculo
hoc excellentius sacerdotibus, nihil sublimius Episcopis reperiri potest. Where
lest the former should be taken as only spoken of such as are Bishops, he in
this latter place, speaks of Priests, and of them, before Bishops: but all
this must be understood of good Bishops and Priests, else I dare say, Nihil in
hoc seculo pestilentius Episcopis and Sacerdotibus impijs, quales sunt papales,
qui ventrem pro Deo habent, qui gloriam sibi adulatione, opibus, honor,
vaniloquentia acquirere student, qui terrestria sapiunt, qui per auaritiam
si^^titijs verbis auditores suos nundinantur; qui similes animalibus ratione
expertibus, voluptatem in quotidianis ponunt delitijs: qui animum habent
rapinis exercitatum, and habendi coaceruandique beneficia and honores
cupiditate inexplebilem, quibus tenebrarum caligo sempiterna reseruatur. But
for such as be faithful is reserved a crown of glory; and by saving of
souls, they shall in heaven shine as the stars for ever and ever.

We thus see the necessity of this calling, the honor thereof; and how highly
it is magnified by God himself, and good men.

There is no cause why amongst us that are called Christians, it should be
esteemed so contemptible a calling: which also the very heathen, who never knew
the true God, so much reverenced.

It is recorded, that amongst the Athenians no King was created before he had
taken orders, and was made a Priest.

The Egyptians are said, of Philosophers to choose their Priests, and of their
Priests Kings.

Vziah a mighty King in Judah, who though he offended in presumption, yet his
act declared his high esteem of the Priests office, and that it was not so
base in his eyes as now the Ministry of Christ is amongst many of us. An
office more meet for the mightiest person of the best education and noblest
birth, than for the basest of the people and lowest sort, upon whom for the
most part it is cast; because the wisemen of the world, men of might, and the
noble, hold it derogatorie to their dignities, the Word it self too simple a
subject for their deep conceits and reach in policies. But this is the Lords
doing; that the foolish things of the world might confound the wise; weak
things, mighty; 1. Cor. ^.
vile things and despised (so is Gods choice) to bring to naught things that
are: that all may be said to be of him, and he have the more glory, who is
herein to be praised for ever.

Amen.
CHAP. II. Of the lawful entrance of a Minister into the Ministry, and also
into his charge and place.
WE see it is no disgrace for any to be a Minister of the Gospel, and is a
calling worthy of any qualified in the excellentest manner; yet is not every
one worthy of it, not fit for it: but such as are called and sent of God,
being furnished with gifts in some measure to be able to discharge the office
of a Teacher, and also stirred up with a godly affection to desire the same.

Thus being sent of God, the Church by examination A Minister must be sent of
God, and called of the Church.
must, or they to whom the authority of the Church is committed* try thee and
approouing thee by finding thee endued with such gifts as is necessary for a
Minister, must call and institute one lawfully presented to a Pastoral charge
to take care over the flock. We may not take it upon us before we be called:
if any run before the Lord call, as many do for profit, ease, and honor, we
may condemn Luke 24. Act. 1.
ourselves for haste, and go without expectation of good speed. God appoints
none but he prepares them before, and gives them gifts to perform their
duty. Considera (says S. Ierom) Sacerdotum esse officium de lege
interrogantibus Jerome on Haggai.
respondere: Si Sacerdos est, sciat legem domini; si ignorant* ipse se arguit
non esse Sacerdotem domini. So as an unfit man, ignorant and vain, may be man's
Minister, but none of Christ's messenger.

Again, if we rush in without authority of the Church, it is presumption,
contempt of Superiority, breach of order, the nurse of confusion, the mother
of schism, and bane of Churches peace: Begin well, and better hope there is to
end well. First let us take our warrant, and then proceed in commission, and
aim at a right end. Let true zeal move thee for Gods glory, the advancing
of Christ's kingdom, to convert sinners, and to build the body of Christ, to
open the eyes of the blind, and to turn them from darkness to light, from
Satan unto God, to the edifying of the body of Christ, and overthrow of the
power of darkness. Begin Causes moving to the Ministry.
not for profit, for fear of poverty, nor for ease, because thou art loath to
labor, neither for honor to be had in estimation. The chief ends, let them
be first in thine intention; Seek God and not thy self, lest with Judas thou
Ephesians. 4. 11. 12.
find thine own desire, coming for the bag, and so lose Gods blessing.
There is a proper end of every thing. The Lord shows why he has appointed
Pastors for his Church: if we intend any other thing sinisterly, seeking by it,
which it in Gods appointment aims not at, it is to abuse hypocritically holy
things by a deceitful heart; as Iesabell did a fast for Naboths vineyard; but
such hearts show themselves actiuely through idleness, conetousnesse, or proud
aspiring afterward.

When God has furnished, and the Church approved, The Ministers gifts must
fit his place.
then as Gods gifts come freely, so purchase not at any hand a place by
Symonie: Neither choose it after thy appetite for the best Benefice, but after
thy gifts, as thou may most profit a people.

A man may be a fit Minister of Christ, yet not meet for every Congregation;
few so qualified: a mild and a soft spirit to a meek company; a low voice
to a little auditorie, else some few hear, and the rest must stand and gaze: an
vndauntable mind to stubborn persons; Duris nodis durus exhibeatur cuneus; a
loud voice to a great assembly, to a more learned Church a better Clerk; and
one of less understanding to a ruder sort: Join like unto like, that Pastor
and flock may fit together, for their best good.

The congregation reapes small benefit where the Preachers gifts fit not for
the place: Therefore as we must have conscience to enter into the Ministry
rightly; so must we be very respective to settle our selves with a people
conveniently, for our best comfort and their more edification.

CHAP. III. Of the Ministers wise and godly proceeding in his Pastoral charge
to teach his people.
A Minister placed over a Congregation, so as is said, is A Minister must feed
his flock.
there appointed of God, and there must settle himself to abide, unless he be
lawfully called from thence, or necessity compel him to depart.

And that flock must he forthwith begin to feed, and not only desire the
fleece: wages are due to the work: the painful labourer should reap the
profit; and not the idle loiterer.

To feed aright its necessary, to weigh what estate they How to feed aright
and profitably diverse sorts of people.
stand in, and to consider their conditions.

A Counselor must know the case to give sound advice; The Physician his
Patient, to administer a wholesome potion: And he that will profit a people,
must skilfully discern his auditorie.

I. If ignorant and indocible, prepare them to receive the Ignorant and
indocible.
Word, and win them from their own ways, pretended customs, superstitious
uses; from supposed good intents, examples of blindly-led forefathers; from the
good liking of Popish religion, as the best, upon carnal reason and worldly
commodities; from dislike of the truth now taught them; and from a conceit of
imagination in them, that they are in case happy enough; and such like
impediments, as rubbish to be removed: to lay a foundation by reasoning Act.
17. 2. 3. 17. Act. 2. 36.
with them, and forciblie conuincing them of sin: so that they may be pricked
in their hearts, and show the necessity of preaching unto them.

If they hereupon be touched and become docible, then Act. 17. 30. 31.
deliver the doctrine of the Gospel more generally at the first, and as they
amend, more particularly.

If they abide obstinate, and will not receive the Word, after some sufficient
time of trial, they deserve to be left, Matthew. 10. 14. Prou. 9. 8. Matthew. 7.
6. Act. 19. 8. 9. and 17. 33.

II. If ignorant, and willing to be taught, they must be Ignorant and willing.
first Catechized and taught the grounds and principles of Religion, the Creed,
the Lords prayer, the ten Commandments, and the doctrine of the Sacraments:
with this milk they must be fed, or else never look that they 1. Cor. 3. 1.
Heb. 5. 13. Ioh. 16. 12. 1. Pet. 3. 21. Luc. 1. 4.
shall be able to receive strong meat; they cannot understand nor judge of
interpretations without it.

All Arts have their principles which must be learned, so has Divinity.

Experience shows how that little profit comes by preaching That people must
be Catechized: and the manner how.
where Catechizing is neglected. Many there are who teach twice or three times
in a week: and yet see less fruit of many years labor by not Catechizing
withal, than some reap in one year, who perform both together.

This manner of Catechizing is to be performed by propounding questions, and the
people answering to them: this plain and simple kind is the best, and will
bring the most profit, though it seem childish, and be to many tedious.

Children (as all are without knowledge, yea babes at first) must be dealt with
as children. Many teach the Catechism, but its after a discoursing manner,
which also experience declares, that it nothing benefits at all the ruder
sort, of which kind are most in country Congregations.

Such as will (...) rightly must (...), that is, audire, as well as erudire:
(...), is audio and erudio, and (...), one Catechized is (...), resonans: In
Schools, masters shall never profit scholars, that hears not them, as well as
to give lectures.

Let the people then learn the Catechism word for word, and answer to every
question: Interrupt not beginners with interpretations, neither go further
with any than he can well say: after come to the meaning, and inquire an answer
still of them, how they understand this or that in one question, and so in an
other; but go not beyond their conceits; state somewhat for an answer, but not
too long: if one know not, ask another; if any but stammer at it, help him,
and encourage him by commending his willingness: if none can answer a
question, show it thy self plainly, how they might have conceived it: and then
ask it some one again, and praise him that understands it, and answers after
thy telling of him.

Note the variety of wits, and as they be, so deal with them; take a word
or a piece of an answer from one, when you may expect much from another: teach
with cheerful countenance, familiarly, and lovingly.

The forward commend openly, speak to them also in private heartily, to
Capt^re beneuolentiam: hardly will any learn of those they hate. Be free of
speech to answer at any man's asking, and gladly take occasion to show a will
ready always to teach. Be familiar, but beware of contempt: never permit any
to laugh at others wants: that will utterly discourage them from coming: Make
much of the meanest, the best esteem of as is meet, to make the rest
aemulous: But the wilful obstinate rebuke as they deserve, lest their example
make the inclinable, careless, and the better sort, less dutiful.

Thus through Gods goodness thou may profit by Catechizing: draw them to it
also without compulsion; but if thou be proud and cannot stoop to their
capacity, or impatient to hear an ignorant answer, or disdainful to be
familiar; few will come to thee willingly, and none but by force; and these
will profit little by thee. Experience has been my Schoolmasters, and taught
me these things, and I find great fruit, to my comfort.

Suspect that we be wanting in our duty, when none profit by our pains:
happily our hearts seek not unfeignedly what we seem to profess; we teach
usually of course, but endeavor not to save our people, of conscience.

III. If they have been a people taught, and having Taught but unsanctified.
2. Cor 7. 8.
knowledge, but without show of sanctification; the doctrine of the Law must be
urged upon them, with legal threats to bring them to a feeling of sin; and
note some special sin whereof they be guilty, and urge the evil of that
sin, and wrath of God therefore upon them, to make Act 8. 22.
them sorry, that at length they may repent thereof, and bring true repentance
for one, and it will cause a hatred of all: when they are humbled, preach
consolation.

IV. If they know and believe, living religiously in a A believing an^
^^^onable* (...). ^. These. 1. 5. and 41. Act. 11. 23.
holy conversation, they must be encouraged, commended, and entreated to
continue with increase, daily delivering the Law without the curse, as a rule
of obedience, not to condemnation; and provoke them by the sweet promises of
the Gospel, to believe and practice unto the end.

V. If they be declining, or already fallen back, whether Backsliding. Gal. 1.
etc. Esa. 1. etc. 1. Cor.
in doctrine or manners, recall them back, and labor to recover them; by
conuincing the errors, correcting the vices, and by showing their future
miseries by relapse, and their happiness by a timely return again.

VI. If the people be mixed of all, as our Congregations A mixed Congregation.
are, they must be dealt withal every way, as in the former particulars has
been declared.

Inform the ignorant, confirm such as have understanding, reclaim the
vicious, encourage the virtuous, convince the erroneous, strengthen the weak,
recover again the backslider, resolve those that doubt, feed with milk and
strong meat continually, in season and out of season: 2. Tim. 4. 1. 2.
when thou thy self art loath to labor, and the people list not to hear; when
pleasures withdraw, wordly cares carry away; much labor before seeming
misspent, and little hope of after profit: yea even in persecution, then cease
not. Remember Ezec. 3. Act. 20.
that thou have a flock to feed, and their blood to answer for: weigh with
compassion their misery, consider thy glory and reward in winning of souls;
and that it is God that will fully recompense, when the people despise thee,
and regard thee nothing.

But yet in performing thy office, be ever so desirous to It is not good to
preach without prepararation.
speak, as nevertheless thou come not to discharge the public duty
unprepared. The best wit readiest to conceive, the firmest memory to retain;
nor the volublest tongue to utter (excellent gifts but much abused to idleness
and vain glory) may not exempt a man from studying, reading, writing
sometime, meditation and continual prayer. The men of God endued with gifts
extraordinary, were diligent searchers of the Scriptures. The Savior and
chief Prophet exhorts the Teachers in Jerusalem hereunto, Ioh. 5.
S. Paul binds Timothy unto it, 1. Tim. 4. 13. S. Peter plainly shows it to
be the practice of the Prophets, 1. Pet. 1. 10. It seems that Jeremy read
the Psalms, Ierem. 10. Ps. 79. 6. Daniel perused Jeremy. It is certain, S.
Paul had his books Dan. 9. 2.
and parchments, not to write in, but to read on, if Calvin 2. Tim. 4. 13.
may be credited; and Peter we may see looked into Paul's Epistles, 2. Pet. 3.
16.

It is not beseeming the weightinesse of the work, nor reverence The vanity
of Preaching extempore.
of the place, to run suddenly to stand up in the room of God: A rash
attempt in so high mysteries breeds but contempts: A desire to show a man's
extemporall faculty, declares a man's indiscretion and folly. Who will, that
is wise, speak before Princes or Princely Peers, of Princes affairs openly
with leuitie? of matters of great importance suddenly? Who will, that respects
blood, give sentence of life and death rashly? The Minister in Christ's chair
speaks of Christ, before God and his Angels; the matter is the secrets of the
kingdom; the precious treasures of heaven, by him are opened and set to sale:
He is setting before his hearers life and death, heaven and hell; and is
pronouncing the sentence of salvation o^ damnation upon them: Sudden conceits
of the mind not digested, must needs be rawly delivered: often little to the
purpose, and eftsoons as far from the matter as he from serious meditations.
And the world is full of carpers, all are not conscionable hearers; by rash and
headdie pouring out of some thing unawares, thou may give an occasion to the
evil disposed, either of contempt or raising of contention. Men of this
disposition labor for pra^^e, who either play the worldlings all the week, or
delight in their pleasures, and yet of a sudden can give men a sermon. But they
often lose that they look for of the wise and judicious hearers. Holy things
are not to be handled hastily, that we may not cast pearls to swine.
Maintenance is allowed, time is allotted; and suddenly we need not, unless we
will, undertake such a work without preparation. This leuitie in preaching
makes a light conceit of Preaching, though not the often preaching done
seriously by study and foreset judgment.

Preaching should not be a labor of the lips, or talk of the tongue from a
light imagination: but a serious meditation of the heart in grounded knowledge
by much study and illumination of the spirit.

So to preach will prevent light account of thy words, it will moon the
hearers to reverence, bring more credit to Gods ordinance, work more
effectually, yea pierce more deeply, as spoken with authority; when words
carry weight of reasons and religion, and are delivered with knowledge
conscionablie.

CHAP. IV. Of Prayer before the Sermon.
THe Minister and man of God well prepared, the godly order of Divine Service
so called, as it is by the Church appointed, without giving of offense
observed; and as the custom is, after a Psalm sung; then may Neh. 8. 7.
thou ascend up into the Pulpit, fitly placed for the benefit Luke 4.
of all, or most, that thou may behold all, and they may have their eyes
fastened upon thee.

Begin with Prayer before thou read the text, after the Begin with Prayer.
August. lib. 4. cap. 1. de doct. Christiana. Ephesians. 6. 19. Ioh. 16.
custom of ancient Fathers, as S. Augustine testifies, and as religious
reverence binds us.

Prayer must be the Proeme; it is the Lord that both gives wisdom to
understand, and words of utterance: it is the spirit that strengthens their
hearts in speaking, that guides them in the truth, calls things to their
remembrance, and makes them able Ministers of the Gospel. The Matthew. 10. 2.
Cor. 3. 5. 6. Luke 24. Act. 1. Act. 2. 47. and 13. 48. 2. Cor. 3. 6. Deuteronomy. 29.
4. Esai 63. 17. What is required in a Minister to be able to pray well.
Disciples might not go out before they had received the spirit; neither may
we go up and speak without it. It is not by the instrument that men are
converted; neither in the words lies the power to save: But it is the Lords
blessing thereupon, who thereby adds to the Church such as are ordained to be
saved. Paul plants, Appollo waters, but God gives the increase; else is al in
vain, though woonders were showed from heaven with the preaching of the Word.

Here for the Minister to do his work, Faith is required; to go to the
throne of grace boldly, the seeling of wants and need of Gods blessing, to pray
ardently: a love and commiseration of his hearers, to cry to God
compassionately: and a consideration of Gods glorious Majesty there present,
to speak unto him reverently. It must be with understanding and affection;
the matter well digested into order, and uttered in few words briefly.

It is not convenient to be long in Prayer usually, except Long and tedious
Prayers not commendable.
upon extraordinary occasion sometime: Remember that one may more easily
continue praying with devotion; than others hearing in silence, can religiously
give an assent with good attention.

Half hour Prayers are too tedious, usual with some men, which is their
indiscretion; wearisome to all, liked of none, but such as use them, who seem
to strive to win God by words, or to waste time. It may be thought that such
weigh not other men's weakness, or that Prayer is not held fervent, that is not
stretched out to such a length; when experience shows to every man's feeling,
that feruencie of spirit in Prayer is not so during; but even in a short space
is interrupted with wavering thoughts and by* fantasies: the edge of godly
feruencie of affection is soon blunted. Let every one in praying consider what
he is in hearing, and so measure his time; as also by the liking or dislike of
the Christianly disposed, whose minds must in these things be our measure.

The voice must be audible, continued with one sound, Of the voice in Prayer.
the words uttered deliberatelie, not huddled up in a hasty manner too
irreuerently.

The gesture is with bended knees; with the eyes and Gesture. 2. Chro. 6. 13. A
set form of Prayer in the beginning.
hands lifted up toward heaven.

It is not amiss (except upon some not common occasion) to observe in the
beginning one set form of Prayer, as many godly men do. In our Prayer we are
the peoples mouth unto God, and therefore such as in the Pulpit pray for
themselves in the singular number, as thus; I pray thee open my mouth, etc. do
therein break off the course of their public function, and make it a private
action, untuneable without concord to the rest, as a iarring string.

CHAP. V. Of the Preface after the Prayer: and of the text of the Scripture.
Prayer finished, he may either stand up or sit down, as the order of the
Church is, it is indifferent. The Doctors Matt. 23. 2. and 5. 1. Act. 13. 16.
When to use a Preface.
in Jerusalem, it seems sat; our Savior Christ sat: but the Apostles stood
up. It is not necessary ever to use a Preface; but men may if they please, and
it is sometime convenient: upon extraordinary occasions in more solemn
assemblies, when one speaks to a strange auditorie, or to a Congregation not
his own the first time, or in taking charge of a flock; he may begin as
he holds it meet, to stir up the auditorie to attention.

From the end of their coming, the matter in hand profitable Whence to fetch
it.
and necessary; from the consideration of Gods presence; from their professing
Religion, their coming at that present, the hope given from their former
endeavor, and the gifts of God in them; from some examples of good hearers; the
commendation of hearing, and commandment thereof in Scripture; from some
sentence of Scripture, containing the drift of the Sermon to be delivered; and
from what he thinks meet, and as he is able. Our Luke 4. 20. 21. Esa. 1. 2.
Act. 2. 14. and 10. 34. and 13. 16. Of giving of titles; but beware of
flattery.
Savior used a Preface before his Sermon; so did the Prophets before him: and
the Apostles after him sometimes: Herein we may also use reverend titles, and
loving appellations, as saying, Men and Brethren, Fathers; You that fear God:
yea Luke can write; Most noble Theophilus: And S. Paul can say, Most noble
Festus. If herein we give but due as we know and are Christianly persuaded, we
offend not: But yet let us not be herein too much in many, nor often; nor too
far; keep a wise moderation of the tongue, in what we may easily slip, and in
heart beware of flattery. It were better to come a little short on the right
hand herein, Job 32. 21. 22.
than go to far on the left. Flattery is pernicious every where, but
chiefly a thing pestilent in the Pulpit; where the very apperance must be
forborne, which we will easily do before the basest; but many can hardly do
before Princes, Nobles, and their bountiful Patrons; especially such as Preach
for praise, or to get a Benefice: of which sort, too many.

After the Preface, declare with an audible voice, what Of the Text of
Scripture.
portion of Scripture is the text you will entreat of, whether a book, or
chapter, or some one or more verses in a chapter; and read the same once on the
book; and if it be but a Nehem. 8. 8.
short text, pronounce it again without the book distinctly both times: if it
be long, read but once, and utter only some part of the beginning again,
with a So forth. Read it in the translation to vulgar people, and in that
which is Read the Text out of the best and commonly approved Translation, and
be not easily a controller thereof.
most commonly received, and best approved; and even as it is there set down,
without addition, detraction or change of any thing therein. It is not fit that
every one be a public controller of a public received translation. As it may
argue some presumption and pride in the Corrector, so it may breed contention,
and leave a great scruple, and cast doubts into the hearers minds, what
reckoning to make of a translation; and it gives great advantage to the
Papists; who hereby labor to forestall many, that they smally account of our
translations; which we see can never be so well done and generally approved
of, but some particular persons will be censuring the same, and that not only
in private (a thing happily tolerable if the censure be true, and wisely
proceeded in) but also they must needs show their skill in Pulpits. It may
seem that such hold it an excellent thing, digito monstrari, and that they
ween and are of opinion, that as Persius notes the vain ones, Scire tuum
nihil est, nisi te scire hoc sciat alter. It is very necessary that the
translation be most sound. But it is nothing expedient that ever public
proclamation be made of some small defects, that by much prying happily may be
noted In a common auditorie we must only use our mother tongue.
therein, of every ordinary person, but only such faults as needs noting, and
that of learned men too. As the text must be read in the mother tongue, so
here to speak a little briefly of it by the way) must the whole Sermon before
a common assembly, according to the Prophets practice, the 1. Cor. 14. 2. 4.
6. 9. 11. 16. 19.
use of our Savior, the reasons of S. Paul, the custom of the Apostles, and
as the Primitive Fathers, the Greek and Latin Doctors of the Church were wont
to do, as their Sermons extant declare, without intermixing of long sentences
in strange languages not understood, differing from their native speech.

A strange tongue hinders the conceit of most hearers (except it be used rarely,
aptly, and briefly) being ignorant of the same, to apt that before spoken, to
that which follows after; and (except it be used with discretion) it is a
hiding to them what we profess, rather than to teach them; an unprofitable
mispending of time: First needless to utter it, happily in Greek, then in
Latin, and after in English: a treble or a double labor for one; it may be
one, two, three, or some few understand hardly the languages, but all other do
not: must we therefore pleasing our selves, seek to delight these few, to win
a little vain praise of learning, whilst all the rest stand at a gaze,
admiring what is said without edification? We that stand up in Christ's room,
must not seek our own commendations, there we must paint out the truth
lively and plainly, approouing our selves faithful dispensers of Gods secrets
to the conscience of every believer, in every thing to the utmost of our
power. Nevertheless necessity constraining, as some time to declare the
emphasis of a word, often more significant in the original than in the
translation; to note some special phrase; to convince some proudly conceited of
his knowledge; or The text must be out of the Canon of the Scripture. Ier. 23.
28. 1. Pet. 4. 11. 1. Cor. 4. 6. John 7. 16. and 8. 26. and 12. 50. Act. 26. 22.
in a learned auditorie, I doubt not of a liberty therein.

For the Text, it must be Canonical Scripture: The Minister is Gods mouth, he
must then speak Gods word, not only taking it for his text, but all his words
must agree to the written truth, above which he may not presume.

The Prophets came with the word of the Lord; our Savior uttered only the
word of his Father, and as his Father spoke unto him: his Text was the Canon of
the Scripture, Luc. 4. 16. 17. he interpreted scripture, Luc. 24. S. Paul
taught Psalm. 19. 7. Heb. 4. 12. 2. Tim. 3. 16. Romans 8. 7. Esa. 29 13. Neh. 8.
2. Chr. 17 9.
nothing but Scripture: it only binds conscience; it is absolutely perfect;
it conuerteth and makes perfect. Men's precepts are no rule in Religion: Will
and affection is too base to rule and to command Reason: and Reason to swaie by
man's wisdom is too carnal for Religion: Esdras text was Scripture; Christ's
out of Esaias; the Levites was the Law; every one spoke out of the book of God,
and so continued until Popish Prelates invented lying Legends, to beguile the
people, such as God gives over to believe lies, for that they kept not, nor
received a love of the truth, and so remain at this day, even ^. These. 2. 11.
their diuinest Doctors by Gods just judgment.

Some heretofore have preached without a Text, but it is not now the custom of
the Church, which ordely must be observed; neither is that way so good to
increase knowledge in the Scripture, nor to cause reverence to that which is
spoken, they not seeing whence it is grounded. Secondly, What kind of Text.
it must be a Text to beget faith, to ground hope, and to settle love: such
places must we choose, as plainly afford us these things, to teach them usually
as the Apostle exhorts. Obscure Scriptures about which must necessarily arise
questions of controversies, leave for Schools, and handle not amongst the
common people and vulgar sort. Common assemblies are not meet either to hear
or judge of controversies; yet it is a fault of many Preachers, who use
commonly in every Sermon, to raise up one point or other in disputation, about
which they spend the most of their time, often without just occasion or
necessary cause: but the fruit of these men's labors is in their hearers
contention, talk about words, quiddities and vain ostentation; but not faith
working by love and holy sanctification.

Thirdly, the Text must be fit for the hearers: If S. Paul It must be a fit
Text.
preach before a Heathen Felix, intemperate and unjust, his words shall sound
out temperance, righteousness, and judgment, that Felix may hear and
tremble. Christ Jesus will preach before Scribes and Pharisees against false
interpretation of Scriptures, men's traditions, and hypocrisy: This choice of ^
fit text commends the Ministers wisdom in teaching; his faithfulness to
perform his office without fear, and his care to do good: It will prevent
cauils when things are reproved, which the Text plainly affords. The
discommoditie of an unapt text.
On the contrary, an impertinent Text shows that the Preacher wants
judgment, either to choose his Text, or to discern his auditorie, or both; or
that he has but some bosom Sermons that alike must serve his turn upon all
occasions in any place; or that he is fearful and dare not take a Text to
touch them, especially men of place, whom he would rather please by his
preaching, to pleasure himself; Gal. 1. 10.
loath therefore is such an one to offend: the fault of too many in these days;
men pleasers, not the servants of The cause of painted eloquence.
Christ. This is the cause why many weigh every word, as in a balance, for
weight and tuneable measure, for fine pronouncing to delight the ear, more for
a plaudite, than to convince conscience, or to remove impiety; they glaunce
at sin sometimes, but fair and far off, for fear of hitting: They are much
in controversies, by which they least displease men of ill conversation, who
willingly hear any thing but of their sins and reformation of life: these
be the Preachers full of discretion, but of little Religion, and less true
and hearty desire to bring men to salvation.

Here then we see that a Preacher must have knowledge What is requisite for a
Minister to fit his text for the auditorie.
of his auditory, to fit his Text unto them, considering where they be, and
what manner of persons, private or public, Ecclesiastical or of the body
politic; superstitious or religious; of holy conversation or profane,
peaceable or persecutors; zealous or lukewarm; constant or back-sliders; of
sound judgment, or erring from the truth, ignorantly, or of obstinacy, etc.

The Place must be also considered of, a city or town, popular or of less
resort. Also if the meeting be not ordinary, note the occasion, the end, and
time; whether in mirth or in sorrow; to rejoice or lament; in time of
prosperity or adversity; and thereafter to frame his speech. And therefore
its also requisite, that he be a man experienced in the Word: and one that
has in reading Scriptures gathered together variety of portions of Scripture,
for variety of matter, and have them ready noted in some little paper book,
and at times studied upon, to be more ready to speak of them, as occasion
shall require. If a man would How to speak aptly ever.
speak not unaptly at any time, in any place, to all sorts unknown, he must
take general Scriptures, which may rightly concern all, and cannot be amiss
spoken to any, as these, Eccles. 12. 13. 14. Iam. 1. 27. 2. Cor. 1. 5. 10. Jude
verse. 14. Ioh. 3. 16. or 36. Act. 18. 26. and such like.

CHAP. VI. Of the Analysis and resolution of the text.
THe text read, the Teacher is to resolve his Scripture, to What to be observed
in the Analysis.
late it open to the hearers: as First, the Author of the words: Secondly, the
occasion thereof: Thirdly, if a particular portion of Scripture, or some
Chapter, or verse of a Chapter, then observe the coherence with that which goes
before or follows after: Fourthly, the scope or principal intendement of the
holy Ghost in that place, of which scope arises the principal proposition;
called of Rhetoricians the State; of Lawyers the Issue. This chiefly is to be
labored in, and is to be found out by observing these circumstances: Quis,
quid, vbi, quibus auxilijs, cur, quo modo, quando, How to find out the scope
of a place, and to resolve the same Scripture.
that is, the Person, the Thing it self, the Time, Place, the Means, the
manner of Doing, and the End. By the Person, Time, and Place, may be found the
occasion; by the Thing, the matter handled; by the Means, the arguments; by
the manner, the method how the arguments are laid down, which method is often
crypticke, and not natural; by the End, the scope, and so the principal
proposition, which may be brought to one of these three kinds, Demonstratiue,
Deliberatiue, or Judicial.

It is a hard thing to find the state of a whole book, and Of dividing a
text, and the benefit thereof.
to reduce it into one sentence or proposition, for that it is mixed of diverse
kinds; but it is more easy in the parts of a book, and in a particular
portion of Scripture. Fifthly, after the scope be found out, the text is to be
divided into his several parts: by this we limit our selves within bounds, to
keep our selves from ranging; the hearer will better follow the matter, and
conceive the meaning in the discourse; It helps memory to carry away that
which is heard. Where order wants without division, there must needs be a
disordered rouing, running in and out, here now in the beginning, by and by
there in the ending; a confusion there is, a mixture of things to be severed,
and a separation of things to be conioined: the discourse is loose, tedious,
and uncertain, wandering without stay or limitation.

Of the Division of books or Chapters, my purpose is not to speak, for that
helps enough are to be had for the same, and so common in all men's labors and
Commentaries, that it is a labor needless to give any precepts herein. I
therefore here intend to speak of particular Scriptures, How to divide
particular verses.
one or two verses for a text, and of the division, interpretation, and
gathering doctrines thereout only: Some verses contain evident doctrines, or
propositions, as Prouer. 29. 18: Ioh. 3. 36. where note the quality thereof;
General or Special, Affirmative or Negative, Necessary or Co^tingent: the
parts, the Antecedent and Consequent; where such evident propositio^s be not,
there, first look out atotum, What first to consider and know to divide a verse.
what in general to name it; as a narration, a doctrine teaching somewhat;
exhortation, dehortation; a commandment, a promise; threat, rebuke; petition,
wish, vow; curse; profession, declaration, a salutation, a counsel, comfort,
prediction, praise, thanksgiving, dispraise, admonition, question, answer,
mock or taunt, definition, description, accusation, prohibition, detestation,
denial or affirmation, and so forth. Then gather the parts by circumstances,
even as the words lie in order, if it may be, for the better help of the
meanersort. To find what to call it, which term or name co^teineth the scope
of the words, and it may be found out from other Scriptures, as Mat. 28. 19. is
called a commandment; by S. Paul Act. 10. 42. so Genes. 17. 4. which S. Paul
calls a Promise, Romans 4. 20. Psalm. 32. 1. interpreted by S. Paul, Romans 4. 6.
Again, we may know how to call it by the sense of the place, albeit we find
it not interpreted elsewhere: and by other means, as by the Verb, as Matthew. 9.
30. its a charge given, Romans 12. 1. an exhortation, Luke 14. 29. 30. a mocking,
By this see the use of Grammar necessary to a Divine.
Romans 9. 14. detestation noted by absit, which Verb shows the Apostles
detestation of that blasphemy by Nounes: Dan. 4. 24. it is a Counsel: by
Aduerbes; Psalm. 119. 5. a wish: by Conjunctions, etsi, quamuis, and the like
are symbola occupationis: nisi is often not a obiectionis, and sed solutionis,
as 2. Cor. 1. 24. by Interiections, as Psalm. 120. 5. a complaint. In one verse
there may be two or three generals, as Genes. 32. 30. the first part a
narration, the latter a gratulation; whereupon in such cases according as the
text will afford, must be first made a general division into diverse totums,
and every of them after into their branches by circumstances: as for example,
Ezech. 18. 30.

These words are the Prophet Ezechiels, whom the Lord 1. Author.
raised up, as to comfort the godly, so to show the wicked their sins and
punishment for the same. Secondly, the wicked 2. Occasion.
Jews had blasphemously accused the Lord of injustice, and murmured against
his chastisements. Thirdly, which 3. Scope and general proposition.
the Prophet reprooues them for, and confutes their error, and shows that Gods
ways are equal and just, and theirs unjust, and that not he, but they, are
the cause of his judgments upon them, which are justly inflicted. Fourthly, 4.
Coherence.
whereupon in these words the Prophet concludes, that for these their speeches
they deserve punishment, and should be punished unless they repented. Fifthly,
the verse contains 5. Parts and general division.
three generals or totums, and therefore must first be observed: the first, is
a threatening of judgment: the second, an exhortation: the third, a promise,
which both the sense and The subdiuision by observation of circumstances.
the Verbes ( I will judge; Return; Shall not be) do note out unto us. Now if
men please, they may by circumstances divide these into several parts, every
one again, and as the words lie in order: as thus; In the threat, note first
the cause, in therefore; secondly, what is threatened, judgment: thirdly, who
in general, the house of Israel, and more particularly every one; fourthly,
the manner of judgment; justly, according to his ways. Fifthly, the person
threatening, the Lord: So likewise proceed in the exhortation and promise.

Another example, Matthew. 10. 14.
These be the words of our Savior Christ in his commission given to his
Disciples, who commanded them to preach, and to go hither and thither, and yet
without care of corporal provision, intimating also to them, that all should
not receive them; he fore-knowing man's thoughts, who upon hearing of enemies,
would be somewhat discouraged: he here preuents an objection or answers
closely to that question which they might make concerning their behavior to
the obstinate, and what shall befall them. All which is to encourage the
Disciples in their Ministry. The parts whereof are two in general, a
Commination and a Commandment.

1. In the threat, note; First the parties threatened, Whosoever, the persons;
and after the place; the house or city. Secondly why, for two offenses, not
receiving the Disciples, and for not hearing their words. Thirdly, the
certainty of the threatening confirmed to his Disciples, truly I say to you.
Fourthly, what is threatened, to wit, their certain damnation and
impossibility to be saved, delivered in a comparatiue speech; it shall be
easier. Fifthly, the time when this shall be effected, in the day of judgment.

2. In the commandment observe first the time, when they depart* secondly,
who, the Disciples, all of them: thirdly, what to do, shake off the dust of
their feet.

Thus may we do with any Scripture, if we can but know the general, how to
name it, and so lay it open by circumstances, even as the words lie in order.
This manner of dividing will afford much matter, easy for the method, and
discends to the capacity of the simplest hearer. But here is no small cunning
required, to gather out lessons from every circumstance fitly, yet easy to any
one that understands, and has labored herein, as shall be after
demonstrated by example. If it be held too great curiosity, so distinctlie to
note every word as it were, and circumstance, then the general division may
be only observed, and one or more of the words followed, passing from one to
another briefly at his pleasure: The way is all one, this more easy and less
distinct to the understanding in particulars: the other more hard and subject
to the censure of a mean hearer, any whit exercised in the Word, who more
easily judges and sees the collections of doctrines, and how it is followed,
and when the Preacher keeps or roues from the present matter. If this way be
not liked, in stead of this dividing, and for How to divide after another
manner, in show more learned.
general heads, one, two, or three propositions may be gathered, and as parts
followed, every proposition containing the substance of the circumstances in
the general part.

As for example, to declare my meaning, Act. 10. 33.
The words are part of Cornelius answer, and contain in them three parts:
First, Cornelius obedience in these words; therefore sent I for thee
immediately: wherein we note these circumstances; first, the cause, in
therefore; secondly, the things done, in sent; thirdly, who, in I, that is,
Cornelius; fourthly, for whom; fifthly, when. Secondly Cornelius encouraging and
commending of Peter: wherein note; first, who and whom; secondly, for what;
thirdly, Cornelius readiness, in the last words, where observe first, when;
secondly, the cause; thirdly, the parties; fourthly, the place; fifthly, the
manner; sixthly, the end; seventhly, what. These three parts thus set forth by
circumstances, may be drawn into three propositions; and in stead of this
dividing, the Teacher may say: We will in these words (after he has read the
verse) handle and speak of three things:

I. That the commandment of God must make him to These three propositions
contain plainly three several circumstances, knit up together ^^ doctrines.
whom it is given, to obey the same without delay.

II. That those which send for Gods messengers should openly encourage them by
commending their willingness in coming.

III. That hearers knowing of their coming should make the mselues ready, wait
for them, submitting themselves with reverence to hear whatsoever they shall
teach them from the Lord.

Which propositions may be proved and followed in the same order to a man's
self, as the circumstances should be; but yet in show differing to the
auditorie: the other being delivered plainly, and in a disiointed speaking,
handling every circumstance by it self; but this way largely set forth with a
continued speech, to the end of every proposition. The other easy to be
conceived of the hearer; and to be delivered of the speaker, requiring neither
singular memory, nor much liberty of speech; and therefore to tickling cares
a harsher way; though for all sorts more profitable: this way not so easy nor
so evident, hardlier to be understood of the simpler sort; and more difficult
to be performed of the Preacher, except he have a good memory to help well
his understanding, and also a ready tongue, freely unfolding without stop, the
conceits of the mind. Choose either after your gifts; but do all to
edification.

Here is required in the Teacher skill in the art of Logic, What use to
make of Logic, an art most necessary for a Minister.
an especial handmaid by the assistance of Gods spirit, to serve for great use
in reading the Scriptures, in interpreting and laying them open unto others. By
Logic we see the method of the Spirit, we behold the arguments, the coherence
and the scope; by it we collect doctrines, confirm them, enlarge the proofs,
gather thence consequently apt uses, and urge them by reasons upon the hearers.
Without this, a Teacher can never soundly lay open the scriptures, solidely
prosecute any matter, nor pithily persuade, nor firmly establish a truth, nor
judge of consequents, nor convince an adversary well, nor answer warily men's
subtilties, nor wittily prevent cauilling Sophistry: Si Logica absit,
rationalis homo, praeterrationem in linguae sono versatur: A man's Oration
without Logic, is but sound of words without reason; an ignorant discourse,
in which if the tongue be flight, and memory weak, as the hearer shall often
lose the drift of his words; so he shall not seldom forget himself by
ouerrunning both his own and other men's wits.

Let Logic be then the stern to guide the course of thy speeches, that the
sudden blasts of affections ouerwhelme thee not, if thou intend to speak
iudicially.

CHAP. VII. Of the Scholies and interpretation of the words.
AFter the division of the text, must follow an explanation of the simple
words, or of words joined together, making evidently a sentence: yet this is
not to be done at once through out the text, but orderly as the words are come
unto, or the sentences in the several parts of the division, which will
prevent tediousness and tautologies.

If the words be but two or three together, or but one brief sentence, then
as necessity requires, they may at once be explaned; and then a Paraphrase
made thereon, What is to be explaned, and what not.
brief and plain. Which thing is not to be done where the words are plain
without any obscurity in them. For every Scripture is either plainly set
down, and the words to be taken properly as they lie in the letter: (So is
every doctrine of Faith and manners necessary to salvation set down) which needs
no explication of words, but enlarging of the matter: or else obscurely; and
this needs an exposition. No How Scripture becomes obscure, and wherein the
obscurity ^^eth.
Scripture is in it self obscure, but that we want eie-sight to behold what
is therein contained. The Sun is ever clear, though we through our
blindness cannot see the shining; or for that some dark clouds hinder our
sight, which are to be removed, that we may look upon it.

The clouds obscuring the clear light of the Scripture in the words or
sentences, are these, which if we can expel, the matter in every text will
become manifest.

1. Is Variety sometimes of reading, quae in quibusdam Hebraei textus and
Graeci locis, vel inscitia, vel negligentia librariorum irrepsere: credatur
tamen non in omnibus exemplaribus maliti^ Iudaeorum textum corruptum esse, vt
impie tenent Papistae.

2. Is variety of signification of words: one word signifying many things,
Homonymies: many words signifying again one thing, Synonymies: and when words
are somewhat like, as if they were Synonymies; and yet differ.

3. The ignorance of the proper signification of the word, for want of
understanding in the original languages; so of the phrase and propriety of
that speech.

4. Defects and errors in translations, by adding, omitting, altering,
misplacing, mispointing, by comma, colon, parenthesis, period, or interrogation.

5. Diversity of the opinions of Interpretours:

6. Shows of contradictorie speeches.

7. Want of knowledge of the Arts, History, Philosophy, Antiquities; closely
couchedin many a text of Scripture.

8. And lastly, Ignorance of points of Divinity, and of such things whereof
the Scripture speaks, proper to it self, of God, of Christ Jesus; of the Law
and Gospel; and of the Sacraments.

As many of these as the text is obscured by, and justly therefore needs an
exposition, must be made plain, both to clear what is dark, and to resolve
the hearer of that which may doubtfully be taken. Words may thus be explained:

1. First, by setting down an usual word, for an unusual; How the text may be
explaned; and to remove obscurities.
a proper for a figurative.

2. A more plain, for one more obscure, by a Grammatical Synonymie.

3. By a nominall definition.

4. By distinguishing words doubtful one from another, and interpret diversity
of significations, according to the subject matter there handled; else as one
says, Dum verba nimis attenduntur, sensus veritatis amittitur.

5. By observing our own common use of such words and manner of speaking, how,
and why we so speak.

For translations, bring them to the original text, and by that try them; and
see the emphasie of the words, the manner of speaking, and the Grammatical
constructions.

Reconcile what seem to jar, and clear the same from false interpretations.
There is but one true and natural One true and natural sense of every place,
and so one right exposition. Sensus Pius.
sense of every place, which is the literal sense, that which the holy Ghost
principally intends there: and accordingly can there be given but one true
and right interpretation of the words and sentence. A godly meaning may be made
of the same; agreeing with the Analogy of faith, tending to Gods glory, the
suppression of vice and maintenance of virtue, and so tolerable. But Sensus
proprius and genuina Genuinus sensus.
interpretatio, is that which makes the place to agree to the chief purpose
and scope of the holy Ghost intended in that same place of Scripture.

Now to give this right exposition of the place; to judge How to give a true
sense up on a place, and to try the same so to be
of other men's interpretations, for the approouing of the best, for the
rejecting of the woorst; to examine aright also variety of readings and
translations; in what sense to take words of diverse significations; to make
supply of a Grammatical Ellipsis, yea and to reconcile truly places which
seem to disagree, may be by these means following. By analogy of Faith, the
points of Catechism.


1. By the Analogy of faith, for it must agree with the principles of
Religion, the points of Cath^chisme set down in the Creed, the Lords Prayer,
the ten Commandments, and the doctrine of Sacraments; One says, Propositio
obscura; primo omnium ad certam alicuius disciplinae methodum reuocetur, and ex
rerum in ea traditarum principijs and (...) indicetur. This is it which the
Apostle means; and for that end wills Timothy to keep the true pattern of
wholesome words, (...), which one right well interprets thus, Methodum dextram
materiarum Theologicarum. to which the interpretation of more obscure places
may be brought, as to certum and immotum interpretationis (...), as the same
author calls it: which if men would use, there should never be such monstrous
opinions broched, nor so dangerous contentions raised in the Church daily, as
there has been and now is. But every thing would agree with Faith and
Charity, in which stands the form of wholesome words delivered by the
Apostle. To which the four formerly mentioned may be reduced fitly. The
Creed to Faith, as the sum thereof, and so the Sacraments as Seals
confirming the same. To Love, the Commandments, which show us what to do to
our neighbor: and the Lords Prayer, teaching what to request of God for our
neighbor.

II. By the circumstance of the place, what, who, to By Ci^cumstances.
whom, by what, when, and how, observing carefully what goes before, what
follows after. Of which things speaks S. Augustine and S. Jerome, upon the
fourth of Amos, and on August. lib. 2. de doct. Christ. cap. 31.
Matthew. 25. Ex antecedentibus and consequentibus colligitur verus Scripturae
sensus. We may not only look upon one word and sentence, and thereupon judge
of all: the scope must withal be diligently attended unto, wherefore the
words are spoken. As the order of the discourse, contextus series is to be
weighed for right interpretation, so the end is to be considered, to give a
true sense; Intelligentia dictorum ex causis sumenda est dicentis. The saying
of Hilarie cited by Lyranus on Deuteronomy. 28. whereunto agrees that Lawyers rule:
Prior and potentior est men's, quam vox dicentis. Of which matter S. August.
libr. 3. de Doctrina Christiana, Cap. 5. and 10.

III. By comparing and laying Scripture to Scripture, By comparing of Scripture
with it self.
the place in hand with other places; the cleerer expounding the more obscure;
and the more places the fewer, as S. August. says; Oportet secundum plura
intelligi pauciora, Aug. lib. de Adulterinis coniugijs, cap. 11. 12. The
Prophets must Ioh. 5. Act. 17. 11.
be laid to the Law, and the New Testament to the Old; for the Prophets
expound Moses; and the Apostles and Evangelists them both. This is the
searching of the Scripture Ioh. 5. Act. 17.
commanded by our Savior, and for which the Bereans are commended.

Now the Scriptures to be conferred together are of 3. sorts. What Scriptures
to be compared together, with the same repeated.


I. Is with places, the self same in other places repeated, as that of God to
Abraham, Genes. 12. 3. confer it with Genes. 22. 18. Act. 3. 2. Galat. 3. 8.
is the same repeated again: so Esai 29. 13. again repeated, Matthew. 15. 8. Yet
here note, that these places are not so precisely repeated, but that sometimes
there may be and is a little alteration: and this is for five causes, which may
be as helps to us in the interpretation of our text in hand.

1. For interpretation sake, as Psalm. 78. 2. Matthew. 13. 38. Why the same places
repeated, have some times some alteration.


2. For to distinguish one thing from an other, as Mich. 5. 1. Matt. 2. 6.

3. To make a restraint of somewhat more general, to a more special, as Deuteronomy.
6. 13. Matthew. 4. 10. and Esai 29. 13. Matthew. 15. 8.

4. For application of the type to the truth, and of a general to a special,
as Jonah. 1. 7. Matthew. 12. 39. 40. Psalm. 69. 25. Act. 1. 20.

5. For brevity sake, or that something fit not the matter in hand, as Zach.
9. 9. Matthew. 21. 5. With places alike, but not the same.


II. Kind is with places, not the self same repeated, but others somewhat
alike, and agree either in words, as Genes. 28. 12. Ioh. 1. 51. and Genesis 3. 15.
Romans 16. 20. or in the meaning, being like in substance of matter, as Matthew.
26. 26. Genesis 17. 10. Salomons precept in Proverb. 28. 13. expressed by David,
Psalm. 32. 3. 4. 5. here one place for illustration, is an example of the same
kind, to a precept or exhortation: So likewise, 2. Sam. 15. 25. 26. a plain
expressing of Peter's exhortation, 1. Pet. 5. 6.

III. And last kind is with places unlike, in show seeming With places unlike
and differing, or seeming contrary in show.
to disagree from the place in hand, when they be compared together: and this
unlikeness is either in words or manner of speaking, as Romans 3. 28. Iam. 2. 24.
so 1. Kin. 9. 28. 2. Chron. 8. 18. and Zach. 4. 13. Matt. 27. 9. where the
Prophecy is ascribed to Jeremy: or else disagree in the meaning, as Act. 7.
16. Genesis 48. 22.

But here note that discord is not in Scripture, neither No Scripture is
contrary to it self.
one place contrary to another, albeit through our ignorance it seem so to
us; but it is not so indeed. For in a contradiction, there must be two places
having the What is required to make a contradiction.
same words in signification: understood of one and the same thing or subject
matter, the same reason and end inended, in one respect and manner of doing at
the same time.

If these be so, there is a contradiction by affirmation and negation; as Faith
alone does justify us before God: Faith alone does not justify us before God.
Here is a contradiction. When there is no contrariety.
But if the places agree not to one indiuiduate thing, to the same part of that
thing, in one and the same respect and consideration, and at the same time
also, there is no contradiction between them. By this try all the seeming
contradictorie places in the Scripture, and we shall find no opposition at all:
As for example. In Genesis 17. 14. and Gal. 5. 2. seems an opposition, but try
the places, and we shall find them disagree in time, so no contrariety.
Likewise that of Romans 3. 28. and Iam. 2. 24. agree not in the same respect, S.
Paul speaking of faith justifying before God: and James of faith instifying
before How to reconcile places together.
men. The way to reconcile such places, must be these foresaid means as I have
said. But now to know when it is needful to use these means, for every text
requires not thus much trouble:

This is the general rule, if the signification of the words A rule to know
when the text according to the letter is the true sense of the place, and when
not.
in any text, as they be there set down, do agree with the circumstance of
the same place, it is the true sense thereof, as Act. 26. 23. Romans 3. 10. But
if the words carry a show of any thing against the analogy of faith, or
against the Scriptures, or against the scope of the Scripture, or against
common good, or against the light of nature, containing any absurdity or show
of evil, as in these Scriptures literally taken by themselves, without farther
consideration, Luke 10. 4. Matt. 10. 9. Matt 5. 29. Luke 16. 8. Ioh. 6. 53.
Reu. 22. 11. and such like; they are not to be taken literally, but
figuratively; and an other meaning must be made of them, than the letter gives
forth, agreeing with other Scriptures, the analogy of faith, with the
circumstances and drift of the place, and the nature of the thing handled. To
make this evident, we will bring in several examples to declare the same of
evident places, of figurative and obscure; of mixed, partly evident, and partly
obscure; lastly of places dissonant one from another how to reconcile them.

I. Eccles. 7. 22. Surely there is no man just in the earth, that does good and
sins not.
Here looking upon this place and observing the words, An evident place of
Scripture carrying the sense after the letter, with proof thereof.
nothing I find obscure, needing interpretation: but the right sense to be as
the words openly declare, for the same agrees with the analogy of faith, it
being a principle taught, That all men are sinners: the fifth petition, teaching
every man to ask pardon of his sins: it agrees with the circumstances of
the place, and Salomons purpose, also with other Scriptures, as Psalm. 14. 3.
Iam. 3. 2. 1. Ioh. 1. 8. Romans 7. 19. Therefore this and the like Scriptures
delivering in the letter the true meaning, we are to proceed to instructions,
without searching forth of any other sense from the words, or standing upon
explaining of the words, being not obscure; except the rudeness of the
auditorie untaught in common things does require a brief unfolding of the
words as one comes to them: For there is nothing so clear, but even the
maine points of Christianity needs opening (as in this place; Who is a just
man; What sin is; And to do good) to such as be vncatechised, and not
instructed in the common terms of Religion as God, Savior, Law, Gospel,
Faith, Repentance, Flesh, Spirit, and so forth.

II. Matthew. 26. 26. This is my body.
An obscure Scripture, which cannot be taken according to the letter. The
Papists exposition false, and proved In examining our expositions upon places,
we must first of al refer the matter to some point of Catechism, and after
that principle of Divinity proceed therein.
This is an obscure Scripture, and cannot be meant literallie as the Papists
expound them; as if Christ had said; This bread is my natural body, borne of
the virgin Marie my mother, by transubstantiation; for it is absurd and too
gross a conceit: Therefore we search out another sense, and say as if Christ
had said, indeed as he meant; This bread is a sign of my body, or my body
Sacramentally.

Now to try out expositions, we must come to the former Rules: First to
confute the Papists, before we confirm our own: the matter in hand is about
the Sacrament, (for this is ever to be marked, of what the place speaks, that
so we may refer it to some Catechism point, to try the interpretation by,
as places speaking of Christ, we must refer them to his nature or offices,
and according unto the Principles therein learned examine our expositions.)
Therefore we are to refer this Predication to the doctrine of Sacraments,
where we shall find their exposition to be against the nature of a Sacrament,
which is a relation and not truly a substance; a sign as well, as the thing
signified. Christ is not bodily in the Sacrament.


II. Bring it to another part of the Catechism, to the Creed, and we shall
find it to be against two Articles of the same; of Christ's true humane nature,
having a true body with all the dimensions, which being so, cannot be enclosed
in a wafer cake. Also against Christ sitting at the right hand of his father,
which is ever true at all moment of times: but this cannot I believe, if he be
in the Sacrament, and every morning Mass, and so often as the Sacrament is
celebrated. It cannot be said that one true body can be at one instant in two
places.

III. Try by the circumstances of the place, and it is overthrown,
considering who administered it, Jesus Christ sitting at the table, and the
bread in his hand: by which either must his body sitting at the table be a
fantastical body, if the bread was his true body; or the bread but bread: if
the bread was then but bread, it was not transubstantiated, belike till after
his resurrection, and in so saying the first institution should be defective,
and the disciples of Christ to receive less than we do, if it be now
transubstantiated. Note again, that it is called bread, and appears ever
bread: now if it were changed, it were a miracle: and no miracle but it was
sensible. The Disciples they took it, saw Christ when they eat it, and felt no
flesh. The end of a Sacrament is to remember him; now we remember not things
present: it is against therefore the end of a Sacrament.

IV. Lastly, it is against Scripture; Act. 3. 21. The exposition therefore is
false, too Caniball like, allowing the eating of man's flesh; which the Jews
abhorred to hear of. It John 6. Our exposition true and plainly proved.
is false, foolish, and absurd, against religion, reason, sense and natural
instinct.

Contrariwise, our interpretation is true, on the contrary agreeing with the
nature of a Sacrament, with articles of faith, with Scripture, Ioh. 6. 63. Act.
3. 21. with all the circumstances of the place, and with places speaking of the
like matter, in like manner, and yet no transubstantiation; Genes. 17. 10. 1.
Cor. 10. 4. 1. Cor. 11. 25. Therefore this must be given, and the right meaning
of the words.

III. Romans 12. 20. If thine enemy hunger, feed him: If he thirst, give him
drink: for in so doing, thou shall heap coals of fire upon his head.
These words are partly evident, and the sense in the letter A scripture partly
obscure, and partly evident.
in the words of exhortation: and partly obscure in the confirmation.

The first needs no explanation, the latter must be interpreted: for that it
seems to carry an absurdity in it, to heap coals of fire upon the head of
him to whom we in charity are bound to do good unto: so may I hurt him, The
trial of two expositions, whether of them true.
and not benefit him. There is a double meaning given of these words: Some say
thus; By well doing, thy enemy not deserving it, thou shall increase Gods
judgments against him: But the circumstances of the place will not allow this.
The Apostles intent is, to move men to the work of charity, even to their
enemies, to do them good thereby, and to purpose the same. But if this were
the sense, the reason were to show how to be revenged on him, and in show of
doing good, to intend him mischief, which is against Christian charity (if
we try it by the doctrine of charity) the nature and end thereof. Some
expound it thus; In so doing, thou shall win him unto thee by force, even as
if thou did heap coals of fire upon his head, which he should not be able
to endure, but must needs yield to thee, thy good deeds will so inflame his
affection of love to burn in him toward thee. This may stand with the
circumstances, the Apostles scope, the nature of charity, and with other
Scriptures, Matthew. 5. 44. 1. Samuel 24. 17. 2. King. 6. 22. 23. Proverb. 25.
22. Therefore the true sense.

IV. An example of reconciling places, as in Genes. 22. 1. and James 1. 13:
Where the places seem contradictorie, to make these An example showing how to
reconcile places seeming to disagree.
not to disagree, and to reconcile them, and so other Scriptures; observe which
of the places agree best with the body of Divinity and principles of
Religion; as here James his words do; and learn from the analogy of Faith,
the scope and circumstances, the true sense thereof. Then consider wherein the
other seems contradictorie thereunto, as the place of Genesis, and there
observe the sense also by the rules: see also whether the rules of opposition
hold in them or no. Lastly, lay to them some other place one or two, agreeing
and being alike in words or meaning to either of them, which by comparison with
them, may give thee a right difference and show the reconcilement of them, as
Exodus 20. 20. which place agrees with Genes. 22. 1. and withal interprets
what is meant by tempting, even proouing of Abraham; by which is plain then,
that there is no contradiction between the two places.

So Matt. 10. 5. and 28. 19. seem to jar, and Christ to be against his own
commandment. But consider and compare them with Matt. 21. 43. and Act. 13. 46.
and the circumstances with the rules of exposition, and the reconcilement will
be made, and no discord found at all. And thus much of the interpretation of
the text.

That a Minister may faithfully and soundly interpret, there What is needful
that a minister may soundly and faithfully be able to interpret scripture.
Art of Grammar.
is required by necessary consequent from that which has been delivered
here in this Chapter, much knowledge:
I. Of Grammar. From false Grammar (as one says) there cannot proceed true
Divinity. By this we find out the true construction, the proper
signification, and the emphasis of words; the propriety of the tongue, manner
of speaking, and other things of less importance, yet necessary, about which
Grammar is exercised.

II. Knowledge of the toongs in some measure is required, Knowledge in the
tongues, Heb. Greek, and Latin.
Theologus must be Philologus; the force of words are more fully in the
original text often, than in the translation; by a man's own knowledge into
the text, he sees the matter immediately with his own eyes, when other see
in the translation the matter by other men's eyes. Every language has peculiar
words, dialects, tropes, and figures. Scruples which may arise by variety of
translations, may be prevented or taken away, doubts removed, and translations
more safely followed. The knowledge of three languages very necessary; the
Hebrew tongue; in it the Canon of the old Testament was written: the Greek
tongue, in which language the Scriptures Canonical of the New Testament are set
down: and the Latin tongue, for the reading of authors, wherein most have
written.

III. Knowledge of Rhetoric, the Scriptures being Art of Rhetoric and
other sciences.
full of tropes and figures, with knowledge in the rest of the Liberal
Sciences: understanding also in natural Philosophy, Oeconomicks, Ethics,
Politiques, Geographie, Cosmographie: he may not be ignorant of Antiquities; he
is to be acquainted with Histories; and with whatsoever he shall be occasioned
to use in the interpretation of the Scriptures; without which no man can work
cunningly upon every text, if he want the instrument, (that is) the skill of
that art which should help him therein.

The diversity of knowledge in several things which a What fruit comes by
much knowledge in diverse things.
man brings with him to the reading of the Scripture, are as many candles to
give light to see into his text, both to find out and lay open such diversity
of matter as lie couched therein; as also to expound and to show the full
meaning of the words, as John 10. 27. to interpret this word Know; note first,
that he speaks by way of Similitude from a Shepherd; then here consider what
is a Shepherds knowledge: first to know sheep from goats: secondly his sheep
from other men's: thirdly to see to them, to love, care, and to provide for
them. Now apply this to the text, and you have the meaning of Know, which is,
I know them from goats to be mine, I see to them, love, care, and provide for
them. And thus may we expound difficult words, by considering to what Science
or Art to refer the word unto. One Artist cannot see by that single skill
all things: but the Grammarian he sees and handles Grammatical points: the
Rhetorician, Rhetorique: the Logitian, Logique: the Natural and Moral
Philosophers, their Philosophy: Historiographers, Antiquaries, and others, the
Scripture does require the use and skill of all sciences.
points of their profession. Every one cannot tell whence is fetched the
simile in Job, 14. 7. 8. 9 nor handle it well without in sight into husbandry.
Nor Job 20. 18. and 24. 5. and 30. 29. and 47. 7. 9. nor Jeremy 8. 7. nor Esai
50. 5. without natural Philosophy: nor Job 26. 7. nor 2. King 20. 9. Esai 38.
8. Amos 9. 6. without Astronomy: nor know how the words in Job 33. 9. are
spoken, without Rhetoric: not 1. Cor. 10. 1. 2. 3. 4. Act. 5. 36. 37. without
History. Nor 2. Peter 1. 5. 6. 7. without Ethics: nor Genes. 49. 10. without
Politiques. And thus might I instance the occasion of all knowledge required to
expound exactly every place in the Scripture: which I speak not as if I were
furnished with them, (for I here show but by my wants what I see to be
needful) nor to discourage some from the Ministry, nor to dishort others in
it, painful and profitable persons, who have not al these particulars to help
them: But to show that brain-sicke opinion to deny the use of Arts to the
Scripture, and to stir us up to the diligent study of these things, as we can
any way possibly do, to commend the great necessity of upholding Schools of
learning for the attainement hereof: and that such as have children and would
prefer them to the Ministry, should endeavor to train Knowledge in
Divinity besides the former humane science. Catechism. Thoroughly to be
acquainted with the scriptures themselves. How to read them profitably.
them up in all kind of learning, if any way they be able.

IV. Knowledge, besides this humane Science, in Divinity, it is absolutely
necessary: first that he be well grounded in the principles of Religion, to be
able to judge of his own interpretations, the opinions of others; and to lay
down sound and wholesome doctrine, as before I have declared the use thereof.
Secondly he be thoroughly acquainted with the Scriptures, by reading the same
orderly thorough, without confusion, reverently beginning with prayer, in
humility, without pride or prophannesse: attentively, without wandering
thoughts; with a hungring desire, without wearisomnesse or loathing; in faith
without doubting, believing and applying the same to thy self; conscionablie,
with purpose to practice the same to Gods glory, without hypocrisy,
constantly. This reading will by Gods spirit be blessed, to make a man expert
in the Scriptures: for the other more particular manner of reading the
Scriptures, I set those over to such as have largely written thereof, that
would be further instructed herein.

V. A minister must be furnished with books, as good Furnished with good
books: Of humanity.
helps to further his study, and these of all sorts. First, for humanity, of
the several Arts of Ethickes, Politickes, Oeconomicks, natural Philosophy,
such as have written of Trees, Herbs, Beasts, of Husbandry, Geographie,
Histories of Jewish customs, of their Waights and Measures, and what other
matter the learned have written of for the Scriptures especially.

Next these, books of Divinity and other necessary, Of divinity.
with such as are immediate intended helps therein. First, the Bible, the
book of God in English, Latin, Greek and The Bible.
Hebrew; our best English translation, Tremelius, Septuagints translation:
Montanus interlineall, or Vatablus: Beza his Testament. Secondly, Dictionaries,
besides the Latin Dictionaries.
and Greek common for all sorts, the Hebrew Pagninus and Auenarius. Thirdly,
Concordances, Latin, Greek and Concordance and the singular use thereof, to
find proofs for a Doctrine to enlarge the use of the same by reasons and
examples, and to handle a common place.
Hebrew, of which there is singular use: a Concordance helps memory much, to
find out any place of Scripture; also in comparing Scriptures, to find
places, the same with the text repeated, or like places in words that afford
help to prove doctrines, by seeking the principal word in the doctrine:
which it will help also to enlarge, by considering the several places which
speak of the same matter, or have the same words; out of which may be
observed, differences, causes, effects, exhortations, promises, threats, yea
and examples also, to handle thereby a Common place. As for example:

If a man would speak of Fear, let him find Fear in the Concordance, and
there he shall see some place will tell him what fear is, as Prouer. 1. 7. some
the kinds, of God, of man, true and false fear, what to fear, and what not,
as Matthew. 10. Exhortations to true fear, Deuter. 4. how to attain it,
Proverb. 2. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. Deuter. 17. 19. signs of fear, Psalm. 119. verse
14. The benefits reaped thereby, Psalm. 25. 34. And diverse other things at
large will be offered to thy consideration, to follow any point of Divinity
thereout, if once you had gotten an use herein; the benefit of this is more
then here I can conveniently express. Surely, he that understands his text
well, and knows how to draw a doctrine, needs no printed or written Sermons,
to help for to enlarge it: the right knowledge how to use a Concordance, is
every way a sufficient help for proofs, reasons, and illustrations of the
same. It may seem, and will prove irksome to him that at the first makes
trial thereof: but time and experience will make it easy and pleasant:

IV: Analyticall expositions for the dividing of books Analyticall exposition
and benefit thereof.
and chapters, and unfolding of the Scriptures, as Pflacherius has done on the
History of the Bible: Piscator on the new Testament: and some of all such
books help to show you the coherence, the antecedents, and the consequents,
the scope of the Author, the whole method and arguments for confirmation or
confutation of the proposition handled.

It were very good for a young beginner to read every day one chapter or two
with some learned man's resolution of the same: he shall profit much thereby in
knowledge of the Scriptures.

V. Of Annotations, as Bezaes; of Phrases, Westhemerus, Annotations.
and Illyricus in his Clauis Scripturae, has gathered many, and of diverse
acceptations of words, as also Marlorats Enchiridion The commodity of
Marlorats Enchiridion.
sets down; which book is of very good use, to show how many ways many
words are taken; to help to find out like places to compare with the text,
and to handle a Common place: the benefit of these books and such of the like
kind, is to further use in the interpretation of any obscure portion of
Scripture. Reconciliation of places.


VI. Of reconciling places seeming to differ, and to be one against an other,
as Christopher Obenhimius and Andreas Catcehismes.
Althamerus, or any other, if any have more, or done better of this matter.

VII. A Catechism containing the doctrine of the Church and principles of
Religion, Caluins Institutions, and Vrsinus Catechism; both which studied
thoroughly, will sufficiently inform a man's judgment in the chief points of
Religion, which a Divine must be well practiced in, for the trial of his
doctrine, and other men's judgments by the Analogy of faith, as before
declared. It is good for a beginner to have without book the definitions and
distributions of the principal heads of Theology, as Polanus Partitions
sets down, that so he may readily know to what Commonplace books, and
special traclates, being particular common places of several things at large.
head to refer his doctrines, or other men's propositions, to examine and judge
rightly of them.

VIII. Commonplace books, Musculus, Peter Martyr, Zegedinus tables, which
book is a sum of most principal learned men's labors before his time. At the
first a Divine is to exercise himself in handling and making Common places,
for so doing he shall furnish himself with much matter, and learn to
discourse, follow, and stand upon a point in a Sermon. Under Common places, I
contain particular Tractats of several things, being some large Commentaries
and what use to make of them.
Common place of some special point; of God, of Christ his incarnation,
passion, resurrection, etc. and of any other thing distinctly let down.

IX. Commentaries of Orthodoxwriters, all which will help thee in
understanding the text, they will more confirm thy judgment, seeing others to
agree in that which thou have conceived thy self; they, by occasion of words,
may put into thy mind what of thy self thou can not dream of, nor they
themselves intended: by these thou may as it were talk with and ask the
judgment of the Ecclesiastical histories, and Epistles of the ancient Fathers.
greatest Divines in the world, of any Scripture they write of; they yet living
and speaking to us by their labors: as Calvin, Peter Martyr, Musculus and
others.

X. Ecclesiastical Historiographers, Eusebius tripartite History, Ruffinus,
Socrates, Theodoretus, Sozomenus, Euagrius, Nicephorus, Josephus, Philo
Zonarus; to which add the Epistles of Jerome and other Fathers, and of late
writers. These historical books are of this use, for the knowledge of the
Churches estate, to reform manners, and to abolish superstitions.

XI. The Acts and Canons of ancient Councels, the Acts and Canons of Counsels.
Centuries, Functius, Sleidans Commentaries, and the book of Martyrs: to see
the judgment of Churches in matters of Religion, the condemning of heresies,
and maintenance of the truth. Heereunto add, the Harmony of confessions of
late reformed Churches.

XII. Controversies whereinto we may safely proceed, Controversies, and when to
study them and whose in the first place.
being well grounded by these things aforesaid. Herein it is good, to begin
with these of later times, Calvin, Peter Martyr, Cranmer, Iuell, Fulke, Sadel,
Beza, Whittakers, Mornay and Reinolds: then to other of former times, and also
to the Fathers. But here take these caueats touching the Fathers. First, see
that the name be not counterset, and Caueats in reading of the Fathers.
the work falsified (as of late the Fathers have been by the Papists.)
Secondly, approve of their opinions, and of all other men's, only as far as
they agree with Scriptures in matters of salvation. Thirdly, when they differ,
consider them as men, reverence them and receive them in the truth: but be tied
to none in their errors. If it be possible, reconcile and cure the jar, to
make them agree. If thou can not by the rules delivered, try which is sound,
and that hold. If an equal probability be of two, and reasons seem to thee
alike for both, make a profitable use of either: but publikly broach neither
unto the auditory, if it be a matter of importance, for it will but breed
contention. If we will thus be wary, we shall not run into error for
company, we shall uphold a consent and preserve a godly peace in the Church.

When we are thus fitly prepared and armed with the sound knowledge of the
truth, against sophistry and subtle distinctions; then may we boldly enter
upon a dangerous sort: for young nouices upon whom nevertheless in these
days, proud conceits, for show of learning, wild youths, wanton by their wits,
foolehardily rush upon, in their very a, b, c, of Divinity to their ruin and
Churches disturbance: Scholemen, Papists, Catechismes, Commentaries, histories,
etc.
as First, Schoolmen, Peter Lombard, Thomas Aquinas, Scotus, Bonauentura, and
Durandus. Secondly, Catechismes, Canisius, etc. Thirdly, Commentaries,
Caietanus, Ferus, Tolet, Arias Montanus, Stella, Pintus, Tansenius, Riberus,
and others with Postils. Fourthly, Histories, Caesar Baronius, Onuphrius,
August. Stuchus, Platina, Anastasius and Iacobus de Voragine. Fifthly, Gratian
decrees, Raymondus Decretals; Clementius Constitutions; the Extrauagants, the
Epistles of Romish Bishops; the Canon Law; the Glosses and Commentaries of the
Canonists; the Acts of late Councels, set forth by Peter Crabbe,
Martyrologies. Sixthly, Controversies of Roffensis, Gregory de Valentia,
Stapletons, Hosius, Eccius, Harding, Bellarmine, with others, and those that
have answered them. Seventhly and lastly, a Minister The holy spirit of God.
besides all these helps, must have to rule and direct him in these
subordinate means, the holy spirit of God, the only true interpretour of the
Scriptures; which are his own words; who is the spirit of truth, leading and
guiding all his in the same; without which men for all the means, may run
into errors, and grow into heresies: above all, this therefore pray for.

CHAP. VIII. Of gathering doctrines from the Text.
AFter Interpretation Logical, Grammatical, and Rhetorical, doubtful things
being resolved, and obscure What a Doctrine is.
made plain, follows the Collection of Lessons or Doctrines, which are
propositions drawn from the Scripture, teaching somewhat to be believed, only
for informing of the judgment. Here first a Teacher must begin to build,
that knowledge may go before zeal to guide the same: this of some is called
the Didascalike or Doctrinal part of a Sermon, wherein a truth is delivered
and confirmed; by this we only learn to know and believe: But to effect and
do is another part of the Sermon, following upon this: As for example. This is
a plain Doctrine delivered by the holy Ghost, Prou. 29. 18. Where there is no
vision, the people perish: This only informs my judgment to take knowledge
of a thing, which is this; That they which want the preaching of Gods word, are
in a fearful estate; it is neither exhortation, dehortation, reprehension,
commandment, promise, nor any such thing, (for these indeed are consequents of
doctrines.) Many such places be, which are evident doctrines of themselves:
Roman. 8. 1. 1. Corint. 2. 14. Galath. 3. 10. 11. Hebr. 13. 4. Psalm. 19. 17.
and a thousand more; out of which if we please, we need not stand to make How to
handle a did ascalike text, or a Scripture which is a doctrine of it self. A
particular explanation of every word.
other collection of Doctrines (except from the emphasis of a word, as an
observation by the way) but forthwith come to the use which is to be made
thereof, after the words be explaned, and a brief Paraphrase made thereon. As
for example, take these words of Solomon, Proverb. 29. 18.

They are a Doctrine of themselves as other Proverbs be: Here then begin to
expound the words thus: Where there is no: in the Hebrew it is only, in not, a
Preposition with an Aduerbe, in stead of a Noune; meaning in the want, or in
not having vision. Vision, this word is diversely taken in Scripture: first for
an ordinary means whereby God The diverse acceptions of a word, and the same
proved.
revealed his will to his Prophets, as Numb. 12. 6. and 24. 4. Secondly, for a
more special manifesting of himself to Moses, as Numb. 12. 8. Thirdly, for
the place of visions, Jerusalem, Esai 22. Fourthly and lastly, for the word of
the Prophets, the messengers of God to his people, Esai 1. 1. Obediah 1. 1.
where by vision is meant prophecy, and Obediah 1. 1.
vision and prophecy both one, 2. Chron. 32. 32. Act. 2. 17. Seers and
Prophets were one, 1. Sam. 9. 9. Preaching is also called Prophesying, 1. Cor.
14 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 13. which stands in the interpretation of the Scriptures,
verse. 13. or expounding thereof, verse. 5. by words which may be understood, v
9. What preaching is.
to edify, exhort, comfort and instruct the Congregation, verse. 3. 4. 19. In
this last sense must this word vision be taken, After that the diverse
signification of the word is noted, them set down one proper and apt for the
text, and prove how that, and not the other is fittest. The emphasis is noted,
and how it serves to the purpose.
and not in any of the three former senses; for this proposition is general
and ever true; but if we put in stead of vision, Jerusalem, it would be absurd
to say, Where there is no Jerusalem, the people perish: or, understand it of
vision to Moses, or the other which were but temporary, and are ceased* must
therefore we perish? It is to be interpreted therefore, preaching, called vision
and prophecy for the excellency thereof; so do also the learned expound it.
The people, that is, persons of all sorts, and not only the ruder multitude;
the word is general, and contains all. Perish, there is a singular emphasis
in this word, and therefore interpretors diuerslietranslate it, To cease and
leave off; to decay; to go back, to rebel, to be naked, to perish: all which
do well agree to this matter in hand. So it is, as if Solomon had said more at
large; Where men are without, and want the true A paraphrase brief in
significant words, according to the explanation, acceptance, and emphasis of
the words.
preaching of Gods word; there all sorts of men begin to give over good things
which before they delighted in, they decaie in graces, and fall back, become
rebellious and wickedly disposed, whereby they make themselves naked of all
graces, yea of Gods favor, exposing themselves to their spiritual enemies,
and so perish and come to destruction. Thus you see the doctrine explaned and
enlarged by a paraphrase, to the capacity of leuerie one; whereof in the next
place are uses to be made, and then as one thinks good, he may make some
observation besides, after the explanation, acception, emphasis, etc.

The gathering of a doctrine, is where the doctrine is not What it is to gather
a doctrine, and when, and also how.
expressed in the text, and is collected by good consequent necessarily. The
doctrine is not to be written from the text, as if the text were drawn to the
lesson; and not the doctrine from it; but must follow iusta consequentia; so is
the collection (...) and (...), which is by help of Logical affection of
arguments; from a general to a special; from the whole, to the parts; from
the proper adiunct, to the subject; and from the cause, effect, subject,
contraries, comparats, definition and distribution. As for example: Ierem. 31.
31. I will make a new covenant; out of which, this doctrine I gather from the
adiunct: That the Law of Moses was not to be perpetual, but for a time till
an other come in place thereof. Hebr. 13. 4. Hence this doctrine arises: It is
lawful for Ministers to marry, and their marriage is honorable, which
follows by just consequent, a genere ad speciem, and is as good a doctrine, as
if it had been said expressly; the marriage of Ministers is honorable, and the
bed undefiled. And thus he that so collects doctrines and delivers them, is to
be heard as the mouth of God. And he that thus can do, is an Apollo^ in Gods
Church, mighty in the Scriptures, showing by Scripture that which he teaches,
Act. 18. 24. 28. and shall convince the consciences of gaine-saiers, and
establish the truth in the hearts of the believers, and be bold to urge it
upon the hearers, as speaking with judgment from authority.

In gathering doctrines which may be diverse ways observed, Whence to collect
doctrines.
proceed in this order, both natural, helpefull to memory, and also will
occasion a man to think of many lessons.

I. From the occasion of that Scripture; as diverse occasions From the occasion.
were of the Psalms, of S. Paul's Epistles of the speeches of our Savior
Christ; of the Sermons in the Acts; and the same of other Scriptures, sometimes
one, sometimes an other, and so accordingly may many doctrines be gathered.

II. From the coherence (when it is) with the other words From the coherence,
whether it be a bare affirmation or negation. A reason, or more reasons of that
which went before: a prevention of an objection: a conclusion
in that place of Scripture:

If a Reason, it may teach to observe, that a reason is to be given of that
which is delivered for confirmation, and that a bare assertion without proof
is not sufficient.

If the matter be followed, but without any reason annexed, it may show the
same sufficiently proved, and easy to be received.

If more reasons be brought in, and the matter much urged, and largely stood
upon, it argues the necessity of that point; the earnest endeavor of the author
therein, and that it is hardly received of men as it ought, or easily rejected
as on: a similitude, an exhort. dehortat. commandment, etc.
it ought not to be.

If the words be a prevention of an objection, we may gather that in teaching,
there is as well required wisdom to prevent a foe, as to instruct a friend.

If a conclusion; a time to be observed to end every thing, wherein is wisdom
how far to speak in a matter, and when to conclude and be silent.

If the words be a similitude, to illustrate the matter; it may not the
obscurity of the point handled, or the plain and evident dealing of the
Author, noting withal the kind of similitude, and whence it is fetched.

Lastly, If an exhortation, threat, promise, etc. we may collect the use of
them, for that end which the spirit uses them.

Also from Commandment affirmative and exhortations; that we are unapt and
slow to a thing. From Commandment Negative and dehortation; our aptness to a
thing. Withal prove the exhortation to be necessary, or dehortation, also
promises and threats by other Scriptures and examples; and show wherein also
the promises and threats made, do stand, and in what particulars.

III. From the scope and maine drift of the words: From the scope. There is but
one true sense of a place, one scope, and one proper doctrine or proposition.
Of a general proposition or doctrine gathered out of many words, from the most
principal scope.
which doctrine is chief and principal of that Scripture As there is but one
drift, so but one proper and most natural doctrine of that place, which though
it may be delivered in a few words, yet it is contained sometimes in many,
sometime in fewer verses or words. As for example.

In handling the Epistle to the Romans, after the Preface to come to the
matter, we shall find the first scope and principal proposition, containing
the same, to be this: That there is but one way for all, Jew or Gentile to
attain salvation, even by the faith in Christ, wrought by the Gospel, the
power of God to salvation: which doctrine is contained and followed from the
16. verse of the first Chapter, to the beginning of the 19. chap. whereunto all
that is spoken is to be referred, as containing reasons to confirm the same.

But now here note, as there is a general scope, and so a Propositions or
doctrines less general drawn from the words which have a more special
scope. The less general proves the more general.
doctrine; so are there other propositions less general contained within the
same, and serve to prove the more general; the words having a general scope
to prove likewise these less general propositions. As to declare my meaning:
The general and principal proposition you hear what it is, now besides, the
Apostle delivers other propositions, General as Romans 3. 9. All men are
sinners; which doctrine is contained from the 18. verse. of the first chap. to
the 19. verse of the 3. chap. Again, that the works of the Law justify none:
That faith alone justifies. All which propositions, as they prove the
principal scope; so the verses wherein these prepositions are set down, must
yield these doctrines, and the words must be applied to prove the same: For we
cannot infer by a true immediate consequent, the principal proposition out
of them, which have a Some verses or words, which come in by the way, prove
not other propositions either general or special, but have an especial drift
as the occasion is, for which they are brought, and so thereafter is the
doctrine thence to be collected.
more particular scope. Again, this is to be marked, that many things come
into a discourse by the way, in handling of a matter, which are carefully to be
observed and taken heed unto, which neither serve to prove either the
principal scope, or the less general doctrines; but coming in by way of
prevention or other occasions have (as I may say) their indiuiduate scope: and
so their like distinct and several doctrines by themselves, as Romans 3. 1. 2.
where the scope is not that all are sinners; but to show by way of prevention;
that though the Jews as well as the Gentiles be under sin: yet have they their
preferment above these: there is the scope differing, the doctrine must differ
also. So the v. 3. and 4. prove not the prerogative of the Jews; the scope of
the two first verses: but are brought in by occasion of the Apostles own
words, to prevent them. The purpose whereof is to show that God is true and
just in his word and promise (though some do not believe the same) and is not
without effect.

Thus we see scope upon scope in handling one chief point; where also we
understand how the general is approved by the special: the special by the
words, which contain them same: so also will the words of an indiuiduate prove
the scope, and proposition gathered from thence: As for example: Act. 15. 21.

Which words contain reasons why the believing Gentiles An example, sha^ing
how the words prove the general doctrine or scope, and that the same words
afford several lessons agreeing with the principal doctrine and scope.
in some things should restrain their liberty for the weaker Jews sake, who
might be easily offended: and hardly yet be drawn to their liberty in Christ
by the impediments herein declared: it is the special scope of these two
verses, 20. 21. differing from that which went before.

The doctrine is this: That the stronger is to bear with the weaker in
indifferent things, when they see reasons that as yet hold them in their
weakness, till they be better instructed: every word contains a reason to
enforce this lesson to be received of the Gentiles, in the Jews behalf.

1. From the authority of their opinion, Moses the man of God. 2. From the
antiquity of it. 3. From the generality thereof, in every city. 4. For that
there be preachers and vpholders of the same. 5. They have the letter plainly,
for that they hold. 6. They see yet a present public observation of Moses,
every sabbath. Therefore sithence they have such pulbackes, reasons yet to
withhold them, they are a while to be borne withal: and their liberty for
fear of offense to be restrained.

The scope thus we see, and the words to contain reasons and arguments to
enforce the same, out of which arguments many doctrines may be gathered
agreeing unto the scope: As thus:

Opinions of great persons once generally received are of great authority to
bind men unto them, and hardly can they be induced to forsake the same.

That antiquity, and so custom, in any religion holds so professors to like
thereof, as they will hardly see their errors, and yield to a manifest truth of
late come to light, and From the manner of delivering the words Grammatically,
and Rhetorically.
known but to some. And so of all the rest of the former reasons may thus
lessons be gathered fitly, to inform out judgments from the scope.

IV. From the manner of delivering the words, by a Grammatical Ellipsis, note
the celeritie of affection or brevity thereof, as Genes. 11. 4. Act. 5. 34:
Exodus 22. 23: Psalm. 6. 3. And so also the use of Grammatical figures approved.
By enallege of tense, note the certainty of the thing, Genesis 10. 3. Esai 9. 6.
and 21. 9. By iterating of Noune Substantives in the same Case, shows either:

an Emphasis, Psalm. 133. 2. Luke 6. 42. or a multitude, Genes. 32. 16. or a
distribution, 1. Chr. 16. 13. Le. 17. 3. 2. Chr. 19. 5. or else diversity and
variety, Ps. 12. 13. Pro. 20. 10.
By iterating the same substantives in construction in the singular number,
they note an Emphasis and certainty, Exodus 31. 15. Micheas 2. 4. in the plural
an excellency, Ps. 136. 2. Eccles. 12*

By repeating of the Verb may be taught an Emphasis,

or vehemence, Genesis 2. 17. Esa. 50. 2. and. 56. 3* or certainty, Ps. 50. 21.
Ps. 109. 10. Ier. 12. 16. or celerity, 2. King. 8. 10. Prou. 27. 23*

By repeating of Adjectives show an amplifying, increasing, or extolling of the
thing, Ier. 24. 3. Esa. 6. 3. Exodus 34. 6. Ier. 7: 4. and 22. 29.

By iterating of a Conjunction, vehemence. Eze. 13. 9.

By repeating of a Sentence: either

Distribution, as Ezech. 46. 21. or Emphasis, Exodus 12. 50. Ps. 145: 18. and
124. 1. or for Explanation, Ps. 2. 3. or for Confirmation of the matter, Ps.
33. 11.
By an ironicall speech, a reprehension and the use thereof.

By interrogation, a vehement affirmation, Genesis 47. Joshua 10. 30. Judge. 4. 6.
John 4. 35.

2. or Negation, Genesis 18. 4. Matt. 12. 26.

3. or prohibition, Psalm. 79. 10. 2. Sam. 2: 22.

4. or diverse affections, as admiration, pity, complaint, Ier. 14. 19. Matthew.
23. 37.

5. or reprehension, Psalm. 8. 10. Esai 1. 21. Psalm. 22. 1.

So does an Exclamation note as much.

By Concession note a negation and reprehension, 2. Cor. 12. 16. And by all
these the use of Rhetoric is confirmed. Also from promises or threats
conditionally delivered, and the end wherefore. Out of all these (nothing in
Scripture being in any manner vainly uttered) some good observation may be made.

V. From the order of the words as they be placed (either From the order of the
words and placing of them, and so of the parts of the division of the text.
one part of the division, or one word) before or after an other, as Ezech. 18.
30. Act. 26. 18.

Opening of the eyes before, turning the lesson, knowledge before repentance.
But here the nature of the thing is to be considered, and other reasons of so
placing the matter, whether natural order be kept or no. For as nothing is
spoken idly, so nothing is placed rashly by the pen man of Gods spirit in the
Scripture. We in ordinary talk, seriously speaking and wisely, will never
misplace our words wittingly in weighty matters. God disposes of our words,
Proverb. 16. 1. much more of the Canonical and holy writers.

VI. From the coupling of words and sentences: by Copulative From coupling of
words and sentences.
Conjunctions, showing the parts to be both true together, absolutely and not
separablie in that matter or circumstance, as Eccles. 12. 13. the fear of God
and keeping the Commandments are inseparable, Psalm. 34. 21. both the parts
true, see Psalm. 33. 17. Matthew. 10. 1.

From disjunctive Conjunctions, showing that but one of the words or sentences
is true, or so to be in either, but not both, as the place intends.

VII. From the several words: for God puts not only From the several words
one by one, and this is diversely done.
matter into the minds of the writers, and directs them in the manner, but also
guides them in setting it down with words, Ierem. 1. 9. 2: Samuel. 23. 2. Our
Savior extends the truth of the Word to an iota or a tittle, Matthew. 5. 18. so
substantial is every thing which therein is set down.

Now this collecting of lessons from the words is diversely How many ways
observations may be gathered from the words.
done.

First, from the natural and most proper signification and emphasis of the
word.

Secondly, from the figurative use thereof, containing some metaphor or other
trope.

Thirdly, from the Grammatical adsignification of the number, as the Apostle
does to the Galath. 3. 16. So of the Case, Gender and Tense, speaking in the
Present, Perfect, or Future tense. This is Musculus course, observing that he
says not thus and thus: but so and so: and thence collecteth lessons.

Fourthly, from a Logical affection of a word; to an other thing, as a cause,
effect, subject, adiunct, and so forth.

Fifthly, by making a question out of the words, and answering the same; which
answer being proved, must stand for a doctrine; and may be delivered in a
proposition. This way was practiced by the reverend man, Master Perkins.

VIII. From the circumstances of the time, quando. From circumstances.
Day, night, winter, summer, present, past or future, fit, inconvenient,
adverse, or prosperous: quandiu, how long, or short; once, or often, Hebr. 12.
26. 27.

2. From the person, God, Angels, Men; Devil, and ill Angels, and Men; public
and general, as Adam and Abraham; or private, ordinary or extraordinary: Sex,
man, woman, age, birth, country, estate, place or calling in Church or
Commonweal: qualities of mind or body, good or bad, elect or reprobate.

3. From the place: heaven, earth or hell: sea, land, holy, profane, large or
strait, common or proper, and so forth.

But here note, in gathering lessons from examples, to make a difference
between the person of Christ and men. Our Saviors example ever good for
instruction; yet not in all things imitable, as what he did and spoke as God;
and what appertained to his proper office and Mediatourship. So men may be
good, as yet often they do ill, we must therefore consider the act or speech
of the person; and then the person himself, with all the circumstances of the
same before noted; and so gather the doctrine, else may we err, and collect
that, which by judicial examination will not stand, nor be found sound and
approoueable.

IX. From the matter contained in the words; Ecclesiastical, From the
diversity of matter contained in the words.
Political, Domestical, and so from the Ethics, Natural Philosophy,
Mathematics, and Arts or Science therein contained. As for example. Psalm. 72.
1. Give judgments to the King ^ God. Here to take occasion to speak of
politic government. ( o God:) from this to handle that point of Divinity
concerning God. Righteousness: from this to speak of Divine, Moral, and
Christian Righteousness. ( Son:) from this to speak of Oeconomicks
somewhat. Whence to begin and what it is to handle a common place.
And so likewise out of any text to fall into a Common place; which is to
handle a thing by the definition, distribution, cause, effect, by the
agreeableness with, or disagreeing from other things: all which are to be
proved by Scripture, reason, and testimonies; and so must be in stead of
doctrines; whereof uses must be made as of collected lessons; to convince the
false definitions and distributions; to instruct for practice, and correct vice
by the same; and to comfort as the matter shall serve.

The common manner of proceeding into a Common place, is by these forms, (as)
here let us see what this is: (or) we have occasion hence to speak of such a
matter, When to common place.
and so forth. But yet it is not convenient to take every where occasion to
Common place upon any word, but upon such as the text may well afford, when
the people need to be informed thereof as yet ignorant, being an vncatechised
Congregation: or when some notable vice is commonly committed, and necessarily
to be corrected: or some godly duty to be commended; happily made then no
account of, or contemned, as is the preaching of the Word, and so forth.

X. From a thing by proportion and resemblance to an For a thing by similitude
and proportion.
other, as Hebr. 11. 1. as Abraham left his natural country at Gods bidding,
to enjoy Canaan; so must we this world, to inherit heaven. And such lessons may
be followed and urged, where good reason may be given of a true proportion
between things compared: as Abraham fitly here may be for every Christian;
and Canaan was a true type of heaven.

Thus we see how we may make an Allegory, which is How to Allogorize
lawfully.
not simply unlawful; for the Apostle does allegorize, 1. Cor. 9. 9. And it
is but an argument drawn from a similitude, when the words are expounded
mystically, otherwise then the litterall sense does afford.

But in gathering allegories: First, gather them after the true and natural
sense be delivered, and not before. Secondly, let them not be too far
fetched, strained, obscure, or foolish: but agreeing with the Analogy of
Faith, and other manifest Scriptures. The best Allegorizing is when the parts
of the allegory may be referred to other Scriptures, speaking of the same
properly, as Matt. 26. 36. and so forth. Where Christ may resemble every
pastor: Peter, James, and John, Christian professors. Gethsamine, the
Congregation; their sleep, sin; Judas, the devil.

The proportion then is this: As the Disciples in Gethsamene, though warned to
watch and pray till Christ's coming to them again, yet fell soon asleep: and
had not Christ returned and awaked them, Judas and his train suddenly had
seized upon them. Even so, though a Pastor teach his flock, and forewarne
them, and leave them but a while to themselves; they will soon fall to sin,
and be suddenly overtaken of the devil and his instruments, if he come not
eftsoons again to call them, and stir them up to godliness. This allegory
is true, and apt; for Christ is called a Pastor; the three Disciples were
Christians; sin is called sleep, Romans 13. and Judas a devil; men are apt to
sin, as to sleep; and the absence of a Pastor very perilous: Prou. 29. 18.
so as this agrees with other Scriptures and the Analogy of faith. Thirdly,
handle an allegory briefly, and use them not too often. Fourthly, let the use
and end be for instruction of life, but not for any proof of doctrine. Fifthly,
let the ancient, grave, and wise collect them. It is not a safe way for young
beginners not well exercised in the Scriptures, and grounded in the truth.
Allegories are delightful, and therefore youth will (as I may say) lasciuire,
soon wax wanton immoderately herein, and so in stead of using, abuse the
Scripture.

Allegories may be gathered diversely.
First, from names, and signification thereof, as Beelzebub How many ways an
allegory may be raised.
prince of Flies, the Devil. Hence this allegory. As great flies, but easily
blowing upon flesh in warm weather, infects it, and makes it more and more
craule with maggots: so does the devil by blasting of our souls with
suggestion; in time of prosperity, etc. But note here, with the name and
signification consider the nature of that whence it is taken (as you see from
this) and also the nature of that whereunto it is applied.

Secondly, from Histories, taking occasion often from the name, as Luke 8. 41.
49. Iairus signifies one enlightened; hearing of Christ, seeks to him in hope
of help; but whilst he is praying, comes the devil or his instrument, and
interrupts and would withdraw him to give over; but that Christ Jesus verse. 50.
comforts him, and gives him encouragement From what places chiefly the Ancient
have used to gather allegories.
to believe, and so soorth. In stories where the places seem not to afford
much matter, there men have accustomed to gather an Allegory, as Genes. 27.
14. 15. 16. 17. Luke 19. 2. 3. 4. and verse. 29. 30. 31. 32. 33. 34. and 45. and
such like.

Thirdly, from those Scriptures, where the words have a show of an untruth in
the letter, and must be understood figuratively, as Psalm. 9. 13. which Christ
literally taken never did, Psalm. 1 18. 22. Esai 11. Matt. 21. 44. and 4. 12.
and such like; where the litterall sense seems to infer an absurdity, as
Romans 12. 20. Mark. 11. 13. 14. Luke 6. 29. 30. where the matter in the
litterall sense may seem in regard of the baseness thereof, to derogate from
the wisdom of the penman; whose excellency of understanding and calling
cannot but persuade us of a farther and more excellent matter then the letter
barely intends. likewise Ioh. 4. 35. Romans 13. 11. 12. 1. Cor. 3. 12. so many
places in the Proverbs, as cap. 24. 30. chap. 6. 9. chap. 9. 1. 2. 3. etc. and
25. 16. Deuteronomy. 25. 4. All these have a further meaning then the letter.

Lastly, where the words be typical: either in precept, as Exodus 22. 18. 19.
Leu. 12. 2. 3, or Example, as in Abraham, Genesis 22. Joshua, Sampson, David, and
others.

XI. Lastly, from Similitudes many lessons be gathered, From similitudes.
and that two ways:

First, from the drift whereto it is brought: and then from the very letter and
thing it self, whence the similitude is made without regarding the similie: as
if it were a plain narration: As Gal. 4. 1. 2.

The scope is to show by the similitude, that the Law of An example.
God makes not freee, but keeps in bondage: for it does with us as tutors and
governors do with an heir, being a child; even keep him under as a servant.

The lesson from the scope is: that the Law is servitude, and freeth not,
neither can it, more then tutors a child: but is at the fathers appointment.

From the letter this lesson. That a wise and a godly father will bring up his
child well, though he be his only son and heir, under tutors and governors.
For we must know that the thing, from whence the similitude is fetched, is the
same in it self, for which it is brought to illustrate another. If the wrath
of a King be fearful as the roaring of a Lion: then a Lions roaring is
fearful.

This collecting of lessons from a similitude, is not only when it is largely
set down, but even contained in one word by a Metaphor; as when a Minister is
called a shepherd; and a believer, a sheep; a wicked man, a dog; we may
note the nature of the thing whence the similie is drawn: and so far as it
may well agree to the thing to which it is brought, apply the same in the
several properties to it as doctrines, but then prove them in the application
and make use thereof.

Thus may we do in Parables.
First mark the scope and the lessons thence, and then To collect lessons from
parables.
from the letter: But yet beware we gather not lessons from every thing
therein; so many absurdities might follow: neither intended in the scope and
spiritual sense, nor in the letter true: as in the Parable of Dives, it is
said, he speaks in hell, and has a tongue, which is not true. Many things in
Parables may be supposed, as if it were so, to teach a truth by a feigned
thing. Of Typical places.


Typical places have also a doublesense litterall and spiritual. Many of the
chiefest and heads of the Jews, were types of Christ. The Jews in prosperity
and adversity, their blessings and curses, and much of their service typical
to us: and therefore double observations may be thence made. And thus much how
to gather Doctrine.

Now of the delivery and proof of the doctrines: wherein

I. Follow your division, and gather the doctrines as the What to be done in
delivering a doctrine, and proouing the same. Ground of the doctrine. What
doctrines to gather, and what to enlarge.
parts do lie in order: for therefore is the division made.

II. Before or after the doctrine be delivered, lay open the ground thereof,
that it may evidently appear how it arises: this is much to persuade, to
believe and embrace the same: now this easily may be done by a short paraphrase.

III. Collect such only as aptly may be collected: and of these; First, what
are well known, note them only in few words, and but point as it were at
them. Secondly, the more seldom and rare, and withal profitable, them only
prosecute largely. Every text has some certain words and circumstances more
Emphaticall then the rest. Thirdly, whatsoever may be above the capacity of
the hearers, omit that. All men are not apt for every thing, Ioh. 16. 12. 1.
Cor. 3. 1. 2. there is beginning, growth, and doctrine for both. Fourthly,
every thing inconvenient to be uttered, in respect of time, place, and person,
is to be with silence passed over: herein is a Ministers wisdom well seen.
Doctrines must be very sound. What things to be avoided.


IV. All doctrines must be sound and good, 1. Tim. 4. 6. wholesome words
according to godliness, 1. Timoth. 6. 3. vncorrupt. Tit. 2. 7. profitable,
Tit. 3. 6. standing in faith and charity, 2. Timoth. 1. 13. We must avoid
carefully profane, Jewish, and old wives fables, 1. Timoth 4. 7. doting
foolish, and unlearned questions, 2. Tim. 2. 23. strife about words 1. Tim. 6.
4. Commandments of men, which turn away from the truth, Tit. 1. 14.
Genealogies, contentions, brawlings about the law; and whatsoever is
unprofitable which procures envy, ingendreth strife, railing, ill surmises,
which peruerteth the hearers, increases to more ungodliness, profane and
vain bablings, 2. Timot. 2. 16. and whatsoever works annoiance to godly
peace.

Now that the doctrine may be sound and true: First ponder How to ^.
it well before it be delivered. Secondly, examine it by the former rules, the
Scripture and Analogy of Faith. Thirdly, see the judgment of all sound
anncient and late writers thereupon. Fourthly, let it not be a point in
controversy undetermined of the Church; for its hard to define a truth in
matters disputeable and not certainly concluded upon. Fifthly, let none of these
things be the ground of our opinions, (...) ground to build upon.
to broach them to the people; no man's bare assertion without substantial
proof, old custom, good intent, carnal reason, nor self conceit where the
word warrants not. These may not sit down to teach in Moses chair, nor bear
any sway in the Lords matters, concerning his worship and his service.

V. The doctrine being true and sound; First, deliver it How a doctrine is to
be delivered.
to the people gravely, with deliberate audible voice, and distinct sound in
the words, not forcing it as in exhortation. There is one voice and speech for
doctrine, another for exhortation, threats, and dehortations. The nature of
things must distinguish the action and pronuntiation. To be loud in doctrine
and low in exhortation, or alike in both, is to make discord between the
matter and proper manner, belonging thereunto. Secondly, let the doctrine be a
short proposition, delivered in few, proper, and significant words; using as
near as possibly may be, the phrase and words of Scripture; avoid all
obscure terms, not usual also words doubtful, lest either the matter be not
understood or mistaken. And therefore if any words be so by necessity or
unawares uttered, expound your meaning before you do leave them, that the
doctrine may go for current.

VI. After so delivered, show sometimes the reason why it is or ought to be so,
but ever prove it, (except it be a maine principle sufficiently known and
approved) for ^
the hearers are not bound to receive our bare affirmations or negations
without warrant. Instance the truth of the doctrine, sometime by an example;
to make it more evident: as speaking of Fear: The doctrine being this: The
Fear of God escheweth evil: This may be proved Prove. 8. Prou. 15. an
instance, Job 1. 2, Joseph.

Confirm the doctrine by Canonical Scripture, Nehem. By that to ^^nfirme
doctrine, and how to dea^ ^^ bringing in a pro^^e.
8. 8. Act. 18. 28. and out of plain places, without any or least obscurity,
if any be explanent; and enlarge also the proof to declare how it confirms
the doctrine delivered, aptly and not strained, which will thus appear, if the
place of proof will thence afford the same doctrine to be collected, for
which its brought forth to confirm an other Scripture. Let the proof be in
the sense, and not only in the bare show of the letter, and recite either the
whole, or but some part of the place, as much as serves for the purpose in
hand: to avoid tediousness to the hearers, and to prevent forgetfulness of
thine own matter in hand, use not many, but few pregnant proofs: under two or
three witnesses, every truth is confirmed.

There is a new vpstart quoting of Scripture now used, Too many quotations to
prove one thing not good ^^ ^t^ now v^ed.
Chapter and Verse for every word: It is an irreuerent abuse, a superfluous and
profane tossing of the Scriptures, without profit to the hearers; whose
understanding can neither conceive them, nor memory bear them away. Pride the
inuentor, to publish the excellency of memory, seeking praise from Gods gift,
and making admirable his natural work by abusing his word, like Judas in show
of love to kiss him, whilst in kissing they betray him. It is not possible
(especially for the yoonger sort, whose vanity it is for the most part) for to
have seriously considered of so many Scriptures, how aptly and truly they be
alleged for the purpose.

If you have no plain place, prove it by necessary consequent out of other
Scriptures, by Logical reasoning, from signification of a word, from
Grammatical adsignification, from a principle of Religion, and so forth. Add
thereunto testimony of Fathers, and famous Divines, consent of Churches,
Councels, and confession of adversaries, for the better persuading of the
hearers, if it be thought convenient or necessary. For these help much to
persuade to the truth first confirmed by the Word, though their authority be
nothing besides the Word in matters of salvation: much less in any thing to be
alleged, and opposed against the truth approved by holy writ. Exhortation
upon the proof.


VII. After all this, then exhort to the embracing of this doctrine, as being
the truth, and urge the force of the proofs briefly, to persuade a constant
holding of the same; if it be a doctrine oppugned, or wherein the people stand
wavering; else it is needless so far to urge every doctrine, or to exhort so
to that which already is believed and received for a certain truth.

Note that every doctrine may be brought to some principles A note.
of Religion, Commandment, Articles of Faith, or Petition in the Lords Prayer,
as Berhusius in his postill shows.

Thus much of collections of Doctrines, wherein we see what profound knowledge
in Scripture for gatherings of Doctrines, and confirming them by proofs is
required of the Minister, and what a student, and how well read he ought to be
in authors, to see their judgments, that he may become exact in this point; to
inform and confirm men in the truth, and to settle them in Religion without
wavering.

CHAP. IX. Of making use of the doctrine, showing what to do with it.
AFter the delivery of the Doctrine, enforming the auditory How to make use of
the doctrine.
that there is such a thing, and what it is, follows the use necessarily;
that the hearers may know what to do with that which they so understand. These
two cannot in nature be sundred; nothing can be taught but there is an use and
end thereof; and these be distinct in nature; the doctrine goes before, and
the use comes after. A lesson without use, is as a devised thing idly without
end. And it is less cunning to give a precept, then to show aptly the use
thereof. We must therefore first in every Scripture show the doctrine; as
laying a ground of our speech, and thereon build the use for further
edification.

The uses which are to be made of doctrines are principally ^.
these four, as it is, 2. Tim. 3. 16. Romans 15. 4.

I. The first is Redargutiue; when the doctrine is used to confute an
souerthrow an error or heresy, contrary to that truth in the doctrine. And
this is the duty of a Teache^; the Prophets used it, Esai 44. our Savior
Christ, Matthew. 5. and 6. and 15. against false interpretations, traditions, and
against false opinions. Matthew. 22. So likewise the Apostles, A^. 17. 2. and 9.
29. and herein he must have ability, Tit. 1. 9.

In conuincing the Adversaries.
1. To do them no wrong, lay down their error truly ^.
and briefly, as it is held by them, expounding the meaning and distinguishing
of the words from their own best approved writers, if any obscurity be in
it, or ambiguitie; that so the matter be not mistaken, nor the adversary have
occasion to cavil and deny the position.

2. Not to make it grosser nor more absurd then it is, show wherein we consent,
and how far we may approve of that opinion. This course will show our
faithful (...)ling, allowing truth in all things, and in every one, and that
we wilfully dissent not where we have just cause to agree.

3. Note our dissent, and wherein we differ, and they mistake the matter;
showing our reasons for the truth (as I have declared in confirmation of a
doctrine) and bring in withal, the forciblest objections which the adversaries
^.
makes against us, to gainsay that we hold. For there are two sorts of
objections; one which the adversary uses against us to hind: our
confirmation, and to weaken the reasons which we bring for the truth we hold.
The other which they make against our arguments in confuting their errors. The
objections we must answer, according as they be made; some from the Scripture;
some from the testimonies of men, Fathers, and Councels, and withal to weigh
what may apparentlie be excepted against our answer, and prevent that.

4. The difference being clear between us, confute With what to confute an
error.
their error. First by express words of Scripture. Secondly, by reasons drawn
from Scripture. Thirdly, from a principle of Religion. Fourthly, from
testimony of the Fathers, by their interpreting of those Scriptures which we
bring in, or their assertions else where. Fifthly, from Councels. Sixthly, from
some of their own writers disagreeing happily in that point, or from some of
their general points, wherein we and they agree, showing that those and such
errors Weak grounds to build upon, and props of errors.
of theirs cannot stand together. Seventhly, by discovering the absurdity, the
weak grounds whereon they build such an error, ftom the bare opinion of one
man, or consent of many, from Custom, from deceived Councels, forged Authors,
from fathers mistaken or perverted, traditions, pretended verities unwritten,
Apocryphal books, or from Canonical Scripture, but the place misalledged
contrary to the meaning, or not fully alleged, by adding or detracting, or
from a translation erroneous. for these be the Sophistical delusions and
deceivable courses which heretics and scismatikes use to maintain their
errors with.

5. The danger of the error is to be declared.

But here; First, let none fall to couince error, except by When its best to
fall to confutation and controversies.
extreme necessity they be urged thereunto, before they have for some time
delivered a certain truth; and Catechized the people. It is a preposterous
course, coming to an ignorant people and superstitious, as most ignorant
persons be, to begin forth with to handle controversies; it breeds contention,
it makes the common sort who cannot judge what is spoken for, or objected only
against the truth, to be answered for clearing the truth; to think the
Preacher teaches contrary things, and to speak he knows not what. It were
better to bear with many things, (yet in the mean season, showing in general
that he would gladly inform them wherein they err: but that as yet they be
not able to bear that he would utter) till they be taught the principles
plainly and diligently, and after a familiar manner; winding the truth into
them at unawares as it were, without controulement of their ignorant customs
and manners for a while. S. Paul was some time at Ephesus before he cried openly
out of the idol Diana. What controversies first to be handled; and how far
to proceed.


II. Also herein let none meddle farther, when they begin, then may benefit
the hearers, and themselves well able to deal with. It is good to raise up no
more spirits by showing the arguments of the adversary, then may be cunningly
coniured down again, lest in seeming either to withdraw or to keep any from
error, such should confirm men therein, and put words into their mouths, to
speak against the truth, before unknown to them. A foolish merchant is he,
who will so much make mention of other men's wares, as that he thereby, though
not intended, overthrow his own market. He is foole-hardie that will
challenge an other into the field, bring him out weapons, and himself without
skill to ward off, and so letting himself be beaten with that which he
brings. Controversies requires sharpness of wit, and some cunning to find out
Satan's Sophistry. Young Cockerils that begin but to crow, may not set upon
the great Cocks of the game. There be many Nouices who have scarce learned
the a, b, c, in Divinity, ignorant in a manner of the common principles of
religion, yet in these days will be meddling with the chiefest controversies:
some crowing against that Sophistical Bellarmine: some billing at that profound
and Judicial interpreter Calvin; audaciously controulling him, and foolishly
despising his incomparable learning and skill. Some running into the
troublesome point of Discipline, when hardly they know what the Noune means:
believing what they hear; but saying nothing what they see themselves
iudicially. A better way were it to let them alone till we be grown to these
things: and then also to proceed wisely and moderately: and in the mean time
to bend our force altogether against the common adversary.

III. Let us beware we call not upon, or once mention, Old and bypast heresies
or such as are not amongst us, not to be mentioned.
old, dead, and bypast heresies, out of all men's memories: this were but to
keep in mind what were better buried ever in oblivion: neither devise any
new, which are not held: which were so to fight with our own shadow: and to
utter lies, and offend against charity by slander. A wicked practice of the
Papists against us, and some of our own brethren amongst our selves.

IV. And lastly, in confutation of any error, let these Certain caueats in
entering into a controversy.
things be looked unto. First, that the text occasion it by good consequent, or
directly speaks against it; that we seem not to delight in controversies,
arguing a vain contentious spirit. Secondly, let it be such a one, as at that
time is abroad, or forthwith is like to come forth, and also dangerous to the
Church. Thirdly, consider whether it be necessary to be mentioned and
confuted, before that auditorie: and also when conveniently. Fourthly, not to
stand long upon it, but so far as may be thought expedient to the edification
of the hearers. It is altogether a fault, to spend in Country and rude
assemblies, the whole time, or most part of the Sermon in some point of
controversies: as some use to do without just occasion, or necessary cause.
These spirits benefit little their auditories and breed more contention then
conscience. And thus much for Redargutiue use.

II. Is Instructiue, when the doctrine is used to bring us Instructiu^ use and
what it is. Matthew. 7. Romans 12. etc. James epist. The ground of this use is
either a doctrine or an observation of circumstances ^^ si ead thereof.
to the exercise of Christian duties to God and man. And this is the Ministers
duty, as the example of our Savior in his Sermon shows, the Apostles also in
their Epistles.

This use must be according to the doctrine, which doctrine is either a
Proposition without regard of circumstances enforming judgment, as thus:
Nothing can cross Gods determination. Salvation is of free grace. True faith
rests on Gods promise: Whence use of instruction, correction, redargution and
consolation may be drawn. Or in stead of the doctrine, the observing and
showing of circumstances, with the thing done or spoken, is the ground of the
instruction: as when we say; You see here this or that done or spoken, by this
or that person, when, where and how; which bare relation of things and
circumstances is the thing taught to inform the understanding: whence the use
of instruction concerning some duty, which must be done, How to gather right
(...) an instruction.
may be made, and also ought to be gathered. First, from the due consideration
of the matter in hand, whether it be ecclesiastical, political, or
oeconomicall, or what thing else soever. Secondly, of all the circumstances in
that place particularlarlie, and so make the instruction accordingly fitting
to the matter, time, place and person. For Instructions from examples, usual
in story, may be erroniouslie gathered, except these things be carefully
noted; as for example, in Reading, Judge. 16. 30. to gather that it is lawful
for a man, to venture his life and kill himself to be revenged on his enemies,
is false and against the Word: which error comes (if so collected) from want of
consideration of all the circumstances, the party. Sampson the judge of Israel,
a type of Christ, who did it by the instinct of Gods spirit, not to revenge
himself, but to perform his calling, executing Gods vengeance against the
Lords enemies; according to all which the instruction must be made, and so it
will be good. But if the place be of a general duty, which belongs to any,
as of any part of holiness to God, righteousness to other, so brietie to ones
self: albeit the person be of a special calling, yet the instruction must be
general; only urged more upon that calling, whereof the place gives the
instance and example. As if the act were o^ diligence in a man's calling, which
is a duty of every man: but let the instance be of S. Paul an Apostle, a
Preacher; and therefore to be urged upon Preachers more specially to be
diligent. So of Daniels praying. Praying is a general duty of all: but the
example of Daniel is of a Prophet and of a great Statesman, both which sort,
are to be urged to the daily exercise of Prayer.

After the Instruction be laid down, three things are to be performed.
I. Prove it, and then use persuasions and exhortations How to urge and
enforce a duty upon a people.
thereunto: urge the same by good reasons upon the auditorie to do it. First,
from a commandment affirmative: the approbation thereof with God, with
godly-men, whose testimony and sentences here are to be brought in, yea the
sayings of heathen, touching moral duties. Secondly, promises temporal and of
eternal favor mentioned in Scripture, to such as perform that duty. Thirdly,
from the effects and use thereof to Gods glory, profit to a man's self and
others. Fourthly, set it forth by examples, which both delight the hearers and
do move and teach the ruder sort. These examples are of two sorts: One of
such as practiced the duty handled: and another of such as received blessings
from God, and honor with man therefore; and here may the examples not only
extant in Scripture, but other true writers, both Christian and Profane, be
brought forth, yea the shadows of these in brute creatures: which be of
great force to persuade, and very lawful to be used. Fifthly, use Similitudes,
which may be taken from persons, things and actions which have this use, both
to explane the necessity, equity, and easiness of the thing: as also to win
the hearer by so plain and evident demonstrations. But here beware What
similies to use, and the benefit of them.
the Similies be from things known, easy to be conceived, and apt; so are all
Similies made in Scripture, whether but short, as Esai 1. 3. 8. 18. and 9. 1.
and 30. 13. Ier. 5. 8. or more at large, as Esai 5. 1. etc. Our Saviors
Parables, and Nathans to David: these being plain they will be understood, and
will draw an assent to the Parable, being delivered in the third person. Men in
hearing will give sentence, by force of their judgment; and after the same
assent given, then being aptly applied to the matter in hand, it will cause
their consciences to urge them after the sentence they have given, as appears
in David. By which it is manifest, that similies are of excellent use even to
teach, move and delight the hearer, and their ministry powerful which must
use them. Saint Chrysostom herein was much in every Sermon, to whom in this
practice, no man lightly is to be compared.

Sixthly, making of comparisons between it and other virtues, and contrary vice.

II. Thing to be done, is to declare the means to attain To show the way and
means to attain to that virtue.
thereunto: for after a matter be declared and reasons urged, the parties may
be moved thereunto, but know not the way thereunto: therefore must the means
be showed, which the holy Spirit in Scripture practices: who, as for an
instance, teaching what fear is, persuading also thereunto, declares the means
how to come by the same: as Prou. 2. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. And here withal show the
easiness, Gods assistance, his promise to help, the excellency and good even
in using of the means, examples of such as have used the same, and the happy
success therein.

III. Exhort hereupon, summarily repeating the reasons; To use exhortation,
any rhetorical amplifications.
enforce and enlarge some one of the waightiest and stir up to the means: that
affection may take hold, and endeavor be used to the thing, as well as to know
the duty. This is the most special point: and here in this place comes in the
use of Rhetoric, and to set abroach all the engines of that Art and grace in
speaking, to move to the fervent study of any thing.

The affections here to be stirred up are four: In exhorting labor upon
affections.

Love to the thing: desire to the means: hope in the means: and joy
respecting the benefits in the end.

The figures chiefly to be used are these:
Exclamation: but this not too often, nor too vehement What Rhetorical figure
chiefly in use.
with Stentors voice: and then, when either the excellency of a thing, the
greatness or strangeness thereof requires it, Esa. 1. 2. Ier. 22. 29.

Interrogation made upon occasion of time, place and person from the matter in
hand and the reasons: it is much used in Scripture: it enforces the conscience
to answer: it makes the hearers judges of the matter, and so causes them will
they nill they, to go on with the speaker.

Compellation; which is a calling upon the hearers, to a consideration of the
thing spoken: this stirs up attention, and fetches in again wandering
thoughts.

Observation; this is making of request, entreating the auditorie to grant
somewhat: this argues love and humility; it wins by meekness an assent
fit for any: but never to be used, but when the matter has been well beat
upon before, and enlarged sufficiently.

Optation; when we fall to wishing, to declare our desire and good will toward
them: it procures good will.

Prosopopeia; the feigning of a person: when we bring in dead men speaking: or
give voice unto senseless things, as Romans 8. this is patheticall and moving.

Apostrophe; which is a turning of the speech suddenly to some person or thing,
from that which we speak of: it is to be used in some great matter, as
speaking of Churches calamities, we must forthwith turn our speech to Christ
to respect his spouse: or speaking of man's disobedience, we might turn our
speech to the earths obedience to condemn him.

Lastly, Sermocinatio or Dialogisme: which is, when a question is made, and
forthwith readily answered, as if two were talking together: this figure S.
Chrysostom used much, but more S. Augustine: it stirs up attention, and
makes the matter manifest with delight: this our Savior used, speaking to the
people of John Baptist. Many more there are, but these are most in use. And
thus much of the use of Instruction. Correctine use.


III. Use of Doctrine is correctiue; which is when the lesson is used against
corruption in manners, vice and wickedness, whether it be for omission or
commission. In this the Prophets spent much, as all their writing show, so John
Baptist, Whence it arises and how to follow it.
Christ and his Apostles, as their works declare. This use arises not only
from a doctrinall proposition, but by the contrary, from the use of
instruction.

In following this; First, plainly lay down the fault of How to prove a
thing to be a sin.
omission or commission. Secondly, if need require sometime prove it a fault,
either by the definition of sin, or by some express word condemning it, or a
negative commandment forbidding, or by a dehortation, or by consequent; it
being referred to some commandment negative, or by the contrary, to an
affirmation: from the opposite virtue, or by threats against it, or by example
of some penitent person for his fall thereinto, as David's numbering of the
people repented of: or else by some punishment for the offense. By these the
sin may be made manifest, if any should doubt of it, as many do of usury,
many of non Residencie, many only of a reading Minister. To dissuade from
vice, and how to do it.


III. Dissuade from the same; by reasons: First, by a negative commandment,
dehortation, the condemning of it by godly men, and heathen writers. Secondly,
by threats temporal and eternal. Thirdly, the fruits thereof, and disprofit,
inward and outward, public and private, to a man's self and other. Fourthly,
examples of punishment, in Scripture, in approved men's writings, and of
home-obserued judgments, of self knowledge, by true relation, and in
Chronicles: the Prophets used to allege judgments in their own nation, Deuteronomy.
11. 2. 6. Ierem. 7. 12. Deuter. 24. 9. Luke 17. 32. 1. Cor. 10. 6. Fifthly,
similies lively depainting the crime, with comparison between it and other, to
make it to appear odious, as Solomon, theft adultery together.

IV. Show how to give it over, and how to attain to the contrary virtue and
goodness.

And herein reprehension and reproof, and the use of Rhetoric is necessary
with the figures, to make the disswasion and reprehension more forcible upon
the reasons, which are also to be enlarged and enforced upon the offenders
consciences.

The affections and effects to be wrought in the hearers are these: What to
work in the hearers to make them leave sin, and how to effect it.

I. Shame of the fact, by noting the filthiness, the baseness of the thing,
to such a man of those qualities, place and age: as he before such and such, in
this or that place, such a time, before the holy Angels and God himself.

II. Compunction of heart, by showing our slavery to the Devil, the curse of
the Law, the strangeness and greatness of that sin, the fierceness of Gods
anger against sin, in giving the Law, in punishing without respect all sorts,
the horror of an accusing conscience, the agony of death, his short time of
life, apt to sudden death, the terror of the last judgment, hell fire the
eternal torture.

III. Loving and true compassion to themselves and others, by showing the
escaping of these dangers, and procuring to themselves and others much good if
they repent.

IV. True repentant sorrow, even with tears, by urging their misery
internal, external, eternal; places inuiting to repentance: examples of
Prophets and Christ speaking with tears: examples of repentant sinners lively
brought forth: mourning and lamenting.

If these stir not, then lay before them Christ's dying for sin, his agony
in the Garden, and crying upon the cross; his unspeakable love, to bring and
free us from sin: and lastly, the outcryings of the damned in hell, their
weeping and howling and all too late.

V. True and reverent fear of God, and hatred against sin.

VI. Hope of mercy by Gods promise and oath, by his readiness to forgive,
examples of forgiveness, etc. And thus much also of the third use of doctrine,
vz. Correction.

IV. And the last is Consolatorie, which is, when the doctrine Consolatorie use.
is used to raise up the spirit with comfort, which is humbled and cast down,
and to encourage such as be obedient. So did Moses, Exodus 14. 13. Esai. 2.
Kings 19. 6. Zach. 8. 11. 12. 13. Our Savior Christ, John 14. 1.

The reasons of Comforts and Encouragements, particularly How to comfort and
whence to raise them up.
must be framed, according to the discomforts and discouragements: being
diverse, inward, outward, public, private, in body, in good name, goods, etc.
But generally from Gods providence; his promises of help and blessings, his
minaces against the enemies of the godly, his power, his constancy: from the
benefits of trial: from experience of Gods former love, and examples of
patience and of deliverances, the short abiding here, and durablenes of a
happy estate after death. As before is requisite the use of Rhetoric, so
here in this place likewise. The affection to be wrought chiefly hereby, is
ioifulnesse, to be of a cheerful spirit, with patience, hope, and constancy.
And thus much for these several uses, whereof the first concerns Faith: the
second and third, Love and Charity: and last Hope.

By these things in this Chapter, we see what is requisite What is requisite
for a minister, to do all these things.
for a Minister to have: First, knowledge in controversies, what errors are
held, what arguments are used; and how to answer them. Secondly, knowledge of
the several states of men, what duty is to be performed, especially the most
principal in every of them; thereby to instruct every man in the right course
of his vocation. Thirdly, knowledge of the sins and corruption of that, age
in men's several callings, to be able to lay them open, and to reprove them.
Fourthy and lastly, to be studied in the cases of conscience, to comfort the
afflicted.

CHAP. X. Of Application of the uses to the hearers.
THe use being made aptly, next and immediately follows the application; which
is not the using of doctrines to several estates: for use and application so
are What application is, and how it differs from use.
made all one; which in nature are plainly distinct. But application is a
nearer bringing of the use delivered, after a more general sort, in the third
person, as spoken to persons absent; to the time, place, and persons then
present: and uttered in the second person, or in the first, when the Minister,
as often the Apostle does, will enclude himself with them.

This is lively set forth unto us in the speech of Nathan and David together:
Nathan comes with a parable and An instance of doctrine, use, and aplication.
shows thereby a thing done, which is the doctrine. David he makes an use
thereof, and speaks in the third person: and Nathan makes application of that
use made from the third person to the second, Thou art the man, 2. Sam. 12. 7.

This is the Ministers duty, Esai 61. 1. Ezech. 34. 15. 16. The minister ought
to make application.
Luke 4. 18. Tit. 2. 2. 3. 4. It was the Prophets practice: Nathan to David,
the Prophet to Achab, 2: King. 20. 42. Our Savior used it, Matthew. 15. 6. 7. S.
Peter to the Jews, Act. 2. 36. And Stephen to those that heard him, Act. 7.
51. This The excellent profit of applying.
home-speaking is the sharp edge of the sword, the word of God, this brings
the uses to their proper places, as salues clapped to the sores of such patients,
as Ministers then have in hand. This indeed is it, which makes faithful
Ministers teaching, unsavory to carnal and evil men: And by this they are
said to name men in the Pulpit, and gall some personally: when no man is named:
but the use of correction of some vice is made in the second person to the
hearers.

This makes a great difference of men's Ministeries, why some are judged so
plain, and other so plausible, and why some move one way or other, to bring
men to be better or worse: others only inform but reform not, because they
speak too generally, and preach as if they meant other persons, and not their
present auditorie. What kind of application is most liked of the wicked, and
what not.


If they make application of uses, its but of instruction and comfort which the
wickedest man can away with. For instruction presupposes to virtue and stirs
up to good life, which the worst would gladly have a name of; and so for praise
and reward sake, will listen to it: the other is comfort and preaching of
peace; which none will refuse. And this kind of application is common with
some, as all that consider of their courses may plainly observe. But the
application of the use of conuincing, but especially of Reprehension and
Correction, the wicked will at no hand abide, because those words sound like
Micheas Prophecies in Achabs ears, never good. Which makes many meallie
mouthed, become so full of discretion (winding up foul offenses, into seemly
terms) as this discretion has almost destroyed devotion, policy has in a
manner thrust out piety: and we see by this means, sins so reproved
continue, by such plausible preaching, unreformed.

Application in this sort must needs be used: No plaster Application
necessary.
cures when we do but only know it; nor the use when it is heard of: but the
particular application to the sore does good, and then it is felt and moves.
It is not the sight of a treasure, nor knowledge of the use whereto it serves,
which moves much the beholders, but if one come and tell them it is theirs,
this application works upon affection.

For a Minister to make application to his hearers, to do it How to make
application profitably.
profitablie, he must preach to them from knowledge out of himself, feeling
the corruption of nature, and being able to decipher out the old man: Secondly,
also from the knowledge of his auditorie, what errors are amongst them, what
practice of virtue, what vices generally, or in particular callings, who
comfortless or discouraged, and need consolation: Concionator (says one)
debet concionari ex praxi sua inprimis autem auditorum: that like a Physician
skillful of his patients disease, he may fitly administer a right potion: or
like a wise Councellor in his Clients cause, he may give sound advice for
safety and defense.

To have this knowledge, it is fit for the Pastor to be resident on his
charge, to converse familiarly with his people, seeing and observing them, and
to have help also of the house of Cloe: that so Paul may by faithful
relation, hear from others (but in this point be not light of belief) what
by himself alone he can not come to understand.

In application there must be had a due regard, discerning aright, to give
every one his portion: in which that exhortation of the Apostle takes place;
Study to yield thy self approved of God, a workman, not to be despised,
duly dividing the word of truth.

The ignorant and docible erroneous, must be informed in judgment, with the
spirit of discretion and meekness; the virtuous exhorted to constancy, and
encouraged; the vicious reproved after the nature of the offense, and the
quality of the offender. How to speak zealously and yet in moderation.


In which point, because there are John's and James, who in their zeal may
forget themselves, I will deliver a few rules for the moderation of zeal, to
speak words with authority; and to keep within compass; that as we may not
offend in plausible terms, to sooth up sinners, so wish I we should not, in
sharp and bitter reproves without sufficient ground: Else sin may be
disgraced, and Epithets may be given to the sinner, according to the
transgression, without just imputation of railing: for so we may read in Esai
and other Prophets: we have the example of John Baptist. yea our Savior Christ
and the Apostle to the Tit. 1. 13. Act. 13. 10. First be mindful of our selves.
Galat. 3. 1.

I. Consider thine own self apt to the like sin, Gal. 6. 1. or guilty
thereof, or of some as ill: that then in all thou do speak so to them, as
also to thy self, which will make thee moderate: yet this is true, that what a
man feels to be ill in himself, if he be truly penitent, and would be freed
from it, the hatred to it will make him earnestly speak against that sin
when occasion is offered.

II. Weigh what a one thou art, young or old, one held Secondly consider thy
person.
illiterate, or learned, vicious or of godly life, beloved and honored, or
hated, and in contempt; for after the acceptance of the person, so are his
words esteemed: youth and ignorance procure small approbation: dislike will
receive no counsel, much less admit of reprehension. As thou art in
estimation, so may thou proceed: howsoever, speak that which thou ought,
and be circumspect in the manner to speak as is meet.

III. Never speak with partial affection against any in Thirdly beware of
partial affection.
a spleen, evil will seldom speaks well: hate sin and no man's person: and
speak for amendment with the witness of thine own conscience before God.
The Pulpit is not a place, in show to be zealous against sin, and intend
nothing but revenge of private wrong from inward grudge: this is railing and
abuse of the Word.

If a party offend, having done thee wrong, being thy adversary, and yet his
sin of necessity deserves reproof; thou may reprehend the crime, but
beware of the least show of privy malice, and prevent by all means conceits
thereof. In all reproves and checkes, show that they come How to manifest our
love in reprehensions, without hatred of the persons. 1. Cor. 11. 1. 18. Act.
3. 17.
of love, and not of hatred, in this manner. First, by using before friendly
appellations. Secondly, by praising fully the good in them worthy
commendations: so does the Apostle to the Corinthians before he reprehended
them. Thirdly, beware in aggravating the offense, or long standing thereon:
suppose the cause to have been ignorance, and testify hope of their
amendment. If it be of obstinacy, note it lightly, and show what an evil it
is: but withal, if just occasion be, suppose it grows not from the offenders
disposition, wisdom, nature, and former experienced tractablenesse: but
rather from some froward persons evil counselors: and these censure deeply,
laying the sin Gal. 5. 10. 15.
upon them, and in their person, condemn the trespassour thoroughly; for
reprehension will so be better borne with, then when its direct and plainly
turned upon a man's own person alone. Fourthly, in conclusion, manifest thy
dislike and grief to be constemed to take this course with them, and excuse
thy self: First, from the necessity of thy calcalling, upon a fearful
penalty, and sin binding thee thereto, Ierem. 1. 17. Ezech. 33. being Gods
commandment also, Esai 58. 1. Secondly, the safety of their souls: and
therefore thou do it from love and compassion toward them. Thirdly, use
loving terms, with mild exhortations, to hear with patience, and to judge
afterward. Fourthly, promise by their amendment, to give over, and that it
shall be only long of themselves, if ever the like course be taken with them
any more. Fifthly, end with promises of Gods mercy, good acceptance with the
Church, and their inward consolation, if there be any amendment. If by this
means they take not well thy admonishments and reproves, they are
inexcuseable, and thou have wisely and faithfully discharged thy duty to thy
comfort.

IV. Consider the fault committed or duty neglected, Fourthly, weigh the sin,
to keep measure in reproof.
an error or heresy maintained, the party offending ignorant or obstinate, a
public person or private, etc. and accordingly proceed, as time, place, and
occasion in godly wisdom shall be thought fit; offenses are not equal,
neither all persons alike, Jude verse. 22. 23. and of this speaks S. Gregory
in his Pastoral: Non ca, inquit, and eadem exhortatio cunctis competit, quia
nec cunctis par morum qualitas, saepe alij officiunt, quae alijs prosunt, and
leuis sibilus equos nutigat; catulos instigat, etc. Those that fall of
infirmity restore with the spirit of meekness, Galat. 6. 1. Speak to the
elder men as All not to be alike dealt with, but some more sharply and with
other more mildely.
to Fathers, to the yoonger as to brethren: show evidently what sin is to
all, but have compassion to the parties, and with patience expect their
amendment, 2. Tim. 2. 25. 26. for private offenses, take a private course: but
open transgressors reprove openly, 1. Timoth. 5. 20. Galath. 2. 11. 14. yet
first more generally, omitting circumstances: if this prevail, then cease to
reprehend, and bless God for their repentance: show some example of repentance
in that kind, how acceptable it is to God, and cause of reioicing to all; but
if not, then come to them more particularly by circumstances, that they may,
will they nill they, take notice of whom it is spoken; but without nominating
of the person, till the Churches public censure of excommunication be justly
pronounced against him. The obstinate being great persons, the greater they be,
are the most roundly to be dealt withal. For by how much he is mighty, by so
much his sin is the greater; the more odious to God and dangerous to other.
Therefore we read how the men of God dealt very personally with Kings,
Princes, false Prophets and Priests, as Eliah with A^hab; Elisha with Iehoram;
Jeremy with Pashur; Amos with Amaziah; John Baptist with Herod; our Savior
with Scribes and Pharisees; Stephen with the high Priests and Elders; yea S.
Paul with the Apostle Gal. 2. Act. 13. 10.
Peter, and the same Apostle with Elymas the Sorcerer, who was reprehended
vehemently, and with most bitter speeches, as could in a manner be devised. But
wicked policy holds this no good course now adays: fearful spirits dare
not so discharge their duties upon such brazen walls; because they by sin, are
deeper in offense to God, and more scandalous than other: Their subjection to
the Word, is example to others. Round, but wise dealing with them is terror to
others. The neglect whereof appearing to the What hurt comes for want of
plain dealing wisely with the mighty. Fifthly to keep moderation in
reprehensions attend to the words uttered.
world, and in steed thereof, fined plausible speeches to please brought in,
causes much preaching to be but performed for fashion: religion to be held
mere policy: Preachers themselves to be but as other men.

V. And lastly in bitter reproves, to set an edge thereon, and yet keep thy
person in authority, and words in regard: Use no speeches of common reuilings,
but such as have proceeded out of the mouth of God against sins and sinners
ingenerall, or against those evils or such like offenders as thou art speaking
against, set down in the scripture.

Again, bring in the Prophets or Apostles, speaking in their own words, as if
we would reprehend Briberie in great ones, we may say: I will not reprove
this sin, but Esai he shall tell who they be, and what to be compared unto,
and so bring in his words; Esai 1. 23. So against wicked Shepherds, bring in
Jeremy cap. 23. 1. 11. 14. Lam. 2. 24. Our Savior against hypocrites, Matthew.
23. and so of other sins: Also the sayings of ancient Fathers, as speaking
for us: which will much help, to make the reprehension more acceptable: and
will prevent the reproach of railing and intemperancie. We must in this crooked
generation be as wise as Serpents; sot hat we keep the innocence of Doves.

And thus much for application: which as it is distinct from use, so have I
severed the precepts of both, for better understanding thereof. Nevertheless
use and application in Preaching may be conioined in one speech: the use How to
(...) use and application in one.
being delivered in the second person to the auditorie present as an applied
use: except it be such an use, as fits not to be applied at that time:
Application is to be made of all such uses as serve for conuincing, correcting,
instructing, and comforting the present auditorie.

CHAP. XI. Of Prevention of Objections.
AFter Application follows Prevention of Objections: Men never rise up to
defend themselves against the minister but in application.
for men are no sooner spoken unto, but if they dislike any thing they will
speak against it: if disobedient or erroneous and reproved, they will stand
upon their defense, and will object against us, for their ways and opinions.
If exhorted to good things, they have their excuses; all which must be taken
away. Thus did our Savior Christ, as Luke 4. 23. It furthers much the matter,
and cuts off the Why and how to prevent objections.
occasion of cauils. First, it is done either by propounding what might be
said and answered, as in the place of Luke, our Savior does. Secondly, or else
to answer an objection which might be made closely, without mentioning of it,
as the Apostle S. Paul does often in his Epistles.

In this, three things are necessarily to be considered: Three things needful
herein.
First, when it is needful to make objections and to prevent them. Secondly,
what to object and answer. Thirdly, how far it is needful to proceed herein.

I. Its needful, first, when the word of the text it self When it is needful.
affoords plainly an objection of necessity to be answered. Secondly, when
either a doctrine gathered, causes any, or a man's own words, in following a
matter, occasioneth an objection, as it often may do: and therefore great care
must be had, and we must weigh our speeches to prevent ever (if any thing slip
us, as not well or doubtfully spoken,) men's cauilling at that which we utter.
Thirdly, if you speak before a captious company, and that thou art persuaded
such there be, who will dislike some particulars which thou art conscionablie
to deliver. Fourthly, when a controuesie is to be handled in a learned
auditorie, against the common adversary. In which respects prevention of
objections is to be used.

The objections either openly to be made, or closely to What things to be
prevented.
be prevented, are such, as the omitting thereof, might occasion in thy
speeches either conceit of error, some approbation of sin, or some senseless
absurdity: also whasoeuer may be a let and hinderance to the receiving of that
which is taught or exhorted unto, must by this means be removed. For always
there must be understanding to know, both what we say for and against any
matter, or also what may be said with or against, on the contrary, by any
other; else the matter will not succeed so well as we would desire.

II. Here for the Minister, to be able to answer objections, What the Pastor
^^ to consider of to be able to prevent objections.
and to prevent what may be said, must in exhortation to virtue, consider
carnal excuses and impediments which may keep men from the entertainment and
practice of that virtue. In dehorting from vice, what show of reason men make
from pleasure, profit, honor, custom, and example to deteine them still
therein.

In conuincing of errors what arguments the adversaries have, what objections
against our reasons, to answer and overthrow them. Lastly, in comforting weigh
what the afflicted may say, to repel comfort, whether their affliction be
inward or outward and thereto answer. By this means we may become skillful in
this necessary point in preaching. How far to proceed in this matter.


III. For the measure herein, how far to proceed, stands in the wisdom of
the Speaker, in the knowledge of the hearers, and the necessity of the matter
in hand. All matters are not alike difficult or of hard receipt: neither all
congregations learned, able to make objections, or to understand betwixt an
objection and an answer: and therefore less care of prevention is to be had
and used amongst such in doctrinall points.

Whatsoever the matter or auditorie is, we are not to continue making so many
objections, as either we can devise or find written from other, so should we
make no end; and such a course as soon makes doubts, as resolves them,
breeding in some men's heads an humor of contradiction, and to others occasion
of contention rather than to the hearers sanctification and edifying. What thou
in thy wisdom shall hold to be sufficient for the matter, convenient for the
time, place and persons; so far proceed and no further. If any be not fully
satisfied, let them be entreated to enquire further in private conference. For
it is not fit, yea it is very hurtful, to make the Pulpit a place for a
continual and full handling of controversies in a common auditorie.

CHAP. XII. Of the conclusion of the whole Sermon.
AFter all these follows the conclusion, and knitting up of the point handled,
and of the whole Sermon.

But in all this which I have spoken, my meaning is not, Note.
that in Preaching, a Minister, after he be entered upon his text, should ever
say: This is the doctrine, this is the proof, this the use: now to the
reasons, now we will make application, and prevent or make objections: which
is, I confess a plain way, to a rude congregation, easy to be conceived and
written of such as attend and will take the pains: but it interrupts the
course of the speech, and it is too disiointed, and less patheticall.
Therefore albeit for the understanding of the things distinctly by them, I have
made several Chapters, yet the Preacher, which will follow Artis est (...)re
artem.
this course, may in speaking knit them altogether in a continued speech after
the manner of an oration, keeping the method to himself: passing from the
doctrine to the proof; from the proof, to the use; from the use, to the
reasons thereof; from thence to the application, and to prevention of
objections: and finally so conclude every doctrine: and one finished, pass by
transitions, uttered sometimes in one term, sometimes in an other, to a new
doctrine in like manner, and so in all to the end of the Sermon: the final
conclusion of all.

Touching the final conclusion of the Sermon: it must How long time convenient
ordinar^ly for a Sermon.
be made within the compass of the hour, or immediately after, except upon
extraordinary occasion: Neither is this to bind Gods spirit to an hour: but
to follow the order of the Church, and thereupon the expectation of the
hearers, and their infirmity; which who so regards not, knows not well how
to keep measure in speaking: neither has discretion to see what is
convenient. Many The discommoditie of passing over commonly the a pointed time.
for want of observing time, and commonly going beyond the customarie space
allotted thereunto, do make their labor to their daily hearers tedious,
themselves to be condemned of pride, loving to hear themselves talk; or of
folsie, without wit to keep a mean, or to know that as much may be uttered in
an hour, as can be of any almost rightly understood and well carried away.
Hereof rises the occasion often of the contempt of some such men's endeavor,
this scandal also, as if the public assembly is made Auditorium non
Oratorium: that such preachers are not painful, to compact things
substantially together: but talk at random, and quicquid in buccam venerit
proferre.

In the Conclusion must be, First a short repetition only What must be done in
the conclusion.
of the principal doctrines and uses of the whole Sermon, especially if the
Preacher be a stranger, and does but make one Sermon: else in ordinary
exercises continued: the repetition may be deferred unto the beginning of the
next Preaching: and very fitly to be as well a renewing of the old as teaching
of new,

II. A pithie, forcible, and loving exhortation to move affection, and to
quicken the hearers to understand: to hold In conclusion to be most patheticall.
the truth taught: to detest the errors convinced; to love the virtues, and
imitate the examples, and to fly the vice it self and persons committing the
evil spoken against. Comforting and encouraging such as need: picking out some
one special doctrine, and use (scarsely mentioned before and thought most
chiefly now to be urged upon them) from amongst all that which has been
spoken, and reserved to this conclusion: that it may be more fresh in memory
than the rest: And this enforce and exhort unto lively; and to make it more
effectual, stand no longer upon it; and end of a sudden: leaving them moved,
and stirred up in affection to long after more: for as one says, Omnia tunc
bona sunt, quando clausula est bona. Ex per orationem noscitur concionater.

Lastly, thus all finished, end with thanksgiving, and prayer Knit up all with
prayer again and thanksgiving.
also for a blessing upon that which has been spoken, mentioning the
especials therein: At que sic vt a praecatione exor dium sumpsit concio sacra
ita in eandem pie desinet iuxta dulcissimum dictum (...). The Prayer ended,
after the Psalm be sung, put upon the people the Lords blessing, and end with
Number. 6. 24. or this Prayer of the Apostle, Hebr. 13. 20. 21. or 1. Thessal. 5.
23. 24. or else, 2. Corint. 13. 13.

And thus much for these things concerning the several The fruitfulness of
this kind of teaching.
parts of a Sermon, and of the things required of a Minister particularly, and
of them distinctly: which if we have and can thus use, we shall proceed
religiously, handle matters methodically, teach soundly, confirm believers,
resolve them that doubt, convince gain-saiers, reprove, the wicked, comfort
the afflicted, prevent cauils, and every way become profitable, to Gods
glory, the hearers edification, and our own comfort, in this great and
miraculous work in converting souls.

CHAP. XIII. Of such things as are required of a Minister to perform the whole
work.
HItherto has been delivered what is required and to What things generally
necessary to a preacher.
be done in several parts. Now follows to show what is necessary for a
Preacher to have in all and every part, requisite for the well performance of
the whole.

I. Is a quick apprehension, either in premeditation, A quick apprehension.
or else in public delivery: thereby to take what the spirit of God presently
does offer to our minds. The holy Ghost forsakes not his own work, neither
saileth to assist a painful Minister, but even in his preparation is with him;
and helps by affoording much in the very speaking not before thought of. A man
not slauishly bound to words, brings not all things with him into the Pulpit,
that there is delivered. The spirit in Prayer helps, Romans 8. so does he in
preaching; if there be a ready conceit to take it.

Heereto must be added invention to find out, understanding to know the thing
what it is, judgment to dispose of it, to bring every thing into his proper
place; and prudence to discern rightly to make application, according to
convenient circumstances and occasions.

II. A good memory, firm and stable to retain at least A good memory.
things newly thought upon; which is a present memory: without this it is
impossible to become plentiful in matter, or in exhortation vehement: for in
the one a brickle memory will omit much, and in the other, a Minister will
soon forget himself where he was, and what about.

A perfect memory needs no precept, happy is he that has it: it is the
storehouse to understanding, and treasure of eloquence, if wit want not, nor
the tongue be tied: by help of a good memory, a man with ease may speak as
How to help the weakness of the memory.
much as he pleases, and as he is disposed also.

A weak memory needs help, and thus it may be strengthened. First,
understand well the thing to be delivered, for as S. Hierome says, quae
firmiter concepimus, been loquimur, siquidem talia in ammae quasi substantiam
concoquendo sunt conuersa. Things of thine own devising are best for memory,
and more easy to be borne away: that which is from other more hardly, and
scarcely not at all, without the right understanding of the matter, without
which a man repeats but words, as a Parat. Secondly, dispose into order and
method what thou art to deliver: an unorderly heaping up of things together
confounds memory. As memory is the maintainer of knowledge, so is method the
preserver Of writing Sermons, the profit and antiquity thereof. See Hipperius in
his first book of framing Sermons cap. 6.
of memory. Thirdly, write what thou would speak: writing confirms
meditation, shows the mind to the senses, and keeps things once thought of:
it makes thoughts set down, better to be judged, either by a man's self, or by
an other, to whom it may be imparted, for their approbation or correction:
Difficile est says one, simul cogitare, and qualiter cogites iudicare, ex nuda
mentis cogitatione. It fixes more firmly what is thought upon, brings to a
style and kind of speaking, it preserues a man's labors thereby afterward, to
judge how he profits, to pleasure himself, by perusing again former
meditations, (more easily found in writing, than called to mind) or any other
by his labor, if it be held worth looking on. It declares his industry, and
pains to speak profitablie, with understanding of that he delivers. In
writing a man loses no thoughts, so as at one time, its not requisite, so
exactly to remember what he has invented, whilst his mind musing upon
farther matter, as he must do in meditating without setting it down. Lastly,
in study, whilst one is intent upon a matter, often occasion is given of
further matter, which arises from reading or meditation, which, if it be not
noted down, will, in following the point in hand, soon slip out of mind,
and hardly to be recalled, except memory be very good. Therefore it is good
to write, and in writing to have a void or empty paper by, to set down
forth with what comes to mind, which will after fitly serve in the right
place: we see writing to be exceeding profitable every way for our selves and
others: and nothing should let from this: Sed est magni laboris quem desides
nos plerunque fugimus. Fourthly, use meditation seriously upon Attent and
serious meditation, and what therein to be obserned. Manner.
that which thou do purpose to speak, after it be penned. Beware herein of
a wavering mind, and by-thoughts: begin not immediately upon weariness, and
serious study before, without some relaxation between: not sudden from one
thing to another; nor upon vehement passions, as of anger, sorrow, fear, joy,
and so forth. Take also time for it, Nam sicut concoctioni corporali spacium
damus and quietem: ita and meditations mentis; quae mentalis quaedam concoctio
est; quam animae nutrimentum cedat materia: How much is sufficient to be
allotted to meditation, is to be judged from every man's industry, and
ability in quickness of conceit, and firmness of memory to retain, which
is more or less in every one. His meditation and pains must be so, as that
he may preach so often as is convenient for the people.

The time when: it is not good after meat, the understanding Time.
then is dulled: and as memory is less able to bear away, and mind to
conceive, so its hurtful for the body, serious meditation much hindering
natures work in concoction. Secondly, it is best over night immediately
before sleep: and forthwith awaking early in the morning: aurora Musis
amica: It may be lying, sitting, standing, or walking, as a man perceives what
is best for himself, and is most used unto: but in walking beware of often
turning: which is hurtful to the brain.

For the place, let it be solitary, lest with noise to the ears, Place.
and variene of object to the eyes, the mind be distracted: neither let it be
too dark, nor yet too light: a mean is best in all. Some in meditating do
use to speak and gesture; but this is a forewearing of the spirits, and too
Histrionian like.

In thy meditation, two things are to be thought upon: Matter.
First, the matter to be handled. Secondly, and the order, how to proceed
according to this former method set down: doctrines with proof, use with
reasons, application with prevention of objections, and finally the conclusion.

For words, never be tied unto them: Puerili nimium est Discommodious to be
tied to words.
verbulum non audere proferrae, quod non ad notatur chartis, and scriptas
conciones verbatim ediscere multa habent incommoda. It hinders devotion,
restrains liberty of speech, it requires much labor, and thereby makes the
Ministry irksome to such: neither can such speak so often as is requisite,
and as just occasion requires. It possesses a man with fear, which confounds
memory, it curbes the good motions of the spirit, and preuents a man of the
benefit of such things, as in speaking might offer themselves to his
understanding. Upon present occasion, such an one, can neither speak more, nor
otherwise, than he has committed to memory before: a very great hurt to a
man's Ministry: and hinderance to the course thereof in pronuntiation also,
action, and affection. If a man fear to want words, let him be well provided
for matter and words non inuita sequentur, as one well says.

Fifthly, and lastly (if all these means be not sufficient to help thy
memory; that so thou may deliver thy mind, both for matter, and manner, as
thou would, and as thou have set it down without fail) add this help
withal: note the chief heads of thy speech briefly in a little piece of
paper, No disgrace to note the chief heads of the Sermon in a little paper to
help memory.
a word or two for every several thing, quae breuis delineatio, erit memoriae
presens subsidium, si in libro repositam and fixam eam ad manum inter
concionandum in pulpito habeas.

If any should think this a disgrace, it is not unknown, how both in the
University and other places, many very learned and worthy Divines use this
help: either taking up little paper books bound like Testaments, or the Bible
with a paper fastened in it: and these no whit at all less esteemed. Eras. li.
2: de ratione Concionandi, page 117. speaks of this matter, and says, tutum
est capita sermonis in Charta notata habere ad manum, quod in Psalmos aliquot
fecisse videtur Augustinus, and hanc scio (says he) an in omnes, quanquam vir
memoria ad prodignum vsque foelici. So as we see it is ancient and no disgrace
at all. It was a common thing in Gregory's time, out of writings to speak to
the people as Hiperius has noted out of one of his Homilies upon Mark, 16.
Its better by this means, to help defect of memory, to utter all thy labor,
and with encouragement, without fear to speak, to urge a matter
affectionately, and to prosecute things fully, as it pleases thee, knowing at
hand present help, to keep thee in mind, with a little glance of the eye,
where thou art, and to bring thee fitly to that which does follow; al which
benefit thou have hereby. Then knowing thy memory to be weak, it is
presumption to attempt to speak without this help, with fear, with some
discouragement, to follow largely any point; and by forgetfulness to deliver
little of much, before thought upon, or else confusedly to utter diverse things,
and impertinent withal. It is more laudable and profitable, than that
conceited Art of Memory, discommodious diverse ways, yea and wicked also; as
is proved by the learned. Natures want must needs, and may by good means, be
lawfully helped. Good gifts many have from God, yet with some defect this way:
good understanding, honest hearts, fervent zeal and free liberty of speech:
the benefit whereof, it were not well for the Church to lose, for so little a
defect, supplied by so good means, which to some which write well, and have a
quick eye to the note, is no hinderance to stay them in utterance, but a
singular encouragement, who can so speak, as if they neither had note, neither
needed the same in the judgment of the hearers.

III. With understanding and memory must be the gift of vterance, the free
liberty of the tongue without stammering Godly eloquen^e, and how to be
attended unto.
or lisping, readily and also plainly, to deliver the conceit of the mind.
This is the key to open the closet thereof, by which men may see thy
apprehension, invention, judgment, and also discern thy hearts affection, ex
cordis abundantia os loquitur: words must be significant and apt for the matter
in hand: and as we must speak plainly so properly. Albeit, as I said before,
we are not sla^^si^ly to tie our selves to words; yet may we not neglect to
speak wisely, and as it is meet, in words, phrases, commaes, and periods:
variety of things require variety of words, and that is a proper Epithet, and
fit phrase for one thing, which is not meet for an other. Speak of wars
like a warrior and a martial man in his terms: of Civil government like a
States man: picture out vice in his deformity, and draw out virtue in her
lively colors: vttter threats with words of terror, and the merciful kindness
of the Lord, with alluring speeches of consolation. Be not too base, use no
foolish terms, ridiculous, too mean for the matter, for fear of contempt: no
scurrilous, railing common terms. These be incident and unbeseeming the staid
gravity of Gods Ambassadors. Prevent hatred: neither be too lofty in hie
terms, strange speeches, huffing words. Beware of foolish affectation, that
we blase not our pride, and too great folly. There is a godly eloquence,
approved by the Scripture: Godly eloquence approved, and how to be attained
unto.
many speak well by nature, an excellent gift of God: and many by industry
attain to commendation herein, by reading well penned works, by hearing the
Sermons of such as be endued with eloquence, by conuersing and talking with
those that can speak well, and putting in practice what they attain unto,
till they come unto an habit. No Col. 4. 8.
man can, neither will any wise man condemn eloquence, or forbid by any good
means, to attain to the gift. To speak rashly, without discretion in so holy
things, is a taking Gods name in vain. All men must order their words with
discretion, much more in that place a Minister. As men write warily, so must
they speak respectively: neglect of right speaking occasions much mistaking.
It has bred heresies; contentions have and do grow hereby, and and many men's
labors are despised by neglect of this, whose pains might well be approved
for the matter, and become an effectual ministry through Gods blessing, by
having care to speak as they ought. Of the voice in speaking, and how it must
be ordered.


With the words there must be a care to the sound of the voice. The voice must
be so far lift up, as it may always be heard; but not strained above
natures power, neither one sound throughout, but tuneable, rising or falling as
the matter requires; sometimes more roundly, but ever distinctly, sometimes
more deliberately. The voice is so to be guided as the hearers not
understanding the matter, may yet by the manner discern where about you are:
we may not be loud where we should be low, nor speak cheerfully in
lamentable matters, nor mournfully in causes of reioicing. If farther direction
be herein required, let those peruse the rules given for this in learned men's
labors.

IV. With the tongue must go a gracious sanctified A gracious heart, and the
benefit thereof.
heart, the tuner of the voice, even as a man would have it. For a man of a
gracious heart, never delivers that to an other, which he feels not in some
measure in himself: and as he is affected, he cannot but endeavor so to affect
other with the same. He sees other men's miseries, and speaks with compassion,
he knows the truth in himself, and speaks confidently, against sin with
hatred, of God with holy reverence, of Judgments with fear. Words from such a
heart cannot be uttered, for and concerning Gods glory, but zealously to the
penitent, with affection of love, and in ioifull hope of Gods promises
cheerfully: to the obstinate with grief, and sharply pronouncing against
them with dreadful threats, exhorting and encouraging the virtuous with all
endeavor, carefully admonishing, and freely reprehending: yea every way to all
sorts so approving himself in the sincerity of his heart, as the wicked
vnreclameable shall be bridled; many shall be won, and the godly shall
justify his labors: he shall speak with authority to men's consciences,
gracious words shall proceed from him, and such as hear him, by feeling the
work of the spirit shall as it is in 1. Cor. 14. 25. fall down in humility,
worship God, and shall plainly say: God is in him assuredly.

V. A comely countenance not lumpish, not frowning or Comely countenance.
irefull, not light, smiling as too full of laughter: but sober, grave and
modest, framed after the godly disposition of the heart, aque vultus ac sermo
animi est iudex.

A reverend gesture of the body, is to be observed. The ^^ly sture.
body stable and right up, as nature has framed it. The The head not wagging,
the eyes moveable, and thy right hand only as occasion shall be offered, but
not always moving.

Unseemliness in countenance and gesture, is to be avoided, which deformed
persons, either so by defect in nature, or by accident, cannot avoid: and
therefore not so fit to be set up in the room of God, and to stand before the
face of the Congregation, such especially as have great blemishes in the face,
want of eyes, or one eye, a scarre on the mouth, but a piece of a lip, the
want of a nose, and such like, which cannot be hidden; but are great eiesores
to the beholders, so huckle backed, want of an arm. These sorts must needs want
countenance and gesture, which no ways can be amended, though some such be
sometimes in the Ministry, and happily blessed therein.

Yet it is not laudable that parents should of all their children thrust such
into the Ministry; as if the woorst were good enough for it, and the more
commonly too good: and therefore brought up to other inferior callings.

Some there be which have comeliness of countenance, Unseemly gestures, and
how they be gotten, and how to be reformed.
and right proportioned of body, yet want seemly gesture: First, either by
rash boldness, or an inconsiderate zeal at the beginning, and by heart of
affection, which have moved them to violent motions, as casting abroad of their
arms, smiting on the Pulpit, lifting themselves up, and again suddenly
stamping down very unadvisedly. Secondly, or by too great fear and
bashfulnesse, which causes hemmings, spitting, rubbing the brows, lifting up
of the shoulders, nodding of the head, taking often hold of the cloak or
gown, fidling with the fingers upon the breast, buttons, stroaking of the
beard and such like toies. Thirdly, or else by acting upon a stage, who cannot
but show their vain and fantastical motions ridiculously in a Pulpit, which
they have used in profane pastimes.

The first seeming furious, may amend by considerate deliberation. The second
fearful, by getting a godly boldness, considering himself as a speaker unto
man, from and in the room of the Lord God Almighty. The third thrasonicall,
may amend by serious consideration of the difference of the actions.

But to prevent these, before we begin, it is good to observe: First, what is
comely in others, what defective. Secondly, to consider our own wants. Thirdly
to have some faithful friend to note us and to admonish us, lest we get an
use of an evil before we be aware, and so cannot amend the fault, neither as
we should, nor as we would.

VI. A Minister must be a good Christian in conversation, A god^y conversation.
else hardly will he be so effectual a Preacher as he ought to be. Here I
think not amisle to set down the properties of a Minister of the Gospel, as
the Apostle both in his Epistles to Timothy and Titus has set down.

I. Unreprovable, and of unblameable life, yea even The Godly virtues
required in a minister.
with those that are without, 1. Timoth. 3. 7. (...). Tit. 1. 6. qui ob aliquod
atrox scelus in ius vocari non potest, est verbum forense, ab ^, priuatiua
particula ^, interseritur ob sequentem vocalem euphomae gratia, and (...), in,
(...) vocatus, non Unreprovable
vocatus inius, ob (...), atrocem iniuriam, quale est adulterium, furtum,
ebrietas, and huiusmodi; quibus criminibus Minister Euangelij omnino vacare
debet. Apost. ad Tim. (...) alio vocabulo vtitur, is est in quem nulla fiat
iusta exceptio.

II. He may not be a young scholar, he says not, (...), iuvenis; No Nouice.
sed (...), nouitius, non intelligitur de iuuene sed de ^o qui recens,
instituitur rudis adhuc eorum, quae ad ministerium sunt necessaria (...) est
nuper plantatus, and ecclesiae insitus, quales erant Catech^ment, est a (...),
nouaplanta.

III. Watching, (...), is est, qui nec nimio, nec intempestiuo Wat^^^ne.
somno est deditus a (...) valde and (...), splendidue, vel albus; for san quia
albescit, dum semper in libris, chartis, noct^^, diu, assiduus, accubans est.

IV. Temperate, (...), temperans, qui suos ita affectus Temperate.
potest moderari, vt in rebus omnibus modum conseruet optime: a (...) seruo;
and (...) men's: Nam qui modum vult tenere, mentem scruare oportet, vbi etenim
regit affectus ibi men's perit, and talis est homo (...).

V. Modest, (...), modestus, compositus, quidam Modest.
de interno cultu exponunt, and (...), dicunt eum esse qui de seipso sentit
conuenienter, and alios non despicit: alij de externo habitu interpretantur;
Apostolus, nec sordidum vult, nec indecenter vestiri Episcopum, (...), mundus,
sic dicitur ab ordine concinne digesto.

VI. Harberous, (...), hospitalis, qui peregrinos and Harberous.
aduenas ac praecipue exules propter veritatis professionem hospitio excipit,
and omnibus officijs complectitur: a (...), amicus, and (...), hospitalitas,
aut (...) hospes: and is est qui excipit vel excipitur.

VII. Apt to teach; (...), ad docendum aptus, Osea Ability to teach.
4. 6. Pie viuere oportet, and pastorem decet se exercere, vt intemerata
conscientia and bonis moribus sit praeditus semper, quo doctrinam cohonestet in
omnibus, and seipsum recte factorum cunctis exemplum praestet: non tamen sine
eruditione, and alijs ad munus peragendum necessarijs; Ex honesta conuersatione
idoneum esse ministrum existimemus? boni mores Christianum Virum, non ministrum
simpliciter iudicant.

VIII. Gentle, (...), lenis vel mitis, is qui de iure suo Gentle.
concedit pacis causa, and qui iniurias moderate and placido animo far
potest: alij interpretantur sic (...), aequus, qui omnia non ad summum ius
exigit, neque suum pertinaciter tuetur; non se contentiosum vlla in re praebet
ab, (...), de, and (...), cedo.

IX. Tit. 1. 8. A lover of good things and good men, A lover of virtue and
virtuous persons. Just. Holy.
(...), rerum and virorum bonorum amans, a (...), amicus, vel amator and (...).

X. Righteous, (...), iustus, qui suum cuique tribuit:

XI. Holy, (...), pius, sanctus, qui deum timet ab (...), sanctitas.

XII. Continent, or temperate, (...), continence, temperance, Continent.
proprie is est, qui in rem aliquam imperium habet, qui appetitum suo domino
nempe rationi subijcere nouit, haec virtus se opponit malis omnibus affectibus,
and bonos ducit and regit, prae A bold and constant professor.
caeteris excellit, and summa est, ab (...), and (...)

XIII. A fast holder of the truth, (...), tenax, solicitus, qui tenax est
fidelis illius sermonis, qui ad doctrinam facit, vt Apostolus ait Tit. 1 9. ab
(...), or, aduersum, and (...), habeo. A^que hactenus de virtutibus singulis,
quas omnes in Euangelij pastore requirit Apostolus.

Now for the vices which he ought to be clear from: The vices to be avoided.
For he must be as ye have heard, unreprovable, especially of these.
I. Not froward, (...), non sibi pertinaciter placens, qui Frowardness.
suum auntaxat in opinionibus approbare solet, aliorum omnium sententiam
contemnere; sua persona, iudicio, moribus contentus: hin^ fit, vt interpretes
v^rie han^ voc^m exponunt, (...), superbus, and (...), pr^fractus, pertinax,
inobediens, tracundus, asper moribus, and difficili quadam natura implacabilis,
quae omnia (...) istius modi quadrant ab (...), ipse, and (...), placeo, n^m
sibi ipsi placet; mayor est de stulto spes, quam de hoc, Prou. 26. 12. vae
illi, qui sibi sapiens videtur, and suo iudicio prudens, Esa. 5. 22.

II. Not covetous, (...), non auarus, pecuniae cupidus. Covetousness.
ab ^ priuatiua part^cula, (...), amicus, and (...), argentum hoc autem ab
(...), albus, (...), faunus. Nummus enim auaro est aspectu pulcher, and fructum
instar faui dulcis; Cuius agitur sordidus ille vel intuitu, vel admiratione
sacratus discedat nunquam auide inhians explere nequit.

III. Not given to filthy lucre, (...), non turpem Greediness of gain.
quaestum faciens: ab (...), turpe, obscoenum, (...), lucrum. Cogitatio
Ministri non erit interra, terrestria curare non debe^, Phil. 3. 19.

IV. Not given to Wine, (...), non vino quasi Excess in drinking and eating.
assidens, non sectator vini, vinosus, vinolentus. Hic per vinum intelligitur
omne genus potus inebriantis, vinum ipsum timetum, ceruisia. Et ij (...)
dicuntur, non qui solum belluino more inebriantur, sed qui ad potandum fortes,
and ad fundendum potum robusti, qui indulgent potationi, multo vino dediti. 1.
Tim. 3. 8. vt vel nasus rubeat, vel palescat vultus, qui ocnopolium aut domum
Ceruisiarij frequentant, qui mane surgunt, and prorogant ad Crepusculum vsque a
diliculo, qui denique redeunt and pocula subinde repetunt, a (...) ad and
(...), vinum; Apud Heroditum capitur pro potu ex hordeo etiam confecto: (...)
Anglice, an Ale stake.

V. No striker, (...), pugnax, percussor, cuius manus Fighting and quarrelling.
non est praeceps ad percutiendum, (...), est vir Martij caloris, and militaris
ferociae, quam nihil minus Christi seruos decet, qui ad lites su^ grauitate
pacandas, quam ad ictum pugni, ne dicam gladij infligendum, promptiores esse
debent; (...), a percutiendo, quidam exponunt conuitiatorem, iurgatorem, qui
lingua ferit.

VI. No fighter, (...), non litigiosus, alienus a pugnis, Contentions, chiding
and brauling.
a iurgijs: Interpretes vix inter haec duo perspicu^ differentiam ponunt ab a
priuatiua particula, and (...), contendo, sieve verbis, sieve pugnis: qui omne
contentionum genus vitare studet Apostolus ad Titum 1. verse. 7. Pro. (...),
dicit (...), non iracundus, non pronus adiram, non bilosus anglice, choleric,
testie, of a hasty nature: quam animi prauitatem multis in locis libri
Prouerbiorum vituperat Solomon.

Thus we see how that the Minister must both be an example of virtue and fly
all vice, so the Apostle teaches and exhorts unto, 1. Timoth. 4. 12. Tit. 2.
7. 1. Peter 5. 3. hereby shall a man better understand that which he speaks,
John 7. 17. and the doctrine of truth: And to such he has promised to show
his will, Amos 3. 7. Psalm. 25. 8. Such shall speak experimentally from
themselves, for as one says: qui pius non est, vtcunque Scripturarum teneat
intelligentiam, tamen interiorem sensum and experientiam verbi cord non
percipit: A godly life is a Seal to sound doctrine.

Common people respect more a good teachers life, then his learning, and
reverence the person, and not his preaching so much: As Herod did John Baptist,
Mark. 6. 20. It adorneth the Gospel, spurreth on other, occasioneth men
sensibly to think of godliness, it stops the slanderous mouth of the
wicked: with more boldness also may a Minister The evil which comes by a
preacher of lewd conversation.
reprove wherein he is clear. On the contrary, a man of lewd conversation,
occasioneth scandal, he is not worthy to stand in the room of the holy God.
Such God is displeased with highly, Psalm. 50. 17. they cause his name to be
blasphemed, Romans 2. and his worship to be abhorred, 1. Sam. 2. 17. The
Preaching of Gods word, the Lords ordinance, to be nothing accounted of. They
dare not reprove sin, lest they blase their own arms: Pray they cannot but
formally: The wicked call not upon God, Psalm. 14. Their words are unprofitable,
because their life is abominable.

Nam qui sana docet (says Nazianzen) and turpiter viuit, vna manu porrigit,
quod altera rapit. Chrysostom on Matthew. 25. says, Doctor ecclesiae been
docendo, and been viuendo, instruit populum, quomodo debet viuere: Male viuendo
instruit Deum, quo modo eum debeat condemnare.

And assuredly fearful wrath abides such, Psalm. 50. 22: Iam. 4. 17. Luke 12.
47. 1. Sam. 2. 17. 25. who transgress with the lantern in their hand, and
word of Reformation in their mouths: whose sins therefore must be the
greater, their damnation just, and punishment the more.

VIII. And lastly, a Minister must have a good library, A good library and
good maintenance.
means must be used, the help of the learned. Extraordinary Revelations, are
now ceased. And to make up all both to provide things necessary, to continue
him in study, to encourage him in labor: He must not want sufficient
maintenance: Some have sufficient, but very many too little, caused by
Sacrilegious Patrons, and other defects, begun by Antichristian practices, and
still continued by carnal hypocrites, who profess hatred against the Pope for
his covetousness, heresy, and tyranny, and yet they cease not robbing the
Church, by their avarice, blaspheming the Gospel by their impiety: but let
them look for their deserved reward, at the hands of God in due time.

And thus much also for these Generals which must in a Ministers calling run
every where throughout, as veins in the body, to preserve life: he will
hault if any of these be wanting.

The understanding finds, memory reteineth, the tongue delivers, a zealous
and gracious heart enforceeth, comely gesture graceth, a good life beautifieth,
a library furthereth, and a competent living animateth, preuents cares, and
distractions of mind.

And one thus qualified is a worthy Minister, to have place in the Church with
a due regard and reverence.

(...).
IVdge me rightly, if this labor like thee, so approve of it, and I thank
thee: but if it be not to my will, and thy contentment, know, that Bernardus
non videt omnia: do thy endeavor to perform a better work herein, I will
acknowledge my defects, and be thankful for thy labors.


