HONOS and ONVS Levitarum. OR, Tithes vindicated to the Presbyters of the
Gospel: In a Sermon preached at an Archidiaconall Visitation at Marleborough,
in the Diocese of Sarum, on the 10. of October. 1636.

By B. P.

Honor the LORD with thy substance, and with the first fruits of all thine
increase. PROVE. 3.9. I give Tithes of all that I possess. LUKE 18.12. Let him
that is taught in the Word, communicate unto him that teaches in all good
things. GAL. 6.6. ACADEMIA OXONIESIS

University of Oxford coat of arms and printer's device of William Turner

OXFORD, Printed by WILLIAM TURNER, for WILLIAM WEBB. 1637.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL SIR WILLIAM DODDINGTON of Breamer, in the County of
Southampton Knight, A Mirror of Piety and Patience.
Honored Sir:
THat which Solomon makes the children and husband of the virtuous woman to
bless her for, and praise her in, Many daughters have done virtuously, but
thou excellest them all, Prove. 31.29. is without fawning or flattery (which God
and all good hearts detest) appliable to you; many sons and daughters in our
Church have done virtuously, in refreshing the bo^els of Gods servants, that
serve him in the Gospel of his Son, and casting of large gifts into his
treasury; but you have outrunne them all in our parts. For not only the eye
that sees you, gives witness to you, but also the ear that has heard you,
yea heard of you, blesses you for the good deeds you have done for the house
of God, and the offices thereof, in restoring by way of free will offering
back again to the Church, those impropriations of yours, of which you might
have said, we have a law of our land, and by that law I ought to hold the^: and
of which many a churlish Nabal would have said, Shall I take my bread, and my
flesh, and give it to men I know not whence they are? 1 Samuel 25 11. And the
hearts of most of the Clergy about you are enlarged, their mouths are opened
to pray for you with Nehemiah's prayer, remember him, O God, concerning this,
and wipe not out the good deeds that he has done, and to speak good of these
worthy works of yours in the gates and chief places of concourse. For if that
one box of ointment which Mary Magdalen poured on our Saviors head, be
pronounced by our Savior himself to be a good work wrought upon him for his
burial, and enjoined to be told for a memorial of him, wheresoever the
Gospel should be preached through the whole world, Matthew. 26.13. much more may
that grace of God bestowed upon you, whereby the riches of your liberality has
abounded, to the restitution of the Tithes of those Church Livings (which you
had in your possession, and which it was in the power of your hand to have kept
back;) be published and proclaimed in this our Britain world. All which as you
have done not out of lightness, vaineglory, or to gain popular applause
(which you cannot look after, having been so long crucified to the world, and
the world to you, both in your afflictions, and by your sufferings, wherewith
God has tried you as a beloved son) but out of a conscience truly informed
out of the saving word of God, both of the lawfulness and necessity of your
act: So that God who has promised that a cup of cold water given to a Prophet
in the name of a Prophet, shall not lose its reward, Matthew. 10.44. and that
whosoever shall forsake houses or lands for his name's sake, and the Gospels,
shall receive manifold more in this life, with life everlasting, Luke 18.30.
has not suffered one word of his good promise to fail in you, but in his
providence has by other fair ways very plentifully restored this loss (as
the world would have accounted it) to you, and blessed you (as Jacob prayed for
his son Joseph, Genesis 49.25. with the blessings of heaven above, and of the
deep that lies under.

Since then you have been not only a hearer, but a doer also of the duties
pressed in this discourse, and brought forth much fruit in this kind, giving
to many others an example what they should do therein, as Esau said of his
benison to his father Isaac, that God had brought it to his hands, Genesis 27. so
may I, that God has brought you to my hands, to whom I should dedicate this
part of my labors, wherein I endeavor to make it clear (unless it be to
them that seeing will not see) that Tithes are as justly the portion and right
of Gods Presbyters under the Gospel of grace, as they were of the Priests of
the most high God before the Law, and of the Tribe of Levi by Gods gift to them
under the Law.

Now the God of heaven, who has given to you not only to believe in his name,
but also to do so worthily in and for his Church, and to suffer so many great
afflictions, as a good soldier of Jesus Christ, (wherein you have been a true
son of Abraham, both in the measure of your sufferings, and the eminency of
your patience) make your comforts abound by Christ, as the sufferings of Christ
have abounded in you, and after you have suffered a while, filled up that which
is behind of the afflictions of Christ in your flesh, and are come out of the
furnace of affliction as his tried gold, bestow upon you that crown of life,
promised to them that love him, and endure tribulations.

Your servant in our LORD and common Savior, Barthol: Parsons.
From the Rectory of Ludgershall, in the County of Wiltes, June 7. 1637.
DEUTERONOMY. 33.11. Bless, Lord, his substance, and accept the work of his hands.
IT is not unknown to them that know any thing, that Moses in this whole
Chapter is totus in benedictionibus, spends himself in blessings, and
stands as it were upon mount Gerizzim, Deuteronomy. 27.12. to bless the people of
Israel, with a several blessing upon every Tribe amongst them. The Text which
I now propose unto you, is a little drop of that dew of grace which falls
here upon the head of the Tribe of Levi, which the Lord had separated from
among their brethren, to teach Jacob his judgments, and Israel his law, verse.
12. And herein this man of GOD calls upon the mighty JEHOVAH, who being the
greater, can bless the less, Heb. 7.7. whose blessing is a doing of some good
Dei benedicere est hen^facere. Lucas Brug. in Matt. 25.
, bestows some gift always upon them that are blessed of him Dei benedictio
aliqui^ muneris sempe^ his qui ab co lenedicuntur impertit. Orig. i^ Romans 12.
, makes rich, Prove. 10.22. and of whom whosoever are blessed, they shall be
blessed indeed, as Isaac said of his blessing of Jacob, Genesis 27.33. To bless,
that is, to defend and multiply: for blessing especially and properly is
understood in multiplication Benedicti^ in multiplicatione solet max^^^e and
proprie intellig^. Aug. (...) Psalm. 66.
: according to which, Moses tells Israel GOD will bless thee; and multiply
thee, he will bless the fruit of thy womb, etc. Deuteronomy. 7.13, 14. His
substance] (...) for so after our best translators (quorum noman sit in
benedictione,) I rather turn the word with many learned Interpreters Calvin,
Pag^ine, Martin Borthaus, Chald. paraphr. etc.
, finding for warrant hereof this word bearing the same sense, Deuteronomy. 8.17.
Beware lest you say, my power, and the strength of mine hand has prepared me
(...) this wealth. And Job. 20.15. He has swallowed down (...) riches: then
with others, his strength Vulg. e^it.
, his army, and multitude Ca^et. Jun.
; for the words are well glossed by Martin Borrhaus, as thou have adorned the
Levites with the Priesthood, so for the maintenance of this, prosper their
riches, which consist in First Fruits and Tithes In loc. ut sacerdotio ornasts
Levita^, it a etiam ad istud conser^andum, opes illorum qua Cernuntur in
pr^^nstiis and decimi^ fortunat^.
: and to accept, or, as Junius more fully, grato animo suscipere, with a
favorable mind to receive; and as the Greek phrase runs, Heb. 13.16. (...).
to be well pleased with the work of his hands] so that howsoever he shall
many times spread out his hands unto a rebellious and gainsaying people. Isa.
65. 2. go unto a rebellious people that will not hear, Ezekiel, 2.3, 4. that
altogether break the yoke, and burst the bands of the Lord ordinances in
sunder, Jer. 5.5. and so may seem to labor in vain, and spend his strength
in vain, and for nothing, yet his judgment may be with the Lord, and his
work with his God, Isa. 49.4.

Before I come to the right dividing of these words, 2 Timothy 2.15. and to show
how they are profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for
instruction in righteousness, 2 Timothy 3.16. the giving of satisfaction to two
questions that lie in the way, shall be as a word spoken in due season. First,
why the man of GOD more specially pours out a prayer for a blesing upon
Levies substance, than any other of the Tribes, unless it be Joseph's, verse.
13. etc. upon whom the blessings also of his father prevailed above the
blessings of his progenitors, Genesis 49.26. Secondly, why he prays not rather
that the work of Levies hands should be blessed by GOD, than that it should
be accepted of him? Of either a word.

For the first. Is there not a cause, nay a double cause, why he should thus
strive in prayer? why with Jacob he should not let the LORD go, unless he
gave a blessing, Genesis 32.26. to Levy, substance? First, for the consolation of
Levi himself. This prayer (says Calvin) seems secretly to be opposed to
that penury which would come upon the Levites, unless GOD had provided them
food by some other means, than by the revenues of their fields. They were
deprived of all common inheritance, and GOD himself was their possession.
Therefore that their estate might not be troublesome to them, Moses ministers
a comfort, and bids them expect from GOD all abundance for sufficient food,
and promises that his blessing shall be in stead of a large revenue Videtur
hac precatio tacit opponi penuriae qua Levitas manebat, nisi aliunde illis
cibum suppeditasset Deuteronomy, quam ex agrorumproventu. Privati erant commun^
hereditate, and solu^ Deuteronomy era^ illis pro latifundio. Ergo n^ illis molesta sit
sua conditio, solatium adhibet Moses, and tubet a Deo expectar^ copiam quae ad
victum sufficiat, ac promittit e^^^ benedictionem ube^rims provent^s lo^o fore.
Calv. in loc.
. The other for the consternation of Levies enemies, those Harpyes, who as the
Poet says Aeneid. 3*
,

Diripiunt que dapes, contactuque omnia foedant
Immundo, --
Triftius haud illis monstrum, nec savior ulla
Pestis, etc. --
For the wisdom of the Spirit of GOD, in whose eyes all things are naked and
opened, Heb. 3.13. and who declares the last things from the beginning, Isa.
46.10. foresaw and foreshewed, that the days would come, that men would be so
far from bringing offerings with the Israelites to the building of the
Tabernacle, Exodus 36. that they would rather let it lie waste, yea, make it
waste themselves, that they might dwell in sieled houses, Hagg. 1. So far
from asking with Saul, What present shall we bring to the man of God? 1 Samuel
9.7. that they will rather with Gehezi pursue them hard to pull somewhat from
them, 2 King. 5.20. so far from providing with the Shunamite, a chamber
furnished for the Prophet Elisha, 2 King. 4.10. that rather with profane
Tobiah, they will chamber themselves in the courts of the house of GOD, Nehem.
13.7. and with Oreb and Zeeb, take to themselves the houses of GOD in
possession, Psalm. 83.12. So far from paying Tithes of all, with Abraham; yea,
of the spoils gotten in war, to the Priests of the high GOD, Heb. 7.2. that
they will rather spoil them, yea, GOD himself in Tithes and Offerings, Mal.
3.8. To show therefore that these men's ways are as much abominable to JEHOVAH,
as they are different from his ways, he prays that where they would bring a
curse, he would give a blessing; where they would devour, he would defend;
where they would diminish, he would multiply; where they would spoil, he would
protect; and adds this imprecation against such, Smite through the loins of
them that rise against him, and of them that hate him, that they rise not
again.

The other question is, why he rather prays not for a blessing from God upon
their labors, then an acception of their labors by God? Since, Except the
Lord build the house, their labor is in vain that build it, Psalm. 125.1.
Except he give increase, Paul's planting, and Apollo's watering, is nothing, 1
Cor. 3.6, 7. Except he open the heart, as he did Lydia's, Act. 16.14. their
speaking to the ear is but a beating of the air; for, he has his chair in
heaven, Cathedram (...) coel^ habet, qu^ cord^ d^ce^, Aug.
who teaches the hearts (k). The answer whereof may be, that Moses prays
rather here for an acceptance of Levies labor by GOD, as being their proper
and peculiar good, than for a blessing upon their labors; which is their
peoples good committed to them. For although Levi, the LORDS messenger, must so
unfainedly desire in his heart the salvation of Israel; that in the fervency of
his zeal, he could be content, with Moses, to be razed out of GODS Book for
them, Exodus 32.32. With Paul, be willing to be separated from Christ for them,
Romans 9.3. Although their standing fast in the LORD, must be the life, and the
joy of his heart, 1 These. 3.8. That he may rejoice in the day of the LORD,
that he has not run in vain, Phil. 1.16. Although every soul that he saves,
must be his crown of rejoicing, his glory and joy in the presence of Christ at
his coming, 1 These. 2.19, 20. Yet shall John Baptist as well receive his
crown for preaching vengeance against disobedient Herod, as for winning
converts to come to his baptism, and profess resurrection of life, Luk 3. And
we are unto GOD the sweet savor of Christ, not only in them that are saved,
but also in them that perish, 2 Cor. 2.15. And although we labor in vain in
the world, and spend our strength for naught: yet is not our work unregarded
before God, neither shall it pass unrewarded, Isa. 49.4. He prays therefore
for this acceptance, as being their special good for whom he specially
prays.

To come then to the anatomizing, the unfolding of this Text. We have here
honos Levitarum, the Levites honor, and onus Levitarum, the Levites duty: a
substance wherewith Levi must be supported, and sustained; and a work
wherewith he must be burdened. We have here, what JEHOVAH (who gives
liberally to every one that asks of him, Jam. 1.5.) is invocated to do for
him, To bless his substance.] What his Master, to whom he stands or falls,
Romans 14.4. is entreated fabourably to accept from him, Accept the work of his
hands.] What must descend from JEHOVAH to Levi? a blessing upon his substance.
What must ascend and come up in remembrance before JEHOVAH from Levi? an
acceptable work. In a word, all is comprehended in a two fold petition. First,
for a blessing to be powered down upon Levies substance from JEHOVAH. Secondly,
for an acceptance of Levies work by JEHOVAH. In the former we have either
the author from whom the blessing must come, Bless God; or the object on which
it must come, substance; amplified by the property, his substance. In the later
we have again, first, an intimation of a work to be performed by Levi, the
work of his hands: secondly, a supplication for the acceptance of it, accept
the work of his hands.

To begin with the first, the author from whom this blessing must come, is he
who opens his hand; and fills with his blessing every living thing, Psalm.
145.16. even the LORD: bless Lord] In this particular then as in capital
letters, like to that vision of Abacuk, so plain, that he may run that
reads it, Hab. 2.2. We have this lesion, that the LORD is an ever-springing,
an ever-streaming fountain, from which all good gifts spring and flow upon
every thing: and that this King of Kings and LORD of LORDS, is as that tree
showed to Nebuchadnezzar in a dream, having in it meat for all, under the
boughs whereof the beasts of the field had shadow, in the boughs whereof the
fowls of the heaven dweit, and of which all flesh was fed, Dan. 4. And as on
the one side affliction comes not out of the dust, neither does misery spring
out of the ground, Job 5.6. but whatsoever evil is done in the City ( malum
poena; the evil of punishment) it is the LORD that does it, Amos 3.6. For
whereas there are two kinds of evil; sin, and the punishment of sin Cum sint
due genera malorum, peccatum and p^na peccati, etc. Aug. contr. Adimant. Manich.
: sin belongs not unto GOD, the punishment of sin belongs unto him as
the avenger: so on the other side, not only promotion, but every good gift,
comes neither from the east, nor west, nor from the south, Psalm. 75.6. but it
is from above, and comes down from the Father of lights, Jam. 1.17. and it
is a general interrogatory to be ministered unto every one, What have thou
that thou have not received? 1 Cor. 4.7. The voice of the natural man who
places his perfection in himself, is, By the strength of mine hands I have
done this, and by my wisdom, for I am prudent, Isa. 10.13. Is not this great
Babylon that I have built by the might of my power? Dan. 4.30. His own power,
his own mighty power. But they that are taught in the School of grace, have
learned to believe with their hearts, and confess with their mouths, that it
is the LORD that gives, Job. 1.21. that because GOD has dealt graciously with
them, they have all things, Genesis 33.11. that all things come of GOD, all the
store that they have comes of his hand, and all is his own, 1 Chronicles. 29.14,
16. Let us beware then (beloved) of sacrificing to our nets, of burning incense
to our drags, Abac. 1.16. But as all things are of him, so to him let us give
glory for all things, as the Apostle coupleth them together, Romans 11.36. And
let us be as mindful to remember, as forward to receive; as ready with our
Hallelu-jahs after deliverance, as with our Hosannahs in the time of trouble;
as ready with our Quid retribuanous? What shall I render unto the Lord? Psalm.
116: after benefits received; as with our Domine misere^e's, God be merciful
unto us, and bless us, Psalm. 65.1. in our woes and wants: as ready to fall
down at JESUS feet, and give thanks after cleansing, as before to cry out,
Jesu, master have mercy upon us, Luke 17.13.

But I cannot figere pedem hic; I hasten from the author of this blessing, to
the object about which it is conversant, a substance, wealth, riches, (so much
the word imports) and that such as is his, not others; his own peculiar, not
other men's alms or voluntary contribution, to be given and taken away at
pleasure; his in justice, as his proper right, not his by way of gratuity, and
at other men's courtesy; for so serving at the Altar would soon come to
starving at the Altar. But because the Priests, and all the whole Tribe of
Levi, were to have none inheritance in the land of Israel, nor any part among
them, Number. 18.20. nor to share with their brethren, in dividing the land by lot
among the Tribes, Deuteronomy. 18.1, 2. let us examine a little what this substance of
Levies was, what in the whole was the portion of Aaron and his seed, that were
to minister unto GOD in the Priests office, Exodus 28.1. of the Levites, that
were appointed over the Tabernacle of the Testimony, to do service in it, Number.
1.50. First then, although the land was not divided amongst them, as to the
other Tribes, yet had they (in all likelihood) in the Cities, and suburbane
grounds assigned unto them, as much as the portion of the greatest Tribe came
unto. For the forty eight Cities, which the children of Israel were commanded
to give them to dwell in, with the Suburbs for the Cities round about them,
reaching two thousand cubits on every side from every City, Number. 35.4, 5, 6.
must in all probability equal the portion of any other Tribe, in so little a
land as that was, which by St. Hieromes description Hierom. Epi. ad Dardanum.
did contain but in length from Dan to Beersheba an hundred and sixty miles,
in breadth from Joppe to Bethlehem, about forty six miles. Secondly, besides
this glebe wherewith they were endowed, they had all the tenth in Israel, Number.
18.21. even all the Tithes of Corn, Wine, Oil, Fruits. Herds and Flocks,
Levit. 27.30, 32. Thirdly, they had every thing which opened the matrice in all
flesh, whether of men or beasts, the firstlings of Kine, Sheep, and Goats, not
to be redeemed; the firstborne of Men to be redeemed at five shekels, and the
firstlings of the other beasts to be redeemed at the Priests estimation, with a
fifth part put to it, Exodus 34.19, 20. Number. 18.15, 16. Levit. 27.27. Nehem.
10.36. Fourthly, they had the first fruits, even whatsoever was ripe in the
Land, Number. 18.13. the firh fruits of their Corn, Wine, Oil, the first fruits
of the fleeces of their Sheep, Deuteronomy. 18.4. the first fruits of all manner of
Trees, and of their very dough for a blessing upon the rest, Ezekiel. 44.30.
Nehem, 10.35, 37. Fifthly, they had all Oblations and Vows, even every devoted
thing in Israel, Number. 18.18, 14, 19. Ezekiel. 44.29, 30. Sixthly, they had every
meat offering, every sin offering, every trespass offering, every heave
offering, every shake offering, and the show bread, Number. 18.9, 10. Ezekiel. 44.29.
Levit. 24.9. Seventhly, of Sacrifices eucharisticall, the breast and the
shoulder, Number. 18.18. Levit. 7.31, 32. of other Sacrifices, the shoulder, the
two cheeks, and the maw, Deuteronomy. 18.3. and of whole burnt Sacrifices, the
skin, Levit. 7.8. And last of all, all the males among them must three times
a year appear before the LORD, in the place which he should choose, and not
come empty handed, but every one was to give as he was able, according to the
blessing of the LORD which he had given him, Deuteronomy. 16.16. This was the matter
of their maintenance, being in respect of the quantity very large and liberal,
and for the manner of it also, it was very honorable, for all these duties
were to be brought year by year unto the house of God, Neh. 10.35, 37. that,
(as Lib. de prim. sacerd.
Philo Judaus observes) from thence the Priests and Levites might receive them
as from the hands of GOD, and not be upbraided by the people, as though they
lived by them, and were their almesmen, which is now rise in the mouths of
rude and ignorant men: But GOD stops the mouths of such miscreants, when
he says, I have given the children of Levi all the tenth, Number. 18.20. I,
whose the earth is, and the fullness thereof, Psalm. 24.1. and not the children
of men, to whom I have given the earth, Psalm. 115.16. And if any for their own
ease were desirous to redeem any duty, and not to carry it to the LORDS house,
(which to some that dwelt afar off would have been very cumbersome) they
were to pay according to the Priests estimation, at all times, Levit. 27.27.
with the addition of a fifth part; and not by any injurious and Church-robbing
prescription or custom, a feather for a goose, as the change of the times has
made it amongst us. And if any but through ignorance (for wilful theft in
civil matter was punished with a fourefold restitution, Ex. 22.1. much more in
the things of GOD) detained any thing either in whole or part, which was holy
to GOD, he was to bring a ram for an offering, to make good that which he
withheld, and to adda fifth part, Levit. 5.15, 16. This both for the matter and
the manner was the substance of Levi, given, granted, assigned and confirmed to
him, haredibus and successoribus in perpetuum, for their executing the Priests
office, for their service in the Tabernacle, for their teaching of Jacob Gods
judgments, and Israel his law; and that not by man (by whom notwithstanding
any thing devoted to the LORD is most holy, Levit. 27.28.) but by this JEHOVAH,
who is implored here to bless his substance; unto whom by an eternal right,
before the Law, under the Law, and after the Law, all Tithes are holy, Levit.
27.30. and so not only his, as the whole earth is his by right of creation and
preservation, (for he has founded it upon the seas, and established it upon
the floods, Psalm. 24.2. but by a propriety and immediate right that he has in
them, as having separated them from man's use to himself, and allowed man none
interest in them at all, no not of use and possession.

Now to come home with this to our times, men, brethren, and fathers: Was this
Levies substance? Was the LORD so bountiful to the Priests and Levites under
the Law? And will he not be as liberal to those whom he has put apart to
preach the Gospel, and to serve him in the Gospel of his Son? If the
ministration of death, of condemnation, 2 Cor. 3.7, 9. received so plentiful
and large a maintenance from the hand of God, no man that has any
understanding in the mystery of Christ, can deny, but he would be as open
handed to the ministration of life and of the spirit. And why shall not the
Apostles reasoning a pari, that as they which minister about the holy things,
live of the things of the Temple; and as they which wait at the Altar, are
partakers of the things of the Altar; even so GOD has ordained, that they
which preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.13, 14. hold as
well for the proportion and quantity of the maintenance, as for the just right
and authority to claim and receive it? so that from that very Scripture we may
not only show, that as GOD and not any man gave the Tithes to Levi; so GOD and
not man has ordained, that the Preacher of the Gospel should live of the
Gospel; not of the Disciples goods, but of the Gospel, as Theophylact Non ex
discipulorum facultatibus sed ex Evangelio. Theophylact. in 1 Cor. 9
glosseth the words, not of the Disciples goods, by way of voluntary
contribution, or beggarly alms, but upon their own goods gotten by preaching
of the Gospel: for neither (as Theophylact says there) do thou yield them
maintenance, but their own industry maintains them Neque emnitute in
alimontum subminish as sed propria quaedam industria ipso^ alit.
; but also that as great a portion and proportion is due to him that preaches
the Gospel, as to him that ministered in the Tabernacle, and served at the
Altar. And if as great, why not the self same in kind for Tithes, Oblations,
and vowed things (setting aside the Sacrifices, and the like, which were merely
ceremonial and shadows of things to come, and are now abrogated by Christ the
body and substance of them, Col. 2.) Since they were due to GOD long before the
Law, as we see in Abraham's giving Tithe of all to Melchisedech Priest of the
high God, Genesis 14. in Jacobs vowing of Tithes unto GOD, Genesis 28. since there
can be no better course for fulfilling that Canon of the Apostle, Let him that
is taught in the word, communicate to him that teaches, in all his goods or
good things, Gal. 6.6. If in all his good things, why not by way of a tenth?
since there can be no more equal course, any quantity above that being too
little for the teacher to receive, and under it being too much for him that is
taught to give. That Tithes are to be given to GOD and his Ministers, Abraham
signifies by his deeds, Jacob by his promises, afterward the Law ordains
it, and all the holy Doctors mention it Decimas Deo and sacerdotibus eius
dandas, Abraham factis, Iaacob promissis insinuas, d^inde lex statuit, and
omnes Doctores sancti commemorant. Walfr. Strabo de rebus Ecclesiasticis
,

But here,

The scorching East, the South wind loud do bluster,
The Southwest wind up all his storm, do muster V^a Eurusque Notusque ruunt,
creberque procellis Africus, etc. Virg. id. 1.
.
The Tabernacles of Edom, and the Ishmaelites: of Moab and the Hagarins, Gebal,
Ammon, and Amalek, the Philistines, with the inhabitants of Tire, Assure also is
joined with them, Psalm. 83.6, 7, 8. Politicians and Papists, Schismatikes and
Atheists, are confederate together against GOD and his Church, for the spoiling
of him and it in Tithes and Offerings, Mal. 3.8. The Politicians plea, is, that
Levi was in estimation as the tenth part of Israel, and therefore having none
inheritance amongst them, had the tenth for their inheritance, whereas our
Clergy are not the tenth part, nay scarcely the fiftieth part of the Realm, so
that they need less maintenance, and it is enough to provide them of a
competent stipend. These men are wise to do evil, can reason plausibly, so
long as they speak Babylons Logic, Down with it, down with it to the
ground, Psalm. 137. But all their reasonings herein, are but perverse disputings
of men of corrupt minds, and destitute of the truth, supposing that gain is
godliness, 1 Timothy 6.5. And their mouths may be easily stopped by answering
them, that howsoever the Levites were the thirteenth Tribe, yet they were not
the tenth nor thirteenth part in Israel, but at that time that GOD gave them
the Tithes for the service of the Tabernacle, the sixtieth part. For when the
other Tribes were numbered from twenty years old and upward, such as were able
to bear arms were in number six hundred thousand, three thousand, five
hundred and fifty, besides those which were either but twenty years old, or
unfit for service, who would have doubled the number at least: but the Levites
being reckoned from a month old and above, their number was twenty two
thousand; Number. 1. per totum, which was not much above the sixtieth part. At
this day then the Clergy of England, and their families, being not less than
the sixtieth part of the Reame, as large a portion (even in their own
reasoning, out of their own mouth will I judge them) is requisite for them as
for the Levites. But that fancied Chimaera, that individuum vagum of a
competency, how shall it answer the Apostles rule of communicating in all their
goods? Gal. 6.6. How shall it supply their want at all times? How shall there
be any certainty in it? since by reason of the ebbing and flowing, rising and
falling of the prices of things, it is as impossible to set down a competent
stipend, as it is to make a coat for the Moon. Was not ten pounds by the
year as competent about an hundred years since, as an hundred pounds are now?
and who knows not whether future ages may not see as great alterations?
Certainly these competencies have already brought our Livings to an impotency,
and the yoke of prescription and custom in receiving our dues after the old
rate, lies so heavy on our necks, that the more other men prosper, we pine;
the more they flourish, we fade; the more their estate increases, the more
ours diminishes.

Now again the Papists, and some of our own side, that have not looked so
narrowly into this truth as they might have done, hold Tithes not to be
required by the Moral Law consonant to the law of Nature, but by the Judicial
Law, and therefore now to stand or fall in the Church, as it shall please Saint
Peter's heir the Pope, (says the one) or the supreme Magistrate, says the
other. But here, both antecedent and consequent, both assertion and inference
halt down right, and find no rest for the so^le of their foot in any place of
Scripture. The antecedent, that Tithes are judicialls, for all Tithes are holy
to the Lord* Levit. 27.30. separated by himself from common use; but all
judicialls are things in common use, not separated from man: Tithes therefore
are not, cannot be judicialls. The consequence again is lame, Tithes are
judicialls, therefore now they may be retained or removed ad placitum. For is
it not a received tenent amongst many of our Divines Pisc. praefat. in Levit.
Perk. cases consc. etc.
, that those judicialls which serve for the backing of the Moral Law, for
punishing the breaches of it, namely, idolatry, witchcraft, blasphemy, murder,
adultery, theft, disobedience to parents, are still alive, stand in force, or
at least have a surviving equity in them? If the rest, why not this of Tithes,
which is as a bulwark to the first Table, which prescribes the worship of
GOD, the manner and maintenance thereof?

But this position of our latter Papists, is not so old as their Canon Law: It
was first invented by the Schoolmen. Alexander of Hale^ the Master, and Thomas
Aquinas the Scholar, and the rest of that rank. When dominus de^s Papa, had
taken the Tithes from the Oxen, that either did or should plough, Job 1. the
Rectors of the Churches, to whom they were properly due; and had improperly
given them to the Asses that fed by the Covents of Monks and Friars. Those
locusts that had made the face of the Church more desolate, than ever the
locusts of Egypt did the face of the country, by devouring every green thing
throughout their land, Exodus 10.15. That so his s^criledge in exempting some of
their orders, from paying Tithes of their grounds, where they were due, (as
Alexander the third exempted the Cistercians Hospitalars, and Templars from
payment of Tithes Alexander 3. Cistercienses, Hospitalario^, and Templario^
decimarum s^lutione exemit, Catal. test. verit. To^. 2. lib. 15.
. John the fifteenth gave the like privilege to the Benedictine Monks at
Cusinum Leo Maisicanus Hostiens. Epise. lib. 2. hist. ca. 1.
. And in appropriating Church livings to all their Covents, might the better
be salved.

Therefore, as in many other points; so in this there is war between the
Canonists and the Scholemen: the Canonists contending, that payment of Tithes
is necessary by Gods commandment, against the opinion of the Schole Divines
Quod decimarum solutio ex divino praecepto sit necessar^a contra Theologorum
sententiam Ians. Concord. cap. 83.
; for so the old Canon runs. We admonish and command, that by no means they
neglect to pay Tithes to God, which God himself has appointed them to pay
Admonemus atque praecipimus ne decimas omnino dare Deo negligant, quas ipse
Deus dare consituit, cause. 16 qu. 2.
. And the authority of the Scripture shows, that Tithes were granted for the
furtherance of piety Decimas in usum pieta^^^ concess^s esse Canonica autoritas
demonstrat. cause. 16. qu. 7.
. The Schole-men on the other side striving that they are but judicialls, and
so laying them open to the Popes power, to be alienated, transferred, and
disposed of by him at his pleasure.

But the schismatic and upstart generation of the Browmists cry out, (and
herein the whole world will as easily wonder after these beasts, as after the
beasts mentioned, Rev. 13.3.) that Tithes are ceremonies; (an opinion of
yesterday, scarclely devised an hundred years since) and therefore to be
thrown headlong out of the Church of Christ, as well as all other ceremonies
which Christ has taken away and nailed to his cross, Col. 2.14. Assuredly, if
their assertion be justified, the conclusion cannot be denied. I pronounce with
a free voice, faith S. Hierom Libera voce pronuntio cerimo^ias Juda. ^rum and
perni^iosas esse and mortiferas Christianis. Hieron. Aug. epist. 11.
, that the ceremonies of the Jews are both pernicious and deadly to
Christians. That which they cannot prove, let me in a word or two disprove.
Ceremonies were shadows of things to come, carrying with them an analogicall
resemblance of the things signified, as the shadow carries with it a
resemblance of the body, Col. 2.15. They were carnal rites, of holy, of
heavenly things, Heb. 9.10, 23. of some Evangelicall truth. Let them show then
the body, whereof they were shadows; the holy things, the Evangelicall truth,
whereof they were types; or else we must tell them that Tithes are no
ceremonies. For, if the definition does not agree to any thing, the thing
defined cannot agree to it Cui non convenit definitio, eidem non convenit
definitum Regula Dialect.
. And since all these carnal rites were but to endure till the time of
reformation, Heb. 9.10. it is more then marveilous, that the Church of Christ
ever retaining Tithes in use since the Apostles time, could not see them to be
dead elements; yea, deadly ceremonies, till this generation arose. Oh, but they
were given to the Levites for the service of the Tabernacle, Number. 18.21.
therefore ceremonies. But I shall make it appear by and by, that Tithes were
not then first instituted, but long before, even from the beginning, they were
then only assigned to the Levites. Again, the argument holds not to prove them
ceremonies, because given to the sons of Levi for the service of the
Tabernacle: For what manner of reasoning is this; their work was ceremonial,
therefore their wages ceremonies? May not I better reason, they were given to
the Levites for their service in the Tabernacle, which was not only
ceremonial, but also, yea and more principally moral; reading of the
Scriptures, causing the people to understand the reading. Neh. 8.38. blessing
and praising the GOD of Israel, 1 Chr. 16.4. and teaching of the people the Law
of the LORD of Hosts, Mat. 2.7. Therefore they were moral duties.

But as when our Saviors disciples had rehearsed to him the diverse opinions
of men concerning him; some saying that he was John Baptist, some Elias, some
Jeremiah, or one of the Prophets: He asked them, Whom say ye that I am? Mat.
16.15. So happily having proposed to you the diversity of opinions herein, some
saying that they are judicial, some ceremonial, some tolerable, some
abominable, some one thing, some another, most of them shooting at one mark,
to wrest them out of the hands of GODS Ministers, you are ready to demand, But
what sai'st thou that they are? whether moral, ceremonial, or judicial? I am
not (beloved) fearful to answer you concerning this point, but do resolutely
profess unto you, that they are neither ceremonies necessary to be rejected,
nor judicialls indifferent, either to be retained or refused; but moral, being
holy to the LORD by an eternal right, as well before and after the Law, as
under it; and being by him ordained to be the portion of his Priests and
Ministers, as well before and after, as under the Law; so that that assertion,
all Tithes are holy to the Lord, Levit. 27.30. is no way Leviticall, but
contains in it a perpetual truth, and that the Ministers of the Gospel may
as lawfully claim the tenth of their peoples increase, as before and under the
Law the Priests of the high GOD received them. For the making good whereof two
points are to be proposed. First, that Tithes were ever due, and paid before
the law of Moses. Secondly, that they are now due in the time of the Gospel:
for from thence it must follow evidently, that howsoever in the Law they were
specially assigned to the sons of Levi, yet they had not then their
beginning, but were ever the Lords and his Ministers by a moral and perpetual
right. For the first, Tithes were ever due, and paid before the Law. As soon
as ever we find any mention of a Priest of GOD, we find payment of Tithes to
him, and that eo nomine, because he was the Priest of GOD; Melchisedek was
Priest of the most high GOD, and Abraham gave him Tithes of all, Genesis 14.19,
20. And this he did, not by voluntary contribution, but rather by necessary
injunction; for such a gift would rather have argued the superiority and
excellency to have been in Abraham the giver, than in Melchisedek the
receiver: whereas the Apostle would have us to consider Melchisedeks greatness
by Abraham's giving of Tithes to him, Heb. 7.4. Again, the Original is (...),
verse. 6. Melchisedek tithed Abraham; importing, that he took it by lawful
authority, not as a free will offering. In this way of Abraham walks his
grandchilde Jacob, (who no doubt was taught by Abraham's pious direction to
keep the way of the LORD herein, Genesis 18.19. and voweth payment of Tithes unto
GOD, Genesis 28.20. as acknowledging that they were his right before the Law was
given. But here Cardinal Bellarmine and his side would feign wring this
testimony out of our hands, and conclude hence, that tithes are no moral
duties, because they were vowed; he himself faith, it had been an ungodly
thing to vow Tithes, if he had been absolutely bound to pay them Impium
fuisset vovere decimas, si absolute fuisset obligatus eas solvere, Bellar.
contr. 5. l. cap. 25. tom. 1.
: and great a Rabbi amongst them as he, that a man may not vow a moral duty
conditionally, as Jacob here does Alphons. Tostat. in Matt. 23.
, if GOD would be with him, and keep him in his way, and give him bread to
eat, and raiment to put on. But it seems they are ready with their answer
before ever they looked on the Text. For Jacob voweth, and that conditionally,
that if GOD will be with him, etc. the LORD shall be his GOD, which I think
they will not deny to be a moral duty: even here then is evidence enough,
that moral duties may be vowed, that they may be vowed conditionally. And if
moral duties may not be vowed, why do the people of the Jews enter into a
covenant, and swear unto the LORD GOD of their fathers, to seek him with all
their heart, and with all their soul? 2 Chronicles. 15.12, 13, 14. Why does David
bind himself by an oath to keep Gods righteous judgments? I have sworn, and
will perform it, that I will keep thy righteous judgments, Psalm. 119.106.
Thus out of the mouth and deeds of two witnesses beyond all exception. Abraham
and Jacob, may this truth be established, that Tithes were held Gods right,
and his Priests, in the law of Nature, before eve^ the law written. The
persuasion whereof was by the law of Nature so engraven in men's hearts, the
practice of it in all possibility so dispersed from Noah amongst all people,
that (as Fes^us says Decima quaque veteres diis suis offerebant.
) the old people offered all kind of Tithes to their gods, as Cyrus
overcomming the Lydians offered all to Jupiter Heredot. Cli^
, and Bacchus overcomming the Scythians, offered to him also Te memorant Gange,
totoque oriento subacto, Primitias magno seposuisse Iovt. Ovid. l. 3. Fast^rum.


They say when thou had Ganges and the East o'vethrowne,
Thou set'st apart for Jove the first fruits, as his own.
And the ancient Romans did vow Tithes to Hercules Macrob. Sat. lib. 3. ca. 24.
, yea the very barbarous Sabeans and Ethiopians sold not their spices to the
Merchants, before their Priests had laid out their tenth for their gods Decimas
deo sacerdotes cap^unt, neconte mercari licet. Plin. not. hist. li. 12. ca. 14.
. Thus have I examined and cleared the first point.

I come now to the second, which is, that they are now due to GOD, and those
that serve him in the Gospel of his Son, since the abolishing of the Law of
Ordinances. And here the great Cardinal and the Popish Champions (who when the
door must be set open to unwritten traditions, can deny the Scripture to be
full enough without traditions, to contain expressly the whole doctrine
either concerning faith or manners, and that therefore traditions are requisite
Scriptura non contiuet express totam doctrinam sivo de fide, sive de moribus,
etc. Bellarm. li. 4. de verb. dei c. 3.
: nay can with the like affection of piety and reverence, receive and honor
unwritten traditions, as all the books of the Traditi^nes non scriptas pari
pieta^^^ affect^^ and reverentia suscipere and venerari, ac omnes libros tam
veteru quam novi Testamenti, Council. Trid. Sess. 4.
Old and New Testament) do now call for an express precept in the new Law,
specifying Tithes to be the Ministers maintenance, an express precept, it is
not enough to have it in sense, but we must have it in words; to have it by
sound consequence and collection, but we must have it (...), word for word;
and yet Gregory Nazianzen says, that those things which are gathered out of
the Scriptures, are alike to those things which are written expressly Perinde
sunt ea qua e^ Scripturis colliguntur, atque ea quae scribuntur.
. If I can then deduce it by good consequence out of the New Testament, it
shall be enough, though it be not written in totidem verbis and syllabis. When
the Apostle then mentions living of the Gospel, and that ever so, as they
which wait at the Altar are partakers of the Altar, 1 Cor. 9.13, 13. when he
urges communicating to our teachers in all our goods, Gal. 6.6. we may not
here (...), collatis testimoniis demonstrare, (as Beza interprets it, Act
9.22.) by comparing testimonies of Scripture, by laying one place to another,
show, that this living of the Gospel, this communicating in all our goods,
should be now by the tenth, as being a course held before the Law, and under
the Law, unless man will be wiser than his Maker, and devise a new way of
living for them, of communicating to them, leaving the old which GOD had
settled from the beginning of the world. And what shall become of that double
honor, double maintenance, which the Elders that rule well are worthy of, 1 Timothy 5.17. if the portion of the Presbyters under the Gospel come short of the
portion of the Priesthood under the Law? for so to understand honor the next
verse there gives us light, for the Scripture says, The labourer is worthy of
his reward; and accordingly Saint Hierome expounds honor to be maintenance,
and understands by maintenance Tithes; adding also, What we have said
concerning Tithes which heretofore were given by the people to the Priests and
Levites, understand it also concerning the people of the Church Quod de decimis
dixim u^ qua olim dabantur a populo Sacerd^tibu^ and Levitis, in Ecclesiae
quoque populis intelligito.
. May we not find here as good evidence in these testimonies for Tithes, as
any where in the New Testament, for the perpetual and unchangeable observation
of the seventh day (cried up with more than a Jewish rigor, by many not
zealous according to discretion See their absurd positions in Rogers preface to
Articles of Relig.
,) for the baptizing of infants, and many other truths, which are not expressed
in the very letter, and so many words, but soundly and justly gathered out of
the sense and purpose of the holy Scripture? And what think we of the
Apostles reasoning, Heb 7.6, 7, 8, 9. when he proves Melchisedechs Priesthood,
and so Christ's, which is all one, greater than the Leviticall: first, because
in Abraham Levi paid Tithes to Melchisedeck, and so to Christ. Secondly,
because Melchisedeck is a Tith taker that lives still, and Levi is a
Tith-taker that dies. Do not these consectaries follow and flow from it?
First, that if Levi paid Tithes in Abraham, then they are originally no
Leviticall ceremonies, howsoever under the Law they were specially assigned to
him; for that is a crossing of the Leviticall ordinances, which injoyne, that
Tithes should be paid to Levi. Secondly, if before the Law Tithes were paid
unto Christ in Melchisedeck, (then he receives them of whom it is witnessed
that he lives, verse. 8.) why should they not likewise be paid unto Christ in
his Presbyters, after that law is abolished: now they must live of the Gospel,
and being in his stead, 1 Cor. 5.20. are fittest to be his receivers. Thirdly,
if other things wherein Melchisedeck the type, and Christ the antitype agree,
and are brought to prove his eternal Priesthood, are ever true of him; as,
that he is King of righteousness, King of peace, that he is without father or
mother, without descent; having neither beginning of days, nor end of life.
verse. 1.3. Why not this, he ever takes Tithes: since he receives Tithes of
whom it is witnessed that he lives, and since this paying of Tithes is
produced with the rest, to prove Christ's eternal priesthood.

Again, is not sacrilege accursed, and accursed for sin, not only in the old
Testament, (it is a snare to to the man who devoureth that which is holy, Prove.
20.25.) but also in the New? Thou that abhorrest idols, do thou commit
sacrilege? Romans 2.22. Is it not punished as a capital sin, not only in the
one Testament, (in Balshazzar, Dan. 5.) but also in the other? (In Ananias and
Sapphira, Act. 5.)? For the sin is so much the more grievous, by how much it
cannot be committed, but against God. Tanto gravius est peccatum, quanto
committinon potest nisi in Deum.
And so speaks Beza of Ananias sin: To this sacrilege there was added
diffidence and hypocrisy: And so St. Ambrose, Beza in locum.
whilst he takes away part of that which he promised, he is condemned both of
sacrilege and fraud: of sacrilege, because he deceived God of his promise Dum
exeo quod promiserat* partem subtrahit, sacrilegii simuleondemnatur and
fraudis: sacrilegis quod Deum in pollicitatione fefelle^at. Ambr. ser. 9.
. Now if sacrilege* which is the taking away of things deputed and consecrated
to GOD and his worship, being either such things as God by express reservation
has consecrated to himself: or else such as man has consecrated and set
apart to him, be still a sin under the Gospel, still make men guilty before
God. How then should not the payment of Tithes be a moral duty, stand still in
force under the Gospel? since (as for mine own part I take it) God has
consecrated them to himself by an eternal right: which right he chalengeth, (
Levit. 27.30. All Tith is holy unto the Lord.) At least (as no man can deny)
they are by the Laws, not only of this Land, but almost of all Christendom,
consecrated unto God for the maintenance of his worship and ministry. And as
the Scriptures are pregnant enough on our side to prove Tithes a moral duty,
and now to be continued under the Gospel. So in the primitive and best times of
the Church, the best of the Fathers and Councels understood, interpreted, and
pressed them so; required them as a moral and Christian duty: and for almost a
thousand years it was never held in the Church, that they were either
judicial or ceremonial. Origin, who was near to the Apostles times, (there
being but eighty four years between John the Evangelists death and his birth)
urges the payment of Tithes as a doctrine then received in the Church, and
binding Christians. How does Quomodo abundat iustitia ^ostraplusquam Scribarum
and Pharisaeorum, si ^lli de fructibu^ terra sua gustare non audent, priusquam
primitta^ sacerdotibu^ offerant, (...) and Levitis decimae separent^r, and ego
nihil horum faciens, fru^tibus terra ^ta abutar, ut Sacerdes nesciat, Levita
ignoret, divinum altar non sentiat Orig. homil. 11. in Number?
our righteousness abound more than the righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, if they dare not taste of the fruits of the earth, before they offer
the first fruits to the Priests, and the Tithes be separated for the Levites:
and I doing none of these, shall so abuse the fruits of the earth, that the
Priests shall not know it, the Levit shall be ignorant of it, GODS Altar shall
not perceive it. And further, there he delivers his judgment for that point.
I think it necessary that this Law should be observed according to the letter
Hane egolegem observart etiam secundu^ literam, necessarium puto.
: and expounds our Saviors words ( Mat. 23. These things you ought to have
done, and not to have left the other undone) to be a precept no less binding
Christians than Jews. Thus did he hold them to be moral, found them in
novalege. St. Cyprian (whofe Martyredome fell about two hundred fifty nine
years after Christ,) gives us to understand, that Ministers then lived of
Tithes, then distributed to them by the Bishops, who were the general Stewards
of Church goods In honor sportulantium fratrum tanquam decima^. ex fructibu^
accipientes. Ep. 66. Sportula was the stipend allowed by the Bishop to the
Presbyter.
: living (faith he) of that honorable stipend, with their brethren, as they
who received Tithes of the fruits of the earth. St. Ambrose also presses this
payment and a reformation, when fault had been committed before. Whosoever shall
call to mind in himself, that he has not faithfully paid his Tithes, let
him now amend that which he has failed in Quicunque recogno verit in se, quod
sideliter non deder it decimas, quomodo emendet quod. minu^ fecit. Ambr. sermon.
34. in fer. quadrag.
. St. Augustine also can find footing in the new Testament for Tithes, when he
expounds, Give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to God the things
that are Gods, Mat. 22.21. Tribute to Caesar, Tithes to GOD Caesa^i censu^,
decima deo. Hom. 48. tom. 10.
. When he says again, Set apart the Tithes, although that be a small matter;
for it is said that the Pharisees gave Tithes: And what says the LORD, Unless
your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, you
cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven Decimas exime quanqua^ parum sit,
dictu^ est enim quia Pharisas decimas dabant: and quid art dominus, nisi
abundaverit, etc. Idem in Psalm. 146.
. And it seems that this was no new thing done under the Sun in his time, by
that which he faith again, Our Ancestors did therefore abound with all store,
because they gave Tithes to GOD, and paid their Tribute to Caesar. But now
because devotion has decreased, exactions have increased: we will not give
the tenth part to GOD, and now all is taken away; that which Christ cannot
have, Caesar will Maiores nostr^ ideo coptis omnibus abundabant quia do
decimas dabant, and Caesar's censum reddebu^t, modo autem quia decessit devotic,
accessit ^ndictio fisci, nolumus partiricum deo decima^, m^doaute tollitur
tetu^: hec tollit fiscus, quod non accipit Christus. Id. hom. 48. inter 50 ser.
. The time would fail me if I should produce other testimonies out of Fathers.
Councels, Oecumenicall and provincial, laws Ecclesiastical and Imperial:
all of them acknowledging payment of Tithes to be a moral duty, commanding
them now to be paid to the Church. The one of the second Council held at
Matiscon, anno 586. shall serve for all Leges divina consulentes Sacerd^tibus
and Mi^istris Ecclesi^rum pro hareditar^ a portione, omus populo praceyerunt
decim as fruct^^um suorum locis sacres prastare, ut nullo labor impedite per
res illegitimas, spirit^^alibus possis vacare Ministeri^s, quas leges
Christian^rum congeries longis temporibus custodivit intemeratas. Vnde
statuimus etc.
. The Laws of God providing for Priests and Ministers of the Churches, for
their hereditary portion, have commanded all people to pay the Tithes of their
fruits to the holy places: that being no ways hindered by unlawful things,
they might attend their spiritual offices: Which laws the Christian Church
has a long time kept undefiled. Whereupon we ordain that all people shall pay
their Ecclesiastical Tithes. And so I conclude with that of Junius, that
Tithes have been holy to God by all right since the memory of man Decima iut^
o^^ns post hominum memoria^ Deo fuerunt sacra.
: And that it was sacrilege in the Pope at first, to appropriate them to Monks
and Friars, from the laboring Oxen: no better in secular persons at the
dissolution of the Abbeys to invade them, in Patrons to set them to sale, to
detain any glebe or Tithes consecrated to God: In Parishioners, either by
secret practice, or pretended customs, to defraud the Minister of them: And
that God is much robbed in our Church, partly by prescriptions and customs,
which snatch away somewhat from every Church in our Realm; partly by
impropriations, which of nine thousand two hundred, eighty and four Parish
Churches, (for that is the just number in England and Wales Cam^d. Brit. page
262.
) have devoured three thousand, eight hundred ninety five, almost the half in
number, but far above the half in value and goodness. God put it into the
hearts of our Reverend Bishops, Deanes, and Chapiters, and Colleges, (who hold
many of them still in the right of the Church) to proved so conscionably for
those that labor in them; that whilst they serve at the Altar, they may not
starve at it. But to dream of any restitution of them from the Lay possessors,
(unless it be here and there one, like a berry or two in the top of a bough,
whose heart God has touched) were as the Poet says, (...), a dream of a
shadow. When we have said and reasoned all that we can, they have against us
one argument for themselves, ab utili, which we shall never solve nor dissolve.
In this case let me say to you as Jeremy said to the Prophets that prophesied,
Behold the vessels of the Lords house shall now shortly be brought again from
Babylon. If we be Prophets, let us now make intercession to the LORD of Hosts,
that the vessels that are left in the house of the LORD, go not to Babylon,
Jer 27.15, 16. For as the Israelites of old cried, so may we; The sword of the
LORD and of Gideon, Judge. 7.20. It is the goodness of our God, and the Piety
of our gracious King, that yet preserves to us from those Evening wolves,
these,

Relliquias Danaum, atque immitis Achillis Virg. Aeneid. 1.
.

That I have so long dwelt upon this point and petition, The blessing of the
Levites substance, I may say to these evil times whereinto we have fallen, as
Paul to the Corinthians in another case, Ye have compelled me. In the next
petition, which is another request for an acceptance of the work of his
hands. I will briefly touch the first branch, which is an intimation of a work
to be performed by him, as being most pertinent to this time and personshere
present.

Accept the work of his hands.] There lay a necessity upon man, even in his
innocence, to labor in an honest calling: The LORD GOD took Adam, after he
had made him, and put him into the garden of Eden to dress it, Genesis 2.15. But
when man had sinned against his Maker, and forfeited his state in that Paradise
of pleasure, when his labor should have been with pleasure, without
defatigation; he was turned out into the wide world; into the earth, cursed
for his sake, Genesis 3.17. In which with the sweat of his brows, even with
difficult labor, pain, and sorrow, he must eat his bread, and get his
living. For now all his days are sorrow, and his travel grief, Eccles. 2.13.
And now labor lies on him not only as a duty, testifying his obedience,
wherein he must imitate the holy Angels, who are created of GOD to be
ministering spirits, Heb. 1.14. Yea, his heavenly Father, who labored in the
beginning of time, in the creating of all things, and at this time; and to the
end of times; works in the preservation of all his creation, John 5.17. but
also as punishment of his disobedience; Man is borne unto labor, as the sparks
fly upward, Job 5.7. And this working with his hands, is the discharging of
the duties of that calling wherein GOD has set him, as the LORD has called
every man, so let him work 1 Cor. 7.17.

Now this work of Levies hand, was (that I may distinguish the things that
differ) either ceremonial, or moral. The ceremonial was to minister in the
Priests office, Ex. 28.1. to offer gifts and sacrifices, Heb. 8.3. to be over
the Tabernacle of the Testimony, over all the vessels thereof, and all things
that belong unto it; Numb. 1.10. The moral was to thank and praise the GOD of
Israel, 1 Chro. 16.4. and 23.31. to bless the children of Israel in GODS name,
Numb. 6.23. Deuteronomy. 10.8. to read in the book of the Law distinctly, give the
sense, and cause the people to understand the reading, Neh. 8.8. to show the
people the sentence of judgment in hard matters, Deuteronomy. 17.8. 2 Chro. 19.8.
Ezekiel. 44.23, 24. to exhort them in war, Deuteronomy. 20.23. to teach them at all
times the Law of the LORD of Hosts; and to walk before the Lord in
uprightness, that so they might turn many stom their iniquities, Mal. 2.6, 7.
Now the first of these, the ceremonial work, was to endure but till the time
of reformation, Heb. 9.10. the fastening of that hand writing of ordinances, to
the cross of Christ, Col. 2. that law being changed, and abolished, this work
of the Priesthood is abolished also. The other work, the moral, is to
continue, though not in the tribe of Levi; yet in those Prophets, Pastors, and
teachers that Christ gave for the perfecting of the Saints, the work of the
ministry, and the edifying of his body, Ephesians. 4.11. till the end of the world;
the appearing of JESUS CHRIST, Mat. 28.20. 1 Timothy 6.14. This work in regard of
the authority by which, or master for whom it is don, is called the Lords work.
1 Cor. 16.10. in regard of the dignity of it, (...), a good or godly work, 1 Timothy 3.1. and the workmen thereof laborers together with God, 1 Cor. 3.9. in
regard of the greatness of it; a work hardly to be fitted with a workman, who
is sufficient for these things? 2 Cor. 2.16. it is onus vel ipsis angelis
formidan^ dum Bernard.
; a burden to be feared of the very Angels. Ars est artium regimen animarum
Gregor. in past. par. 1. ca. 1.
; the government of Souls is the art of arts.

Now beloved Brethren of the Clergy, the chariots of Israel, and the horsemen
thereof, 2 King. 2.12. Since the lines are fallen to us in this pleasant place,
suffer, I pray you, a few words of exhortation. As, then, we have taken upon
us the Ministerial office and work: so that ministry which we have received
from the LORD, let us fulfill in the LORD, Col. 4.17. even do the work of
Evangelists, 2 Timothy 4.5. And since we are Ambassadors for Christ; let us in
Christ's stead pray our people to be reconciled to GOD, 2 Cor. 5.20. show all
the counsels of Christ to the household of faith, Act. 20.27. Since we are
watchmen set over the house of GOD, let us take heed unto our flocks; watching
night and day, in season and out of season, for the Souls committed to our
charge, Heb. 13.17. For if all ought to watch, (says Bernard) much more ought
the shepherds Stomnes vigilare debent, multo magis pa^sto^es. Bern. de vigil.
pastor.
. If he so labors and watch who feeds Labans sheep, (says St. Basil);
with what labor, and what watchings ought he to bestirre himself, who feeds
GODS sheep Sisic laborat and vigilat ^us pascit oves L^b^n, quanto^a bort,
quantis^ue vigiliisd be^ ^ntendere, qui pascit oves D^^? Basil, hom. de pae^st.
. Since we are GODS stewards, let us give to every one of his household their
portion in due season, Luk 12.42. For if he who provideth not for them of his
own house, the bread that perishes, Joh. 6.27. has denied the says, and is
worse than an Infidel, 1 Timothy 5.8. Much more is he to be accounted so, who
provideth not for those of GODS house, the bread that indureth to eternal
life. The rulers slacknesse is their charges wrong Incuria praposits est
insuria deposits. Hieron. Epist. ad Furia^.
. Since we are sowers* let us go forth to sow, Mat. 13.3. not to reap only:
since planters, 1 Cor. 3.6. let us ingraft in the minds of the faithful, that
word which is able to save their souls, Jam. 1.21. Since waterers, let us
water those tender plants, that are planted in the courts of the LORD; and let
it not be our fault that the LORDS field should seem to be cursed with the
curse of the mountains of Gilboa, upon which neither dew nor rain fell, 2 Samuel 1.21. Since builders in the house of GOD, let us so build up the household
of faith upon Christ Jesus the corner stone, that they may grow unto an holy
temple in the Lord, Ephesians. 2.21. Since men of GOD, let us quit our selves like
men, 1 Cor. 16.13. preach the word, be instant, reprove, rebuke, exhort with
all long suffering and doctrine, 2 Timothy 4.1, 2. Since the salt of the earth,
let us have salt in our selves, Mark 9.50. and let all our speech be so
seasoned with salt, that it may minister grace to our hearers, Col. 4.6. Since
Messengers of the LORD of Hosts, let our lips preserve knowledge, Mat. 27. let
us bring glad tidings of good things to our auditors, Romans 10.15. And since we
are laborers in his vineyard, let us go into it; and that not only to feed
there, but also and much more to labor, Mat. 20.4. Let us not be dumb dogs,
such as cannot, or will not bark; and who have need that Christ should cast
out of them that dumb devil, Luk 11.14. nor dead idols, who have mouths, and
speak not. Psalm. 115.5. Nor Pastors derived by Antiphrasis, a non pascendo,
from not feeding Vt monia^ non movendo.
or of pascor pasceris, to be fed only: For when they do not feed, but are fed
themselves, they are not derived from pasco, to feed; but from pascor, to be
fed Cum enim non pascant sed pascantur, non agrave; pasco der^vantur, sed a
pascor pascerit. Vetus poema per Illiricum, de corrupt. statu Ecclesiae.
. Let not those complaints light upon us which Saint Bernard darted out against
the Clergy of his time, saying, that they were in habit Clergy men; in
following after gain, men of the world; but in work, neither: that they
labored not as other men; but whereas all states of men have some labor, and
some pleasure, that they by a new cunning dividing between these, have chosen
that which is delightful in every thing, and rejected that which is
displeasing Eos esse habitu Clericos, quastis mundanos, actu neutr^s; in labor
hominum non esse, sed cum cuncts status hominum aliquid habeant laboris, and
aliquid voluptatis, Clericos inter haec novo quodam artificio discernentes
totum quod delectat in quolibet elegisse, and totum quod molestat respuisse di.
3. de consideratione.
. Let the Pope only take this privilege to himself, that though he draw
millions of souls after him to hell, yet no man may presume to say to him;
Sir, why do thou do so Distinct. 40 in decret.
. But let us take heed unto our selves, to reading, or exhortation and
doctrine, that we may save our selves, and them that hear us, 1 Timothy 4.26.

But above all things, let me put you in mind of one thing, that we be not
only such as have the light of knowledge, but such also as are endued with the
fire of zeal; that our lips may not only preserve knowledge, but also (that
which the LORD requires in the Tribe of Levi, Mal. 2.6, 7.) that we may walk
with GOD in peace and equity; that we may wear upon our breastplates, not only
the Vrim of light and knowledge, but also the Thummin of integrity and good
conversation, Exodus 28.30. that we may always enter into the sanctuary of the
LORD with our golden bells, the sound of preaching; and Pomegranates, the fruit
of good living, (as St. Gregory interprets it Greg. lib. 1. epist. 24.
) mingled together, Exodus 28.33, 34. that we who teach others, may teach our
selves, Romans 2.21. who preach to others, may not our selves be cast-awayes, 1
Cor. 9.27. For it belongs to GODS Priests, not only to teach, but also to do
the laws that they may not only teach their people and flock committed to them
with words, but also with examples Sacerdotum. enim est proprie non solum
docere sed and facere, legem, ut nequaquam verbi^ subjectos sibi populos, and
creditum gregem, sed exemplis doceant. Hieron. in Jerem. 16.
. This is the best harmony of all, when the Priests mind, hand, and tongue
agree Haecest pulcherrima harmonia, quando Sacerdotis men's, manus, lingua,
concordant. Ide^ epist. ad Nepo^.
. But on the other side, it is nothing to preach the truth, if the heart
disagree from the tongue Praedicare veritatem nil est, si cor lingua
dissentiat. Aug. in Psalm. 37.
: Nay, if we could speak with the tongue of men, should be so skillful in
Oratory, that we could at our pleasure lift up, advance, amplify, extenuate,
and as it were by an enchanting power of eloquence, turn any thing into what
shape and habit we would; and so subtle in disputing, that we could work
any thing out of any thing: if we could speak with the tongue of Angels, (if
there were any angels tongues Si quae sint Angelorum lingua. Hieron.
, for the words are to be understood hyperbolically) if we had prophecy, the
gift of interpreting the Scriptures, and knew not some few, but all mysteries;
even the whole mystery of godliness: and had not some little knowledge, but
all; even not only the wisdom of this world, and the Princes thereof, which
come to naught, 1 Cor. 2.6. So that with Solomon we could speak of plants from
the Cedar which is in Libanus, to the Hyssope which grows upon the wall: and
of beasts, and birds, and creeping things, and fishes* 1 King. 4.33. but also
the wisdom of GOD hid in a mystery, and had not charity: not only these
excellent gifts are to be accounted nothing, but we our selves are nothing, 1
Cor. 13.1, 2. To such Pharisees who say and do not, that same song of St.
Bernard, not pleasant but profitable, must be sung. Monstrosa res est gradus
summus, and ^uimus infimus, seeds prima and vita ima, lingua magniloqua and
manus o^^osa, sermo multus and fructus nullus, vultus gravis and actus levis,
caput canum, and cor vanum, facies rugosa and lingua nugosa, ^ngens autoritas
and nutan^ stabilitas, Lib 2. de considerat.
It is a monstrous thing to have an high degree, and a base mind; the chief
seat, and a lewd life; a tongue speaking great words, and an idle hand; much
speech, and no fruit; a grave countenance, and a light carriage; a gray head,
and an idle heart; a wrinkled face, and a trifling tongue; great authority, and
a tottering stability. To grow to an end then, let us so take heed to our
selves, that we may live well, and to our doctrine, 1 Timothy 4.16. that we may
instruct our people committed to our charge: Let us so shine as bright stars in
the militant Church, (that is in Chrysostomes interpretation Chrysostom. hom. 11. in
Matt.
, Let. us so teach that men may not only hear our words, but also see our good
works) that at length we may shine as bright stars in the triumphant Church
for ever and ever, Dan. 12.3. And let us so jointly do, and teach the least,
Mat. 5.19. the greatest, all the commandments of GOD, that we may be called
great in the Kingdom of grace; may be found heirs in the Kingdom of glory,
and sit with Christ in his Throne, Rev. 3.21. To whom with the Father, and the
Holy Ghost, three Persons, one GOD, and King eternal, immortal, invisible,
and only wise, be Honor and Glory, for ever and ever. AMEN.

FINIS.

