SINETES Passions upon his fortunes, offered for an Incense at the shrine of
the Ladies which guided his distempered thoughts.

The Patrons patheticall Posies, Sonets, Maddrigals, and Rowndelayes. Together
with Sinetes D^mpe.

Plena verecundi culpa pudoris erat.

By ROBERT PARRY Gent.

AT LONDON Printed by T. P. for William Holme, and are to be sold on Ludgate
hill at the sign of the holy L^mbe, 1597.

To the right worshipful John Salisburie of Lleweni Esquier for the Body to
the Queens most excellent Majesty.
THe Hope of these, and glass of future times,
O Heroes which even envy itself admir's,
Vouchsafe to guarde, and patronize my rimes,
My humble rhyme, which nothing else desir's;
But to make known the greatness of thy mind,
To Honors throne that ever has been inclyn'd.
Give leave a while unto my breathing Muse.
To pause upon the accent's of her smarte,
From the respite of this short-taken truce,
For to record the actions of my Heart:
Which vowed has, to manifest thy worth,
That noble fruits to future age bringes forth.
Even thou alone, which strengthn'st my repose,
And d^est give life unto my dead desire,
Which malice daunt'ste, that did thy fame oppose,
Now, with reviving hope, my quill inspire:
So he may write, and I may glory singe,
That time, in time, may pluck out enui's stinge.
Renowned Patron, my wayling verse,
To whose protect I fly for friendly aid,
Vouchsafe to hear, while I my woes rehearse:
Then my poor muse, will never be dismaide,
To countenance the babbling Eccho's frown,
That future age may ring of thy renown.
I that ere-while with Pan his hindes did play,
And tuned the note, that best did please my mind,
Content to sing a sheapheards Round-delay;
Now by thy might, my Muse the way did find,
With Maddrigals, to store my homely style,
Gra^ed with the applause, of thy well graced smile.
Even thou I say, whose travail hope does yeilde,
That honors worth, may reap a due reward,
Which flies with native plume unto the field;
Whose pains deserves thy countries just regard:
Time cannot dashe, nor envy blemish those,
Whom on fam's strength, have built their chiest repose,
It Is only that, which thou may claim thine own,
Devouring time, cannot obscure the same,
In future age by this thou may be known,
When as posterities renew thy fame:
Then thou being dead, s^alt life a new possess,
When works nor words, thy worthynes express,
Then shall my time a sort of strength remain,
To shield the flourish of thy high renown,
That ruin's force may neu'r graces stain^,
Which with fames sound, shall through the world be blown:
If that the ocean which includ's our style,
Would passage grant out of this noble Isle.
For steling time of muses low remain.
Will from the fountain of her chief conceyte,
Still out the fame, through Lymbecke of my brain,
That glory takes the honor to repeat:
Whose subject though of royal accents barde,
Yet to the same, vouchsafe thy due reward,
So shall my self, and Pen, bequeath their toil,
To sing, and write prays, which it self shall praise,
Which time with cutting Sith, shall never spoil,
That often worthy Heroes fame delays:
And I encouraged by thy applause,
Shall teach my muse on higher things to pause.
Upon the Authors muse.
IF Poets with pen do purchase praise,
Let Pa^rie then possess his part:
Whose Posies rate, report does raise,
To Pernasse Mount of due desarte.
In house of fame he ought have place,
If Ovid eu'r deserved that grace.
His pleasant vain, his phrases fine,
Sentencious eke, in verse and prose:
That they include some grace divine,
His former doings do well disoose.
With his sweet Muse, and lovely lays,
Who may compare in these out days.
But chiefly his SINETES now,
Has moved his muse her prize to play.
As if therein she had made a vow,
Some p^ p^ie to displaye.
There Cupides k^ke are liuelye seen,
With Venus bai^es, that louelye Queen.
Then Momus moment; and Zoylus cease,
And foul Mouth Theon leave to rail:
Seeing Parries pen, the best does please,
What does vour carping then avail.
Whom valiant Lion does protect:
May well all craving Curres reject.
Habet scintilla calorem. Hu. Gry.

Upon Sinetes Passions.
AH Love, fond love, false love, deceitfu love,
Unkind, unto the kind, to friend a foe:
A Tirant, loyal lovers do thee prove,
And faithful hearts, thou fillest full of woe.
Ah blind love: bliud, but not in wou^ding blind,
Yea blind for why? thy friends thou do not see,
Those which resist, thou lika a child do flee,
But they which yeilde thrice man-like do thee find,
Still, Still a boy, delightinge still to play,
What play? to slaye, what kind of play is this:
So plays the hungrye hawk, with taken pray:
So plays the wily Catte with captive Mise.
Sinetes mournful Muse does this descrie,
His haples hapes my plaints do justify.
The bloody bear, which rangeth in the wood,
Does cease to rage, when that she has her fill:
The hungry woolf, which often is bathed in blood,
When greedy paunch is glutted leaves to kill.
But Cupide, whom men call the god of love,
(Unjustly call: nay, do most justly call:
For why, he loves to kill, whom? those which love)
He daily kills, and is not filled at all.
What thing is rare? to see a Tirant old,
In praise of the Book.
CVupid is old, though he a Tirant be:
What old? nay young, we Cupid still behold,
Though young in sight, yet Tirant old is he.
Old may he be, and Tirants wages have,
Which thousands have untimely sent to gra^.
Happy thou art, Sinetes though vnhappies
Unhappy were the happes, which thee befell,
Happy yet in this, that learned Parrye,
Thy happles happes, in sugared songs does tell.
Thou shrouded art, under the Lions winge,
Whose noble Name, all carping curres will quail,
Now neither Zoil* privily back biting,
Not Momus barks against thee shall prevail.
Sing boldly then, sing (pleasant Nightingale)
Sweet warbling tunes, and heavenly harmonye:
Fear not filthy birds, which would annoy thee,
Jove's Eagle, will thee shend against them all.
Parrye thou pend'st, the Muses did indite,
They sweetly song, their sweet songs thou did write.
H. P. gentleman.

In praise of the Book.
Fair Philomele her ratishment has song*
But Parry rauisheth with musefull tunes,
No sooner has his praise with flourish sprung,
With Daphins bosom st^ft with sweet perfumes,
But forth his nectar-feasting poezie bloomes,
And eke the Delion harper does lament,
In Passions poor SINETES discontent.
Amored shepherds wonder at thy wit,
And to thy piping lend their listening ear,
And in thy praise the muses frame a writ,
Therefore I thought my ruder lines to tear,
And skillesse riming bid my hand forbear:
But little candles give their glimering light,
As well as torches in the brighter sight.
W. R. Gent.

In praise of the Book.
THe rarest gifts need not a Trumpe to sound,
For fame it self will undertake the praise,
The sun needs not a light for to be founder;
But in the height of Sphere gives light always:
Fly then thou work no soil shall thee disgrace,
And why thy worthy patron is thy fort,
Thou needs not shun t'approch into each place,
Twy flowring bloome of wit shall thee report.
Thy wise and deep conceytes need not be graced,
For dayntie choice here found each fancies please,
Thy minds repose may never be defaced,
Each fancy then thy fancies fame will ^aise.
O that my tongue could duly raise thy fame,
Yet after age at large shall do the same.
H. P. Gent.

In praise of the Book.
O Floue of joy of solace sweet and pleasant vain,
That wanted was thy sugared muse to write and sing,
Both Sonetts Maddrigals with dainty ditties plain,
What sudden chance has moved to chang thy style what thing.
If Prince prelate peer and Parry discontent,
Complaynes a like against froward fortunes bad intent.
Compier, full many shall thou find with there estate;
Both discontented bear and blame their direful fate.
When all things alter kind that subject be to change.
Then love the joy shall likewise turn to sorrow strange.
T. S. Esquire.

In praise of the Book:
SWeet is the pain which virtuous travel brings,
High is the place which wisdom does commend,
Sower is the ease of vices root that springs:
Love is the sea^e which idleness does lend.
None gets wealth that puts not from the shore,
Pain breeds honor, virtue wins fame,
Glory does follow, courage goes before,
Though often the vent, answer not the same.
Virtuous attempts are void of all shame,
The base whom means obscurely does keep,
Lives void of honor, dies without name,
And in eternal darkness ever he does sleep.
Therefore SINETES it is then no blot,
With mournful Passions to lament thy lot.
R. S. Esquire.

In praise of the Book.
THou O too cruel guide of lovers train,
Proud in thy tyranny on yielded hearts,
When shall thy thralls forget to mourn and plain?
When will thou cease to hurl hateful darts?
Shall all the earth fing through her spacious parts,
From out the mouth of every fordon swayne,
That thou in steed of love, breedst hellish pain,
Thou dire Usurper of caelestiall arts.
Shall heavenly Posie be profaned still,
In woes description to thy peevish will,
Will thou in steed of love, true lovers kill,
Far be it from a God to do thus ill.
No PARRY no, he does but show thee sorrow,
That from woes darkness, joy more light may borro^.
W. M. Esquire.

PASSION. I.
FIne ripe coceyts forsake the wearied miude,
And fancies fail, when sorrows surges swaye
My pen bathed in the waves of griefs unkind
Must write of moan, of ruin and decay:
A tragic note does fit a tragic chance,
A heavy heart with sorrows pipe must dance.
Like PELICAN I wander all alone,
The dezart woods and wilderness so wild,
To senseless groves, I cry and make my moan,
Even from my thoughts all hope is quite e^il'd,
Left thus to mourn the skriching owl keeps time?
With doleful notes that to the heavens do clime.
Notes that bewail the griefs of careful heart,
That charge my mind with heaps of deep annoy,
Which unto none I vowed to impart,
But unto you my drenching dolors joy:
Keep ladies keep the closet of my grief,
Yeilde Ladies yeilde, for sorrow some relief.
No dark despair may drown my drowsy hope,
If you give life unto my dead desire,
Nor ought may daunt my mind, if you give scope,
To pitties floodes to quench the kindled fire:
Fortune is blind and will not see my pain,
Time has a salve to cure the same again.
PASSION.
Ripe grief has graft in slumbring hearts disp,
What still increase the motions of my care,
Think I of salues my sorrows to impair:
Then fearful fitt^ the torments rack prepare;
For him that would presume to think of good,
When dark despair drowned hope in sorrows flo^
Seas, floods, and waves, of fortunes weakefull sco^.
Cease not to roar, to swell, to toss with wind,
Of bale-full hap, (which increase the surge,
Of sharp disgrace) where perrils foord I find:
For to augment the terror of my pain,
Where hope of naught but carking care remain,
The stock is dead, whereon the ympe was graft,
Which bear the fruit, that wonted sores did cure,
The graft must die, so must the fruit be laft
Naked to pinc, and nipping fiostes endure:
The branch consumes when perished stock does fail,
When sap is gone how can the growth prevail.
My sap is gone which norishment did yeilde,
My wythered fruit does fall before his time,
I am the graffe which want my wonted sheilde
For stock decayed I have no root to clime:
Lend ladies now your doleful notes each (...)
Pity at least though not assuage my mo^
PASSION. III.
(...) Nimphs in mournful sables dressed
Nith plyant pipes sound doleful music note,
^ewayle your sheapheards fare, that thus oppressed,
(...) increase of sorrows set a floate:
(...) course does scarce abide the tu^ch of time,
(...) wearied heart endured the bale-full chime.
^he sound of chime does sound in lothed ears,
^could endure such cruel sound to hear,
which does increase a heap of dreadful fears.
Where to my soul dark horror does appear:
Long passed cares renew again their course,
Fates fatal chance does change from bad to worse.
A happy man had I neu'r happy been,
For fortunes s^le did cause my greatest fall,
To purchase ease by new increase of sin;
Were for to make my soul, my bodies th^all:
Hap then what may, let fortune frown or smile,
^res cruel scourge shall not my mind defile.
(...) shrines I sill with volumes of my grief,
(...) de I crave to quench the burning fire,
(...) (...) brought to CACAS some relief;
(...) ^orts may revive my dead desire:
(...) (...) hope by fortunes passed change,
(...) ^mes the d^arts wild to range.
PASSION. IIII.
NIghts rest is bard with weried thoughts control,
The pillow moanes bathed in my dre^ching tears,
The sheets bear guilt of my distressed soul,
Wherein is wrapped a multitude of fears,
When stealing nappe does close my drowfie eyes,
Then starting, fear says it is time to rise.
If sleep at all possess my vytall parts,
Then dreadful dreams with ghastly sights appear,
Which do present the cause that wrought my smarts:
And do a fresh renew forgotten fear;
I sleep in pain, I watch in wretched grief,
Lyef's in despair since hope forbids relief.
When cursed thoughts there careful couch forsake,
Confused heaps of new increasing sores.
Like wildfier tossed in PHLEGETONS fiery lake,
Or ship that stirrs against raging stream with ores:
So does my heart with sorowing sobs near spent,
Strive with the course that cares command has sent.
My moan I make where pities bower is built,
Your gentle breasts is mercies chair of state,
A Butt of bane which neu'r for lack is tilt:
Yeildes fresh supplies unto my frowning fate,
Then fortune then clear once this smothing air,
With salues of hope, after this long despair.
PASSION. V.
SOund TRITON forth thy heavy doleful knill,
That, rings a peale of eu'r enduring woe,
No vacant place but balefull ECCHOS fill:
My heart is made a harbor for the foe:
That yeildeth food unto my cursed cares,
And poison strong with honey joined prepares.
Heavens show your power, earth tremble at my cry,
And stony rocks be molyfied with moan,
The rural Gods with mournful melody,
Lament my chance, bewail choice each one,
Your sheapheard swain in sables clad with care,
Does for the dead some mourning weeds prepare.
The lining does presage his dying dole,
His life is death while others reap his toil,
Who has not power himself for to control,
Is sure the fruit of some aacursed soil,
His tongue too long, his wisdom is too short,
Who rues in deed the thing he spoke iu sport.
But Ladies yet condemn not his desire,
Though passed deeds his present grief pro^^re,
And lare mishhapps yield fuel to his fire,
That scant he can the scorching heat endure,
Whose aid he craves to mollyfie his pain,
With pleasant sport of some conceyted vain,
PASSION. VI.
INtract of time is pers'd the hardest fliut,
Not by the force but by the droppinges fall,
My greefes from raging rigor never stint:
And can I then endure such cursed thrall?
Yt were a hell to think of such a pain,
Which naught but cares does wrest from gored vain^*
Vain is my vain, yet void of vain delight,
Cursed is the chance that chayngeth to extreme,
Unhappy man, subject to Fortunes might,
Can naught but grief my fatal grief redeem,
Then welcome grief though death more welcome wear,
Whose force at once might e^d tormenting fear.
Fear, which does frett the weary crased heart,
More then the pain, that torment can procure,
The heavens I call for to record my smart.
That thus long did such agonies endure^
Leave to ^aye, love to be just ye skie^,
And martyr those that do your power despise.
Skies filled with flame, of fiery fretting ire,
That kindled wrath into my pensive soul,
In LVCANS forge which frames deep desire,
To sell my life for Fortunes blessed dole;
Y^ dole, I c^e sweet Ladie^ to assuage,
The dism^ (...) of IANVS daughters rag^.
PASSION. VII.
SCarce warm I burn, yet freeze in fiery flame,
Displeased still, I rest content withal,
Yet malcontent again, even with the same;
What freedom wrought, eft-soones has made me thrall,
Thus contrary these coutraries I taste,
Thus borne to bear I live my life to waste.
Life is a death, when dolors taste does sway.
And death a life to such as crosses bear,
My thread is spoon to be the VVLTV^ spray,
That Tiger-like* my ^ell death does swear:
Thoughts, force my lingering life, to wear and pine,
Conceyt will kill the stoutest heart in fine.
Distressed thus, my light-some hope is past,
And darkness does with horror now appear,
Master the ship that has a broken Mast:
Through darkest clouds Sonns goulden beams are clear.
So let the beams and beauty of your grace,
Shine through the mist that does my joy deface.
Hide not the glass with any wooden case,
Let virtues minds some virtues works bring forth,
Do not sweet Nimphs your noble minds imbase,
With any act that shall not be of worth,
But let your son shine to your sheapheards case,
The praise is yours, if you his grief appease.
PASSION. VIII.
VVay-faring thus in wilderness of care,
My woeful mind, with thorns of discontent,
Does yield new thoughts, which torments new prepare,
Then I begin a gain for to lament:
Where first began the Period of my fall,
There first I pause; and rue the sum of all.
Thus do I mourn, thus do I moan my days.
And itt'terate still my heaps of deep annoy,
Thus do I live, and living love to praise:
The thing which does my comforts hope destroy,
How can I live and lead this weary life?
When life increase, and death might end the strife.
O blessed death, would death but hear my cry,
And succor lend, to such as succor want,
O happy man yflingering misery:
Had once an end my dolors to supplante,
Yet would I fear least death would me forsake,
And lothed life my carcas dead awake.
Whom heavens do spite and earthes disdain despise,
He whylome lived in pleasures pleasant bower,
With patience the low again may rise,
The fretting horse is spent within an hour:
For all extremes do work extreme effects,
And contrary yeilde contrary aspectes.
PASSION. IX.
IF wayling may appease the wrathful Gods,
And pity move the tyranized heart,
My scourged mind with fiery burning rods,
May pay the tribute of my restles smart,
With sacrifice of salt and brinish tears,
Which yeilde new life to late departed fears.
No floode so heigh but has as lo^ an ebb,
No storm so great but has a caulme ensuies,
No man so mad to weaue his sorrows webb,
And being condemnd his pardon will refuse:
Floods, storms, and webbs, of grief, of care, of paitre,
Mayfall, may cease, may be undone again.
Floods, storms, nor webs, of my new budding woe,
Will fall, or cease, or be undone at all,
The more I strive, the stronger is the bow,
Which will not bend but to my greater fall:
And still does shoot the arrows of disdain,
My hope being dead to wound, to kill again.
Dead hope except my froward fortnne change,
Which bends her browe, and yeildes no hope to me,
But that I must in wildest dezartes rainge,
With savage rude and Tigers to agree;
No force, for there the Driads I shall find
With musickes note for to refresh my mind.
PASSION. X.
Leave soul to mourn for that which has no cure,
Yt is in vain to strive against the wind,
Set up thy rest; that nothing can endure,
In such extremes, except it be assignd,
Bv th'mperiall powers that guide the stars,
To try thee here that send such deadly wars.
These miseries vn-thought approch'd the place,
Where first I ken'd the pe^ll which ensued,
But all to late: for then did hope deface,
My passedioyes which heavenly I view^d:
Looking astance on that which came behind,
My heart penned up in sorrows fould I find.
You Ladies then the Nurses of my hope,
Which may assuage the swelling of my mind,
Affoorde unto my captive soul some scope,
Whom to your wills is willingly inclined,
With firm repose of uncontrolled thought,
Who, but your dome, accounts all for naught.
By PHEBVS beams, is cherished each wight,
By PHEBVS beams, the dead obtains life,
When ATROP cutts (which is our joys delight)
The twisted twine with stroke of fatal kniffe:
Can you not then help dead to life again,
And comfortyeild that PHEBVS beams retain.
PASSION. XI.
O lamp that guides the circle of the globe,
If pitties fruit does nestle in thy breast,
Scorn not in pride, the humble to disroabe,
With nakedness from his enjoyed rest;
That willing yeildes unto thy sacred doom,
Though web of care be knit in sorrows loome.
You scoffing ECCHOS that repeat my cry,
And answer make when to the woods I moan,
Yfanie say I feign, you may reply,
And witness that under this curse I groan,
Who better knows, if that the priest did ken,
All that he ought? then clark that said Amen.
You are the Sextons of my hapless plaints,
That say amen unto my doleful songs,
And you do know, my Ladies are the saints*
(With sweet conceyts) that may redress my wrongs,
Applaude their praise, record my deep despair,
With shrill, short sound, of new abrupted air,
Nay prating sound cease for to brag my pain,
Thou have no skill to itterat my smart,
Let such repeat that has a copio us vain,
Th'xtreamest panges and langor of my heart;
My Ladies may express my inward grief,
Whose changed note may sound me some relief.
PASSION. XII.
Waste is the soil where naught but thistles grow,
And barre^ ground will nothing yield but weeds,
Unhappy is such that sows not to mow,
When hope is lost in care, then comfort bleeds;
Waste soil, void hope, thistles and weeds increase,
In my minds waste, that waste for want of peace.
Peace with my soul (although my body wars)
Would qualify the rigor of my pain,
But that I want and must endure the scarrs,
To ranckle, which do now begin again,
When ulcers bleed, then dangers do ensue,
And careful thoughts my bleeding sores renew.
Renewed thus I count the clock of care,
No minute past without the taste of smart,
Not as the dial, which does often declare:
The time to pass, yet not perceau'd to stait;
Poets feign, time swiftly to fly away,
Yet time is slow, when sorrow surges sway.
As rotten rags being dipped, the water draws,
By soaking fits out of the vessel clean,
Even so from me does sorrows droth (which thawes,
Mycongeal'd heart, with cruel cursed speene)
Soake out the joyce and moisture of my brain,
For dropping eyes can not from tears refrain.
PASSION. XIII.
GVyded by fit^s, with malencholy look,
I lay me down upon the winding bank,
To hear the music of the running brook,
And smell the grass that was both fresh and rank:
There I complain, there ^ament my state,
That thus am crossed with fortunes deadly hate
Then to the brook, I thus begin to moan,
Thou warbling stream that do refresh my care,
To my dis^led grief, and do alone,
Give place, and passage free prepare:
The same to bring unto the boundles Seas,
Which there attend Sir NE^TVNS mind to please.
Thou searching scowrer of the grossest mould,
And element most subtle, fresh, and pure,
That windest about dame TERRA thousand fould,
Behold the martyrdom which I endure:
That passes through the Limbecke of my heart,
And setts my mind, with force of gauled smart.
Say to thy self in still and silent sort,
Does fortune thus SINETES true confound?
Ah Goddess blind that loves such cruel sport,
To thy dishonor this will sure redownde,
Leave of, knit thy bended brows on him,
That daily does in seas of sorrows swim.
PASSION. XIIII.
HArpies, and hagges, torment my fearful ghost,
No part is freed, from horror, and despair,
My carcas thus in CARONS boat is tossed,
MEDVSA does with cursed snakie hair,
Trans-na^ue quite, the virtue of my mind,
Unto a stone, that is deaffe, dumme, and blind.
Might but my soul enjoy the fruit of rest,
And purge the sting, that wrought my bitter bane,
That hope mihht once my desp'rat mind inuest,
And strenngth increase, to bannish thoughts profane:
Then would I joy to see such happy day,
That once I might be freed from decay.
Sure I believe, though joy could bannish care,
And that I might possess a quiet mind,
And should wind out my self from sorrows sna^e,
To cleanse my thoughts from fruits of errors blind:
Yet would remembrance of my passed pain,
Where grief I left, force to begin again.
Then were my case far worser then before,
For ulcers cut yeilde corosiues extreme,
Salues hardly can, the former health restore,
And naught but death can to^tur'd minds redeem:
Then must I rest contented with my lot,
Si^h sorrows now can not dissolve the knot.
PASSION. XV.
BEnighted thus with clouds of new-sprong charge,
My swelling heart (puff^d up by force of heat,
Suppressed) did burn, till tears did fire enlarge;
Then water quenched the flame, and frost the sweat;
A doleful choice of two evils one to name,
To f^ie in frost or freese in fiery flame.
The time was come, that all my joys should end,
Then straying to me was this vn-wonted care,
And so much more my scalding sighs I spend:
For as I could I did my mind prepare;
For to endure these floods of deep annoy,
That drowned my hope, and robbed me of my joy.
O time accursed that eu'r I knew that day,
Which has dis-roabde my mind of sweet content,
For then were hatched the birds of my decay:
When vn-awares my listening ear I lent,
To SIRENS song, and CIRCES cursed charms,
That trained my mind, to work his masters harms.
No music then could better please mine ear,
Nor object seem more precious to mine eye,
Then that which did my cruel torments rear,
Where but content I nothing could epsy,
Yet fairest flowers have filthy Adders nest,
And I have found in pleasures vain unrest.
PASSION. XVI.
Yiedling consent having unlocked the gate,
The guard which kept my mind in reasons fold,
Then fond desire wrought in my Mind debate,
How of my friends I might live vn-controulde:
To folly then the restrained raines I lent,
Of liberty, which now I do repent.
What toys so vain which then I did not taste,
What act so badde I would not seem to prove,
I thought that time could never my joys waste:
Nor check the pride of mine untamed love
Till on a heap my joys and follies toule,
The Bell of care, my loving joys control.
Then ga^ I sighe, even with a sad lament,
And pause upon the remnent of my life,
Then that seemed great which lest did discontent:
When as repentance sharpened sorrows Knife,
To ex^te the Judgment of the law,
On him, thereof that never stood in awe.
When friends forsook, and enemies did pry,
To work revenge for some vn-modest part,
Then began my soul, with sorrows to discrie:
The guilte of sin, that lodged in my heart,
Whose memory did rack my senses so;
That strech't they were beyond the bonds of woe.
PASSION. XVII.
ENgendr^d grief from seed of pleasures vain,
Enforcing still the agents of my smart,
From sins aspect, my mind could not refrain,
For fretting lust did cynge my broyled heart,
Till loath to yeilde, yet could not choice but yield,
When as remorce perforce did win the field.
Then of two harms making a choice of one,
To salve my soul, I paunde my life a thrall,
And gave consent to that which makes me moan,
Whereof proceeds the fruit of bitter gall,
Which penned my mind that s^ared in the skies,
In basest sold, where in despair it lies.
An abject thrown before the face of wrath,
That date not view what I of late enjoyed,
Of new-cut grass naught but a rotten swath,
After the rain the virtue has destroyed,
My drooping thoughts forsake their wonted se^,
And back decline their sorrows to repeat.
Thus feeling smart opens the new s^ar'd vain,
That bled so fast till life's blood near is spent,
And now inclos^d in Laborinth of pain,
I still expect the MIMOTAV^ to rent,
The bonds which do restrain my liberty,
Closed in the ^ue of woeful misery.
PASSION. XVIII.
LOng loathed looks, of my forepassed life,
Are glutted with the sense of fond desire,
And discontent did agrauate my strife,
When hope did stay, my stamring steps t'aspire:
Being tied by faith my fatal fortunes woe,
To this base chance; I must embrace my foe.
Lo he which sometimes thought great scorn to se^,
Stamp made of purest mould to frown on him,
And thought the Queen of love might well agree,
To taste his skill that in conceyte did swim,
And dee^'d a toy, for to deserve a smile,
Of coyest she that eu'r did man beguile.
Whose ouer-weening wits and cake aspiring though,
Like finest law^e which wants not his bracke,
By fortun's spite was suddenly ou'r-raught,
And swelling sail endured the greater wrack:
The greatar oak the louder is his fall,
The higher mind the uneasier is the thrall:
The silly fly in spyders web i^hrauld,
The more he strives the more entangled lies,
Even so my mind that with conceyte is gauld,
No way to escape the Laborinth he spies,
The more he seeks his follies to avoyde,
The more he loves the fruit himself au^oyde.
PASSION. XIX.
IF fortunes cross be bitter to endure,
That frets the mind which tastes her despite,
The same being past, when changes new procure,
Some offer which might wearied mind delight,
But that fore-chance, his latter fate prevent,
Then will he rue the fruit of fond intent.
The freeman thinks it small for to be bound,
Not knowing then the danger which ensues,
But freedom lost despair does straight confound,
Confused thoughts, which bring untimely news,
For bondage come, and liberty being lost,
What is the the thing whereof we then can boast.
Who would not seem for to condemn his eye,
That first did lust, and heart that gave consent,
When fruit thereof proves seed of misery,
But more when as some kindly glaunces lent,
Yeilde constant hope if that his mind were free,
Some better hap in time obtained might be.
You judges of my heavy doleful song,
To whose g^e doomes my self I do submit,
If worth, may not obtain his worth; it is wrong,
Such is the fate of those which daily flit:
Such was my chance to make my prime^ choice,
That to be (...) I only might rejoice.
PASSION. XX.
Zeal is but cold, where loue-lesse law restraine^,
The soaring Hawke, to cease upon his pray,
Which from the fruit of his intent refraine^,
Expecting once for to behold the day:
Which being expired may yeilde some hope of rest,
If future happs may be foretold jest.
So SIEILL said, SINETES doubted thoe,
She did affy^me, he still did fear the worse,
She prophesied a freedom of his woe,
And he did doubt that fate would alter course:
For though on him that Fortune false did smile,
Yet sure he thought it was but to beguile.
MEDEA did make AESON young again,
She thought to gain a daughters name therefore,
But she that does a daughters name obtain,
With art can not her fathers weal restore:
For bound he is, and freedom cannot sway,
Except that he who gave do take away.
Sweet ladies then what help is to be had,
That time decreede may once be expired,
But that mean time you do with comforts glad,
And dayne a smile where no more is desired,
Yeilde poor SINETES hope though in his grave,
That in your minds his worthes you will ingraue.
PASSION. XXI.
AGreeu'd in grave of minds dispayting cross,
Not in the grave which cancelleth annoy,
If fate will not again restore his loss,
The fatal grave, he craves to enjoy:
For fortune does bu^ spite, to smile again,
When former frowns, did cut the artire vain.
Suppose you came unto a gard^n fine,
And might there choose one of the fairest flowers,
So choice being made as fancy did incline,
Yet walking there to view the fruitful bowers,
Amongst those groves, a thousand flowers you find,
Then former choice better to please your mind.
Where fight is free, but handling, is denied,
And if you touch, you may not taste the fruit,
Though neu'r so feign, least Garden-keeper spied,
And would ympeach your crime with blazing brute,
How much agreeu'd would you be then in heart,
That better choice befell not to your part.
Would you not curse the rashness of your brain,
That moved s^each which could not be vnsaide,
And Fortune ban^ which laid this subtle train,
When you did find how much you were betraide:
No doubt you would ^hinke this a heavy cross.
Exept you might in chosing, change your choice*
PASSION. XXII.
BEtrayed thus with lust of luring sight,
The flower is cropped which now I may not change,
The garden's free to view what might delight.
But passed c^oice restraines my mind to range:
So that beholding still what I desire:
It fuel yields unto the kindled fire.
The memory of what I might obtain!
If I were free, extenuates my joy,
This is the root of mine endured pain,
Though this be great, yet not my chief annoy,
With daily showers, new weeds spring, and increase,
Which fruit out-growes, and future hope decrease.
Envying fortune thrice be thou accursed,
Who not content to make me what I am,
Amongst the mean to be accounted worst,
That from one bad, unto a worser came,
And heaped coals a new upon my head,
To bring me home unto my loathed bed.
Bed of disgrace, when stealing time gave light,
Discovering the messages of fame,
Which witness bare how dear I bought delight,
That for good will enjoyed naught but blame:
And paid therefore even at the dearest rate,
For had I wist does always come to late.
PASSION. XXIII.
ECclipsed with the blemish of disgrace,
Coms ATROPOS the messenger of night,
And says I must, new sorrows now embrace,
Who has in charge to cancel my delight:
A cruel doom thus to ou'rcharge my mind
Where hope dispaires true comforts fruit to find.
If former cause did formal grief apply,
And formal grief in time increased more,
This treble cause of woeful misery,
Will make me yeilde to cruel fortunes lore:
That does devise new tortures to increase,
My martyrdom, the wrath-full Gods to please.
Might carcas cras'd with battring engyns noyde,
Content (the strength being scaled and defaced,)
The cruel executioner deuoyd,
Of pitties fruit, which Justice neu'r embraced:
Then Fortune would be wearied to torment,
My wracked mind, thus clothed with sad lament.
But since I must endure these pains extreme,
Now let me sigh and breath this fatal doom,
For death I crave this thraldom to redeame.
If death would hear the cry of such a groom;
If not, you Gods hear now my mournful verse,
Wherein my cares with tears I do rehearse.
PASSION. XXIIII.
TRembling with fear my threadbare comfort left,
To feed upon the object of my smart,
And to repeat the cause which thus bereft,
The hope, the joy, and comfort of my heart:
Sing then with me such as will mourn and moan,
Eise I must sing with mourning tears alone.
For Fortunes clouded-brow does threatenings send,
And scorning bands a smile from stormy face,
Disdayning comforts of my cares to lend,
Intending still to keep me in disgrace:
As servile drudge to her commanding will,
In cruel spights that has a tried skill.
O sacred muse with melody deplore,
And deck the hearse with mournful ornaments,
Which does to me renewed grief restore,
And filled my face with sorrows sad laments:
Whose life was deer^, whose death must be my dole,
Which wringes my thoughts, and racks my vexed soul.
You lovely sweetes to whom I do appeal,
Attire your selves in Sables with the rest,
For to assist with moan my burning zeal,
The smoke whereof has near my mind suppressed:
In cloudie storms it yeildeth much relief,
To have a friend for to impart our grief.
PASSION. XXV.
HECTOR in time did scour the greekish host,
And made them flee like Bees unto the hiue,
Yet in the end his valiant mind did co^t,
The price of life, when rashly he did str^ue.
Against such power, that rather time would yeilde;
Then force should want to vanquish him in field.
Brave HERCULES whom CERBRVS might not tame,
Could not withstand the dart of destiny,
And rash attempts to gain a worthy name,
Bringes lofty minds to woeful misery;
Ou'r-weening thought of a self-willed mind,
Has made me loose, what more I cannot find.
Brave man, brave mind, and fit to fear the foe,
But words or deeds, with fate can not prevail,
Pity it were, life should be prised so,
For passed deeds, words cannot now avail:
So it befell, so destiny assigned,
They went before, and we must come behind.
Again I call where aid I hope to have,
To you I call that may my call command,
Come tune your trebled notes of care I crave,
And sooth the humor of a fond demand:
If you do salve with comfort mine annoy,
The praise is yours, though I the ease enjoy.
PASSION. XXVI.
VVEaried with clouds of tempest-beaten sense,
Whole armies of reproaches fill my sail,
Marching with life, that has but weak defense,
But in despair I look not to prevail:
For unto me befell a worser spite,
Then any thing that yet my pen could write.
Far worse it is then what is worst of all,
Mine eye bewrayes the care I take therefore,
Th'annotomie of my accursed thrall,
The more I strive the pain increases more,
For that does make the new healed scar to bleed,
And wounds again; o would it killed with speed.
Twice launced sore the third time now is searched,
The first was pain, which scant I could endure,
The second has my crased carcas pearch'd,
The third and last did latest harm procure.
And by as much the second past the first,
Even by so much, or more, the last is worst:
Three harms in one, conspired to betray,
The guiltles thought, scant wayned from despair,
Scarce first had end, before the next did sway,
Third came too soon his joys to ympaire;
But last it was that most did vex my mind,
Though former twain did not come much behind.
PASSION. XXVII.
O Pale death inexorable monster,
That seized upon the remnant of my hope,
Who can thy spites with grauest wisdom conster?
That to thy self do only give a scope,
To choose the same that worst might be spared,
And do refuse those that are prepared.
With cutting sithe why have thou racked together,
The future hope of my declyning state,
And left me cut behind alone to wither,
For to bewail the rigor of their fate?
O gentle death now let me beg and crave,
To follow them that now be closed in grave.
Else if I live, let him that rules all,
Jove sole commander both of thee, and thine,
Give thee in charge, remembrance for to fall,
That racketh still this wracked heart of mine:
Then may I hope some rest for to enjoy,
Though laden now with burdens of annoy.
Fair choysest dames that patronize my joy,
Now join with me, in prayer to IVPITER,
That I may die, if dying may destroy,
The living grief which leads me thus to err:
Or if I live, let life be clothed so,
That new attire may banish former woe.
PASSION. XXVIII.
LITICIOVS thoughts will grant no quiet rest.
For care is close intombed in my mind,
And memory of passed woes mole^t,
Such as in vain expect some ease to find:
When ripping of the cares long past and gone,
Will make a fresh the stoutest heart to groan.
Ymprouident prosperity is caught,
Within the net of new confused shame;
For still the vn-respectiue minds are fraught
With heap of toye, that bring untimely blame;
My follies first did lead me to this case,
When I began to tread the lovers maze.
Vn-warie peace on fat-fed pleasures stall,
Whose wanton thought, made weak with lust and eas^;
Did guide my steps to this untimely thrall,
And destiny my sorrows did increase:
Being tangled thus in Labrinth of despair,
New-sprong effects my ioyed hope impair.
Sing Muses, sing, the ruins of my time,
Read in my face the Calendar of care,
With tragic notes repeat my passed crime.
My wrinckled browe records how hard I fate:
All must consume so shall my care have end,
When as no sap is left for life to spend,
PASSION. XXIX.
FOre'd to endure the burden of my charge,
Which loades my mind with more then I can bear,
Drenched in despair, rowing'n cares cursed barge,
I try the foordes which dangers new do rearo:
Wherein I wade too far for to return,
For all in vain against the prick I spurn.
Against the prick I spurn, the more I strive,
The deeper wo^ it makes within my mind,
For of true joy it does my poor heart shriue,
When fear does lead and hope does come behind,
Thus like the Mer-maide pained, I watch deaths dome,
And reereat my self with glass and come.
With glass and comb I trifle thus the time,
Fit bables for those which are children twice,
The flood of care, late filled with mud and slime,
My swelling heart, which now beginns to rise,
Against her bank, and often does rebel,
When pains extreme do pleasures sap expel.
You handmaides which do wait on beauties Queen.
Or rather peers to beauties excellence,
In my distress you which so well are seen,
For future harms now lend your providence:
That though I pain, and pine eu^n to my grave,
Yet after I may hope some rest to have.
PASSION. XXX.
Reply and say my fortune is so base,
That you disdain to lend me any aid,
Sav it is so, such crosses to embrace,
(Amidst those storms) I must not be afravde,
But rarher scorn, proud fortune to her face,
Which thus with spite does work my deep disgrace.
Shall I now mourn for what cannot be had,
Great folly were my labor so to loose,
Nay rather seek some comfort for to glad,
The drooping heart that knows not what to choose:
For chances whose event be desperate,
Redress craves speed, or else it coms too late.
Too late the succor coms the fort being sacked,
And comfort, when no comfort can prevail,
Is torture to the mind alreadle rackt,
When in the effect true comforts fruit does fail:
Then lend your aid before my wrack be such,
That past recall the pains increase too much.
Now must I stir to catch a lively hold,
While fortune bends her frowning brow on me,
Who cannot shift being young will neu'r be old,
And he that strives with froward destiny:
In fortunes front must seek a hold to find,
Else 'twill not be: for she is balde behind.
PASSION. XXXI.
Eyes weep no more, heart breath no fighing sobs,
Cease to repeat o quill thy masters grief,
The thief is known which hope of quiet robs:
And courage must (not weakness) gain relief;
Leave of to moan, with Fortune be content,
No case is found by this thy sad lament.
Tears cannot quench the heat of kindled fire.
Nor sighing sobs restore thy former state,
Pen cannot write the accents of desire,
Nor courage quail the force of frowning fate:
Yiedling cannot help, force cannot prevail,
Against the stormy winds no ship can sail.
Envy not Death, he claymeth but his due,
Fortune cannot her crabbed nature leave,
Why do thou then these sighing sobs renew,
And fate revile that did thy hope deceive?
Now debts are paid, call home thy wits again,
Desire not that which thou shall wish in vain.
Thus rest content with this thy fatal chance,
For that will check thy angry fortunes pride,
With enuies pipe that leads a scornful dance,
And with disdain thy sorrows does deride:
With patience thou may ou'rcome at length,
And more then this repose no trust in strength.
PASSION, XXXII.
SVppose dear Dames you give me such advise,
This cannot please the humor of my mind,
For flesh is frail, and cannot thus despise,
The thing whereto our nature is inclined:
Nurture may strive, but nature must prevail;
Well may I try, yet shall, not miss to fail.
What if I should endeavor to entreat,
Fortune no doubt would hear my careful cry,
Sweet Fortune then give care I will repeat,
The total some of this my misery:
I want my will, I would what may not be,
Unless thou do yeilde some relief to me.
I seek no more but quiet to enjoy,
Yeilde me my right, and that is all I crave,
Not to dispease I do my mind employ,
(With chastest thought) but comforts fruit to have,
I seek and sue not to a Goddess blind,
But unto thee in hope some ease to find.
Some one will read that knows mine intent,
Let such but pause and canuas my desert,
And pity him which thus his youth has spent.
Then zealous thought of honor set apart:
Give all their due and stain not virtues name,
With trifling trash that brings but defame.
PASSION. XXXIII.
THe fit is come, my trembling flesh does fear,
These idle toys forerunners of my grief,
Prognosticate what torment I must bear,
I see me thinks the agents of relief,
Repulst by force of the tormentors hand,
Seeking in vain his strength for to withstand.
Yield then I must unto the cursed stroke,
That shall wear out the remnant of my days,
And be content to bear the servile yoke,
Which sorrows charge from sorrows store defrayes:
For being enroul'd within the book of woe,
I must not scorn for to embrace my foe.
And for my follies which sometimes yield ease,
To clear the smoke of cloudie ATHOS fire,
Their force cannot my fettered thoughts release,
But rather do encerease my fond desire:
And as ACTEONS dogs, spared not their Lord,
To hunt me from my rest, so they accord.
O harsh accord of woeful harmony,
That naught can tune but solemn notes of care,
Wherein is crossed the fruit of charity,
Whereof I want (to salve my griefs) a share,
Then past redress, I must remain content,
To cherish that which frowning fortune sent*
PASSION, XXXIIII.
O Heavens record the sum of my request,
Confess I seek nothing but what is just,
Some case of that which does my mind molest,
Ear all my hope be buried in the dust:
Ye angry stars let my submission pay,
The ransom of my captive hearts decay.
It Is not obscure that I long penance bore,
To purge the guilt of my fore-passed crime,
Let tribute paid, make even with the score,
Which in Fates book care crossed of ancient time:
Then doubtless I some comfort shall obtain,
Though Fortune do my sacrifice disdain.
Yet let me yield, it booteth not to strive,
Of force I must give place to higher powers,
Too weak I am, for such as me cortiue,
Without I might rain down some Golden showers:
So DANAE no doubt I might enjoy,
To bear a son his Graund-sier to destroy.
Have I forgot my Ladies yet to move,
Whose sole applause may plead their sheapheards woe,
It Is you alone that shall my deeds approve,
For like the wee^es, that fairest flowers out-grow,
My cares ou'r-spread the relic of my joy,
And fatal fear did fadeing hope destroy.
PASSION. XXXV.
NEPTVNE the wrathful EOLVS appease,
Call TRITON forth to summon a retreyte,
Of raging storms, which do my rest disease,
How they beyond their limmits past repeat:
And though EOLVS may the winds increase,
Yet tell them this, thou can command the seas.
JOVE prince of all, stop greedy fortunes iawees,
Send MERCVRIE for to edict thy will,
And let her know she has transgresd thy laws:
Which all the Gods are subject to fulfill:
For though she spite and spend her bitter gall,
Give her to know, that thou commaundest all.
What though she may wring poor SINETES mind,
The same to heal thou have a salve in store,
Send patience to check this Goddess is blind,
For all in vain these sorrows I deplore:
When hope is drowned in slymie sudds of care,
And patient lies fast in furies snare.
The raging force of agues burning fits,
(With potions cold) does yeilde at last to cure,
Each thing extreme in time decreasing flits;
And patient may best my ease procure:
The sound (though weak) by food recouer'th strength,
So may my sores obtain some salve at length.
PASSION. XXXVI.
REpyning fretts and sturs the angry mind,
That patience (which is the nursing food,)
In such extremes, can no disgestion find;
No more then meat increases sick-mens blood:
The one by course to choler alters fast,
The other turned to excrements does waste.
Who so by art would cure infected minds,
Must mildely first prepare the sickly thought,
When faulkner good a sorry feather finds,
He first beginns to pare and prune the naught:
And better graffes; then keeps his hawk on fiste,
My troubled mind of such a salve has miste.
For first we should learn to forget the cause,
Before a salve may be thereto applied,
Then may the gulf which waytes with open jaws;
For to devour therewith be satisfied:
And this observed, root perishes in time,
Which fed the cause the subjects of my rhyme.
Who has such strength to moderate extremes,
That without change his countenance may bear,
When that does perish which he well esteems;
Which suddenly procures a dreadful fear:
No heart so hard for to endure the same,
Who then is he that can my weakness blame.
PASSION. XXXVII.
Often have I sightht, and to my self thus said,
O poor unhappy relic left to pain,
Thus wronged by death which has my death delayed
Whose ears thou first, with prayers though in vain:
Leave to entreat the fiend that forced to fall,
And does triumph thus glutted with thy thrall.
See not that time cannot so long endure,
But that thou must needs have some speedy end,
Of that which does thy sorrows thus procure,
What needs then thy breath in vain to spend:
For date of time which shortly wastes away,
Being once expired, thy sorrows must decay.
The greatest fire PI^ACKMON sends forth,
Will soon be quenched, when matter none is left,
And here we see that men of greatest worth,
When sap is gone, will soon of breath bereft:
Why should I think death would my time delay,
Sith that which feeds life does fade away.
Nothing so hard but time at last does wear,
Naught wants rest but will consume in fine,
How can my heart which does my sorrows bear,
Choose but with speed consume away and pinc,
Death will at last stretch out his angry arm,
Inforst by time, to end my endless harm.
PASSION. XXXVIII.
Bows not my body with the force of age,
Is not the skyn far wyder then my face,
And flesh consumed by force of wrathful age,
What do not silver hayres yeilde goodly grace:
And be not these the kalendars of time,
Which witness that in cares I spend my prime.
Were none of these my blood still waxes could,
And I do feel a weakness in my mind,
Fear dispos^est my wonted courage bold.
Dimnes of thought does make my senses blind:
Benomn'd I am in every part at length,
That clean I lost the force of former strength.
These tokens show my pain not long shall last,
Nor I (though steel) be able to endure,
These torments, which increase the surging blast,
Then let me not my greater harms procure:
By fearing pain more then the force of pain,
Which feeble strength could not in me refrain.
Should I suppose I could exceed the days,
Which are laid down to finish all my cares,
And does increase the cause which hope delays,
Then let me yeilde, to him that still prepares:
A salve, to such as call to him for aid,
And to abide the brunt are neu'r dismayde:
PASSION. XXXIX.
EStranged from the fruit of quiet rest,
How can I choose but waste, and wear away,
Whose accents new with feeling force molest
The troubled thoughts which careful mind dismay:
Who would the some of sorrows all display,
Within my life let him the same suruay.
Some one repeates, he roules the restles stone
With SISIPHVS: an other Ta^tals pain
Does bear: the third is racked with IXION:
And others do like TITIVS complain:
But yet the worst of their accursed annoyes,
Even is the best and chiefest of my joys.
Walk I abroad to meet some company,
For to remove these cursed eats away,
Each man I meet, a map of misery
Presents, to work my ruin and decay:
His humor stored with pleasure and delight,
Unto my mind new cares effect inuit.
And as in storms copartners yield content,
And makes less the burden of the mind,
Even so a man in seas of sorrows spent,
And knows not where a mate therein to find,
Must needs endure the torment all alone,
When to the wind he makes his ruthles moan.
PASSION. XL.
REst I at home, remembrance rackes my mind,
The object which does feed my hungry thought,
For nothing there remaynes for me to find,
But even the sound which I have dearly bought,
Repentance, purchased with hasty brain,
Which stores my mind with heaps of loath, d disdain.
For idle heads build castles in the air,
And being alone am I there where I am?
No sure I view full many a country fair,
And foreign thoughts do feed my fancies flame,
Even thus I wear and waste away the time,
Declining when I have most mind to clime.
The day expired, the nights approach supplies,
Where dreams with fear preuert my quiet rest,
And MORPHEVS a sopor sweet demes,
Which after toil should be my mornings feast.
Sometimes I bathe my careful couch with tears,
From soundest sleep, a waked with starting fears.
Iturne and toss: for Bodies ease is scant
When mind is fraught with burdens of annoy,
And cares my joys with spreding bows supplant,
Despair does hope with ugly face destroy.
Thus discontents plant accentes of my grief,
Which do suppress the agents of relief.
PASSION. XLI.
TIme draws on to frustrate my desires,
Which vent will give to my abortiue cares,
For to burst forth to cruel flaming fires,
Which wastes my life, fast fettred in the snares:
Of discontents, and then shall cease to moan,
When matter wantes for grief to feed upon.
Yeilde then content till sorrows wearied be,
Let them complain what toil they do endure,
Both day and night in persecuting thee,
Then they will cease thy torments to procure*
And for to reap unto themselves some ease,
Thy will consent thy bondage to release.
Then shall the beau'ns confess they did thee wrong,
And earth possessed with such a tyranny,
Shall curse the seeds, whereof thy woes are sprung,
All moaning thus thy woeful misery:
O man thus borne in spite of angry stars,
Whose selfe-conceyte work to him deadly wars.
Could all the Gods being ioin'd in one consent,
Frame such a one which art no time could cure,
Though SATVRNE had some crooked nature lent,
Things of such force but fieldome are in ure:
And though they be yet cannot much prevail,
If fate give place unto our swelling sail.
PASSION. XLII.
PLant seated in a loose unstable soil,
Know not the state of this deceiving time,
How cruel FATE return with world of spoil,
After the sack of a most fertile clime:
What does earth hold? or sea or air contain,
But a congealed heap or errors vain.
Our days do move like shadows on the wall,
What does not move like shadows light effect?
Hours fly full fast to bring us unto thrall,
What does not fly like shortest hours aspect:
Waves dos ou'r-flowe the sands that be so wide,
What does not swell as does the flowing tide.
The fruits made ripe by force of hasty time,
Do soonest fade the blossom being decayed,
And as the flowing waves swell in their prime,
So flies it fast like shadows form displayed,
The day is full of labor paynefull toil,
The day is full of dolors deadly spoil.
Pale death does knock even at thy princely gate:
With like demand, as at the cottage poor,
Does pale death knock with just demand; no hate,
Ingraf'd with wrong, to these extremes do sture:
For he destroys as well Captain boulde,
As poorest wretch framed of this earthly moulde.
PASSION. XLIII.
Armed to offend death makes choice of none,
Nor difference to work his savage will,
But all alike none by (...) is gone,
Unto the pot, his hu^ngrie mawe (...):
One house of death is common unto all,
One law of death does govern great and small.
Flowers, grass, mist* does fall, does wither, does fade,
With wind in time, to the air, flowers, grass, and mist we be,
For here being sent to dig, and delue with spade;
Our works bring forth the fruit of misene:
As flowers fall, grass wither, mist fades away,
So does our days, fall, wither and decay.
What thing so sure but falls at the last,
Or what so firm but minates in time,
Who is so wise that can endure the blast?
Which does forbid the hasty for to clime:
Of things that shall be dust let no man store,
Dust we shall be, and dust we wear before.
If choice be made, or difference take place,
Even with that choice death waxes more vnmil'd,
The fairest flowers fall soonest to disgrace*
And worser things escape often vndefil'd.
So many bad do days enjoy,
When din^ of death do better sort destroy,
PASSION. XLIIII.
REsted by choice our days we finish here,
And JOVE himself the choice thereof has made,
Being loved we die, JOVE lou's as does appear:
By motions which errors do invade,
So those whom JOVE with princely care does love,
Them he does chase his Godhead to approve.
O happy man of whom JOVE made a choice,
O happy man whom IVPITER does love,
Whom JOVE accepts he only may rejoice,
Whom JOVE takes to himself he does reprove:
If chosen thus, and loved so by JOVE,
Or though reprou'd, why should we fa^t in love.
He only shall the flaming walls enjoy,
That gardes the thorn of JOVE'S imperial ^eate,
And shall behold that prince which may destroy,
PHEBVS brig^t beams which feeds us with heat*
No sorrows then, nor grief shall him molest,
Being lath'd by JOVE unto his heavenly feast,
So shall he ^est amongst the chiefest stars,
There a new star placed for to yeilde us light,
And by his death shall end these terren wars,
And life a new begin to lead upright;
And shall no more behold the theater,
Where tragic eu'll lead mortal men to err.
PASSION. XLV.
REstes any thing more lighter then a hair,
No hair but does JOVE'S godhead high reprove,
What is more light then birds which sparrowes rere,
Yet sparrowes witness that there is a JOVE:
Is any thing of greater weight then life,
And shall life pass in mistie clouds of strife?
Yt may not be that I should so believe,
Life comes to us even by the heu'ns decree,
To such conceyt I may ^o credit give,
Life flies away by dynt of destinye,
Life we possess by force of JOVE'S command,
Life we must yield, if IVPITER demand.
For borne we are, and die we stalbe sure,
Because we are of purpose borne to die,
But not content with our estates unsure,
Nor pleased yet death should our patience try:
JOVE did command, and death obaves his will,
So let it rest JOVE'S doom for to fulfill.
JOVE did command, which must not be gainsaid,
He spoke the word, and all did yield consent,
He made a beck, and roaring seas obayed,
Then with our states why are we not content?
He wills us from these worldly cares refrain,
And his edict must eu'r and eu'r remain.
PASSION. XLVI.
IF this be thus? then farewell all my joy,
Which I possessed before these cares encroc'hd,
JOVE made a choice, death did his choice destroy,
O would that death had unto me approch'd:
More welcome sure had been his deadly dart,
Then these annoyes which breed increasing smart.
Farewell my joy, I do renounce thy smile,
I hate the thing which cause of joy may yield,
Least feigned hope should certain FATE beguyle,
Despair has won the honor of the field,
My love, my life, my joy is gone before,
Death may alone my hope of ease restore.
Then as the faithful which embrace the tool,
And kiss the same, which life does take away,
Who well were taught in high IEHOVAS school,
That bears the bag of simple truth always:
So will I clippe and kiss this world of pain,
Which Jove has sent to cool my wandering brain.
Embracing death and loathing life's repose,
I rest content and watch the happy time,
I seek not now to triumph over my foes,
Yet here would feign end both my life and rhyme:
But that I vowed over as your sheapheard true,
With hand and heart to serve and honor you.
FINIS.
THE Patron his pathetical Posies, Sonets, Maddrigalls, and Rowndelayes.

Together With SINETIS Dompe.

Plena vercu^di culpa pudoris erat.

POSIE. I The patrones conceyte:
DOmesticke Gods of the Sea-whal'd Isle,
Heau'^ erected trophies of thy prays,
AV^ORAS blush, that beautifies thy smile,
Sh'nes far more bright then Phoebus goulden rays,
Natures chief pride, the map of beauties grace,
Loves lovely swee^, which virtue does embrace.
Offspring of ^dds, borne of the salt-sea foame,
Thoughts, (...) that does to Pallas bower inclines
A Commet, that in starrie night does gloame.
And does presage of mysteries divine?
An ornament, bedecked with goulden tyres,
A pearl in camp'd in strength of chaste desires.
Reposed rest of ADON'S ardent look.
Thy Christall-pointed eyes (like Sapphires blue,
Set in the snow) do hide a bayted hook:
Which does entrap by force of Goulden hue:
Were ADON here to view thy VENUS eye,
Could ADON such a VENUS suite deny.
Olympus Queen, that does command the skies,
Whose shining beam's do light the western Isle,
No base aspect in thy swee^e body lies,
Thy fauou^ do the stealing time beguile:
For precious breath so does perfume the air,
That all applaude thou on^ art sweet and fair.
POSIE. I The Patrones Conceyte.
THe Radian beam's of natur's purest die,
With honors Equipage long live thy fame,
Whose silver arkes, surpasing Crystal sky,
Does force love Queen to reverence thy name:
Stars do inuay, that earth retains thee,
From making Fourth amongst the graces Three.
Heavens new joy, earth's possessed wonder,
The welkins ptide, if they might thee embraece,
As they did JOVE'S love that kills with thunder,
Thy memory her beauty does deface.
Live long thou star, which in the North does shine,
That noble worth's may fill thy sacred shrine.
Y^pe graft with virtue in her tender years,
Deriuing honor from her noble stock,
Which Needles wear? for honor still appeer's,
Within her browe, which does fames cradle rock:
Whose searching wit, dipped in MINERVAS vain,
Fraught with content, does Pallas praises stain,
HIBBLA has Bees, stored with a sweet increase,
And she has beauty, furnished with grace,
Live stinges do prick, though hony's taste to please,
So wounds her beauty those which it embrace:
A Lamp of glory shines in th^e alone,
Live long in earth thou match-lesse Paragone.
POSIE. II The Patrone's affection.
LAunterne of love the patron due of lore,
Light some beam my affection to guide,
Amongst the drerie throbbes increasing sore,
Sore in the veil of heart where I them hide:
Languishing in delight I do delight to pine,
And can I pine a more contented pain,
Heart once mine-owne, is now possesion thine,
Yeilde then to yeilde this hearts due entertain.
Honor is the guest, let bounty be my prize,
Truth be the page of my admired light,
Occasion be thou pressed at my aduize,
Regarding hand, and heart, to attend her ^ight.
Or else my heart and mind I hold in hand:
Do then my hope confirm that hope may stand.
POSIE. III. The patrones fantasy.
TOrmented heart in thrall, Yea thrall to love,
Respecting will, Heartbreaking gain does grow,
Ever DOLOBELLA, Time so will prove,
Binding distress. O gem will thou allow,
This fortune my will Repose-lesse of ease,
Unless thou L^DA, Ouer-spread my heart,
Cutting all my ruth, dayne, Disdain to cease,
I yeilde to fate, and welcome endless Smart.
POSIE. IIII. The Patrons pauze in ode.
DImpl's flourish, beauties grace,
Fortune smileth in thy face,
Eye bewrays honors flower.
Love is norish'd in thy bower,
In thy bended brow does lie,
Zeal impressed with chastity.
Jove's darling dear,
Opale lips of coral hue,
Rarer die then cheries new,
Arkes where reason cannot try,
Beauties riches which does lie,
Entombed in that fairest frame,
Touch of breath perfumes the same.
Orubie clear:
Ripe ADOn fled VENUS bower,
A^ming at thy sweetest flower,
His ardent love forced the same,
Wonted agents of his flame:
Or be to whose enstamed fire,
Love in^l'd him to aspire.
Hope of our time,
Oriad's of the hills draw near,
Nayad's come before your peer:
Flower of nature shining shoes,
Riper then the falling rose,
Entermingled with white flower,
Stayn'd with vermilion's power.
Nest'ld in our clime.
The silver swans sing in poe,
Silent notes of newe-spronge woe,
Tuned notes of cares I fing,
Organ of the muses spring,
Natures pride inforceth me,
Even to rue my destiny.
Star show thy might,
'Helens beauty is defaced,
Io's graces are disgraced,
Reaching not the twentieth part,
Of thy gloases true desert,
But no marvel thou alone,
Even art VENYS paragone.
Armed with delight.
Iris coulors are to base,
She would make APELLES gaze,
Resting by the silver stream,
Tossing nature seame by seame,
Pointing at the Crystal sky,
Arguing her majesty,
Loves rampire strong.
Hair of Amber, fresh of hue,
Wau'd with goulden wyers new,
Riches of the finest mould,
Rarest glory to behold,
Ympe with natures virtue graft,
Engines new for dolors fraught,
Even there are spronge,
A Iem framed with Diamounds,
In whose voice true concord sounds,
Joy to all that ken thy smile,
In thee does virtue fame beguile,
In whose beauty burns fire,
Which disgraceth Queen desire:
Saunce all compare,
Love it self being brought to gaze,
Learnes to tread the lovers maze:
Lying vncou'red in thy look.
Left for to ^nclaspe the Book:
Where enroul'd thy fame remains,
That IVNOS blush of glory stains:
Blot out my care.
Sphere containing all in all,
Only framed to make men thrall:
Onix deck, d with honors worth,
On whose beauty brings forth:
Smiles ou'r-clouded with disdain,
Which loyal heart does pain:
Void of disgrace,
AVRORA'S blush that decks thy smile,
Waiting lovers to begnile:
Where curious thoughts built the nest,
Which neu'r yeildes to lovers rest:
Wasting still the yiedling eye,
Whilst he does the beauty spy.
Rea'd in her face.
Lamp enric'hd with honors flower,
Blossom gracing VENUS bower:
Bearing plumes of feathers white.
Wherein Turtles do delighte,
Sense would seem to weak to find,
Reason's depth in modest mind:
Yiedling desire.
Lode-starre of my happy choice,
In thee alone I do rejoice:
O happy man whose hap is such,
To be made happy by thy tutch:
Thy worth and worthynes could mou^,
The stoutest to incline to love,
Enflamed with fire.
POSIE. V. The dittie to Sospiros.
THe wound of heart does cause my fighes to spring
And sighs do often report my hearty sore,
This sore of heatt does woeful tidings bring,
That love is lack and I do grieve therefore:
O fighes why do you rise and take no rest,
O heart why art thou thus with them possessed.
My heart in self it self would pine away,
if that sometimes sighs music I should miss,
This bitter joy and pleasant pain must stay,
The greatest grief in now my greatest bliss:
The night I groan the day I tear my heart,
I love these sighs I triumph in their smart (...)
When mind and thought are clogged with their car^,
And that my heart is ready for to break,
Then every sigh does question how it fares,
and heart to them replies that it is weak.
^et af^r sighs the heart is somewhat glad,
^s without sower the sweet is never had.
My wish and will for succor do aspire,
Unto the seat of my endeered trust,
But want and woe ensuing my desire,
My heart does quail and after sigh it must:
Yet wish I must and well I may delight,
Though sighs for wants and woes do me affright.
These sighs I Will entertertaine though they me noy,
For they do like the cause from where they rise,
They bring in post news of my minded joy,
And as they pass they message me no lies:
And yet they leave behind them such a want,
That mind and joy I find to be but scant,
O will you never cease me sighs to grieve,
And may not hope keep you in calm repose,
Let me some respite have, heart to relieve,
Lest that your selves and you fully lose:
Sighs do aspire till they obtain their will,
Sighs will not cease they seek my heart to kill.
POSIE. 6 The patrones Dilemma.
OF stately stones the Diamound is king,
Whose splendour does dazell the gazing eye,
The Onix gloze, is ^yed to honors winge.
Whose vertu's governed by th'mperiall sky:
These graces all in thee combined remain,
For glory thine their glories still does stain.
Shall I not speak of Rubies glorious blaze,
That blazeth still, like blazing star that shoes.
Or cease to write how men at th, Opale gaze.
Whose beauty shines like perles of dew on rose:
These virtues all (compared with thine) are base,
For nature gave thee excellent of grace.
The Topas chaste thou do in kind excel,
The Hyacinth that strangers love procures,
Has not such force, nor can not work so well,
As honors beauty still in thee alures;
Yris sheews not more coulors in her kind,
Then virtues be with in thy noble mind.
The windy Histmos shows, and bright aspects,
Comes far behind this fair Angragos worth,
The Lupinar has not more chaste affects.
Then glory of th'vnspotted mind brings forth.
My pains increase thy graces to repeat,
For cold despair drives out of hope the heat.
If Saunus fort which does expel deceate,
Or Agathes which happy bouldnes yeild's,
And eke Luperius whose virtues great,
Does glad the mind; all which are found in fields:
If these I had to comfort my despair,
Hope yet might hope to win and wear thy fair.
POSIE. VII. The Palmers Dittie upon his Alms.
FAvre Dole the flower of beawties glorious shine,
Whose sweet sweet grace true guerdon does deserve.
My Orisons I offer to thy shrine,
That beauties name in glories state preserve:
My hap (o hapless ha^) that gave the applause,
Thy beauty viewed when trembling heart did pause.
Were I a King, I would resign my Crown,
To gain the name of Palmers happy kind,
I would not crave to live in high renown,
If Dole I had to satisfy my mind:
Then I for Dole a Palmers name would crave,
If Palmer might be sure his dole to have.
POSIE. VIII. The Patrones Adieu.
IF love deserves the fruit of loves desire,
Hope loathes my love to live in hope of right:
Time after trial once may quench my fire,
Oh salve the sore and cherish my delight:
Rue lawles force, which fervent zeal procures,
Obtain a heart like to the Emerauld pure:
Dayne hope to grant where fear despair allures,
In deep distress naught but true faith is sure.
POSIE. IX. Fides in Fortunam.
MOst sacred is the sweet where fortune swayes,
Divine the sound of her enchaunting voice,
Noe hope of rest, where hope, true hope delays,
Thongh I despair I may not change me choice:
For hue I well, though fortune me despise,
To honor her, that scorns my enterprise.
To bandie looks will ease my thrauled heart,
With looks, my life shall be at her commanode,
If so much grace to faith she will impart:
With looks again, to answer my demand;
And that I may still love her to my grave,
With purest faith, is all that I do crave.
Let Phoebus draw his shining beam's away,
Let heau^ns forsake to grant me any light,
Let food me fail; let hope, my hope delay;
Let ears not hear; let watch-full eyes want sight:
Let sense, my sense, with fury fell confound,
Before that faith, to fortune false be found.
Thy eu'r sworn friend, and servant to thy end.
Has made a vow and promise with his soul,
His fortun's ^ight wi^ cou^age to defend,
Again^ proudest (...) ^his offer dare control:
My ^ch is sure if For^e grace her swayne,
And c^llors give her quarrel to maintain.
Colors they are of purest Indian die,
For none but such does Fortune use to lend.
Whose sight may move the coward neu'r to fly,
And all his force against his foe to bend.
Then let sweet soul thy colors be my guide,
And hap what may, thy doom I will abide.
Then write thy Censure with thy pretty hand,
I will obey the sentence of thy mind,
And grave the same in table fair to stand:
So that, ensuing age the same may find:
For monument in goulden letters wrought,
To whet with sight the accents of my thought.
POSIE. X. My sorrow is joy.
Sour is the sweet that sorrow does mainetaine,
Yet sorrow's good, that yeildeth mickle joy,
True joy he has, that can from joy refrain.
Which haruest's still the fruits of deep annoy:
Yet I enthraulde in blind CVPIDOS s^are,
With fond conceyte in sorrows joy I fare.
Fortun's my joy, which sorrow still does yield,
Her frown I count a favor to my soul;
Sorrow does away, and joy has lost the field,
Yet fame in mind does often joy enro^le:
But when I think for whom I bear this smart,
It yields new joy unto my careful heart.
POSIE. XI. An almon for a Parrat.
Disdainful dames that mountains move in thought,
And think they may Jove's thunderbolt control,
Who past compare each oue do set at naught,
With spuemish scorn's that now in rethorick roll:
Yet scorn that will be scorned of proud disdain,
I scorn to beire the scorns of finest brain.
Gestures, nor looks of simpring coy conceyts,
Shall make me move for stately ladies mocks:
Then SIRENS cease to trap with your deceyts,
Least that your barks meet unexpected rocks:
For calmest ebb may yield the roughest tide,
And change of time, may change in time your pride.
Leave to converse if needs you must inuay.
Let meaner sort feed on their mean intent,
And soar on still, the lark is fled away,
Some one in time will pay what you have lent,
Poor hungry gnatts fail not on worms to feed,
When go shaukes miss on hoped pray to speed.
POSIE. XII. The authors muse upon his Conceyte.
Fair, fairest, fair; if passing fair, be fair,
Let not your deed's obscure your beauties fair,
The Queen so fair of Fearies not more fayer,
Which does excel with fancies chiefest fayer,
Fair to the worlds fair admiring wonder,
Fayrer then JOVE'S love that kill's with thunder.
Even to your swayne you seem prides passing fair,
That naught desires but fortun's fair to reap,
If fortune then will drive me to despair,
No change can make your sweetest fair so cheap,
But that I must, and will live in exile,
Before your thoughts with thought I will defile.
Fair fierce to faith, when fortune bend her brows.
Yet fortune sweet be thou reclaym'd again:
For unto rhee I offer all my vows,
That may appease the rigor of my pain:
Yeilde wished hope after this stormy blast,
That c^lm's repose may work content at last,
POSIE. 13 Fides ad fortunam.
THe goulden Phoebus (longing ost) is seen,
To prick his furious st^edes to run in haste,
To clip and coll fair Thetis lovely Queen,
In pensive thoughts lest he the time should waste,
So I make speed thy self for to embrace,
Being almost tired in pursuit of the chase.
For hounds uncoupled, range the forest wide,
The stance being pruned, I watch the rowsed game,
And to the mark my shaftes full well I guide:
The crafty Do takes on then to be lame:
But having past the danger of my bow,
She, limping leaves, and hastes away to go.
Thus I being surest of my hoped sport,
Still miss the fairest mark that eu'r was kend,
Words do abound of comfort to exhort,
But deeds are slow sure promises to end;
The hope then left is game to rowse a new,
(Till deeds supply) and feed my self with view.
Fortune has said, and I believed that,
Renewed hope might ease my heart near spent:
Despair in sequel often my hope does squat;
That doubtful I remain still discontent,
Wherefore to faith if faith remain in thee,
With faithful words let deeds in one agree.
FINIS.
Sonetto. 1
Read these my lines the the carrecters of care,
Sweet Nymph these lines read over and over again,
View in this glass (that glory does prepare,)
The depth of worthes which in thee does remain,
Hear I set forth the garden of thy grace,
With plenty stored of choice and sweetest flowers,
Where I for thee abortiue thoughts embrace;
When in conceyte hope lodges in thy bowers.
Hear shall thou find the Orphans of my hope,
Shad'wed with veil even of thy rare defeart,
Of all my thoughts here shall thou find the scope,
Which to the world thy honor shall ympart.
Thus will I say when skies advance thy name,
Live HELENS peer eternized thy fame.
Sonetto. 2
FArewell my hope thy hap did thee not steed,
And thou my hap unhappy come to me,
Farewell my trust which void wast of all meede,
And thou heart-sore attend my misery,
Farewell my hold which wast to strong to hold,
And thou my ruin welcome to my gain,
Farewell my life which dead are in my monld,
And life no life torment my heart with pain
Farewell my chief that conquerst with thy look,
And thraldom I appeal to riue my heart,
Farewell my thought, thy thoug^t she w^ll not brook,
Yet think I will for that I feel the smart.
Farewell my choice I lastly do thee choose,
I cannot choose another to my will:
Farewell my comfort comfortles o muse,
And sorrow weak thy wrath my joy to spill.
Farewell long stay for wind to fill thy sail,
Come banishment. Adieu, love must prevail.
Sonetto. 3
EMerald of treasure eternal spring,
Nursed by the graces day star shine on hie,
Ingendring perfect bliss with valens ring:
Twisting love and liking with constancy.
Now stanchlesse heart redres and soule-sick wound,
Enwrap the same in foldes of fresh desire,
Let love be waking harvest hope be found,
And living spring to quench this flame of ^er.
Unto your excellent love sole command,
Seeing es you may prooure I me commend,
Into your counsels grace voutch my demand,
Heat burning joy sustain in joyful end.
So shall my muse your name ay coronize,
I will it blaze to all posterities.
Sonetto. 4
Relieve my mind being ouerprest with care,
O hear my sorrows for I do complain,
Non may the^ help save you the cure being rare,
Ah put me not to death with lingering pain.
Lest that my death to you shall nothing gain,
Enforced love dislikes which is not meet,
Equality of love does never pain.
You paragon most precious pure and sweet.
Rejoice your lovers heart with love for love,
Unlace dislike and let be far disdain,
Both one in one and let affection move:
Since that in heart affection does remain.
Untie distress to find my blisfull sport,
Let not your heart be cruel to the meek,
Attend my hearts desire in humble sort:
Soon grant my humble heart what it does seek.
Sonetto. 5
REtire you thoughts unto your wonted place,
Or let your place be where your thought are prent;
New joys approaching with a kindly grace:
And hope that blossoms on affections dent.
Excelling worth lies buried in my breast,
Love eke concealing pain in tomb of heart,
Each joy is grief wherewith thou art oppressed;
Yound is thy grief but sudden old thy smart.
Rich is thy choice desire has twice a need,
Even so my hope would reap hope to sustain,
Bearing in my heart the wish of hearty deed,
Sealing self and lore high concealed vain.
Unspotted trust and truth tied to the same,
Love keeping awe as awefull trust shall prove,
Amongst the stings where heart does feel the flame,
Such is the meaning of my fixed love,
Such be her heart my dolors to remove.
Sonetto. 6
Upon the sands where raging sea does roar,
With fearful found, I standing with desire,
The element his billows sendes to shore,
And takes away my joy to my great ire.
So water tho did seek to quench my fire,
Whose surie (I beheld) with rash rebound,
That would furflow my life, o rage to dire,
My hearts high rock was re^t which stood on ground:
But high command retreait she made him sound,
Who once immite his fury did surcease,
And way-white waves to vieu her did redound,
Breaking at her sight her empire to complease.
And blustering winds their forces did release,
Least that their tumult might her ears offend,
And with a calmie fawn breathed to her ease,
Thus was my wish to port they should her send.
So wauie seas and winds once made me sad,
So wauie seas and winds have made me glad.
Amore e mare.
Sonetto. 7
MArching in the plain field of my conceyte,
I might behold a tent which was at rest,
My forces I did bend but ah deceit:
There left I freedom last which is now least.
For when I thought to fight with Mars for best,
There Cupid was which brought me to distress,
Of foe when I thought to make a conquest.
Love and desire in tent did me oppress.
These captains twain from torment may surcease,
If they did know the lore I bear in mind,
They may as Turtles one procure thy ease,
O that to me of twain one would be kind.
Thou te^t that holdst in night such turtle doves,
Rejoice, embrace the twain of world the loves.
Sonetto. 8
OF all the buddes that yield to men delight,
Sweet eglantine that sentest in the air,
Art worthy pen of gold thy praise to dight:
Thy flowers of bloome make world both green and fair,
To wearied sense thou comfort do repair,
Thy pleasure from the eye does never stray,
To fancies hest thou art a stately chair:
And wounded hearts desire thou can allay.
More bright then sun thou stand'st in window bay,
And to thy light the sun may not come near,
Thou lasting flower do everlasting stay:
O that within thy flowers I might appear.
As I did pass sweet sent to heart did clime,
O thou sweet branch the sweetness of my time.
Sonetto. 9
AS eye bewrays the secrets of my mind,
I did regard an Eglantine most fair,
That sprung in sight of sun that brightly shind,
And yet no sun her springing could empayre.
I did rejoice to come within her air,
Her sweetenes to receive within my breast:
O that her sent in heart ay might I wear,
With griping grief heart should not be oppressed,
Heart panting sore would cease or take some rest,
And fear disloyal vanish would away,
Then over grief in triumph were I blessed,
To be revived when life went to decay,
With shadow hide me from these hart-breake showers,
And with thy sent refresh me in thy bowers.
Sonetto. 10
THe only help that some distressed have,
To keep the life though lingering in the pain,
Is that a time some place will find to save,
The loss of heart procured by disdain.
Now place is fair yet hope I do retain,
That distance never alters the mind,
The height of hills does make the lowly plain,
The rising sun in sky fears not the wind:
And yet I see place is somewhat unkind,
To offer me the lack of her sweet face,
Which cannot solac'd be till I it find:
To free my heart and love of loves disgrace,
O place if thou did take her from my eye,
Bring her in place where place may remedy:
Sonetto. 11
When chirping byrds did chaunt their musickeslayes,
For to salute Dame Flora with her train,
And vesta clothed with chaung of fresh arayes,
For to adorn Hopes happy entertayne:
Then sweetest Bri^re that shylded our repose,
Sent odours sweet, from her fresh hanging bows,
And Philomel' oft-changed notes did close,
Which did accord even with our hallowed vows.
But then; ah then, our discontent began,
A barking Dog stepped forth with scolding rage,
And Music changed to notes of singing Swanne,
That March we must with swiftest Equipage.
Loose not sweet bird thy voice, nor briet thy set:
We Will meet again when fortunes frowns be spent.
Sonetto. 12
Live long sweet b^de, that to increase our joy,
Made soleme pause, between thy chirping lays;
When stately brier shilded our anoye,
And sheltred us from peeping Phoebus raves:
Sweet Philomel' record not our delights,
In Musicks sound, but to the subtle air;
Least any should participate our spites,
Wrought by a sudden Cerberus repair.
The pleasing sound our spirits did revive,
The sweet, sweet sent, refreshed our yiedling sense,
The happy toutch, most to delight did strive,
But caytiffe dog did hinder our pretense.
Then happy Byrd farewell, that eased my pain,
Farewell sweet brier, till fortune smile again.
Sonetto. 13
UUHen Lordlin Tytan lodged in the west,
And EBON darkness ou'r-swayde the light,
LATONAS beams decreasing were suppressed,
When silent streams did murmur (...) ere delight.
Then I entrenched near to a noble mark,
With courage bold a spear I took in hand,
To win my will fired with honors spark,
Or loose my life in my commanders band.
My spear I brake upon my gentle foe,
Which being performed the second I did charge,
But honors force would not be quailed so:
The third I took my thoughts for to enlarge;
Then called I was for treason arms to take,
And wisdom would my former charge forsake.
Sonetto. 14
SHould fear pale fear make me forgo my mind,
Or legions of monsters make me quail,
No no, I was not borne of so base kind,
As dreadful sighs would make my heart to fail.
Yet care command that honors my conceyte,
Made me forsake what my desire embraced,
And loath I was that riualls should repeat:
My arms should be by humane force vnlac'd,
Which made me yeilde unto the tyms restraynt,
And leave the charge of that most noble fight,
Where kindness more then force could make me faint,
To shild my fame from fortunes cancred spite.
Thus I did charge, thus I discharged my lance,
And so I rest contented with my chance.
Sonetto. 15
AS fond conceyt does move the wavering mind,
Of artlesse sottes that know not wisedoms lore,
Inconstant still to chang with every wind,
Whose base desires wants fruits of virtues store.
So does the art and knowledge of the wise,
Stir up his mind in honors foorde to wade,
With fervent zeal base changlinges to despise,
And their weak strength, with courage to muade.
Whose mind being armed with true loves strong defense,
He gyrdes his loins with bonds of constancy,
And scorns that ought should alter his pretense,
Or stayne his name, with blot of infamy.
Thus wisdom is not given to many,
And but to such for to be constant any.
Sonetto. 16
NEu'r-resting chariot of the fiery god
Embossed with beams of his eternal light,
Waytes at her beck when she but shakes her rod
Of her command; who is the heavens delight:
AVRORAs shine does blush to see her grace,
Nymphs gather flowers to make her chaplets fine,
Engendered grief my hoped favor deface,
Love hates to live when longing makes it pine:
Even so her fair makes longing dear to me,
HELEN the fair was not so fair as she.
Sonetto. 17
NO care so great nor thoughts so pining seem,
Enioving hope to reap the hearts desire;
Which makes me more your beauties grace esteem,
Oppressed with heat of PAPHOS holy fire.
Appoint some place to ease my thrauled mind,
Not freed yet from thy late luring look;
Emove thy time and solace shall thou find,
Let VVLCAN toil to forge his bayted hook:
Eyes glorious glaunce will train him to the lure,
Heavens do repine thou should his frowns endure
Sonetto. 18
NAmelesse the flower that works my discontent,
Endless the cares for her I do sustain,
Waste is the soil which shadows my content
Once lend a salve to cure my curelesse pain.
Ah dear, how dear I purchase my delight?
Not long when first I viewed thy sweetest fair.
Except thy beauty lend my darkness light,
Long shall that look my heavy looks ympayre;
Esteem of him that lives to honor thee,
Hopes true repose shall then be lodged in me.
Sonetto. 19.
NO sooner I had thy beauty espied,
Cl^ washed from the dreggs of vices stayne,
But heart to thee with constant love was tied;
And thou perhapps wilt yeilde me but disdain:
If thou (...) not my love with love require,
I shall wear out in pain my dismal days,
But if thy heart once harbor my delight;
Then shall I live thy heart to love and praise.
Yeilde thy consent to cure my fatal wound,
And let desert prevail to gain thy grace,
So secret truth shall eu'r in me abound;
If we may meet in some convenient place:
And then be sure his name I will deface,
That should be seen to speak in thy disgrace.
Sonetto. 20
CAmpaspe's fair fresh-paynted form embraced,
By the rare Father of the paynters art,
Could yeilde small joy except that she had graced,
His lively cuning by her good desert,
Yet he reioyc'd her counterfeyte to kiss,
Which she neu'r saw though he the same profaned,
How infinite is then my joyful bliss,
That still enjoy the Id'ea of thy hand;
Thy glove it is mine only comfort left,
Which thy sweet hand made happy with her touch,
This is the Idol that my heart infeoft,
With loves sweet hope; which I adore to much.
That I retain a monument for thee,
Though without life; life it affordes to me.
Sonetto. 21
Sweet lady I love, by stelth my love does creep,
Unto the depth^ of my profounde conceytes,
Not daring when I wake I dream a sleep,
Thus stealing love by inward signs entreat:
Though merry gale bydes anchor up to way,
And canuas store swells with a puffing blaste,
Yet fear of storm does make us keep the baye,
For he is safe that fitts on shore at last:
So love embraced when others presence feared,
Makes sweet prove sower when shadows substance seem^
And Mars himself when Vulcans net he tear'd:
Does witness fear does stolen love redeem.
When sweet repose does calm the troubled mind,
Fear of suspect does leave his sting behind.
Sonetto. 22
MY heart enthraul'd even with mine own desire,
Makes me to be, more then I dare to seem,
For ielosie may kindle enuies fire,
To hazard that which strength cannot redeem:
The fairest rose, on statelyest stalk that grows,
Draws a delight his odours swee^e to smell,
Whose prick sometime does sting at later close,
Which makes suspect the wished sent to expel.
Love pri^es my mind to gather fairest flowers,
And fear forbids lest garden keeper spy,
Whose ielosie ra^es down untimely showers,
And Argos-like does loves repose discrie:
Thus does thy fair my secret glaunce detect,
For ielosie does daily breed suspect.
Sonetto. 23
UUHen sweet repose in loves fair bower does rest
Enchamp'd with veil of an unfeigned desire,
Then careful thoughts the fearful minds inuest,
Lest ARGVS should epsy the kindled fire:
For where the dicte of such as may command,
Forbidds the same, which lovers must embrace,
There fear, and care, together do demand;
Account of things which honor may deface:
So is their joys with fearful passions mixed,
Which does increase the ardencie of love,
On the forbidden things our eyes are fixed;
Whose accents still does loves affections move:
Thus stolen love is eu'r with fear possessed,
(...) (...) shadows glymse often fears the friendly guest.
Sonetto. 24
THimpatient rage of fretting Ielosie,
Suspectes the wind that comes from Cupids wings,
Whose watch preuents the opportunity,
Whose lovers seek to cure his noisome stinges:
Each look, a fear, infuseth to the mind,
That gauled is with such a base conceyte,
Which makes them prove to their hearts joys unkind?
When louesweete-ones, of sorrow, suck the teate:
If one but speak to do another right,
Suspect says then, of smoke there comes fier^
His good deserts are houlden in despite?
And rancor does his cruel fate conspire.
So Ielosie still breeds base suspect,
Whose fruitelesse fear there own good name dete^t.
Sonetto. 25
IF Argus, with his hundred eyes, did watch
In vain, when often love did his cunning blind*
Who doubts but she that means to make a match?
For to perform, both time, and place can find.
And to abridge a woman of her will,
Is to power oil in fie^, to quench the flame:
For then far more she is inclined still,
(Though once despisd) again to seek the same.
Love does command, and it must be obayde;
The sacred deity of the god is much,
Whose majesty makes lovers often afraid,
That to his shrine with bended knee they crutch.
This is the cause, let women bear no blame,
Who would not play if they did like the game.
Sonetto. 26
VVHeare true desire, (in simpathie of mind)
Has ioin'd the hearts, with APHRODITES delight;
There loving zeal, (to sweet aspect inclined)
Will find a time in spite of fortunes might.
ARGVS forefight, whose wake-full heedie eyes
Seek to prevent the wynged Gods command)
Is all to weak his charms for to surprise;
Against whose resolve his cuning could not stand:
Yet if in Delphos sleepie lay the God,
Authority against Hundredth eyes had fayld,
But MERCVRIE, with his enchaunting rod;
Brought all a sleep; when Argus Jove assayld:
Then since such happ^ to watching is assigned,
Nothing is hard where willing is the mind.
Sonetto. 27 Dangers altered delays in love.
THe heart inthraul'd with loves ^ttractiue force,
(Whose hope does martch with honors equipage,
When reason does his true deserts remorse)
Must take his time his sorrows to assuage:
For cheeries ripe will not so long endure,
But will in time, fade, wither, and decay,
That which this day, could finest wits allure;
To morrow, CORIDON does cast away,
The Iron being hot who list not for to strike,
Shall sure, being cold, neu'r forge it to his mind,
And all those parts, moves love to like;
Do often (in time) make love to prove unkind.
Even so in time danger attends delay,
For time and tide for no man's pleasures stay.
Sonetto. 28
Was ^o watched by Argus in the downs?
What did not then the winged god inchaunt,
The heardmans ^yes, obaying Iunos forwnes:
What needs loves cross so much to make her vaunt*
The brazen tower could not his valor quail,
Who scorned that Dana^ should live a maid:
Loves inward force against envy will prevail,
And hap what may: his laws must be obayd.
What though fair star thy glory is obscured:
And cou'rd with a thick and foggie cloud:
Yet Titan when he has the heavens invr'd,
Will clear the storms which fatal frowues did shrowde*
And though that fate abridgeth our delight,
Yet time I hope will clear this cloudie spite.
Sonetto. 29
THe fluent stream, whose stealing course being stayed,
Breaks out unto a g^eater deluge rage,
The force of fire with violence delayed,
Makes all things weak his fury to assuage:
Desire contrould, will agrauate desire,
And fancy crossed will fancies force increase,
When loving thoughts will motive love inspire,
Enuies oppose can not their bonds release:
Thus currents small do prove the greatest streams,
Small cinders do increase, to raging flame,
The hardest hearts are pearc'd with beauties beams,
I hide my grief yet love discou'rs the same:
Sweet beauty is the spark of my desire,
And sparks in time may breed a flaming fire.
Sonetto. 30
Sweet beauty in thy face does still appear,
Mine only joy and best beloved dear:
Mine only dear and best beloved content,
Revive my heart and lyinge spirrits spent:
The only agent of my thoughts delight,
Embrace my love and do not me despite:
Secure my fears and solace cares content,
With hopes repast t^ ^auour mine intent;
The sier will out if fuel do but want,
And love in time will die if it be scant:
Let then desire yeilde fuel to your mind,
That love be not blown out with every wind.
So shall my heart like Etnas lasting flame,
Burn with your love and joy still in the same.
Sonetto. 31
I Lo^, inforst by loves unloving charms,
My love is pure, my love is chaste, and true,
And that I love, the greater is my harms:
If love does purchase hate, then love adieu.
Why should not love be recompensed with love,
And true desire, obtain his due desert,
If beauty stir thee to disdain to move?
When mighty storms oppress my troubled heart:
Know then that truth, may beauties blaze dismay,
And loyal hearts, scorn perjured beauties pride,
Yeilde then in time, prolonge not my delay?
Lest others should your beauties grace deride:
So shall your worthes eternished remain,
And gain his love which others pride disdain.
To Paris darling.
UU^re I sheapheard as I am a woodman,
Thy Paris would I be if not thy goodman*
And yet might I perform to thee that duty,
If thou will add that favor to thy beauty.
Now that these feasts make other minions frolike,
Why is my love, my dove, so melancholic:
O but I near guess, what the cause should be,
Which to tell, tel-tale paper, were but folly;
I Will therefore for this time conceal it wholye:
For that must counsel betwixt thee and me,
Twivt thee and me where none may here nor see.
Buen matina.
Sweet at this mourn I chanced,
To peep into che chamber; lo I glaunced.
And saw white sheets, thy whyter skin disclosing;
And soft-sweete cheek on pyllowe soft reposing:
Then said were I that pillowe,
D^ere for thy love I would not wear the willowe.
Maddrigall.
MAdame, that now I kiss your white hands later
Then wild my loving duty,
Retayner to thy beauty:
The water crossed my wish, to cross the water.
Yet think not (sweet) those gallants held thee deerer,
Who for thy beauties, then the sunnneshine cleerer:
Even seas vneu'n have coasted,
But thou art wise and know it.
No; thy Leander, whose hearts fiery matter,
Cannot be quenched, by the deuyding water,
Will with his oare-like arms quite sheare a sunder
The waves that floate him under:
If when I shall so try me,
In thy sweet circled arms I may respire me.
Rounde-delay.
Could-st they none other spite me,
When but once fortune friendly did indite me:
Thy self thou should absent me?
And all unkind, unkind, to more torment me.
I have not thus deserved,
To be with tell-tale Tantalus hunger-starued:
That having store of dishes,
I could not feed according to my wishes?
But this he for reuealinge,
Gods counsel bide: and I for yours concealing:
In this yet do we vary,
That desert to his, is quite contrary?
Then o most kind and cruel,
(Except thou mind to starve thy beauties fuel)
For all my love, faith, duty,
Let me but pray, I pray thee on thy beauty?
And thou my newborn dittie,
Desire her for my second dishe but pity.
Maddrigall.
I Love, just love, not lust, thus constant live I:
My ^yfes dear love mislikes me,
Yet her sweet fair does like me:
If love dislikes; to like and love why should I?
If she be coy why should her love be trusty?
If she be slow; why should I be so hasty?
Yet loyal heart has vowed it,
And constant truth performs it:
Fair; to thy beauties fair, firm have I vowed,
Sound is the seed that my resolve has sowed:
But weed is the fruit that my fate has mowed.
Yet lust I banish, loving
True zeal, I live, yet still dying:
Thus still to be constant eu're have I plodded.
Rounde-delay.
MVch grief did still torment me,
In this regard thou do thy self absent me;
Thy beauty (ah) delights me?
And this thou know to well and therefore spites me.
So women's minds do vary,
And change of air does work quite contrary;
Proof tried my truth and trust too,
Still to be thine, most constant, firm, and just too:
Therefore should regard me,
And love for love (fair love) thou should award me,
For since I still attend thee,
How can thou choose unkind (unkind) but friend me,
Feign I alone would find thee,
That my hearts grief (sweet heart) might the^ unbind thee:
For were I with thee resident,
I doubt not I, to be of thy heart president;
Yeilde then to love (love kind is)
Else would I had been blind, even as love blind is.
Sinetes Dumpe.
YE angry stars, do you envy my estate,
Because content is lodged in my mind;
And therefore will you needs reprove my fate?
That discontent in glory looks to find:
My thoughts were far above my fortunes bent,
Which was your fault to frame unequal parts,
Except it were of purpose to torment.
Gloring in clouds to smother my deserts:
When I did yeilde unto the times despite,
And stroke down sail lest shypracke would ensue,
Enforcing nature to subdue delight?
A cuning bayte within my way you threw.
Ys't then my fault if feathered thoughts aspire,
Clippe not the wings, that gave them force to fly,
Either give scope unto my wished desire;
Or salve my sores with present remedy.
Who seeks by art his nature to suppress,
In vain does strive against the raging stream,
My soaring mind procured my distress?
The branch will grow unless you cut the steame.
Thus if I should ympugne my fantasies,
Invaine it were my nature to oppose,
Then yeilde I must unto these myseries?
Or to the heavens my secret griefs disclose.
Heavens then bear witness of my secret smart,
For you alone are privy to my pains,
Because to her I dare not once ympart:
How love insculpt within my breast remaynes.
The fervent heat of hearts reposed zeal,
Does urge me still for to embrace her fair,
To whom for grace and favor I appeal:
My only refuge for to salve despair.
Yet all in vain I throb my breath-lesse playntes,
When fear does daunte my once vn-daunted mind,
But neede-lesse fear: for few of them are saints.
Yet duties care denial looks to find.
Thus as my thoughts do cope with Jove's desire,
And scorn the mean should once their rival be,
So fearful love does burn like glowing fire,
And threats revenge if I make suite to thee.
The one persuades, that beauties bower is stored,
With pity, and grace, for to requite my love?
The other says the subtle serpent (gored:
With pearsing darte that Ielosies approve)
Will soon infect the virtue of thy shine,
To give repulse; regarding no desert,
Though naught I seek but thou should know I pyne:
And in thy mind thou would my worthes insert.
Know sovereign beauty of thy noble race,
And flower of all that bear thy parents name,
That I desire thy presence to embrace.
To glut mine eyes with looking on the same.
Which is an object that does please mine eye,
Then will I arm my self against the storm,
For to endure this cursed misery:
For hope will help my charge for to perform.
Then will I say to my disquiet mind,
Rejoice thou may do service to her looks,
What needst thou care although ^e be unkind.
Let it suffice thy name is in her ^okes.
Though crossed for follye of thy soaring mind,
Yet art thou blessed her name is in thy ringes,
At last thou shall o^f her some comfort find?
Though she be now disposed to clippe thy wings:
If thou art bashful to discou'r thy mind,
Let thy ringe tell that she thou do adore,
If then thou may not some contentment find?
In mourning weeds thy woeful happs deplore:
Thy habyte then will sure reveal thy care,
She will enquire thy cause of thy annoy,
Then may thou seighe if thou can not declare?
How that her favre has thus obscured thy joy:
She then no doubt will soon conceive thy mind,
When in thy looks thy ruins will appear,
And with a smile thy thraulled chains un-binde;
Whose bright-beam'd sun thy cloudy storms will clear:
And grant thee that (at last) thou love so dear.
FINIS.
Posse and nolle nobile.
A worthy man deserves a worthy motte,
As badge thereby his nature to declare,
Wherefore the fates of purpose did alot?
To this brave squire, this simbole sweet and rare:
Of might to spoil, but yet of mercy spare.
A simbole sure to Salisberie due by right,
Whose still does join his mercy with his might.
Though lion like his Posse might take place,
Yet like a Lamb he Nolle uses aye,
Right like himself (the flower of Salisberies race)
Who never as yet a poor man would dismay:
But princockes pride he used to daunt always:
And so does still: whereby is known full well
His noble mind and manhood to excel.
All crauen curres that coms of castrell kind,
Are knownefull well when they there might would strain*
The poor to oppress that would there favor find?
Or yeilde himself their freinpship to attain:
Then servile sottes triumphs in might a main.
But such as coms from noble lions race,
(Like this brave squire) who yeildes receaues to grace.
Haud ficta loquor. Hugh Gryffyth Gent.

THE Lamentation of a Malcontent upon this Enigma.

Master thy desiers or live in Despair.

Ovid Hoc si crimen erit crimen amoris eris.

If this a fault be found in me, Blame love that wrought the mystery

To the Honorable minded unknown, the Name-lesse wishes perfect health and
perpetual happiness.
Dear Patroness of my hapless lamentations; guided by the stern of thy
beauty, which has the full command of my heart, and wearied with tiranyzing
over my self, in forcible suppressing the agonies of my afflicted mind, by
smothering the feruencie of my desires, in the cloudie center of dumme silence:
at the last with the raging violence of a stopped stream, for want of course
in the intelligible part of my mind; I am driven to ouer-flowe the banks of
reason, and in despite of my self to yeilde up the raynes to uncontrolled
desire; which ensuing Poem willfullie manifest unto you, with the observation
of my co^ed fancyes: Written upon a dream, wherein me thou^ I heard a voice
from a Cloud pronouncing these words ensuing. Master ^hy desires or live in
despair, and albeit I held dreams but fantasies, which commonly do fall
out by contraries; my fortunes being so far inferior to my thoughts, makes me
to doubt the sequel thereof. Yet noble beauty of this sea-bound Region
disdain not to read end, and pity if you will vouchsafe to mity gate the
heaviness of my martyred heart, which near stifled with the dampe of my
discontentments, lamentably beggeth for comfort at your hands.

Yours ever true, secret, and faithful. Namelesse.

The lamentation of a Malcontent.
Master thy desires, or live in despair*


DEpose desires, or in despair remain,
A heavy doom, what my desires depose?
How can I from my chiefest joys refrain?
And march^ (...) retire from hopes repose.
Master desire; this seems st^ (...):
What voi^e is this that does (...) (...) ^use?
If Jupiter that from his throne does see,
My secret woes which ruin's cares induce.
Then mighty Jove impugn not my content,
For thou have been in such an error trayn'd,
What god soeu'r, yet pity my lament,
That cannot from my sweet desires be wayn'd.
Yeilde me no reasons to dissuade my course,
Though some obiecte, who clym's may hap to fall,
The bad is good for to avoyde a worse:
And better venture then to live in thrall.
Or in despair remain; a cruel threate,
Ay me remain still in despair I must,
Fear which forbids my languor to repeat?
Has cou'red hope with veil of sad distruste:
For that her son which does obscure my sight,
Shines always clear, whose beams reflecte (...) me.
The greater still does drown the lesser lig^*
So I am blind when I would faynest see:
Opposed by the star that lendes me hop^*
I glutt mine eyes with sweet aspects conte^*
All are but shadows hemmed in narrow scope?
Within the orb^ of wearied minds lamen^:
Looks cannot (...) (...) motions cannot (...)*
So eyes and ge^ (...) do play their part,
Give her no knowledge that I am in love:
For with dessembled mirth I hide my smart.
Repugnant fear controuleth my desire,
When I would speak despair pluckes back the raynes,
But yet no che^kes can quench the kindled fire;
For fantasy to be controul'de disdaynes:
The mark is fair, for beauty gives aim,
Yet majesty forbids the mean to shoot,
The same is it that gave my heart the mayme,
With whom to strive I fear it is not boot:
Could but my pen, find out the way to write,
The moan^ I make, the flint to tears would melt,
Or that I could the worthy praise indite;
Of that rare Iemfor whom these pains I felt:
The world would wonder for to read my verse,
That nature could frame such a perfect stamp,
Yet as I can I will the same rehearse:
And for to light this Isle set out this lamp.
O blooming blossoms with the rising sun,
Cou'rd with the dew distilled from the skies,
You are like shows that be vnspected done?
And seem but miste which from the clouds arise.
When this fair Nymph she ^orth her golden shine,
She scales the pride ^u'n of the ^re sky,
Each blossomed flower to honor her incli^,
There virtues all upon her shrine do lie,
The Gods built up a trophie^ of renown.
Honor to add to her admired grace,
The Queen of beauty must resign her Crown*
To her whose fair does her proud fair disgrace.
How can I then master my sweet desire,
That takes no rest but in this heavenly bower,
Fuel is scant to kindle reasons fire?
My mind enclosed lies in fancies tower.
The heavens are sad when she is Malcontent,
And Phoebus does in^ome his goulden beams,
In Ebon darkness till her cares be spent:
Hyding himself within the Oce'n streams.
But when her frowns be turned to smiles again*
He lendes his light out of a Cloudie tower,
Thus the superior bodies do remain,
Subject to this Semy-goddesse power:
Can I resist what Jove could not control,
Who can resist the power of beauties force,
It Is to well known unto my troubled soul,
Bootelesse I stri^e unless she ^ke remorse:
Remorse said I, how (...) she pity take,
On him that yet durst (...) for pity crave,
She does not know I languish for her sake:
How am I like her sweet resolve to have.
Had she but known the secrets of my thought,
How he^ sweet fair is shrined in my heart,
And but for her I count my life for naught?
Yt would neu'r grieve me to abide this smart.
But she whose Orb with Roses circled is,
Both red and white of purest die on earth,
Does often of course show me a heaven of bliss,
When modest smile is strayn'd with sudden mirth:
This is the ^ase that my desires enjoy,
This is the cause that has procured desire,
And this do^ire has sommon'd mine anoye:
Lo see the ^ruite of such as would aspire.
I here a threate of this my fond intent,
Yet cannot have the thing I love so dear,
O heavens bear witness how my days are spent?
In sighs, in sobbs, in sad and mournful cheer:
Each night my bed, I bath with brirush tears.
And turn me still in hope to have some rest,
When first I sleep my mind (encamped with fears)
Makes me to starte with trembing care possessed:
The^ thoughts approach unto my troubled brain
And now I think that ^ne for whom I pine,
Even couched does in happy bed remain:
And so in mind, I do behold her shine,
Then I begin for to commend the fate,
Of that sweet bed, perfumed by her sweet breath,
And with my self even thus I do debate*
What rarest beauty there appears in death;
Her spirits move with such a lively grace,
That death does seem in her an ornament,
Whose stately tower the pillow does embrace;
And clipping kiss reposed with sweet content.
Art can not paynt how thus she Nature feeds,
Or living death her fair seems to possess,
Wherein no doubt the careless gazer reeds:
The Calender of his accursed distress.
These tho^ghes increase the heat of my desire,
Whose accents banished reason from the stage,
My bed be^res guilt of this my burning fire:
That accessarie was of this my rage.
For when each place denied me scope of thought,
He gave repose unto my wearied mind,
To feed upon what to my harms I sought,
Which now a poison to infect I find:
The night being spent in these vnhal'wed cares,
The days aproch does (...) desires ^crease,
Her goulden trammels which my senses snares:
Like towering Fawlcon does on my sight cease.
To view this star I roll my light-lesse eye
Asqu'int, and then sights force is clean bereft,
That sense can not her sweetest fair descrie,
Which has my heart in sobbing sorrows left.
Then like the thief that shunns the Judges face,
I fly her sight that may judge my desire,
Although in heart her presence I embrace;
For still my thoughts to her sweet fair aspire.
Her noble breast even is that bower of bliss,
Which in it self does harbor my delight,
My stay of life therein intombed is,
Which locked retaynes from wished hope his right:
From wished hope his right, ah bootelesse hope,
That soothes his master in his ruins course,
In vain I strive, too large is honors scope,
That to his center has a still recourse.
^ught Palmers come and sit in Princes throane,
To beg for Dole to satisfy there want,
Shall I to her uenter to make my moan,
Whom for to serve I am right worthy scant.
No sure, the Roe which swift beasts out-ran,
Would scorn to see the bearded goat contend,
Yet Paris thought the go^desse striefe to scanne*
When he did Venus beauty in I Would defrude:
Why shall not I her love hope to obtain,
Though Ve^us peer, or yet rather peerless,
Paris a sheaphard I a homely swayne,
He want on, I chaste Helen would possess.
No Phereclea^ bark with treason stored,
Laden with heap of desembling lays,
Nor cruel darts with friends dear blood begor'd,
Did guide my course to view thy glorious rays.
Was It to revenge of ancestors the wrong,
As Paris did; these passions me molest?
No, without fraud of pure affection spronge,
True love, yea lone which robb^ me of my rest.
Thy Idea ymprest is in my heart,
And gonlden trammels shrined in my mind,
That if dome fignes do not my grief ympart,
And hope of thee my entertaynment find.
I shall wear out the remnant of my days,
In cursed cares, and sorrows deep despair,
Divine sweet Nymph cut off my fates delays:
And let consent salve this thy joys ympayre.
For my desires, with ^ombling waves, are t^st,
Within The Ocean of thy swee^ ^utie,
And I in wilderness of cares am lost,
Devising still how to perform my duty:
None knows my mind nor yet what I do mean,
In vain it is to thunder forth my grief,
And thus to spend my self on such a spleen,
When sure I am not to obtain relief:
What though she read these ruin's of my time,
She will not think that ought by her is meant*
For my mean fancies are too base to clime:
Or once to aim the Period of my bent.
That soars aloft even in the racking Clouds,
Beyond the reach of any mortal sight,
And in bright Phoebus beams her honor shrowd's.
Which does from thence increase fair Tytanslight.
So that no fight unless the Eagle eyed,
(For fear of taynt) dare gaze on this bright son,
But happy is he that peeping has espied,
The veil that cou'rs the fair this third has spo^:
Sometimes mine dye (forgetting duties charge)
Gaze on those orbs that be so orient fair,
Where anchor-lesse they sail in fancies barge,
And feed themselves even with thy heavenly pair:
Then while she does on other obiectes look,
They think a vauntage for to steal a sight,
Forgetting that they snatch the bayted hook:
But being encountered by those circlets bright,
They do retire for to prepare excuse,
And blush for fear least that they were descried,
Or that her eye^ would message here the news,
When as they had unto my glavnces pried:
Thus would I feign that she did know my case,
And yet a^oth she should my fancies know,
Lest that she would my little hope deface,
And being my friend begin to be m^ foe.
Have I not ^d that hollow fearful voice,
Sound in mine cares? which late pronounced my care,
Had she ^de so, it had been past all choice:
For the I h^ been (...) fast in snare.
But since this E^o of ab^pted air,
Breathe (...) these threats from bowels of conceyte,
Yt shall not Coward-like cyre my despair,
But (...) give me courage to entreat.
Then (...) patroness of my repose*
Divine the m^ng of my pure intent,
And though that fear forbids me to disclose,
My inward care, that banisheth content.
Yet have remorse on him that living dies,
Unless thou take com^on on his fate,
Whose wynged thought in pensive passion lies,
Fenced with veil of sorrows deep debate.
Eu'r-during care possesses my poor mind,
Once freede from the badge of discontent,
To be thy thrall my soaring thoughts inclinde,
View then my playntes which do my hap lament.
Dayne to regard the silent griefs I bear,
Hoping that signs add inward motions plead,
True tokens of unfeigned love, yet fear,
Eclipseth still the hope I had to speed.
Bashful I am, sweet love speak thou for me,
Ah well thou know the some of my desire,
Love made me thrall and thou can make me free,
Then lend me hope to quench the kindled fire*
I only crave that thou should know I ^oue,
And that I spend my days in care for thee,
Thou art the stern which wearied bark does move,
Ane to the harbor of thy grace I flee.
Not for my self alone, these pa^ssions strive,
And torture still my neere-decayde heart,
Nor yet of malice others to corriue,
But secret matters which the heavens ymp^,
For to increase thy noble beauties race:
That barren lies for want of timely seed,
The branch, spread Palm the blossomed buds deface,
Note ^s is true when thou my Poem reed.
If barren Sara unto Abraham gave,
Agar her maid, his seed to multiply,
That She a child by her brought forth might have?
For to fulfill the sacred Prophecy:
Why should not I being moved by loves desire,
And stirred by motion of the heavenly powers,
Yeilde to the fury of this hallowed fi^e,
Whose heat cannot be quenched with stormy shower^.
Depose the scruple of a double zeal,
For time once lost cannot be had again,
From all the world to thee I do appeal:
Though thou should hate, my love shall still remain.
I vow to be true unto thee alone,
and eu'r in heart none other to embrace.
Now let fond Echo itterate my moan*
And part in Clouds, my fates hope to deface.
I still will sing the glory of thy name,
And glutt my self in praising thy sweet fair,
My pen is bound for to advance thy fame;
Unto the heavenly region of the air:
Then Jove will pine and fret for such a love,
When thundering blasts, of thy renowned grace,
Shall, that great God, with thy fair beauty, move*
Which I in heart do honor and embrace*
These secret griefs this love unknown does fo^e,
Whereof I die unless thou take remorse.
FINIS.

