THE FIRST FRVITES OF THE GENTILES.

In three Sermons Preached in the Cathedral Church at Sarum.

By BARTHOLOMEW PARSONS Bachelor in Divinity, and Vicar of
Collingborne-Kingstone, in the County of Wiltes.

ESAIAS 60 3.4. The Gentiles shall come to thy light -- thy sons shall come
from far.

LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Oaks for I. H. and Edw. Blackmore, and are to be
sold at his shop in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Blazing Star, 1618.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, GEORGE MARQUIS of Buckingham, Viscount VILLEIRS, Baron
of Whadon, Justice in air of all his Majesty's Forests, Parks, and Chases
beyond Trent, Master of the Horse to his Majesty, and one of the Gentlemen of
his Majesty's Bedchamber, Knight of the most Noble order of the Garter, and
one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council of England and Scotland.
RIGHT HONORABLE
ALthough my meanness of condition, my bashfulnes of disposition be very strong
Remoraes to stay me from pressing like Joseph's brethren, with a present, of
such poor Fruits as my barren soil yields into the presence of your Honor,
whom not a Rex gentium only, Genesis 43.11.
a Pharaoh, Assuerus, or Nebuchadnezar, but such a King as for his
Intellectual, Moral, Political and Theological Virtues, and Endowments, the
Globe of this Earth has not borne till this present, has made a great man in
his Kingdom, given many great gifts unto Dan. 2.48.
and whose seat he has set above many other of his Nobles, because he
finds the spirit of God, even an excellent spirit of Wisdom and Discretion
in you, Genesis 41.38.39.
which has a Magneticall Virtue to draw the favor of a King toward it by the
testimony of the wisest King that GOD gave to his old people of the Jews:
Dan. 1.17.18 19. c Prou. 14.35.
Yet my second (and I hope my better) thoughts yield me motives, to
counteruaile these retractiues and encouragements: to preponderate these
discouragements. For to presume so far, and soar so high in this Dedication,
I am not a little emboldened by the general, and constant Fame of your Honors
Heroical, and Benign disposition, who (according to that of Antisthenes: That
Virtue and true Nobility go together (...) Laortius lib. 6.
Labor to excel others, as well in goodness of mind: as greatness of place;
and to use that favor and grace which God has given you with his royal
Majesty, not with Absalon to popular insinuations and applauses: Sam. 15.16.
nor with Haman, to make your self terrible by procuring decrees against
oposites, Est. 3.8.
but with Nehemiah, to do good amongst your people, and seek the welfare of
them, Neh 2.
with Ebedmelech, to deliver those that are in distress, Ier. 38.
and with Daniel to become a suitor, for the setting of men of Wisdom and
Understanding over the affairs of the Realm, Dan. 2.49.
who not only standing before so gracious and clement a King, but also tasting
so deeply of the fountain of his Favors cannot but imimate so glorious; and
resplendent a pattern: As they that walk in the Sun must needs be colored
by the Sun, and as that woman in the Gospel, to whom much love was showed in
the forgiveness of her many sins, could not but show much love again in
pious Offices. Luke 7.37.
As then Alexander the great determined about the relinquishing of his
Kingdom, when he was ready to die, that it should be Optimo et
generestssimo, fo I (si parua licet componcre magnis) about the dedicating of
these my unpolished Labors, that it shall be to him, that is so good and
generous. Again the dignity of the subject ministers fuel to the fire of my
boldness in this kind. For if David durst speak of Gods Testimonies before
Princes Psalm. 119.46.
happily those Princes that did sit and speak against him, and persecute him
Ibid. v. 23. and 161.
for his love to Gods Law; how much more may we that are Ambassadors for
Christ, dare both to speak and wright of any of the glad tidings of his
Gospel to a Theophilus, a friend of God, that is persuaded of the certainty of
them Luke. 1.4.
and to whom, they are the very Joy and rejoicing of his heart? And if Paul
thought it no presumption but happiness, to speak in defense of his religion
before king Agrippa, who could be but almost persuaded to be a Christian,
Act. 26.28.
how much more may even a minimus Apostostolorum be bold in the Lord to declare
(Voce aut Scripte,) any part of the Gospel of Christ to a Sergius Paulus, a
prudent deputy, who both desires to hear the word of God, and believes it.
Act. 13.7.12.
who is all out a Christian, and believes the Prophets, even all the holy men
of God that wrote by divine inspiration. 2. Pet. 1.21.

As then that Evangelist whose praise is in the Gospel, specially dedicateth
both his books (which yet were published for the general benefit of all the
household of Faith) to that excellent Theophilus, who was (as the Greek
Scholies say (...) a Governor, (for so that style of Excellent given to the
Governors Felix and Festus) euineeth: Act. 23.26. and 26.25.
So I who have addicted all my pains to the Gospel of Christ, have trodden in
his steps, in tendering a part of them (which I now make public to the
Churches that are in Christ) to your Honor; who with Zabud are a principal
Officer about our Solomon. 1. King 4.5.


And it cannot be but that your Honor, standing a servant before the Throane
of our Solomon, 1. King 10.8.
who is as well an Ecclesiastes, as a Rex in our Jerusalem Eccle. 1.1.
and whose wisdom excels not only the wisdom of the children of the East
and of Egypt, 1. King 4.30.
(the perishable wisdom of this world) but even the wisdom of the sons of
the Prophets amongst us, in dissoluing of doubts, deciding of controversies,
impugning of the common adversary, expounding of Prophecies, interpreting of
difficult places, and discoursing readily upon any Problem proposed
concerning the great things of Gods Law, must be both in lightened with a great
measure of understanding therein, and inflamed with a fervent zeal and
affection thereto. For such is the rauishing beauty of divine learning, that
the more it is seen, the more it is admired, the more you understand with
Daniel Dan. 9.1.
the more you will set your heart to understand, and to question about these
sacred mysteries, Dan 10 and 12.8.
which makes me hope that your Honor will vouchsafe to taste of this Manna,
though dressed after the contrary fashion, to listen to these Songs of Sion,
though sung out by my harsh voice, and played to on the Harp by my unskillful
hand, and to entertayne these Meditations though uttered by a slow tongued
Moses, not one whose tongue is as the pen of a ready writer, by a country
Amos, not a courtly Isaiah, and by him that is rude in speech, not one that
comes with excellency of words.

And so I tender them to your Honor in all humility, with that farewell
benediction of Jacob to his Sons going into Egypt, God Almighty give you
Favor in the sight of the Man. Genesis 43.^4.


Now the Lord of Lords, who has brought your Honor hitherto, fasten you as a
nail in a sure place, bless your House, that it may continue for ever before
him, and after fullness of Days, Riches and Honor, here on Earth, give you
the fullness of Joys in his presence in Heaven.

Your Honors in all humble Duty, BARTHOLOMEW PARSONS.

The first fruits of the Gentiles.
In three Sermons preached in the Cathedral Church at Sarum.
MAT. 2. VERSE. 1.2. 1. Now when Jesus was borne in Bethlehem of Iudaea, in the
days of Herod the King, behold there came wise men from the East to Jerusalem.

2. Saying, where is he that is borne king of the Jews? for we have seen his
Star in the East, and are come to worship him.


I Cannot but ingeniously acknowledge here with Chrysostom that Multa nobis
opus est vigilantia, etc. We have need of much watchfulness, many prayers,
that we may pass through and learn the difficulty of this present place,
Chrysostom. homil. 6. in Mat.
For the strife between the heard-men of Abraham's Cattle, and the heard-men
of Lots Cattle, about their pasturage Genesis 13.7.
was never so great, so irreconcilable as the strife between the sheepeheards
of Israel is here, what these (...) Wisemen were, what their Profession, what
their Country, when they came thence, at what time after Christ's birth they
came to Jerusalem, and Bethlehem, what this star was, when and how it first
appeared and rose, how it guided them in their Journey, one (as it was in the
case of Ahab) Saying on this manner, and another on that manner 1. King. 22.20
Manasses being against Ephraim, and Ephraim against Manasses, and both of them
against Judah, Isa. 9.21.
Amongst all which varieties, and extreamities, I hold it the best discretion
to keep that which is good for edification, 1. These. 5.20.
to cast away that which is but the fuel of contention, rather to find out
and follow that which may minister the edifying which is in Faith: 1. Tim. 1.4.
then to doat about vain and unprofitable questions 1. Tim. 6.4.
which do but gender strife 2. Tim. 2.23.
. To come to the Text then, there is a word in it and it is Ecce, Behold, which
is Nota attentionis promittens rem magnam, a note of attention, promising some
great matter to follow after, which serves as an Index to point out unto us
many admirable remarkable things here related, and which stands as a Beacon
on an hill, to discover a strange and unexpected coming and inquiry, not of
enemies, but of friends, for the newborn Messiah, accompanied, and attended,
with many circumstances of Times, Places, Persons, Causes, and Ends, all of
them full of admiration. For is it not wonderful in our eyes that such persons
(...) Wisemen should come and enquire for him, that they which sat in
darkness should see great light Matt. 4.16.
and that light should spring up to them, which sat in the region, and shadow
of death, that they to whom he was not spoken of should see, and they that
have not heard, should Isa. 52.12.
understand any thing of him, Ioh. 1.11.
who coming amongst his own, was not received by his own, Romans 15.21.
could have none honor in his own Country, Mat. 13.57.
Nato Christi exultabat Chaldea (says Maximus,) Maxim. 9. homill in hunc locum.
When Christ was borne Chaldea was glad, and all Jerusalem with her princes
was troubled, the Jew persecuted him, the wise man adored him, Herod whetted
his Sword, the wise man prepared his gifts, that they should come at such time
as this king was newly borne, having no form nor comeliness, no beauty,
that he should be desired, Isai 53.2.
no better Chair of state then an Oxes Manger, Luke 2.7.
before he had knowledge to refuse the evil, and to choose the good, Isai. 7.15.
and in the days of Herod the King, who to attain and maintain his Crown,
spared neither Priest nor presbytery, rooted out all the posterity of David
that he could find, butchered the Infants of Bethlehem, made hauock of all
the nobility of Jury, yea, hated his own flesh, killed his own brother
Pheroras, his own wife Mariamne, with all her kindred, his own Sons,
Aristobulus, Alexander and Antepater, Joseph Antiq. lib. 16. c. 17.
that they should come from the East, leaving their own people, and their
fathers house, and being followers of the obedience that was in Abraham, the
Father of this newborn King, who went out of his Country, and from his
kindred, and fathers house, unto a Land that God showed him, Genesis 12.1.
with the religious Eunuch: go so far a Journey to worship, Act. 8.27.
that they should come to Jerusalem, that so Israel might know, that God
might prouoake them to Jealousy by them that are no people; and anger them by
a foolish Nation, Romans 10.19.
and Vt studio magorum damneretur, pigritia Iudaeorum Remigius apud Thomam in
catena.
by the diligence of the wisemen: the sluggishnesse of the Jews might be
condemned, that they should come by the guidance of a Star, God creating a
new Star, not to give light by night, Ier. 31.35.
but to be a light to lighten these Gentiles, that they might see, and find
the way to that star of Jacob, Number. 24.17.
of which Balam had fore-prophecied, and calling them: per ea quae familiaria
ijs consuetudo faciebat, Chrysostom. homil 6. in Matt.
by those things which custom made familiar unto them, that they should come
to worship him, looking not on the things which were seen, his outward
contemptible appearance, his being in the form of a servant: but on the
things which were not seen, his eternal Godhead and power, his being in the
form of God, and his thinking it no robbery to be equal with God, Phil. 2.6.
yea and acknowledging him which was Rex Iudaeorum, King of the Jews, to be
also Rex Seculorum: August sermon. 31. de temp.
the eternal King, magnum aliquod latebat in paruo (says Saint Austin) August
sermon. 35. de temp.
there lay hid some great thing in that little one, which those men the first
fruits of the Gentiles, which came so suppliant from so far, learned by
heaven that showed it, not by the earth that brought them and by adoring they
desired to obtain the favor of that: which by beholding they did not see. are
not all these wonderful wonders? are they not the great mysteries of
Godliness? 1. Tim: 2 16.
are they not (...) The great works of God, Act. 2.11.
worthy to be published to the World with an Ecce, a note of attention: of
admiration. The body, the sum of all here is an Historical narration, a
description of a solemn coming: and inquiry for the newborn Messiah, which
being as the Center has many circumstances, as the circumference compassing it
about on every side, First of the time when Jesus was borne, which birth is
farther illustrated either by the place, at Bethlehem of Judea, or the time In
the days of Herod the king. Secondly, of the persons who; Wise men: Thirdly,
of the places either from whence? From the East, or whither? to Jerusalem,
Fourthly, of the form of the inquiry: Where is he that is borne King of the
Jews? Fifthly of the moving cause, We have seen his Star, Sixthly, of the
final cause and end, We are come to worship him.

To prosecute these in the order I have proposed them, I must begin first
with the time when all this was done, for to every thing there is a season, and
a time to every purpose under the heaven, Eccles. 3.1.
and that is Now when Jesus was borne, presently upon his birth all this
falls out: for he that as long as he was in the World, was the light of the
World, John 9.5.
could not be hid after his coming into the world, Quis enim celauerit
ignem, Lumine qui semper proditur ipse suo (says the Poet) for who can hide
fire, which is always disclosed by it is own light, Latere inter obscura
saeculi, lumen caelesti non poterat (says Maximus) Maximus sermon. 2. in Epiphan.
the heavenly light could not be hid amongst the darkness of the world, he
that at his lifting up upon the Cross, would draw all men both Jews and
Gentiles, Ioh. 12.32.
at his manifestation in the flesh, does presently begin to manifest himself
to the sheepe-heards of the Jews, and to the wisemen of the Gentiles, Noluit
intra, (says Leo,) etc, Leo sermon. 1. in Epiphan.
He would not have the beginning of his birth hid within the narrow corners
of his mothers House, but would presently be acknowledged by all men: who
vouchsafed to be borne for all men.

But here the wisdom; or rather the curiosity of man (which cannot content
it self, with the revealed things which are only ours.) Deuteronomy. 29.29.
but must make it self ouer-wise Eccles. 7.17.
eat of the forbidden Fruit: and pry into the Ark of God 1. Sam. 6.19.
cannot forbear to enquire into the things that God has secreted, nor keep
it self from running upon the rocks of vain, and unprofitable questions,
touching the very particular time, and day of their coming after our Saviors
Birth. And as in them that were guided by their own conjectures: and not by
any heavenly revelation; there were sundry erroneous oppinions about the
Savior of the World, some saying, that he was John Baptist, some Elias, others
Ieremias, or one of the Prophets, Matt. 16.14.
so in this point wherein the Scriptures are silent: and have revealed nothing
unto us, men following their own conjectures, are divided in their opinions:
some saying, that they came the very day of Christ's birth, and worshipped him
with the sheepeheards; August. sermon. 30. de temp.
some a little before the Virgins purification, some presently after, some a
year after this birth, some almost two years after. All which if I should at
large discourse of, or discuss, I might happily build upon the foundation,
Hay and Stubble, Vanas and inutiles argutias, Beza in 1. Cor. 3.12.
vain and unprofitable quirkes: which would be but matter for the fire,
enough for the present, that our Church has thought fit for a memorial of
these men's coming unto Christ, to celebrate the twelfth day after his
Nativity: and to note withal unto the disputers heereaabouts, that if the
wisdom of the spirit, (which has singled out those things to be written,
quae saluti credentium sufficere videbantur, August. tract 49. in Ioh.
which seemed sufficient for the salvation of them that believe,) had held the
precise knowledge of the particular time so necessary, it would as well have
recorded it: as the very time of the Sheepheards coming to see him, which was
the very day of his birth, Luke 2.11.15.
Howbeit the very Phrase used by the HOLY GHOST (...) Jesus being borne or as
soon as Jesus was borne: importing that they came with as great celeritie and
speed, as so large a Journey could be accomplished, it shall be good and
profitable for us Tit. 3.8.9.
(avoiding foolish questions) to learn by this which is written for our
instruction, to do that which we here and see in them here; namely to make
have, and delay not to keep Gods commandments Phil. 4.9.
to make no tarrying to turn unto the Lord, nor to put it of from day to day,
Psalm. 119.60.
but to seek the Lord whilst he may be found, to call upon him whilst he
is near, Eccle. 5.7.
that is requisite in all the duties of godliness, which is required in our
vows, that we must not be slack to pay them, Isai 55 6.
and as wheresoever the Gospel should be preached in the whole world: that
work of the Woman, which powered an Alablaster box of precious ointment, Deuteronomy.
23.21.
upon the head of our Savior: was to be mentioned in memorial of her, Matt.
26.13.
so wheresoever the obedience of Gods servants is recorded; the haste that they
used the diligence that they gave, is ever remembered, as that which crowns
the work, Abraham being enjoined to circumcise himself and his family, does
it the same day, Genesis 17.23.
to sacrifice his son, rises up Early in the morning to go about it, Genesis
22.3.
Cornelius to send for Peter, who must speak unto him words, whereby he
should be saved, does it immediately, Act. 10.33.
Paul, to go unto the Gentiles, to open their eyes, and turn them from
darkness to light, does it immediately: without communicating with flesh and
blood, Gal. 1.16.
Nescit tarda molimina, spiritus sancti gratia, (says Ambrose on Luke,) the
grace of the holy Ghost, cannot skill of any slow enterprises. How sharply
then are the men of this generation to be rebuked, who say of the building of
the spiritual Temple of Christ in their hearts: as the Jews did of the
material Temple, the time is not yet come, Hag. 1.2.
who with the Jews, will not in this their day: know the things that belong
unto their peace, Luke 19.41.
but are content that their legions of sins which possess them; as so many
devils (for Quot crimina, tot Doemonia, says Bernard, how many sins, so
many devils,) should say unto Christ when he comes to cast them out: as the
Devils that he came to dispossess, art thou come hither to torment us before
the time? Matt. 8.29.
and who when they should hear Gods voice to Day, Psalm. 95.7.8.
putit of till to Morrow, as Exo. 8.10.
Pharaoh did praying for him, August. in. confession.
Quamdiu cras, cras, quare non modo, quare non haec hora finis turpitudinis
meae, (says Saint Austin) How long? to morrow, to morrow, why not now, why in
this very hour is there not an end of my filthiness.

Now this first circumstance of Christ's birth: is amplified either by the place
or the time, the place: In Bethlehem of Judea, it makes no matter whether we
read here Bethlehem of Judea, or of Judah, Judea, being put, not for the
whole Country of the Jews, but for the Tribe of Judah, as elsewhere; Joseph
hearing that Archelau^ reigned in Judea would not go thither, but turned aside
into the parts of Galilie. Mat. 2.22.
Now this addition serves here for a distinction between it and another,
Bethlehem in the Tribe of Zabulon, Iud. 19.15.
duae Bethlehem sunt (says the ordinary gloss) there are two Bethlehems, one
which is in the Land of Zabulon, another which is in the Land of Judah, which
was first called Ephrata. And for this Bethlehem, the place of Christ's birth,
Saint Austin has well observed that August de concord. Euangel.
Matthew and Luke do agree concerning the City of Bethlehem: but how and for
what cause Joseph and Mary came thither, Luke declares; Matthew omitteth.

When our Savior then was conceived in the womb of his mother at Nazareth,
and by all likelihood should in her purpose have been borne there, both Joseph
and Mary are compelled by the decree of Augustus Caesar to go to Bethlehem:
the City of David, to be taxed there because they were of the house of David,
Luke 2.4.5.6.
God so making a way for the accomplishment of that Prophecy: which foretold
the place of his birth. Oh come hither then, and behold the works of the Lord;
yea the mighty hand of our God, who, as in the great work of the Creation,
he made the light out of darkness, so in the wonderful works of his
providence, and preservation: can out of the evil actions of men and devils,
bring forth good: and turn those things which they do for the satisfying of
their sinful wills; to the executing of his holy, and righteous will. Deus
suas voluntates vtique bonas, implet per malorum voluntates vtique non bonas,
says Austin August in Enchirid cap. 101.
God can fulfill his wills being good, by the wills of wicked men that are not
good. Thus when Joseph's brethren thought evil against him in selling him for a
slave into Egypt: God meant, and turned it to good, to save much people alive
thereby. Genesis 50.20.
As then the expert Physician can so temper, and compose the poison of
Serpents: that it shall be a preservative against poison: so the great
Physician of our Souls, did so master, and ouerrule the poysonfull action of
the traitor Judas, who betrayed his Master, and through covetousness, made
merchandise of him that his shipes became a plaster to heal us, Isa. 53 5.
and the selling of him, made him ours, as Rabanus says sweetly, Exulta
Christianae. Rabanus apud Ludolphum de u^ta Chri. part 2. part. 52.
And rejoice O Christian, for by the merchandise of thine enemies thou have
gotten the victory, that which Judas sold, and the Jew bought, thou have
gotten, for Christ is ours not the Jews, which bought him.

But because the things which befell our Savior in the days of his flesh,
came not to pass, (...) Luke 10.31.
By chance, but were done either for the fulfilling of some promise or
prophesy, or for the expressing of some mystery, let us a little examine why
Bethlehem is the place of his birth. Not to heap up all that might be said
herein, it was in respect; first either of former prediction, secondly,
present condition, thirdly, or future signification; first, of former
prediction: he that came in the fulness of time, would be borne at
Bethlehem; for the fullfilling of former both prophecies and promises: for so
it was fore-prophecied, that out of Bethlehem Judah: should he come forth that
was to be ruler in Israel. Micah 5.2.
And here by the way, the very place of his birth does serve like a John
Baptist Ioh. 1.29.
to point out, to demonstrate him to be the Lamb of God, the very God, the
very Christ: Ioh. 4 29.
so that as the things which John's desciples that he sent unto Christ, saw and
heard the works that he did, did testify of him; so the place where he was
borne, shows that this is he that should come, and none other is to be
looked for. Matt. 11.3.4.5.6.
And so it was fore-promised to David, yea; bound with the indissoluble bond of
an Oath, (that God would not shrink from) that of the fruit of his womb, he
would set upon his Throane Psalm. 132.11.
yea, such a seed which should endure for ever, and whose Throne should be as
the Sun before God, Psalm 89 36.
which must necessarily be understood of that blessed seed of the Woman,
which should bruise the Serpents head, Genesis 3.15.
of that branch that should grow out of the root of Iesse, Isa. 11.1.2.
at whose conception the Angel promised to the Virgin: that God should give
unto him the Throane of his father David, etc. Luke 1.32.33.
And then where should this seed promised to David, be more fitly borne: then
in that Town which was especially denominated of him? the City of David, and
where he himself was borne; where should the root of Iesse first sprout out:
but in Bethlehem, the town of Iesse the Bethlehemite? 1. Sam. 16.1.
Now that I may refer all things to edification and instruction, I cannot but
cry out with our blessed Savior: Matt. 13.6.
Happy are our eyes that see or may see: here is this particular, the truth of
that general laid down by the Apostle, That all the promises of God made in
Christ are in him, yea, and in him Amen: 2. Cor. 1.20.
has he said, and shall he not do it? has he spoken, and shall he not make
it good? Number. 23.19.
It is one of his properties whereby he proclaimed himself to Moses, and would
be known to the whole World to be abundant in truth, Exo. 34.6.
that is such an one as keeps covenant and mercy with his servants. 1. Kin.
8.23.


Oh then beloved, let us that are the heirs of grace, seeing the immutability
of Gods counsel; have strong consolation Heb. 6.17.8.
against all either outward striuings, or inward terrors, that would seem to
separate us from the love of God in Christ: and seeing he is faithful, that
has promised: let us hold fast the profession of our faith without Heb. 10.23.
wavering.

Again, our Savior was borne at Bethlehem, in regard of the present condition
of the place, a poor place was fittest for his birth: that made himself poor
for us. 2. Cor. 8.9.
A City little amongst the thousands, of Judah, (a thing which the spirit of
God takes notice of, Micah 5.2.
) meetest for him to be borne in, who made himself of no reputation, and took
upon him the form of a servant, Phil. 2.7.
Qui serui susceperat formam (says Leo Leo sermon. primi in Epiphan.
) etc he that took on him the form of a servant, and came not to judge, but to
be judged, chose Bethlehem aforehand for his nativity, and Jerusalem for his
passion. A City so mean, that it is not rekoned up in the number of those
Cities that fell by lotte unto the Tribe of Judah, Josh 15.
for him that should have neither form nor beauty, Isai. 53 2.
but must be the shame and contempt of the people Psalm. 22.6.
If the wisdom of the flesh should have been Gods counselor, to have taught
him Isa. 40.13.
it would rather have advised to make choice of Jerusalem, the City of God
Psalm. 87.2.
the Joy of the whole Earth, Lam. 2.15.
where the wise men sought him, or of Rome, that was then the head of the
World, ( Romanos rerum Dominos says the Poet about this time, the Romans that
were Lords of all,) then of Bethlehem: so ignoble a place: But the Lord, to
show that his ways are not as man's ways, his thoughts, as man's thoughts,
Isai. 55.8.
that his virtue is made perfect in weakness 2. Cor 12.9.
and that he has chosen the weak things of this World, to confound the
things which are mighty, 1. Cor. 1.27.
honored this mean village, with the birth of the Savior of the World.

Simaximam Romanam, eligisset Ciuitatem, etc. (says Tho. Aquinas, Thom. 3.
part quest. 35. artic. 7.
) If he had chosen that great city Rome men would have thought that the change
of the World: had come through the power of the Citizens: If he had been the
Son of the Emperor, they would have attributed the profit that came by him
to his power: But that it might be known that the Godhead had altered the
World, he chose a poor Mother, and a poorer Country.

To give here some brief touch of instruction as I pass along; the
meandness of our Saviors birth, in so contemptible a Town, yea; in a stable,
the basest place in the Inn, his lodging in a Cratch, for a Cradle, serves to
pull the Peacocks feathers of the high-minded ones of this world, who glory so
much in the flesh; of the Nebuchadnezars, who stand so much upon their great
Babels that they have built for the honor of their Majesty, Dan. 4.29.
of the vainglorious boasters, that brag so much of their earthly Burges
ships, Act. 22 28.
that rejoice because their wealth is great, and because their hand has gotten
much; Job. 31.25.
that glory in their strength, in their wisdom, in their riches, or in any
outward things, which (as Paul said of meats:) commend us not unto God. 1.
Cor. 8.8.
That we may the better cast away this sin of vainglory, which cleaves so
fast unto us: we are to look upon the pattern which Jesus the author and
finisher of our faith, has left us herein, we must for lowlines of mind, have
the same mind in us which was in Christ Jesus, who made himself of no
reputation. Phil. 2.5.
Quae superbia sanari potest (says Bernard.) what pride can be healed, if it
be not healed by the humbleness of the Son of God.

Thirdly, Bethlehem is the place, in regard of a future and mystical
signification, I will rather utter it in the words of the ancients then mine
own. Locus iste Bethlehem (says Chrysostom, Chrisost. hom 1. ex uariis in
Matt.
) This place of Bethlehem, where the Lord was borne, had a prophetical name:
for Bethlehem out of the Hebrew, is interpreted the house of Bread, because
here the son of God must be borne, who is the bread of life, according to
that which he himself says in the Gospel, I am the bread of life, which came
down from heaven. Almost the same words speaks Gregory Gregor. hom 8. in
Euangel.
that out of the mouth of two witnesses the matter might be established. Been
etiam in Bethlehem, etc. well also is he borne in Bethlehem, for Bethlehem is
interpreted the house of Bread, for it is he that says I am the Bread of life,
which came down from Heaven: therefore the place wherein the Lord is borne, is
beforehand called the house of bread, because it should come to pass that he
should there be borne in the substance of flesh, who should with inward
fullness refresh the minds of the Elect. The interpretation howsoever it be
Allegorical, need not be offensive, because it is Analogicall, agreeing to
the proportion of faith, Romans 12 6.
At such times then amongst us, wherein, as we have heard, so we must see in
the city, and church of our God Psalm. 48 8.
wherein we must not only hear with ears: but also see with our eyes, and
handle with our hands, the word of life, 1. Ioh. 1.1.
and bread of life, it shall not be an unprofitable meditation for us to
consider: that he who gave his body for us upon the Cross, and now gives it
to us in the Sacrament, would be borne at Bethlehem, that thereby he might
show himself to be the true bread of life, that comes down from Heaven, and
gives life to the World, Ioh. 6 33.35.
that eating thereof, we might live and not die, Ibid. verse. 50.51.
and also that as Eusebius Emissenus speaks, Eusebius. Emiss. hom. in hoc
Euangel.
we must be Bethlehems, houses of bread, spiritual Temples, in whom Christ
must be formed, Gal. 4.19.
and in whose hearts he must dwell by faith, Ephesians. 3.17.
Simus nos Bethlehem, (says he) etc. Let us be Bethlehem, let us be the house
of Bread for he which will not be the house of Bread must perish, for this the
Lord himself says, unless ye eat the flesh of the Son of man: ye shall
not have life in you, let us therefore receive Christ in our house, let us
receive him in our mind and heart, Let him be borne in us. Now after the
description of the place, follows the mention of the time of our Saviors
Birth: In the days of Herod the King] in the days, an hebraisme, quo optime
exprimitur, Beza in Luc. 1.5.
etc. Whereby it is well expressed, how short and fading is the power even of
good Kings, much less that the tirrany of some should be perpetual. Of Herod]
surnamed the great King] of Judea, as he is called Luke 1.5. And he is so
called to distinguish him from Herod Antipas the Tetrarch of Galile, Luke. 3.1.
and Herod Agrippa his nephew, that butchered S. James, Act. 12.2.
of which three the common verse runs Ascalonita necat pueros Antipa
Iohannem,
Agrippa, Iacobum mittitque in carcere Petrum.
The infants, kills great Herod. Antipas the Baptist slayes,
And I ames, Agrippa kills, and Peter in the Prison lays.


Now this accurate mention of the time, is not for the times sake only: but
there is a further mystery in it, Hoc non tantum ponit, (says Hierome) Hier.
in locum
The holy writer brings this in: not only in regard of the time; but that
that might appear to be fulfilled, a prince shall not depart from Judah, Genesis
49.10.
till Shiloh come, ponit tempus (says Chrysostom Chrysostom. hom. 6. in Matt.
) etc. he mentions the time that he might bring to our memory the old
prophecy of the Patriarch Jacob, who heretofore diligently mentioned the time
unto us, and gave an evident sign of the coming of Christ saying, a prince
shall not depart from Judah, etc. Huius ineffabilis miserecordia manifestatio,
(says Leo) Leo homil. 3 in Epiphan.
the manifestation of this unspeakable mercy, came to pass at such time, as
Herod was King of the Jews, even when the lawful succession of Kings ceased,
the power of the high priests was destroyed, and a stranger bare rule, that the
true kings birth might be proved by that prophecy which had said, a prince
shall not depart from Judah. Genesis 46.10.
Or as we read the Scepter shall not depart from Judah. As then Bethlehem was
the place, so the days of Herod, are the time of his nativity, that so, that
might be fulfilled, which God almost two thousand years before, had showed by
the mouth, and last words of that blessed Patriarch Jacob, for now the scepter
was departed from Judah, the royal power that from that time had been
invested in that Tribe, was now pulled from it, and none of the seed of David
sat upon the Throane of the kingdom, but Herod patre Idumes, et matre ortus
Arabica, Rupertus
Whose Father was an Edomite and his mother an Arabian, being created King by
the Emperor Augustus, and the senate of Rome, Joseph Antiq lib. 14. cap. 26.
into whose hands at this time, God had given the whole World, Luke 2.1.
now also was a Lawgiver departed from between his feet, for whereas till
this time the Sanhedrim, the Eldershippe of the seauentie Judges (which were
chosen out of the house of David) stood and had judicial power, this Herod in
the thirtieth year of his tyrannical rule, Philo Iudeus de partibus imp.
destroyed the Sanhedrim of the house of David, and foysted in a Sanhedrim of
proselytes-because it was said that Christ promised in the Law, was now borne,
so that now: he that was to come, must come, the fullness of time was now come
for God to send Shiloh, even him that was made of a Woman: Gal. 4 4.
borne of a Virgin that had not known a man. Luke 1.34.
As then the finding of him wrapped in swaddling clouts, and lying in a Manger,
is a sign to the sheepe-heards, that he is the newborn Messiah, Luke 2.12
so the finding of him in the flesh, at such time as God, (who only can
declare the end from the beginning: and from ancient times, the things that are
not yet done, Isa 46.10.
) had fore showed by the mouth of his Prophet, that he must come: is a sign
unto us that he is the horn of salvation, raised in the house of David: Luke
1.69.
as being none abortiue, borne out of time, but coming in due season, even in
the fulness of time, that was appointed for him.

Now then in that Christ is raised up here in the house of David, to be the
glory of Gods people Israel, at such time as in outward show his glory seemed
to cease, and his Throane to be cast to the Ground, Psalm. 89.44.
in that when the heathen were come into Gods inheritance, Psalm. 79.1.
and they that hated them ruled over them Psalm. 106.41.
God did so graciously look down from Heaven, and visit them, and his hand
was upon the man of his right hand Psalm. 80.17.
idest super Christo filio delectionis eius, that is, upon Christ his beloved
son, Iunius in psalm. 80.
and upon the Son of man, whom he had made strong for himself, to lift him
up to be a Prince, and Savior unto Israel, Act. 5.35.
this is as a word behind us Isa. 30.21.
to tell us, that God is ever nerest to his Church; when he seems to be
farthest of, that then he looks with the tendrest eye of his mercy upon the
affliction of his people, when in all outward appearance he seems to have
forgotten to be gracious, and to have shut up his loving kindness in
displeasure, Psalm. 77.7.
yea to cast off for ever: and utterly to break promise with his people, and
that when all ordinary humane means fail, then God sends help from on
high. When the Lord sees that there is no man, his arm brings forth
Salvation, Isa. 59.16.17.
when my Father and Mother forsake me (says the Psalmist Psalm. 27.10.
) ordinary means, usual helps fail, then the Lord takes me up. Bono animo
estote socij (says Philo Iudeus, when he saw the Emperor Caius angry with
his friends) be of good courage fellows: because Gods help must needs be at
hand, when man's help fails. When the poor and needy seek water: and there
is none, and their tongue fails for thirst, I the Lord will hear them, I the
God of Israel will not forsake them, Isa. 41.17.
When Abraham, and Sarah were old, and stricken in years, and there was no
more possibility of issue to come from them: then of fruit from a dead stock;
then is the seed so often promised given unto them, and Sarah bears a child
in her old age. Genesis 21.2.
when Joseph was fold into Egypt for a bondslaue, when his feet were hurt with
fetters, and he laid in Iron, Psalm. 105.18.
when his Soul did cleave unto the dust, and his belly unto the ground, he
being come to the lowest Ebb, and to be even, Infra infimos, Lower then the
lowest, then; even then: the Lord raised him out of the dungeon: to set him
with the princes of Egypt, and made him ruler over the land, Genesis 41.43.
when the Egyptians made the Israelites to serve them with rigor, and made
their lives bitter with hard bondage, when they commanded all the male children
(that were spes gregis the hope of posterity) to be destroyed, so that there
was little hope, either of continuing posterity, or of returning into the Land
of Canaan, (which God had promised to Abraham and his posterity, Genesis 13.15.
then the eyes of the Lord out of his holy habitation look upon their
affliction, and then is his right hand stretched out, to deliver them out of
Egypt, and to bring them into that good land that he promised, Exo. 3.1.
when Egypt pursued them after their departure, Exo. 14.9.
and there was behind them an army of Egyptians: before them the Red Sea, so
that their hearts failed them: then the Lord works his wonders in the Sea,
and leads them through the depthes; as through the Psalm. 106.9.
wilderness. When to Gideon, (judging according to the outward appearance: and
by the misery which they endured under the Midianites) the Lord seemed to have
departed from Israel: then was he with them, Iud 6.13.
then did he arise to help them. When Daniell must into the Lions Den, and
the King himself, though he labored till the going down of the Son, could
not deliver him out of the hands of his Enemies; then is his God whom he
serves: able and willing also to deliver him from the Lions: and to shut
their mouths that they shall not hurt Dan. 6.
him. And when Jonah, though the Mariners tow hard to bring him unto the Land,
must needs into the Sea, so that he thought himself cast out of Gods sight:
Ion. 2.4.
then does God prepare a great fish to swallow and save him, Ion. 1.17.
causing Salvation, to come out of the destroyer, as meat out of the Eater.
Iud. 14.14.
It is then a faithful saying uttered in the song of Moses Deuteronomy. 32.36.
The Lord will repent himself for his people, when he sees that their power
is gone, and that there is none shut up or left.

And this assurance, that God will stand with us, when all the world forsakes
and fails us: must secure us in all our trouble, the end whereof we cannot
see, the means to wade out of which we cannot find, it must be armor of
proof to keep off all fears, which through the weakness of our faith are
ready to enter into our hearts Ma^^ 8 26.
Etsi fractus illabatur orbis, although the world should break in pieces and
fallon us: God is our refuge and strength (...) 1.
a very present help in trouble therefore will we not fear though the Earth
be removed, and though the Mountains be carried into the midst of the Sea,
though the waters thereof roar and be troubled, and though the Mountains
shake with the swellings thereof.

I have but begun to speak of the matters, and mysteries in this text, and
the swiftness of the time, the sharpness of the weather inioyne me to
silence, and to hold my peace from farther good words. I will then according to
our Saviors counsel, Ioh. 6.12.
gather up the fragments that remain, concerning these wisemen, their
Country, their coming to Jerusalem, their inquiry for the newborn King,
the moving cause and end of their coming, and when I have a convenient time,
propose them unto you.

To God the Father that sent his son made of a Woman, and made under the Law
for us, to the son that took on him the form of a servant, and made
himself of no reputation for us; and to the holy spirit, which must lead us
into the truth of these high and heavenly mysteries, three persons and one
God, be honor, and glory, now and for ever, Amen.

The end of the first Sermon.
The second Sermon.
AS Jonah at his second sending brought the same message to the Ninevites, so I
coming again amongst you bring the same matter and text, and as I promised
gather up the fragments, the sundry circumstances of this Text that were left
unhandled. In the rank of these circumstances next to the time of their
coming Christ's birth (of which with the amplifications coincident thereunto, I
have spoken many things) follows the circumstance of the persons that come
and make this enquiry.

Behold wise men came. Now here again are vain reasonings amongst the
interpreters, strifes to no profit, but to the troubling and amasing; of the
hearers, 2 Timothy 2.14.
what these (...) wise men were, what their profession was, whether they were
Philosophers, Priests, Astrologers, Sorcerers, Kings or Statesmen, Non nostrum
inter eos tantam componere litem, I mean not to arbitrate the first between
them, for cui bono? what good is there in it? whether they were all, any or
many of these, it mattereth not, dummodo salua maneat historiae veritas, as
long as the truth of the History remains safe Beza in locum.
. Only to speak that for which we may have some light out of the text it
self, it seems to be most probable that they were Astrologers, Viri siderum
inspectionibus assueti Cyprian. Sermon. de Magis and stella.
Men acustomed to gaze upon the stars, and spectandorum siderum art
pollentes, Leo Sermon. 4. de Epiphan.
such as were skillful in the art of gazing upon the stars, such as amongst
the Chaldeans, were called by the Prophet, Viewers of heaven and Starre-gazers,
Isa. 47.13.
because they are lead here by a star, to seek out this star of Jacob
that was newly arisen.

Amongst our adversaries the Papists (who speak things that they ought not for
filthy lucres sake Tit. 1 11.
, it is an unwritten tradition, and therefore (say they) to be received Pari
pietatis affectu, With the like devotion that the Book of the Old and New are
Council. Trident sessione. 4.
, that they were Kings, three Kings because they brought three gifts, that
their bodies after their death were translated from their Country to
Constantinople, from thence to Millaine, from Millaine to Colon, whither at
this day there is great resort of the simple people (who like the Athenians are
in all things too superstitious Act. 17.22.
, to adore them as holy relics. And, to fill up the measure of their fayning,
they have found out three names for them also, Iaspar, Melchior, and Balthazar.
And to this purpose they bring or rather wring and wrest the words of the
Psalmist, the Kings of Tarshish and of the Isles shall bring presents: the
Kings of Sheba and Seba shall offer gifts Psalm ^2.10.
, But, constat hoc ex pictura non ex scriptura D. Boys postill in Epiphan.
, it is a tale painted on a wall, not written in the word. And their own men
are against them herein, Nec veterum interpretum quisquam hos Magos reges vocat
(says Iansenius Iansenius concord, cap 9.
) not one of the old interpreters calls these wise men Kings. And Mantuan
Mantuan: in Fastis Lib. 1.
.

Nec reges vt opinor erant, neque enim tacuissent
Historiae sacrae authors genus istud honoris.
As I think sure they were not Kings,
for then the men that wrote;
The Holy History, would this,
so great an honor note.
Maldonate Maldo ^at. in loc^ ^.
, and Baronius (...) ton. 1. An^^l. ^. 7^.
, make no more of them but regulos, petty Kings, such as those five that
Abraham subdued Genesis 14.
. And for the text of the Psalm, they must turn about the earth (the
foundation whereof God has so laid, that it should not be removed for ever
Psalm. 104.5.
) they must ex Meridie and Occidente facere Orientem (as Calvin says they have
done Calu. in Matt. 2.
) turn South and West into East, before it will crown them Kings, Saba and
Arabia respectu Jerusalem plane in Meridie, non in Orient (says their own
Iansenius Ia^sen. vbi supra.
) Saba and Arabia in respect of Jerusalem, are altogether in the South not in
the East. But to leave this vain iangling de lana caprina, and to come to that
whereby the Church may receive edifying 1. Cor. 14.5.
, as our Savior first rising from the dead, became the first fruits of them
that slept in the earth 1. Cor. 15.20.
, so these men that were Gentiles in the flesh (and therefore aliens from the
commonwealth of Israel, strangers from the covenant, far off both in place
and grace) by coming first unto Christ are here made the first fruits of the
gentiles, whereby as by a pattern God would show forth, that he would give unto
the Gentiles repentance unto life Act 11.18.
In istis fides gentium vt primitiae deo consecratur (says the ordinary gloss
here) in these men the faith of the Gentiles is consecrated as the first fruits
unto God. Stellae ortus etc. (says Hillary Hill. in expos. huius Euangely.
, the rising of the star being first understood of the Gentiles, shows that
the Gentiles should presently believe in Christ. Ideo Magi etc. (says
Chrysostom Chrysostom. hom. 1. ex varij in Matt.
, therefore the Wisemen of the Gentiles were first chosen to salvation, that by
them the gate of salvation might be set open to all the Gentiles. And he
cries out elsewhere, O beati Magi etc. Chrysostom. in opere imperf. hom. 2.
Oh happy wise men, who of all the Gentiles were vouchsafed to be the first
fruits of the faithful, for those wise men were a representation of the Church
that should be afterward. Illi Magi etc. (says Saint Austin August. sermon. 32.
de temp.
, Those wise men, what were they but the first friuts of the Gentiles? the
sheepheards were Israelites, the Wisemen Gentiles, they from nere, these from
far of, and both of them run unto the corner stone; for he coming (as the
Apostle says) preached peace to us which were far off, and peace to them
which were near, for he is our peace, which has made both one. And again he
says August sermon. 30 de tempore.
, Manifestatus est etc. He was manifested in the very cradles of his infancy
to them which were nere, and them which were far off, to the Jews by the
neerenesse of the sheepheards, to the Gentiles by the farnesse of the Wisemen.

So then Christ as soon as ever he was borne, was (as old Simeon uttered in the
spirit of prophecy of him) a light to lighten the Gentiles Luke 2.32.
, for although God for a time to show his (...) manifold wisdom Ephesians. 3 10.
, set up a partition wall Ephesians. 2.14.
of rites and ceremonies, whereby he hedged in the Jews to be a precious
people and a chief treasure to him above all the nations of the earth Deuteronomy.
7.6.
, and excluded the rest of the Nations of the world from his covenant, although
he gave them his statutes and his ordinances which he did not to any Nations
besides Psalm. 147.20.
, although to them pertained the adoption and the glory, and the covenants, and
the giving of the Law, and the service of God, and the promises Romans 9.4.
yet many and excellent things were ever uttered of the calling and coming in
of the Gentles, of bringing them into the sheepe-fold of the Church by Christ,
who is the great sheepe-heard of the sheep Heb. 13.20.
.

It was promised to Abraham that was the father of us all Rom 4 16.
, that in his seed (which is Christ Gal. 3.16.
, not the Jews only, but all the Nations of the earth should be blessed Genesis
18.18. and 22.18. Gal. 3.8.
It was fore-prophecied by Jacob, that Shiloh should be expectatio gentium, or,
to him should the gathering of the people be Genesis 49.10.
by Haggai, that he should be the desire of all Nations Hag. 2.7.
, by the Psalmist, that all Nations should serve this Solomon, this King of
peace, and builder of the new Temple made without hands, Psalm. 72.11.
and that he should have the Heathen for his inheritance, and the ends of the
Earth, for his possession, Psalm. 2 8.
by Isai, that to the root of Iesse should the Gentiles come, Isa. 11.10.
that he should bring forth judgment to the Gentiles, Isa. 42.2.
that he should not only be Gods servant to raise up Jacob and Israel: but
that also he would give him for a light unto the Gentiles, that he might be
his Salvation, to the ends of the World. Isa. 49.6.
And that the Gentiles should come, to the light of Lion, Isa. 60.3.
by Ieremias, that the Gentiles should come unto the Lord, from the ends of the
earth, and say: surely our Fathers have inherited Lies, Vanity, and things
wherein is no profit. Ier. 16.19.


And that we may not drink up the whole Sea, to show that the water is Salt,
Ireneus aduers. haeres. lib. 2. cap. 34.
bring all out of the treasury of the prophets, that is stored up in this
kind, let me tell you in one word, that of that horn of Salvation raised up in
the house of David, not only to be the glory of Gods people Israel: but also
to be a light, to lighten the Gentiles, God has spoken by the mouth of all
his holy Prophets, which were since the world began. Luke 1.70.
And that which God has so spoken, he makes have (as it were) to fulfill by
bringing these first fruits of the Gentiles, as soon as ever the blessed
seed: (in whom all nations must be blessed) was manifested in the flesh: to
receive the promised blessing from him. In his impletum est illud, (says
Maximus Maximus homil 2. in Epiphan.
) In these wisemen is fullfilled, that which was foretold by the Prophet: they
to whom he was not spoken of: shall see, and they that have not heard, shall
understand. Yea, and that we may see greater things then these, Ioh. 1.50.
the Jews, that were Gods only people: are now none of his people: that were
the natural branches, are broken of, and we grafted in; that were Gods own
household: have their house left desolate, and we are come to be of the
household of faith, and fellow Citizens with the Saints, Ephesians. 2.19.
that were the children of the Kingdom; are cast out into utter darkness,
and the Gentiles come from the East and West, and sit down with Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, in the Kingdom of Heaven. Matt. 8.11.12
Thus has God taken away his vineyard, from those husbandmen, that refused to
yield him fruit; even the Kingdom of God from them, and given it to the
Gentiles. Mat. 21.41.
Let me here then speak the words of exhortation to us Gentiles; has God
done so great things for us; and shall not our soul magnify him, and our
spirit rejoice in him? Has he called us out of darkness; into his marvelous
light? Has he made us a people, which were no people? Have we obtained mercy,
that had not obtained mercy? And shall we not show forth the praises of him
that has done this? 1. Pet. 2.9.10.
now we see all this fullfilled in our eyes, shall it not make our hearts
rejoice, and our bones flourish like an herb? Isa. 66.14.
could David being taken from the sheepecoate to be ruler over Israel, wonder
at the Lords doing herein? who am I, O Lord God, and what is my house, that
thou have brought me hitherto? 2. Sam. 7.18.
And shall not we being taken out of the power of darkness, and translated into
the kingdom of Gods dear Son, even a kingdom that cannot be shaken, Heb.
12.28.
an inheritance immortal, undefiled that withers not, 1. Pet. 1.4.
give thanks unto God the Father, that has made us meet to be partakers of
the inheritance of the Saints in light? Col. 1.12.14.
Could Mephibosheth, so magnify David's kindness, for restoring him the Lands
that were Saul's: and making him eat bread at his Table? All my Fathers house
were but dead men before my Lord the King, yet did thou set thy Servant,
among them that did eat at thine own 2. Sam. 19.28
Table. And shall not we that were dead in sins, and trespasses, sing
praises unto our God, who of his good pleasure does give us a kingdom, that we
had no right at all to: could lay no claim to, and makes us to eat bread, in
the kingdom of Heaven. His igitur dilectissimi, diuinae gratiae, mysterijs
eruditi (says Leo Leo. sermon. 3. in Epiphan.
) therefore beloved, let us which are instructed in these mysteries of Gods
grace, celebrate the day of our first Fruits, and the beginning of the calling
of the Gentiles with all possible Joy, giving thanks to our merciful God, who
has made us meet, (as the Apostle says) to be partakers of the inheritance,
of the Saints in light, who has taken us out of the kingdom of darkness:
and translated us into the kingdom of his dear Son. Because as Esaias
prophesied, the people of the Gentiles, which sat in darkness saw great
light, and light, is risen to them: which dwelt in the region of the shadow of
Death. Of whom the same Prophet says unto the Lord, the Gentiles which knew
thee not: shall call upon thee; and the people which were ignorant of thee:
shall she unto thee.

I might here again gather, that which the Holy Ghost has scattered, that
Christ in bringing these Astrologers, Sorcerers, practisers of curious Arts,
Act. 19.19.
that had run away farthest from him, to be the first fruits of the Gentiles
unto him, and in calling these Diaboli vates ad sui adorationem prae caeteris,
these prophets of the Devil to worship him before others, yea in stirring up
Gentium primitias ex ipsis inferorum penetralibus Beza ex Theod^^^t in ^unc
lo^^^n.
the first Fruits of the Gentiles, out of the very privy chambers of Hell,
would (in vouchsafing mercy to these chief of sinners) show forth all long
suffering, for a pattern to them which should hereafter believe on him to
everlasting life, 1. Tim. 1.6.
Idcirco magis eluxit, and (says Chrysostom, Chrysostom. homil. 1. ^x variis in
Mat.
) therefore the grace of God shined unto the wiseme^, that Gods goodness might be
manifestly known, and no man might despair that salvation might be given him
upon his believing: because he now saw it given to the wisemen. But though we
may find much honny here, it is not good to eat too much honny, Prou.
25.16.27.
nor good to cloy you with too much upon one matter. I pass therefore from the
persons to the next circumstance of the places and first of the place from
whence.

From the East.] (...) from the rising of the sun the sense is from the East
Country, or which in respect of Judea, is situated toward the East Piscator
in locum.
, Now in their coming from the East, I am praesignabatur etc August. sermon.
31 de tempore.
. was now foresignified that which afterward the Lord said, many shall come
from the East etc. Quoniam ab orient venerunt (says Chrysostom Chrysostom.
upere imperf. in Matt. hom. 2.
,) Because they came from the East whence the day springs, from thence did
the beginning of faith come, because faith is the light of our souls. Been ab
orient etc. (says Maximus Maximus homil. 4. in Epiphan.
) they are well said to come from the East, who come to worship that
everlasting dayspring, of whom it is said, and the day spring from an high
has visited us. Merito sane ab Orient veniunt (says Bernard Bern sermon 3. in
Epiphan.
) they come worthily from the East, which publish unto us the new rising of the
Son of Righteousness, which enlighten the whole World with joyful news.
But these are happily magis florida, quam solida, have in them more flourish of
wit then soundness of Divinity, therefore I say unto them as Iehu to the
messenger of Iehoram, turn behind me 2. King. 9.18.
.

Now as before about their profession, so here again about their Country,
there is a door of controversy set wide open, and there is (...) Act. 28.29.
, much reasoning, amongst the fathers and interpreters about this East Country
from whence they came, whither it were Persia, or Chaldea, Arabia, or Ethiopia,
Egypt or Mesopotamia. And it is but a poor conciliation, that a F^ier gives,
who to reconcile all these diversities says Dicamus ex varijs locis venisse,
vnum hine, alium illinc, tertium aliunde Bo^kierus con ione 10. in Epiphan.
, let us say that they came from diverse places, the one from hence, the other
from thence, the third from some place else; much like to the confutation that
he makes of our answer, that the wisemen which came from the East, could not
be the Kings of Tarshishe, of Sheba and Seba Psalm. 72.10.11.
, because those Countries are South from Jerusalem, in which respect the Queen
of Sheba that came to hear Salomons wisdom is called the Queen of the South
Luk 11.13.
, Nos non dicimus (says he Boskierus con^ione 6 in Epiphan.
, etc.) We do not say that they came out of Tharsis, Sheba, and Seba, but that
the Kings of Tharsis, the Kings of Saba, the Kings of Arabia came, for they
might be Kings thereof, and yet not come from thence, but from another part of
their Kingdom, as I may say that the King of Spain came, though he come not
out of Spain, but out of India or Seicily, I may say of him as Austin of his
adversary, vbi respondere conatus est, magis ostendit quod non poterit
respondere August. advers. literas Petiliani lib. 3. cap. 36.
, when he indeuoureth to answer, then he shows most of all that he cannot
answer.

But for the point in question, although there be fair probability that this
East Country is Persia, both by the situation of it which lies East from
Judea Cyrill. in Isa. lib 4. cap. 4. orat: 4 vide Ptolomei tabulas.
, and also by the name Magi, here given them (which as Peter's language bewrayed
him to be a Galilean Matt. 26.73.
,) shows them to be Persians, being nomen mere Persicum, a mere Persian
name, nomen professionis, a name of profession (as says the Commentator upon
Prudentius) Quod genus sapientum and doctorum habebatur in Persis (says Tully
Cicero lib. 1. de diuinatione.
) which kind of wise and learned men was to be found amongst the Persians, yet
because I have professed from the beginning to a void foolish and unprofitable
questions, from which we can reap no edification, either in faith or in love,
I will pass from it, and see what instruction, we that must follow the faith
and conversation of them that have gone before us in the faith Hebr. 13.7.
, may gleane from hence. Their action then in coming so far out of the East,
from their fathers house and kindred, which it is hard to flesh and blood to
leave (for that is a point that Pharaohs daughter must be Catechized in Psalm
45.10.
) from their native soil, which nescio qua dulcedine cunctos afficit (as the
Poet says) is unspeakably sweere unto all men, to seek and see Christ the
newborn King of the Jews in a strange land, must be our instruction to
seek Christ as well where, as while he may be found, to go far for him, to
leave all things with the holy Apostles, and follow him Matt 19.27.
, even to forsake houses, brethren, sisters, father mother, wife, children, or
lands for his sake Ibid. 29.
. For, patrem honora etc. Hieron. ad Furiam de viduis seruand.
Honor thy father, if he do not separate thee from the true father:
otherwise licet patvulus etc Hieron. ad Helio. lorum de vita Eremit.
. Although thy little Nephew should hang upon thy neck, although thy mother
with her hair about her ears, and her garments rent, should show thee the
breasts, wherewith she nurced thee, although thy father should lie on the
Threshold, tread upon thy father to go over, pass away with dry cres to the
banner of the Cross. It is a chief point of Piety, to show thy self cruel
in such a matter. And if the Queen of the South, came from the uttermost parts
of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon Mat. 12.42.
, about hard questions and riddles 1. King. 10.1.
, if there came of all people from all the Kings of the earth, to hear the
wisdom of Solomon, uttering proverbs, and speaking of the nature of trees,
beasts, fowls, creeping things and fishes 1. King. 4.33.34.
, (all which is but the perishable wisdom of this world 1. Cor. 2 6.
,) how much more ought they, that desire to be filled with the knowledge of
GOD, in all Spiritual Wisdom and understanding Col. 1.10.
, (as the Spouse of Christ goes about the City in the Streets, and in the
broad ways, to seek him whom her soul loves Cant. 3.2 4.
, and gives not over till she find him) go from sea to sea, from North to
East Amos. 8.11.12.
, (af God send such a spiritual fammin in any Land) to seek him that is
greater then Solomon, in whom are hidden all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge Col. 2.3.
, and who is made unto us that wisdom Cor. 1.30.
, whereby we become wise unto salvation? if the Eunuch, being a man of great
authority under Candace Queen of Ethiopia, and having charge of all her
treasure, forgot and forsook both honor and Country, ease and dignity (being
so many remora's to flesh and blood, which will pity it self, that these
things may not be endured by it Matt. 16.22.
) to come so far for Gods great name 2. Chr. 6.32.
, to come to Jerusalem to worship God in a kind of worship that stood in
carnal rites and ordinances Heb. 9.10.
, which were but the rudiments of the world Gal. 4.3.
, but shadows of things to come Col. 2.17.
, how much more ought we with that great multitude Mar. 8.1.3.
, to come from far, to shake off all worldly, either pleasures or profits
which cumber us, that we may with Philip Ioh. 1.45.
, find the Messiah, the Christ, who is the body and substance Col. 2.17.
, who is the mediator of the New testament Heb. 12.24.
, yea who is surety of a better testament Heb. 7.21.
, and in whose face God does give us the light of the knowledge of his glory 2.
Cor. 4.6.
, Nay, if wisemen, the disputers of this world, Plato being Magister Athenis, a
Master at Athens Hieron. Epist. ad Paulin. Presbyt.
, Pythagoras, whose words were as Oracles to his Scholars, travailed over many
Countries, vt fierent discipuli, and aliena discerent, that they might become
scholars, and learn other men's doctrines, if Apollonius the Philosopher went
almost through the whole world, vt inueniret vbique quod disceret Hieron. ibid.
, that he might find every where somewhat to learn, to get the wisdom of
this world, which GOD will destroy 1. Cor. 1.19.
, and bring to nothing; ought not we that are children in understanding, that
naturally cannot perceive the things of GOD 1. Cor. 2.14.
, that know nothing as we ought to know 1. Cor. 8.2.
, to compass sea and land (if the candlestick of the Gospel should not stand
in our habitations) that we might follow Christ Jesus, sit at his feere Luke
10.39.
, hear his preaching, and learn the wisdom of God in a mystery, even the
hidden wisdom, which God, ordained before the world to our glory, 1. Cor. 2.7.
Jacobs sons, when the Famine was in the Land of Canaan, went down into
Egypt once and again, to buy food for the famine of their houses, Genesis 42.
and 43.
and shall not the true Israelites be as wise for their Souls: as they for
their bodies? Labor more for the meat which endures to everlasting life:
which the Son of God shall give unto them, then they for the meat that
perishes? Ioh. 6.27.
And with Cornelius fetch Peter from Ioppae, to speak unto them words: whereby
they may be saved Act 10.5.
when he is not to be had at Cesarea: Pharaohs daughter being to be married to
Solomon, (which marriage was a Type of the mystical union, between Christ,
and his Church) must forgett her own people: and her Fathers house, that she
might be brought in to the King, and he take pleasure in her beauty, Psalm. 45
10.
and they that will be the spouse of Christ, married unto him, in loving
kindness and in mercy: Hos 2.19.
must shake off all carnal affections to Country or Kindred, to the World and
the things of the World, (which hang on like so many clogges to keep them
back, lie in the way like so many Lions to hinder them) that they may run
after him, and be brought into his chambers, Cant. 1.7.
must hate Father, and Mother, etc, That they may come to Christ, and be his
Disciples. Luke 14.26.
And to bring the best Wine at the last, to take for an example him that was
the friend of God, Iam. 2.23.
and Father of the faithful. Romans 4.2.
Abraham when he was well stricken in years, being seauenty five years old: so
that he could take no pleasure in traveling, gets him out of his own
Country, and from his kindred and fathers house, where they served other Gods:
Ios. 24.2.
leaving all, that he might go into a Land which God would show him to build
an Alter there unto the Lord, and call upon his name, Genesis 12.1.2.7.
and if we be Abraham's children, and of the household of faith, we will do
the works of Abraham herein, Ioh. 8.39.
otherwise as Abraham showed his faith by this work of his, in going out from
Idolaters, and separating himself from amongst them, and coming into the Land
of promise, where he served the Lord, (for that, that was a fruit of his
faith, the holy ghost witnesses, b by Faith Abraham, when he was called to go
out into a place, which he should after receive for an inheritance, obeyed,) So
on the other side, men's little faith, or rather flat infidelity is shown
and known, as well as if it were written in their foreheads with a pen of
Iron, when with the rebellious Israelites, in Moses time: for the love of the
flesh pots of Egypt, they would rather tarry in Egypt, Number. 11.5.
where they cannot Sacrifice to the Lord, without the abomination of the
Egyptians, Exo. 8.26.
then go out into the Land of Canaan, where they might freely Sacrifice unto
him, when with the Idolatrous Jews, in Ieremies time, Ier. 44.17.18.
they can burn incense in Egypt, to the Queen of Heaven, and pour out drink
offerings to her, to enjoy plenty of victuals: and keep themselves out of
want; when with Lot: they can pitch their Tents near Sodom, for the
pleasantness of the Country; Genesis 13.10.12.
when with Martha, they trouble themselves about so many worldly matters, that
they can never be at leisure to hear Christ, Luke 10.42.
and with those in the parable, they prefer Farms, Oxen, Merchandise,
Pleasures, Profits, all before their spiritual marriage with Christ, Matt. 22.
yea with the Gergesens, will rather thrust Christ out of their coasts, then
loose their hoggs to enjoy him: Matt. 8.34.
and to come near unto our selves, beloved, where shall faith be sound
amongst the men of this generation, who when Christ is not now per longinqua
querendus, to be sought far off: when his word is not in Heaven? that we
should say, who shall go up into Heaven for us, and bring it us: nor beyond
the Sea, that we should say: who shall go over the Sea for us, and bring it
us, but is very near us, Deuteronomy. 30.12.13.
and dwells plentiously amongst us, yea, when he himself dwells amongst
us, has his tabernacle in our costs, from on high has visited us, and walks
in the midst of our Candlestick, Reu. 1.13.
when his Kingdom is come near us: will not go out to meet him, will not
with Nathaniell, come and see him, Ioh. 1.46.
with Zacheus stir a foot, take a little pains to see him, Luke 19.4.
nor with David desire to come into his Temple, to behold his beauty, Psalm.
27.4.
to hear with their ears, to see with their eyes, and to handle with their
hands, him being the word of life, 1. Ioh. 1.1.
who when he rises up early, and sends unto them his prophets, wisemen and
Scribes: will not receive his prophets, in the name of a Prophet, but account
the preaching of his word foolishness, 1. Cor. 1.23.
and are ready with the Athenians to say of them that bring it: what will this
babbler say? Act. 17.18.
Surely these men would be far enough from going far with these wise men to
seek him: if they will not receive him when he comes amongst them, if now,
when he stands at their door and knocks: they will not let him in; with
Zacheus receive him to house. If when he has his house amongst them: they
will not come into his Courts, nor worship him in the assembly of his saints.
amongst the old people of the Jews, all the males must three times in the
year, appear before the Lord in the place which he should choose to put his
name in, even in the feast of unleavened Bread, in the feast of weeks, and in
the feast of Tabernacles. Some of them then must come from far, the Land
being in length, from Dan to Bersheba, one hundred and sixty miles, and in
breadth, from Ioppa to Bethlehem, forty and six miles. Deuteronomy 16.16.
And to what a number all the males appearing, Hieron. Epist. ad Dardanum.
(none being exempted upon any worldly pretense) would amount, it may be
gathered by that great multitude, that were come to Jerusalem, to keep the
Passover, when Vespasian the Emperor began his siege against it Josephus
and alij.
being (as the Histories of those times report tricies centena millia, thirty
hundred thousand. And whereas by the letter of the Law, the Males only were
bound to appear, it is worth the marking, that the blessed Virgin would not
take liberty in that kind, but went with Joseph to celebrate those feasts, the
father and the mother of Jesus went to Jerusalem, after the custom of the
feast day Luke 2.42.
.

But in our days, amongst us, when Gods worship is tied to no one place,
neither to Jerusalem, nor to the mountain Ioh. 4 21.
, but our Temples and Houses of prayer, wherein Christ is to be found, are
according to the number of our Cities and Towns, so that it is but a step to
them that dwell nearest, a Sabbath days journey to them that are remotest, to
come unto them, there are too many, that whereas they should thrice a week
appear before the Lord, scarce tread in the Courts of the Lords house thrice
in a year, that with Simeon they may see the Lord Christ Luke 2.26.27.
, there are too many dainty dames amongst us, that are so far from offering
this free will offering with the Virgin, that they will not do the least part
of that duty that is required of them in appearing before God in Sion, that are
so far from never departing out of the Temple with Anna Luke 2 37.
, that on the other side, they almost never come into it, and had need to be
dealt withal, as those in the highwaies and hedges were, to bring them to the
marriage feast Luke 14.23.
, even compelled by the vigor of authority to come in, that Gods house might be
full on his Holiday. But enough has been spoken of the place from whence they
come, I will therefore proceed to speak of the place whither they come. To
Jerusalem.] Jesus being borne at Bethelehem, they come to seek him at
Jerusalem. As the Church her self at the first sought her beloved, and found
him not Cant. 3.1.2. and 5.6.
, so these first fruits of the Church that God would call of the Gentiles, at
the first seeking for Christ, find him not. But how comes it to pass (will
some man say) that having run well hitherto, they should now go out of the
way, that having hitherto followed the guiding of the heavenly light, and the
showing of the star that went before them Leo in Epiphan.
, they should now have a mist before their eyes, and wander in darkness? The
answer is, that out of the context telling us, that when they went toward
Bethlehem, after their conference with Herod, behold the star which they had
seen in the East, went before them again Verse. 9.
, Colligere promptum est (says Piscator) We may gather that that star was
hid from them for a time, which seems to have begun, when they came into
Judea. Ex hoc etc Chrysostom in opere imperfect in Matt. homilia. 2.
, out of this place it appears, that when the star had brought the wise men
somewhat near to Jerusalem it was hidden from them, that being forsaken of the
star, they might be compelled to ask for Christ, and to manifest him also in
Jerusalem. Their light failing them then, they soon went out of the right way,
if a man walk in the night, he will both stumble Ioh. 10.11.
, and turn out of his way. And as these having lost the star their guide,
soon loose their way, like the ship that without the Magneticus index, the sea
compass or needle, would quickly run aside upon rocks and shelfes: so the ship
of Christ the Arc of his Church, if he the star of Jacob, the day spring
from an high Luke 1.78.
, should not visit it to give light unto it, if the day star of his Gospel
2. Pet. 1.19.
, should not shine unto it, to show it the way, would never come into the
haven, where it would be, but either fall upon the rocks of heresy, or run
aground into the sands of Impiety, where it would stick fast, till it were
broken in pieces with the violence of the waves of wickedness, like that ship
that Paul's sailed to Rome in Act. 27.41.
Now in that, when they know not whither to go, they come to Jerusalem to
seek for Christ, they have both motives and inducements in themselves to do
so, and also God (who sits at the stern, and ouerruleth not only the falls
and infirmities, of his servants, but also the impieties of the Prince of
darkness, and the children of disobedience, for the fulfilling of his will,
the showing of his power, and declaring of his name and glory Romans 9.17.
) has his hand, his work and purpose herein. In themselves they have a double
motive. First from natural reason, even the wisdom of the flesh, for where
should they seek the King of the Jews, but in the mother City of the Jews,
Which above the other Cities of Judea, excelled amongst all the inhabitants, as
the head in the body Joseph: de bell Iudaico. lib. 3. cap. 2.
. Jerusalem ciuitas regia est etc. (says Remigius Remig: in catena aurea.
) Jerusalem is the Kingly City, and they believed that such a child ought not
be borne, but in the Kingly City. Humano sensu etc. (says Leo Leo sermon. in
Epiphan.
.) By humane reason they imagined, that the birth of the King which was showed
unto them, was to be sought in the Kingly City. Here then by the way (for I
mean not to insist upon the point) we may observe, that if the wisdom of the
flesh be our leader in the things of God, it will soon mislead us. For the
world with all her wisdom, cannot know, find out the things of God 1. Cor.
1.21.
the natural man (...) does not receive, apprehend the things of the Spirit of
God 1. Cor. 2.14.
. If flesh and blood be our Counselor, it will soon mistake with Nicodemus
Ioh 3.9.
, in the great Mysteries of godliness. For as the bands of men, which Benhadad
King of Syria sent to lay hands on the Prophet Elisha, being smitten with
blindness, in stead of coming to Dothan, went into the midst of Samaria 2.
King. 6.19.
, so there hangs such a mist of natural blindness over all the eyes of the
sons of Adam, that in stead of seeking a Christ made of no reputation, they
are ready to dream of, and seek a Christ all glorious without, rejoicing in
the flesh, and crowned at Jerusalem (...) With great pomp and Solemnity.

A second motive that they had to seek Christ at Jerusalem, is from that
dim light, that had shined unto them in religion, from that little taste that
they had of the word of God, concerning him that was to come into the World.

They had heard of that Prophecy of Balaam a Gentile* spread abroad amongst the
Gentiles, that a Star should come out of Jacob, and a Scepter rise out of
Israel. Number. 24.17.
No wonder therefore, that seeing his Star, they should acknowledge his
birth, quam vtique, etc. (says Maximus Maxim 9. homil. 3. in Epiphan.
) which if through Gods revealing of it, a Gentile could foretell, in like
manner also a Gentile might acknowledge. Now Jerusalem, being the City of
God, of the great King, Psalm 48.12.
the perfection of beauty: the Joy of the whole Earth, Lam. 2.15.
of which glorious things were spoken Psalm. 87.3.
even amongst the Heathen, wherein God had set his Temple, and put his name,
and wherein devout men, of every nation under Heaven, that came from far for
Gods great and glorious name, used to dwell Act. 2.3.
and whither the Eunuch, and other devout men came to worship: Act. 8.27.
where should they (judging according to the appearance, of that slender light
that had shined unto them) seek for this Star of Jacob, (whose birth they
acknowledged, by this new Star concurring with the prophecy) but in
Jerusalem, where God would be worshipped? Quare veneru^t Hierosolymam? etc.
(says Haymo Haymo in Exposit. huius Euan
) Why came they to Jerusalem? They were Astrologers, when they saw a Star
which they had not seen before, they began to think what manner of Star
it might be! when they thought this, they remembered the Prophecy of Balaam!
when they read this; and saw that the Star was risen, they presently knew
that the Lord was borne in Judea: therefore they come to Jerusalem. And
indeed it was the custom of Foreign Nations: that when they saw any wonder
in the Heavens: they would go, or send to Jerusalem, where the knowledge of
God was, as they did in the time of Hezekiah, when the Sun went back ten
degrees. For Merodach Baladan, King of Babylon sent Ambassadors to him, to
enquire of the wonder that was done in the Land 2 Chro. 32.31.
Ad inquirendum prodigium prout obseruatum fuerat a Chaldeis, Iunius in 2. reg.
cap. 20.
to inquire of the wonder, as it had been observed by the Chaldeans. Now in
that they had some show, some color in Religion, for this mistaking of the
place of Christ's birth: we may here be instructed, how easy it is to err
in the best matters, for as the blind man but half enlightened, took men to
be trees, Mark 8.24.
so men newly converted, being but Babes: in whom Christ is but begun to be
formed, and not able to discern the things that differ, may easily take
shaddows, for substances, likely hoods and outward appearances, for truth it
self, wild grapes for good fruit, a show of godliness: for the power of
godliness it self. For thus in matters of our holy faith, and salvation, many
that are unlearned: children in understanding, are deceived, to take that
filthy harlot of Rome, for the true spouse of Christ, that den of thieves,
cage of unclean Birds for the Temple of God, Antichrist sitting in the Temple
of Christ, for his Vicar, his Steward set over his house, Satan's messenger: for
Angels of light, Wolves in Sheep clothing: for faithful Pastors, the Idol
of the Mass: for the true propiciatory Sacrifice of Christ, bastard Sacraments
of man's invention: for legitimate Sacraments of Christ's institution, lip-labor
in an unknown tongue: for devout praying; will worship, which God has not
required: for a reasonable serving of him; distrust, and doubtfullnesse of
Salvation: for a saving faith; calling upon the Saints and Angels, falling
down before Stocks, and Stones, for the way by which in humbleness of mind
they must go unto God, and in a word their whole heap of Gibeonitish trash,
Ios. 9.4.
and ceremonies for ancient unwritten verities coming from Christ and his
Apostles.

Again in matters of christian conversation, men are easily beguiled to take
worldly sorrow for Godly sorrow, Esaus Tears, for Peter's Tears, Ahabs
Repentance, for Manassehs Repentance, Pharisaicall giving, for good
Almes-dooing, Lip-labor for Praying in the Spirit, Pharisaicall boasting
before God and the World, for sound and hearty Thanksgiving; drawing near
unto God with the Lips, for drawing near unto God with the Heart, Yea, and
every Vice: for some seeming Virtue. Superbia celsitudinem imitatur, etc.
(says Saint Austin August. confess. lib. 2. cap. 6.
) Pride imitateth magnanimity, Curiosity seems to affect a desire of
knowledge, Ignorance also is covered with the name of Innocence, Prodigality
carries a show of Liberality. Vitia nobis sub Virtutum nomine obrepunt, (says
Seneca Seneca Epist. 45.
) Vices creep on us under the name of Virtues, Rashness lurketh under the
title of Fortitude, and the Coward is taken for a Wary man.

Since then we may be so quickly deceived with the hurtful weeds of the
Field being like to the wholesome Herbs of the Garden, it shall be good for us
not to judge according to the outward appearance: but to weigh and try every
thing in the Balance of the Sanctuary, and to hold fast only: that which is
truly and certainly good. 1. These. 5.2.


But as Joseph said to his Brethren, about their selling of him into Egypt, It
was not you that sent me hither: but God Genesis 45 8.
not they alone, but God had his finger, his work in it, and they did
whatsoever his hand, and his Counsel determined before to be done: Act. 4.28.
so it was not of themselves alone that they came to Jerusalem to seek Christ,
but it was the Lords doing, who brings them hither that he might provoke
Israel to jealousy by them that were no people Romans 10 19.
, Deferuntur Magi etc. (says Hierome H^oron^^ exposit^^ms (...).
) the wise men are brought by the leading of a star into Judea, that the
Priests, being asked of the Wisemen where Christ was borne, might become
inexcusable about his coming. Fides ista Magorum (says Chrysostom Chris^^^
him^ 4. (...) Epiphan.
) this faith of the Wisemen, is the Jews condemnation: they believed their
own Prophet (Balaam) these would not believe so many Prophets: they confess
him being an aliene, these do not acknowledge him being their own, he was
known of the Gentiles, he was not known of the Jews; he was acknowledged by
the Church, he was not acknowledged by the Synagogue.

They come to Jerusalem, ad confusionem Iudaeorum (says the same Author
Chrysostom. in opere impers: hom 2. in Epiph.
) for the confounding of the Jews, because the Gentiles being confirmed only
by the sight of a star, did seek Christ even in foreign Countries; and the
Jews reading from their infancy the prophecies concerning Christ, did not
receive him being borne in their coasts.

And to this purpose has Maximus a pleasant and passionate Apostrophe, a
turning of his speech unto the Jews. Quousque Iudaee durissirre (says he
Maximus hom. 2. ^n Epiphan.
.) How long, O thou obstinate Jew, will thou continue with thine ear stopped,
thine eyes shut, and thine heart faithless? Behold now, after those Sermons
of the Patriarchs, after the Prophecies of the Prophets, Christ is also
preached by the Gentiles. If thou refusest to believe thy fathers, who from the
beginning of the World, have by infinite Holy Prophecies, spoken of the coming
of the everlasting King, believe these men now at length which testify, not
that he shall be borne hereafter, but that he is already borne with thee,
and for thee. What great frowardness, and deadly obstinacy is there in thine
heart, that thou only hear not that which all men speak, thou only
abhorrest that which all men believe, thou only make none account to see
that which shines out of heaven? A Virgin has conceived with thee, and a
stranger takes notice of the birth of thy Virgin, the Angels words cannot
persuade thee to thy salvation, and yet one star brings the wisemen unto
thy Christ.

Thus, then thorough the hardness of heart that was come unto Israel Romans
11.25.
, Christ reueiled unto them by these wise men, was a savior of death unto
death unto them. Thus, he could not have done more to his Vineyard then he
did, but it would not bring forth good but wild grapes only Isai. 5.4.
, thus, he would have gathered the children of Jerusalem together, as an hen
gathers her chickens under her wings, and they would not Mat. 23.37.
. Beloved, let me conclude with the words of exhortation to our selves: let us
not make Isreal's sin ours, Isreal's punishment ours. Let there not be such a
spirit of slumber upon us, that Christ should be preached unto unto us, as the
great book of the creatures is published to the world, to make us (...) Romans
1.20.
, without apology, without excuse for our selves, that his peace should be
preached unto us, and we not be the sons of Peace Luke 10.5.6.
that his Kingdom should come near unto us, and we be deeper in the
condemnation of hell in the last day Luke 10 11.12.
then Sodom it self, but let us with Zacheus receive him joyfully Luke 19.6.
, and when we are possessed of him, let us, with the two Disciples that went to
Emaus, constrain him to abide with us Luke 24.29.
, use a kind of holy importunity and violence (such a violence as the Kingdom
of Heaven suffers Matt. 11.12.
) to keep him in our coasts, that so he may give unto us (...) right or
prerogative, to be the sons of God Ioh. 1.12.
, even to be heirs of God and joint heirs with him, of that inheritance
incorruptible, undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in heaven for us
by him, to whom with the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, three Persons
and one God be a scirbed greatness, and Power, and Glory, and Victory, and
Majesty now and for ever. Amen.

The end of the second Sermon.
The third Sermon.
IN the earthly buildings, he that begins to build and finisheth not, makes
himself a mockingstocke to the beholders Luk 14.29.30.
. Let it not then be grievous unto any, that I (a poor builder in the house of
God, according to the measure of the grace that is given to me 1. Cor. 3.10.
) should finish the work that I have begun, and add the roof to the
foundation that I have laid upon this text already.

Now in the bill (as it were) of the particulars of this text (the total sum
and substance whereof, is a narration, a description of a solemn coming and
enquiry for the newborn Messiah) there remains upon mine account that I made
of them, the three last to be scanned, and examined, namely the form of the
enquiry. Where is he that is borne. King of the Jews?] The moving cause that
brought them to come and enquire, for we have seen his star in the East]
and lastly the final cause and end of their coming, and are come to worship
him.] Of these three, if I render an account at this time, the whole bill will
be perfectly discussed, and cleared in every particular. To peruse and scanne
them in their order, I must first begin with the form of enquiry that they
make here saying.

Where is he that is borne King of the Jews?] There is a little diversity
about the reading and meaning of these words, some reading them according to
the course of the words in the original, (...). Where is he that is borne King
of the Jews, and interpreting them, that the Wisemen should ask, for him,
qui minime natus est etc Beza in locum.
. Who was not borne a private man, but the King of the Jews, from his very
cradle, and factitio regi naturalem opponere Maldonat. in locum.
, and oppose the natural King against the made King: others, where is the King
of the Jews that is borne Beza, Piscator Geneua translat.
, and maintayning that there is a traiection or transposing of the words from
their Grammatical order in the original, according to that manner of speaking
(...) Luke 19.38.
Blessed be he that comes a King in the name of the Lord (for so we must
turn the words, if we follow the literal order) for, blessed he the King
that comes in the name of the Lord.

Now in that they style this newborn Babe King of the Jews, It may say with
Austin, multa consideranda sunt hi^ August. sermon. 66. do diuersis.
. I is worthy our consideration to examine, First why they call him the King of
the Jews, not by any other name. Secondly what King they mean him to be? For
these are good and profitable considerations, and none of those vain and
unprofitable questions, which in these Lectures I have professed to shun. For
the first, if the prophecy of Balaam a Gentile, dispersed amongst the Gentiles,
concurred with the star to give them the knowledge of this hidden mystery
(which is the judgment of Antiquity) then without controversy this title was
built upon the foundation thereof, for it gives unto him Kingly power and
pre-eminence.

There shall come a Star out of Jacob, and a Scepter shall arise out of
Israel, and shall smite the corners of Moab, and destroy all the children of
Sheth! out of Jacob shall he come, that shall have dominion, and shall destroy
him that remains of the City, Number. 24.27.19.
Scepter, having Dominion, Smiting, Destroying, give unto him the marks, Name,
Nature of a King.

Again, the Star that appeared unto them, did portend, that he that was
borne was a King. At the birth and death of great Princes, there have been
oftentimes. Ostenta a sole, Luna and Stellis: Signs and wonders from the
Sun, Moon, and Stars. To instance in one or two amongst many, Mithridates
Rex (says I^stine I^stin lib. 37. H^^. or. in mit.
) In the year that King Mithridates was borne in, and in that that he began
to reign in, a blazing Star at both times so shined, for seauentie days,
that all the Heavens seemed to be on fire. And because happily we will be
most delighted with our own Histories herein. Sub Henerico tertio, etc. Polid.
virg. lib. 16. Histor. Anglic.
In the Reign of Henry the third, King of England, Otho the Popes Legate,
Baptized Henrys son, Edward, about whose birth there appeared a Star of
great bigness, certain days before the rising of the Sun, which was
carried along the Heavens with a swift and speedy course, sometimes showing
fire before it, sometimes leaving smoke behind it.

Besides this, as the finger of God (as I formerly showed) brought them to
Jerusalem, to take away all excuses from the Jews, so it is not (...) without
Gods doing: that they here enquire for the newborn Messiah, under the name
of the King of the Jews. God would hereby let the Jews see (though seeing
they would not see) that he whom they looked for was come into the World. For
both in the prophecies that went before of him, he is styled and called a
Ruler, out of Bethlehem Ephrata shall he come forth to me, that is to be a
Ruler in Israel, Micah. 5.2.
A King, rejoice O Daughter of Zion, Shout O Daughter of Jerusalem, behold thy
King comes unto thee, Zach. 9.9.
and innested with all princely power for all eternity: Unto us a Child is
borne, unto us a Son is given, and the government shall be upon his
shoulders-of the increase of his government and peace there shall be none end,
Isa 9.6.7.
and also the Jews themselves, were fully persuaded, that the Messiah, when he
came would deliver Israel out of their Temporal servitude, Luke 24.21.
and restore again the kingdom to Israel, Act. 1.6.
out of which persuasion, at one time they would have made him a King Ioh. 6.15.
by force, at another time they cried out in their solemn acclamations to him:
Blessed is the King that comes in the name of the Lord. Luke 19.31.
Therefore God would have Christ published unto them by the name of the King of
the Jews, vt ad suscipiendum regem beneficio sibi blandiente concurrant:
Chrisost. homil. 7. in Matt. 2.
That they run to receive this King, through the alurement of the benefit.

Secondly, it is to be considered, what manner of King they mean him to be,
whither a King of this World: which he himself denies, Ioh. 18.36.
or else the King eternal 1. Tim. 1.17.
the only Potentate, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, 1. Tim. 6.15.
Quid Magi venientes dixerunt, etc. (says Saint Austin, August. sermon. 31. de
tempore.
) Why do these wisemen that come say: where is he that is borne King of the
Jews? What means this? Were there not so many Kings of the Jews heretofore?
Why do they so greatly desire to know, and adore the King of another Nation?
They would never seek after this with so great devotion, desire it with so
zealoas affection, if they did not acknowledge him King of the Jews, who is
also the eternal King. And to the same effect he speaks, August. sermon. 35.
de tempore.
Non vtique etc. These far strangers, and aliens altogether from that
Kingdom, could never think that they did owe so great honor to such a King
of the Jews, as was wont to be there: but they had learned that such an one
was now borne; by the worshipping of whom they doubted not to obtain their
salvation before God: for he was not of age to be flattered by man, he sat
upon no royal Seat, he wore no purple, no Crown glittered upon his Head, no
pompous Train of his, nor terrible Army, no fame of his glorious Battles drew
these men from far Countries unto him, with so earnest desire to worship him.
He lay in a Manger, a Child newly borne, little in Body, contemptible for his
Poverty, but in that little one was hid some great things. Therefore they did
as Saint Cyprian speaks, Cypr. sermon. de Stella and magis.
profiteri regem and Deum, profess him to be both a King and God, and (as
Chrysostom also) Chrysostom. hom. 1. ex variis in Mat
aliud Oculis corporis, aliud visu mentis aspiciunt, they behold one thing with
the eyes of their Body, another thing with the eyes of their mind, Now when
thus boldly, thus confidently, they propose their interrogatories in the
Streets of Jerusalem, and ask for the King of the Jew; that was newly
borne, even in the hearing of Herod, (of whom I may speak, as it was said of
Boniface the eight) He entered like a Fox and reigned like a Lion,) istud
nequaquam, etc. Chrysostom. homil. 6. in Mat.
They could not be ignorant of this, that coming into a City wherein another
King reigned, by speaking such Words, and naming another King of that People,
they would stir up a thousand Sword about their ears. Therefore the
imperfect work upon Matthew that carries Chrysostomes name, questioneth and
resolves this matter thus. Numquid nesciebant, etc. Chrysostom. in opere imperf.
hom. 2.
Did they not know that Herod reigned in Jerusalem? Understood they not the
Justice of the Law? that whosoever, whilst one King is alive, pronunceth
another to be King, and adoreth him, loses his life as an instrument of an
Usurper, but whilst they think upon the king to come, they fear not the King
present. Had they not before their Eyes the danger of Death, when they went
about such an unlawful thing: But they cared not for Death, if they had, they
would never have been so bold. All this while they had not seen Christ, and
yet were they ready to die for him, Oh happy wisemen, whom the presence of a
most cruel King, before ever they knew Christ, became his Confessors.

Hear then these worthies of the Gentiles, through faith, out of weakness,
became strong, a believing sinceerely in their hearts, confess boldly with
their Mouths, 2 Cor. 4 13.
and like to Moses seeing him that is invisible Heb. 11.17.
fear not the wrath of a mortal King, whose breath is in his Nostrils, and
who though he kill the Body, cannot touch the Soul. They are then (as Paul
said of old Israel in another case) (...) Cor. 10.6.
Patterns Ensamples to us, to profess with Timothy, the good profession of our
Faith before many Witnesses, 1. Tim. 6.12.
even the Eyes and View of the present World: and with David, not to be ashamed
to speak of Gods Testimonies before Kings, Psalm. 119.46.
not to swerve from Gods Testimonies: though our Persecutors, and Oppressors
were many. Psalm. 119 157
Herein we must be followers of Christ Jesus the Author and finisher of our
Faith, who witnessed a good confession before Pontius Pilate the Judge that
condemned him, 1. Tim. 6.23.
and of Abraham the Father of the Faithful, who built Alters to the Lord, and
called upon the name of the Lord, when the Canaanite, an Idolatrous Nation,
that served other Gods, was in the Land. Genesis 12.6.7.
For then we especially show that the love of Christ is in us, when we abide
with him in tribulation, that we come to him sinceerely, when we take up the
Cross and follow him, Mat. 16.24.
Non est magnum si tunc a Dei Testamonijs non declines, cum te nullus
persequitur. It is no great matter if then thou go not astray from Gods
Commandments, when no man persecuteth thee. It is no great matter to be as
resolute as Peter, when no danger is at hand; to march under the banner of
religion, when authority allows it, honor and prosperity follows it, but
then to endure when the heat of the Day arises, when the fiery trial
comes. is a proof of our rooting and grounding in Christ. The Devil
himself knows that Trouble is the best Trial of Religion, and therefore
thinking Job to be but a Temporizer, one that served God for wordly need, he
would have him tried by adversity, Lay now thine hand upon all that he has,
and he will curse thee to thy face Job. 1.11.


Scilicet vt fulvum spectatur in ignibus aurum,
Tempore sic duro est, inspicienda fides.
Good gold from dross is in the sornace tri'de,
And faith from falsehood in trouble descri'de.
The soldiers courage is not so well seen in the camp, as in the battle,
when they cloase together, Pede pes densusque viruir, foot by foot, and man
cloase with man. The mariners skill is not so well discerned, Cum placidum
ventis stabit mare, When there is not a wagge of wind, as when vna Eurusque
Notusque ruunt, creberque procellis Africus etc. When all the winds hurry
together. And the constancy and courage of the soldier of Jesus Christ, is
best seen and shown, when tribulation arises, when he can endure to the end,
though he be hated of all men for Christ's sake Matt. 10.22.
, It is the protestation of the Church of the Jews, That their heart was not
turned back, nor their steps declined from Gods way, though God had sore
broken them in the place of Dragons, and covered them with the shadow of death,
that they had not forgotten the name of their God, nor holden up their hands to
any strange God, though for his sake they were killed all the day long, and
counted as sheep for the slaughter Psalm 44.18.19.20.21.22.
Shidrach, Meshach and Abednego, would not forsake the Lord their God whom they
served, to fall down before the idol that Nebuchadnezzar had set up, though
the Kings anger were the messenger of death unto them, but were even fortiores
ignibus, stronger then the fire it self Dan. 3.
, Daniell would not intermit his ordinary devotions, which he had formerly
used, no not for a little time, though the decree of his casting into the Lions
Den were signed, and unalterable, according to the Law of the Medes and
Persians Dan. 6.
. Let us not then be ashamed of Christ and his Gospel, when for the same, we
come before the Herodes, the Princes of this world, but let us confess him
boldly before them, who when they have killed this mortal body the baser part
cannot come near our immortal soul the better part.

And let us not with Nichodemus be such cowardly professors, that we should
come to h m by night Ioh. 3.
, doing the works of light in the darkness, nor with Joseph of Arimathea,
be his Disciples in hidde-locke for fear of trouble Ioh 19 38.
, nor with the Parents of the blind man Ioh. 9.22.
, and many of the Jews believe in him, but not dare to confess him, for fear
of being put out of the Synagogue Ioh. 12.42.
: but let us be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might, that we may
be able to stand and withstand in the evil day Ephesians. 6.10.13.
: let us with Paul be ready not be bound only, but also to die at Jerusalem
for the name of the Lord Act 21.11.12.13.
: not pass for all that may happen, nor reckon our life dear, so that we may
fight the good fight of Faith and a good Conscience, and let us cast our
expenses, count what it will cost us, and resolve to endure the heat of the
day, as Chrysostom did to bear whatsoever the Empress Eudoxia would inflict
upon Histor. tripart. lib. 10. cap. 18.
him, (...) (says he Chrysostom. in Epist. ad Cyriaeum Episcopum.
,) If the Empress will banish me, let her banish me, the earth is the Lords
and the fullness thereof. If she will saw me asunder, let her, I have Esaias for
an example. If she will throw me into the Sea, I remember Jonas. If she will
cast me into the Furnace, I have the three Chrildren that counsel me this. If
she will cast me to wild beasts, I remember Daniell cast to the Lions in the
Den. If she will stone me, let her, I have Stephen the first Martyr. If
she will take mine head, let her take it, I have John the Baptist. If she will
take my goods, let her take them, naked came I out of my mothers womb, and
naked shall I return. The Apostle tells me, that God accepts not the person
of man, and, if I should yet please men, I were not the servant of Christ, and
David armeth me saying, I spoke before Kings and was not ashamed. I have been
sufficiently accountable for the first particular, I pass to the next: the
moving cause that brings them to come and enquire.

For we have seen his star in the East.] Of all the senses, wherewith God
has endued man for preservation of nature, there are two, the hearing and the
seeing, that are as windows, whereby he reueileth Divine mysteries, and
conueieth supernatural truths unto the mind. For by hearing he acquainteth
us with his will and word, faith comes by hearing Romans 10.17.
, and let h m that has an ear, hear what the spirit says to the Churches
Reu. 2.7.
. And by seeing his works, either of nature in the creation and preservation
of the universal, or beyond nature, in the wonders that he does: we learn
that the workman is God alone, that none is like him Isai. 46.9.
, and that he is to be praised for his wonderful works to the sons of men
Psalm. 107 8.
. The invisible things of God, even his eternal power and Godhead, are clearly
seen, being understood by the things that are made Romans 1.20.
. The heavens doelare the glory of God, and the firmament shows his handy
work Ioh. 2.11. and 6.14.
. And by miracles, our Savior manifested his glory, and wrought faith in the
hearts of them that saw them, as here, Noua stella novum adventasse hominem
reuelabat Max. hom. 2. in Epiphan.
. A new star showed that a new man was come. And they call it here his
star, quia quamvis etc Idem. homil. 4. in Epiph.
, because although all the stars being created by him are his, yet this was
Christ's more peculiarly, because it did specially show his coming. And the
rest of the stars were made, that they might distinguish the times, and
courses of this world, but this was commanded to appear, that the Lord of the
world, and the time of heaxenly Kingdom was at hand.

Now, eo nascente etc August. sermon. 34. de temp.
, at his birth, a new light was reueiled in a star, at whose death the old
light was veiled in the Sun. At his birth, the heavens shined with a new
honor, at whose death hell trembled with a new fear, at whose resurrection his
Disciples were inflamed with a new love, at whose ascension the Heavens obeyed
with a new service.

And our Saviors birth was not only honored with this new sign from heaven
(a thing which at another time the Pharisees desired Matt 16.1.
, though now it would not work upon them) but also, omnia noua (says
Chrysostom Chrysostom. hom. 1. ex varijs in Matt.
) All things both new and going beyond humane admiration, do meet in the
Lords birth. An Angel speaks in the Temple to Zachary, and promises that
Elizabeth shall have a son. The Priest not believing the Angel, is dumb,
the barren conceiueth, a Virgin brings a child. John being inspired leapeth
in his mothers womb. Christ our Lord being borne, is told of by an Angel --
the Angels were glad, and the sheepe-heards rejoice.

There were multa documenta (says Leo Leo sermon. 5. in Epiphan.
) Many instructions which by manifest tokens declared that the Lord was borne,
either when the Blessed Virgin Mary heard and believed, that she should
conceive by the Holy Ghost, and bring forth the Son of GOD, or when at her
salvation John Baptist being in his mothers womb and not yet borne, leaped
with a prophetical exultation, and did (as it were) cry in the womb of his
mother. Behold the Lamb of God which takes away the sins of the World, or
when at such time as the Angel told of the birth of the Lord, the
sheepe-heards were compassed about with the glory of the Heavenly army. Now for
the questions wherewith the curiosity of man has loaded this particular, what
this star was, whether one or many, whether newly created, or one of the old
stars created from the beginning, whether a real star, or a Comet, or an
Angel in figure of a star, whether it was seated in the firmament or in the
air, whether it rose in the East, or they being in the East saw it in Judea,
whether, they saw it and none others, how it moved, whether circularly or
right forward, when it first began to appear, and when it ceased, they are
but aranearum telae, in quibus retexendis tempus non collocabo, Spider webbes,
which I will not spend time to unweave; the knowledge of them will make us
never a whit nearer to heaven, and the ignorance of them will nothing hinder us
from coming there. Only illud inquisitione dignum puto, vnde ad hunc illi
potuerunt intellectum venire (says Chrysostom Chrysostom. homil. 6. in Matt.
) I think this point worth the asking how they could come to the
understanding, that this star did portend the birth of the Messiah, and quis
eos in hoc suscitasse credatur, and who may be thought to have stirred them up
hereunto. For solution whereof I may say, that besides the prophecies, of
Balaam (whereof I have already spoken) of Daniell about the seventy weeks and
the coming of the Messiah Dan. 9.24.26.
, (which by reason of the captivity of Babylon were spread abroad amongst the
Gentiles) of the Sybillaes (which though some condemn for fained, because they
speak some things of Christ more plainly then the holy Prophets) yet Saint
Austin thinks that they prophesied by the same Spirit of God to the Gentiles,
by which the Prophets prophesied to the people of the Hebrews August. lib. 18.
de ciuit dei cap. 18.
, of whom one says Samia Sybilla.
.

Huma no quem Virgo sinu inuiolata fouebit,
Annuit hoc caelum rutilantia sydera monstrant.
Whom in her arms a Virgin pure shall hold,
The heaven showed, the shinning stars foretold.
Besides these I say that God did singulariter excitare illos, stir them up
particularly. Magnitudinem significationis intelligunt (says Leo Leo sermon. 3.
in Epiphan.
) They understand the depth of the meaning by divine inspiration, which did so
work in their hearts, that they could not be ignorant of the mystery of this
great Vision, and that that, which was unusual to their eyes, might not be
unknown to their minds. And so Chrysostom answers his own question Chrysostom.
hom. 6. in Matt.
, This seems to me not to be the stars work alone, but Gods also, by whom
their mind was stirred up hereunto, whom we may read to have done such a
thing in Cyrus King of Persia, preparing him, and stirring him up to deliver
the people of the Jews from the yoke of captivity C^ro. 36.22. and Ezra. 1.1.
, And to the same effect he speaks also, forte miratur aliquis etc Chrysostom.
homil. 1. ex varijs in Matt.
, Happily some man may wonder how the wisemen could know the birth of our
Savior by the sign of a star! We say that this was the gift of Gods grace.
And Baronius a great Rabbi amongst our adversaries makes no bones to say, that
all the fathers agree that these Magi, were brought to Christ, as well by the
inward light of the Spirit, as by the outward light of the star Baron. tom.
1. Annal. page 55.
.

But to come out of the Laborinth of these questions, to that which may
minister edifying to the hearers, as Moses upon the Mount Nebo Deuteronomy. 34.1.2.
, saw the glory of the Land of Canaan, so we in this bringing of the wise men
to Christ by a star, may as in a mount of visions, see a twofold glory of
the Lord. First a glory of his goodness, in that he calls them by a new
star, that had abused all the old stars to impiety and superstition, making
the stumbling block whereby they fell, to be the star whereby they should
rise again. Quare per stellam Petrus Chryso. Log. sermon. 157.
, etc. Why by a star? That through Christ, the matter of their error might
be an occasion of their salvation. Of his goodness, I say, in that he does as
it were, vti foro serve the time here, fitting himself to their disposition,
and catching the fish by the bait wherewith it would soonest be taken. Inquis
oportuit mitti Prophetas potius (says Chrysostom Chrysostom. bomil. 6. in Matthew.
etc.) Thou will say that Prophets should rather have been sent, but the
Wisemen would never have believed Prophets, or that he should have spoken to
them with some voice from heaven, neither would they have cared much for that.
Or that he should have sent an Angel, but happily they would have slightly
regarded him. Therefore God leaving all these, calls them by those things
which custom had made familiar unto them, by his wonderful gracious carriage
of the matter, even stooping to he salvation of men. And a little after, and so
in imitation hereof, Paul taking occasion from the Altar, disputes with the
Gentiles, and brings forth testimonies out of their own Poets; and for a
while preaches Christ to the Jews without forbidding of circumcision, and
from the sacrifices takes the beginning of his doctrine for them that yet
lived under the Law. For because every one is greatly in love with his own
custom, both God, and the teachers that he sent for the salvation of the
world, take to themselves matter to speak of from the custom of every nation.
Think it therefore no strange matter, that the Wisemen are called by a star.
Quoniam Astrologierant etc. (says Theophylact Theophyl. in hoe Euangel.
.) Because the Wise men were Astrologers, therefore God brings them by a
familiar sign, as he brought Peter a Fisher man by a multitude of fishes unto
the name of Christ, and caused him to wonder. And so John Baptist used Baptism
Muscul. in locum.
, a matter familiar to the Jews (for washing was much in request with them
Mar. 7.1.6.
) that thereby he might prepare a people to the Lord. Thus does God (as Saint
Austin speaks) ad se homines miris modis adducere, bring men unto him after
wonderful sorts, and becomes all things to all men, that by some means he
might win some of them.

Secondly we may see here a glory of our Lord and Saviors greatness, in that
his baseness in the flesh, his being in the form of a servant, is accompanied
still with some marks, of his Deity, of his being in the form of God, that so
where the one did (...) cause any occasion of error, the other might (...)
take away the error again Gregor. Nazianz. in oral. 2. de filio.
. For thus in praesepe iacebat (says Austin August. sermon. 30. de tempore.
) he lay in a Manger, and yet brought the wise men from the East, he was hidden
in a Stable, and yet acknowledged in the heavens, that being acknowledged in
heaven, he might be manifested in the Stable. Cum ipse dominus noster (says
Maximus Maximus homil. 3. in Epiphan.
etc.) When our Lord according to the Law of man's birth, being a little one and
an infant, cried in his cradle, and was wrapped in swaddling clouts, yet then a
wonderful star from an high showed his greatness to the whole world. And
Quamuis (says he Maximus homil. 4 in Epiphan.
.) Although he covered his Godhead with the Mantle of our body, yet heaven
showed him, and the earth knew him to be God.

Gregory Nazianzen has an excellent passage to show how the glory of his
godhead, went as it were, hand in hand with the meanness of his manhood from
his cradle to his cross Greg. Naz. vbi supra.
, I will recite it, though it be somewhat long.

He was borne of a woman, but a Virgin, that as man, this as God; he was
carried in the womb, but he is known to the Prophet being also in the womb,
and leaping before the Word by whom he was made: He was wrapped in swaddling
clouts, but when he rises he pulls off the clothes, that he was buried
in: He is laid in a Manger, but he is glorified by the Angels, signified by
the star, adored by the Wise men: He was made fly into Egypt, but he
makes the idols of Egypt fly: He had neither form nor beauty to the Jews,
but to David he was more beautiful then the sons of men, but upon the
Mountain he shines, and is brighter then the sun: He was baptized as man,
but he washes away sins as God, but it was to Sanctify the waters (and the
Holy Ghost descends upon him, and the Father gives him a testimony as being
God) he was tempted as man, but he overcomes as God, but he bids us be
of good comfort, because he has overcome the world: He was hungry, but he
fed thousands, but he is the Bread of Life that came from heaven: He was
thirsty, but he cried, if any man thirst, let him come to me -- he was weary,
but he is the rest of all them that are weary, and heavy laden. He is heavy
with sleep, but upon the Sea, he is light, but he rebukes the winds but he
lifts up Peter ready to be drowned: He pays tribute, but out of a fish,
but he is King of them that require it. He is called a Samaritane, and one that
is possessed with a Devil -- but he is acknowledged of the Devils, he drives
out the Devils, and sends legions of Friends into the Deep, and sees the
Prince of the Devils falling as lightning. He is stoned, but not vanquished.
He asks where Lazarus was laid, for he is a man, but he raises Lazarus,
for he was God. He is sold, and that very cheap, for thirty pieces of silver,
but he redeemeth the World, and that with a great price, even his own blood.
He is weak and wounded, but he heals every disease and every sickness. He
is brought to the Cross, and fastaned to it, but by the Cross he restores
life, but he saves the Thief that was crucified with him, and causes
darkness, but the Veil of the Temple renteth, but the stones cleave a sunder,
and the dead are raised: He dies, but he makes alive, and by death
destroys death: He is buried, but he rises again; Thus that no man might
stumble at his humiliation in the flesh, the glory of the Godhead manifested
it self still therein.

But that I may draw toward an end of mine account for the whole bill here, I
come to the last particular, which is the final cause and end of their coming.

We are come to worship him.] And this though the last in order, is the
weightiest of all the particulars here in nature. For upon it hangs not
only the grace, but even the goodness and virtue of all that formerly here
they do, and of all the circumstances, that make this work of theirs so
commendable, yea so admirable unto us. For it is a ruled case of the Logitians,
that Vltimus finis solus perfecit tam agentem quam actionem: The chief end
alone does make perfect as well the doer, as the action, and again, Qualis
finis talis actio, such as the end is, such is the action; so that to have come
presently upon Christ's birth, and that when bloody Herod reigned, to have come
so far a journey, even out of the East to Jerusalem, the place that God had
chosen to put his name in, to have enquired so solemnly for the newborn King
of the Jews, and to have been led thither by the guiding of a star, had
been nothing if the end had not commended the action: yea had been
abominable rather then admirable, if they had come, not to worship him (as
they both profess and purpose) but to worry him, as Herod intended when he
would have gone unto him, howsoever he pretended to adore him. We may here
then as in a glass, see what should be the very final cause and end of our
coming unto Christ (who though he be not bodily present with us, yet secundum
^aesentiam maiestatis August. tractat. 50. in Ioh.
, is ever in the assembly of his Saints) which is, to yield him the homage that
we owe unto him, the honor that is due unto him, either in bringing our
oblations and sacrifices unto him, or in receiving from him, the treasures that
he does impart unto us by his Word and Sacraments. All other ends that men
propose to themselves in coming unto him, are not ends, but rather aberrations
from the true end. And as it were better never to know the way of
righteousness, then after knowledge of it to turn from it 2. Pet. 2.21.
, so better it were, never to come to Christ at all, then to mar our coming
in the end thereof, to cause that quod officio videtur bonum, in the work
seems to be good, to be ipso non recto fine peccatum, a sin for want of a
right end August. contra Iulianum pelagian. lib 4. cap. 3.
. For thus men do, when eitheir they come unto him for the belly and for
pleasures, as the people followed him for Loaves, and as Bernard complaining of
pomp and luxury of the Clergy of Popery in his time said pro huiusmodi volunt
etc Bernard sermon 37. super Cantica.
. Ioh. 6.26.
For these matters they will be, and become rulers of Churches, Deanes,
Archdeacons, Bishops, Archbishops, or for honor and preferment like to
Zebedeus sons, who desired to sit one on his right hand, the other on his
left hand in his glory Mar. 10.37.
, or like to Diotrephes for love of preferment 3. Epist. Ioh. 9.
, or of curiosity because they would see some great works wrought by him, as
the Pharisees and Sadduces come to him, desiring him that he would show a sign
from heaven Mat. 16.1.
, and as Herod, who desired to see Christ, because he hoped to have seen some
miracle done by him Luke 23.8.
, or of Hypocrisy, because they would put a fair Vizard upon a foul face,
and cover their evil deeds with a good profession, being (as Saint Austin
speaks) in superficie boni, in alto mali, good in the out side, bad in the
inside, or of vain glory, as our Saviors brethren would have had him gone up
to the feast of Tabernacles that he might be known openly Ioh. 7.3.4.
, and that with the Pharisee they might seem better and holier then other men
Luke 18.11.
, that with Simon Magus they might seem to be some great men Act. 8.9.
, sunt qui scire volunt, vt sciantur (says Bernard Bernar sermon. 36. super
Cantica.
) There are some that would have knowledge that they might be known again; or
for their corporal need only, as the nine Lepers that roar out for mercy
that they may be cleansed, but have not a word of praise in their mouths to
glorify God with, when they are delivered Luke 17.17.
, or which is worst of all, out of malice and mischief, as the Pharisees
Disciples and the Herodians came unto him to entangle him in his talk Mat.
22.15.
, as the officers sent by the High Priests, to take him Ioh. 7.32.
, and as Judas one of them that did eat bread with him to betray him Mat.
26.47.


But to speak somewhat of this honor that they give here to Christ, it is the
opinion of some Calvin, Musculus.
, that they give unto him civil adoration, as taking him to be a great Prince,
not religious adoration, as acknowledging him to be God. But in mine
understanding, both all Antiquity and the truth it self stand on the other
side. Putas adorassent infantem etc. (says Chrysostom Chrysostom. in opere imperf.
in Mat. homil. 2.
) Think thou that, they would have adored an infant that did not understand
the honor of adoration, unless they had believed that there was some Divine
power in him. Therefore they gave this honor, not to his Childhood that
understood nothing, but to his Godhead that knew all things. Nec apud sensus
eorum August. sermon. 29. de tempore.
etc. Neither in their understanding, does the baseness of his birth diminish
the glory of his Godhead -- with their eyes they see man, by their service
they confess him to be God -- he was scene in the Manger, but he did bear
rule in Heaven. And therefore the Wisemen humbled themselves because they saw
the stars do him service. For they knew him to be God, to whom the heavenly
creatures yielded their service. And Athanasius reasons well in this case
Quomodo in stabulo etc Athanasius lib. de incarnat.
. How do they adore him that lay in a stable and a manger, if they imagine him
to be nothing but a man? How does Herod say that he would adore him also? In
vain truly had God taught them by so unusual a miracle, that they should
adore a man only and not God also. It is then religious and divine honor that
they give unto him as God. Let me here then show you a mystery, which is how
Christ being both God and man is to be adored. Although then the Godhead be
the propper object to which adoration is propperly directed, yet is not the
Godhead adored without the manhood, but by reason of that strict band of the
personal union of the two natures Christ as (...) God and man is to be adored
with one only adoration, which adoration is given Oblique, August in Psalm. 58.
In an indirect manner, to the manhood, in regard that it is the Manhood of the
Word, and received into the unity of the second Person, Dominum rerum
creatarum (says Athanasus, Athanas: contra Arrianos
etc. We do adore the Lord of all created things the Word being made flesh:
For although the flesh of it self be a part of things created, yet it is
become the body of God; neither therefore do we adore this Body a part, and
separated from the Word, neither when we are about to adore the Word, do we
separate it far from the flesh, but because we know (as has been said)
that the Word was made Flesh: We acknowledge it now manifested in the flesh to
be God. Who then is so graceless, as to speak so to the Lord, stand aside
from the Body that I may adore thee? Or who is so wicked that with the Jews
because of his Body he will say unto him, Why do thou being a Man, make
thy self God? And for this adoring of the Word being made flesh with one only
adoration, we have the Anathematisme of Cyrill in the Ephesine Council, which
is the Third Oecumenicall Council Tom 1. Council. in Council. Ephesine
Anathematismo. 8.
Si quis, etc. If any one does not adore Emanuell with one only adoration, and
give him one only glory, according to that, the Word was made flesh, let him
be accursed. It is then but a profane novelty both of words and Doctrines
not only in the Papists, to give a several kind of worship (which they call
Hyperdulia, a Service a step higher, then that which they give to Saints and
Angels) Soli humanitati Christi Bellarm. lib. 1. de beatit. Sanctorum cap. 12.
To the Manhood of Christ alone, but also in the Vbiquitaries, who contend for
the adoration of the humanity of Christ properly and severally by it self
Barbarossa in quinquagessima
, Adoratio Latriae (says Aquinas Thomas in 3.2. quest. 25.25. arti. 2.
.) The adoration of Latria or Divine Worship, is not given to the humanity in
respect of it self, but in respect of the Divinity to which it is united, and
Cyrill says Cyri^l ad Theodos.
, that we do not adore Emanuell as a man, for that were dotage, deceit and
error, for in this we should nothing differ from them which worship the
creature etc. Let them that have ears then hear these deep mysteries of
their faith, and the Lord give them understanding in all things, that they may
so adore and glorify God manifested in the flesh, so honor the Son, serve
the Son, that the Father may honor them Ioh. 12.26.
, and give them Glory with him. To this Father and Son with the Holy Ghost a
Trinity in unity, and an unity in Trinity, be Honor and Power everlasting.
Amen.

The end of the third Sermon.

