THE Second part of the Book of Christian exercise, appertayning to Resolution.

OR A Christian directory, guiding all men unto their salvation.

Written by the former Author R. P.

Psalm, 27. ver. 4. One thing have I requested of the Lord, and that I will
demand still, which is, to dvvell in his house all the days of my life: to
the end I may know and do his will.

AT LONDON, Printed by John Charlwood for Simon Waterson, in S. Paul's
Church-yarde, at Cheape-gate. 1592.

To the right Honourarable, Sir Thomas Heneage, Knight, Chancellor of the
Duchy of Lancaster, vize Chamberlain to her excellent Majesty, Treasurer of
her royal Chamber, and one of her Highness most honorable privy Counsel.
All happiness in this life, and in the life to come heartily wished.
BOth duty, for honorable favors received, and entire affection, the spur
that pricketh forward the very harshest conceit: has imboldened me to
present this treatise to your honors view, as a testimony of good will to
shun the infamous title of ingratitude, as also in some measure to express
my poor yet unfeigned zeal, the boldness of the one (I presume) noble nature
will pardon, the slender ability of the other (I hope) the same will accept.

I know how far from your honorable thoughts, sinister opinions are, that
might check the young springing plants, whose forwardnes promise greater
mattters to ensue. I know withal, not only your honorable care to cherish
such endeavors, but also your provident and liberal bounty, in supporting any
towardly hope from falling. Over faint hearted might he then be thought, that
would dismay when doubt is so worthily removed.

Then boldly (yet as it becomes me in duty) I reverently deliver your
honor this simple gift: referring the judgment both of it and me, to your
wonted noble consideration. And as your years, so pray I all blessings of
heaven may increase upon you, to the comfort of such as have good cause to
love you.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER, Health.
CVrteous Reader, not many years since a book was published Of Christian
Exercise, appertaining to Resolution: written by a Jesuit beyond the seas, yet
an Englishman, named M. Robert Parsons; which Book M. Edmund ^unney having
diligently perused, committed to the public view of all indifferent
judgments: as glad, that so good matter proceeded from such infected people,
and that good might arise thereby to the benefit of others. Since the
manifestation of that Book, the first Author thereof, named M. Robert Parsons,
has enlarged the same Book, with a second part and new Additions, wherein
he has concluded and finished his whole intent of the Resolution, and that
upon special causes, as himself sets down in Preface in this manner.

Being admonished by the writings of diverse, that since the publishing of my
first Book, it has been misliked in two principal points. First, that I
speak so much of good works and so little of faith. Secondly, that I talked so
largely of Gods justice, and so briefly of his mercy. Beside, conceiving by
the information of many, that diverse persons, having a desire in themselves to
read the ^ormer book, but yet being weak and fearful to be touched so near
in conscience, as they imagined that Book did, durst never intermedle therewith,
being informed there was nothing in the same wherewith to entertain
themselves, but only such vehement matter of persuasion, as would greatly
trouble and afflict them. For remedy of which inconueniencie, I have framed
this second part of that work, and therein inserted diverse chapters and
discourses of matters more plausible, and of themselves more indifferent,
wherewith the Reader may solace his mind, at such times as he finds the same
not willing to feel the spur of more earnest motion to perfection.

Hereupon grevv the occasion of his framing his second book: which being
perused by sundry learned men who have thought it as worthy to be seen as
the first, ^s now (gentle Reader) presented to thy view: read it
indifferently, and judge thereof, as thou find occasion.

OF THE MANIFOLD PERILS THAT ENSVE to the World by Inconsideration. And how
necessary it is for eueri^ man, to enter into cogitation of his own estate.
CHAP. I.
THE Prophets and Saints of GOD, The charitable proceeding of God by his
Prophe^s.
who from time to time have been sent by his merciful providence to
advertise and vvarne sinners of their perilous estate and condition for sin,
have not only foretold them of their wickedness and imminent dangers for the
same, but also have revealed the causes thereof, whereby they might the easier
provide remedy for the inconveniences to come.

Such is the charitable proceeding of our most merciful Lord with the children
of men. And among other causes, none is more general, or oftener alleged, than
the lack of consideration: The danger of Inconsideration.
by which, as by a common snare and deceit of our adversary, most men fall
into sin, and are holden also perpetually in the same, to their final
destruction and eternal perdition. So Esaias the Prophet, speking of the
careless Nobility and Gentry of Jury, that gave themselves to banqueting
and disporte, without consideration of their duties toward God: repeateth
often the threate of woe against them, and then puts down the cause in
these words: Esa. 5. The sensual life of the Jewish gentry.
The Lute, and Harp, and Timbrel, and Shalme, and good wine, abounds in your
banquets, but the works of God you respect not, nor have you consideration of
his doings. And then insueth, Therefore has hell enlarged his soul, and
opened his mouth without all measure or limitation, and the stout, and high,
and glorious of thi^ people shall descend into it.

Here are two causes (as you see) and two effects linked together, of these
Jews damnation, the one depending of the other. For as good cheer and
sensuality, brought these men to inconsideration of GODS works and
proceedings toward sinners: so inconsideration brought them to the mouth and
pits brimme of hell. I say, that inconsideration of Gods works toward
sinners, brought them to this perrill, for that it follovveth in the very same
place: And the Lord of hosts shall be exalted in judgment, and our holy God
shall be sanctified in justice: as if he had said, that albeit you will not
consider now Gods judgments and justice, amidst the heat and pleasure of
your feasting: yet shall he, by exercising the same upon you hereafter, be
known exalted and sanctified thoroughout the world. The like discourse
makes God himself by the same prophet, to the daughter of Babylon, Esa. 47.
and by her to every sinful and sensual soul, figured by that name. Come
down (says he) and sit in the dust thou daughter of Babylon^ thou have said,
The daughter of Babylon forgets her end
I shall be a Lady for ever, and have not put upon thy heart ye things that thou
should, nor have thou had remembrance of thy last end, etc. Now therefore
harken thou delicate (daughter) which dwell so confidently, there shall come
upon thee an evil, whereof thou shall not know the offspring, and a calamity
shall rush upon thee, from which thou shall not be able to deliver thee. A
misery shall overtake thee upon the sudden, which thou shall not know, etc.

Holy Jeremy, after he had weighed with himself what miseries for sin the
Prophets Esaias, Amos, Hosea, Joel, Abdias, Micheas, Nahum, Sophonias, and
himself, (all which Prophets lived within the compass of one hundred years)
had foretold to be imminent upon the world: not only to Samaria and the ten
Trybes of Israel, 4. Reg. 15. and 17.
which were now already carried into banishment to the furthest parts of the
East, but also to the States and Countries that most flourished at that time,
(as by name to Babylon, Egypt, Damasco, Tyrus, Sidon, Moab, and finally to
Jerusalem and Judea it self, The complaint of Jeremy for inconsideration.
which he foresaw should soon after most pitifully be destroyed) when he saw
also by long experience, that neither his words, nor the words and cries of the
other forenamed Prophets, could any thing move the hearts of wicked men: he
brake forth into this most lamentable complaint, Desolatione desolata est omnis
terra, quia nullus est qui recogitet cord. The whole earth falls into
extreme ruin and desolation, for that there is no man which co^sidereth
deeply in his heart.

This complaint made good Jeremy in his days for compassion of his people,
that ran miserably to perdition for want of consideration. And the same
complaynt with much more reason, may every good Christian make at this time,
for the infinite souls of such as perish daily by inconsideration. Whereby,
as by a general and remediless enchantment, many thousand souls are
brought a sleep, and do find themselves within the gates of hell, before they
misdoubt any such inconvenience, being led thorough the vale of this present
life as it were blindfolded, with the veyle of careless negligence, (like beasts
to the slaughterhouse) and never permitted to see their own danger, until it
be too late to remedy the same. Esaias 5.
Propterea captiuus ductus est populus m^us, quia non habuit scientiam, says
God by the mouth of Esaias. Therefore, and for this cause is my people led
away captive in all bondage and slavery to perdition, for that they have no
knowledge, no understanding of their own estate, no foresight of the times to
come, no consideration of their danger. Herehence flows all the misery of my
people, and yet this is a mystery that al men will not know.

The mystery of Inconsideration. Job. 4.
Will you see what a mystery and sealed secret this is? harken then how one
describes the same, and with what circumstances. Furthermore (says he) a
certain hidden word was spoken unto me, and mine e^re (as it were by stealth)
received the veins of his whispering: it was in the horror of a vision by
night, when dead sleep is wont to possess men: fear came upon me and
trembling, and all my boanes were extremely terrified. At length a spirit past
by, in my presence, whereat the hairs of my flesh stood up in horror. There
stood before me one whose face I knew not. His image was before mine eyes,
and I heard his voice, as the sound of a soft air.

Hitherto is described in what manner and order this secret was revealed; but
now what said this vision or spirit (think you) at the last? truly, he m^de a
short discourse, to prove by the fall of Angels for their sin, that much
more, Job. 4.
Qui habitant domus luteas, and terrenum habent fundamentum, consumentur velut
tinea, et de mane vsque ad vesperam succidentur: A collection to be noted.
they who dwell in houses of mortar, (as all do, whose bodies are of flesh)
and they which have their foundation of earth, (as most folk of this world
have, that put their confidence in things of this life) they must all consume
by little and little, as the cloth does by the moth, and at length they must
upon the sudden (within less space perhaps than is from morning to night) be
cut down and dispatched, when they think least of it.

And to show that herein stands a point of high secrecy (I mean to consider
and po^der well this discourse) he makes his conclusion in these words
immediately following Et quia nullus intelligit, in aeternum peribunt; And for
that few or none of these men before mentioned, who have such earthly
foundations, do understand this point aright, (I mean of their sudden
death, Lack of consideration, cause of eternal destruction.
and cutting off from this world) therefore must they perish eternally, and
this is a secret which few men will believe. Psalm. 91.
Vir i^sipiens non cognoscet (says David) and stultus non intelliget haec: An
unadvised man will not learn these things, A point that fools will not
consider.
nor will a fool understand them. But what things? it insueth in the same
place: how wonderful the works of God, and how deep his cogitations are
about sinners; who spring up as grass (and flourish in this world) vt intereant
in seculum seculi: to the end they may perish for ever and ever.

The Prophet Daniel had many visions, and strange reuel^tions of great and high
mysteries: but one among all other (and this is the least) of the most
dreadful judgments of God, upon sinners in the end of the world. The Vision
was by the great River Tygris: Dan. 10. A most terrible vision of Daniel,
wherein he saw Christ.
where, as diverse Angels were attending about the banks, so upon the water it
self stood one in the likeness of a man, of exceeding dreadful majesty; his
apparel being only linen, through which his body shined like precious
stone, his eyes like burning lamps, his face like flashing lightning, his arms
and legs like brass enflamed, and his voice as the shoute of a whole multitude
of people that should speak together. This was Christ by all interpretation,
at whose terrible presence when Daniel fell down dead, he was erected again
by an Angel, and made strong to abide the vision; and so having heard and seen
the most wonderful things that in his Book he recounteth, he was bold to ask a
question or two, for better understanding thereof: and his first question was,
Dan. 12.
How long it should be ere these wonderful things took their end? Whereunto
the man upon the water answered, by stretching forth both his brazen arms to
heaven, and swearing strangly by him that lives for ever: that it should be A
time, and times, and half a time. Which answer, Daniel not understanding,
began to question further, but he was cut off with this dispatch: A secret.
Go thy way Daniel, for these speeches are shut up and sealed, until the time
pre-ordayned. And yet for his further instruction, it was added in the same
place; Impreagent impij nec intelligent: Dan. 12.
wicked men will always do wickedly, and will not understand these mysteries,
albeit we should never so much expound them.

Whereby, VVilfull ignorance.
as by all the rest that hitherto has been alleged, is made apparent, that
inconsideration, negligence, careless ignorance, and lack of understanding in
our own estates, and in Gods judgments and proceedings with iniquity and sin:
has been a bane, and a common perdition of retchlesse men from time to time.

The cause of so much sin at this day.
And if we will turn our eyes to this our age, much more shall we see the same
to be true. For, what is the cause (think you) why at this day we have so
many of those people, Job, 15.
whom holy Job does call abominable, that drink up iniquity, as beasts
drink water? that commit all sin, all injustice, all turpitude, without
remorse or scurple of conscience? What is the cause of this (I say) but lack
of consideration, lack of understanding, lack of knowledge? For as Christ
said to Jerusalem touching her destruction, Luke, 19.
Si cogno^isses et tu, etc. If thou also (o sinful soul) did know what
hangs over thy head for this careless life of thine: if thou (daughter of
Babylon) would remember and ponder in thine heart, what shall be the end of thy
delights, thou would not live so pleasantly as thou do: Luke, 19.
Nunc autem abscondita sunt ab occulis tuis: But now (says Christ) these
things are hidden from thine eyes.

Not, but that thou might have known them if thou would, but for that
thou art one of them that say to God, Voluntary inconsideration.
scientiam viarum tuarum nolumus, we will not have understanding of thy ways:
one of them qui sunt rebels lumini, Job. 21.
yt are rebellious against the light and illumination of Gods grace: Job. 23.
one of them, qui nolunt intelligere vt been agent, that will not understand to
do well: and finally, one of them, Prou. 28.
qui declinant aures ne audiant Legem, that turn away their ears to the end
they may not hear Gods Law: Prou. 28.
quorum oration est execrabilis, whose not only life, but also prayer is
execrable and dete^table in the sight of their Maker.

Truly, nothing in reason can be less tolerable in the presence of Gods
Majesty, than whereas he has published a Law unto us, Deuteronomy. 6. and 11.
with so great charge to bear it in mind, to ponder in heart, Joshua. 1.
to study and meditate upon it both day and night, Psalm. 118.
at home and abroad, Eccle, 6. and 22.
at our vprising and our down lying, to make it our cogitation, our discourse,
our talk, our exercise, our rumination, and our delight: that we should
notwithstanding contemn the same, as to make it no pat of our thought, but
rather to flee the knowledge thereof, as we see most men of the world do, for
not troubling their consciences.

Eccl^ 17. The first cause why men flee consideration.
But the holy Ghost has laid down the reason hereof long ago in these words:
Cum sit timida nequitia testimonium condemnationis: For that wickedness in it
self is always fearful, it gives witness against it self of damnation,
whenever it thinks of the Law of God, or of hon^stie. So Foelix the
Governor of Jury, when S. Paul began to talk of justice, chastity, Acts 24.
and Gods judgments before him, he was wonderfully afeard and said to Paul,
that he should depart for that time, and that he would call for him afterward,
when occasion should require. But he never did, and wh^t was the cause? for
that (as Josephus testifies) he was a wicked man, Iosep. lib. 20. antiq. cap.
5.
and Drusilla his fair Lady that was with him at S. Paul's speech, was not his
true wife, but taken by allurement and violence from an other, and therefore it
offended them both to hear preaching of chastity.

This then is one principal cause, why men of this world will not enter into
consideration of their own estate, and of Gods commandments, least they
should read and see their own faults, and bear witness against themselves of
their own condemnation. The second cause why men flee consideration.
Whereunto the holy Scripture annexeth an other cause, not far unlike to this,
which is, that worldly men do so drown themselves in the cares and
cogitations of this life, as they leave in their minds no place to think upon
Gods affairs, which are the business of their own souls.

This expresses Jeremy the Prophet most effectually, Ierem. 7.
when having made his complaint, that notwithstanding his preaching and crying
in the Temple gate, for long time together, where all the people passed by him
and heard him: yet no man (says he) would enter into consideration, or say
with himself, Ierem. 8.
what have I done? and reason: Omnes enim conuersi sunt ad cursum suum, qua
siequus impetu vadens ad praelium. All men are set upon their own courses and
ways, and do run in the same with as great vehemency and fearce
obstinacio^, as a furious armed horse, when he hears the Trumpet in the
beginning of a battle. By which comparison, the holy Ghost expresses very
liuly, ye irrecouerable state of a settled worldlly man, that follows greedily
his own designments in the negotiation of earth.

These are two of the chief causes of inconsideration, I mean wilful malice
and obstinate corruption in the vanities of this life. And yet me^tioneth the
Scripture, The third cause of inconsideration.
a third sort also of inconsiderate men, who neither of direct malice, nor yet
of great occupation in worldly affairs do neglect consideration, but rather
of a certain lightness and idle negligence, for that they will not trouble their
heads with any thing but disport and recreation, of whom it is written, Wisdom.
15.
aestimauerunt lusum esse vitam nostram: They esteem this life of ours to be
but a play-game. And in an other place of the same men: Eccle, 8.
Ita securi viuunt quasi iustorum facta habeant. They live as securely and
confidently without care and cogitation, as if they had the good works of just
men to stand for the^. But as the holy Ghost pronounces in the same place^ hoc
vanissimum: this is vanity and folly in the highest degree.

For as in things of this life, A comparison.
he were but a foolish Merchant, that for quietness sake would never look into
his own account book, whether he were behind hand or before and as the
ship-master were greatly to be laughed at, that for avoiding of care, would sit
down and make good cheer, and let the ship go whether she would: so, much
more in the business of our soul, it is madness and folly to fly consideration
for eschewing of trouble, seeing in the end this negligence must needs turn
upon us more trouble, and irremediable calamity.

For as Jeremy says to all such men, Iere. 30.23.
in nouissimo die intelligetis ea, in the end of your days, you shall not
choose but know, and see, and understand these things, In the end evil me^
shall understand, whither they will or no.
which now for delecacie you will not take the pains to think of. But when
shall this be trow you? he tells plainly in the same place: When the fury of
the Lord shall come forth as a whirlwind, and shall rush and rest upon your
heads as a tempest: then shall you know and understand these things.

It seems that the Babylonians were a people very faulty in this point of
consideration, The example of the Babylonians.
(as all wealthy people are) not only by that which before has been touched
of the daughter of Babylon, that would not consider her ending days: but also,
for that not long before ye most terrible destruction of that great city by
the Medes and Persians, God cried unto her in these words: Esaias, 21.
My dearly beloved Babylon, put aside the Table, and stand upon thy watch:
rise up you Princes from eating and drinking: take your Targets in your hands:
go, and set a watchman upon the walls, and what soever he sees, let him
tell you.

And then was there a watchman set upon the walls, and a Lion to denounce
with open mouth, whatsoever danger he saw coming toward them. And God taught
the Prophet to cry in this sort to their Sentinel or watchman: Custos, quid de
nocte? custos, quid de nocte? Thou Watchman, what see thou coming toward
thee by night? what espyest thou (O Sentinel) drawing on us in the darkness?

By all which circumstaunce, what else is insinuated, but that God would have us
stand upon our watch, We must stand upon our watch.
for that his judgments are to come upon the world by night, when men least
think thereof? they are to come as a thief at midnight, as also in an other
place we are admonished, and therefore happy is the man that shall be found
watchful. Consideration the only door to our watch.
But now the door and sole entrance into this watch, whereof the security of
our eeternal life depends, can be nothing else but consideration, for that
where no consideration is, there can be no watch, nor foresight, nor knowe^edge
of our ^state; and consequent^y no hope of our salvation, as holy S. Bernard
holds; Bern. lib. 1. de con^i.
which thing, caused that blessed man to write ^iue whole books of
consideration ^o Eugenius.

Consideration is the thing that ^ringeth us to know God and our ^elues. And
touching God, it lays before us his Mai^stie, his mercy, his ^udgments, his
commandments, ^is threatenings, his promises, his ^roceeding with other men
before ^s, whereby we may gather, what we ^lso in time must expect at his hands

And for ourselves, consideration ^s the key that opneth the door to the
closet of our heart, where all our Books of account do lie: The many
commodities of consideration.
it is the looking glass, or rather the very eye of the soul, whereby she
takes the view of herself, and looks into al her whole estate; into her
riches, her debts, her duties, her negligences, her good gifts, her defects,
her safety, her danger, her way she walks in, her course she follows, her
pace she holds, and finally, the place and end whereunto she draws. And
without this consideration, she runs on headlong, into a thousand brakes
and briars, stumbling at every step, into some inconueniencie or other, and
continually in perrill of some great and deadly mischief.

And vvonderfull (truly) it is, that in all other business of this life, men
can see and confess, that nothing may be begun, prosecuted, or well ended,
without consideration: and yet in this great affayre, of vvinning heaven, or
falling into hell, fevve think consideration greatly necessary to be used.

Effects of consideration.
I might stand here to show the infinite other effects and commodities of
consideration, that as it is ye watch or larum bell, that stirs up and
awakeneth all the powers of our mind; the match or tinder, that conceiueth and
nourishes the ^ire of devotion: the bellows that enkindleth and enfl^m^th the
same, the spur that pricketh forward to all virtuous, zealous, and h^royc^ll
acts; and the thing indeed, that gives both light life, and motion to our
soul.

Our faith is ^onfirmed and increased by consideration of Gods works and
miracles; our hope by consideration of his promises, How al virtues are stirred
up and quickened by consid^ration.
and of the true performance thereof to all them that ever trusted in him: our
charity or love to God, by consideration of his benefits and innumerable
deserts toward us: our humility by consideration of his greatness, and of our
own infirmity: our courage and fortitude, by contemplation of his assistance
in all causes for his honor: our contempt of the world, by consideration of
the joys of heaven eternal; and so all other virtues both morral and divine,
do take their heat, quickening, and vital spirit from consideration.

By the exercise of consideration ^ meditation, holy David says, Psalm. 38.
that he felt a burning fire to flame within his breast; that is, the fire of
zeal, the fire offeruour in Religion, the fire of devotion, the fire of love
toward God and his neighbor. And in an other place he says, that by the
same exercise, Psalm. 76.
he swept and purged his own spirit: which is to be understood, from the dust
of this world, from the dregs of sin, from the co^tamination and coinquination
of humane creatures, for that consideration indeed, is the very fan that
seuereth and drives a way the chafe from the corn.

For which cause we shall never read of any holy man from the beginning of
the world, neither before Christ nor after, The exercise of holy men touching
consideration.
who used not much and familiarly this most blessed exercise of consideration
and pondering. And for the first three Patriarchs, it shall be sufficient to
remember the custom of young Isaac recorded in Genesis. Which was to go
forth toward night into the field, ad medit andum, that is, to meditate,
consider and ponder, Genesis 24.
upon the works, judgments, and commandments of God. The first three
Patriarchs.
And this he di^ being but a child and unmarried (far different from the
custom o^ young Gentlemen now adays, wh^^ frequent the fields to follow
their vanities,) and as little Isaac could not have that custom but from his
Father Abraham, so (no doubt) but he taught the same to his son Jacob, and
Jacob again to his posterity.

And as for Moses and his successor Joshua, Moses and Joshua.
it may easily be imagined how they used this exercise, Deuteronomy, 6. and 11.
by the most earnest exhortations, which they made thereof to others, Joshua. 1.
in their speech and writings. The good Kings of Judah also, notvvithstanding
their many great temporal affairs, do testify of themselves concerning this
exercise; as David almost every where, K. David.
that the commandments of God were his daily meditation, not only by day,
Psalm. 38.62. and 118.
and that tota die, all the day, et per singulos dies, every day, et in
matutino, in the morning, et septies in die, seven times a day, but also he
insinuates this custom by night; Psalm. 76.
meditatus sum nocte cum cord meo, I do meditate by night in my heart, upon
thy commandments o Lord; signyfying hereby, both his vvatchfulnes by night
when other men were a sleep, and the hearty ^^re that he had of this
exercise, which we esteem so little.

King Solomon.
Solomon also King David's son, so long as he lived in the grace and favor of
God, observes this exercise of his Father, and exhorts other men, Eccle. 6.
to have continual and daily cogitation in this affair. Which if himself
had continued still, it is likely he had never fallen from God by women as he
did. The good K. Ezechias is reported to have meditated like a Dove, King
Ezechias.
that is, in silence and solitarines with himself alone, which is the true way
of profitable meditation. Esaias testifies of his own watching by night in
this exercise, Esaias. 58.
and how he did the same with his spirit alone, Esaias. 26.
in the very bowels of his heart.

The consideration that Job used, and the fruits thereof.
Holy Job makes mention, not only of his manner of considering, but what also
he considered, and what effect he found in himself by the same. First he
considered (as I said) the ways, foote-steps, and commandments of God, and
then his dreadful power: to wit, how no man was able to auert or turn away
his cogitation, but that his soul did what it pleased, and by this (says he)
considerans eum timore solicitor: Job. 23.
I am made sollicitous or vvatchfull vvi^^ fear, when I consider him.

In which words he insinuateh two most excellent effects of consideration; Two
effects of consideration. Esaias, 32.
First, the fear of God, of which it is written, salutis thesaurus timor
Domini, the fear of God is the treasure of salvation; and the second, yt by
this fear he was made sollicitous, vvatchfull, and dilligent in Gods
service, of which the Prophet Michaeas says thus. Michae. 6.
I will tell thee (O man) what is good, and what the Lord requires at thy
hands: to wit, to do judgment and love mercy, and to walk sollicitous and
watchful with thy God.

But thou o holy and blessed man Job, A consideration upon the doings of Job.
Job. 9.
did this exercise bring forth in thee, so great terror and fear of God: and
so careful watchfulnes for observing his commandments? now I see well the
cause why thou vvrit^st of thy self, that thou did doubt and fear all thy
works and acti^ns, were they never so circumspect. But what shall we say now
adays (most happy saint) who do not doubt so much as our own dissolute,
careless, and immoderate actions, who feel no terror of God at al, nor do
use any one ^ote of watchfulnes in observing his ^ommaundements? t^uly, this
proceeds of nothing else but of inconsideration: it proceeds of lack of
knowledge both of God and of our selves. For (doubtless) if we knevve either
of these two things aright, (as indeed neither of them can be well
understood without the other) it could not be, but that many of us would
change our vvrong courses.

O merciful Lord, what sinful man in the world would live as he does, if he
knevv either thee or himself as he should do? I mean, if he considered what
thou art: and what thou have been to other that have lived and continued in
sin as he does? Not without great cause cried to often and earnestly to
thee, that holy Doctor of thy church, August. in lib. confess.
for obtaining of those two points at thine hands: vt cognoscam te, vt
cognoscam me: that I may know thee, and that I may know my self, says
he, that is, that I may consider, and feel the true knowledge hereof, for
many men do know, but with little commodity.

Knowledge and belief in gross.
We know and believe in gross the mysteries of our faith, that there is a
God which revvardeth good and evil, that he is terrible in his counsel^ upon
the sons of men: that there is a hell for sinners, a heaven for good lyuers, a
most dreadful day of judgment to come, a straight account to be demanded, and
the like. All this we know and believe in general, as merchandise wrapped up
together in a bundle. But for that we unfold not these things, nor rest upon
them in particular, for that we let them not down into our hearts, nor do
ruminate on them with leisure and attention: for that we chewe them not well
in mind by deep consideration, nor do digest them in heart, by the heat of
meditation, they remain with us as a sword in his s^aberd, and do help us as
little to good life, A similitude.
(for which they were revealed,) as a preservative in our pocket never applied,
can help our health. We bear the general knowledge of these mysteries
locked up in our breasts, as sealed bags of treasure that be never told nor
opened, and consequently, we have neither feeling, sense, nor motion thereby,
even as a man may carry fire about him in a flint stone without heat, and
perfumes in a Pomander without smell, except the one be beaten, and the other
chafed.

The importance of consideration.
All stands then (good Reader) in this one point, for direction of our selves
in this life, and for reaping benefit by the mysteries of our faith, and
Religion; that we alot our selves time to meditate, ponder, and consider what
these things do teach us. For as the sick man that had most excellent
remedies and precious potions set before him, could expect no profit or ease
thereby, if he only did look upon them, or smelled them, or took them in his
mouth alone, or should cast them forth of his stomach again, before they were
settled, or had time to work their operation: even so is it in this case of
ours. And therefore with great reason said S. Paul to Timothy, 1, Tim. 4.
after he had taught him a long lesson, haec meditare, meditate, consider, and
ponder upon these things which I have showed you, as if in other speeches he
had said: all that hitherto I have told you, or written for your instruction,
and all that ever you have heard or learned besides, will avail you nothing
for you^ salvation, except you meditate and ponder upon the same, and do suck
out the juice thereof by often consideration.

Wherefore to conclude this chapter, The conclusion of the Chapter.
my dear and well-beloved brother, for that consideration is so precious and
profitable, so needeful and necessary a thing as has been declared, I thought
it convenient in this first front and entrance of my book, to place the
mention and dilligent recommendation thereof, as a thing most requisite for all
that ensues. For without consideration, neither this that I have said
already, nor any thing else that shall or may be said hereafter, can yield
thee profit, as by lamentable experience we see daily in the world, The misery
of the world.
where many millions of men pass over their whole age, without taking profit
of so many good Books, so many preachings, so many virtuous examples, so many
terrible ch^stisements of God upon sinners, which every where they see before
their face. But yet for that they will not, or have not leisure, or dare not,
or have no grace to enter into consideration thereof, they pass over all, as
sick men do pylles, diuerting as much as they may, both their eyes and
cogitations, from all such matters as are ungrateful to them.

Bu^ as good Jeremy says, Iere. 30. and 2^.
the time will come when they shall be enforced to see and know, and
consider these things, when perhaps it will be too late to reap any comfort or
consolation thereby. Wherefore (dear brother) that which perforce thou must do
in time to come, and that perhaps to thy greater damnation, (I mean to enter
into consideration of thine own estate,) do that now willingly to thy
comfort and consolation, for preparing the way to thy salvation. Ephe. 5.
Prevent the day and redeem the time, according to S. Paul's wise counsel;
run not headlong with the world to perdition, stay sometime as holy Jeremy
admonishes thee, and say to thy self, Iere. 7.
what do I? whether go I? what course hold I? what shall be my end? Take
some time from thy pleasures, and from the company of thy pleasant friends, to
do this, althought it be with loss of some pastime and recreation; for I
assure thee, it will recompense it self in the end, and make thee merry when
thy laughing friends shall weep.

The effect of all the Chapter. following.
The effect of all the considerations that ensue, is, rightly to know God, for by
knowing him, we shall know our selves, and all things else which are necessary
for us to know: and without knowing him, all knowledge in the world is vanity,
and mere folly. Haec est vita eterna, (says our Savior Christ to his Father)
vt te cognoscant solum Deum verum, John. 17.
et quem misisti Iesum Christum. This is life everlasting, that men know thee
which art only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent.

Gods nature and essence we can not know in this life; The way to know God in
this life.
but the only mean to know God in this world, is, to know his Majesty, to
know his mercy, to know his justice, to know his judgments; to know his hatred
against sin, his favor to the good, his benefits, and promises to all: his
grace, his threats, his ways, his commandments, his dealings toward other
men before us: all which things, the considerations following do set before
our eyes, and consequently, they do teach us to know GOD aright. Read then
therefore (dear brother) with attention, and remember the words that God
uses to us all; Psalm. 45.
Vacate et videte quoniam ego sum Deus. Take leisure, and consider that I am a
God. It must not be done in haste, nor (as the fashion is) for curiosity
only, to read three or four leaves in one place, and so in another? but it
must be done with such serious intention, as appertains to so great a
business, which (in truth) is the weightiest that possible under heaven may
be taken in hand. It is the business whereof Christ meant especially, when he
said, Luke. 10.
vnum est necessarium, one only thing is necessary. For that all other things
in this world, are but trifles to this, and this alone of it self, of more
importance than they all.

THAT THERE IS A GOD, WHICH REWARDS GOOD AND EVIL, against all Atheists of
old, and of our time. With the proofs alleged for the same, by the Jew and
Gentile. CHAP. II.
IT is a thing both common and ordinary in Sciences and Arts, A common
customs in Sciences to suppose principles.
when they are learned or delivered by other, to suppose diverse points and
principles, and to pass them over without proof, as either known before to
the learner, or else so manifest easy, and evident of themselves, as they need
none other proof, but only declaration.

So when we take in hand to instruct a man in Chivalry, An example in
Chiualry.
or feats of Arms, we do suppose that he knows before, (were he never so
rude) what a man, what a horse, what armor, what fighting means: as also that
war is l^wfull and expedient in diverse causes; the Princes of y^ world may
wage the same; that Soldiers have to live in order and discipline under their
regiment, that Kings for this cause do hold their Generals, Lieuetenants,
Coronels, Captains, and other like Officers, in their bands, Garrisons, Camps,
and Armies.

In handy crafts.
In manual arts and occupations likewise, it is evident, that diverse things
must be presupposed to be foreknown by the learner; as in husbandry or
agriculture; in bulding, in paynting, and other such exercises, when a man is
to be taught or instructed, it were not convenient for the Teacher, to stand
upon every point or matter that appertains to the same, but must leave and
pass over many things, as apparent of themselves, or easy to be discerned
of every learner by nature, sense, reason, or common experience.

In liberal Sciences.
But yet in liberal sciences and professions of learning, is this more
apparent, where not only such common and vulgar points are to be presumed,
without proof or discourse: but also certain propositions are to be granted
in the beginning, Grounds to be granted in Sciences.
as grounds whereupon to build all the rest that insueth. So the Logitian (for
example) will have you yield ere he enter with you; In Logic.
that contradictorie propositions cannot be together either false or true,
neither, that one thing may be affirmed and denied of an other, in one and the
self same respect and time.

The Morrall Philosopher, In Morrall phylosophie
will have you grant at the beginning, that there is both good and evil in
men's actions: and that the one is to be followed, and the other refused.

The natural Philosopher, In Natural philosophy
will have you confess, that all physical bodies which depend of nature, have
motion in themselves, and are subject to alterations, and whatsoever is moved,
is moved of another.

The Mathematique at his first entrance, In the Mathematics.
will demand your assent, that every whole is bigger than his parts: as also,
the Metaphisicke or Supernatural Philosopher, The Metaphisick.
that nothing can be, and not be at one time. And so other such like principles
and common grounds, in these and all other Sciences are to be demanded,
granted, and agreed upon at the beginning, for the better pursuit and
establishment of that which has to follow, being things in themselves, (as you
see) either by nature, common sense, or experience, most clear and manifest.

In Divinity.
And is not this also in Divinity (trow you) and in the affairs that we have
now in hand? yes truly, if we believe S. Paul, who writes thus to the
Hebrews: Heb. 11.
Credere oportet accedentem ad Deum, quia est, et inquirentibus se remunerator
sit. He that is coming toward God, must believe that there is a God, and that
he is a rewarder of such as seek him. Behold here two principles, Two
principles in Divinity.
wherein a man must be resolved before he can seek or draw unto God. The
one, that there is a God, and the other, that the same God is just, to reward
every

Which two principles or general grounds, are so evident indeed of their own
natures, and so ingraffed by Gods own hand, into the mind and understanding of
every particular man, at his nativity, (according to the saying of the
Prophet: Psalm. 4.
the light of thy countenance is sealed upon us (O Lord,) that were not the
times we live in, too-too wicked, and the shameless induratian of sinners
intolerable, we should not need to stand upon ye proof of these points for
confirmation of our cause that we now entreat, of resolution; but rather
supposing and assuring our selves, that no reasonable creature living, could
doubt of these principles; should pursue only the consideration of other
things, that might styr up our wills to the performance of our duetyes toward
this GOD that has created us, and remains to pay our reward at the end.

But for so much as iniquity has so advanced her self at this day in the
hearts of many, The cause of this Chapter.
as not only to contemn and offend their Maker, but also to deny him, for
patronage of their evil life, and for extinguishing the worm of their own
afflicted and most miserable consciences; I am enforced before all other
things, to discover this fond and foul error of theirs, and to remove also
this refuge of desperate iniquity, by showing the invincible verity of these
two principles, the one depending of the other in such sort, as the first
being proved, the second has of necessity to follow. For if once it be
manifest that there is a God, If there be a God, he is a just rewarder.
which has care and providence of all those: whom he has created and
governs; then must it ensue by force of all consequence, that he is also to
reward the same men, according to their good living and deserts of this life.

First then to prove this principle, That there is a GOD, I need use no other
argument or reason in the world, but only to refer each man to his own See
Lactantius at large, in his book of the workmanship of the world. The works
of ye world do declare the workman.
sense, in beholding the world, whereof every part and portion is a most clear
glass, representing God unto us, or rather a fair Table, wherein God has
drawn or imprinted himself, in so manifest characters and legible Letters, as
the simpliest man living, may read and understand them.

In respect hereof said the Wise Man so long ago. That vain and foolish were
all those, who considering the works that are seen in the world, could not
thereby rise to understand the workman. And he gives this reason. Wisd. 3.
A magnitudine enim speciei creaturae, cognoscibiliter poterit Creator horum
videri. For that by the greatness of beauty in the creature, may the Creator
thereof be seen and known. Romans 1.
Which S. Paul confirms, when he says, that the invisible things of God,
may be seen and known by the visible creatures of the world. Which is to
be understood in this sense, that as a prisoner in a dungeon, may easily by a
little beam that shines in at a chincke, conceive there is a Sun, from whence
that beam descends: and as a Trauailer in the wilderness that falls upon
some channel or brook, may ascend by the same to the Well or Fountain: even
so, he that beholds and considers the wonderful works of this world, may
thereby conceive also, the wonderful Artificer or workman that made them.

If a man should pass by Sea, A similitude.
into some foreign, strange, or savage Country, where nothing else but birds
and beasts do appear: yet if he should espy some exquisite building, or
other work of art and reason in the place, he would presently assure
himself, that some men dwelt or had been in that Country, for that such
things could not be done by beasts or unreasonable creatures, even so in the
view and consideration of this world.

If we cast our eyes upon the heavens, The heavens teach GOD.
we remain astonished with the miracles that we behold: but who made them? we
see the skies of exceeding great highness, distinguished with colors, and
beauty most admirable; adorned with stars and Plannets innumerable, and
these so qualified with their diverse, different, and unequal motions, as albeit
they never move or go together, yet do they never give let or hinderaunce the
one to the other, nor change their course out of order or season.

I^b. 28.
Quis enarrabit coelorum rationem, et concentum coeli, quis dormire faciet?
Who is able to declare the reason of these heavens, or who can make cease or
sleep the uniform course of their motions, says God to Job? As who would
say, that because no man or mortal creature can do this, therefore may we
imagine of what power and perfection their maker is. Which King David had done
when he pronounced, Coeli enarrant gloriam Dei, et opera manuum eius, annunciat
firmamentum, the heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament does
preach the works of his hands.

If we pull down our eyes from heaven to earth, The earth teaches GOD.
we behold the same of an infinite bigness, distinguished with hills and dales,
woods and pastures, covered with all variety of grass, herbs, flowers, and
leaves: moystened with Ryuers, as a body with veins, inhabited by creatures of
innumerable kinds and quallities: enriched with inestimable and endless
treasures, and yet it self standing, or hanging rather with all his weight
and poyse, in the midst of the air, as a little ball without prop or pyller.
At which devise and most wonderful miracle, God himself, as it were glorying,
said unto Job, Job, 38.
Where were thou, when I laid the foundations of the earth? Tell me if thou
have understanding, who measured it out, or drew his line upon the same?
Whereupon are fastened the pyllers of his foundation, or who laid the first
corner stone thereof?

If we look neither up nor down, The Sea shows GOD.
but cast our countenannce only aside, we espy the Sea on each hand of us,
that enuironeth round about the Land. A vast creature, that contains more
wonders than man's tongue can express. A bottomless gulf, that without
running over, receives all Rivers which perpetually do flow. A restless
fight and turmoyle of waters, that never repose neither day nor night. A
dreadful, raging, and furious element, that swells and roareth, and
threatens the Land, as though it would devour it all at once. Arist. lib. de
mirabilib.
And albeit in situation it be hier than the earth, as the Philosopher shows,
and do make assaults daily toward ye same with most terrible cries, and
waves mounted even to the sky: yet when it draws near to the Land, and to
his appointed borders: it stays upon the sudden, though nothing be there
to let it, and is enforced to recoyle back again, murmuring as it were, for
that it is not permitted to pass any further.

Of which restraint, GOD asks Job this question. Job. 38.
Who has shut up the Sea with gates, when he breaks forth in rage as from
his mothers womb? Whereunto no man being able to give answer, God answers
himself, in these words: I have limited him with my bounds, and I have set
him both a door and a bar, and have said unto him, hitherto shall thou
come, and shall not pass further: here shall thou break thy swelling waves.

This in sum, is of things without us. But if we should leave these, and
enter to seek God within our selves, The things in man declare God.
whether we consider our bodies or our souls, or any one part thereof, we shall
find so many strange things, or rather so many seas of miracles and wonders,
that preach and teach their Maker unto us, that we shall not only perceive
and see God most evidently, but rather (as a certain old Heathen has written)
we shall feel and handle him in his works. Iamblicus de Mist. cap. 1.
Which kind of speech also S. Paul himself doubted not to use, affirming that
God has given space to every man in this life to seek him, Si forte attractent
eum aut inueniant: Acts. 17.
if perhaps they would handle him, or find him out.Which manner of words do
signify, that by consideration of Gods creatures, and especially of the
wonders in man himself, we may come to see and perceive the Creator so
clearly; that in a sort we may be said to handle and feel him. So jointly
do all things concur to the manifestation of their Maker: so manifestly and
effectually do they teach, demonstrate, and paint out God unto us; nothing
being so little, that declares not his greatness: nothing so great, which
acknowledges not his sovereignty: nothing so low, that leads us not up to
behold his Majesty, nothing so high, that descends not to teach this verity.

It were a labor without end, to go about in this place to allege what
might be said in the proof of this principle, That there is a GOD, seeing
there was never yet learned man in the world, either Gentile or other, that
acknowledged and confirmed not the same, being driven thereunto by the
manfiest evidence of the truth it self.

If you object against me Diagoras, Protagoras, Theodorus, Cyrennensis, Bion
Borysthines, Epicurus, Old Atheists.
and some few others, that were open Atheists, and denied GOD, I answer, that
some of these were vterly unlearned, La^rtius lib. 2. et 4. de vit. Phylos.
and rather sensual beasts than reasonable men; and consequently might deny
any thing, according to the saying of holy David, The fool said in his heart
there is no God. Others, that had some smack of learning, Psalm. 13. and 52.
rather iested at the falsehood of their own Panisme Idols, than deny the
being of one true God.

But the most part of these men in^deede, and such others, as in old time were
accounted Atheists, denied not God so much in words, as in life and facts; Romans
1.
Phil. 3.
such as S. Paul called Atheists in his days, that obeyed their bellyes, and
followed their pleasures in sin and s^usualitie^ not vouchsafing to think of
God in this life, (such was the Epicure, Lactant. lib. 3. institut.
and many other are at this day of his profession) but yet (as Lactantius well
notes) when the same men came to be sober, and spoke of judgment (as at their
death or other time of distress and misery,) they were as ready to confess
God, as any other whatsoever.

But for learned men, and people of discretion, sobriety, and judgment, there
was never yet any (were he Jew or Gentile) that doubted in this verity, but
had means of probations to confirm the same, as more particularly in the rest
of this Chap^er shall be declared.

How the Heathen proved there was a God. SECT. 2.
AMong the Gentiles or Heathen people, those men were always of most credit
and estimation, that professed the love of wisdom, and for yt respect were
termed Philosophers. Philosophers.
Who being divided into diverse sorts and sects, had four principal Sciences,
whereof they made profession, each one of these having other lower Sciences
comprehended under it.

Four principal Sciences.
The first of these four, is called Natural Philosophy: the second, Morrall;
the third, Supernatural, or Metaphisick; the fourth, Mathematick. And for the
first three, they have each one their proper means and peculiar proofs,
whereby to convince, that there is a GOD. The fourth, which is the Mathematique,
The Mathematick proves not GOD.
for that it has no consideration at all, of the efficient or final cause of
things, (under which two respects and considerations only, God may be known and
declared unto men in this world) therefore this Science has no proper mean
peculiar to it self, for proouing this verity, as the other Sciences have,
but receives the same as borrowed of the former.

The Natural Philosopher.
THe Natural Philosopher amon^ the Gentiles, had infinite arg^^ments, to
prove by creatures, that there was a God, but all he reduced to three
principal and general heads, which he termed Ex Motu, ex Fine, et ex Causa
efficiente. That is, arguments drawn from the Motions, from the Ends, and from
the Cause efficie^t of creatures that we behold; which terms ye examples
following shall make clear and manifest.

The argument of Motion, The first argument in Natural philosophy Arist. lib.
7. et 8. phy.
stands upon this general ground in philosophy, that what soever is moved,
is moved of another: Wherein also is observed, that in the motions of
creatures, there is a subordination the one to the other. As for example; These
inferior bodies upon earth, are moved and altered by the air and other
elements: and the elements are moved by the influence and motion of the Moon,
Sun, and other heavenly bodies; these Planets again are moved from the
highest Orb or Sphere of all, that is called The first moveable: Primum mobile.
above which we ^an go no further among creatures.

Now then asks the Philosopher ^eere, who moves this first moue^ble? for if
you say that it moves it ^^lfe, it is against our former ground, that nothing
is moved in nature but of another. And if you say that some other thing
moves it, then is the question again, who moves that other? and so from one
to one, until you come to some thing that moves, and is not moved of an
other, and that must needs be God, which is above all nature.

Plato lib. 10. de legib.
This was the common argument of Plato, and of Aristotle, Arist. lib. 8 pysic.
cap. 5.
and of all the best philosophers^ And they thought it a demonstration
unavoidable, and it seems they were admonished of this argument by
consideration of the Clock, An argument taken from the Clock.
whose hammer when it strikes, shows the next wheel whereby it is moved, and
that wheel shows to another wheel, and so from one to one, until you come
to him that was the first cause of motion to all the wheels, that is, to the
Clock-maker himself.

Aristotle, Arist. lib. de mundo.
to King Alexander, uses this pretty similitude. That as in a Quiar of
singers, when the foreman has given the first tune or note, there ensues
presently a sweet harmony, and consent of all other voices, both great and
small, sharp and mean: so God in the creation o^ this world, A similitude.
having given once the first push or motion to the highest heaven, called
Primum mobile, there ensues upon the same, all other motions of heavens,
planets, elements^ and other bodies, in most admirable order, concord, and
congruetie, for conservation and government of the whole. And thus is God
proved by argument of motion.

The other two arguments of the End, and of the Cause efficient of creatrues,
The second argument of Natural philosophy
are made evident in a certain manner, by this that has been spoken of
motion. For seeing by experience, that every thing brought forth in nature,
has a p^culiar end appointed, whereto it is directed by the self same nature,
(as we see y^ bird is directed to build her neast by nature, the Fox to make
his den, and so so the like in all other creatures,) the Philosopher asks
here, what thing is that that directs nature herself, seeing each thing must
have somewhat to direct it to his end? And no answer can be made, but that the
Director of Nature, must be some thing above nature, which is GOD himself.
This argument of the final End, is most excellently handled, by Phylo Iudaeus,
Phylo lib. de opific. mund.
in his learned treatise, Of the workmanship of the world.

The third argument of Natural philosophy.
From the Cause efficient, the Philosopher disputes thus. It is evident by all
reason, in respect of the corruptions, alterations, and perpetual motions of
all creatures, that this world had a beginning, and Vide Plutarch de placetis
phylos.
all excellent Philosophers that ever were^ have agreed thereupon, except
Aristotle, Arist. lib. 8. phys. et lib. de Genesis et corrup.

Arist. lib. de mund. Et vide Ploti. lib. de mundo.


who for a time held a fantasy that the world had no beginning, but was from
all eternity; albeit at last in his old age, he confessed ye contrary, in his
Book to King Alexander.

This then being so, that this world had a beginning, it must needs follow
also, that it had an efficient Cause. Now the^ is the question, who is that
efficient Cause that made the world? If you say, that it made it self, it is
absurd, for how could it have power to make it self, before it self was, and
before it had any being at all? If you say, that something within the world,
made the world: that is, that some one part of ye world, made the whole: this
is more absurd; for it is, as if a man should say, that the finger (and this
before it was a finger, or part of ye body) did make the whole body

Wherefore we must confess by force of this argument, that a greater and more
excellent thing, than is the whole world put together, or than any part
thereof, made the world, and was the Cause e^ficient of the frame that we see;
and this can be nothing else but God that is above the world. So that hereby we
see, how many ways the Natural Philosopher is fraught with arguments, to
prove there is a God, and that by reason only, without all light or assistance
of faith.

The M^taphisique and his argument.
BUT the Metaphisique, or Supernatural Philosopher among the Gentiles, as he
to whom it appertained most in special to handle these high and supernatural
affairs, and many more arguments and demonstrations, to prove and convince the
being of one God.

And first of all he said, The first argument in Metaphisicke.
that it could not stand with any possibility in his Science, that Ens finitum,
a thing finite, or closed within bounds or limits, (as this world, and every
creature therein is) could be, but from some Maker or Creator. For (says he)
the thing that in it self is not infinite, has his bounds and limits, and
consequently there must be some thing, that assigned these bounds and limits.
And seeing in this world there is no creature so great, which has not bounds
and limits, we must of necessity imagine some infinite supreme Creator or
Maker that limited these creatures, even as we see that the Potter (at his
pleasure) gives bounds and limits to the pot that he frames.

This argument the Metaphisicke confirms by a ruled principle in his Science.
A Maxim in Metaphisicke.
That every thing which is by participation, must be reduced and referred to
some other thing, that is not by participation, but of it self. Arist. lib. 8.
metapis. capit. 2.
And he calls a thing by participation, which is not in the fullest or
highest degree of perfection in his kind, but may have addition made unto it.
As for exmple; water, or any thing else that is heated by fire, is hot by
participation, and not of it self, for that it may always be hoter, and have
addition of heat made unto it; but fire is hot of it self, and not by
participation, for that it has heat in the highest degree, and in that kind
can receive no addition, wherefore the heat of all other things, which are
hot by participation of fire, are reduced (concerning their heat) to the
heat of fire, as to their origin^ll.

Now then (says the Metaphisick) we see by experience, that all the creatures
and parts of this world, are things by participation only, for that they are
infinite in nature, How all creatures are by participation of GOD.
and have limitatio^s in all their perfections, and may receive additions to
the same, and consequently, they must of necessity be referred to some higher
cause that is infinite in perfection, and consists of it self alone, without
participation from others: and this is God, who being absolute, endless, and
without all limitation of perfection in himself, deriueth from his own
incomprehensible infiniteness, certain limited natures and perfections to
every creature: which perfections in creatures, are nothing else but little
particles, and participations of the bottomless sea of perfections in the
Creator, whereunto they are to be referred and reduced, as the beam to the
Sun, and the brook to the Fountain.

The second argument in Metaphisicke.

Multitude. Plato in Parmen.


A second argument uses the Metaphisicke, grounded upon certain rules of
unity, whereof one principle is, That every multitude or distinction of things,
proceeds from some unity, as from his Fountain.

This he shows by many examples of things in this world. For we see by
experience, Primum mobile.
that ye diverse motions or moving of the lower Spheres or bodies celestial, do
proceed of the moving of one highest Sphere, and are to be referred to the
same, as to their Fountain. Many Rivers are reduced to one well or offspring:
innumerable beams to one Sunue: and all the boughs of a tree to one stock.

MICROCOSMOS.
In the body of Man, which for his beauty and variety, is called the little
world: the veins which are without number, have all one beginning in the
Liver, the arters, in the heart, the sinnowes, in the brain. And that which is
more, the infinite actions of life, The infinite things that proceed from the
soul.
sense, and reason in man, as generations, corruptions, nourishments,
disgestions, and alteration; feeling, smelling, tasting, seeing, hearing,
moving, speaking, thinking, remembering, discoursing, and ten hundred thousand
particular actions, operations and motions besides, which are exercised in man's
body, under these or other such names and appellations: all these (I say) being
infinite in number, most admirable in order, and distinct in every their office
and operation, do receive notwithstanding their beginning from one most simple
unity, and indivisible substance, called the soul, which produces,
governs, and directs them al to so innumerable, different and contrary
functions.

By this concludes the Metaphysicke; that as among the creatures, we find
this most excellent order and connection of things, whereby one brings forth
many, and every multitude is referred to his vnity^ so much more in all reason,
must the whole frame of creatures contained in the world, (wherein there are so
many millions of multitudes with their unities) be referred to one most simple
and abstract unity, that gave beginning to them all, and this is God.

A third argument uses the Metaphisick, The third argument in Metaphisick.
Subordination.
derived from the subordina^io^ of creatures in this world; which ^ubordination
is such, and so wonder^ull, as we see no creature by nature serves it self,
but another, and altogether do conspyre in serving the common. We see the
heavens do move about continually without ceasing, and this not to serve
themselves, but inferior creatures, less excellent than themselves. We see ye
water moysteneth the ground, the air cools, opens, and cherishes the
same, the Sun heateth and quickens it, the Moon and Stars pour forth
their influence, the winds refresh it, and all this not for themselves, but
for other. The earth again, that receives these services, uses not the same
for herself, or for her own commodity, but to bring forth grass wherewith
to feed Cattle, and they feed not for themselves, but to give nourishment
unto man.

A similitude.
Now then (says the Metaphisick) if a man that stood a far off upon ^
Mountain, should see in a field under him, a great, huge, and maine Armi^ of
Soldiers, most excellent wel^ appointed, each one in order agreeing with the
other, divided into Ranks, Squadrons, Companies, an^ Offices; subordinate the
one to y^ o^ther by degrees, and yet all te^ding on way, all their faces bent
upon on place, al moving, marching, and turning together, all endeavoring with
alacrity toward the performance of one common service by mutual assistance,
without dissension, discord, difference, or clamor; he that should see this
(says the Metaphisicke) as he could not but imagine some General high
Captain to be among these Soldiers, whom all obaied, and from whose supreme
commandment and order, this most excellent subordination, agreement, and
union proceeded, so much more, upon consideration of the former coherence,
consent, and miraculous subordination of creatures among themselves in their
operations, must we infer, that they have some general commander over them
all; by whose supreme disposition, each creature has his charge and peculiar
task appointed, which he must perform, for the common and universal service
of the whole.

The fourth reason or argument alleged by the Supernatural Philosopher, The
fourth argument in Metasick. Providence.
is, of the marvelous providence art and wisdom, discovered in ye making of
every least creature within the world. For seeing there is nothing so little,
nothing so base or contemptible, within the compass of this heaven that
covers us, but if you consider it, you find, both art, order, proportion,
beauty, and excellency in the same: this cannot proceed of Fortune, as foolish
Lucrecius made diverse books against the workmanship of the world.
Lucrecius and some other would have it, for that Fortune is casualty without
order, rule, or certain tie, and therefore needs it must come from the
wisdom and providence of some omnipotent Creator.

If you take a fly, or a flea, or a leaf from a tree, or any other, the least
creature that is extant in the world, and consider the same attentively: you
shall find more miracles, than parts therein: you shall find such proportion
of members, such variety of colors, such distinction of offices, such
correspondence of instruments, and those so fit, so well framed, so coherent,
and so subordinate: as the more ye contemplate, the more ye shall marvel,
neither is there any one thing in the world more effectual, to draw a man to
the love and admiration of his Creator, than to exercise himself often in this
contemplation, for if his heart be not of stone, this will move his affection.

We read of Galen, Galen. lib. 5. de vsu part.
a profane and very irreligious Physician, who as himself confesses in a
certain place, taking upon him to consider of the parts of man's body; and
finding much wisdom in the order, use, and disposition of the same, sought
first to give the praise and glory thereof to nature, or to some other cause
than to God. But in process of time, being oppressed (as it were) with the
exceeding great wisdom, cunning and providence, which he discovered in every
least parcel and particle of man's body, wherein nothing was redundant, nothing
defective, nothing possible to be added, altered, or better devised; he brake
forth into these words: Lib. 3. de vsu. par.
Compono hic profecto canticum in Creatoris nostri laudem, quod vltra res suas
ornare voluit, melius quam vlla art possent. Here truly do I make a song in
praise of our Creator, for that of his own accord, it has pleased him to
adorn and beautify his things better, than by any art possible it could be
imagined.

Hereby then does the Metaphysicke gather and conclude most evidently, that
there is a God, a Creator, a most wise and powerful artificer, that made all
things: such a one, as exceeds all bounds of nature, and of human
ability. For if all the world should join together, they could not make ye
least creature that we see in this wo^ld. He concludes also, that the
for-sight and providence of this Creator is infinite, for things to come in all
eternity; and finally, that his wisdom and cogitations are i^scrutable. And
albeit sometime he reveal unto us some part thereof, yet often again we err
therein. For which cause, A wonderful speech of a Heathen.
a wise Heathen Platonic concludes thus, after long search about these
affairs. I will praise God (says he) in those things I understand, and I will
admire him in those things which I understand not. For I see that my self
oftentimes, do things wherein my servants are blind and conceive no reason. As
also I have seen little children, Plotin. lib. de proui.
cast into the fire Jewels of great price, and their Fathers writings of great
learning and wisdom, for that they were not of capacity to understand the
value, and worthiness of the thing.

One argument more will I allege of the Metaphisick, The fifth argument in
Metaphisicke. Immortality of the soul. Plato. lib. 10 de Republ.
grounded upon the immortality of man's soul; which immortality is proved with
one consent of all learned men, (as Plato alleges) for that it is a spyrit
and immateriall substance, whose nature depends not of the state of our
mortal body, for so by experience we see daily, that in old men and withered
sickly bodies, the mind and soul is more quick, clear, pregnant, and lively
then it was in youth, when the body was most lusty.

The same is also proved by the vnque^chable desire which our mind has of
learning, knowledge, wisdom, and other such spiritual and immateriall
things, wherein her thirst by nature is so great, as it cannot be satis-fied in
this life, neither can the objects of sense and bodily pleasures, or any other
commodity or delight of this material world, content or satiate the restless
desire of this immaterial ^reature. When the desire of our soul shall be
satisfied.
Which is an evident argument to the Phylosolopher, that some other object and
contentation, is prepared for her in another world: and that of such
excellency and supereminent perfection, as it shall have in it all wisdom,
all learning, all knowledge, all beauty, and all other causes of love, joy, and
contentation, wherein our soul may rest for ever.

This being so (says the Philosopher) that the soul and mind of man is
immortal, of necessity it must ensue, that an immortal Creator sent the same
into our bodies, and that to him again it must return after her departure
from this life here. Themist. in lib. de anima.
This was the true meaning indeed (how soever some latter interpreters have
misunderstood the same) of that ancient doctrine of old Philosophers, which
Plutarch alleges out of Pythagoras and Plato: Plut. de placit. phylos.
affirming, that all particular souls of men, came sent from one general and
common soul of the whole world, as sparkles from the fire, and beams from the
common Sun: and that after their separation from their bodies, they shall
return again to that general soul, called Anima mundi: The meaning of old
Philosophers, touching Anima mundi.
the soul of the world (for that it gives life and being to the world) and so
to remain with that g^nerall soul eternally.

This was the doctrine of old Philosophers, which seemed indede to have been
nothing else, (though delivered in other speeches) but that which Solomon
himself affirms in playner words, Eccle. 12.
Et spiritus redibit ad Deum, qui dedit illum: and our soul or spirit shall
return to God that gave it unto us.And this may suffice for a taste of that
which the Metaphisicke or Supernatural Philosopher can say, for proof that
there is a God.

The Morrall Philosopher.
THere remains yet a third part of human wisdom or phylosophie, called
Morrall, whose reasons and arguments for proof of this verity, I have of
purpose referred to the last place, for that they be more plain and easy than
the former, and more siensible to the capacity of every simple and unlearned
Reader.

For first of all, The first argument of Morral philosophy.
he observes in the very natural inclination of man, (be his manners
otherwise never so evil) that there is a certain propention and disposition to
confess some GOD or Deity; as by example he proves in all Nations, were
they never so fierce or Barbarous, yet always confessed they some God by
nature, though no man did teach or instruct them therein. The same is confirmed
by the common use of all Heathens, in Tertullian handles this point
excellently in Apolog.
lifting up their eyes and hands to heaven, in any sudden distress that
comes upon them. Which imports that nature herself has ingrafted this
feeling, that there is a God. Yea, further he alleges, that by experience of
all ages, it has been proved, that Atheists themselves, that is, such men, as
in their health and prosperity, for more liberty of sinful life, would strive
against the being of any God; when they came to die, or fall into any great
misery, they of all other men, would show themselves most fearful of this God,
as Seneca declares, and as Suetonius shows in the example of Caligula^
Seneca lib. 1. de ira Suet. in Caligu.
Which is a token, that their conscience enforced them to believe a Godhead.

Nay, Zeno the Philosopher was wont to say, The saying of Zeno, touching the
death of Atheists.
that it seemed to him a substantial proof of this verity, to hear an
Atheist at his dying day^ preach God from a pair of gallows or rather such
place of misery, (wh^ he asked God and nature forgiveness) than to hear all the
Philosophers i^ the world dispute the point; for that at this instant of death
and myserie, it is like, that such good fellows do speak in earnest and
sobriety of spirit, who before in their wantonness, impugned God, ^yther of
vanity, ambition, sensuallitie, or dissimulation.

Now then, when the Morral Philosopher has proved by this natural inclination
of man, that there is a God, which has imprinted in us such a feeling of
himself, as no conscience can deny him, when it comes to speak sincerely:
the^ steppeth he a degree further, and proves that this God which is
acknowledged, can be but one; for that if he be a God, The reason why there
can be but one God.
he must be infinite, and if he be infinite, he can have no companion, for that
two infinite things cannot stand together, without impeachment the one of the
others infinity.

He proves the same by the cu^tome of the most Gentiles, Lact. lib. 2. diui.
instit. cap. 2.
who (as Lactantius well noted in his time) when they swore, or cursed, or
prayed, or wished any thing heartily, (especi^lly in affliction, that lighteneth
the ^nderstanding,) their fashion was ^o say, God, and not the Gods. Deus et
no^ Dij.
And for the learneder sort of them, howsoever they dissembled, and applied
themselves outwardly to the error of the common people, yet in earnest they
never spoke of more the^ of one God, as Plato signifies of himself to
Dionisius King of Sicilie, in a certain Letter, wherein he gave him a sign
when he spoke in earnest, and when in jest. Plato Epist. 13. ad Dyonisi.
Hinc discis tu, s^ribam ego serio, nec ne: cum serio, ordior Epistola^ ab vno
Deo, cum secus, a pluribus. By this sign shall ye know whether I write in
earnest or not: For when I write in earnest, I begin my Letter with one God,
and when I write not in earnest, I do begin my Letter in the name of many Gods.

Julian the Apostata, in his three most scornful Books that he wrot^ against
us Christians, Cyrillus lib. 2. cont. Iuli.
(whom contemptuously he called Galilaeans) endeavoring by all his means to
advance and set forth the honor o^ Paganism, Plotin. Ennea. 1. lib. 8.1 2.
et Eu. 6. lib. 4. capit. 12.3.4.
alleges this Plato for a chief pyller and father thereof, an^ dares
prefer him with our Moses: and yet you see what he testifies of himself.
And that this wa^ his perpetual opinion, three of hi^ most worthy Scholars, I
mean thre^ of the most learned that ever professed the Platonic sect,
Plotinus, Porphyrius, Porhy. lib. 2. de abst. et lib. de occa. cap. 21. Procl.
in theolo. Platon. et lib. de anima. et Daem. 1.31.42.53.
and Proclus, all Heathens themselves, do testify and prove in diverse parts
of their works, assuring, that both they and their master Plato, never
believed indeed but only one God. And as for Socrates that was Platos Master,
Socrates. Apuleius, Alegus, et Laerti. in vita Socratis.
and pronounced by the Oracle of Apollo, to be the wisest man in all Greece;
the world knows that he was put to death foriesting at the multitude of Gods
among the Gentiles.

Aristotle that ensued after Plato, began ye sect of Peripateticks, Aristotle
and the Peripateticks.
and was ^ man so much given to the search of Nature, as in many things he
forgot the Author of Nature, or at least ^ise, he treated little and very
doubt^ully thereof, yet in his old age, when ^ee came to write the Book of the
world to K. Alexander (which Book Iustine the Martyr esteemed great^^, Justin.
in Apolo.
and called it the Epitome of all ^ristotles true philosophy) he resol^eth the
matter more clearly, Arist. lib. de mundo.
say^^g thus of God, He is the Father of ^^ds and men, he is the maker and
conser^^ all things that be in the world. And ^ee adds further in the self
same place, that the multitude of many Gods, Theo. in metaph. Alex. Aphrod.
lib. de prouiden.
was invented to express the power of this one God, by the multitude of his
ministers: so that he makes all Gods to be servants besides only one. Which
sentence of their Master, Theophrastus and Aphrodiseus, two principal
Peripatetickes, do confirm at large.

Zeno and the Stoickes.
Zeno the chief and ^ather of the Stoics was wont to say, (as Aristotle
reports) that, either one God, or no God. Plut. de oracul. defect. de ^ranc.
de quest. Plat. Seneca de vita beat. de prouid. in Epist.
Which opinion is auerred every where, by Plutarch and Seneca, two most
excellent writers, and great admirers of the Stoic severity. And before them,
by Epictetus, a man of singular account in that sect, whose words were esteemed
Oracles. Dicendum ante omnia, vnum esse Deum^ omnia regere, omnibus prouidere.
Epict. apud Arianum.
Before all things (says he) we must affirm^ that there is one God, and that
thi^ God governs all, and has providence over all.

As for the Academiks, The Academickes.
who mad^ the fourth division or sect of Phylo^sophers, it is sufficient which
I hau^ mentioned before, that Socrate their founder, was caused to dye for his
opinion in this matter; albeit (...) seem, that such as insued in that sect,
whose profession was to dispute and doubt of every thing, So in this time of
variety of Sects.
came at length, by their much iangling and disputing, to believe and hold
nothing. Whereof Cicero himself may be an example, who in his Books De natura
Deorum, follows so far the Academicall vein of doubtful disputing to and
fro, about the nature of Gods, as he may seem (and so did he to diverse
Christians of the Primative Church) to be very irresolute whether there were
any God or no. Arnob. cont. gentes.
Albeit in the end he make show to conclude very plainly and peremtorily with
the Stoics.

All the four sects of Philosophers then, All old Philosophers acknowledged
one GOD.
who in their times bare the credit of learning and wisdom, made profession of
one GOD, when they came to speak as they thought. But if we ascend up hyer, to
the days before these sects began, that is, to Py^hagoras, Vide apud Plutarch
de placitis phylos. Trismeg. in Paemand. et in Asclep.
and Archytas Tarentinus, and before them again, to Mercuri^^ Trismegistus,
that was the first pa^ent of phylosophie to the Egypti^ns: we shall find them
so resolute and plain in this point, as no Chri^tian can be more. Wherefore he
that desires to see innumerable examples, as well of these men's sayings, as of
other learned Heathens of all ages: let him read but S. Cyrils first Book
against Julian the Apostata; or Lactantius his first and second books against
the Gentiles, and he shall remain satisfied.

The recollection of the first argument in Morral philosophy.
This th^n is the Morrall Philosophers first argument: the inclination of al
people to believe a God-head^ the instinct of nature to confess it, the force
of man's conscience to fear it, the custom of all Nations to adore it. And
finally, the consent and agreement of all learned and wise men, in applying
this God head not to many, but to one only, that made this world, and governs
the same. Non hominibus, non demonibus, non Dijs ipsis, quos non naturae
ratione, sed honoris causa Deos nominamus. Trismeg. in Paeman. cap. 2, 3, 4, 5,
6, etc.
We do not attribute the appellation of true God (says Trismegistus) either
unto men, In Asclep. 1.2.6. etc.
or unto devils, or unto the multitude of other Gods themselves, for that we
call them Gods, not in respect of their natures, but for honors sake. That is,
we call them Gods to honor them for their fa^mous acts, and not for that we
thin^ them in nature true Gods. Which Cicero confirms in these words;
Cicero his opinion of the multitude of Panyme gods how they were made.
The life of man, and common custom has now received, to lift up to heaven by
fame and good will, such men as ^or their benefits are counted excellent. And
here hence it comes, that Hercules, Castor, Pollux, Aesculapius, and Liber,
are now become Gods, and heaven almost is filled with mankind.

The second argument of Morrall philosophy, The second argument of Morral
philosophy.
is, De vltimo fine, et summo hominis bono: that is, concerning the last end of
man, and of his highest or supreme felicity, whereby the being of God is also
confirmed. And albeit I have said somewhat of man's end before: yet that which
in this place I am to add, is more proper and peculiar to Morrall philosophy.
For as other Sciences may, and do consider the final ends, of other
^reatures, which are diverse, and yet ^ll concur for the service of man: so ^his
Science of Morrall philosophy, ^oth properly consider the final end of man
himself, calling it, summum ^onum, his greatest and highest hap^inesse,
whereunto he was created, and whereunto he tends in this ^^fe, and wherein
he rests and reposeth, without further motion or appetite, when he has
obtained it.

For better understanding whereof, it is to be considered, that every thing in
this world, has some particular end, together with an apetite and desire
ingrafted by nature to that end, Every thing in this world has a natural
desire to his end.
which desire cease when the end is obtained. As for example, a Stone has a
natural appetite to go downward into the Center or middle of the earth, and so
rests in no place (except by violence it be stayed) until it come thither.
On the contrary, fire, reposeth no where, (except it be restrained) until it
mount above the air to his peculier and natural place of abode, where, of it
self it rests. And so in other things that are without sense, there is a
certain appetite and desire to their end, which end being once obtained, that
desire and appetite of it self reposeth.

In beasts likewise we behold, that they have a desire to fill their bellies,
and to satis-fie their other senses, which being satis-fied they remain^
contented, and desire nothing else, vn^till the same appetite of sense vvan^ his
object again. The felicity of beasts.
VVherby we per^ceiue, that sensuality or co^tentatio^ of the senses, is the
final end desired of beasts, and their very summum bonum, or supreme
felicity.

But in man, albeit for maintenance of the body, there be this appetite also to
satisfy his senses, according to the lower proportion of his mind, that is
called sensatiue, yet according to the higher part of his mind, whose name is
reason, or the reasonable part, (which is the only part indeed, that is
peculier to man, and distinguishes him from unreasonable beasts,) he has an
appetite of some more high and excellent object, then is the contentation of
these senses: for that by experience we see and feel, that oftentimes when
the senses be al satisfied, yet is the mind not quiet, which argues, that
sensuality, or sensual delectation, is not our s^mmum bonum, wherein our
mind must rest, and enjoy her felicity.

Hereupon have Philosophers and wise men fallen to dispute in all a^es, what
should be the final felicity and summum bonum of mankind? And Cicero says,
Cic. lib. de sibonorum and malorum.
that this point is, ^^do totius phylosophiae, the very hook ^^hynge whereupon
all phylosophie ^^^geth. For that this being once found out, clear it is,
that all other things and actions are to be referred to the obtaining of this
end and happiness. And therefore about this point there has been marvelous
contention and fight among Philosophers, The conte^tion of Philosophers about
the felicity of man.
the Stoickes refuting the Epicures, and Peripatetiques refuting again the
Stoics: and the Platonickes, (who went nearest the truth) impugning and
refuting both the one and the other: and this dissension went so far forth,
the one part assigning one thing, and the other another, to be this felicity
or summum bonum, that Marcus Varro, a most learned Roman, gathered two
hundred, fourscore, Aug. lib. 19. de ciuit. cap. 1
and eight different opinions (as S. Augustine notes) about this matter.

And finally, when all was said and examined, Plato found, that nothing which
might be named or imagined in this life, could be the felicity or summum bonum
of man, for that it could not satis-fie the desire of ou^ mind. And therefore he
pronounces this general sentence. The sentence of Plato in Phaedon.
It is impossibl^ that men should find their felicity (...) summum bonum, in
this life, see^ what way they will: but in the next li^^ without all doubt it
must be found. The reason of which sentence and determination was, for that
Plato was able to refute any thing, that the other Philosophers did or could
name, to be our felicity and fin^ll end in this life, were it Riches,
Honors, Pleasures, morrall virtues, or other like, which each sect did assign.

As for example, How nothing in this life can be our felicity.
he proved that riches could not be our summum bonum or happiness, for that
they are uncertain, vndurable, vain, variable, and things that bring with
them more danger oftentimes and trouble of mind, than poverty does. Honors
he refelled, for that besides their vanity, they depend of the mouth and
minds of other men, who are changeable and inconstant. Pleasures of the body,
and voluptuousnes, for that they are common to us with beasts, and always
have annexed thy r^sting, and discontentation, when they are past. Morrall
virtues, for that they consist in a certain perpetual fight and war with our
own passions, which never give us rest or repose in this life. Finally, whether
soever we turn our selves, or what so ever we lay our hands upon in this life,
to make our felicity or summum bonum, it fails us (says Plato) neither
gives it any durable contentation to our mind, wherefore this felicity is to
be sought and obtained in the life to come.

Thus far arriueth Morrall phylosophie by reason, How far Morral philosophy
reaches in determining man's felicity.
to prove, that man's felicity or final end, cannot be in any thing of this
life or world. It proves also by the same reason, (as in part it has been
touched before) that this felicity of our mind in the life to come, must be a
spiritual and immaterial object, for that our mind and soul is a spirit: it
must be immortal, for that our soul is immortal. But what? goes yet human
philosophy any further? or can Plato assign the particular point wherein it
stands? Hear his words and confess, that not without reason he was called
Divine. Plato in Phaedon.
In this it consists (says he) Vt coniungamur Deo, qui omnis beatitudinis
fastigium, meta, finis, That we be joined to GOD, who is the top, the butt, and
the end of all blessedness. And can a^y Christian (think you) say more than
this? Yet ha^ken what a scholar of his says, for explication of his Masters
sentence: Plotin. Enu. 1. lib. 4. cap. 1
Supremus hominis finis, supremum bonum, id est Deus. The final end of man
whereto he tends, is a supreme or sovereign good thing, and this is God
himself. By which words we see, that these Heathens, by the end of man could
find out God, which was the second argument propounded in Morrall philosophy.

A third argument uses the Morral Philosopher, The third argument in Morral
philosophy, touching reward and punishment.
for proof of God, (which shall be the last I will allege in this place)
deduced from consideration of good and evil, vice and virtue, and especially
of the reward, which by nature, reason, and equity, is due to the one: as
also, of the punishment belonging to the other.

For (says he) as in all other things, cre^tures, and actions of this world,
that pass from the Creator, we see proportion, order, justice, wisdom, and
providence observed; so, much more must we assure our selves, that the same is
observed in the same Creators actions and proceedings toward man, that is the
chief and principal of all other his creatures.

Now then we see and behold, that all other creatures are directed to their
ends by nature, and do receive comfort and contentation so long as they hold
that course: and loss, disease, and grief, as soon as they break and swerve
from the same. Only man, has reason given him whereby to know and judge of
his end; and the holy Scriptures, whereby he may either direct his way to the
same by virtue, or run astray by following of wickedness. Whereupon it ensues,
that in all equity and justice, there must remain reward for such as do well,
and follow the right path assigned them to their end and felicity, which is by
good life: and punishment for the other that abandon the same, for pleasure and
sensuality.

But we see in this world, (says the Philosopher) that most wicked men do
receive least punishment: and many there be, (as Princes and high Potentates)
whose lives and actions, be they never so vicious, yet are they above the
correction of mortal men: and many poor men on the contrary part, who for
their virtue, pa^ience, and honesty, receive nothing in this life, but envy,
m^lyce, contempt, reproach, despite, and oppression. See of this matter Socrates
in Apolog.
Wherefore (says he) either wants there providence and equity in the
government and disposition of these affairs, which we see not to want in
things of lesser moment: or else must there be a place of punishment and
reward in the life to come, Plato in Cratil. et in Gorgia. et in Phaed. et in
lib. 10. de legibus. Plutarch. de Sera numinis vindicta and others.
upon the souls of such as part from hence, and a just and powerful Judge to
make recompense of these inequalities and iniustices permitted in this world.
Which Judge can be none but the Creator himself.

And so hitherto have I declared, how every particular Science among the
Gentiles, had particular means and ways to demonstrate God by contemplation
of his creatures, and by force of reason, which no man could deny.

Now remains it to show, how the Jew or faithful Israelite, before
Christ's appearance in the flesh, was able to confirm this verity to a
Heathen, which shall be the subject of the Section following.

How the Jews were able to prove God. SECT. 3.
The people of Israel Gods partage.
THE people of Israel, that for many years and ages, were the peculiar people
and partage of God, as they dwelt environed with Gentiles of each side, that
impugned their Religion and worship of one God, and had many weak-lings among
themselves, that were often tempted to doubt of the same Religion, by the
example of so many Nations and Countries about them, that made profession of a
contrary Religion, so had the Divines and learned men of this people diverse
forcible proofs, and most reasonable arguments peculier to themselves,
(besides the gift of faith, or any other demonstration that hitherto has been
alleged) to confirm their brethren in ye belief of one God, and to
convince all Atheists or Infidels in the world.

Diverse things where by the Jews show God.
And albeit these proofs which they used were many, as the creation of the
world by one God: the dividing of the Hebrew Religion from the beginning: the
conversation of God with Abraham, of whom the Jews descended: the myraculous
delivering of that Nation from Egypt: the Law received from Gods own mouth by
Moses: the strange en^rance of the Jews into the Land of Promise: the
extinguishing of the Gentiles which before inhabited there: the errection of
the Jewish Monarchy; and protection thereof against all Nations; the
myraculous deeds and sayings of Prophets: and a thousand reasons besides,
which confirm most evidently, that the Jews God, was the only true God: yet
for that all these things and sayings with an Infidel, had no more credit,
than the wrytings or Scriptures wherein they were recorded; hereby it came to
pass, that al which a Jew could say for proof of God, more than a Gentile,
depended only upon ye authority of his Scriptures; and for this cause he
referred all his proofs and arguments to make evident the truth and
certainty of these Scriptures, which thing once performed, the being of one
God cannot be called into controversy: for that these Scriptures are nothing
else, but a narration of the acts and gests of that only God, which the Jews
profess.

Comfortable to hear the certainty of Scriptures declared.
We are now to see then, what the Jew was able to say for proof of his
Scriptures, and consequently, for demonstration of God, and of his judgments
declared therein. Which discourse, as it was profitable in old time, for stay
and confirmation of all such, as were or might be tempted with infidelity: so
can it not be but very comfortable to us Christians of these days, to behold
the certainty of these Scriptures laid open before us, upon which the
foundation of our whole faith depends.

The first proof of Scriptures.
FIrst therefore, the Jew for proof of his Scriptures, alleges the great and
wonderful antiquity thereof. Antiquity.
For as God (says he) was before Idols, and truth before falsehood, so was the
Scripture, (which is the Story of the true God) long before the writings of
Panims or Infid^ls. Nay, Josephus lib. 10. con. Appion handles this at large.
further he shows, that the most part of things recounted in the Bible, were
do one before most of the Panym gods were extant, and that the very last
Writers of the Hebrew Cannon, which are Esdras, Aggaeus, Zacharias, and
Malachie, ( Eusebius assigns them 570. in Chron.
almost six hundred years before the coming of Christ, when the second
Monarchy of Persians began) were before most of the Heathen ancient
Historiographers; to wit, before Hellanicus, Herodotus, Pherecides, Thucydides,
and Xenophon. And albeit the Gentiles had some Poets before, as Orpheus, Homer,
Hesiodus, and Lycurgus the Lawmakers, that lived a good while after: yet the
eldest of these, arrived no higher than the days of K. Solomon, which was five
hundred years after Moses, the first writer of the Bible. After whose time,
the most part of Heathen gods were long unborn, as Ceres, Euphemerus Missen.
in Genealo. Deorum.
Vulcan, Mercury, Apollo, Aesculapius, Castor, Pollux, and Hercules, as the
Gentiles themselves in their Genealogies do confess. And as for Abraham, that
lived five hundred years before Moses, he was not only elder than these gods,
which I have named, but also than Jupiter, Neptune, Pluto, and such other, who
for dignities sake and antiquity, are called by the Gentiles, Ci^^ de natura
Deorum.
Dij maiorum Gentium, the gods of great Nations. And yet before Abraham, do
the Scriptures contain the story of two thousand years or there abouts.

So that by this it is evident, that the writing of Heathens, and the multitude
of their gods, are but late Fables in respect of the old and venerable
antiquity of Hebrew Scriptures, and consequently the authority of these
Scriptures, must in reason be greater than all other writings in the world
besides, seeing they were extant before all others, in those first times of
simplicity and sincerity, and were in part translated into diverse languages,
before the Monarchy of the Persians, that is, before any story of the Gentiles
was written, Eusebius. lib. 9. de praep. Euang. cap. 2.3.4.
as Eusebius out of many Heathen Authors declares.

The second proof of Scriptures.
Their manner of writing and conseruing.
NExt to the reason of antiquity, is alleged the manner of writing,
authorizing, and conseruing these Scriptures, which is such, as greatly
confirms the certainty of things contained therein. For first, what soever
is set down in these writings, was either taken immediately from the mouth of
God, as were the prophecyes and books of the Law: or else collected from time
to time by general consent, according as matters and miracles fell out, as
were the Books of Judges, the Books of Kings and Chronicles, and some other
that contain records and Hystories of times. Which books were not gathered by
some one pryuate man, upon hearsay, or his own imagination, long after things
done, as Heathen Hystories, and other profane records and monuments are; but,
they were written by general agreement, in the self same days, when things
were in sight and knowledge of all men, and so could not be feigned.

Secondly, How Scriptures were authorized.
when books were written, they were not admited into the common authority of
Scriptures, that is, of Gods word or divine wrytings, but upon great
deliberation, and most evident proof of their undoubted verity. For either the
whole Congregation or Sinagogue, who had the approouing hereof, (and among
whom commonly were diverse Prophets) did know most certainly the things and
miracles to be true, (as did also the whole people,) that were recorded in
these vvritings, concerning Histories, or else they saw the same confirmed from
God, by signs and wonders, as in the books of the Prophets, and of their
Lawgiver Moses it fell out.

Thirdly, when any thing was written and admitted for Scripture, the care of
conservation thereof was such, The care of conservation.
and the reverence of Jews thereunto so great: as may easily assure us, that no
corruption or alteration could happen unto it. For first ye thing was coppied
out into twelve Autentical copies, for all the twelve Tribes: and then again in
every Trybe there were so many copies made, as were particular Synagogues
within that Trybe. All was done by special Notaries, Scribes, Ouer-seers, and
Witnesses. The copies after diligent reuiewe taken, were laid up by the whole
congregation, in the Treasure house of the Temple, under diverse locks and
keys, not to be touched, but by men appointed; not to be used, but with
singular reverence To add; diminish, corrupt, or alter, was present death by
the Laws of the Nation. And then how was it possible (says the Jew) that
among these writings, either falsehood should creep in, or truth once
received, could afterward be corrupted?

It is not possible (says he) in reason, and therefore observes he another
thing in this case, which in truth is of very great consideration, to wit, that
no other Nation under heaven, did ever so much esteem their own writings, The
estimation that the Jews had of their Scriptures,
that they would offer to dye for the same, as the Jews were ready to do, for
every sentence and syllable of their Scriptures. Wherefore also it did proceed,
that in all their miseries and afflictions (wherein they were a spectacle to
all ye world) in all their flights and banishments, to Egypt, Babylon, Persia,
Media, and other corners of the earth, in all their spoils, assaults, and
deuastations at home: they ever yet had special care to conserve these
writings, more than their own lives, and so have kept the same without mayme
or corruption, more ages together, than all Nations in the world have done any
other Monuments.

The third proof of Scriptures.
THE third persuasion which is used by the Jew for the verity of these
Scriptures, The sincerity of the VVriters.
is, the consideration of the particular men that vvrote them: who were such,
as in no reason can be suspected of deceit or falsehood. For as I have said,
the stories of the Bible, were written from time to time by public
authority, and by the testimony of al men that saw and knew the things that
are rehearsed. The books of the prophecies were indicted by the Prophets
themselves, who were plain, simple, and sincere men, authorized from God by
continual miracles, and yet so scrupulus and timorus of their own speeches, as
they durst say nothing, but only, The Lord says thi^, the Lord of Hosts
commands that etc.

And when they preached and read their wrytings in the hearing of all the
people, they protested, that it was not man's word, but Gods, and that for such
they left it in the public Treasury of their Nation, until by tract of
time, the event and fulfilling of their prophecies should prove them true, The
lives and deaths of the Prophets.
(as always it did) and their own both lives and deaths declare, that they
meant no falsehood: subject to the corruption, pride, vanity, or ambition of
this life (as other profane and Heathen VVryters were) and their deaths for
the most part offered up in holy martyrdom, for defense of that truth which
they had preached and written: as appears in See Epiphan. de vitis Propheta.
Esaias, that was sawed in pieces by King Manasses; in Jeremy, that was stoned
to death by the common people; in Ezechiell, that was slain by the Captain of
the Jews at Babylon; in Amos, whose brains were beaten out^ by Amasias the
wicked and Idolatrous priest in Bethell; in Michaeas whose neck was broken by
Ioram, son to King Achab; in Zacharias, that was slain at the Altar, and the
like.

And this for the Prophets of the latter times among the Jews. But now, if we
consider the first Prophet of all that wrote among the people, A peculier
consideration of Moses, first writer in the Bible.
I mean Moses, that was not only a prophet, but also an historiographer, a
Law-gyuer, a Captain, and a Priest, the first that ever reduced that people to
a Commonwealth, and the first that put their acts and gestes in writing, or
rather the acts and gestes of the almighty God toward them: this man (I say)
if we consider him only? (I mean the circumstances of his person) the I^we
thinks this a sufficient motive to make any man of reason believe what soever
he has left written in the Bible without further confirmation.

And first for his antiquity, I have spoken before, and the Heathens do
confess: Eusebius. lib. 9 et 10. de pre. Euan. Joseph. lib. 1. de content. Appio.
et li. 2. anti.
and for miracles done by him, the greatest enemies that ever he had in the
world; that is, Appion in his fourth book against the Jews, and Porphyrie in
his fourth book against Christians do acknoweledge them; and Porphyrie
adioyneth more for proof hereof, that he found the same confirmed by the
story of one Saconiathon a Gentile, who lived (as he affirms) at the same
time with Moses. But what? all those miracles (say they) were done by
Arte-magick, and not by the power of God, as Moses boasted.

But then asks them the Jew, where Moses a sheepeheard, Exo. 3.4.8.
could learn so much Magic, or why could not the Magitians of Pharao, whose
study was in that profession from their infancy, either do the like, or at
least wise deliver themselves from the plagues of Egypt? why did they cry out,
The miraculous works of Moses. Exo. 14.
The finger of God is here? Where did you ever hear of such works done by
Magic, as Moses did, when he divided the Red Sea? when he called into his
Camp so many Quayles upon the sudden, Exo. 16.
as sufficed to feed six hundred thousand men, besides women and Children?
When he made a Rock to yield forth a Fountain? Numb. 11.
when he caused a dew to fall from heaven, Joshua 5.
that nourished his whole Camp for forty years together? Psalm. 77.
When he caused the ground to open, and swallow down alive, Numb. 16.
three of the richest Noble men of all his Army, together with their
Tabernacles, and all other bags and baggage? Joseph. lib. 4. antiq. cap. 2.
and 3.
When he caused a fire to come from heaven, and consume fifty Gentlemen of the
former Rebels and Ad^^rents, without hurting any one that stood about them?

These things did Moses, and ma^y other in the sight of al his Army, that is,
in the sight of many hundred thousand people, among which there were diverse
his emulators and sworn enemies, as by the story and Scripture it self
appears, Core, Datha^, and Abiron, with their faction, Numb. 16.
sought in all things to disgrace him, Deuteronomy. 11.
and to diminish his credit: Psalm. 125.
and therefore, if any one point of the miracles had been reproouable, Moses
would never have durst to put the same in writing, nor would the people have
stood with him; and much less have received his writings for divine, and for
Gods own words, (being solicited against him by so potent means) had not they
known al things to be most true therein contained, and had seen his strange
miracles, and familiarity with God.

The plain and sincere proceeding of Moses.
But he dealt plainly and simply in this behalf: he wrote the things of his
own doings, which every man present did know to be true: and of Gods speeches,
and communications to himself, he wrote so much as he was commanded, whereof
both God, and his conscience did bear him witness. He caused the whole to be
read unto the people, and laid up in the sacred Arc and Tabernacle, as Gods
own writing and covenant with that Nation. He caused all the whole Army to
swear and vow the obseruaunce thereof. Number. 20. and 17.
And then drawing toward his death, Deuteronomy. 31.
he made a most ex^ellent Exhortation unto them, persuading them sincerely to
the service of their God; and confessing his own infirmities, and how for his
offenses he was to die before their entrance into the Land of promise. He
concealed not the offense of his brother Aaron, Exodus 32.
of his grandfather Leui, Genesis 49.
of his sister Marie, Numb. 12.
and other of his kindred, Deuteronomy. 14.
(as worldly princes for their honors are wont to do) neither did he go
about to bring in government after his decease, any one of his own sons,
(which is greatly to be observed) notwithstanding he left behind him goodly
gentlemen fit for the room, Numb. 27.
Deuteronomy. 3.
and himself of power to place them, ^f he had endeavored: but he left ^he
government to a Stranger, na^ed Joshua, as God had commanded him.

Al which things (says the Jew) do ^rooue sufficiently, that Moses was ^o man
of ambition, or of worldly spirit, but a true servant of God, and consequently,
that he wrought not by Magic or falsehood, but by the only power of his Lord
and Master, and that his writings are true, and of the same authority, that in
his life and death he affirmed them to be, that is, the undoubted Word of
Almighty God.

The fourth proof of Scriptures
THis he confirms yet farther by a fourth reason, Consent.
which is the consent and approbation of al later VVriters of the Bible, that
ensued after Moses. For as among profane writers of worldly spirit, it is a
common fashion for him that follows to reprehend the former, and to hunt aft^r
praise by his auncetors disgrace: so in these VVriters of the Bible, it is a
most certain argument, that all were guided by one Spirit from God, that in
continuance of so many Ages and thousand years, no one yet ever impugned the
other, but always the latter supporting and approving the former for true,
does bui^d thereupon, as upon a sure foundation. S^ the writings of Joshua do
confirm^ and approve the writings of Moses: and the records of the Judges do
reverence and allow the Book of Ios^a. The story of the Kings and Chronicles,
does refer it self to the story of Judges. One Prophet confirms another.
And finally, Christ appro^eth them all, by the known division of the Law,
Psalms, and Prophets, which is a demonstra^ion, that all their spirits agreed
in one.

And thus hethertoo has been declared the four considerations, Four
considerations external.
that ^re external or without the Bible, to ^it; the antiquity an
continuance of the Scriptures; the manner of their Considerations internal.
(says he learned Jew) if you will but open ^^e Book it self, and look into
the ^ext, and that which therein is con^^ined: you shall see Gods own ^^nd,
Gods own charecters, Gods ^wne sign^ and seal, and subscripti^^ to the paper.
You shall see Gods ^mnipotencie, Gods Spirit, Gods ^rouidence, no less in
these Letters ^f his Book, than you beheld the same before, in the tables of
his creatures. Nay, much more (says he) for these letters were devised for
declaration of those Tables, to the end that such as for their blindness could
not see him in his creatures, might learn at least to read him in his
scriptures.

The fifth proo^e of Scriptures.
Their argument, and end.
COnsider then first (says he) the subject or Argument which the Scriptures do
handle, together with their scope and end whereuntoo they do level. You
shall find, that the first is nothing else, but the acts and gests of one
eternal God, as before has been mentioned; and the second nothing else, but
the only glory an^ exaltation of the same great God together with the
salvation of mankind upon earth. And shall you fin^ any writings in the world
besides^ that have so worthy an argument, o^ so high an end? Read all the
volumes and monuments of the Pagans, turn over all their Authors, of what kind^
name, or profession soever; and see what mention they make of the^^ two
things^ I mean, of the honor of God, and the salvation of man? Read their
Philosophers, Philosophers.
and see whether ever they name or pretend these things. Read their
Historiographers, Historiographers.
and mark how many battles and victories they attribute unto God? They will
describe to you often the particular commendation of their Captain, they will
defraud no one Soldier of his praise in the victory, they will attribute
much to the wisdom of their General, much to his courage, much to his
watchfulnes, much to his fortune. They will attribute to the place, to the
wind, to the weather, to the shining of the Sun, to the raising of the dust in
the enemies eyes, to the flying of some little bird in the air, and to a
thousand such petty observations besides; but to God nothing. Whereas
contrariwise in the Scriptures, it is in every battle recorded, God
deli^^^ed them into their enemies hands: G^d ouer-threwe them: God gave the
^^ctorie.

Again, consider the Laws and law makers among the Gentiles, Heathen
Lawmakers.
as Ly^^^gus, Solon, Draco, Numa, and the ^^^e, and see whether you find any
one such Law, or tending to such an end, as this of the Jews: Deuteronomy. 6.
Thou shall love the Lord thy God, with all thy heart, and with all thy soul:
and shall love thy neighbor as thy self.

Prophets and Soothsayers.
Consider in all the Soothsayers and Divines among the Gentiles, whether they
used to say in their predictions, as the prophets of Israel did, Dominus
dixit, the Lord has spoken it; or else, Ego dico, I do speak it. Compare their
versifiers and Poets with those of the Scripture, Versifyers and Poets.
and see, whether they have labored in the praise of men, or of God. And
whereas Heathen Poets have filled up their Books (as also the most part of
ours at this day,) with matte^ of carnal love: mark where any o^ them ever
brake forth in^o such panges of spiritual chaste love, as holy David did, when
he said: I will love thee my God, Psalm. 17.
my strength, my firmament, my refuge, my deliverer, my helper, my protector,
and the horn of my salvation. And again^ in another verse. The vehement love
of David. Psalm. 72.
What have I desired upon earth besides thee? my fle^^ and heart have fainted
for thee, tho^ God of my heart, thou God art m^ part and portion everlasting?

By all which is evident, that as profane writings and Writers, which do
treat of men, Profane writers treat only of men.
extol men, seek the grace of men, refer all to the commodity and good
lyking of men, do proceed of the spyrite of man, and are subject to those
infirmities of falsehood, error, and vanity wherewith m^n is entangled in this
life: so the Scriptures, which handle matters above the compass of flesh and
blood; that refer al to God, and supernatural ends, could not proceed of
nature or of humane spirit. For that by nature, the Jews were men as the
Gentiles were, and had their infirmities of flesh and blood as the other had.
And therefore it must needs be concluded, that these high and supernatural
writings among them, proceeded from God, that specially directed them, and
gave them light of understanding, above all other Nations and people in the
world.

The sixth proof of Scripture.
NExt after the argument and end of the Scriptures, the Jew wills us to
consider the peculier style Their style.
and phrase which they use: for that (says he) it being different from all
manner of writings in the world, and inimitable to man, it does discover the
finger of God, by which it was framed. For See S. Augustine of this at large.
Lib. 12. de ciuit. Dei.
whereas human writers do labor much in adorning their style, and in reducing
their words to number, weight, measure and sound, with addition of many
figures, and other ornaments for allurement of the Reader: the Scripture takes
quite another course, and uses a most marvelous simplicity, Simplicity.
thereby to accomodate it self to the capacity of the weakest; but yet always
carrying with it so great profundity, Profunditie
as the best learned in the search thereof, shall confess their own ignorance.
For examples sake, consider but the very first words of the Bible, Gene. 1.
In the beginning, God created heaven and earth: and the earth was empty and
void: and darkness was upon the face of the deapth: and the Spirit of God
was carried upon the waters: and God said, let light be made, and light was
made etc. What can be more plain and simple then this narration, to instruct
the most unlearned about the beginning and creation o^ the world? and yet when
learned men come to examine every point thereof, how, and what, and where, and
in what manner, and when things were done; it astonisheth them all, to consider
the difficulties which they find, and the depth of so infinite inscrutable
mysteries.

Besides this, The gravity and majesty of speech in the Scriptures.
there goes in the same simplicity, a strange majesty, and gravity of
speech, declaring sufficiently, from how great and potent a Prince it
proceeds. For as great Monarchs in their Edi^ts and proclamatio^s, are wont
to speak unto their subjects, not in figures or rethorical ph^ases, but
plainly, breefelie, and peremptorily to show their authority, so the
Scriptures, to declare whose Edicts they be, do use the like manner of phrase
and style to all the world, without alluring or flattering any man, and without
re^pect of Monarch, Emperor, King, Prince, or Potentate: Fac hoc and viues:
De^. 4.16. and 22.
do this, and thou shall live. Si peccaueris in me, ^^rieris in aeternum: if
thou sin against me, thou shall die everlastingly.

And albeit (as I have said) the Scriptures do use this simplicity of speech,
and do not admit that kind of painted and artificial style, which humane
writers do so much covet, yet in persuading, instructing, moving of
affections, The force of the scriptures in moving of affections.
and all other effects which speech or writing can work, there is no
comparision, (a thing most wonderful) between any other writing in the world
and these.

Wherefore I could allege many proofs and examples, but that it were
too-long. Let any man read attentively, but the first Chapter of the prophecy
of Esaias, and compare it with any one part or parcel of Tullies or Demosthines
Orations. and see whether the difference of words, be as great as the
difference of motions? Let diverse Himnes and holy Psalms of the Scriptures,
be conferred with the most patheticall Poems, that man's wit has invented, and
see whether there be any comparison in stirring and siering of affections, or
no?

Flauius Josephus de antiq. Iud.
This am I sure, that Josephus the I^w, who for glory of his eloquence, had his
Image of metal erected by Titus the Emperor in the Marketplace of Rome,
wrote the sam^ story which the Scriptures conta^ne, and bestowed much labor
and humane cunning therein. See S. Ierom lib. de scrip. Eccle.
But yet even in those places, where he endeavored most to show his art, as
in the Sacrifice of Isaac by his father, and in the meeting of Iephte with his
only daughter, Gene. 12.
Judge. 11.
which by vow he was constrained to put to death; the scriptures are able to
pierce the h^rt, and wring out tears of the Reader, whom Josephus will not
greatly move with his rethoricall narration, though otherwise very learned
and artificially penned.

Aristaeus that learned Gentile, Two Miracles reported by Aristaeus.
of whom we have made mention before, who was in special favor with Ptolomie,
the second great Monarch of Egypt, (about three hundred years before our
Savior Christ his nativity) and a chief doer in procuring the translation of
the Hebrew Bible into the Greek language, Aristaeus libello de tra^slat.
Bibli, and apud Eusebius. lib. 8. de praep. E^ang. cap. 1
reported of his own knowledge ^o the said King Ptolomie, two strange
accidents which had happened in his time, and which he had understood o^ the
parties themselves, to whom they had happened. The first was, of Theopompus,
Theopompus.
an eloquent Historiographer, who having translated many things out of the
Bible, and endeavoring to adorn the same with vain colors of eloquence,
could not perform his desire, but was stricken with a sudden maze and
giddiness in the head, and was warned in his sleep, not to proceed any
further in that work after that sort, for that such manner of style was too
base for so high matters, as the scriptures contained.

The other example, was of one Theodectes a writer of Tragaedies, Theodectes
who told Aristaeus, that he once attempted to bring certain matters out of
the Jews Bible into a Pagan tragaedie, and that thereupon he was presently
stricken blind, wherewith he being astonished, and falling to repentance for
that he had done, and desisting from the enterprise, (as also Theopompus did)
they were both of them restored again to their former healthes. And thus much
did these three Pagans confess of the authority, divinity, and peculier
sacred style of our Scriptures.

The seventh proof of Scriptures,
BUT now further it insueth in order, that after the subject and phrase, we
should consider a little the contents of these Scriptures, The Contents.
which will perhaps, more cleerelie direct us to the view of their Author,
then any thing else that hitherto has been said. And for our present purpose, I
will note only two special things contained in the Bible. The first shall be
certain high and hidden doctrines, High doctrines.
which are above the reach and capacity of human reason, and consequently
could never fall into man's brain to invent them. As for example; that all this
wonderful frame of the world, was created of nothing, whereas Philosophy
says, That of nothing, nothing can be made: That Angels being created spirits,
were damned eternally for their sins; that Adam by disobedience in Paradise,
drew all his posterity into the obligation of that his sin: and that the
woman's seed should deliver us from the same: That God is one in substance, and
three in person; that the second of these persons being God, should become man,
and die upon a cross for the ransom of mankind; that after him, the way to
all felicity and honor, should be by contempt, suffering, and dishonor.
These doctrines (I say) and many more, contained in the Bible, being things
above man's capacity to devise, and nothing agreeing with humane reason: most
evidently do declare, that God was the Author and enditer of the Scriptures,
for that by him only, and from no other, these high and secret mysteries could
be revealed.

The prophecies in Scriptures do declare their Author.
The second thing contained in the Scriptures, that could not proceed but from
GOD alone, are certain prophecies and fore-tellings of things to come. Wherein
God himself provoke the Idols of the Gentiles, to make experience of their
power, in these words: Esaias. 42.23.
Declare unto v^ what shall ensue hereafter, and thereby we shall know that
you are God^ indeed. Which is to be understood, if they could foretell
particulerly and plainly, what was to come, in things meerelie contingent or
depending of man's will: How the Devils and other creatures may foretell
things to come.
they should thereby declare their power to be divine.

For albeit these Idols of the Gentiles^ as Apollo, and other that gave forth
Oracles, (which were nothing else indeed, but certain wicked spirits, that
took upon them these names) did sometimes happen upon the truth, and fore-tel
things to come, as also most Astrologers, Soothsaiers, and Magitians do,
either by ^ore-sight in the stars and other elements, or by the assistance of
these wicked spirits and devils: yet are the things which they pronosticate,
either natural and not contingent, and so may be foreseen and foretold in
their causes; (as rain, heat, cold, winds, and the like) or else, if they be
mere accidental: these predictions of theirs, are only conjectures, and so
most in certain, and subject to errors.

This testifies Porphirie the great Patron of Paganism, The opinion of a
Heathen touching the Prophecies of his gods.
in a special book of the answers of gods, wherein he swears, that he has
gathered truly without addition or detraction, the Oracles that was most
famous before his time, with the false and uncertain event thereof, in
consideration of which event, he sets down his judgment of their power in
predictions, after this manner. The Gods do foretell some natural things to
come, Porphiry lib. de resp. et Oraculorum.
for that they do observe the order and conjunction of their natural causes:
but of things that are co^tingent, or do depend of man's will, they have but
conjectures only, in that by their subtlety and celeritie, they prevent us.
But yet they oftentimes do lie, and deceive us in both kinds, for that as
natural things are variable, so man's will is much more mutable.

Thus far Porphirie of the prophecies of his Gods, whereunto agrees an other
Heathen, o^ great credit among the Grecians, named Oenomaus, Oenomaus de
falsitate oracul. et de artificibus maleficijs.
who for that he had been much delighted with Oracles, and more deceiued^ wrote
a special Book in the end, of their falsehood and lies; and yet shows, that
in many things wherein they deceived, it was not easy to convince them of open
falsehood, for that they would inuolue their aunswers (of purpose) with such
obscurities, generalit^es, equivocations, and doubt^uln^sse, as always they
would leave them selves a corner wherein to save their credites, when the
event should prove false. Deceitful Oracles.
As for example, when Craesus that famous and rich Monarch of Lydia, consul^ed
with the Oracle of Apollo, whether he should make war against the Persians,
and thereby obtain their Empire, or no? Apollo desirous of bloodshed, (as all
wic^ed spirits are,) gave his Oracle in these words, for deceyuing of Craesus.
Eusebius. Lib. 5. de praep. Euan. cap. 10
If Craesus without fear, shall pass over Halys, (this was a River that lay
between him and Persia) he shall bring t^ confusion a great rich kingdom.
Upon which words, Craesus passed over his Army, in hope to get Persia, but
soon after he lost Lydia, by evil understanding of this doubtful prophecy.

This then is the imbecilitie of both humane and angelical power, The
circumstances of prophecies set down in the Scriptures.
in pronosticating things to come, which are mere contingent. In which kind,
notwithstanding, seeing that the Scriptures have many, and almost infinite
prophecies, foretold many years, (and sometimes ages) before they came to pass,
set down in plain, particular, and resolute speech: at such time as there was
neither cause to conjecture them, nor probability that ever they should be
true; delivered by simple and unlearned persons, that could foresee nothing by
skill or art; and yet that all these by their events, have proved most true,
and never any one jot in the same have failed: this (I say) alone, does
convince most apparently, (all proofs and reasons, and other arguments laid
aside) that these Scriptu^es are of God, and of his eternal and infallible
Spirit. And therefore of these Prophecies, I will alledg in this place some few
examples.

The Prophecy to Abraham for his posterity.
ABraham the first Father and special Patriarch of the Jews, had many
prophecies and predictions made unto him, as of his issue, when he had yet
none, nor ever like to have: of his inheriting the Land of Canaan, Gene.
12.13.15.17.18. etc.
and the like. But this which follows is wonderful, of his posterities
descent into Egypt: of their time of servitude, and manner of deliverance
thence; the same being fore told, more then four hundred years before it was
fulfilled, and at that time, when no likelihood thereof in the world appeared.
The words are these. Gene. 15.
Know thou be^o^e hand, that thy issue shall be a strange^ in a foreign Land,
and they shall subject them to servitude, and shall afflict them for four
hundred years: but ye^ I will judge the Nation unto whom they have been
slaves, and after that, they shall depart thence with great riches. This is the
Prophecy, and how exactlie it was afterward fulfilled, by the ruin of the
Egyptians, and deliverance of the Israelites, even at that time which is here
appointed: not only the book of Exodus does declare, Exodus 12. Gala. 3.
where the whole story is laid down at large, but also the consent of Porph.
lib. 4. contra Christia. Appion lib. 4 cont. Iud^.
Heathen writers, as before has been touched. And it is specially to be
noted, that this prophecy was so common and well known among all the Jews,
from Abraham's time down unto Moses, and so delivered by tradition from fathers
unto their children; as it was the only comfort and stay, not only of all
that people in their servitude of Egypt, but also of Moses and others, that
governed the people afterward, for forty years together in the desert, and was
the only mean^ indeed, whereby to pacifi^ them in their distresses and
miseries: and therefore Moses in every exhortation almost, makes mention of
this promise and prophecy, as of a thing well known unto them all, and not
devised or invented by himself or any other.

The Prophecy for the government of Judah.
LOng after this, Jacob that was Abraham's Nephewe, being in Egypt, and making
his Testament, said of his fourth son Judah. Gene. 49.
Judah, thy brother shall praise thee, and the children of thy Father shall
boowe unto thee, etc. The scepter shall not be taken from Judah, until he come
that is to ^e sent, and he shall be the expectation of Nations. Which latter
part of the prophecy, all Hebrews do expound, that it was meant of the coming
of Messiah, which was fulfilled almost two thousand years after, at the
coming of Christ, as shall be showed in another special Chapter. For at that
time, Iosep. de antiqu. lib. 14.
King Herod a stranger, put out quite the line of Judah, from the government of
Jury. But for the first part, touching Iudaes scepter, it is wonderful to
consider the circumstances of this prophecy.

For first, when it was spoken and uttered by Jacob, there was no probability
of any scepter at all, to be among the Jews, for that the Israelites, or
sons of Jacob at that day, were poor, and few in number, and never like to
be a distinct Nation of themselves, or to depart forth of Egypt again. And
secondly, if any such thing should come to pass, as they might be a people,
and have a scepter of government of their own, yet was it not likely,
Vnlikeli-hoods of this prophecy.
that Judah and his posterity should possess ye same, for that he had three
elder Brothers, to wit, Ruben, Simeon, and Leui: who in all likeli-hoode were
to go before him. And thirdly, when Moses recorded and put in writing this
prophecy, (which was diverse hundred years after Jacob had spoken it,) it was
much less likely, that ever it should be true, for that Moses then present in
government, was of the Tribe of Leui, Exodus 2.
and Joshua designed by God for his successor, Joshua. 15.
was of the Tribe of Ephraim, and not of Judah: which makes greatly for the
certainty of this record. For that it is most apparent, that Moses would
never have put such a prophecy in writing, to the disgrace of his own Tribe,
and to the prejudice and offense of Ruben, Simeon, Ephraim, and other Trybes;
neither would they ever have suffered such a derogation, but that it was
evident to them by tradition, that their Grand-sire Jacob had spoken it, albeit
then presently there was no great likelihood, that ever after it should come to
be fulfilled.

And this was for the time of Moses, but yet consider further, 1. Regu. 1. and
8.
that from Moses to Samuel, (that was last of all the Judges) there passed
four hundred years more, and yet was there no appearance of fulfilling this
prophecy in Israel; for that the Tribe of Judah was not established in that
government. At length they came to have Kings to rule, 2. Reg. 9.
and then was there chosen one Saul to that place, not of the Tribe of Judah,
but of Benjamin, and he endued with dyue^s children to succeed him. And who
would then have thought, that this prophecy could ever have been fulfilled?
but yet for that it was Gods word, it must needs take place, and therefore
when no man thought thereof, there was a poor David.
Sheepeheard chosen out of the Tribe of Judah, 1. Reg. 16.
to be a King, and the regiment and scepter so established in his posterity,
that albeit many of his descendents offended God more grievously then ever did
Saul, who was put out before: 3. Reg. 12^
2. Chro. 11.
And albeit ten Trybes at once brake from Judah, and never returned to obedience
again, but conspired with the Gentiles and other enemies on every side, to
extinguish the said Kingdom and regiment of Judah: The wonderful providence of
God toward the house of Judah.
yet for the fulfilling of this prophecy, the government of Judah held out
^^ill, for more then a thousand and two hundred years together, until Herod's
time, (as I have already said) which is more then any one family in the world
besides, Eusebius. in Chron.
can show for his nobility or continuance in government.

The Prophecy for the greatness of Ephraim above Manasses.
THE same Jacob, when he came to bless his little Nephews Manasses and
Ephraim, that were Joseph's Children: though himself were now dim of sight,
and could not well discern them, yet did he put his right hand upon the head
of the younger, and his left hand upon the elder, and that of purpose, as it
proved afterward. For when Joseph their Father misliked the placing of their
Grandfathers hands, and would have removed the right hand from Ephraim, and
have placed it upon the head of Manasses, that was the elder Brother, Jacob
would not suffer him, but answered, G^ne. 48.
I kn^w my son, I know, that Manasses is the elder: and he shall be
multiplied in many people, but yet his younger brother shall be greater then
he. Which afterward was fulfilled, Joshua, 16. and 17.
for that Ephraim was always the greater and stronger Tribe, and in fine,
became the head of the Kingdom of Israel, Eccle. 47.
or of the ten Trybes, Esaias, 7.28.
whereof there was no suspicion or likelihood, Ierem. 31.
when Jacob spoke this, Ezech. 37.
or when Moses recorded it. H^sea, 5.
And how then came Jacob to foresee this so many hundred years before? Gene.
49.
as also to foresee and foretell the particular places of his childre^s
habitations in the land of Promise? Joshua, 14.
as Zabulon at the sea side; Exodus 12.
Aser in the fertile pastures; Gala. 3.
and other the like that fell out by casting lotts, Acts, 13.
after four hundred years and more. Where-hence had he this (I say) to
foretell what lots so long after should appoint, but only from GOD, who
governed their lots.

The foresight of Moises.
THE like may be asked concerning Moises, Numb^ 34, 35, 36.
who before his death in the Deser^, divided out the Land of Canaan to every
Trybe, Joshua, 15.16.17.
even as though he had been in possession thereof, and as afterward it fell out
by ^^^ting of lots, as in the book of Joshua appears. And could any humane
wit or science (think you) fore see, what each Tribe should attain (after his
death) by drawing of lots?

Again, the same Moises foresaw and foretold in public hearing of all the
people, how in times to come, long after his death, the Jews should forsake
GOD, Deu, 31, 32,
and for their sins be cast into many banishments, and finally be forsaken,
Deuteronomy, 32, verse, 21.
and the Gentiles ^^ceiued in their room, as indeed it came to pass. And
whence (trow you) could he learn this, but from God alone?

The Prophecy for the perpetual desolation of Jericho.
IN the book of Joshua, there is a curse laid upon the place where Jericho
stood, and upon what-soeuer person should go about to rebuild the same, to
wit, That in his eldest son he should lay the foundations, and in his
youngest Son should he build the gates thereof. Joshua, 6.
Which is to say, that before the ^oundations were laid, and the gates builded,
he should be punis^^^ with the death of al his children. Which thing was
fulfilled almost five hundred years after, in one Hiel, who presumed under
wicked King Achab, to rebuild Jericho again, and was terrified from the same,
by the sudden death of Abiram and Segul his children, as the book of Kings
reports, 3, Regu, 16,
according to the words of the Lord, which he had spoken in the hand of Joshua
the Sonn^ of Nun. And since that time to this, no man, either Jew or Gentile,
has taken upon him to raise again the said City, albeit the situation be
most pleasant, as by relation of stories and Geographers appears.

The prophecy for the birth and acts of Ios^^s.
THE third book of Kings makes mention, 3. Reg. 1^.
that when Jeroboam had with-drawne ten Trybes from the obedience of Roboam K.
of Judah: to the end they might never have occasion to reunite themselves again
to Judah, by their going to sacrifice in Jerusalem, (as by the Law they were
appointed) he builded for the^, a goodly gorgious high Altar in Bethel, and
there commanded them to do their devotions. And when he was one day there
present himself, and offering his incense upon the said Altar, and all the
people looking on: there came a man of God, (says the scripture) and stood
before the Altar, and cried out ^loude, and spoke these words; 3. Reg. 13.
O ^ltar, Altar, this says the Lord, be^^ld, a child shall be borne of the
house of David, whose name shall be Josias, and he shall sacrifice upon thee,
these i^^latrous Priests that now burn ^^^ncumcense upon thee, and he shall
^^^ne the bones of men upon thee.

Thus spoke that man of God in the presence and hearing of all the people, more
the^ three hundred years before Josias was borne: and it was registered
presently, according to the manner of that time (which I have noted before) and
with the same were registered also, ye miracles which happened about that fact:
as that the Altar cleft in two upon the man's words: and Jeroboam extending out
his hand to apprehend him, lost presently the use and feeling thereof, until it
was restored again by the said holy man's Prayers: who notwithstanding, for that
he disobeied Gods commandment in his return, and eat with a Prophet of
Samaria, Disobedience punished grievously in Gods dearest.
(which was forbidden him,) he was slain in his way home-warde by a Lion, and
his body was brought back again and buried in Bethel nigh^ the said Altar,
amongst the Sepulchers of those idolatrous Priests of that place, but yet with
a superscription upon his Tomb, cont^yning his name, and what had happened.

There passed three hundred yere^ and Josias was borne, 4. Reg. 23.
and came to reign in Judah, and one day coming to Bethel to overthrow the
Altar, and to destroy the Sepulchers of those Idolatrous Priests that had been
buried in yt place: when he began to break their Tombs, he found by chance,
the Sepulcher of the said man of God, with the superscription upon it. By which
superscription and relation of the Citizens of Bethel, when he perceived that
it was the Tomb of him that had foretold his birth, his name, and his doings,
so many hundred years before he was borne: he let the same stand untouched,
Chap, 23,
as the fourth book of Kings does declare.

Now consider, whether among any Nation in the world, but only among the
Jews, there were ever any such prophecy, so certain, so particular, so long
foretold before the time, and so exactly fulfilled? But yet the holy
scriptures are full of the like, and time permits me only to touch some
few of the principal.

The prophecy for the destruction of Jerusalem and Babylon.
Esaias the Prophet is wonderful in foretelling the mysteries and acts of the
Messiah, his nativity, his life, and all the particulers that happened in his
passion. In so much, that S. Ierom says, he may seem rather to write a story
of deeds past, Hieron. in prol. Galeat^
then a Prophecy of events to come. But yet among other things, it is to be
noted, that he living in a peaceable and prosperous time in Judah, when the
Jews were in amity and great security with the Babilonians, he foresaw and
foretold the destruction of Jerusalem by the said Babilonians, 4, Reg, 20,
verse, 17, Esaias, 5.
and the grievous captivity of the Jews under the^; as also the destruction of
Babylon again by Cyrus King of Persia, whose express name and greatness, he
published in writing almost two hundred years before he was borne: saying in
ye person of God; First, to Ezechias king of Judah, that rejoiced in the
friendshyp he had with Babylon: 4. Reg. 20.
Behold, the days shall come, when all that thou and thy Fathers have laid
up, shall be carried away to Babylon, and thy children shall be Eunuchs in the
King of Babilons Palace. And next, to Babylon, he said: Esaias, 13,
The destruction of Babylon, which Esaias the son of Amos saw, etc. Howl and
cry, for that the day of the Lord is at hand. etc.

The wonderful prophecy for Cyrus King of Persia.
THirdly unto Cyrus (not yet born) who was preordained to destroy the same, and
to restore the people of Israel from banishment, to rebuild the Temple in
Jerusalem, he says thus; Esaias, 24.
I say to Cyrus, thou art my sh^epe-heard, and thou shall fulfill all my will.
I say to Jerusalem, thou shall be builded again. I say to the Temple, thou
shall be founded again. This says the Lord to my anointed Cyrus, I will go
before thee, and will ^umble the glorious people of the earth in thy presence:
I will break their brazen gates, Esaias, 25.
and crush in pieces their iron bars, for my servant Jacobs sake have I called
thee by Name, and have armed thee, whereas thou This he says, for that Cyrus
was an Infidel.
know not me.

Can any thing be more clearly or miraculously spoken in the world, then to
name a Heathen not yet borne, that should conquer so strong a Monarchy as
Babylon was at this time, and should build again the Temple of Jerusalem,
which others of his own Religion had destroyed before him? What cause, what
reason, wh^t likeli-hoode could be of this? Yet Esaias speaks it so
confidently, as he says, Esaias, 13,
that he saw it: and he names two witnesses thereof, that is, Vrias, and
Zacharias, that were not borne in many ye^es after, saying: Es^y, 8, verse, 2.
and I took unto me two faithful witnesses, Vrias the Priest, and Zacharias
the Son of Barachias. Whereof the first was a Prophet in Ieremies time, a
hundred years after Esaias, Ierem, 26, verse, 20,
and the second lived fourscore years after that again, in the days of
Dari^s, as by the beginning of his prophecy appears: Zach, 1, verse, 1,
and yet both (as you see) were d^stinctly named by Esaias long time before.

And whereas this Book of Esaias was pronounced openly to the people (as other
prophecies we^e) and published into many thousand hands before the captivity
of Babylon fell out, Circumstances of certain truth.
and then carried also with the people, and dyspersed in Chaldea, and other
parts of the world, there can be no possible suspicion of forgery in this
matter, for all that the world both saw it and read it, many years before the
thing came to pass: yea, when there was no likeli-hood of any such possibility
to come.

The Prophecies and doings of Jeremy, in the siedge of Jerusalem.
THE same captivity and destruction of Jerusalem by the Babylonians, was
prophesied by Jeremy, a hundred years after Esaias, and a little before the
matter came to pass: yea, while the Babylonians were about the walls of
Jerusalem, and besiedged the same for two years together, Jeremy was within,
and told every man, that it was but in vain to defend the City, for that
GOD had now delivered it. And albeit he were accounted a Traitor for so
saying, (especially, when by an Army of Egypt, that came to the aid of
Jerusalem from Pharao, the siedge of the Babylonians was raised for a certain
time,) yet Jeremy continued still in his asseueration, and said to Zedechias
the King, Ierem, 37.
Thou shall be delivered into the hands of the King of Babylon. Iere, 38,
And to the people, Hae dicit Dominus, tradendo tradetur, haec Ciuitas, etc.
This says the Lord, this City most certainly shall be delivered into the
hands of the Babylonians. And so he continued notwithstanding he were put in
prison and whipped, and threatened daily to be hanged: until indeed the City was
taken, and Zedechias eyes pulled out, his children slain before his face, Iere,
39, 4, Reg, 24, 25,
and al other things performed, which Jeremy had prophesied and foretold them
before.

And which was yet more marvelous, Jeremy did not only foretell the
particulers of this captivity, but also the determinate time, how long it
should endure, saying. Ierem, 25,
And all this Land of Jury shall be into wilderness, and astoniednesse: and all
this people shall serve the King of Babylon for threescore and ten years,
The years foretold of the captivity of Babylon.
and when threescore and ten years shall be complete, I will visit upon
the King of Babylon, and upon that Nation says the Lord, and I will lay the
same into eter^all desolation. Iere, 24, and 29
But upon Iud^ will I cast my pleasant eyes, and will bring them back^ to this
Land again. etc. In which prophecy is contained, first the particular time
how long this captivity should endure. Secondly, the destruction of Babylon,
and of that Monarchy by the Persians. And thirdly, the returning home of the
Jews again; which three things to have been afterward fulfilled, 1. Esdr. 1,
2. 2, Esdr. 2.
not only Esdras that lived at that time, and was an actor in performance of
the last: but all other Heathen writers besides, do record and testify.

And this prophecy of Jeremy, was so famous, and certainly believed amongst
all the Jews, in the time of their captivity: as when the day of expiration
drew near, Daniell writes thus of himself. Dan, 9.
In the first year of Darius, I Daniell, understood in the scriptures, the
number of the seauentie years whereof God spoke to Jeremy, that they should
be fulfilled, touching the desolation of Jerusalem: and I turned my face to my
Lord God, and besought him in fasting and sackcloth. etc. Neither only the
Jews understood and believed this prophecy, Gentiles believed the scripture.
but even Cyrus himself, that was a Gentile, gave full credit thereunto, and
the^eby was induced to restore the Jews, as appears both by his own words
and Proclamations, 1. Esdras, 1. 3. Esdras. 2
set down by Esdras that executed the same: and by his deeds also, in
r^storing home the Jews, and rebuilding their Temple at his own great cha^ges,
as all Historiographers of the Heathen do confess.

I might here allege infinite other examples, and make no end, if I would
follow the multitude of Propheci^s which are dys^ersed through out the whole
Scripture? I might show how Daniell fore-tolde to Baltasar King of Babylon, The
Prophecies of Daniell. Dan. 5,
in the midst of his triumph, as in the hearing of all his Peers, the
destruction which insued upon him the very same night after.

I might here allege, how the same Daniel, Dan. 11.
in the first year of Darius the Median, in the beginning of that second
Monarchy of Medians and Persians, foretold how many Behold, three kings
shall yet stand in Persia and the four^h shall be rich above all the rest. Dan.
11.
Kings should reign after him in Persia, and how the last (who was the fourth
after him, and his name also Darius) should fight against the Grecians, and be
overcome by a Grecian King, (which was Alexander) and how the Kingdom also of
the Grecians, should be divided and torn in pieces, after Alexanders death,
Justin. hist. lib. 12. et 13.
and not pass to his posterity, as Iustine and other Heathen writers do
testify that it was, by Antigonus, Perdiccas, S^leuchus, Antiochus,
Ptolomaeus, and other Captains of Alexander, that divided the same among
themselves, above a hundred years after Darius was dead.

I might declare also, how the same Daniell foresaw and foretold, the four
great Monarchies of the world, The four Monarchies of Assirians, Persia^s,
Grecians, and Romans.
and described the same as distinctly, as if he had lived in them all, and as
by experience we find since to be true. I might allege the particular
description, of the fight betwixt Darius and Alexander, Dan, 2, Dan, 8,
set down by Daniel under the names of the great Ram, The foretelling of
great Alexander.
and the fierce Got with one horn, which Goat himself interprets it to be
meant of a Grecian King that should conquer the Persians. And therefore
Alexander (as Josephus reports) coming to Jerusalem about a hundred years
after, Iosep^ lib. de antiq. Iud. cap. 8,
and hearing the Prophecy of Daniell interpreted unto him by Iaddus the high
Priest, assured himself that he was the man therein signified, and so after
long sacrifice done to the God of Israel, (of whom he affirmed that he had
appeared unto him in Macedon, and had exhorted him to take this war in hand,)
and after he had bestowed much honor and many benefits upon the high Priest,
and Inhabitants of Jerusalem, he went forward in his war against Darius, with
great alacrity, and had yt famous victory which all the world knows.

A hundred such prophecies more, which are as plain, as evident, and as
distinct as this, I might allege of Elias, Elizeus, Samuel, David, Ezechiel,
the twelve lesser Prophets, and of other which I have not named. And in very
truth, the whole Scripture is nothing else, but a divine kind of body,
replenished throughout with the vital spirit of prophecy, and every day some
prophecy or other is fulfilled, (though we mark it not) and shall be unto the
worlds end.

What manner of persons our Prophets were.
And the miracle of this matter is yet more increased, if we consider what
manner of people they were for the most part, by whom these Prophecies of
hydden things were uttered, to wit, not such men is could gather the
foresight of things by Astronomy or Astrology, that is, by contemplation of
the stars, as some fond Gentiles did pretend, (though Ptolomie deny that
any such thing can be foretold but only by inspiration from God, Ptolo. in
lib. de fructu.
) neither yet were they so sharp witted, as to attain to Prophecy by strange
imaginations, Moses Narbon in lib. Abubacher et Auampare.
as most vainly Auerroes and his fellows hold that some men may; nor finally,
were they so delicatly fed, as by ^xact diet and rules of Alchimie, to come
to Prophecie^ as Alchimists dream that a man may do, and that Appolonius
Thyanaeus did, Roger. Baco. lib. de sex scient experimentalib.
who by stillified meats (as they speak) came to be stillified himself, and
so by help of his Glass called Alchimusi, to soretel some matters and
affairs to come. Our Prophets (I say) knew none of these fantastical devises,
being for the most part poor, simple and unlearned men, as in particular was
recorded, that David was a sheepeheard, and Amos was a keeper of Oxen. Amos, 1,
Yea, oftentimes they were Women, as Marie the sister of Aaron, Exodus, 15,
called in the Scripture by the name of Prophetess. Judges, 5,
Debora the wife of Lapidoth: 1. Reg, 2,
Hanna the Mother of Samuel, Elizabeth the Mother of John Baptist: Anna the
Daughter of Panuell: and finally, the most holy and blessed virgin Mary, Luke,
1, et 2,
with the daughters of Phillip, Acts, 21.
and many such other, both in the old and new Testament, who prophesied
strangely, nor could possibly receive such foreknowledge of things to come,
but only from the Spirit of the living GOD, and by inspiration of the holy
Ghost, which is a manifest demonstration, of the excellency of Holy-writ, and
of the certainty contained therein.

The eight proof of Scriptures.
AND now, albeit this might seem sufficient in the judgment and conscience of
every reasonable man (as the Jew supposes) to prove that the Scriptures be
only ^ro^ God, and consequently by them, that there is a GOD; yet has he one
reason more to confirm their sinceri^ie, which I will allege in this place,
and therewith make an end. His reason is, that although these holy writings,
(which proceed of Gods spirit) do not take their testimony or confirmation
from man: yet ^or more evidence of the truth, God has so provided, that all the
principal, most strange and wonderful things, recounted in scripture, should
be reported also, and confirmed by Infidels, Pagans, Gentiles, and Heathen
Writers themselves; Approbation of Heathen Writers.
albeit in some points they dyffer from the Scriptures, in the manner of their
narr^tion, for that they adioyne superstitions thereunto. Which makes the more
for approbation of the things, for that hereby it appears, they took not
their stories direc^ly from the Bible, but by tradition and most ancient
antiquities of their own.

The Creation of the world.
FIrst the^ he shows, Gene, 1, et 2,
that the creation of the World, which is the marvel of all meruailes, with
the infusion of man's soul from God, is ^oth granted and agreed upon, by all
those Heathen Philosophers that have been cited before, (albeit the
particularities be not so set down by them, as they are in Scriptures,) and
by all other, that do see in reason, that of necessity, there must be yielded
some Creator of these things.

The floode of Noe.
Gene, 6, 7, 8
NExt to this, the flood of Noe is mentioned by diverse most ancient Heathen
Wri^ers: as by Baerosus Chaldaeus, Iosep. li. 1. de antiq. Iud.
Ieronimus Egyptius, Nicholaus Damascenus, Abydenus, and others: according as
both Josephus and Eusebius do prove. Eusebius lib. 9, de praep. Euan^ cap. 4.
And in Bresile, and other Countries dyscouered in our age, where never
teach^rs were known to be before, they talk of a certain drow^ing of the
World, which in time past happened: and do say, that this was left unto them
by tradition, from time out of mind, by the first inhabitants of those places.

The long life of the first Fathers.
OF the long life of the first Patriarchs, Gene, 5, 10. and 11.
according as the Scripture reports it, not only the former Authors, but
also Manethus, that gathered the History of the Egiptians: Molus Hestiaeus, yt
wrote the Acts of the Phaenicians, Hesiodus, Hecataeus, Abderida, Helanicus,
Acusilaus, and Ephotus, do testify, that those first inhabitants of the world,
lived commonly a thousand years a piece; and they allege the reason thereof
to be, both for the multiplication of people, and for bringing all Sciences to
perfection, especially Astronomy and Astrology, which, (as they write) could
not be brought to sufficient perfection, by any one man that had lived less
then six hundred years, in which space, the great year (as they call it)
runs about.

Of the Tower of Babylon.
OF the tower of Babylon, Gene. 11.
and of the confusion of tongues at the same, Eusebius cites the testimonies
at large, both of Abydenus that lived about King Alexanders time, Eusebius. lib, 9
de praep. ca. 4^
and of Sibylla, as also the words of Hestiaeus concerning the Land of Sennaar,
where it was builded. And these Gentiles do show by reason, that if there had
not been some such miracle in the division of tongues, Mark this reason.
no doubt but that al tongues being derived of one, (as all men are of one
Father,) the same tongues would have retained the self same roo^es and
pri^ciples, as in all dial^ct^ or deri^ation of tongues we see that it comes
to pass.

But now (say they) in many tongues at this day, we see that there is no
lik^l^-hoode or affin^tie among them, but all different the o^e from the other,
and thereby it app^ar^th, that they were m^de di^ers and distinct even from the
^eg^n^ing.

Of Abr^ham.
Gene, 11, 12.13, 14, etc
OF Abraham and his ^^^ayres, I have all^dged some Heathen Writers before, as
Berosus, H^cat^^us, and Nicholaus Damascenus. But of all other, Alexander
Polyhistor alleges Eupolemus most at large, Alexan. Polihist. lib. de Iudai.
hist.
of Abraham's being in Egypt, and of his teaching the^ Astronomy t^ere^ of his
fight and victory in the behalf of Lot: of his entertainment by K.
Melchisedech, of his wife and sister Sara, and of other his doings, especially
of the sacrifice of his son Isaac. To whom also agrees Melo, Melo lib. de
fraudib. Iudeorum.
in his books written against the Jews, and Artabanus. Arta. in Iudeorum
hist. Gal de simp. Pausan. in Eliae Solin. in Polih. Tacitus lib. vlt. histor.
And of the strange Lake wherinto Sodom and Gomorra were turned by their
destruction, called Mare mortuum, the dead Sea, wherein nothing can live. Both
Galen, Pausanius, Solinus, Tacitus, and Strabo, do testify and show, the
particular wonders thereof.

Of Isaacke, Jacob, Joseph, Job, etc.
FRom Abraham down to Moises, writes very particulerly the forenamed
Alexander, albeit he mingle sometimes certain fables, whereby appears, that
he took his story not out of the Bible wholly. Gen, 15, 16.17, 18, etc,
And he alleges one Leodemus, who as he says, lived with Moises, and wrote
the self same things that Moises did, so that these writers agree almost in
all things touching Isaacke, Jacob, Joseph, and all their affairs, even unto
Moises; and with these do concur also Theodotus a most ancient Poet,
Artabanus and Phylon, Gentiles. Aristaeus in like manner about Aristotle's time,
Aristae. lib. de Job.
wrote a book of Job.

Of Moises.
OF Moises and his acts, not only the forenamed, Exodus, 2, 3, 4, 5, etc.
(especially Artabanus in his Book of the Jews) do make mention at large: but
many others also, as namely Eupolemus, out of who^ Polyhistor recites very
long narrations, of the wonderful and stupendous things done by Moises in
Egypt, for which he says, that in his time he was worshipped as a God in that
Country, and called by many Mercurius. And that the Ethiopians learned
circumcision of him, which afterward always they retained, and so do unto
this day. And as for his miracles done in Egypt, his leading the people thence
by the Redde-sea: his living with them forty years in the wilderness: the
Heathen Writers agree in all things with the Scriptures, saving only, that they
recount diverse things to the praise of Moises, which he has not written of
himself, adding also his description, The description of Moses person out of
Heathen Writers.
to wit, that he was a long tale man, with a yellow beard, and long hair,
wherewith also accords Numenius Pythagoricus, touching the acts of Moises,
whose lyse he says that he had read in the auncientest records that were to be
had.

The story of Joshua, the Judges and the Kings.
BUT the forenamed Eupolemus goes yet forward, and pursues the story of
Joshua, of the Judges, of Saul, David, and of Solomon, even unto the building of
the Temple, Iosep. lib. 8^ de antiq. cap. 2.
which he describes at large, with the particular Letters written about that
matter to the King of Tyrus, which Josephus says were in his days kept in the
records of the Ty^^ans. And with Eupolemus, agree Polyhistor, and Hecataeus
Abderita, that lived and served in war with King Alexander the great, The
treasures hidden in the Sepulcher of David.
and they make mention among other things, of the inestimable riches of
Solomon, and of the treasures which he had hyd and buried, (according to the
fashion of that time) in the Sepulcher of his Father David, which to be no
fable, (though not mentioned by the scripture) Josephus well proves, Iosep. l.
13. de antiq. ca. 16.
for that Hir^anus y^ high Priest and King of Jury, being besiedged in
Jerusalem by Antiochus, surnamed Pius, not many years before our Savior
Christ his nati^ity, to redeem himself and the City, and to pay for his
peace, The same thing attempted Herod in his time, as Josephus says lib. 18,
anti.
opened the said Sepulcher of David, and fecht out of one part thereof, three
thousand Talents in ready money, which amount to six hundred thousand pounds
English, if we account the Talents but at the least size, of Talentum H^braicum.

The things that ensued after King Salomons days.
AND as for the things that ensued after Solomon, as the division of the Tribes
among themselves, and their diverse wars, a^flictions, and transmigrations
into other Countries, many Heathen Writers do mention and record them, and
among other, Herodotus, and Diodorus Si^ulus. And the foresaid Alexander
Polyhistor, talking of the captivity of Babylon, says, that Jeremy the
Prophet, told Ioachim his King, Ierem. 37.
what would befall him, 4. Reg, 24.
and that Nabuchodonoser hearing thereof, was moved thereby to besiedge
Jerusalem.

Of the flight of Senacherib from the siedge of Jerusalem, Of Senacherib.
and how he was killed at his return home, by hiw own sons in the Temple,
according to the Prophecy of Esaias, Esaias, 31. and 33, and 36.
and story of the book of Kings, for that he had blasphemed the Lord God of
Israel, 4. Reg, 9
as Herodotus witnesses: and that after his death, he had a statue or Image of
metal erected in his memory, with this inscription in Greek: Hero. lib. 2.
He that beholds me, let him learn to be godly. Confer Xenophon also in
his seventh book De Cyropaedia, and you shall see him agree with Daniell in
his narrations of Babylon. Dan. 16


And finally, I will conclude with Josephus the learned Jew, Iosep. li. 1, de
antiq. Iudai.
that wrote immediately after Christ's ascension, and protests that the
public writings of the Syrians, Chaldaeans, Phaenicians, and innumerable
hystories of the Graecians, are sufficient to testify the antiquity, truth,
authority, and certainty of the holy scriptures, if there were no other proof
in the world besides.

The conclusion of this Chapter, with the application. SECT. 4.
THus ^arre have I treated of the ways and means, which have been left unto
the world from the beginning, thereby to know and understand their Maker. In
treating which point, I have stayed my self the longer, for that it is the
ground and foundation of all that is, or may be said hereafter. It is the
first, final, and chief principle, of our eternal salvation or damnation,
and the total weal or woe that must befall us, and possess us for ever.

Which ground and verity, if it be so certain and evident, as before has
been showed, by all reason an^ proo^e, both divine and humane, and that ye
matter be so testified and proclaimed unto us, by all the creatures of heaven
and earth, and by the mouth and writing of our Creator himself, as no
ignorance or blindnes^e can excuse the same, No excuse of ignorance of GOD.
no slothfulnes dissemble it, no wickedness deny it: what remains then, but
to consider with our selves, what service this God requires at our hands? what
gratitude, what duty, what honor for our creation? to the end, that as we have
proved him a most bountiful Creator, so we may find ^him a propitious Judge,
and munificent rewarder. For it is not probable, that his divine Majesty,
which has appointed every other creature to some action for his own glory,
(as has been declared at large before) should leave mankind only, which is
the worthiest of all the rest, without obligation to his service.

In which one point notwithstanding, though never so clear (such is the
fondnes of our corrupt nature, The error of the old Philosophers. Romans 1. et 2,
without Gods holy grace:) failed those ancient wisemen of ye world, of whom
S. Paul speaks so much in his Epistle to the Romans, taking compassion of
their case, and calling them fools, and all their great learning and
Philosophy mere fondnes: for that whereas (by the means before mentioned) they
came to know GOD, they did not seek to glorify him, Rom, 1.
as appertained unto God, nor yet did render him due thanks: but vanished away
in their cogitations. etc. That is, they took no profit by this knowledge of
theirs, but applied their cogitations upon the vanities of this world, more
the^ upon the honor and service of this their God. For which cause, as Saint
Paul adioyneth presently in the same place, Rom, 1.
that for so much as they did thus, and did not show forth by their life and
works, that they had the knowledge of God indeed: GOD delivered them over to
a reprobate sense, and suffered them to fall into horrible sins, which S.
Paul does name and detest in all that Chapter, and finally concludes, that
their everlasting perdition ensued principally upon this one point: that
whereas, Romans 1.
They knew the justice of God, (by all the ways and arguments that before have
been declared,) yet would they not understand (says he) that death was due to
all such, which lived wickedly as they did.

And the same Apostle, upon consideration of these matters, wherein he stands
long for the importance thereof, pronounces in fine, this general sentence, A
general sentence pronounced by S. Paul. Rom, 1.
with great asseueration and vehemency of Spyrite: That the wrath of God is
revealed from heaven, upon all impiety and injustice of those men, who hold
the knowledge of God in unrighteousness. That is, who being endued with y^
knowledge of God, do live notwithstanding unrighteously, or (as he said
before) do consume their days in vanity, not making account of the service
which they do owe to that God, for their creation and other benefits. The
application to our selves.
Which thing, if Saint Paul might truly say to those Gentiles before his time,
who had only natural knowledge and understanding of God: that is, so much as
by his creatures was to be gathered: what may, or shall be said unto us, who
have not only that light of nature which they had, but also the wrytings and
law of God himself, communicated especially unto the Jews, and above that
also, have heard the voice of his only son upon earth, and have received the
doctrine of his most blessed Gospel, and yet do live as negligently (many of
us) as did the very He^then, touching good life and virtue.

Surely in this case I must denou^ce against my self, that if it be true, (as
it cannot be ^alse) which this blessed Apostle affirms here of these Heathen
Philosophers, that by that little knowledge they had of GOD, they were made
inexcusable, Romans 1,
then by the most just and certain rule of Christ, laid down by S. Luke, cui
multum datum est, multum queretur ab eo, Luke, 12.
that of every man which has received much, a great a^count shall be taken for
the same; we are forced to in^erre, that our account shall be the greater, and
our selves much more inexcusable before his divine Majesty, then the very
Gentiles and Heathens are; if after our knowledge and manifest understanding of
his Godhead and justice, We vanish away in our cogitations, as they did, and as
the most part of the world at this day are seen to do, that is, if we apply
our cogitations and cares, about the vain affairs of this tempor^l life and
transitory commodities, which we should bestow upon the service and honor of
this Lord and Creator.

OF THE FINAL END AND CAUSE WHY MAN WAS CREATED BY GOD, and placed in this
world. And of the obligation he has thereby, to attend to the affair for which
he ca^e heth^r. CHAP. III.
BY the Chapter precedent, I nothing doubt (gentle Reader) but if thou have
seen and perused the same, thou remainest sufficiently informed of thy
Creator. A necessary consideration.
Now follows it by order of good consequence, that we consider with some
attention, (for that is stands us much upon) what intent and purpose God had
in creating us, and this world for our sakes, and in placing us therein as
Lords of the same? By the former considerations we have learned, that as among
other creatures, nothing made it self: so nothing was made for it self, nor
to serve it self. The heavens (we see) do serve the ayre^ the air serves
the earth, the earth serves the beasts, the beasts serve man: and then is
the question, who^ man was made to serve? for in him also hold^th the former
reason, that seeing he was not made by himself, it is not likely that he was
made to serve himself.

If we consult with the scriptures herein, we find a general sentence laid
down without exception: Prou. 16.
Vniuersa propter semetipsum operatus est Dominus, the Lord has made al things
for himself. Man made to serve GOD.
And if al, then man (no doubt,) who is not ye least of the rest which he has
made.

And heerby it comes to pass, that man cannot be said to ^e free, or at his
own appointment or dysposition in this world, but is obliged to perform that
thing, for the which he was sent into this habitation. Which point holy Job
declares plainly, in a certain inuectiue against such men as were careless
and negligent in consideration of this affayre. A vain man, (says he) is
lifted up in pride, Job, 11.
and think^th himself to be borne as free as the ^olt of a wild Ass. That is,
he thinks himself bound to nothing, subject to nothing, accountable for
nothing that he does in this life: but only borne free, to pass his time in
disport and pleasure, as a Colt in the wilderness, that has no Master to tame
him.

Which in other words, the wiseman utters thus; Wisd, 15^
He esteems this life of ours, to be but a play-game, and therefore cares
not how he lives, or wherein he spend and pass over his time. And this of the
man who^ the Scripture calls vain.

But now, for the sober, wise, and discreet, of whom it is written, Prou, 15,
The way of life is upon the learned, to the end he may decline from the
lowest hell: they are far from so great folly, as to imagine that no account
shall be demanded of our being in this world: for that they have read, Eccles.
11, and 12.
That God shall bring into judgment what-soeuer is done, for every fault
that is committed. And the Christian man knows further, by the mouth and
asseueration of his Savior and Redeemer, that he shall be accountant for
every idle word that he mis-vttereth, Math, 12, Account to be given.
and finally, there is no man that is either of reason, or conversant in the
wrytings and Testament of his Creator, but remembers well, that among al other
irritations, whereby the wicked man is said to provoke Gods patience to
indignation, none is more often repea^ed, or more grieuouslie taken, Psalm, 9,
43. and 141.
then, that he said in his heart, God will ask no account.

With these men then alone shall be my speech in this present Chapter, who have
a desire to dyscharge well this account. For attayning whereof (truly) I can
give no better counsel, instruction, o^ advise, then to do in this case, as
a good Merchant factor is wont to do, when he arriueth in foreign Countries,
or as a Soldier or Captain, sent by his Prince to some great exployt, is
accustomed, when he comes to the place appointed, Profitable demands and
considerations.
that is, to weigh and consider deeply, for what cause he came thither? why he
was sent? to what end? what to attempt? what to prosecute? what to perform?
what shall be expected and required at his hands (upon his return,) by him
that sent him thither? For these cogitations (no doubt) shall stir him up to
attend to that for which he came, and not to employ his time in impertinent
affairs. The like would I counsel a Christian to put in ure, concerning a
case proposed, and to demand of himself, between God and his conscience,
why, and wherefore, and to what end, he was created and sent hither into this
world? what to do? wherein to bestow his d^yes. etc.

And then shall he find, that for no other cause, matter, or end, but only to
serve God in this life, and by that service to enjoy heaven, and everlasting
salvation in the life, to come. This was the condition of our creation, Gene,
14,
as Moises well expresses: and this was the consideration of our redeeming,
fore-tolde by Zachary, before we were yet redeemed: Luke, 2,
That we being d^liuered from the hands of our enemies, should serve God in
holiness and righteousness, all the days of o^r l^ues.

Of this consideration do ens^e two con^^quents to be observed. The first
consequence, upon due consideration of our end.
Where^f the first is, that seeing our end and final cause of being in this
world, is to serve God, and so to work our own salvation with fear and
trembling: what-s^euer thing we do, or bestow our time in, which either is
contrary or impertinent, or not profitable to this end, (though it were to
gain kingdoms) it is vanity and lost labor, that will turn us in time to
grief and repentance, (if we change not our course) for that it is not the
matter for which we came into this life, nor whereof we shall be demanded an
account, except it be to receive judgment and punishment for the same.

The second consequence,
Secondly, it follows of the same consideration, that seeing our only business
and affair in this world, is to serve our Maker, and save our own souls, and
that all other earthly creatures, are put here to serve our uses to that end
only: we should for our parts be indifferent to all these creatures, as to
riches or poverty, to health or sickness, to honor or contempt: to little
learning, or much learning; and we should desire only so much or little of
either of them, as were best for us, to the attainment of our s^id end and
Butte pretended; that is, to the service of God, and the weal of our souls.
For whosoever desires, seeks, loves, or uses these creatures, more then
for this, runs from the end ^or which he came hither.

By this then may a careful Christian take some scantling of his own estate
with God, How each man may take a scantling of his own estate.
and make a conjecture whether he be in the right way or no For if he attend
only or principally to this end, for which he was sent hither; if his cares,
cogitations, studies, endeavors, labors, talk, conversation, and other his
actions, A right course.
do run upon this mat^er, and that he cares no more for other creatures,
as honors, riches, learning, and the like, then they are necessary unto him
for this end that he pretends; if his days and life be spent in this study
of the service of God, and procuring his own salvation, in carefulnes, fear,
and trembling, as the Apostle advised him: Phillip, 2,
then he is (doubtless) a most happy man, and shall at length attain to the
Kingdom which he expected. But if he find himself in a contrary case and
course: A wrong and dangerous course^
that is, not to attend indeed to this matter, for which only he was sent
hither, nor to have in his heart and study this service of God, and enjoying of
heaven, but rather some other vanity of the world: as promotio^, wealth,
pleasure, sumptuous apparel, gorgious buildings, beauty, favor of Princes, or
any other thing else, that appertains not unto this end^ If he spend his time
about these trifles, having his car^s and cogitations, his t^lk and delight
more in these things then about the other great business, of possessing Gods
eternal kingdom, f^r which he was made and pla^ed in this world: then is he
(I as^ure him) in a perrilous way, leading directly to perdition, ex^ept he
alter and change his course. For, m^st cert^in it is, that whosoever shall not
att^nd unto the ser^ice he came for, shall neu^r attain the reward assigned and
promised to that service.

And for that the most part of all this wo^ld, (not only of Infidels, but also
Christians) do run amis^e in this point, and do not take care of that assayre
and business, The reason why so few are saved.
for which alone they were created and placed here: hence is it, that Christ
and his holy Saints, both before and after his appe^rau^ce in the flesh, have
spoken so hardly, and severely, of the very small number that shall be saved,
(even among Christians, Math, 7.20. and 22.
) and have uttered certain speeches which seem very rigorous to flesh and
blood, Luke, 13,
(and to such as are most touched therein) scarce credible, albeit they must be
fulfilled. As among other things, James, 4,
that a lover of this world cannot be saved; Math, 19,
that rich men do enter as hardly into heaven, Mark. 10.
as a Camel through a needles eye, and the like. The reason of which manner of
speeches do stand in this, that a rich man or worldling, attending with all
his industry to heap up ri^hes (as the fashion is) can not attend, (nor ever
does) to that for which he came into this world, and conseq^ently, can never
attain heaven, except God work a miracle, and thereby do cause him to spend
out his riches to the benefit of his soul, (as sometimes he does) and so do
lessen the Cammell in such sort, as he may pass the needles eye. Whereof we
have a very rare example in the Gospel, Luke, 19^
of Zacheus, who being a very rich man, did presently upon the entering of
christ into his house, (but much more as appears into his heart by faith)
resolve himself to change his former course touching riches, and at one blow
to begin with-all gave away half of all he posses^ed to the poor; and for
the rest made proclamation, that whosoever had received any wrong at his
hands, A perfect example of a good conversion.
(as commonly many do by the^ that are rich) he should come and receive four
times so much amends. By which alms and restitution, he was delivered from
the Camels gib or bunch on his back, that let his passage through the
needles eye. And this extraordinary favor and grace he received, by the
fortunate presence, of his most blessed and bountiful guest, who had signified
before in an-other place, that himself was able, so to draw the Camel, Math.
19.
as he should pass the needles eye, for that the things which are impossible
with man, Mark, 10,
are possible with GOD.

But to leave this, and to go forward in our former purpose, no marvel it
is, if in the world abroad, so few be saved, seeing yt of thousands, scarce
one does account of that business, which of all other is the chief and
principal. Consider you ye multitude of all sorts of people upon earth, and
see what their traffic and negotiation is? see whether they treat this
affair or no? see wherein their care, study, and cogitation consists? How
many thousand find you in Christendom, The wrong course of the world.
who spend not one hour of four and twenty, nor one half day in forty, in
the service of GOD, or business of their ^oule? How infinite have you, that
break their brains about worldly commodities, and how few that are troubled
with this other cogitation? How many find time to eat, drink, sleep, disport,
deck and trym themselves to the view of others, and yet have no time to bestow
in this greatest business of all other business? How many pass over whole
days, weeks, months, and years, (and finally their whole life time) in
hauking, hunting, and other pastimes, without regard of this important affair?
How many miserable women have you in the world, that spend more d^yes in one
year, in pricking up their apparel, and adorning their carcass, then they
do hours in prayer for the space of all their ly^e? And what (alas) shall
become of this people in the end? what will they do or say at the day of
account? what excuse will they allege? what way will they turn them?

If the Merchant-factor which I mentioned before, after many years spent in
foreign Countries upon his Masters expenses, A comparison expressing the
vanity of our occupations.
should return at length and give up his accounts, of so much time and money
spent in singing; so much in dancing, so much in fencing; so much in courting,
and the like; who would not laugh at so fond a re^koning? but being further
demanded by his Master, what time he had bestowed upon the Merchandise and
affairs for which he was sent, if the man should answer, that he had no
leisure to think upon that thing, for the great occupation which he had in the
other: who would not esteem him worthy of all punishment and confusion? And
much more shame and confusion, no doubt shall they sustain at the last dreadful
day, Math, 16,
in the face and presence of God and all his Angels, who being sent into this
world, to traffic so rich a Merchandise as is the kingdom of heaven: have
neglected the same, and have bestowed their studies, upon the most vain
trifles and f^llies of this world, witho^t cogitation or care of the other.

Psalm, 4,
O ye children of Adam, says the Spyrit of GOD, Ierem, 2.
why love ye so vanity, and seek after lies? why leave you the Fountain and
seek after Cesterns? If a golden game of inestimable value, should be proposed
for such as would run, and could win the same; A comparison.
and when the course or r^se were begun, if some should s^ep aside and follow
flies or feathers that passed in the air, without any regard of the prize and
gole proposed, who would not marvel and take pity of their folly? even so is
it with men of the world, if we believe S. Paul, who affirms, 1. Cor. 9.
that we are all placed together in a course or race, and that the kingdom of
heaven is propounded unto us for the Game or Prize, but every man says he,
arriueth not thither; and why? for that most men do step aside, and leave
the mark. Most men do run awry, and do follow feathers up and down in the
air; most men do pursue vanities, and do weary themselves out in the pursuit
thereof, until they can neither run nor go, nor move their lyms any further:
and then, for the most part, it is too-l^te to amend their folly.

Will you here the lamentations of such unfortunate men? these are their own
words recorded by scripture. We are wearied out in the way of iniquity and
perdition, Wisd. 5. The complaint of worldlings in the end of their life^
and the way of God have we not known. What profit have we received of al our
pomp and pride, and vaunting riches? what good have they done us? They are
now past away as a shadow, and as a Messenger that ryde^h in post, and we are
consumed in our own iniquities.

This is the lamentable complaint of such men, as ran awry, and followed a
wrong course in their actions of this life. These are they who pursued riches,
honor, pomp, and such like vanities, and ^orgate the great and weighty
business for which they were sent^ These are they, who were esteemed happy men
in this world, and thought to run a most fortunate course, in that they heaped
much riches together; advanced themselves and their families to great
dignities: became gorgious, glorious, and dreadful to others: and finally,
obtained what-soeuer their lust and concupiscence desired. The fond judgment
of ye world.
This made them seem blessed to worldly cogitations, and the way wherein they
ran, to be most prosperous and happy. And I make no doubt, by experience of
these our times, but they had admirours and enuiours in great abundance, who
burned in desire to obtain ye same course. And yet when I hear their
complaint in this place, and their own confession, wherein they say expreslie:
Wisd, 5^
We senseless men did err from the way of truth: When I consider also the
addition of scripture, Talia dixerunt in inferno: they spoke these things when
they were in hell: I cannot but esteem their course for most miserable, and
condemn wholly the judgment of flesh in this affair.

Wherefore, my dear brother, if thou be wise, yield not to this deceit of
worldly lips and tongues, that v^e to bless and sanctify such, Psalm. 10.
as are in most danger and nearest to perdition. Lean rather to the sincere
counsel of saint Paul, who wills thee to examine uprightly thine own works
and ways, Gala, 6.
and so to judge of thy self without deceit. If thou walk the way of
Babylon, most certain it is, that thou shall never arrive at the gates of
Jerusalem, except thou change thy course.

Oh my brother, what a grief will it be unto thee, A comparison expressing our
grief in the end, for running a wrong course.
when after long labor and much toil, thou shall find thy self to have gone
awry? If a man had travailed but one whole day, and thereby made weary should
understand at night, that all his labor were lost, and that his whole journey
was out of the way: it would be a marvelous affliction unto him (no doubt)
albeit no other inconvenience were therein, but only the loss of yt days
travail, which might be recovered and recompensed in the next. But if besides
this, his business were great, if it lay upon his life to be at the place
whether he goes, at a certain hour: if the loss of his way were
irrecouerable: if the punishment of his error, must be death and confusion; and
himself wear so weary, that he could stir no one foot further: imagine
then what a grievous message this would be unto him, to hear one say: Sir, you
are amiss, your labor is lost, and you have travailed wholly besides your way.

So then will it be unto thee (my soul) at the day of death, The misery of a
soul that has gone awry, at the last day.
and separation from my body, if in this life thou attend not to thy salvation
for which thou were created, but shall pass over thy days in following of
vanites. Thou shall find thy self astray at the end of thy journey, thou shall
find thy self weary, and enforced to say with those miserable damned spirits,
Wisd, 5^
I have walked hard and craggy ways: for that indeed the way of wickedness is
full of thorns and stones, though in show it be covered with fair grass, and
many flowers. Thou sha^t find at that day that thou have lost thy labor, lost
thy time, lost al opportunity of thine own commodity. Thou shall then find thy
error to be unrecoverable, thy danger unavoidable, thy punishment
insupportable, thy repentance unprofitable, and thy grief, sorrow, and
calamity inconsolable.

Oh, he that could behold and feel the inward cogitations of a worldly man's
heart at that instant, after all his honors and pleasures were past; no doubt,
but he should find him of another judgment and opi^ion in things, then he was
in the ruff and heat of his iolitie. He does well perceive then, the sondnes
of those tryfles which he followed in this l^fe, albeit it were to make
himself a Monarch. If a man did know the cogitations that K. Alexander the
great had, Alexanders death.
when of poison he came to die, after al his victories and incredible
prosperity; if we knew the thoughts of Julius Caesar, Julius Caesar's death.
at the day of his murder in the Senat-house, after the conquest of all his
enemies, and subi^ction of the whole world, to his own only obedience, we
should well perceive, that they took little pleasure in the ways they walked;
notwithstanding they were esteemed most prosperous and happy men of this world.

Josephus the Jew, recounteth two very rare examples of humane felicity, Two
rare examples.
in Herod the first, and Agrippa his Cosine, whereof the one by Anthony the
Triumuir, and the other by Caligula the Emperor, Iosep. lib. 14.15. et 18. d^
antiq. Iudai. et bello. Iud. lib. 2.
(both of them being otherwise but private Gentlemen, and in great poverty
and misery when they fled to Rome,) were exalted upon the sudden, to
unexpected great fortune, and made rich Monarchs and glorious Potentates. They
were endued (at several times) with the kingdom and crown of Jury, and that
in such ample sort, as never any of that Nation after the^ had the like. For
which cause they were called in the Hebrew story, (for distinction sake) Herod
the great, and Agrippa the great. They ruled and commanded al in their days,
they wanted neither silver nor gold, neither pleasures nor pastimes, neither
friends nor flatterers. And besides all these gyfts of Fortune, they abounded
also in ornaments and excellency of body and wit. And all this was increased
and made the more admirable, by reason of their For envy only of Agrippa his
fortune, Herodias did ruin herself and her husband, as Josephus says. Lib.
18. antiqu. capit. 8, 9, 15, Her husband was Herod Antipas, that slew Saint
John Baptist, and was son to Herod the first. Luke, 3. Math, 14.
base and low estate before, in respect whereof, their present fortune was
esteemed for a perfect pattern of most absolute felicity.

This they enjoyed for a certain space, and to assure themselves of the
continuance, they bent all their cares, cogitations, and studies, to please
the humors of the Roman Emperors, as their Gods, and Authors of all their
prosperity and felicity upon earth. In respect of whose favors, (as Josephus
notes,) they cared little to violate their own Religion of the Jews, or any
thing else that was most sacred. And this forsooth, was esteemed of many a most
wise, politic, prosperous, and happy course. But what was the end and
consumation of this their pleasant raze?

First, Herod fell sick of an incurable and loathsome disease, Herod's death.
Iosep. lib. 15. antiq.
and was tormented in the same with so many terrors, This Herod was called
Ascolonita, and slew the infants in Bethlem. Math, 2.
and horrible accusations of his conscience, as he pronounced himself to be
the most miserable afflicted creature that ever lived; and so calling one day
for a knife to pare an apple, would needs have murdered himself with the
same, if his arm had not been stayed by them that stood by. And for Agrippa,
Josephus reports, how that upon a certain day which he kept festival in
Caesaria, The death of Agrippa.
for the honor of Claudius the Roman Emperor, when he was in his most
extreme pomp and iolitie, Iosep, li. 19. capit, 7,
in the midst of all his Peers, Nobles, and Damsels, coming forth at an
hour appointed, all glyttering in gold and silver, to make an Oration unto the
people his voice, gesture, countenance and apparel so pleased, as the people
began to cry, (being solicited thereunto by some flatterers) That it was the
voice of God, and not of man, whein Agrippa taking pleasure and delectation,
was S. Luke says he was stricken by Gods Angel. Acts, 12. And consider how
Josephus agrees with this narration.
stricken presently from heaven, with a most horrible putrefaction of al his
body, whereof he died, repeating only to his friends these words in the midst
of his torments; Euse. li. 2. hist. cap. 9,
Behold ye me, that do seem to you a God, how miserably I am enforced to
depart from you all.

Now then would I demand of these two fortunate men, who laying aside all
care of God and Religion, did follow the preferments of this world so freshly,
and obtained the same so luckily: how they liked of this their course and raze
in the end? Truly, I doubt not, but if they were here to answer for
themselves, they would assure us, that one hour bestowed in ye service of God,
and of their salvation, would more have comforted them at the last instant,
then all their labors and travails which they took in their lives for
pleasing of Emperors, and gathering the grace and good lyking of mortal men.

Use then, o Christian, use this experience to thy commodity: Sincere and
profitable counsel.
use it to thy instruction, use it to thy forewarning. That which they are now,
thou shall be shortly, and of all follies it is the greatest, not to profit or
flee from danger by the example of others.

The difference between a wiseman and a fool is this, that the one provides
for a mischief while time serves, and the other would do, when it is
too-late. If thou might feel now, the state and case wherein thy poor heart
shall be at the last day, for neglecting the thing, that of all other it
should have studied and thought upon most, thou would take from thy meat,
and sleep, and other necessaries, to repair that is past; Hitherto have thou
time to reform thy course of life if thou be willing, which is no small
benefit, if all were known. For in this sense (no doubt) it is most true,
which the wise man says; Eccle. 4.
that better it is to be a living dog, then a dead Lion. For that while the day
time of this life endures, all things amiss may easily be amended. Job. 9.
But the dreadful night of death will ouer-take thee shortly, and then shall
there be no more space of ^eformation.

Oh that men would be wise, and foresee things to come, says one Prophet.
Deuteronomy, 32.
The greatest wisdom in the world (dear brother) is to look and attend to
our salvation: for as the scripture says most truly: Eccle. 37.
He is a wise man indeed, that is wise to his own soul. And of this wisdom
it is written in the very same Book, as spoken by herself. Eccle. 24.
In me is the grace of all life and truth, and in me is the hope of all life
and virtue. In morrall actions and human wisdom, we see that the first and
chiefest circumstaunce is, to regard well and consider the end. Great folly
and error.
And how then do we omit the same, in this great affayre of the kingdom of
heaven? If our end be heaven, what mean we so much to affect our selves to
earth? If our end be God, why seek we so greedily the worldly favor of men?
If our end be the salvation and eternity of our soul, why do we follow
vanities and temporalities of this life? Why spend ye your money and not in
bread, says GOD by the mouth of Esaias, Esaias. 55.
Why bestow ye your labor on things that will not yield ye saturitie? Ephe, 1,
1, These, 2, 2, Pet, 1, Luke, 15.
If our inheritance be that we should reign as Kings, why put we our selves in
such slavery of creatures? If our birth allow us to feed of bread in our
Fathers house, why delight we to eat husks provided for the swyne?

But (alas) we may say with the wise man in the Scripture, Wisd, 4,
Fascinatio nugacitatis obscurat bona. The bewitching of worldly trifles, do
obscure and hide us from the things that are good and behoueful for our souls:
o most dangerous enchauntment. Error in our course of life is not pardoned.
Osea, 4,
But what? shall this excuse us? no truly for the same Spyrite of GOD has left
recorded, Populus non intelligens vapulabit: The people that understands not,
shall be beaten for it. And another Prophet to the same effect pronounces.
Esaias, 28,
This people is not wise, and therefore he that made them shall not pardon them,
neither shall he that created them, take mercy of them. It is written of
fools, Ventum seminabunt et turbinem metent. They shall sow and cast their
seed upon the winds, and shall receive for their harvest, nothing else but a
storm or tempest. Whereby is signified, that they shall not only cast away
and leese their labors, but also be punished for the same.

Consider then I beseech thee (my dear brother) attentively, A profitable
forewarning.
what thou will do or say, when thy Lord shall come at the last day, and ask
thee an account of al thy labors, actions, and time spent in this life: when he
shall require a reckoning of his talents lent unto thee: Math, 25.
when he shall say, as he said to the Farmour or Steward in the Gospel, Luke, 16.
Read rationem villicationis tuae: give account of thy stewardship and charge
committed unto thee. What will thou say when he shall examine, and weigh and try
thy doings, as gold is examined and tried in the furnace, that is, what end
they had? whereto they were applied? to what glory of God? to what profit of thy
soul? what measure, weight and substance they bear?

Baltasar King of Babylon, A rare chance that happened to Baltasar K. of
Babylon. Daniel, 5.
sitting at his banquet merry upon a time, espied suddenly certain fingers
with out a hand, that wrote on the wall right ouer-against his Table, these
three Hebrewe words, MANE, THEKEL, PHARES. Which words Daniell interpreted in
three sentences unto the King, in this manner. Mane, God has numbered thee
(Baltasar) and thy kingdom: Thekell, he has weighed thee in ye Goldsmithes
balance, and thou art found too-light: Phares, for this cause has he divided
thee from thy kingdom, and has given the same to the Medes and Persians.

Oh, that these three most golden and most significant words, engraven by the
Angel upon Baltasars wall, were registered upon every door and post in
Christendom, or rather imprinted in the heart of each Christian, especially the
two first, that import the numbering and weighing of all our actions, and that
in the weights and balance of the Goldsmyth, where every grain is espied that
wants. If God examine straightly the actions of Infidels, much more of
Christians if they live careless. Dan. 5,
And if Baltasars actions, that was a Gentile, were to be examined in so nyse
and delicate a pair of Balance for their trial, and if he had so severe a
sentence pronounced upon him, that he should be divided from life and kingdom,
(as he was the same night following) Quia inuentus est minus habens, for that
he was found to have less weight in him then he should have: what shall we
think of our selves, that are Christians, of whom it is written above al
others; Soph, 1.
I will search the sins of Jerusalem with a candle. What shall we expect, that
have not only less weight then we should have, but no weight at all, in the
most of our actions? what may such men (I say) expect, but only that most
terrible threat of division made to Baltasar, A dreadful division.
(or rather worse, if worse may be) that is, to be divided from God and his
Angels: from participation of God and our Savior: from communion of Saints:
from hope of our inheritance: from our portion celestial and life everlasting:
according to the express declaration made hereof by Christ himself, in these
words to the negligent servant. Math. 24.
The Lord of such a servant shall come at a day when he hops not, and at an
hour that he knows not, and shall divide him out, and assign his part with
hypocrites, where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

Wherefore (dear brother) to conclude this chapter, The conclusion.
I can say nothing more in this dangerous case, wherein the world so runs
awry, but only exhort thee (as the Apostle does) not to conform thy self to
the common error that leads to perdition. Fall at length to some reckoning
and account with thy self, and see where thou stand, and whether thou
go. If hitherto thou have wandered and gone astray, be sorry for the time
lost, but pass no further. If hitherto thou have not considered ye weightines
of this affayre, serve thy self of this admonition, and remember that it is
written, that a Wiseman profits by every occasion. Prou, 6.
Esteem thy resolution in this one point, the chiefest menage that ever shall
pass through thy hands in this world, albeit you were a Monarche and Ruler of
ten worlds together. And finally, I will end with the very same words,
wherewith the wiseman concludes his whole Book. Fear God and observe his
commandments, for this is every man. Eccle, 11.
That is, in this does all and every man consist: his end, his beginning, his
life, and cause of being: that he fear God, and direct his actions to the
obseruaunce of his commandments; for that without this, he is no man in
effect, seeing that he loses al benefit, both of his name, nature,
redemption and creation.

THAT THE SERVICE WHICH GOD REQVIRETH OF MAN IN THIS present life, is Religion.
With the particular confirmations of Christian Religion, above all other in the
world. CHAP. IIII.
Having proved in the former chapters, that there is a GOD, which created man:
and that man in respect thereof, and of other benefits received, is bound to
honor and serve the same GOD, the question may be made in this place, what
service this is that God requires, and wherein it does consist? Whereunto the
answer is brief and easy, that it is Religion; Of Religion.
which is a virtue that contains properly the worship and service that we
owe unto GOD; even as Piety is a virtue, Piety.
containing the duty that children do owe unto their Parents, and Obseruaunce
another virtue, Obseruaunce,
that comprehends the regard, that scholars and servant bear unto their
Masters. In respect of which comparison and likeness between these virtues,
God says by a certain Prophet; Mala. 1.
The son honoreth his father, and the servant his Master, if then I be a
Father, where is my honor? if I be a Master, where is my fear?

The acts and opperations of Religion.
The acts of Religion are diverse, and different; some internal, as devotion and
prayer: some other external, as adoration, worship, sacrifice, oblations, and
such like, that are declarations, and protestations of the internal. It
extends it self also to stir up and put in ^re, the acts and operations of
other virtues for the service of God; in which sense saint James names it,
^ames, 1,
Pure and unspotted Religion, is to visit Orphans and widows in their
tribulation, and to keep our selves undefiled from the wickedness of this
world. Finally, how soever some Heathens do use this word Religion, August.
lib, 10, de ciuit. capit. 1.
to some other significations: yet, (as S. Augustine well notes) the use
thereof among the faithful, has always been, How much it imports to be
religious.
to signify thereby, the worship, honor, and service, that is due unto GOD,
so that if in one word you will have it declared, what GOD requires of man in
this life: it may be rightly said, that all stands in this, that he be
religious.

Hereof it proceeds, that whatsoever sort or sect of people in the world,
professed reverence, honor, or worship to GOD, or to gods, or to any divine
power, essence, or nature what-soeuer: (were they Jews, Heathens, Gentiles,
Christians, Turks, Moors, Heretics, or other,) they did always call their
said profession, by the name of their Religion. In which sense also, and
signification of the word, I am to treat at this time of Christian Religion;
that is, of the substance, form, manner and way, revealed by Christ and his
Apostles unto us, of performing our duty and true service toward God. Which
service, is the first point necessary to be resolved upon, by him that seeks
his salvation, as in the Chapter yt goes before has been declared. And for
obtaining this service and the true knowledge thereof, no mean upon earth is
left unto man, but only the light and instruction of Christian Religion, The
necessity of Christian Religion.
according to the protestation of S. Peter unto the Governors of the Jews,
when he said; Acts^ 4,
There is no other name under heaven given unto men whereby to be saved, but
only this of Christ and of his Religion.

If you object against me, that in former times before Christ's nativity, as
under the law of Moises for two thousand years together, there were many
Saints^ who without Christian Religion served God uprightly, How men were saved
in old time without Christian Religion.
as the Prophets and other holy people: and before them again in the law of
Nature, when neither Jewish nor Christian Religion was yet heard of, for more
the^ two thousand years: there wanted not diverse that pleased God, and served
him truly, as Enoch, Noe, Job, Abraham, Jacob, and others. I answer, that
albeit these men, (especially the former, that lived under the Law of nature)
had not so particular and express knowledge of Christ and of his mysteries, as
we have now: for this was reserved to the time of grace, (as S. Paul in diverse
places at large declares, Gal, 3, and 4, Ephe, 3, Colos, 1,
) that is, albeit they knew not expressly, how and in what manner Christ should
be borne: whether of a Virgin or no; or in what particular sort he should live
and die: what Sacraments he should leave, See S. August. lib. 19. cont. Faust.
capit. 14.
what way of publishing his Gospel he should appoint, and the like, (whereof
notwithstanding very many particulers were revealed to the Jews from time to
time, and the nearer they drew to the time of Christ's appearaunce, the more
plain revelation was made of these mysteries:) yet I say, all and every one of
these holy Saints, that lived from Abraham until the coming of Christ, had
knowledge in general of Christian Religion, and did believe the same; All old
Saints believed in Christ, and were saved by him.
that is, they believed expressly that there should come a Savior and Redeemer
of mankind, to deliver them from the bondage contracted by the sin of Adam.

This was revealed straight after their fall, to our first Parents and
Progenitors in Paradise: to wit, that by the Woman's seed, Gen^ 3, v, 15
our redemption should be made. In respect whereof, it is said in the
Revelations, Apoc. 3,
that Christ is the Lamb that has been slain ^ro^ the beginning of ye world.

And Saint Peter, in the first general Counsel holden by the Apostles, Acts,
15.
affirms, that the old ancient Fathers before Christ's nativity, Rom, 5.
were saved by the grace of Christ, Ephe, 8.
as we are now, which S. Paul confirms in diverse places. And finally, the
matter is so clear in this behalf, that the whole Read S. Aug. l. 18. de
ciuit. 1.47. et Epist. 49. and 157. and tract, 45. in Ioh. Cle. Alex. lib. 6.
Strom. et Ierom in ca. 3. ad Gala.
school of Divines accords, that Faith and Religion of the ancient Fathers,
before Christ's appearaunce: was the very same in substance that ours is now,
saving only, that it was more general, obscure, and confuse then ours is, for
that it was of things to come, as ours is now of things past and present.

For example; they believed that a Redeemer should come: and we believe that
he is already come. The difference between our belief and the old Fathers.
They said, Virgo concipiet, a Virgin shall conceive: and we say: Virgo
concepit, a Virgin has conceived. They had sacrifices and ceremonies yt
prefigured his coming for the time ensuing: we have sacrifice and sacraments
that represent his being for the time present. They called their Redeemer, The
expectation of Nations: Esaias, 7.
and we call him now, The salvation of Nations. Gene, 49.
And finally, there was no other difference between the old faith of good
men from the beginning, and ours: but only in the circumstaunces of time,
cleerenes, particularitie, and of the manner of protesting the same, by outward
signs and ceremonies. For that in substance they believed the same Redeemer
that we do, and were saved by the same belief in his merits as we are. For
which cause Eusebius Eusebius handles this matter at large, lib. 1. them. Euan.
cap. 5,
well notes, that as we are called now Christians, so they were called then
Christi, Psalm, 104. that is, anointed in prefiguration of the true Christ in
whom they believed, as the first and head of all other anointed, and who was
the cause and author of their annoynting.

By this then it is most manifest, that not only now to us that are
Christi^ns, but at all other times from the beginning of the world, and to all
other persons and people what-soeuer, that d^sired to have their souls saved,
it was necessary to believe and love CHRIST, and to profess in heart his
Religion. For which consideration, The causes of this Chapter.
I thought it not amiss in this place, after the former grounds laid that
there is a GOD, and that man was created and placed here for his service: to
demonstrate and prove also this other principle, that the only service of this
God, is by Christian Religion. Wherein, al^eit I do not doubt, but that I
shall seem to many, to take upon me a superfluous labor, in proouing a
verit^e, which all men in Christendom do confess: yet for the causes before
alleged in ye second chapter, which moved me in that place to prove, that
there is a GOD; that is to say, first, for the comfort, strength, and
confirmation of such, as either from the enemy may receive temptations, or of
themselves may desire to see a reason of their bel^efe: and second-lie, for
awaking^ styrring, or stinging of others, who either of malice, carelesnes, or
sensuality, are fallen a sleep, and have lost the feeling and sense of their
belief, (for ma^ie such want not in these our miserable days,) it shall not
be (perhaps) but to eue^y good purpose, to lay together in this place, with the
greatest breuity yt possibly may be, the most sure grounds and invincible
evidences, which we have for declaration and confirmation of this matter.

For albeit the Apostle Saint Paul declares the things which we believe, Heb,
11,
be not such in themselves, as may be made apparent by reason of humane
arguments: yet such is the goodness, and most sweet proceeding of our
merciful GOD toward us, as he will not leave himself without sufficient
testimony, both inward and outward, as the same Apostle in another place does
testify. Acts, 14,
For that inwardly, he testifies the truth of such things as we believe, by
gyuing us light and understanding, with internal joy and consolation in
believing them. And outwardly he gives testimony to the same, The diverse
testimonies from God, of ye things that we believe.
with so many conueniences, probabilities, and Arguments of credibilitie, (as
Divines do call the^,) that albeit the very point of that which is believed,
remain still with some obscurity: yet are there so many circumstaunces of
lykelihoodes, to induce a man to the belief thereof, as in all reason it may
seem against reason to deny or mistrust them.

This shall easily appear by the Treatise following of Christ and
Christianity, and of the foundations of our Religion, which shall be confirmed
by so many pregnant reasons, and most manifest circumstances of evident
probability, as I doubt not, but the zealous Christian shall take exceeding
comfort therein, and esteem himself happy, to have a lot in that faith and
Religion, where he shall see and feel so much reason, proof, and conueniencie
to concur and show it self, for his satisfaction.

And to this effect, it shall be of no mean moment, that I have proved
before, the certainty, divinity, and infallible truth of ye Jews scriptures,
or old Testament; which writings we have received from that Nation that does
(as it were) profess enmity against us, and the same being written so many
ages before the name of Christianity was known in the world: it cannot be but
of singular authority, whats^euer shall be alleged out of those records for
our purpose. And therefore as before, in procuing our first principle, That
there is a GOD, we used only the testimony of such witnesses, The undoubted
witnesses to be alleged in this Chapter.
as could not be partial: so, much more in this confirmation of Christian
Religion, shall we stand only, either upon the confession of such as are our
enemies, or upon the records of others, who must needs be indifferent in the
cause, for that they lived before either cause or controversy in Christianity
was known or called in question.

My whole purpose shall be then, to make manifest in this Chapter, The dryft of
this Chapter.
that JESUS CHRIST was the Savior and Redeemer of all mankind, fore-promised
and expected from the beginning of the world; that he was the only son of
God, and God himself, and consequently, that what-soeuer he has left us in
his doctrine and Religion, is true and sincere, and the only way of salvation
upon earth.

For cleerer proof, and declaration whereof, I will reduce what-soeuer I have
to say herein, unto three principal heads or branches, The principal heads.
according to the order of three distinct times wherein they fell out; That is
to say, in the first place shall be considered,

In declaration of which three general points, I hope by the assistaunce of
him whose cause we handle, that so many clear demonstrations shall be
dyscouered: as shall greatly confirm thy faith (gentle Reader,) and remove all
occasions of temptation to infidelity.

How Christ was foretold to Jew and Gentile. SECT. 1.
FIrst then, for such things as passed before Christ appeared in the flesh, and
do make for proof of our Christian Religion, it is to be noted, that they are
of two sorts, or at least wise, The Jew and Gentile.
they are to be taken from two kinds of people, that is, partly from the
Jews, and partly from the Gentiles. For seeing that Christ was appointed from
the beginning, yea, before the world was created, Ephe, 1, 1. Tim, 2,
(as Saint Paul affirms) to work the redemption both of Jew and Gentile,
Titus, 1, 1. Peter, 1,
and to make them both one people in the service of his Father: heer-hence is
it, that he was foretold and prefigured to both these Nations, Esa, 2, 11, 19
and diverse fore-warnings were left among them both, Ier, 9, 12.16
for styrring them up to expect his coming, as by the considerations following
shall most evidently appear.

The first Consideration.
AND to begin with the Jews, The Messiah promised.
no man can deny, but that throughout the whole body and course of Scriptures,
that is, from the very beginning to the last end of their old Testament, they
had promised unto them a Messiah, which is the very same that we call Christ,
that is to say, a person anointed and sent from God, to be a Savior, a
Redeemer, a Pacifier of Gods wrath, a Mediator between God and man, a Satisfier
for the sins and offenses of the whole world, a Restorer of our innocence
lost in Paradise, a Master, an Instructor, a Lawgiver, a Spiritual and
eternal King, that should sit, and rule and reign in our hearts, to conquer
the power and tyranny of satan, ye enemy of mankind, who ouer-came our first
Parents Adam and Eve, and never cease to assail us.

The first covenant to Adam.
THIS is evident by the first covenant of all, that ever GOD did make with man,
when he said to Adam our first Father in Paradise, Gene, 2,
In what day soever thou shall eat of the Tree that is forbidden, thou shall
die.

Which covenant being after broken, on the part of our said Progenitor, he
received his judgment, but yet with a most benign promise of redemption for
the time to come: for thus God said to ye devil or Serpent that had deceived
him: Gene, 3.
The seed of the Woman shall crushe thy head, and thou shall lie in wait to
hurt his heel. That is, one shall proceed in time, of the seed of the Woman,
who shall conquer Death and Sin (that are thy weapons,) and shall not care
for thy temptations, but shall tread them under hi^ feet, and this shall be
Christ the Messiah of the world.

Thus did not only the Rabbi Moses Benmaimon in hun^ locum.
eldest Jews and Rabbines understand this place, (what-soeuer the latter have
dreamed, that their Messiah should be only a temporal King,) but also the
old Chaldie Paraphrase, (named Thargum Hierosolimitanum) expounds it plainly
in these words, applied unto the devil that had d^ceiued Adam: Tharg. Hieroso.
in Genesis cap. 3.
They have a certain and present remedy against thee (O devil,) for that the
time shall come, when they shall tread thee down with their heels, by the
help of Messiah which shall be their King.

To Abraham and Isaacke.
THE same thing is confirmed by the very same promise seven times repeated and
established unto Abraham, that lived very near two thousand years after Adam:
and again to Isaac his son after him, In semine tuo benedicentur omnes
gentes terrae. Gene. 12. and 18. and 22.
All Nations of the earth shall be blessed in thy seed. Which had been
indeed, but a very small benediction to Abraham, or to the Jews after him,
(yt never saw their Messiah actually) if he had been only to be a temporal
king: And much less blessing had it been to the Gentiles and all other
Nations, if this Messiah of the Jews, must have been a temporal and worldly
Monarch, to destroy and subdue them to the servitude of Jury, as fondly the
latter teachers of that Nation do contend.

Jacobs prophecy of Christ.
THIS yet makes the Patriarch Jacob more plain, who prophesying at his death
of the coming o^ Christ, has these words: Gen, 49,
The scepter (or government) shall not be taken from the house of Judah, until
^ecome that is to be sent, and he shall b^ the expectation of Nations. Which
latter words, the forenamed Chaldie Paraphrase, as also great Onke^los, Tharg.
Hieroso ^t Onkelos in hunc locum.
(both of singular authority a^mong the Jews,) do interpret thus Donec
Christus ^eu Messiah venia^ etc. Until Christ or ye Messiah com^ (which is the
hope and expectation of all Nations, as well Gentiles, as (...) us that are
Jews,) the government shall not cease in the house or Tribe of Judah. By which
sentence of scripture, and interpretation of the Jews themselves, we come to
learn, (besides the promise of the Messiah,) two consequences in this matter,
against ye Jews of latter times. First, that if their Messiah must be ye hope
and expectation as well of the Gentiles as of the Jews: The Messiah must be a
spiritual and not a temporal king.
then can he not be a temporal King to destroy the Gentiles, (as ye latter
Jews would have it,) but a spyrituall King, to reign over them, and to bring
in subjection their spyrituall enemies for the^, (I mean the flesh, the world
and the devil,) as all true Christians do believe. Secondly, if the temporal
kingdom of the house of Judah, (whereof Christ must come,) shall cease and be
destroyed at the coming of Messiah, as the Scripture avouches: how then can
the Jews expect yet a temporal King for their Messiah, as most fondly they do?

But to leave this controversy with the latter Rabbines, and to go forward
in declaration of that which we took in hand, that is, to show how Christ was
fore-tolde and promised to the Jews. It is to be noted, that after the death
of Jacob last mentioned, there is little recorded in scripture of the doings of
his people, during the space of four hundred years being ye time of their
bondage in Egypt; The tradition of the Jews in Misdrasch Thehilim.
but yet ye tradition of that Nation teaches, that as soon as they were
delivered out of Egypt, and were in the Desert toward the Land of Promise, the
three sons of Chore, called Aser, Eleana, and Abiasaphe, (of whom mention is
made in the sixth chapter of Exodus, and other places) made diverse songs and
Psalms in the praise and expectation of the Messiah to come, and that the holy
men of that time, did solace themselves with singing the same: and that king
David afterward in the second part of his Psalms, See the tytles of these
Psalms here specified.
beginning from the forty and one, unto the eyghty and seven, gathered the
most part of these old songs together, as yet they are to be seen in his
Psalter.

Moises Prophecy of Christ.
BUT Moises, who lived with the people, and governed the^ in the wilderness,
had a clear revelation from GOD of this Messiah in these words, Deuteronomy. 18^
I will raise up a Prophet to this people from amongst their brethren, even as
my self: and I will put my words in his mouth, and he shall speak unto them
all things which I shall ordain unto him: and he that shall refuse to hear the
words which he shall speak unto them in my name, I will be revenged upon that
man. Which words, that they cannot be understood of any other Prophet that
ever lived after Moises among the Jews, but only of CHRIST, it appears most
manifestly and plainly by the testimony of the holy Ghost, where he says,
Deuteronomy. 34.
And there arose not any other Prophet in Israel like unto Moises. etc,

David's Prophecy of Christ.
AFter Moises about four hundred years, ensued David, who for that he was a
holy man, and the first King of the house of Judah, out of whose lineage ye
Messiah was to com: the particulers of this mystery, were more abundantly and
manifestly revealed unto him, then unto any other. And first, for assurance
that Christ should be borne of his stock and lynage, these are the words of
GOD unto him: Psalm, 88, 2, Reg, 7, 1. Chro, 22.
I have sworn to David my Servant: I will prepare thy seed from eternity, and
will build up thy seat to al generations. Which words, albeit the latter Jews
will apply it to King Solomon, that was David's son, (and in some sense they
may so be, for that King Solomon was a figure of Christ to come) yet properly
these words, 3, Reg, 5, 1. Chro. 22.
And his kingdom shall stand for ever, and for all eternity, which are so
often repeated in this and other places of the Scripture, cannot be verified in
Solomon, whose earthly kingdom was rent and torn in pieces straight after his
death by Jeroboam, 3, Reg. 12,
and not long after, as it were extinguished; but they must needs be
understood of an eternal King, which should come of David's seed: as must also
these other words of GOD in the Psalms: Psalm, 2, 45, 47, 67, 72.
Thou art my son, this day have I begotten thee, I will give unto thee the
Gentiles for thine inheritance.

Which was never fulfilled in Solomon, nor in any other temporal King in Jury
after him. And much less these words which follow: Psal^ 71,
He shall endure with the sun, and before the Moon, from generation to
generation. There shall rise up in his days peace, until the Moon be taken
away: he shall reign from sea to sea, unto the ends of the world: all kings
shall adore him, and all Nations shall serve him: for that he shall deliver
the poor man that had no helper: he shall save their souls, and deliver them
from usury, and from iniquity: all Trybes of the earth shall be blessed in
him, and all Nations shall magnify him.

These words of Christ's eternal kingdom, of his enduring to the worlds end:
of his universal reign over Jew and Gentile: of his adoration by all Nations:
of his delivery of souls from bondage of iniquity, and finally, of his
making blessed all trybes of the earth: cannot possibly be applied to any
temporal King that ever was among the Jews, or ever shall be unto the worlds
end, but only Christ.

Ieremies Prophecy of Christ.
THIS promise made unto David, for Christ to come of his seed, is repeated
after his death, by many Prophets, and confirmed by GOD, as in Jeremy, where
God uses these words; Behold, the days come on, and I will raise up to David a
just seed, Ierem, 23. and 33.
and he shall reign a king, and shall be wise, and shall do judgment and
justice upon earth. And in his days shall Judah be saved, and Israel shall
dwell confidently, and this is the Name that men shall call him, OUR JUST GOD.
All this was spoken of David's seed, above four hundred years after David was
buried.

Which proves manifestly, that the former promises and speeches, were not made
to King David for Solomon his son, or for any other temporal King of David's
line: but for Christ, who was called so particulerly The son and seed of
David: for that David was the first King of the Trybe of Judah, and not only
was Christ's Progenitor in the flesh, but also did bear his tipe and figure in
many other things.

Ezechiels prophecy of Christ.
FOR which cause likewise in the Prophet Ezechiell (who lived about the same
time yt Jeremy did,) the Messiah is called by the name of David himself: for
thus GOD spoke at that time unto Ezechiel: Ezech. 34. Christ is called Da^id.
I will save my flock, nor shall they be any longer left to the spoil, etc. I
will raise over them, ONE PASTOR, which shall feed them, my servant DAVID, he
shall feed them, and he shall be their shepherd, and Prince, and I will be
their God, and will make with them a covenant of peace. etc. In which words,
not only we that are called Christians, but the latter Jews also themselves,
do confess in their Thalmud, Thal. tract. Sanch. cap. halec.
that their Messiah is called by the name of David, for that he shall descend
of the seed of David; as by reason also it must of necessity be so, for that
King David being dead four hundred years before these words were spoken, (as
has been noted) could not now come again to feed Gods people, or govern
them himself.

The Prophecies of Esaias, touching Christ.
Esaias the Prophet, who lived about a hundred years before Jeremy and
Ezechiel, had marvelous foreknowledge of the Messiah, and his affairs, and
describes him very particulerly, beginning in this manner. Esaias. 2,
In the latter days, the HILL of Gods house shall be prepared upon the top
of Mountains, and all Nations (or Gentiles) shall flow unto him. And many
people shall say, come and let us ascend unto the HILL of the Lord, and he shall
teach us his ways, and we shall walk in his paths: he shall judge Nations,
etc. Which very words are also repeated in Michaeas the Prophet, Mich, 4,
and are applied there (as also here) unto the Messiah, and can have no other
meaning, by the judgment of the Jews and Hebrews themselves. And Esaias does
prosecute the same matter afterward in diverse Chapters. As for example, in
the fourth, talking of the same Messiah, which before he called the HILL of Gods
house, he adds these words. Esaias, 4,
In that day shall the issue of the Lord, be in magnificence and glory, and the
fruit of the earth, in sublimitie and exultation, to all such as shall be saved
of Israel. In which words he calls the Messiah, both the issue of GOD, and
the fruit of the earth, for that he should be both God and man. And in the
ninth Chapter he calls him by these terms, Esaias, 9,
Admirable: Counselor: God: Strong: Father of the future world: and Prince of
peace.

In the eleventh Chapter, he describes him most wonderfully, in these words:
Esaias, 11, Psalm, 71.
There shall go forth a branch of the stock of Iesse, (which Iesse was
David's father, Eccle. 45.
) and out of the root of that branch, there shall mount up a flower, and the
Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him: the spirit of wisdom and of
understanding, the spirit of counsel and fortitude, the spirit of knowledge
and piety: Wonderful properties of Christ.
he shall not judge according to the sight of (fleshly) eyes, nor yet condemn
according to the hearing of (fleshly) ears: but he shall judge poor men in
justice, and shall dispute in equity for the mild men of the earth. He shall
strike the earth with the rod of his mouth, and with the spirit of his lyps
shall he sley the wicked man. Justice shall be the girdle of his loins: and
faith shall be the band of his reins. etc.

Hitherto are the words of the Prophet: wherein truly nothing can be more
plain and evident, then that by the rod or branch of Iesse, is meant the
Virgin Marie, Math. 1.
who directly descended of the lineage of Iesse, Luke. 3.
and by the flower ascending from this branche, Acts. 13.
must needs be understood Christ, Rom, 15.
that was borne of her, and had all those excellencies and privileges above
other men, which Esaias in this place assigns unto him.

Whose further gr^ces yet, and special divine properties, Other properties of
Christ.
the same Prophet expresses more particulerly in the Chapters following, where
he says; Esaias, 25.
He shall for ever ouer-throwe and destroy death: he shall open the eyes of the
blind, and the ears of the deaf: Esaias, 35. Esaias, 42.
he shall not cry nor contend, nor shall he accept the person of any man: but
in truth shall he bring forth judgment. He shall not be sorrowful nor
turbulent. etc.

And finally, in the forty and nine Chapter, he alleges the words of God ye
Father unto Christ, touching his commission, in this sort; Esaias, 49, Acts.
13.47.
It is too-little that thou be to me a servant, to raise up the trybes of
Jacob, and to convert unto me the dregs of Israel. The Commission of Christ.
Behold, I have appointed thee also for a light unto the Gentiles^ that thou be
my salvation unto the uttermost parts of the earth.

Daniels prophecy of Christ.
AND to conclude this matter, without alleging more Prophecies for the same,
(which in truth are infinite throughout the Bible,) Daniell that lived in the
end of the captivity of Babylon, a little before Aggaeus, Zacharias, and
Malachias, (who were the last Prophets that ever flourished among the Jews,
almost five hundred years before the nativity of Christ:) this Daniel (I say)
reports of himself, that being in Babylon, and having fasted, worn
sackcloth, and prayed long unto GOD, there came the Angel Gabriell unto him
at the time of the evening sacrifice, and fore-tolde him, not only of the
deliverance of the people of Israel from the captivity of Babylon out of
hand, for that the seauentie years of their punishment foretold by Jeremy,
were now expired, but also he told him further, that the time of the
universal deliverance of mankind, from the bondage and captivity of sin:
was now shortened, and that after seventy Hebdomades, (which as shall be showed
after, make up just the time that passed from the rebuilding of the Temple of
Jerusalem after their deliverance from Babylon, unto the birth of Christ,)
there should be borne the Savior of the world, and be put to death for the
redemption of mankind.

The Angels words are these: Dan, 9.
I am come to show thee, O Daniell, for that thou art a man of good desires.
And therefore do thou mark my speech, and understand this vision. The
seauentie Hebdomades are shortened upon thy people, and upon thy holy City: to
the end preuarication may be consumed, and sin receive an end, to the end
iniquity may be blotted out, and eternal justice brought in her place: and to
the end visions and prophecies may be fulfilled, and the SAINT OF SAINTS
anointed. Know thou therefore and mark, that from the end of the speech, for
rebuilding of Jerusalem, unto Christ the CAPTAIN, there shall be hebdomades
seven, and hebdomades sixty two, and after sixty two hebdomades, Christ shall
be put to death, and the people which shall deny him, shall not be his people.

I might pass on further to other Prophets, and make no end, if I would
allege what might be said in this behalf; for that the whole Scripture
runs all to this one point: The Butte of all Scripture.
to foretell and manifest Christ, by signs, figures, parables and prophecies:
and for this cause was it principally written. But that which is already
spoken, shall be sufficient for our first consideration, whereby is seen,
that among the Jews from age to age, Christ was prophesied and foretold,
together with the eternity of his kingdom, that should be spiritual.

The second Consideration.
That Christ should be both God and man.
Now follows there a second consideration of the quality of Christ's
person, of no less importance then the former, and wherein the latter Jews
do more dyscent from us: and that is, of the Godhead of the Messiah promised.
I say the latter Jews or Rabbines, are different herein from us, as also they
are in many other points and articles, wherein their ancestors (that were no
Christians) did fully agree. Even as all Heretics are wont to do, The
custom of Heretics.
that first break in one point, and then in another, from the true Catholic
faith of Christ, to follow men's traditions; and so do run on from one to one,
making themselves in all things as dislike as they can, for hatred of that
unity, whereunto their pride will not suffer them to return. So is it in the
generation of this reprobate people, who first agreed with us in all, or most
points, touching Christ to come, and denied only the fulfilling or applycation
thereof in Jesus our Savior, but afterward, their ungracious offspring, being
not able to stand in that issue against us, devised a new plea, and be took
themselves to a far higher degree of impiety, affirming that we attribute many
things unto Jesus, that were not fore-tolde of the Messiah to come; and among
other, that he should be GOD, and the son of God, and the second person in
Trinity. etc.

But herein (no doubt) these obstinate and graceless men, do show themselves
both ignorant of their own scriptures, and disagreeing from the writings of
their own forefathers. For as for scriptures, it is evident by all, or most
of the Prophets alleged before, that Christ (or the Messiah) must be GOD, and
the son of God, That Christ must be both God and man.
endued with man's nature; that is, both God and man. So in Genesis, Gene. 3.
where he is called the seed of the Woman, it is apparent that he shall be man;
and in the same place, when he is promised to crush the devil and to break his
head: The first proof.
who can do this but only God? Likewise, when he is called Germen Iehouae,
Esay^ 4,
the seed of our Lord God, his Godhead is signified, as is his man-head,
also, when in the same place he is named the fruit of the earth. Esaias, 9.
Who can interpret these speeches; Psalm 71,
That, his kingdom shall be everlasting. That, he shall endure until the Moon
be taken away, and after. Psalm. 109.
That, God bega^e him before Lucifer was created. Esaias, 53.
That, Psalm. 96.
no man can tell or recount his generation. Hebru, 1.
That, all Nations and Angels must adore him. Psalm, 110
That, he must sit at the right hand of God. And many other such speeches
pronounced directly and expressly of the Messiah, who (I say) can understand or
interpret them, but of God, seeing that in man they cannot be verified? And as
for the last of these testimonies, concerning Christ's sitting at his Fathers
right hand: three of our Evangelists do report, Math, 2, Luke, 20.
that Jesus did blancke diverse of the learnedest Pharisees, with alleging
only these words of David, The Iehoua in Hebrew. Psalm, 110.
Lord said to my Lord, sit at my right hand, until I put thine enemies as thy
footstool. For (said Jesus) if Christ be David's son, Rab. Ionath. lib,
collect. et Misdr. Tehillim. in Psalm. 2. v. 7,
how did David call him his Lord? signifying hereby, that albeit the Messiah
was to be David's son, according to his man-head: yet was he to be David's Lord
according to his Godhead. And so do both Rabbi Jonathan, and the public
Commentaries of the Hebrews, interpret this place.

Micheas is plain; The second proof. Mich^ ^.
And thou Bethleem, out of thee shall proceed a RVLER in Israel, and his
going forth is from the beginning, and from the days of eternity. This
cannot be understood of any mortal man, that ever was or shall be. But yet
Esaias goes further, when he says: Esaias, 9.
A little child is borne unto us, and a young son is given unto us, and his
principality is upon his own shoulder, and his name shall be GOD, the Father
of the future world ( So it is in the Hebrue^
or of eternity:) the Prince of peace. etc.

In which words we see that Christ is called GOD. But if the Jew do cavil
here, An objection answered.
and say, that El or Elohim the Hebrew words, which we interpret God in this
place, may sometime be applied to a creature, as in Exodus, Exodus 10.
once El signifies an Angel, and Elohim at other times is applied to Judges:
then mark this discourse of David touching ye Messiah, to whom he says: Psalm,
45.
Thou art beautiful in form above the children of men: grace is spread in thy
lyps, and therefore has God blessed thee for ever. etc. Thy seat O God, is
for ever and ever: the rod (or Scepter) of thy kingdom, is the rod of
direction, thou have loved justice and hated iniquity, therefore God, thy God
has anointed thee with oil of joy above thy partners. Here the Messiah is
called God twice by the same word Elohim, as God his Father is: and therefore
as the word signifies true God in the one, so must it also in the other.

The third proof.
But to remove all ground of this refuge touching El or Elohim, that are names
of GOD, which may be communicated sometimes, and upon some occasions to
creatures: most apparent it is, that the name IEHOVA, Christ is called Iehoua.
which is called Tetagrammaton, and which is so peculier to GOD alone, as never
it may be communicated to any other, this name (I say) which is of such
reverence among the Jews, as they dare not pronounce it, but in place thereof
do read Adonai, that signifies Lord, is every where almost in scripture,
attributed to Christ, See Esaias cap. 18. ver. 7. and cap. 28. ver. 5.
namely where the Latin Interpreter has translated Lord: as for example, in
two diverse places of Jeremy, after the long description of the Messiah, which
before I have recited, he concludes thus; Ierem, 23,
Hoc est nomen quod vocabunt eum, Iehoua iustus noster: Iere, 33.
this is the name which they shall call him, OUR JUST IEHOVA, or as the Hebrew
has word for word, Iehoua our justice. And so do the ancient Hebrew
expositors confess upon this place of Jeremy, namely, Rabbi Abba, Rab. Abba
coment in Thren. v. 16 Misd. Theh. in Psalm. 20. ver. 1.
who asks the question what Messiah shall be called? and then he answers
out of this last place, He shall be called the eternal Iehoua. The like does
Misdrasch gather upon the first verse of the 20. Psalm. And Rabbi Moses
Hadarsan, expounding a place of the Prophet Sophonie, Chapter 3. verse 9.
concludes thus: Rab. Moses Hadars. in Gene. ca. 41^
In this place Iehoua signifies nothing else but the Messiah.

Whereby appears, that as well in scripture, as also in the opinion of old
Hebrew expositors, the Messiah was to be true God and man. And I might allege
many other testimonies of ancient Rabbines, if it were not too long:
especially, if I would enter among the kind of expositors, whom they call
Cabalists, Two sorts of Hebrew expositers, Cabalists and Thalmudists.
(who are more ancient, and less brutish then are the other sort, which are
termed Thalmudists,) I should find many clear and manifest declarations
against the Jews doctrine and error of latter times. And among other, (for
example only of Cabalisticall expositions) I refer the Reader to the
discourse of Rabbi Hacadosch (which in Hebrew signifies the holy Rabbine, and
lived not long after Christ) upon the words of Jeremy before recited: in
which, for that he finds the Messiah to be called Iehoua, which word in the
Hebrew is compounded of the three Letters, Ierem. 23.
Iod, Vau, and He twyse repeated: this Doctor makes this discourse by art
Cabalist, in this manner.

Even as (says he) the Letter He in Iehoua, is compounded of two other
Letters, named Daleth and Vau, (as appears by their form) so shall the
Messiah, Rab. Hacadosch in Esaias. cap. 9.
(that is signified by this word Iehoua,) be made of two natures, the one
divine, and the other humane. A Cabalisticall discourse.
And as in Iehoua, there is twice He, and consequently two Daleths, and two
Vaus contained therein: so are there two byrthes, filiations, or chyld-hoods in
Messiah, the one, whereby he shall be the son of GOD, and the other whereby
he shall be the son of a Virgin, which Esaias calls the Prophetess. Esaias, 8.
And as in Iehoua, the Letter He is twice put, and yet both Hes do make in
effect but one Letter: so in Messiah there shall be two distinct natures, and
yet shall they make but one Christ.

Thus plays this Cabalist upon the Letters of Iehoua, (according to the
manner of their divinity,) and draws great mysteries (as ye see) from
Letters ends. In which kind of reasoning, albeit we put no ground of strength
at all: yet is it sufficient to show, that among ye elder Jews, it was known
and confessed doctrine, that Christ should be both God and man, and have two
natures conjoined distinctly in one person, which is the same that we
Christians do affirm.

Nay, I will add further, The fourth proof.
(and this is greatly to be observed,) that the self same ancient Jews, (as
some also of the latter) do hold, and prove by Scripture, that Christ shall be,
Christ called the Son of GOD.
(for always they speak of the Messiah to come) the very son of GOD. Et
verbum Dei incarnatum, and the word of God incarnate, or made flesh. And for
the first, that shall be the son of God, they prove it out of diverse places
alleged by me before: as for example, out of Genesis, Gene, 49.
when the Latin text has: The scepter of Judah shall not be taken away, until
he come that is to be sent. Rab. David Kimhi. in li. radicum.
The Hebrew has, until Silo come, which Silo, Rabbi Kimhi proves by a long
discourse, to signify so much as Filius eius, his son, that is, the son of
GOD. The same they prove by the place of Esaias, Esaias. 4.
where the Messiah is called Germen Iehouae, the seed or son of Iehoua.
Which the Chaldie Paraphrase terms, Tharg. in hun^ locum.
the Messiah of Iehoua. They prove the same also out of diverse Psalms, where
Christ is called plainly the son of GOD, as where it is said: Psalm, 49.
He shall say unto me, thou art my Father. etc. I will put him, mine eldest
son, more higher then all the Kings of the earth, etc. Iehoua said unto me,
thou art my son, this day have I begotten thee, etc. Psalm. ^.
Kiss the This is according to the Hebrew text.
son ye Kings and Judges of the earth, and happy are al they they place their
hope in him. Which last words can no way be understood of the son of any man,
for that it is written, Cursed is the man that puts his trust in man. Ierem,
17^
Wherefore Rabbi Jonathan, Rabbi Selemoth, Aben Ezar, and others, do conclude
by these and other places which they allege, that the Messiah must be the very
Son of GOD.

And for the second point, The fist proof.
they go yet further, affirming this son to be Verbum Patris, the word of
God the Father. Which the foresaid Jonathan in his Chaldy Paraphrase, does
express in many translations: as for example; where Esaias says, Israel shall
be saved in Iehoua with eternal salvation, (which Iehoua signifies Christ, as
al men do co^fes^e) Jonathan In the Chaldie Paraphrase. Hosea, 1,
turns it thus: Israel shall be saved by Gods word. So again, where God
says by Hosea, I will save the house of Judah by Iehoua their God: (which is by
Christ,) Jonathan translateth it thus: I will save Judah by the word of their
God. In like manner where David writes, Psalm. 110.
Iehoua said to my Lord, sit at my right hand, etc. Jonathan expresses it
thus: Iehoua said unto his word, sit at my right hand. So Rabbi Isaac
Arama, Rab. Isaac. com. in cap. 47. Genesis
writing upon Genesis, expounds this verse of the Psalm: Psalm, 106. verse
20.
he sent his word and healed them, etc. to be meant of Messiah, that shall be
Gods word. And Rabbi Simeon the chief of all the Cabalistes, upon these words
of Job, Rab. Simeon Ben. Iahai. com. in cap. 10, Gene. Job, 19,
I shall see GOD in my flesh: gathers, that the word of God shall take flesh
in a woman's womb. So that this doctrine was nothing strange among the ancient
Rabbines.

For further confirmation whereof, (seeing the matter is of so great
importance) consider what is recorded in a Treatise called Zoar, Rab. Simeon in
Zoar.
of high authority among the Jews, where Rabbi Simeon that was last before
alleged, cites a place out of old Rabbi Ibda, upon these words in
Deuteronomie, Deuteronomy, 6.
Iehoua our Lord is one Iehoua, which words the said ancient Rabbi Ibda, The
blessed Trinity, proved by an ancient Rabbine.
interprets in this manner: by the first Iehoua in this sentence, (being the
inco^munible name of God,) is signified, says he, GOD the Father, Prince of
all things. By the next words our Lord is signified GOD the son, that i^
fountain of all Sciences. And b^ the second Iehoua, in the same sen^tence, is
signified GOD the holy Ghost, proceeding of the^ both. To all which there is
added the word (One) to signify that these three are invincible. But this
secret shall not be revealed until the coming of Messiah. Hitherto are the
words of Rabbi Ibda, reported in Zoar by Rabbi Simeon, where also the said
Rabbi Simeon interprets these words of Esaias, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of
Sabbath, in this manner. Esaias by repeating three times holy, says he, does as
much, as if he had said, Holy Father, holy Son, and holy Spirit: which three
Holies, do make but one only Lord God of Sabbath.

Finally, The sixth proof.
I will conclude this controversy between the latter Jews and us, with the
authority of learned Philo, who lived in the very same time with Christ, and
was sent Ambassador twice to Rome, in the behalf of his Nation in Alexandria;
Phil. li. 2. legate Ruff. lib. 1. hist. 1, 6. Eusebius. in Chron.
that is, first in the 15. year of Tyberius the Emperor, which was three
years before Christ's passion, and the very same year wherein he was baptized
by S. John: and the second time about eight years after, to wit, in the first
year of the reign of Caligula. This man, that was the learnedest that ever
wrote among the Jews, (after ye writers of holy scriptures ceased) made a
special Book of the banishment of his Countrymen, where he has this
discourse ensuing.

Philo. lib. de exulibus.
What time may be appointed, (says he) for the return home of us banished
Jews, it is hard to determine. For by tradition we have, that we must expect
the death of an high Priest. But of those some die quickly, and some live
longer. But I am of opinion, that this high Priest shall be the very word of
GOD^ which shall be void of all sin, both voluntary and inuoluntarie: whose
Father shall be GOD, and this word shall be that Fathers wisdom, by which all
things in this world were created. His head shall be anointed with oil, and
his kingdom shall flourish, and shine for ever.

This wrote Phylo at that time, when he little imagined, yt the same high
Priest, whom he so much expected, and the same word of God, whose kingdom he
describes, was now already come into the world. And this shall suffice for
our second consideration, what manner of Messiah the Jews did expect.

The third Consideration.
NOw in the third place comes to be considered, what authority and power the
Messiah should have at his appearance upon earth, and whether he should change
and abrogate the Law of Moses, Whether christ should change the Law of Moses.
or no? Wherein there is no less controversy between us and the latter Jews,
then in the former point of his divinity. For we hold with Saint Paul, Gal^
3, and 4^
that the Law of Moses was given unto the Jews but for a time, Hebru. 7.
to entertain the people withal, and by the outward signs and ceremonies
which it had, 1, Cor, 20.
(whereof ye most part, or a^l, prefigured Christ to come:) to be their
Schoole-maister and leader to the time of faith, wherein it should be
abrogated, and a far more perfect law se^te down by Christ in place thereof.

This we prove first, The Law of Moses imperfect. Hebru. 7.
for that the Law of Moses was an imperfect Law, bringing nothing to
perfection, as S. Paul well notes; It was as S. Peter says, Acts, 15,
a burdensome law, which the Jews themselves were not able to bear, for the
multitude of ceremonies therein contained. It was a carnal and servile Law,
consisting most in the external. It was a Law of terror and fear, Gala, 3.
more then of love and liberty of the spirit. It was a Law (as I said
before,) of signs and figures for things to come, and consequently to cease,
when those things which it prefigured should come to be present. It was a
Law, peculier and proper to the Jews only, Deuteronomy, 15,
without respect of all the rest of the world: Deuteronomy, 13, and 14, Leu, 5, 25,
Exodus, 23, Deuteronomy, 27,
and the exercise thereof, was allowed only in the Country of Jury; and that
which is more, it was not permitted but in one place only of that Country,
that is, in Jerusalem, whether every man was bound to repair three times a
year, to wit, at the Pasqua, at the Pentecoste, and at the feast of
Tabernacles: and in that place alone to make their sacrifices, and in no other
Country or place besides.

Now then reasons the learned Divine, Good reasons.
if this Law of Moses were for the Jews, and Jury only, how could it serve
for ye time of the Messiah, who was to be King as well of the Gentiles as of
the Jews: Psalm, 2, 21.
and to rule all people in the world, Esaias, 2, 11,
that should believe in him under one Law. If the exercise of this law were
allowable only, and law^ull in Jerusalem: how could it possibly be fulfilled
by Christians, that are dyspersed over all the world? as for example, how
could they repair to Jerusalem thrice every year? how should every woman
that should dwell in England or India, Leuit, 12, Exodus, 13, Number, 8,
repair to Jerusalem for her purification after every chyld-byrth, as by the
law of Moses she was commanded?

Most evident is it then, which we said before, that this Law was given but to
endure for a time. And to use S. Paul's own words, it was but Introductio
melioris spei, Hebr. 7,
an introduction to a better hope. It was but an entertainment to that people,
(which by their being among the Egiptians, were prone to Idolatry) until
Christ should come and ordain a perfect Law. The new Law of Christ, and the
perfections thereof.
That is, a Law of spirit and internal affection: a Law of love and liberty:
a Law that should be common to al men: serve for all Countries, times, places,
and persons: a Law that should be written in the bowels of our hearts: a Law
that should be tolerable, easy, sweet, plain, light, brief, and flexible,
as well to the poor as to the rich, a Law (to conclude) yt should consist in
charity.

This signified Moses, when he said to his people, after he had delivered the
former Law unto them: Deuteronomy, 18,
The Lord shall raise unto you a Prophet of your own Nation, and from among
your own brethren, as my self: him shall you hear. As though he had said,
you shall hear me until he come, that must be a Lawgiver as my self, but
yet of a more perfect Law: and therefore more to be heard and obeyed. And then
he adds, whosoever shall refuse to hear the words of this Prophet, I my self
will revenge it says the Lord God. Which words cannot be verified in any other
Prophet after Moses until Christ: for that of those Prophets the Scripture
says, Deuteronomy 34,
There arose no Prophet like unto Moses in Israel.

Which is to be understood, that they had no authority to be Lawmakers, as
Moses had, but were all bound to the observation of yt Law only which Moses
left, until Christ came, whom Moses here calls A Prophet as himself: that
is, a Lawmakers, and exhorts all men to hear and obey him.

This yet is made more plain by the Prophecy of Esaias, who says: Out of Sion
shall come a Law, and the word of God out of Jerusalem, Esaias, 2,
which cannot be understood of Moses law, A new law proph^cied.
that had been published eight hundred years before this was spoken, and that
from the Mount Sinai, and not from Sion. But Christ's Law began from Sion and
Jerusalem, and from thence was spredde into all the world. Which the same Esaias
foresaw, when talking of the coming of the Messiah, he says: Esaias, 1^^
In that day there shall be an Altar to God, in the midst of the Land of Egypt.
And the title of the Lord at the end thereof. etc And God shall be known to the
Egiptians at that day, and they shall honor him with sacrifices and oblations.

Which words could not be verified in the old Law of Moses, for that by that
Law, the Egiptians could have neither Altar nor Sacrifice, but at Christ's
coming it was fulfilled when ye Egiptians were made Christians, and enjoyed
both the Altars and Sacrifices that Christians do use.

The same thing was foretold by GOD in Malachie, where he says to the Jews
and of the Jewish Sacrifices. I have no pleasure in you, neither will I receive
oblations at your hands. Mala, 1.
For that from the vprising of the sun, unto the going down thereof, my name
is great among the Gentiles, The reprobation of the old Law with a promise of a
new.
and they do sacrifice unto me every where, and do offer unto my name a pure
oblation, says the Lord God of Hosts. In which words we see first, a
reprobation of the Jewish sacrifice, and consequently of the law of Moses,
which depends principally of that Sacrifice. Secondly, we see, that among the
Gentiles, there should be a pure manner of sacrifice, more grateful unto God
then the other was, and such, as might be performed in every place of the
world, and not to be tied to one place only, as the Moisaicall Law and
sacrifice was. And finally, I will conclude this whole matter, with the express
words of God himself, concerning the ceremonies and precepts of the old Law;
Ezech, 20,
Dedi eis praecepta non bona, and iudicia in quibus non viuent. I gave unto
them precepts that were not good, and judgments wherein they shall not live.
That is, they were not good to continue perpetually, nor shall they live in
them for ever, but until the time by me appointed: of which time he
determines more particulerly by Jeremy the Prophet in these words; Jeremy. 3,
Behold, the days shall come, and I will make a new Covenant or Testament
with the house of Israel and Judah: A new Testament promised.
not according to that Covenant which I made with your Fathers, when I brought
them forth of the Land of Egypt. Where you see, that at the coming of Christ
into this world, (for of him and his birth, he talks at large in this
chapter) there shall be a new Testament, containing a different Law from that
of the old Testament, which was given to the Jews at their going forth of
Egypt.

Thus much then hitherto has been showed, that Christ in all ages was
foretold and promised: The sum of that which has been said.
that he should be God, and that his authority should be to change the Law of
Moses, that was given but for a time, and to establish a new Law and
Covenant, and a new Testament of his own, that should endure and continue
for ever.

The fourth Consideration.
All particulers foretold of Christ.
AND albeit these things be very wonderful, and sufficient to establish any
man's belief in the world, when he shall see them fulfilled, (which shall be the
argument of my second Section,) yet rests not the Scripture here, but
passes further, and fore-telleth every particular act, accident and
circumstaunce, that shall fall out of importance about the Messiah at his
coming, incarnation, birth, life, death, and resurrection. As for example, at
what particular time and season he should appear. Gene, 49. verse, 10, That he
should be borne of a Virgin. Math, 1,
Esaias, 7, ver. 14. That the pl^ce of his birth should be the Town of Bethleem^
Luke, 2,
Michae. 5, verse, 1. That at at his birth all the Infants round about Bethleem
should be slain for his sake. Math, 2,
Ierem. 31, verse, 15. That the Kings of the East should come and adore him,
Math, 2,
and offer Gold and other gyfts unto him. Psalm. 71. ve. 10. That he should be
presented by his Mother in the Temple of Jerusalem. Luke, 2,
Mala. 3, ver, 1. That he should flee into Egypt, and be recalled thence
again. Ose. 11, ver, 2, Esaias, 19, verse, 1. That John Baptist should go before
him, and cry in the Desert. Esaias, 40. ver, 3, Mala, 3. ver. 1.

After this, that he should begin his own preaching with all humility,
quietness, and clemency of spirit. Math, 5.
Esaias, 42, verse, 2. That he should do strange miracles, Mat, 4. et 8, Mark, 8.
and heal all diseases. Esaias, 29, verse, 8, and 35. ver. 5. and 61. ver. 1.
That he should die for the sins of all the world. Esaias, 53, Dan, 9. Math,
27,
That he should be betrayed by his own Disciple. Psalm. 40, ver, 10. and 54,
ver. 14, and 108, verse, 8. Math, 16, and 27.
That he should be sold for thirty pieces of silver. Zach, 11, ver. 12. That
with those thirty pieces, there should be bought afterward a Field of
pot-shardes. Ierem, 30. Mat. 21.7^
That he should ride into Jerusalem upon an Ass before his passion. Zach, 9,
verse, 9. Mat, 26, 67
That the Jews should beat and buffet his face, and defile the same with
spetting upon him. Esaias, 50. verse, 6. That they should whip, rent and tear
his body before they put him to death. Esaias, 53, ve. 2. Psa. 37. verse, 18.
Luke, 22,
That they should put him to death among thieues and malefactors. Esaias, 53,
ver. 12. That they should give him vinegar to drink, Math, 27,
divide his apparel, and cast lots for his upper garment. Psalm, 68, ver, 22,
and 21, verse, 19. Math, 28,
That he should rise again from death the third day. Psalm. 15. verse 19.
Ose, 6, ve. 3. That he should ascend to heaven, Luke, 24,
and sit at the right hand of God his Father for ever. Acts, 7.
Psalm, 67, verse, 19, and 109. verse. 1.

All these particularities, and a number more, were revealed in scripture
touching the Messiah, some four thousand years, some two thousand, and some one
thousand, and the last of all, above four hundred years before Christ was
borne. Which if we lay together, and do consider withal, how exactly they
were fulfilled afterward, in the person of Christ, as in the next Section
shall be declared: if we add also to this, that we have received these
Prophecies and predictions from a Nation that most of all other does hate us,
and that the same are to be seen and read in their Bibles, even word for word
as they are in ours; if you hold in memory also, what invincible proofs are
alleged before in the second chapter, for the infallible truth and certainty
of those Hebrew scriptures: you shall find, that hardly any thing can be
imagined for manifestation of a truth before it com to pass, which God has
not observed in fore-shewing the Messiah.

The fifth Consideration.
AND all these considerations are touching the Jews. There remains somewhat
to be said of the Gentiles; Manifestation of Christ to the Gentiles.
who albeit they were to receive their principal knowledge in this affayre from
the Jewish Nation, to whom the Messiah was first and principally promised, and
from whom the Gentiles had to expect, both their Savior and his Apostles, as
also the Scriptures for testimony and witness of them both, and finally, al
their certain knowledge and sound understanding in the mysteries of Christ:
yet had they also among themselves, some kind of notice and fore-warning in
this matter, which being joined with that which I have set down before of
the Jews, and examined at the light of Gods divine Prophecies before alleged,
it will make very much for confirmation of our Christian verity. And therefore
this last consideration, shall be of the foreknowledge of Gentiles in this
behalf.

For better understanding whereof, it is to be noted, yt besides all knowledge
of ye Messiah, that diverse Gentiles might have by the Hebru^ scriptures, which
(as Chap, 2.
I have showed before) were in the Greek language, diverse ages before Christ
was ^orne, or by the instruction or conversation of the Jews, with whom many
Pagans did live familiarlie: there remained three ways peculier to the
Gentiles, Three particular ways whereby the Gentiles might hear of Christ.
whereby they received some understanding and fore-warning of this great
mystery. The first was, by tradition and writing of their ancestors. The
second by prophecies of their own. The third, by admonishment of their Idols
and Oracles, especially when the time of Chris^es appearaunce drew near.

The first way.
And for the first way, it is evident, that as the Jews received diverse things
by succession from their forefathers, and they again from Moses, and Moses
from the Patriarchs, Jacob, Isaac, and Abraham, (who was the first man from
whom that whole Nation proceeded, and in whom they were distinguished from all
other people in the world:) so had the Gentiles and other Nations, Tradition of
learning among Jews and Gentiles.
their succession also of doctrine and monuments, even from the beginning,
albeit the lower they went, the more corrupt they were, and more obscured in
divine knowledge, by their exercise in Idolatry. So we know, that the Romans
had their learning from the Graecians: the Graecians from the Egyptians: and
the Egyptians from the Chaldaeans, who were the first people that received
instruction in divine matters from Adam, Methusalem, Noe, and others of those
first ancient Fathers.

Now then it is to be considered, Eusebius in Chron.
that by consent of Writers, there were three famous men that lived together in
those ancient times, to wit, A^raham, Abraham.
(who descending from HEBER, was the Father and beginner of the Jews or
Hebrews,) and with him Job, Job.
and one Zoroastres, Zoroastres.
that were not of that lineage of HEBER, but as we call them for distinctions
sake, either Heathens or Gentiles, albeit that difference was not then in ure.
And of Job, we know by ye testimony of his book, that he was a most holy and
virtuous man. Of Zoroastres, we know only, that he was greatly learned, and
left testimonies thereof unto his posterity.

This Zoroastres living in Abraham's time, might (by account of Scripture) see
or speak with Noe. For Abraham was borne threescore years before Noe
deceassed. And Noe was borne above five hundred years before Met^usale^ died,
which Methusalem had lived two hundred and forty years with our first Father
Ad^m, and had enjoyed conversation both with God and Angels. And thereby (no
doubt) could tell many high and secret mysteries, especially touching Christ,
in whom all his hope for redemption of his posterity did consist. Which
mystery and hidden knowledge, it is not unlike, but that Abraham, Job,
Zoroastres and others, who lived at that time with them, might receive at the
third hand, by Noe, and his children, I mean The Jews have a tradition, that
Abraham served Sem 15. years in chaldaea.
Sem, Cham, and Iaphet, who had lived before the flood, and had seen
Methusalem, which Methusalem lived (as I said before,) so many years with Adam.

Heere-hence it is, that in the wrytings of Zoroastres which are extant See
Clem. Alex. lib, 1, strom. et Orig^ lib^ 6. co^tra Celsum. et Procl. lib. 2, et
3, in Par. Plato,
or recorded by other Authors in his name, there be found very plain speeches
of the Son of GOD, whom he calls, Secundam mentem, the second mind. And much
more is to be seen in ye writings of Hermes Trismegistus, (who lived after in
Egypt, and received his learning from this Zoroastres: Trismegistus.
) that these first Heathen Philosophers had manifest understanding of this
second person in Trinity, whom Hermes calls, Mercu. Her. in Paemand. cap, 1,
et de incepi.
The first begotten Son of God: his only son: his dear, eternal,
immutable, and incorruptible Son: whose sacred Name is ineffable, those are
his words. And after him again among the Graecians, Graecians.
were Orpheus, Hesiodus and others, that uttered the like speeches of the son
of God: as also the Platonists, whose words and sentences were too-long to
repeat in this place. But he that will see them gathered together at large,
let him read either Origin against Celsus the Heathen, or else S. Cyrill in his
first book against Julian the Apostata. And this shall suffice for this first
way, whereby the Gentiles had understanding of Christ.

The prophecies touching christ among the Gentiles.
For the second thing which I mentioned, is to be understood, that among the
Gentiles there were certain Prophetesses, or women Prophets, called Sibyllae,
which in the Greek tongue (as Lactantius gathers) may signify so much, as
either Counselle^s to God, or Reuealers of Gods council. Lact. li. 1. diui.
inst. ca. 6.
And these women, being endued, (as it seems) with a certain spirit of
prophecy, did utter from time to time, (though in such terms as most Gentiles
understood them not,) most wonderful particularities of Christ to come,
agreeing (as it were) wholly with the Prophets of Israel, or rather setting
down many things in more plain and evident speech then did the other: Of the
Sibyls.
the one of them beginning her Greek meeter in these very words. Know thy
God, which is the son of God. etc. Lact. lib. 4, inst. cap. 6.
An other of them makes a whole discourse of Christ in Greek verses called
Accrostichi, for that the beginning of every verse, is by some Letter appointed
in order, forth of some one sentence that runs through the whole. As for
example, the sentence that passed through the beginning of those verses which
now we talk of, was this, S. Aug^. translateth all the verses lib, 18, de
ciuit. Dei. cap, 23.
Jesus, Christ, Son of God, Savior, Cross. And there were so many verses in
ye whole discourse, as there are Letters in this ^entence. The total argument
being, of the incarnation, life, death, glory, and judgment of the son of
God. And ye last two verses of all the meeter, are thus, He that has been
here described, by our Accrostick verses: is an immortal Savior, and a King
that must suffer for our sins.

And for that these Prophecies of the Sibyls are of marvelous importance to
confirm the verity of our Christian Religion, The Greek verses of the Sibyls,
of what importance and authority.
and are alleged often for that purpose, by the most grave and learned Fathers
of the Primative Church: as for example, by Justinius the Martyr, in his
Apology for Christians; by Origin against Celsus; by Arnobius and his scholar
Lactantius against the Gentiles; by S. Cyrill, against Julian the Apostata; by
S. Augustine in his book De ciuitate De^: by Eusebius, and Constantine the
Emperor and other; I will say somewhat in this place, for the authority and
credit of these verses, least any man perhaps might imagine, (as some Gentiles
in old time would seem to do) that they were devised and invented by
Christians. And the most of my proofs shall be out of a learned See this
Oration in Eusebius. lib. 4, cap, 32, de vita Constable. at the end.
Oration, written in Latin by the foresaid Emperor, to a Counsel of Prelates
in his days: wherein he endeavors to show, the undoubted authority of these
Sibyl prophecies, which he esteemed so much (after dilligent search made for
their credit and sincerity) as they seem to have been a great cause of his
constant zeal and fervor in Christianity.

The first proof, for credit of the Sibyls verses.
Varro lib. de rebus diui. ad C. Caesarem pont. max.
First then he shows, that these predictions of the Sibyls, could not be
devised or fained by Christians, or made after the time of Christ's nativity,
for that Marcus Varro, a most learned Roman, who lived almost a hundred
years before Christ, makes mention at large of the Sibyls, (who in number he
says were ten) and of their writings, Countries and ages, as also of the
writers and Authors, that before his time had left memory of them. And both he
and Fenestella, Fenest. cap. de 15, viris.
(an other Heathen) do affirm, that the wrytings of these Sibyls, were
gathered by the Romans from all parts of the world, (where they might be
heard of,) and laid up with diligence and great reverence in the Capitole,
under the charge and custody of the High Priest and other Officers, in such
sort, as no man might see or read them, but only certain Magistrates,
called the Fiftine, and much less might any man come to falsify or corrupt
them.

The second proof.
SEcondly he shows, that Sibylla Erithraea, who made the former Accrostike
verses of Christ, testifies of herself, that she lived about six hundred
years after the floode of Noe, and her Countriman Apollidorus Erithraeus and
Varro do report, that she lived before ye war of Troy, and prophesied to the
Graecians that went to that war, that Troy should be destroyed. Lact. lib, 1,
inst. cap. 6.
Which was more the^ a 1000. years before Christ was borne.

Cicero.
Cicero also, that was slain more forty years before Christ's nativity,
translated into Latin, the former Accrostike verses, See Cicero of these
Accrostike verses of Sibylla, lib. 2. de diuinatione.
as Constantine affirms, which translation was to be seen in his works,
when Constantine wrote this Oration: so that by no means they could be devised
or brought in by Christians.

The third proof.
THirdly he shows, that the same Cicero, in diverse places of his works,
besides the mention of these Accrostike verses, insinuates also an other
Prophecy of Sibylla, touching a King that should rise over all the world,
wherewith himself and the Romans were greatly troubled: and therefore in one
place, after a long inuectiue against his enemy Anthony, that would seem to
give credit to that Prophecy, or rather as Cicero does urge against him,
would have had the same fulfilled in Julius Caesar, he concludes thus; Cicero,
lib. 2. de diui. paulo post medium.
Let us deal with the Prelates of our Religion, to allege any one thing
rather out of the book of Sibilla, then a King, whom neither the Gods nor yet
men, can suffer hereafter to be in Rome.

The like prophecy of Sibylla touching a King, Cicero, lib. 1. Epist. fam.
Epist. 1.2.3.4.5.6.
is insinuated by the same Cicero, in his first Book of Epistles to Lentulus:
to wit, that when the Sea lib. 2. Oracul. Sib.
Romans should restore a King in Egypt by force, then should ensue the
universal King, that should be Lord over Romans and all other. Which
Prophecy being much urged by Cato the Tribune, Epist. 5.
against the restoring of He was Father to Cleopatra.
Ptolomeus Aulates late King of Egypt, that for his evil government was
expulsed by his subjects, ye matter was thought of such weight by all the
Roman Senate, The fear which the Romans had of the universal King
prophesied by Sibylla.
(I mean the sequel of this Prophecy) that whereas otherwise for many respects,
they were greatly inclined to have restored the said Ptolomie: yet in regard of
this Religion, (as they called it,) they changed their minds. But what? could
they alter by this the determination of God? No truly, for soon after, King
Ptolomie perceiving the Senators minds to be altered, fled secretly from
Rome to one Gabinius, that was Governor of Syria, Dion. li. 39. histor.
and for five Millions of Gold that he promised him, he was by the force of
Gabinius restored: and not long after was Christ born, according to the meaning
of the Sibyll Prophecy.

The fourth proof.
FOurthly, the said Emperor Constantine proves the authority of these Sibyls
verses, for that Augustus Caesar, before our Savior Christ was borne, had such
regard of them, that he laid them up in more straighter order then before,
(according as Suetonius a Heathen, Suet. tranq. cap. 3. de vita Aug.
in his life reports) under the Alter of Apollo, in the hill Palatine: where
no man might have the sight of them but by special license; which license
Constantine proves that Virgill the Poet had, The Prophecies of Sibylla
alleged by Virgill.
for that he was in high favor with Augustus. And therefore in a certain
Eglogue or composition of Verses, that he made in praise of a young child named
Saloninus, newly borne to Asinius Pollio, Augustus great friend, (or as other
take it) of Marcellus a little boy, that was Nephew to Augustus by his sister
Octauia, or rather of them both, for adulation of Augustus, he applies (I say)
to one or both of the young Infants, the whole prophecy, which he had read in
the verses of Sibylla, touching the birth of Christ, and of the peace, grace,
and golden world yt should come with him. Upon which subject he begins thus.

Vltima Cumaei venit
iam temporis aetas: Virgil. Eglog. 4.

Magnus ab integro
saeculorum nascitur ordo: Christ's preordination.

I am redit and Virgo,
rediunt Saturnia regna.
That is, now is come the last age prophesied by Sibilla, called Cumaea, now
comes to be fulfilled the great ordinance and providence of GOD, appointed
from the beginning of the world, (these were Sibylles words,) now comes the
Virgin, and the first golden days of Saturnus shall return again.

Thus much translated Virgill out of Sibylla, touching the eternal
determination of God, for Christ's coming into this world: as also of his
Mother the Virgin: and of the in^inite blessings that should appear with him.
Now ensues in the same Poet, what Sibylla had said for Christ's actual
nativity.

Christ's birth.
I am noua progenies
caelo dimittitur alto:
Chara Deum soboles. etc.
Now a new progeny or offspring is sent down from Heaven: the dearly
beloved issue or child of the Gods. And note here, that Sibylla says
plainly, Chara Dei soboles, the dearly beloved Son of God, and not of Gods;
but that Virgil would follow the style of his time. And thirdly, he sets
down out of Sibylla, the effect and cause of this son of Gods nativity, in
this sort.

Christ's cause of coming.
Te duce, si qua manent,
sceleris vestigia nostri:
Irrita perpetuo,
soluent formidine terra.
That is, thou being our leader or Captain: the remnant of our sins shall be
made void, or taken away, and shall deliver the world for ever from fear for
the same.

These are Virgils words translated (as I said) out of Sibylla. And now
consider you in reason, whether these Prophecies might be applied (as Virgill
applied them) to those poor children in Rome, or no, who died soon after this
flattery of Virgill, without doing good, either to themselves, or to others?
Albeit (perhaps) in this point, the Poet be to be excused, in that he being
not able to imagine what the Sibyl should mean, made his advantage thereof, in
applying the same to the best pleasing of Augustus.

These then are the proofs, which Constantine used for the credit and
authority of the Sibyll verses. And of Sibylla Erithraea in particular, that
made the Accrostike Verses before mentioned, of Christ's death and Passion, he
concludes in these words; Constantines opinion of the spirit of Sibylla
Erythraea: orat. ad caetum. Sanct. ca. 18
These are the things that fell from Heaven, into the mind of this Virgin to
^ore-tell. For which cause I am induced to account her for blessed, whom our
Savior did vouchsafe to choose for a Prophet, to denounce unto the world, his
holy providence toward us. And we may consider in this whole discourse of
Constantine, for authority of these verses. First, that he uses Lactantius.
that was Master to his son Crispus, and who most of any Author, recites
and confirms the said Sibyls verses: and Eusebius Caesariensis, that wrote
the Ecclesiastical history, and See Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 32. de vita Constant.
how this Oration was first written in Latin and translated into Greek.
recorded this Oration of Constantine therein. And finally, we may consider,
that Constantine was the first public Christian Emperor, and lived within
three hundred years after Christ, when the records of the Romans were yet
whole to be seen. He was a religious, wise, and grave Emperor, and therefore
would never have bestowed so much labor, to confirm such a thing, at such a
time, to such an audience, had not the matter ben of singular importance. And
thus much of the second point, touching Prophets among the Gentiles.

Of the conf^ssion of Oracles, concerning Christ's coming.
THere remains only a word or two to be spoken of the third: which is, of
the confession of devils and Oracles, concerning the coming of Christ;
especially when the time of his appearance drew near, and that they began to
foretell his power and virtue. Wherein as I might allege diverse examples,
recorded by the Gentiles themselves: so for that I have been somewhat long in
the former points, and shall have occasion to say more of this matter in
another place hereafter, I will touch only here two Oracles of Apollo
concerning this matter.

The one whereof, was to a Priest of his own, that demanded him of true
Religion, and of GOD: to whom he answered thus in Greek. The first Oracle.
O thou unhappy Priest, why do thou ask me of GOD, that is the father of
all things: and of this most renowned Kings dear and only son, and of the
spirit that contains all. etc. Alas, that spirit will enforce me shortly, to
leave this habitation and place of Oracles. Suidas in Thulis, et Porphy. et
Plut. de ora.


The other Oracles was to Augustus Caesar, The second Oracle.
even about the very time that Christ was ready to appear in flesh. For
whereas the said Emperor now drawing into age, would needs go to Delphos,
Suidas in vita August. Niceph. lib. 1 hist. cap. 17.
and there learn of Apollo, who should reign after him, and what should
become of things when he was dead, to which demand, Apollo for a great space
would make no answer, notwithstanding, Augustus had been very liberal, in
making the great Sacrifice called Hecatombe. But in the end, when the Emperor
began to iterate his Sacrifice again, and to be instant for an answer: Apollo
(as it were) enforced, uttered these strange words unto him. An Hebrew child,
that rules over the blessed Gods, commands me to leave this habitation, and
out of hand to get me to Hell. But yet do you depart in silence from our
Altars.

Thus much was Apollo enforced to utter of his own misery, and of the coming
of the Hebrew boy, that should put him to banishment. But yet the deceitful
spirit, to hold still his credit, would not have the matter revealed to many.
Whereupon, Augustus falling into a great musing with himself, what this
answer might import: returned to Rome, and builded there an Altar in the
Capitole, with this Latin inscription (as Nicephorus affirms,) Ara
primogeniti Dei: Niceph. lib. 1 hist. cap. 17.
The Altar of Gods first begotten Son.

Thus then have I declared, how that the coming of Gods son into the world,
The conclusion of this first Section.
was fore-tolde both to Jew and Gentile, by all means that possibly in reason
might be devised; that is, by Prophecies, signs, figures, ceremonies,
tradition, and by the confession of devils themselves. Not only that his
coming was fore-tolde, but also, why, and for what cause he was for to come,
that is, to be the only Savior of the world: to die for the sins of all
men: to ordain a new Law, and more perfect Commonwealth. How also he was to
come to wit, in man's flesh, in likeness of sin, in poverty, and humility.
The time likewise of his appearance was prefigured, together with the manner of
his birth, life, actions, death, resurrection, and ascension. And finally,
nothing can be more desired for the foreknowledge of any one thing to come,
then was delivered and uttered concerning the Messiah, before that ever Christ
or Christians were talked of in the world. The argument of the two Sections
following.
Now then remains it to consider and examine, whether these particularities,
foretold so long ago of the Messiah to come, do agree in Christ, whom we
acknowledge for the true Messiah. And this shall be the subject or argument of
all the rest of our speech in this Chapter.

How the former predictions were fulfilled in our Savior Christ, at his being
upon earth. SECT. 2.
ALbeit in the points before recited, which are to be fulfilled in the Messiah
at his coming, we have some controversy and disagreement with the Jew, Our
controversy with Gentiles.
as has been showed, yet our principal contention in the^ all, is with the
Gentiles and Heathen, that believe no Scriptures. For that in diverse of the
former Articles, the Jew stands with us, and for us, and offers his life in
defense thereof, as far forth as if he were a Christian. In so much, as the
Gentile oftentimes, is enforced to marvel, when he seeeth a people, so
extremely bent one against another, as the Jews are against Christians: and
yet do and so peremptorily in defense of those very principles, which are
the proper causes of their disagreement.

But heereunto the Jew makes answer, Our controversy with the Jews.
that his disagreement from us, is in the application of those principles, For
that in no wise he will allow, that they were, or may be verified in Jesus. And
herein he st^ndeth against us, much more obstinatly then does the Gentile. For
that the Gentile, as soon as he comes once to understand and believe the
Prophecies of Scripture, he makes no doubt or difficulty in the application
thereof: for that he sees the same most evidently fulfilled in our Savior
Christ. Which is the cause, that few or no Gentiles since Christ's appearance,
have come to be Jews, but that presently also they passed over to be
Christians.

The obstinacy of the Jews.
But the Jew by no means will be moved to yield, albeit he have neither
Scripture, nor reason, or probability for his de^ence. Which among other
things, is a very great argument to prove, that Jesus was the true Messiah
indeed, seeing that among the marks of the true Messiah set down by Gods
Prophets, that was one: that he should be refused of the Jewish Nation.
Heerehence are those words of the holy Ghost so long before uttered; Psalm.
118
The stone which the The Jews are the builders, who take upon them to build
Gods house.
builders refused, is made the head stone of the corner, this is done by God,
and it is maruailous in our eyes. Heere^hence is that great complaint of Esaias,
touching the incredulity and obstinacy of his people, against their Messiah,
at his coming, which Moses also long before Esaias expressed most effectually
Math. 21.
Esaias, 6.


Deuteronomy. 28.
It makes then, not a little for our cause (gentle Reader) that the Jewish
Nation is so wilfully bent against us, The Jews obstinacy against us, a great
argument for us.
and that they refused Christ so peremptorily at his being among them. For whom
soever that Nation should receive and acknowledge: it were a great argument by
Scripture, that he were not indeed the true Messiah. But yet to demonstrate to
the world, what little show of reason they have in standing thus against their
own salvation, and in refusing Christ, as they do: I will in as great
brevity as I may, run over the chief points that passed at his being upon
earth, and thereby examine by the testimonies of his greatest enemies, whether
the foresaid Prophecies, and all other signs, which have been from the
beginning, to foretell unto us the true Messiah, were fulfilled in him and
his actions, or no.

And for that the matters are many and diverse, that will come heerin to be
handled, I will for order sake, reduce all to four considerations. The
division of this Section into four considerations.
Whereof the first, shall be, touching the time fore-prophecied of ye coming of
the Messiah, and whether the same agreed with Christ's nativity or no. The
second shall be of diverse particulers that passed in Christ's incarnation,
birth, circumcision, and other accidents, until the time that he began to
preach. The third shall be of his life, conversation, miracles, and doctrine.
The fourth and last, shall be of his passion, death, resurrection, and
ascension. In all which, (as I said before) I will use no one Author or
testimony of our own side, The testimonies here used.
for approving any thing that is in controversy beetweene us: but all shall
pass by trial, either of their own Scriptures, or of manifest force and
consequence of reason, or else by express record of our professed enemies.

The first consideration.
FOR the first then, concerning the time, The time appointed.
which is the principal and head of all the rest it is to be noted, that by
consent of all Writers, both Pagan, Jewish, and Christian, JESUS, (whom we
believe and confess to be true CHRIST) was borne the twenty five day of
December, in the end of the forty and one year of the reign of the Emperor
Augustus Caesar, which was fifteen years before his reign ended. Also in
the beginning of the thirty-three year of Herod's reign in Jury, which was
four years and more before his death. And from the beginning of the world, as
See Eusebius. in Chron.
some account, four thousand, one hundred, and ninetie-nine. And as others do
account, four thousand, foure-score and nine: for that in this point, between
the Hebrews and the Graecians, there is a difference of some little more then
an hundred years, concerning their reckoning.

The state of the world at Christ's nativity, The general state of the world
at Christ's coming.
was this. The three Monarchies of the Assirians, Persians, and Graecians were
past over, and ended: and the Romans were entered into the fourth, that was
greater then any of the rest, according to the Prophecy of Daniell, Daniel, 2.
five hundred years before Octauius Caesar, surnamed Augustus, Suet. tran. et
Aurel. victo. et alij in vita August.
after five civil wars by himself waged, and after infinite broils and
bloodshed in the world, reigned peaceably alone for many years together: and
in token of an universal peace over all the earth, he caused the Temple gates
of Ianus to be shut, according to the custom of the Romans in such cases:
albeit this had happened but twice before, from the building of Rome unto that
time. And the very same day that Christ was borne in Jury, Augustus
commanded in Rome ( Oros, lib. 6. hist. cap. 22.
as afterward was observed) that no man should call him Lord, thereby to
signify the free liberty, rest, ^oy, and security, wherein all men were
after so long miseries, which by continual wars the world had sustained.

The first proof.
By this we gather first, that this time of Christ's birth, agreed exactlie
with the Prophecy so long before set down in Daniell, (who lived in the
first Monarchy, The Roman Monarchy. Daniell, 2.
) that after his time there should be three Monarchies more, and the last
biggest of all: at whose appearing the Messiah should come, and build up Gods
kingdom throughout the whole world.

The second proof.
Secondly, we see that fulfilled, which Esaias the Prophet, above an hundred
years before Daniell, foretold that at the coming of Christ, people should
sit in the beauty in peace. The peace of all the world. Esaias, 32.
And again, there should be no end of peace. And yet further, he shall be
Prince of peace. And K. David long before him again: Psalm, 71.
In his days there shall arise justice and abundance of peace. Which thing,
though especially it be to be understood, of the internal peace and
tranquillity of our minds and souls: yet considering that external peace
also was necessary for a time, for the quiet planting and publishing of
Christ's Gospel, and seeing that ye same was brought to pass most
miraculously upon the sudden, when in reason men might least expect the same,
for the infinite wars wherein the world a little before had been: and by
reason of the Roman Monarchy so freshly established, (which in their
beginnings are wont to be troublesome:) this peace (I say) can not be but a
great argument, that this was the proper time of the Messiah his coming. And
thus much for the state of the world in general.

And now for the particular state of Jury at Jesus nativity, The third proof.
thus it was, according as Josephus the Jew (who was borne within five years
after Christ's passion) describes ye same. The Scepter of Judah.
One Herod a stranger, whose Father called His grandfather was a Sextane in
Apollos temple, and his father was brought up among thieves in Idumaea.
Antipater, came out of Idumaea, was risen to acquaintance and favor with the
Romans, partly by his said Fathers means, who was, (as Josephus words are) a
well monied man, industrious, and factious, and partly by his own diligence
and ambition, being of himself both witty, beautiful, and of excellent rare
qualities. By which commendations, Eusebius. lib. 1. cap. 6. ex Aphricano. Joseph.
lib. 14 antiq. cap. 2.
he came at length to marry the daughter of Hyrcanus King of Jury, that was
descended lineally of the house of David, and Tribe of Judah. And by this
marriage, obtained of his Father in law to be Governor of the Province of
Galilie under him. But Hircanus afterward falling into the hands of the
Parthyans, that carried him into Parthya: Herod ran away to Rome, The first
rising of Herod Ascolonita.
and there by the special help and favor of Anthony, that ruled in company
together with Octauius, he obtained to be created King of Jury, without any
title or interest in the world. For that not only his said Father in law
Hyrcanus was yet alive in Parthya, but also his younger brother Aristobulus, and
three of his sons, named Antigonus, Alexander, and Aristobulus, and diverse
other of the blood royal in Jury.

Herod then, having procured by these means to be King of Jury: procured
first to have in his hands the foresaid King Hyrcanus, Joseph. lib. 15 anti.
ca. 9.11
and so put him to death: he also brought to the same end, his younger brother
Aristobulus, and his three sons likewise. He put to death also his own wife
Mariamnes, The most horrible murders committed by Herod.
that was K. Hyrcanus daughter, as also Alexandra her Mother: and soon after
two of his own sons, which he had by the said Mariamnes, for that they were
of the blood royal of Judah. And a little after that again, Lib. 17. c. 10.
he put to death his third son named Antipater. He caused also to be slain
at one time, forty of the cheifest noble men of the Trybe of Judah. Lib. 15.
ca. 1. Phylo lib. de tempore.
And as Phylo the Jew writes (that lived at the same time with him) he put to
death all the Sanhedrin, that is, the seauentie and two Senators of the Trybe
of Judah, that ruled the people. He killed the chief of the Sect of the
Pharisees. Joseph. lib. 14. cap. 2.
He burned the Genealogies of all the Kings and Princes of the house of Judah:
and caused one Nicholaus Damascenus an Historiographer that was his servant, to
draw out a Petidegree for him and his line, as though he had descended from
the ancient Kings of Judah.

He translated the High priesthood, A pattern of an ambicious Tirant.
and sold it to strangers. And finally, he so rased, dispersed, and mangled
the house of Judah: as no one jot of government, dignity, or principality
remained therein. And when he had done all this, then was JESUS of the same
house and line of Judah, borne in Bethleem, the proper City of David, which
David was the founder and first Author of Regalitie in Judah.

The Prophecy of Jacob touching the Scepter of Judah. Gene. 49.
Now then, consider the prophecy of Jacob, concerning the particular time of
Christ's appearance, almost two thousand years before these things fell out.
Come hither my children, (said he) that I may tell you the things which are to
happen in the latter days etc. The Scepter shall not be taken from Judah,
until he come who is to be sent: and he shall be the expectation of Nations.
Which prophecy, that it was fulfilled now at Christ's nativity, when Herod
h^d extinguished all government in Judah, no man can deny, that will
acknowledge the things set down before, which are recorded by Writers both of
that time, and of the Jewish Nation and Religion themselves.

That the Scepter never failed in Judah until Herod came
And that it never was fulfilled from David's days, (who began the government
of the house of Judah) until this time, appears plainly by all Histories and
Records both divine and profane. For that from David, 1. Reg. 16.
(who was the first King) unto Zedechias that was the last, and died in the
captivity of Babylon, 4. Reg. 29.
Ierem. 37.
the Scripture shows how all the Kings descended from the house of Judah. And
during the time of their captivity in Babylon, Thal. in tra. Sanh. ca. Dinei.
Manmonoth.
(which was seauentie years) the Jews were always permitted to choose
themselves a Governor of the house of Judah, whom they called RESCHGALVTA.

And after their delivery from Babylon, Rab. Moses Egip. in prae. Maimonim.
Esd. lib. 1. ca. 1.2.3.
Zorobabel was their Captain of the same Tribe: and so others after him, until
you come to the Macchabees, Mac. lib. 1. cap. 2.3.
who were both Captains and Priests: for that they were by the Mothers side,
of the Tribe of Judah, and by the Fathers side, of the Tribe of Leui, as Rabbi
Kimhi holds. Rab. Kimhi. com. in Agg. Iosep. lib. 13. and 14 antiq.
And from these men down to Hircanus and Aristobulus whom Herod slew, there
continued still the same line, as Josephus declares. So that by this Prophecy
it is evident, that Jesus was borne at the proper time appointed for the
Messiah, when there was neither King nor Captain, nor High Priest, nor
Counselor, nor any one Governor of the house and Trybe of Judah, left in Jury.

The fourth proof.
An other Prophecy there is, no less evident then the former, wherein it is
affirmed, that the Messiah should come before the second Temple of Jerusalem,
The destruction of the second Temple.
(that was builded by Zorobabel after the Jews were returned from their
captivity in Babylon) should be destroyed by the Romans. For better
understanding whereof, it is to be noted, that the Temple of Jerusalem was
builded twice; 3. Reg. 6. et 7
first by Solomon, which lasted about four hundred and forty two years, 2.
Chron. 3.
and then it was burned and destroyed by Nabuchodonozer King of Babylon. Eusebius.
in Chron. Clem. lib. 1. strom.
Wherefore about seauentie years after, it was builded again by Zorobabel, 4.
Reg. 25.
who reduced the Jews from Babylon, 1. Esd. 1.3.4.
and so it continued, until it was destroyed the second time by Tytus, son to
Vespasian the Roman Emperor, about forty and six years after our Savior
Christ his ascension. At what time it had lasted from Zorobabel almost six
hundred years: and from Solomon, above a thousand.

And in the time of the second building, the people of Israel were poor, and
much afflicted in respect of their late banishment, 1. Esdras 5. and 6.
(though much assisted to this work by the liberality and munificencie of
Darius King of Babylon:) so was the building and workmanship of this second
Temple, The building of the second Temple less gorgeous then the first. 1.
Esdras, 5.
nothing comparable, for excellency to the first, which was builded by
Solomon, when the Jews were in the flower of their glory and riches. This
testifies Aggaeus the Prophet, who was one of the builders, and he testifies
the same to Zorobabel, and to the rest of those that were with him, by Gods
own appointment, in these words. Aggae. 2.
The word of God was made to Aggaeus the Prophet. Tell Zorobabel the son of
Salathiel Captain of Judah, and Jesus the son of Iosedec high Priest, and the
rest of the people. Who is there left of you, that saw this Temple in his first
glory, (before our transmigration,) and what say you to this, which now we
see? is it not in our eyes as though it were not at all? That is, is it not as
though it were a thing of nothing, in comparison of ye former Temple, which
Solomon builded.

Thus says Aggaeus by Gods commission, of the material building of the
second Temple. And yet to comfort the Jews with all, he was commanded
presently in the same Chapter to say thus; Comfort thy self Zorobabell, and
comfort thy self Jesus thou son of Iosedec high Priest, and comfort your
selves all ye people of the earth, says the Lord God of Hosts: Aggae. 2.
do ye the things which I couenanted with you, when ye came forth of the
Land of Egypt, and fear not, for that my Spirit shall be among you. Thus
says the Lord God of Hosts This he said for that the three Monarchies ensued,
wherein there was continual war and bloodshed.
a little time yet remains, when I will move both heaven and earth, both Sea
and Land, with all Countries in the world. And then shall come the DESIRED OF
AL NATIONS: And I will fill his house (or Temple) with glorie^ says the Lord
GOD of Hosts. Silver is mine, and Gold is mine, says the Lord GOD of Hosts:
great shall be the glory of this last house or Temple, more then of the
first, says the Lord GOD of Hosts. Hitherto are the words of God by Aggaeus,
and the often repetition, o^ the Lord GOD of Hosts, is to signify the
certainty and great weight of the matter promised. Now consider then, that
whereas God had said immediately before, that this second Temple was nothing in
respect of ye first, for pomp and riches of the material building, which the
old men in the book of Esdras do testify by their weeping^ (when they saw
this second, and remembered the first) yet now GOD says, 1. Esdras, 3.
that Gold and Silver is his own, (as though he made no account of the
abundance thereof in the former Temple, or of the want of the same in this)
and that notwithstanding the poverty of the second building, yet, shall it be
filled and replenished with glory, and that in such sort, as it shall far
pass in glory the former: and that shall be, (as both here is expressed, and
other where most plainly,) by the coming of our Savior This was fulfilled
when christ was personally, and taught in the Temple.
Christ into the second Temple, Luke 1, 2, 19.
which shall be a greater dignity, Math, 21, 26, etc.
then any dignity what soever was found in the first building of Salomons
Temple.

Concerning which point, Prerogatives of the first Temple.
it is to be considered, yt the learned Jews, besides the material dyfference
of building before mentioned, do note five things of great importance to have
been wanting in the second Temple, Rab. Samuel tract. Sanh. in Thalm.
which were in the first. To wit, The fire sent from Heaven to burn the
Holocaustes; Hieroso. Ra. Aba. in lib. deorum.
The glory of GOD (or Angels) appearing among Vrim and Thumim. All which great
wants and differences, notwithstanding, God says as you see, that the glory of
this second Temple, shall be much greater then the first, by the coming of
Christ into the same. Which thing, Malachie that lived at the same time when
the second Temple was in building, confirms more expressly in these words.
Mala, 3,
Behold, I send my This christ interpreted of S. John Baptist. Mat. 11,
Angel, and he shall prepare the way before my face. And straight after, shall
come to this Temple, the Lord or Ruler, whom ye seek and the MESSENGER OF THE
TESTAMENT whom you desire. Behold, he comes says the Lord of hosts, and who
can imagine the day of his coming? or who can stand or abide to see him? for
he shall be as a purging fire. etc.

By all which is made evident, tha^ Christ must come and appear in the second
Temple before it be destroyed, (as Jesus did) and therefore he cannot be now
to come, seeing the said Temple was destroyed above one thousand and five
hundred years past by the Romans, as has been said. Which destruction and
final desolation, was prophesied by Daniell, to ensue soon after the birth
and passion of Christ in these words. Dan, 9.
After sixty and two hebdomades, Christ shall be slain: and a people with
their Captain to come, shall destroy the City, The second Temple to be
destroyed presently after Christ's passion.
and the Sanctuary, and the end thereof shall be vastitie or spoil. And after
the war ended, there shall ensue the appointed desolation. Which prophecy to
have fallen out literally about 40. years after Jesus was put to death, when
Jerusalem was destroyed and the Temple overthrown by Titus, Iosep. de. bell.
Iudaico. li. 6.
the story of Josephus yt learned Jew, who was Captain against Tytus in that
war, does mani^estly and at large declare.

And for that we have made mention here of Daniels prophecy concerning the
particular time of Christ's coming, The fifth proof. The 72. Hebdomades.
and of his death, which confirms the purpose we treat of so perspicuously,
as nothing can be said more evident, it shall not be amiss to examine the same
before we pass any further. For better conceiving whereof, it is to be
understood, that this Greek word Hebdomada, (signifying seven) does som-time
import a week or seven days, Two kinds of weeks.
according to our common use, and then it is called in scripture Hebdomada
dieru^, a week of days, as in Daniell the tenth chapter, and the second
verse; where the Prophet says of himself, that he did mourn three weeks of
days. But at other times, it signifies the space of seven years, and is
called in scripture Hebdomada annorum, a week of years. As in Leuiticus where
it is said; Leu. 25. vide etiam ca^ 23 et ali. passim
Thou shall number unto thee seven weeks of years, that is seven times
seven, which make forty and nine years.

Now then it is certain, that Daniell in the Prophecy before alleged, where
he assigns sixty-two weeks to ye time of Christ's death, could not mean
weeks of days, for that he appoynteth only seven weeks, to the rebuilding
of the Cit^tie of Jerusalem, of the Temple, an^ of the walls about; which were
not ended but in forty and nine years after, as may be gathered by the Books
of Esdr^s: Lib. 1. et 2.
which forty nine weeks, do make just seven weeks of years. And ther^ore it
is certain, that such Hebdomades of years, are meant here by Daniell in all
the prophecy.

First then, when the Angel came to comfort him, and to open unto him secrets
for the time to come, he said these words; Dan. 9.
Mark my speech, and understand the vision. The seauentie Hebdomades or weeks
are shortened, (or hastened) upon thy people, and upon thy holy City: to the
end all preuarication and sin may take an end, and iniquity be blotted out,
and everlasting justice be brought in place thereof: to the end that visions and
prophecies may be fulfilled, and the HOLY OF HOLIES may be anointed. Ierem,
25, et 29.
In which words, it seems that the Angel did allude by naming s^auentie, Why
the Angel named seventy and two Hebdomades in this place^
unto the seauentie years of captivity, prophesied by Jeremy, after which
ended, the people should be delivered from their temporal bondage in Babylon.
And therefore Daniell now being in that place, and perceiving the same time to
be expired, prayed to God with great instance, to fulfill his promise made by
Jeremy. Whereto the Angel answered, that it should be done. And as after the
expiration of 70. years, God was now to deliver them from the bodily captivity
of Babylon: so was he also after seauentie Hebdomades more, to deliver them
from bondage of sin and pre^arication, and that by the anointed MESSIAH,
which is indeed the Holy of all Hol^es.

This (I say) may be the reason of naming seauentie Hebdomades, thereby to
allude to the number of the se^uentie years of that Babilonicall servitude.
For that immedi^tly after, the Angel appoynteth the whole exact number to be
threescore and nine Hebdomades, that is, seven to the building of the Cit^y
and Temple, and sixtie-two from that to y^ death of Christ, in these words.
Dan. 9,
Know ^hou and mark, that from the end o^ this speech, to the time that
Jerusalem shall be builded, The exact number of we^kes from the building of the
second Temple to the death of Christ. 62.
and unto Christ the Captain, there shall be Hebdomades seven, and Hebdomades
sixtie-two: and the streets and walls (of Jerusalem) shall be builded again,
though with much difficulty of the times: and after sixty and two Hebdomad^s,
Christ shall be slain. And the people that shall deny him, shall not be his^
etc. And then unto consumation and end, shall persevere desol^tion.

Now then, if we put these yee^es together, which are here mentioned by
Dani^ll: The account of Daniels weeks.
that is, first the seven Hebdomades, which make forty and nine years, and
then the threescore and two, from the restoration of Jerusalem, which make
four hundred, thirty and four more, we shall find the whole number to be
four hundred, and eyghtie-three years. Which being begun from the first
year of Cyrus, as some will, (for yt he first determined the Jews reduction,)
or from the second year of Darius, as others will, (for that he confirmed and
put the same in execution,) or from the twenty ye^e of the said Darius, for
that then, he made a new Edict in the favor of Nehemias, and sent him into
Jury, every way they will end in the reign of Herod and Augustus, under who^
Christ was borne, or in the r^igne of Tyberius Caesar, under whom he suffered.
And by no interpretation in the world, can it be avoided, but that this time
appointed by Daniel, is now out, above one thousand and five hundred years
past, while yet the Temple stood, and was not put to desolation. And therefore
of necessity, Christ must be come about that time, and never more hereafter to
be looked for.

The sixth proof.
The traditions and observations of the old Jews themselves, do meruailously
confirm this belief of ours, for that they all did run to this one point, The
traditions of Rabbines.
that about the time of Augustus his reign, (wherein Jesus was borne) the
Messiah should appear. It is often repeated in the Thalmud, Thal. tract. Sand
cap. ^elec. et alibi
that one Elyas left this tradition, that the world should endure six
thousand years; that is, two thousand before the Law of Moses, two thousand
under the same Law, and two thousand after that, under the Messiah. Which last
two thousand years, by all computation, could not begin much from the birth
of Jesus. And the Rabbines a great while agone, complained in their Thalmud,
Thal. in tra. Auodazara.
that there seemed to them in those days, seven hundred and fourteen years
past, since Christ by the Scriptures should have appeared: and therefore they
do marvel why God so long deferreth the same.

An other observation they have upon the words of Esaias, Esaias, 9. An observation
of the Cabalistes.
Paruulus natus est nobis, a little child is borne unto us. In which words,
for that they find the Hebrew Letter Mem, to be shut in the midst of a word,
(which is strange in that tongue, for that Mem is wont to be open in the midst
of words, and shut only in the end,) they gather many secrets. Thal in lib.
Sabbat. et in tract. Sanh^.
And among other, that seeing Mem signifies six hundred years, so long it
should be after Esaias, until the time of Christ. Which account of theirs falls
out so just, Esaias, 7,
that if you reckon the years from Achaz King of Judah, in whose time Esaias
spoke these words, Math, 2.
until the time of King Herod under whom Christ was borne, you shall perceive
the number to fail in little or nothing.

A much like observation has Rabbi Moses, The observation of Rabbi Moses.
the son of Maimon, (whom the Jews do hold in extreme great reverence,
calling him the Doctor of justice,) in his Epistle to his Countrymen of
Africa, Rab. Moses Ben. Maimon. ep. ad Iudeos Afri,
concerning the time of Christ's appearaunce, which he thinks to be past
according to the Scriptures, above a thousand years in his days, (he lived
about the year of Christ, one thousand, one hundred and forty,) but that God
deferreth his manifestation for their sins.

Rab. Iosue Ben. Leui, in Thal tract. Sanhed. cap. helec.
To which purpose also, appertains the Narration of one Elias, as Rabbi Iosue
reports it in ye Thalmud, yt the Messiah was to be borne indeed, according
to the Scripture, before the destruction of the second Temple; for that Esaias
says of the Sinagogue, Esaias, 66,
Before she was with child she brought forth: and before the grief of
travail came, she was delivered of a man child. That is, says he, before the
Sinagogue was afflicted and put to desolation by the Romans, she brought
forth the Messiah. But yet (says he) this Messiah for our sins, does hyde
himself for a time in the Sea, Christ hydeth himself in the Sea^
and other desert places, until we be worthy of his coming. To the like
effect is the observation of the Thalmud it self, The observation of the
Thalmud.
and of diverse Rabbines therein, concerning the wicked manners of men that
should be at Christ's appearance upon earth, of who^ they do pronounce these
words: Thal. tract. Sanhed. cap. helec. Rab. Iohanan. Rab. Judah. Rab. Nehoras.
etc.
The wise men in Israel shall be extinguished: the learning of our Scribes and
Pharisees shall be putrified: the schools of Divinity shall be stews at that
time. Which thing Josephus that lived in the same age with our Savior Christ,
Iosep lib. 20, anti. ca. 6. et 8^ et lib. 6, de bell. Iud. 15, et li. 7. cap. 9.
affirms to be fulfilled in the time of Herod: in so much, that if the
Romans had not destroyed the^, without doubt, says he, either the earth
would have opened and swallowed them down, or else fire from heaven would have
consumed them.

All then runs to this end, The seventh proof.
both by Scripture, tradition, observation, and instinct of God himsel^e:
Foreboding.
that about Herod's time the true Messiah should be borne. And hereof came that
common and public fame that is recorded by Tacitus Suetonius, and Josephus,
Tacit. li. 12, Sueton. in vita Vesp. Iosep. de bello Iudai. lib, 7, cap. 12,
(which was also written in open sight, upon the chiefest Tower of the City of
Jerusalem) that out of Jury should rise^ A general Lord of the universal
world. Which Prophecy, as the Romans either contemned, or turned another
way, applying the same afterward to the Emperor Vespasian, so the Jews
understood it of their Messi^s, and Herod feared the matter greatly; and for
that was so watchful to extinguish the line of David as has been already
showed.

Hereof also it did proceed, that the Magi, The eight proo^e.
or Wise men of the East, attended so diligently about yt time, to expect the
star that Balaam had promised at the coming of this King. Heere-hence also
it was, that the whole people of Jury, The general expectation of the people.
remained so attent at this time, more then ever before or since, in expecting
the Messiah. Whereupon, so soon as ever they heard of I. Baptist in the
Deserte, John, 1,
they ran unto him, asking if he were Christ? As afterward also they flocked to
Jesus, demanding; Art thou he which is to come, or do we expect another? Which
words import the great expectation wherein that people remained in those
days. Neither wanted that expectation in the chief Governors themselves, as
may appear by that sp^ech of theirs to Jesus; John, 10.
How long will thou kill us, (with this expectation?) if thou be Christ, tell
us plainly.

Of which fame, expectation, Diverse false Christ's did rise in Jury.
and greedy desire of the people, diverse deceivers took occasion to call
themselves the Messiah in those days, and the people followed them presently:
Acts, 5.
which thing had not happened in any age before. Iosep. lib. 17, ca. 8. et li.
18 ca. 1. et 2. et lib. 20. cap. 2, and 6.
And among other, there is named one Judas Gaulonites, or Galilaeus (as S. Luke
calls him,) and another Judas the son of Ezechias, both of them very wicked
and licentious fellows One also called A tongues, a shepherd, and two other,
named Theudas, and Egiptus, most notable deceivers. And above all, there was
one Barcozbam, Thal. tract. San. ca, helec Rab. Moses, Ben Maim. in Sententijs
(who as the Thalmud affirms) for thirty years together was received for the
Messiah, by the Rabbines themselves, until at last they slew him, for that he
was not able to deliver them from the Romans.

Which facility in the people when Herod saw: he caused Nicholaus Damascenus
(as I noted before) to devise a petidegree for him, Nicol. Damascenus. Iosep.
lib. 14. antiq. cap. 2.
from the auncientest Kings of Judah, and so he, as well as other, took upon
him to be the Messiah, whom diverse carnal Jews, that expected the Messiah to
be a magnificent King, as Herod was, would seem to believe, and divulgate
abroad, and thereof in the Gospel, they are thought to have been called
Herodiani, that is, Herodians or followers of Herod, Math, 22,
who came to tempt Christ, Mar, 3, 12,
with the Scribes and Pharisees.

Wherefore to conclude at length, this weighty point of the time of Christ's
appearing; The conclusion of this first consideration of the time.
seeing that about ye birth of Jesus under Herod's reign, there concurred so
many signs and arguments together: as the general peace of the Roman
Empire; the defection of the line and regiment of Judah; the open decay of the
second Temple; the just calculation of Daniels Hebdomades; the attestation of
Oracles; the observation of Rabbines; the public fame and expectation of all
the Jews: together with the palpable experience of more then fif^eene hundred
years past, since Jesus appeared, wherein we see the Jewish people in vain
do expect another Messiah, they being dispersed over all the world, without
Temple, law, Sacrifice, Prophet, or promise for their redemption, (which never
happened unto the^ til after Jesus death, for that in all other their
banishments, captiuities, and afflictions, they had some Prophecy,
consolation, or promise for their delivery.) These things all (I say)
considered and put together, we may most undoubtedly and assuredly conclude,
that Jesus was borne at the just time appointed, and foretold by the spirit
of GOD; and consequently, that he only was the true Messiah and Savior of the
world, which yet shall better appear, by examination of other things that are
to follow.

The second Consideration.
NOw in the second consideration there come to be weighed these points
following; Christ his birth.
the line and stock of Jesus; his manner of conception; the place of his birth;
his circumcision and name; his adoration by the Magi; his presentation in the
Temple; and his flight to Egypt.

For his line and stock, Jesus line.
there was never man denied or doubted, but that Jesus was directly of the
Trybe of Judah, and descended linially by his Mother of the peculier house of
David, ( 3, Reg, 7, Psalm, 80,
according as it was foretold that the Messiah should do, Esaias, 11, Math, 1,
Luke, 3,
) which is proved most clearly by the two Genealogies and petidegrees, set
down by S. Matthewe and S. Luke, of the blessed Virgins whole descent, from
David to Joseph, that was of the same Tribe and kindred with her. And it is
confirmed by their repayring to Bethleem, (when Proclamation was made by
C^renius in Of this matter writes Iosep. lib. 18. cap. 1. antiq.
Augustus name, that every person should repair to the head City of their
Trybe and family, to be cessed for their Tribute,) seeing that Bethleem was the
proper City only of them that were of the house and line of David: for that
K. David was borne therein. 1. Regu. 17^ 2 Reg, 2,
And finally, it is evident by that the Scribes and Pharisees, who objected
matters of much less importance then this against Jesus, Math, 13.
(as that he was a Carpenters son, Luke, 6.
thereby to debase him for his poverty,) yet never objected they against him,
that he was not of the house of David, which they would never have omitted, if
they might have done it with any color: for that it would have weighed more
against him then all the rest: and would in one word have dyspatched the whole
controversy Nay I add further, that it remains registered in the Jews
Thalmud it self, Thal. tract. San. ca. Nigmar had.
that Jesus of Nazareth Crucified, was of the blood royal from Zorobabel of the
horse of David.

For the manner of his conception, The manner of his conception. Luke, 1,
and of the Message or annunciation made unto his Mother by the Angel, albeit
it depend principally, upon the relation and credit of the Virgin herself,
who only was privy thereunto: and ^ppon the testimony of Joseph, to whom it
was re^ealed by the same Angel afterward; yet, he that shall consider the
circumstances of the thing it self: as first, the simplicity of both the
reporters, then, how that it is not vnlikeli^, that Joseph being just (as he
is described) would have concealed a thing so much against himself, Math, 1,
and against the Law, if he had not some way been assured of the truth.

Thirdly, Augus. lib. 4^ de Trin. ca. 5 et lib. cont. Iudaeos ca. 5, Chrisost.
in cap. 1, Luc.
the innocent age of the blessed Virgin, (who was not past fourteen years
old at that time, as S. Augustine and other ancient Fathers do prove by
manifest arguments) All these things I say, do make it improbable, that she
would invent such a matter of herself. And finally, the strange prophecy which
she uttered in her Canticle of Magnificat, and which we see now fulfilled,
(albeit at that time very unlikely,) to wit, That all generations should call
her blessed. These circumstances, he that shall consider them, cannot but see
that the matter must needs be true.

The manner of Jesus nativity.
And as for the kind and manner of his nativity: most mani^est it is by
scripture, that the Messiah was appointed to be borne of a Virgin, for so
says Esaias plainly: Behold, a virgin shall conc^iue, and bring forth a Son.
Esaias, 7,
And Esaias appoints this to King Achaz for a wonderful and strange sign from
GOD, which he could not have done in reason, if the Hebrew word in yt place,
might have signified a young woman only, (as some latter Rabbines will
affirm) for yt it is no sign or strange thing, but very common and ordinary
for young women to conceive and bring forth children. Wherefore the Septu^gent
do very well translate it in Greek, Parthenos.
by the proper name of Virgin, and so did also the elder Jews understand it,
Rab. Simeon Ben. Iohai. in capit. 2, Gene.
as Rabbi Simeon well notes. And Rabbi Moses Hadarsan, of singular credit
with the Jews, upon these words of the Psalms: Rab. Moses Hadar. in Psalm, 14,
verse. 12.
Truth shall bud forth of the earth, etc. says thus: here Rabbi Ioden
notes, that it is not said, Truth shall be ingendered of the earth, but, Truth
shall bud forth, To signify thereby, that the Messiah, (who is meant by the
word Truth) shall not be begotten (as other men are) in carnal copulation.
Thus far Rabbi Moses: who in another place, that is, upon the twenty and
five Chapter of Genesis, alleges Rabbi Berachias to be of the same opinion;
and to prove it out of the hundred and nine Psalm and fourth verse.

The same is proved also, in the plain words of the Prophet Jeremy: Ierem, 31,
God has created a new thing upon earth: a woman shall inuiron (or enclose) a
man. That is, she shall enclose him in her womb, and bring him forth after a
new and strange manner, without generation of man. And finally, Rabbi Hacadosch
proves by Cabala out of many places of Scripture, Ra. Hac. qu. 3. in Ea. c. 9.
not only that the Mother of the Messiah shall be a Virgin, but also that her
name shall be Marie. Betu. in lib. de car. Sibyl.
All the ten Sibyls in like manner, (according as Betulius sets out their
Prophecies) do make special mention of the Mother of ^he Messiah, that she
should be a most pure and holy Virgin; so that this matter was revealed very
clearly, both to Jew and Gentile before it came to pass. And Clemens
Alexandrinus writes, Clem. in recog.
that Simon Magus, to the end he might not seem inferior to Jesus in this
point, feigned, that he was also borne of a Virgin, as Jesus was.

That Bethleem where Christ was borne, The place appointed for ye birth of the
Messiah.
was the peculier pla^e preordained by God for the birth of the Messiah: the
Prophet Michaeas foretold plainly, when he uttered diverse ages before Christ
was incar^ate, these words; Mich, 5,
And thou Bethleem Ephrata, art but a little one (in respect of thousands in
Judah:) and yet shall there come forth of thee, one that shall be the RVLER of
Israel: and his coming forth is from the beginning, and from THE DAYS OF
ETERNITY. By which words is plainly expressed, that albeit Bethleem were but a
little poor Town, (as indeed it was, in comparison of many other in Judah:)
yet therein should be borne temporally that Governor of Israel, whose divine
birth, was before the worlds foundation, and from all eternity. And so do
interpret this place, both Jonathan Ben vziell the great Author of the Chaldie
Paraphrase, (who dyed twenty-eyght years before our Savior Christ was borne,)
and also Rab. Selomoth and Hacadosch, in their Commentaries upon this place of
Michaeas.

The same thing fore-tolde David of Ephrata, or Bethleem, (for both names do
signify one thing, as appears by the former place of Michaeas and Gene, 35.
and 48. 1. Cron, 2. Psalm, 131,
others,) when talking of the Messiah, and being desirous to know where he
should be borne, says; I will not go into the tabernacle of my house, nor
into my bed: nor will I give mine eyes sleep, or rest to the temples of my
head: until I find out the place that is appointed for my Lord: the tabernacle
(or house) for the God of Jacob. And then, the mystery being revealed unto
him: he says presently; Behold, we have heard of it (now) in Ephrata (or
Bethleem) we have found it out in the fields of This he said for that in
David's time Bethleem stood nigh unto woods. Math, 2,
wood. And to show how he reverenced ye place for that cause, he adds
immediately; We will adore in the place where his feet have stood. Whereby he
fore-prophecieth, not only the adoration used after in that place unto Jesus
by the Magi, or three kings of the East, but also of all other adoration used
in the same place in the memory of Jesus, by other devout Christians until
this day; for which cause Origin says, Orig. cont. Cells.
that the place of Bethleem, was most famous and renowned in his days.

The Angels singing.
For the Angels appearing to the Sheepe-heards, in the night of the Nativity,
there can be no more said, but the credit, honesty, and simplicity of them
that reported it: and likely it is, they would never feign a thing, that might
have been refuted by testimony of the sheepheards themselves, if it had been
false.

Of the Name of JESUS, given to him in his circumcision: The name of JESUS.
it was to be s^ene set down in a book, that how soever it were not
scripture, yet was it extant in the world before Christ was borne I mean the
second Book of Esdras, which has these words in the person of GOD the
Father. 2. Esdr, 7,
Behold, the time shall come, when the signs shall appear that I have told,
etc. And my son JESUS shall be revealed, with those who are with him. And after
those years my son CHRIST shall die: and the earth shall render those that
sleep therein.

Rabbi Hacados^h also proves by art Cabalist, Ra. Hac^. in Esaias, 9, Gene,
49, Psalm, 71, and 95.
out of many places and textes of Scripture, that the Messiah name at his
coming, shall be JESUS. And among other, he adds this reason: that as ye
name of him who first brought the Jews out of bondage into the Land of
Promise, Note this reason.
was Jesus, or Iosue, (which is all one) so must his name be Jesus, that shall
the second time deliver them from the bondage wherein they are, and restore
them to their old and ancient possession of Jury: which is the chief
benefit they expect by the Messiah.

Finally, it is not probable, that the Virgin Mary should feign this name of
herself, for that among the Jews there were many other names of more honor
and estimation at that time; as Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, and David. And
therefore if she would have feigned any: it is like she would have taken one of
them, as soon as this, which had not been the name of any great Patriarch.

The coming of the three kings.
There follows the coming of the three Magi or wisemen from the East: of whom
Cypr. ser. de Bapt. et idem Yert. lib. 3. cont. Marcion. in hillar. lib. 4. de
Trin. Joshua, 12.
Cyprians words are these: It is an old tradition of the Church, that the Magi
of the East, were Kings, or rather little Lords of particular places. Which is
to be understood, such little Kings as Joshua slew thirty in one battle. And
it is to be noted, that S. Matthew makes mention of the coming of these
Kings to Jerusalem, as of a known and public matter, whereof all Jerusalem
and Jury were able to bear him witness. For he talks of their often
coming to Jerusalem, and of the inqui^y for the newborn King: of their
speech and conference had with Herod: as also of Herod's consultation with ye
Scribes and Pharisees about the place of the Messiah birth. And finally, he
shows the most pitiful murder that ensued, of almost 14. Thousand as says
the Lyturgie of the Aethiopians, et Calend. Grecorum.
infinite infants, in all the circuit of Bethleem for this matter. Which could
not be a thing unknown to all Jury, and much less fained by the holy
Evangelist Saint Matthew; for that he should have given his adversaries the
greatest advantage in the world; if he had begun his Gospel, with so notorious
and open an untruth, which might have been refuted by infinite persons that
were yet alive.

Epiphanius is of opinion, Epiph. haerit. 51.
that the three Kings arrived in Jerusalem, two years after Christ's
Nativity, for that Herod slew all the infants of that age. Amo^. Alex. in
Harm. Niceph. lib. 1, cap. 13.
But other hold more probably, that the star appeared unto them, two years
before Christ's nativity, so that they came to Bethleem the thirteenth day
after Christ's birth, according as the Church does celebrate the Epiphanie.
Saint Basile thinks that they were learned men, Basil ser. in nati. Dom.
and might by their learning and Art Magic, (wherein those Countrymen at
that time were very skilful,) understand and feel, that the power of their
Heathen Gods, was greatly diminished and broken. They might also be stirred up
with that common brute, and general prophecy, spread over all the East in
those days, as both Su^tonius and Josephus do record. That out of Jury
should come an universal King over all the world. Suet. in Ves. cap. 4.
Iosep. lib. 7. de bell. c. ^.12. Number. 24.
By these means (I say) and by the prophecy of Balaam, lest among them from
Mos^s time, (for he was a Gentile) whereby was signified, that a star should
rise and declare a great and mighty King in Israel; they might be induced at
the sight of this star, to take so long a journey as they did toward Jury.

Prophecies of things that should fall out in Bethleem. Number, 24, Psalm, 71.
This star (as I have said) was foretold by Balaam a Heathen prophet, above
one thousand and five hundred years before it appeared. And after Balaam
again, it was prophesied by David, that Kings of Arabia, Saba, and other
Eastern Countries should come and adore Christ, and offer both gold and other
gyfts unto him. The murder also of those infants of Bethleem, was presignified
by Jeremy, in the weeping of Rachell for the slaughter o^ her children: Ierem,
31, Gene. 35.
which Rachel was buried in Bethleem, and for that cause those Infants were
called her chyl^dre^, albeit she were dead above tw^ thousand years before
they were slain, and above one thousand and five hundred years before Jeremy
wrote this prophecy.

Amongst which infants, Herod also for more assurance, Philo lib. de temp,
slew an infant of his own. For that (as Phylo notes) he was descended by his
Mothers side of the line of Judah. Which cruelty coming to Augustus ears, he
said, Macro. lib. 2 Saturnal. cap. 4. Augustus speech of Herod.
(as Macrobius reports) that he had rather be Herod's swine then his son,
for that he being a Jew, was forbidden by his religion to kill his swine,
though not ashamed to kill his son.

The same star whereof we spoke, is mentioned by diverse Heathen Writers: Plin.
lib. 2. capit. 25. Heathen testimonies for the star which guided ye Wisemen.
as by Pliny, under the name of a Comete, (for so they termed all
extraordinary stars) which appeared in the latter end of Augustus days, and
were far different from all other that ever appeared. And therefore contrary to
the nature of those kind of stars, it was adjudged by the whole College of
Soothsaiers, to pretend universal good unto the earth; and for that cause had
an Image of metal erected to it in Rome, and (as Plinies words are) Is
Cometa vnus, tota orb colitur, that only Comete, is worshypped through out the
whole world.

Orig. cont. Celsum.
Origin also, writes of one Chaeremon a Stoike, that was much moved with the
consideration of this Star, and for that after the appearance thereof, he
perceived the power of his Gods decayed: took a journey into Jury, (in
company of other Astronomers) to inform himself further of the matter.
Whereunto Chalcidius a Platonicke does ad, that the Chaldaean Astronomers did
gather by conte^plation of this star, Chalcid apud Marsil. Ficin tract. de
stella Magi.
that some God descended from heaven to the benefit of mankind. And finally,
the Sibyls talking of the coming of Christ, affirmed plainly: Rutilans eum
Sydus monstrabit: Sibyl. Samia apud Betul.
a blazing star shall declare his coming. Which prophecy, Virgil the Poet
having read in Augustus time, and soon having seen ye same fulfilled: applied
it (as I have showed before of all the rest.) to the flattering of Caesar, and
therefore he says in the place before alleged.

Eglog. 4.
Ecce Dionaei,
processit Caesaris astrum.
Behold the star of Caesar, (descended of Venus) has now appeared. Which
star indeed, was the star of Caesar's Lord and Master.

After forty days past over, Saint Luke reports, Luke, 12.
how Jesus by his Mother was presented in the Temple of Jerusalem: The
presentation of Jesus in Jerusalem.
and therewithal, recounteth two strange things that h^ppened at the same
time; to wit, that two grave and reverend persons, Simeon, surnamed Just, and
Anna the Prophetess: both of singular sanctity amongst the Jews, coming
into the Temple at the same time when Jesus was there in his Mothers arms:
took notice of him, and acknowledged him publicly for the Messiah and
Savior of the world Foretelling also by the Spyrite of prophecy, diverse
particular things yt were to ensue, both to Christ and Christians, and
especially to his Mother the blessed Virgin.

Which things being published at that time, and confirmed afterward by the
event, do well declare, that this narration of S. Luke could not be forged; as
do also the number of particular circumstaunces set down about the time,
place, and persons, most notoriously known to all Jerusalem. For, as for Anna,
Anna the Prophetess.
she had lived from her youth until four-score years of age in the Temple,
and thereby was known to the most part of Jury. And as for Simeon, Simeon.
he was the Scholar of the most famous Hillel, and condisciple to Jonathan
maker of the Chaldie Paraphrase, Thal. tract. pitkei. A^outh.
of whom I spoke before, and the Jews Thalmud con^esseth, that by the death of
these two men, (especially of Simeon) failed the spyrite of the great
Sinagogue, Thal. tract. Ioma. cap. Tereph. Becalp^.
called Sanhedrin: which after the captivity of Babylon until Herod's time,
supplied (in a sort) the spirit of prophecy, that was expressly in Israel
before the said captivity.

Christ's flight into Egypt. Luke, 2.
Of Christ's flight into Egypt for fear of Herod, S. Luke well notes, that it
was prophesied by Ose^ long before: Osea, 11,
that God would call his son out of Egypt. And the Prophet Esaias describes
the same very particulerly when he says: Esaias, 19.
Behold, our Lord Iehoua shall ascend up, (or ride) upon a light cloud: (which
was his f^esh or humanity) and shall go down into Egypt, and all the Idols
of Egypt shall shake at his presence.

Which latter point, Eusebius shows that it was fulfilled most e^idently in
the sight of all the world, Eusebius. lib. 6 them cap. 20, ^t lib. 9, cap. 2, 3, 4.
for that no Nation came to Christian Religion with so great celeritie or
fer^our, as did the Egiptians, who threw down their Idols before any other
heathen Nations. And as they had been the first in Idolatr^e to other
Countries: so were they the first, The benefit that Egypt received by Christ's
flight unto it.
by Christ's coming unto them, that afterward gave example of true return to
their Creator. It follows in Esaias: And I will give up Egypt into the hands
of cruel Lords: and a Potent King shall take dominion over them. Which was
fulfilled about the very time wherein Christ was to come. For that then, after
many spoils and cruelties exercised upon Egypt by the Roman Lords and
Princes, as Pompey, Caesar, Anthony and others: in the end Cleopatra their
Queen, that was the last of all the blood and line of the P^olomies, was
enforced to sley herself: and so Augustus the Emperor took possession of al
Egypt, and subjected it as a Province to the Roman Empire.

But consider you, how Esaias concludes ye matter, after all these temporal
afflictions threatened against Egypt, and confess, that such adversity, is no
sign of Gods dys-fauour to the^ who receive it. For thus says God after all
his cominations, In that day, there shall be an Altar of Iehoua in the midst
of Egypt: they shall cry to God in their tribulation, and he shall send them a
Savior, etc. Blessing shall be in the midst of that Land, to whom the Lord
GOD of Hosts has given his benediction, saying: Blessed is my people of
Egypt. And here we make an end of our second Consideration.

The third Consideration.
The life and actions of JESUS.
NOw in the third place there comes to be considered, (according to our former
division) the life, conversation, doctrine, and miracles of JESUS. And first,
touching things done by him after his coming out of Egypt, which might be
about the sixth or seventh year of his age, until his baptism by S. John,
which was the thirtith, there is little recorded, Just. in Trip. Chris. in Ioh.
Aug. li. 4, de Trin. cap. 5.
either in profane, or Ecclesiastical writers. For that as S. Iustine, S.
Chrysostom, S^ Augustine and others do write, he bestowed that time in the
common exercise and labors of man's life: thereby to show himself true man,
and give demonstration how much he hated and detested idleness.

Of S. John Baptist.
OF Saint John Baptist, all Hebrew Writers of that time do make mention, with
exceeding praise and admiration of his holiness: especially Josephus that
lived immediately after Christ's days, says: he was, Iosep. lib. 18, antiq.
cap. 7
Vir optimus: Iudaeos excitans ad virtutum studia. A most excellent man,
styrring up the Jews to the exercise of virtue. He adds also, that partly
for fear of the great concourse of people which flocked unto him, and partly
by the solicitation of Herodias, concubine and brothers wife to Herod Antipas,
the great Herod's son, for whose cause he had turned off his own wife,
daughter to Areta King of the Arabians^ he was apprehended and imprisoned in
the Castle of Acherun, and therein soon after put to death. Which murder,
Josephus esteemed to be the cause of all the misery which insued afterward to
Herod and his whole family.

Of this man it was written by Malachie the Prophet: Behold, I send my
messenger (or Angel) before me, Mala, 3.
and he shall prepare the way before my face: and presently shall come to his
Temple, the RVLER whom ye seek, and the MESSENGER OF THE TESTAMENT whom ye
desire. Which prophecy was fulfilled most evidently, upon the preaching of S.
John, S. John's behavior toward Christ^
when Christ came unto him, and albeit S. John had never seen him before, yet
he a^knowledged him for the Messiah, in the presence of infinite people, and
his acknowledgement was confirmed by the visible descending of a Dove and voice
from heaven, Math, 3, Mark, 1. Luke, 3.
in the sight and hearing of all the people present, according as three of our
Evangelists do report. Which they would never have presumed to do: had not the
matter been most evident, and without all compass of denial or contradiction.

And truly, no one thing in all this story of Jesus life, does more establish
the certainty of his being the true Messiah: then that S. John Baptist, whose
wisdom, learning, virtue and rare sanctity is confessed and recorded by the
writings of all our adversaries, should ref^se the honor of the Messiah offered
unto him self, and lay it upon Jesus: as also, should direct those disciples
that depended upon him, to the only following and embracing of Jesus doctrine.
Which is most evidently proved that he dyd^, for that so many followers and
Disciples as himself had, not one appeared ever after, that was not a
Christian.

The preaching and doctrine of Jesus.
WHen Jesus was baptized, he began to preach, and his whole doctrine was
directed to the manifestation of his Fathers will, and amendment of man's life.
It tends all to this one ground and principle. Thou shall love the Lord thy
GOD with all thy soul: Deuteronomy, 6.
and thy neighbor as thy self. Math, 2.
It was plain, easy, perspicuous, and evident, though it treated of most high
mysteries. Heathen doctrine^
It had neither pomp nor pride of rethoricall words, nor flattering of man's
wickedness, as the doctrine of many Philosophers had. Neither consisted it, of
unprofitable external ceremonies, Jewish Ceremonies.
as the latter observations of the Jewish Law did, nor was it fraught with
carnalitie and spyrite of this world, as the Turkish Alcoran, Turkish Alcoran.
and other sectaries doctrine is. But al was simplicity; all was spyrite; all
was truth; all was honesty; all was humility; all was charity.

It took away or disanulled no one perfect or spiritual point of Moses Law,
The comparison of Christ's Law with that of Moses. Math, 5.
but rather revived, interpreted, fulfilled, and made perfect the same. For
whereas that commanded external obseruaunce, this adds also internal
obedience. Whereas that said, love your friends, this adioyneth, love also your
enemies. Whereas that commanded we should not kill, this further commands
to speak no angry words. Whereas that prohibited to commit actual adultery:
this also forbyddeth to covet in mind. Whereas that said, take no interest or
usury of a Jew that is thy Countriman: this says, take it of no man what
soeuer^ Whereas that accounted every Jew only to be thy neighbor, this
teaches ^uerie person living to be thy brother. Whereas that taught thee to
offer up a Calfe, a Sheep, or an Ox for thy sins: this instructs thee, to
offer up a contrite heart, by faith in the blood of him that dyed for all, with
a firm and resolute purpose of amendment of life. And finally, The effect of
Christ's doctrine.
this doctrine tends wholly to the true, sincere, and perfect service of GOD
thy Lord, that made and redeemed thee, to the exaltation of his holy name,
power, goodness, and glory: to the depression of man's pride by dyscouering his
misery, to the contempt of this world and vain pomp thereof; to the
mortification and subduing of our sensual appetite: to the true love and
unfeigned charity of our neighbor: to the styrring up of our spirit to
celestial cogitations; to peace of conscience; tranquillity of mind; purity of
body; consolation of our soul. And in one word, to reduce mankind again to
a certain estate of innocence, simplicity, and Angelical sanctity upon
earth, with his eye fixed only in the eternal inheritance of Gods kingdom
in heaven.

This was the doctrine delivered by Jesus: which is the same that the Prophets
of God fore-tolde should be delivered by the Messiah.

The life and conversation of Jesus.
AND as for his life and conversation, by ye testimony of his greatest
adversaries, it was more admirable then his doctrine, his life being a most
lively Table, wherein the perfection of all his doctrine was expressed. A man of
such gravity, as never in his life he was noted to laugh, of such humility,
as being the son of GOD, he scarce used in this world the d^gnity of a
servant, of such swee^e and mild behavior, as all the injuries of his
enemies, never wrested from him one angry word. Finally, he was such a one, as
he was described by Esaias, so many ages before he was borne, in these words;
Esaias, 42,
He shall not cry nor contend, nor shall any man hear his voice in the street:
he shall not crush a broken reed, nor tread out a little ^laxe that ^ieth
smoking on the ground etc. And another Prophet not long after him, brake forth
into this speech, upon consideration of the behavior that should be in the
Messiah: Zach, 9.
Rejoice thou daughter of Sion: triumph thou daughter of Jerusalem: for behold
thy King shall come unto thee, thy just Savior: he is poor and humble. etc. And
as the Prophets did foretell the virtue and sanctity of the Messiah, so the
devils themselves could not but con^esse the same to have been fulfilled in
the person of Jesus; as is most evident by the testimony of Porphiry, a
professed enemy of the Christian name. Who after consideration of diverse
Oracles uttered by his Idols, touching Jesus, he breaks forth into this
confession. Porph. lib, de laud. Phylo^
It is exceeding wonderful, what testimony the Gods do give of the singular
piety and sanctity of Jesus: for which they avouch him rewarded with
immortality: but yet these Christians are deceived in calling him GOD. Thus
much writes Porphirie. And last of all Josephus the Jew, that was borne
immediately after Jesus, writes of him thus. Iosep. lib. 18, antiq. cap. 7.
There was at this time one Jesus, a wise man, if it be lawful to call him a
man: a worker of most wonderful miracles, and a Master and teacher of all such
men, as willingly were content to embrace the truth.

Of Jesus miracles.
BY which testimony of Io^ephus, we see mention also of Jesus miracles, which
is the next thing whereof we are to consider. And as Josephus in this place,
(being a Jew) bears witness that Jesus performed many strange miracles: so
most apparently, and according to the interpretation of Josephus in this place,
were the same miracles foretold by the Prophets of GOD, that they should be
done by ye true Messiah. So Esaias in his thirty-fiue chapter, describes at
large, how the Messiah at his coming, Predictions of the Messiah miracles.
shall declare his commission, by giving sight to the blind, hearing to ye
deaf, speech to the dumb, and agilitie of body to the lame and cripple. And
that which is more; God revealed this point very particulerly to the Gentiles
by the Sibyls, among whom, one of them wrote thus of Christ to come, as
Lactantius records: Lact. lib. 4, diu^na. In^tit. cap. 15
He shall do al by his only word, he shall cure all infirmities: he shall
raise the dead: he shall make the lame to run and skip: the deaf shall hear:
the blind shall see: and the dumb shall speak. In five loves and two fishes,
five thousand persons shall be satisfied, and the fragments shall fill twelve
baskets, to the hope of many. He shall command the winds, and walk upon the
furious sea, with his feet of peace.

And after diverse other Greek verses to this purpose, she concludes in these
words; Thal. tract. Beracoth, et Mermathas. Coli^.
Men shall say, that I am a mad and lying Prophetess, but when all these
things shall come to pass, then remember me: for then shall no man say more,
that I was a liar, but rather the Prophet of the great God.

To these predictions of Prophets in Jury and among the Gentiles, do agree the
Doctors of the Jews themselves, in many places of their Thalmud: to wit, that
the Messiah shall be most wonderful in working miracles. And in their public
Commentary upon Ecclesiastes, they have these words. Misdrach, coheleth, ca. 1,
All the former miracles of Prophets or Saints shall be nothing to the miracles
of the Messiah, when he comes. And thus much of the foretelling of Christ's
miracles. But now for the fulfilling thereof in Ie^us; that is, how these
predictions were performed in the stupendous works and actions of our Savior
Christ, there is no difficulty. For that besides the former testimony of
Josephus, (which were sufficient in this case) the Jews themselves do grant
and record Jesus miracles, The confession of Jesus myra^les by his enemies.
in diverse places of Treatises of their Thalmud; yea, they make mention of many
wonderful things that Jesus did, which are not written by our Evangelists. The
same does Mahomet in his Alcoran, Tha. in tract Auodazara Misdr. Coheleth
Alcoran Azoar. 14, 11, 13.
affirming Jesus the son of Mary, to have been a great Prophet, and to have
wrought his miracles, by the only power and Spyrite of God; and that himself
was sent to confirm Jesus doctrine, saving only in the point of his Godhead:
wherein he says, that Jesus went too-farre, and had a check for the same at
Gods hand when he returned to heaven.

Thus much do these enemies confess of Jesus miracles. Which, as it is much,
coming from such witnesses: so if they would either deny or dissemble the
same, they might be proved against them by most evident reasons: especially in
two points, wherein there can be no probability of any denial.

The first is, the calling and retayning of his Apostles, The calling of the
Apostles. Iosep. lib. 18, antiq. cap 4
and other followers, (whereof Josephus also in the place before alleged,
makes mention, as of a great miracle) who were of diverse callings, states,
conditions, trades, and occupations in the world. And yet al, upon the
sudden, left both father, mother, wife, children, and other temporal
respects, and followed him, who had nothing to give or promise the^ in this
world. A man, that never spoke them fair, or uttered doctrine that was not
repugnant to the sensuality of this life, as may appear by their own
wrytinges and testimonies of him. A man, that was accounted by the b^tter sort,
as then it might seem: that is, by the Wise and learned of that Country, and
especially dislyked by them that were in gouernm^nt, as a dangerous and
troublesome man to the state. One that had neither friends in the world to
bear him out, nor a house to put his head in. A great miracle.
And yet notwithstanding all this, that worldly men and women, and some such
also as were great sinners, and loose lyuers before, should leave all their
worldly hope, stay, and condition, to follow such a man, with so great
inconveniences, losses, dangers^ and disfavors as they did; and should
continue with him in all his afflictions, and be content to die and loose their
lives rather then forsake him, or abandon his service; this (I say) is such a
miracle, as never in the world fell out the like, and must needs be granted by
the enemy, to be supernatural.

The miraculous facts of Jesus.
THE second point is, of external things and facts done by Jesus, above all
power of humane ability, in the sight and knowledge of all the Jews, which
facts were published by our Evangelists, and especially by S. Matthew, in the
Hebrew tongue, while yet the persons were alive upon who^ they were wrought, or
infinite other that might be witnesses thereof. As for example, the raising of
Lazarus in Bethania, that was a Village but a mile or two distant from
Jerusalem: John, 11.
at whose death and burial, (being a Gentleman) many Scribes and Pharisees
must needs be present, (according to the Jewish custom at that time, as is
reported by Josephus) and they saw him both deceas^ed, Iosep. lib. 17. antiq.
ca. 11.
interred, and the funeral feast observed for him, as also raised again from
death by Jesus, after four days of his burial. With whom they did both eat
and drink, and converse after his return to life, and every day might behold
him walking up and down openly in the streets of Jerusalem. This story (I
say) how could it be feigned.

So in like manner, Math, 9. Mark, 5,
the raising of the Archisinagogues Daughter, whose name is affirmed to be
Iai^us, with diverse other circumstances that do make the thing most notorious.
The raising of the widows son, Luke, 7.
before the gate of the City Naim, in the presence of all the people that
bare the said corpse, and stood about it. The healing of the Cripple in
Jerusalem, John, 5,
that had lain thirty and eight years lame, at the Pooles side or Bath called
Probati^a, which miracle was done also in ^he sight of infinite people. The
ca^ting out of a Legion of devils, Math, 8. Mark, 5,
from ^ man that for many years together was known to live possessed in the
Mountains, which devils by peculiar license, obtained of Jesus to enter into a
heard of swyne, and so presently carried two thousand of them away into the
sea, and drowned the^. Whereupon the whole Country about of the people called
Gerasines, being stricken with extreme fear upon sight of the fact, Math, 14.
besought Jesus most humbly to depart from their borders. Luke, 9,
The feeding and filling of five thousand men, besides women and children, with
five Barley loves and two fishes only. The turning of water into wine, at a
marriage at Cana, in the presence of all the Guestes. The healing of him by a
word only, Luke, 14,
that had an incurable dropsy, and this at the Table of a principal Pharisie,
and in the sight of all that sat at dynner with him.

This (I say) and diverse other such miracles, which were done in the presence
and sight of so infinite a number of people, and recorded by our Evangelists,
at such times when many desired to discredit the same^ and might have done
easily by many witnesses and authorities, if any one part thereof had been
subiec^ to calumniation: cannot in reason or probability be doubted of. And
therefor I must conclude, The conclusion of this Consideration.
that seeing these things are above al power of humane nature, and could not
be done, but by the finger and virtue of the living God himself, considering
also that it is impossible, that God should assist or give testimony unto any
falsehoode, it must needs ensue, that all was true and sincere which Jesus
affirmed: and consequently, seeing he affirmed himsel^e to be the son of God,
and the true and only Messiah, it must needs follow by these miracles, that he
was so indeed; which is the ground of that speech of his to the faithless
Pharisees, John, 10.
If you will not believe my words, believe my deeds. And thus much of Jesus
life, doctrine, conversation, and miracles.

The fourth Consideration.
THere remains now only, the fourth and last consideration of this Section,
which is, the passion, The passion and resurrection.
resurrection, and ascension of Jesus. And about his passion there is little or
no controversy: for that all his enemies do agree and grant, that he was
betrayed by his own Disciple; apprehended, afflicted, and deliuer^d up by the
Jews, and finally put to death upon a Cross by the Gentiles. The testimony
of Josephus may serve for all herein, whose words are these; Iosep. lib, 18.
antiq. cap. 4
That the principal Jews of his Country, having accused and delivered over
Jesus to Pilate, (that was Governor of Jury for the Roman Emperor) he
adjudged him to the Cross. The same do other Jews and Gentiles record, and
in this they take great offense and scandale, that we should attribute
divinity unto a man that had suffered death upon the Cross.

But if we show that this was the eternal preordination and appointment of
GOD, for saving of mankind: and that the same was foretold both to Jew and
Gentile from the beginning: and so understood also by the Jewish Doctors
themselves of elder times: then every reasonable man (I trow) will remain
satisfied, and prefer Gods divine wisdom before man's folly.

Christ's ascending to Jerusalem to receive his passion.
FIrst then consider, that when Christ had ended his preaching, and wrought so
many miracles as seemed sufficient to his eternal wisdom, and when the time
was come preordained for his passion, (whereof he told publicly his Disciples
before,) he went up to Jerusalem of purpose to receive his death: and made a
solemn entry into that City upon an Ass, which was prophesied of him many
years before; Math, 21.
Rejoice daughter of Sion. Behold thy JUST KING and SAVIOVR, Zach, 9,
shall come unto thee upon an Ass.

And after his abode some days in that place, he was betrayed and sold by his
own Disciple, Math, 10, and 16.
as David before hand in many places had foretold should come to pass. Psalm,
40^ 54, and 108.
Then followed his apprehension, and most servile abusage by the Jews, whereof
it was fore-prophecied in his person by Esaias; Esaias, 50.
I gave my body to the^ that beat it, and my cheeks to them that buffeted the
same. I did not turn my self away from them that reproched me: nor yet from
them that did spet in my face.

The barbarus abusage of Jesus, foretold by prophecy.
AFter this barbarous entreaty by the Jews, they delivered him over to Pilate
a Gentile, and never ceased to solicit and pursue their unquenchable hatred
against him, until they saw him on ye Cross, where also he was used in the
highest degree of spightfull dealing. Whereof likewise the Prophet David made
mention long before, in the person of the Messiah, when he said; Psalm, 21,
They pearsed my hands and feet: they divided among them my apparel, and
upon my (upper.) garment they did cast lo^s. And again of another cruelty he
complains, saying; They gave me gaul to eat, and in my thirst they
refreshed me with Vinegar.

Christ's death plainly fore-tolde.
AND finally, that Christ should die for the sins of mankind, i^ a common
principle, both prefigured and foretold throughout all the old Scripture.
Prefigured by the Sacrifice of Isaac: Gene, 21, 22
by the raising up of the brazen Serpent, Numb, 21.
and by all other sacrifices that were in the Law. Fore-tolde, not only by the
Scriptures before alleged, but also most plainly by Daniell, Dan. 9^
who was told by an Angel, that after a certain time by him there appointed:
Vngetur Sanctus Sanctoru^, the Saint of Saints shall be anointed, et occidetur
Christus, and this anointed Saint or Christ shall be put to death. Zachary
also about the same time, does not only foretell his death, but also the
kind thereof, and from what people he should receive the same: for thus he
says in the person of Christ himself. Zach, 12.
The inhabitants of Jerusalem at that day, shall look upon me, whom they have
crucified.

The wonderful predictions of Christ's passion, set down by Esaias.
BUT if ye will read the whole story of Christ's passion, set down at large
six hundred years before it fell out, I refer you to a narration of Esaias, who
to signify the strangeness of the case, begins with the Praeface. Esaias, 57,
Who will give credit to that we shall report. etc. And the^ a little after he
goes on in these words. Christ's deformity upon the Cross.
He shall mount up as a twig from a dry earth. He has no form or beauty upon
him. We beheld him, and there was no count^naunce in him, we saw him the most
contemptible and despised man in the world. A man full of pains, and
experienced in infirmity. His countenance was obscure and dispicable, and we
made no account of him. Christ appointed to die for our sins.
Truly he took upon himself our greefes, and did bear our pains. We
accounted him as a Leaper, and as a man stricken and punished by GOD. But he was
wounded for our iniquities, and crushed in pieces for our wickedness. The
discipline (or correction) of our peace lies upon him: and by his wounds we
are made whole. We have all erred, and gone astray like sheep, every man after
his own ways, and God has laid upon him the iniquity of us al. He was offered
up for v^^ because he would so, he shall be led to hi^ slaughter as a sheep: and
as a Lamb he shall be silent before his shearers.

For the sins of my people have stricken him, says God. He has done no
iniquity, neither was there deceit found in his mouth. Yet would the lord
crush him in infirmity.

But if he shall give his life for sin: The increase of Christ's kingdom after
his resurrection.
then shall he see a long seed (or generation) and the will of the Lord shall be
directed in his hand. And for so much, as his soul has sustained labor: it
shall see and be filled. And this MY JUST SERVANT, That is in making himself
known, or revealing the knowledge of him self to the world.
in his knowledge shall iu^tifie many, and bear their iniquities. And I will
allot unto him very many people, and he shall divide the spoils of the
stout, for that he has delivered his soul unto death and was accounted among
the wicked, and prayed ^or his trespassours.

The particulers of Christ's passion, foretold by Sibylla.
THus particulerly (as we see) was the death and Passion of our Savior Christ,
foretold by the Prophets of Israel, to that Nation. Now hear ye the Prophecy
of Sibylla, if ye please, wherein she fore-shewed the same to the Gentiles;
These are her own words, set down by Lactantius. He shall appear miserable,
ignominius and deformed, Lactan, li. 4 divine. instit, ca. 16, et 18,
to the end he may give hope unto the miserable. Afterward he shall come
into the hands of most wicked and faithless men: they shall buffet him with
their sacriligious fistes, and shall spet upon him, with their unclean
mouths. He shall yield his innocent back to the whyp, and shall say nothing
while he receives the stripes, to the end he may speak to those that are
dead. He shall bear a crown of thorns, and they shall give him Gaul to eat,
and Vinegar to drink. And this shall be the hospitality he shall find among
them. What thing can be more plainly described then this?

The consent of Rabbines.
Neither do the ancient Rabbines and Teachers among the Jews descent from
this. Thal. tract. Sanh. ca. helec. Misdr. Ruth. Rab. Iosep. in lib. Siph Rab.
Jacob et R. Hanina in cap. helec.
For that in their Thalmud, that was gathered above one thousand and two
hundred years agone, the plain sentences of diverse are set down: that their
Messiah at his coming shall be put to death. And as for Rabbi Jonathan, the
Author of the Chaldie Paraphrase, who died a little before our Savior Christ
was borne, he applies the whole narration of the Prophet Esaias before recited,
Esaias, 53.
(as needs he must) to the murder of the Messiah by the Jews. Whereupon
Rabbi Simeon, that lived the next age after him, writes these words following;
Rab, Simeon Ben. ^ehai. lib. de spe.
Woe be to the men of Israel, for that they shall sley the Messiah. God shall
send his son in man's flesh to wash them, and they shall murder him.

Whereto agrees Rabbi Hadar^an and others, Rab. Had. in Dan.
and do prove further, out of the fore-alledged Prophecy of Daniell, Chapter
9, verse 27. that after the Messiah shall have preached half seven years, he
shall be slain. For that Daniel says: Dan. 9.
In half of seven years, the Host and Sacrifice shall cease. Upon which
words they comment thus: Three years and a half shall the presence of God in
flesh, cry and preach upon the Mount Oliue^, and then shall he be slain.
Which words the Jews ordinary Misdrasch Tehel^m.
Commentary upon the Psalms, do interpret to be meant of Christ's
preaching three years and an half before his passion. Which disagreeth very
little or nothing from the account of us Christians, and of our Evangelists.

Of the miracles that fell out in Christ's death and passion.
THus see we by all that hitherto has been said, that the very particulers
of Christ's whole death and p^ssion, were fore-tolde most plainly both to Jew
and Gentile, and acknowledged also by the ancient Doctors of the Jewish
Nation, before the effectuation thereof came to pass. And Sibylla adde^h
further two particul^r miracles, that should fall out in the said Passion of
the Messiah, to wit; Lact. lib. 4. divine. Inst. capit. 19,
That the veil of the Jews Temple should break in two: and that at midday,
there should be darkness for three hours over all the world. Which thing to
have been fulfilled at the death of Jesus, not only S. Matthew does assure us
in his Gospel: Math, 27.
but also Eusebius affirms that he had read the same word for word,
recorded in diverse Heathen Writers. And amongst other, he cites one Phlegon an
exact Chronicler, that reports the same in the fourth year of the two
hundred and two Olimpiad, Eusebius in Chron. An. Domi. 32, Phleg. Trallian.
11.14. Chro. An. 4 Olim. 202.
which agrees just with the eyghteene year of Tyberius his reign, which was
the year wherein our Savior Christ suffered. And he goes so nigh, as to name
the very hours of the day, as our Evangelists do. See Orig, cont. Cells li. 6.
et Suid. in verbo Jesus et Tert. in Apolg. Dioni Are. in Epist.
Aesculus an old Astronomer, does confirm the same, and proves moreover, by
the situation and cons^itution of the Sun and Moon at that time, that no
Eclipse could then be naturally. Which thing in like manner, Dyonisius
Areopagita did observe in the very day of Christ's passion, being at that time
but twenty and five years old, and yet well studied in Astronomy, as himself
testifies. And finally, Lucianus a learned Priest of Antioche, Lucian praes.
apud Eusebius.
was accustomed to provoke the Gentiles to their own Commentaries and stories,
for record and testimony of those things.

Of Jesus Resurrection.
THere ensues now, f^r ending and confirmation of all that has been said and
proved before, to add a word or two of Jesus Resurrection. Which point, as of
all other it is of most importance: so was it exactly foretold both to Jew
and Gentile, and promised by Christ himself in all his speeches while he was
upon earth. And among the Jews, it was assured by all the Prophecies before
recited, which do promise so great abundance of glory, joy, and triumph to
Christ's Church after his Passion. Which never possibly could be fulfilled,
unless he had risen from death again. And therefore the said Resurrection
was prefigured in Jonas, Jonas, 2,
together with the time of his abode in the Sepulcher. It was also expressly
fore-shewed by David, affirming; Psalm, 16.
That God would not suffer his holy one to see corruption. And after him
again, more plainly by the Prophet O^e; Osea, 6.
He shall quicken us again after two days, in the third day he shall raise
us, and we shall live in his sight. And to the Gentiles, Sibylla left written
not far from the same time: Lactan. li. 4 inst. di. c. 19,
He shall end the necessity of death by three days sleep: and then returning
from death to light again, he shall be the first that shall show the beginning
of Resurrection to his chosen: for that by conquering death, he shall bring us
life.

Thus much was promised by prophets before christ's appearance. And Jesus to
comfort his disciples and followers, Mat, 12, 16, Mark, 8, 9, Luke, 11, 18.
reiterated his promise again of himself in many speeches, albeit many times
his meaning was not perceived. John, 2.
Which promise of return from death, if it had been made for some long time
to come, (as Mahomet promised his Sarasins after eight hundred years to
reuisite them again, Maho. in Alcor. Azoar, 17.
) albeit the performance were never meant: yet might the falsehood lurk in the
length of time. But Jesus assuring all men that he would rise again within
three days, it cannot be imagined, but that he sincerely purposed to fulfill
his promise, for that otherwise the fraud must have been discovered. Now
then let us consider what manner of performance Jesus made hereof.

The appearings which Jesus made after his Resurrection.
AND first the persons most interessed in the matter, as they whose total
hope, stay, refuge, and felicity depended hereof, I mean his appalled
dysmaied, and afflicted Disciples, do recount twelve sundry apparisions, which
Jesus made unto them in flesh, after his Resurrection. The first was, to Mary
Magdalen apart, Math, 16,
when she with Solome and other women, went and remained with ointments about
the Sepulcher. The second was, to all the women together, as they returned
homewards, Math, 28,
who also were permitted to embrace his feet. The third was to Simon Peter
alone. 1, Corin. 15,
The fourth, to the two Disciples in their journey to Emaus. Luke, 24,
The fifth was, to all the Apostles, and other Disciples together when the doors
were shut. John, 20,
The sixth, was to the same company again, 1, Cor, 15, John, 20,
after eight days when Thomas was with them, at what time also he did both
eat and drink, and suffered his body also to be handled among them. The
seventh was to S. Peter and Saint John, John, 21,
with five other disciples, when they were a fishing at what time also he
vouchsafed to eat with them. The eight was to eleven Disciples at one time,
Math, 28,
upon the Mount Thabor in Galiley. The ninth was, 1. Corin, 15,
to more the^ 5. hundred brethren at one time, as Saint Paul testifies. The
tenth was to S. James, Ibidem.
as the same Apostle records. The eleventh was to al his Apostles disciples
and friends together, Acts, 1,
upon the Mount Oliuet by Jerusalem, when in their presence he ascended up to
heaven. The twelfth and last, was after his ascension, 1. Cor. 15.
unto S. Paul, as himself bears witness.

All these apparitions are recorded in Scripture, as made by Jesus after his
Resurrection, to such as by his eternal wisdom, were preordained to be
witnesses of so glorious a spectacle. To whom (as S. Luke affirms, Acts, 1,
) He showed himself alive by many arguments, for the space of forty days
together, and reasoned with them of the kingdom of his Father. And why any man
should mistrust the testimony of those men which saw him, conuersed with him,
eat with him, drank with him, touched him, and heard him speak, and whose
entire estate and welfare, depended wholly of the certainty heerof; I see no
reason. For what comfort had it been or consolation to these men, to have
devised of themselves these former apparitions?

What encouragement might they have taken, in those doleful times of desolation
and affliction, to have had among them the dead body of him, Circumstances
that confirm the true resurrection of JESUS.
on whose only life, their universal hope and confidence depended? The
Scribes and Pharisees, being astonished with the sudden news of his rising
again, confirmed unto them by their own Soldiers that saw it, found no
other way to resist the fame thereof, but only by saying, (as all their
posterity do unto this day) that his Disciples came by night, and stole away
his body while the soldiers were a sleep. But what likeli-hoode or
possibility can there be in this? for first, it is e^ident to all the world,
that his Apostles themselves, (who were the heads of all the rest) were so
dismayed, discomforted, and dejected at that time, as they durst not once go
out of the door, for which cause only those seely women, who for their sex
esteemed themselves more free from violence, presumed alone to visit the
Sepulcher, which no one man durst do for fear of the Soldiers: until by
those women they were informed, that the fore-sayd band of Soldiers were
terrified and put to flight by Christ's Resurrection.

And then how was it likely, Great improbabilities.
that men so much amazed and overcome with fear, should adventure to steal
away a dead body from a Guard of Soldiers that kept it? or if their hearts
had served them to adventure so great a danger: what hope or probability had
there been of success? especially, considering the said body lay in a new
Sepulcher of stone, shut up, locked, and fast sealed by the Magistrate?

How was it possible (I say) that his Disciples should come thither? break up
the Monument? take ou^ his body? and carry the same away, never after to be
seen or found, without espial of some one amongst so many that attended
there? Or if this were possible, (as in reason it is not) yet what profit,
what pleasure, what comfort could they receive heerby? We see that the
Apostles and Disciples of his, who were so abandoned of life and heart in his
passion: after two days only they were so changed, as life and death can be
no more contrary.

For whereas before they kept home in all fear, and durst appear no where,
except among their own private friends: The great change in Jesus Disciples by
his resurrection
now they came forth into the streets and common places, and avouched with all
alacrity, and irresistible constancy, even in the faces and hea^ing of their
greatest enemies, that Jesus was risen from death to life; that they had seen
him, and enjoyed his presence. And that for testimony and confirmation
hereof, they were most ready to spend their lives. And could all this (trow
you) proceed only of a dead body, which they had gotten by stealth into their
possession? would not rather the presence and sight of such a body, so torn,
mangled, and deformed, as Jesus body was, both upon the Cros^e and before: have
rather dysmayed them more, then have given him any comfort? Yes truely^ And
therefore Pilate the Governor, The examination of the matter by Pilate.
considering these circumstaunces, and that it was unlikely, that either the
body should be stolen away without priuity of the Soldiers, or if it had been,
that it should yield such life, heart, consol^tion, and courage to the ste^lers:
began to give ear more diligently to ye matter; and calling unto him the
Soldiers that kept ye watch, understood by them the whole truth of the
accident, to wit, that in their sight and presence, Jesus was risen out of his
Sepulcher to life, and that at his rising, there was so dreadful an earthquake,
with trembling and opening of Sepulchers round about; such skryches, cries,
and commotion of all Elements: as they durst not abide longer, but ran and
told the Jewish Magistrates thereof, who being grea^ly discontented (as it
seemed) with the advertisement, gave them money to say, that while they were
sleeping, the body was stolen away from them by his Disciples^

All this wrote Pilate presently to his Lord Tyberius, Pilats Letters to
Tyberius, and his pro^eeding therevppon.
who was then Emperor of Rome. And he sent withal, the particular
examinations and confessions of diverse others, that had seen and spoken with
such as were risen from death at that time, and had appeared to many of their
acquaintance in Jerusalem, assuring them also of the Resurrection of Jesus.
Which information, when Tyberius the Emperor had considered, he was greatly
moved therewith, and proposed to the Senate, that Jesus might be admitted among
the rest of the Roman Gods: offering his own consent, with the privilege of
his supreme royal suffrage ^o that de^ree. But ye Senate in no wi^e would
agree thereunto. Whereupon, Tyberius being offended, gave license to all men to
believe in jesus that would: and forbid upon pain of death, that any Officer
or other, should molest or trouble such, as bare good affection, zeale^ or
reverence to that name. Thus much testifies Tertullian against the Gentiles,
Tertul. in Apolog. pro Christ.
of his own knowledge, who living in Rome a learned man, and pleader of
causes, diverse years before he was a Christian, (which was about one hundred
and foure-score years after our Savior Christ his ascension,) had great
ability by reason of the honor of his family, learning, and place wherein he
lived, to see and know the Records of the Romans. And the same does affirm
also Egisippus, Egesip. lib. 1. hist. Eusebius. lib. 4, cap. 21, Ruff. li. 1, cap.
22.
another ancient W^yter, of no less authority then Tertullian, before whom
he lived.

Neither only diverse Gentiles had this opinion of Jesus Resurrection again
from death, The opinion of ye wiser sort of Jews, touching Jesus resurrection
at that time.
but also sundry Jews of great credit and wisdom, at that time were enforced
to believe it: notwithstanding it pleased not God to give them so much grace as
to become Christians.

This appears plainly by the learned Josephus, who writing his story not
above forty years after Christ's passion, took occasion to speak of Jesus
and of his Disciples. And after he had showed how he was crucified by Pilate,
at ye instance of the Jews, and that for all this, his Disciples ceased not to
love him sti^l: he adioyneth for^h-with these words; Iosep. lib. 14, antiq. ca.
4,
Id^irco illis tertio die vita resumpta, denuo apparuit. That is, for this love
of his Disciples, he appeared unto them again the third day, when he had
resumed life unto him. Which express, plaine^ and resolute words, we may in
reason take, no^ as the confession only of Josephus, but as the common
judgment, opinion and sentence, of all the dyscreete and sober men of that
time, laid down and recorded by this Historiographer. In whose days there
were yet many Christians alive, that had seen and spoken with Jesus after his
Resurrection; and infinite Jews, that had heard the same protested by their
Fathers, brethren, kins-folkes and friends, who had been themselves eye
witnesses thereof.

Of Jesus ascension.
AND thus having declared and proved the Resurrection of our Savior Jesus,
both how it was foreshewed, as also fulfilled: there remains nothing more of
necessity to be said in this Section. For that whosoever sees and
acknowledges, that Jesus being dead, could raise himself again to life, will
easily believe also, that he was able likewise to ascend up to heaven. Whereof
notwithstanding, Acts, 1,
S. Luke alleges one hundred and twenty witnesses at the least, in whose
presence he ascended from the top of the Mount Oliuet, after forty days space,
which he had spent with them from the time of his resurrection.

He alleges also the appearing of two Angels among all the people for
testimony thereof. Likelihoods of truth.
He names the day and place, when, and where it happened. He recounteth the
very words that Jesus spoke at his ascension.

He tells the manner how he ascended, and how a Cloud came down, and
received him into it out of their sight. He declares what the multitude did,
whether they went, and in what place they remained after their departure thence.

And finally, he sets down so many particulers, as it had been the easiest
matter in the world, for his enemies to have refuted his narration, if all had
not been true. Neither was there any to receive more damage by the falsehoode
thereof, then himself, and those of his profession, if the matter had been
feigned.

Wherefore to conclude at length this treatise of the birth, The conclusion of
this second Section.
life, doctrine, actions, death, resurrection, and ascension of Jesus: seeing
nothing has happened in the same, which was not fore-tolde by ye Prophets of
GOD: nor any thing foreshewed by the same Prophets concerning the Messiah,
which was not fulfilled most exactly, within the compass and course of Jesus
abode upon earth: we may most certainly assure our selves, that as GOD can
neither foretell an untruth, nor yield testimony to the same, so can it not
be, but that these things which we have showed to have been so manifestly
fore-prophecied, and so evidently accomplished, must needs assure us, ye Jesus
was the true Messiah. Which thing shall yet more particulerly appear, by that
which ensued by his power and virtue, after his ascension: which shall be the
argument of the next Section which follows.

How Jesus proved his Deity, after his departure to heaven. SECT. 3.
AS by the deeds and actions of JESUS while he was upon the earth, compared
with the predictions of Gods Prophets from time to time: The contents of this
third Section.
he has been declared in the former Sections to be the true Messiah and
Savior of the world; so in this that now we take in hand, shall the same be
showed by such things as insued after his ascension and departure from this
world. Wherein his power and Deity appeared more manifestly, (if it may be so
spoken,) then in other his works which he wrought in his life. In which kind,
albeit I might treat of many and almost infinite branches, yet for order and
breuities sake, I mean only to take in consideration these few that ensue.
Wherein not only the power of Jesus, but also his love, his care and
providence, and most perfect accomplishment of all his promis^s, and finally,
the justification of al his speeches, prophecies, and doctrines upon earth have
declared.

And to reduce what is to be said herein to some order and method, The
division of the particular considerations ensuing.
it is to be noted, yt in the first place shall be considered the sustentation,
protection, increase, and continuation of Christ's little Church and kingdom,
that himself first planted and left upon earth. The second consideration,
shall be of his Apostles and their actions. The third of his Evangelists. The
fourth of his Witnesses and Martyrs throughout the world. The fifth shall treat
of the kingdom of infernal powers, beaten down by his virtue. The sixth, of
the punishment and just revenge that lighted upon his enemies, who most
impugned his divine person in the world. The seventh and last, shall declare
the fulfilling of al such Prophecies and predictions, as proceeded from his
divine mouth, while he was conversant upon earth.

The first Consideration.
NOw then for the first, it is to be considered, Christ's Church.
that as JESUS departure out of this world from the Mount Oliuet, S. Luke
reports, that all the multitude of his followers, which there had beheld his
ascension into heaven, returned back together into the City of Jerusalem, and
there remained in one house together, continuing in prayer and expectation what
should become of them, The whole City was bent against them: themselves were
pore and simple people: and diverse of them women: Lands or revenues they had
none to maintain them: nor friends in Court to give them conntenannce against
their enemies. The name of Jesus was most odious: and whoso^uer did favor him,
was counted an enemy to the state. There wanted not (perhaps) among them, who
considering the great multitude, The state of christ's first Church.
would imagine with themselves what should become of them: where they should
find to maintain and sustain them, what should be the end of that ^eeble
Congregation? For abroad they durst not go, for fear of persecution; and
continue long together they might not, for want of necessaries. Besides that,
every hour they expected to be molested and drawn forth by Catch-poles and
other Officers. And albeit in these distresses, the fresh memory of Jesus, and
his sweet promises made unto them at his departure: as also the delectable
presence of his blessed Mother, and her often exhortations and encouragements
unto them, did comfort them generally as may be supposed: yet, to him that by
human reason should ponder and weigh their present state and condition, it
could not choose but seem hard, and no ways durable.

But behold upon the sudden, when they had continued now ten days
together, and might by all probability find themselves in very high degree of
temporal distresses, Jesus performed his promise of sending them a Comforter,
which was the holy Ghost. The coming of the holy Ghost, and what comfort he
brought with him. Acts, 2.
By whose coming, besides the internal joy and incredible alacrity and
exultation of mind, they received also fortitude and audacity, to go forth
into the world. They received the gift of tongues, enabling them to concourse
and deal with all sorts of people. They received wisdom and learning, with
most wonderful illumination in highest mystery, whereby to preach, to teach,
and convince their adversaries. They received the gift of Prophecy to
foretell things to come, together with the power of working signs and
miracles, whereby the whole world remained astonished.

And for a taste or earnest penny of that which should ensue, concer^ning the
infinite increase of that little Congregation: they saw thre^ thousand of
their adversaries con^uerted to them in one day, by a Se^^mon of S. Peter.

Which increase went on so fa^^ for the time that ensued: that within forty
years after, the Gentiles themselves confessed, that the branches of this
Congregation, were spredde over all the world, and began to put in fear the
very Roman Emperors themselves. Suet. in vita Nero. Co^n. Ta^it. lib. 5. hist.
Whereof not long after, a man that was as learned as ever was any, converted
from Paganism to Christianity, bears record in his de^ence to an Emperor
and his Officers, who according to the nature of persecutors, accounted
Christians for Traitors and enemies to his state and dignity. Which vulgar
objection, this fore-sayde learned man refuteth in these words.

If we were enemies to your estate, Tertul in apol. ad genesis
you might well seek new Cities and Countries whereof to bear government;
for that you should have in your Empire more enemies then Citizens. We have
filled you Cities, your Towns, your Provinces, your Islands, your Castles,
your Fortresses, your Tents, your Camps, your Courts, your Palaces, your
Senats, and your Market places. Only we have left your Idolatrous Temples unto
your selves: all other pla^es are full of Christians. If we were enemies, what
dangerous wars might we make against you, (albeit our number were far
less,) who esteem so little of our lives, as to offer our selves daily to be
slain at your hands? This then is your safety in very deed, not your
persecuting of us, but that we are honest, patient, and obedient; and that it
is more lawful in Christian Religion, to be killed, then to kill.

By which words of Tertullian, in this first beginning and infancy (as it
were) of Christian Religion, The wonderful quick increase of Christ's Church.
(for he lived in ye second age after Christ) we see how this little flock and
kingdom of JESUS was increased, notwithstanding all the resistance and violence
of the world against it^ Which appears by the same Ter^tullian, to have
been such: In Prefa. Apolog.
and was even at that time when he wrote those words (the fourth persecution
being then in most fury,) as all the malefactors of the world together had
not so much rigor showed a^gainst them: as had the most inno^cent Christian
that lived, for confe^sing only that name and Religion^

This then declared most apparen^^ly, that it could not proceed but (...) some
divine power and supernatural assistaunce, that in so short a space, amidst
the contradiction and oppositions of so many adversaries, among the whyppes,
swords, and tortures, of so great, potent, and violent persecutions, this
poor, simple, and feeble Congregation should pearse through, and augment it
self so strongly. Especially if we consider the outward means of this
incre^se, The increase of Christians against nature.
wherein there was nothing to allure or content man's nature: nothing gorgius,
nothing delectable, nothing to please or entertain sensuality.

We read of an Emperor, that taking in hand to co^quer the world, made this
Proclamation for winning men unto his party. Plut. in Apoth. Prisc. regum. The
Proclamation of Cyrus, Monarch of Media.
Who soever will come and be my servant: if he be a foote-man, I will make him
a horseman; if he be a horseman, I will make him ride with Coches; if he be a
Farmour, I will make him a Gentleman, if he possess a cottage, I will give him
a Village; if he have a Village, I will give him a City; if he be a Lord of a
City, I will make him Prince of a Region or Country. And as for gold, I will
pour it forth unto them by heaps and weight, and not by number.

This was the Proclamation and Edict of Cyrus to his followers, very glorious
(as we see) in pomp of words and ostentation of style. Let us now compare the
Proclamation of Jesus, Jesus Proclamation.
whose entrance and Praeface was: Paenitentia^ agite, Repent ye. And then it
follows: Math, 3,
In hoc mundo pressuram habebitis: John. 16,
in this world you shall receive affliction. And then after again; They shall
whyp and murder you. Math, 10.
And yet further: You shall be hateful in the sight of all men for my sake.
Then is there adioyned^ He that loves his life, shall lose his soul. Luke, 9.
After that ensues, He that will follow me, must bear his Cross. And
finally, the conclusion is; Luke, 14,
He that comes to me and does not hate his Father, his Mother, his wife, his
children, his brethren, his sisters and his own life for my sake, he is not
worthy to be my servant.

This was the entertainment proposed by Jesus, to such as would come and serve
under his Banner; with express prostestation, yt himself was sent into the
world, Math, 5,
not to bring peace, rest, and ease to flesh and blood, but rather to be the
cause of sword, fire, trybulation, combat, and enmity. And yet with these
cold offers, presented to the world by pore, abject, and most contemptible
Officers; and by this doctrine, so cross and opposite to man's nature,
inclynation, and sensual appetite, he gained more hearts unto him, within the
space of forty years, as has been said, then ever did Monarch in the world
possess loving Subjects, by what-soeuer temporal allurement they did or might
propose. Which argues most evidently, the omnipotent puissaunce of him, that
contrary to man's reason, could bring to pass so miraculous a conquest.

The second Consideration.
THere follows in order, the consideration of Christ's Apos^les: Of Christ's
Apostles.
which in some respect, may be said more strange and wonderful then the
former, in that they being both rude, simple, and unlearned men, (and for the
most part of the baser sort,) should be chosen and assigned to so great a
work, as was the conversion of all Countries and Nations, and to stand in
combat with the power, learning and wisdom of all the world. Neither only
had they to contend and fight against they^ enemies, but also to direct,
govern, and menage all those, who should be adjoined to their Masters
kingdom^ To which charge they seemed so untoward and insufficient, in all that
time wherein they lived with him here upon earth: as by their questions and
demands made unto him a little before his passion, they might appear to have
learned very little, in three whole years conue^sa^ion and instruction: and in
very deed, to be incapable of so high mysteries and ^unctions.

Yet notwi^hstanding, these men, who of themselves were weak and impotent,
after strength and confirmation received by ye descending of Gods holy Spirit
into them, became so perfect, able, and most excellent men, as they brought the
whole world in admiration of them. Not only by the most exquisite perfection
of their doctrine, (wherein on a sudden, without study, they excelled, and
convinced the greatest Philosophers then living,) but also, and that
especially, by the rare and stupendous miracles which they wrought in the
sight of al men. The contemplacion whereof, Acts, 2,
as S. Luke reports, drove the beholders, not only into great marvel, but
also into fear and exceeding terror.

And for example, he recounteth the restoring of a lame man at ye Temple gate
of Jerusalem, The Apostl^s miracles.
which had been a Cripple for the space of forty years and more, and this
miracle was done and testified in the presence and knowledge of all the
City. He records also the dreadful death of Annanias and Saphira, by the
only speech and voice of S. Peter: Acts. 3,
as in like manner, the healing of infinite sick people, by the presence and
shadow of the same Apostle. He reports also the most wonderful deliverance
of the said Saint Peter, Acts. 5,
out of the hands and prison of Herod by the Angel of God. The variety of
languages, which all the Apostles spoke. The visible descending of the holy
Ghost upon al such, on whom the said Apostles did but lay their hands. 1.
Cor, 15, 2, Cor, 12, Acts, 9, 22, and 26,
The miraculous conversion of S. Paul, by Christ's appearing unto him in the
way, when he went to persecute. Of which miracle, S. Paul himself protests in
every place afterward, and once especially, in an open audience and judgment,
before K. Agrippa, and Festus Governor of Jury.

These miracles and many more are recorded by S. Luke, whereof some part were
seen by himself, and the rest most evident to all the world, as done in
public before infinite witnesses. Neither is it possible they could be
^ayned, The miracl^s reported of the Apostles, could not be feigned.
for that (as in the like I have before noted) it had been most easy to have
refelled them, and thereby to have discredited ye whole pro^eedinges of
Christian Religion in their first beginnings. As for example; if the miracle of
Saint Peter, being delivered forth of the hands and prison of Herod Agrippa,
had any way been to be touched with falsehood, how many would there have been
of Herodes Officers, Courtiers, servants and friends, that for defense of
their Princes honor, (so deeply tainted by this narration of Saint Luke,
published not long after the thing was done) how many (I say) would have
offered themselves to refute and disgrace the writer hereof, having so
pregnant means by public record to do the same; So again, whereas the same
S. Luke reports of his own knowledge, that in a City of Macedonie, named
Philippi, Act, ^6.
Saint Paul and Silas after many miracles done, were whypped and put in
prison, with a dilligent guarde in the lowest prison of all: their feet lo^ked
fast in the stocks of Timber, and that at mydnyght, when Paul and Silas began
to pray, the whole prison was shaken, and all the doors thrown open, as also
the gyues, not only of those two, but of all the other prisoners upon a
sudden burst in sunder: and that thereupon, not only the Iaylor cast himself
at the feet of S. Paul, but the Magistrates also, (who the day before had
caused them to be whipped,) came and asked them pardon, and humbly intrea^ed them
to depart out of their City. This story (I say) if it had been false, there
needed no more for confutation thereof, but only to have examined ye whole
city of Philippi, which could have testified the contrary.

And yet among so many adversaries, and eager impugners of Christian Religion,
as Gods enemy styrred up in the Primative Church, of all sorts and sects of
people: no one ever appeared, that durst attempt to take in hand, None ever
durst impugn the miracles of the Apostles, but by calumniation.
the particular improuing of these or ye like miracles, but rather confessing
the facts, sought always to discredit them by other sinister calumniations:
namely and commonly, that they were wrought by the deceits and sleightes of
Arte-Magick.

Thus said the Jews of the miracles of Jesus, Math, 12.
and so said Julian the Apostata, of the wonderful strange things done by
Saint Peter and S. Paul; Apud Cyril. lib, 1, cont. Julian.
affirming the^ to have been the most expert in Magic, of any that ever
lived: Augu, lib, de ^era Relig.
and that Christ wrote a special book of that profession, and dedicated the
same to Peter and Paul: whereas notwithstanding it is most evident, that Paul
was a persecutor diverse years after Christ's departure.

Eusebius. lib. cont. Hiero.
One Hierocles also wrote a book, wherein he feigned Appolonius Tyanaeus to have
done the like miracles by Magic, which Christ and his Apostles did by divine
power. And finally, it is a general opinion, that both Nero and Julian, gave
themselves so extremely to the study of that vain Science, as no men ever
did the like; upon emulation only of the miracles done in Rome by Peter and
Paul when Nero lived, and by other Saints and Disciples in the time of Julian.

But what was the end? Pliny that was a Pagan, Plin. lib. 30. Not. Hist. cap.
1.
writes thus of Nero; that as no man ever labored more then he in that
Science, so no man ever left a more certain testimony of the marvelous
exceeding vanity thereof. The like in effect writes Zosimus of Julian,
Zosimus in vita Julian.
albeit himself a malicious Heathen. And if it were not written, yet their
several extraordinary calamities, and most miserable deaths, which by all
their Magic they could not foresee, does sufficiently testify ye same unto
us; especially the last words of Julian, Niceph. lib. 10. c. 35. hist.
Vicisti Galilaee, vicisti. Thou have won (o Galilaean) thou have gotten the
victory. Acknowledging thereby, as well the truth of Christ's miracles and of
his followers, as also the vanity, folly, and madness of his own endeavors.

Thus then went forward Christ's Apostles, The success of the Apostles.
and preached him every where throughout the world; Domino cooperante and
sermonem co^firmante, sequentibus signis: Mark, 16,
that is, (as S, Mark affirms) the Lord Jesus working with them, and
confirming their preaching by signs and miracles. In respect of which benign
assistance of Jesus in their actions, S. Luke says further: Acts, 14,
They dealt most confidently in the Lord: his word of grace giving testimony
unto their doings, and showing forth signs and most prodigious wonders by
their hands. No persecution, no terror, no threats of enemies, no
dyfficultie, or danger that might occur, could stay them from their course of
setting forth Christ's name and glory. And they were so assured of the truth,
The assurance of the Apostles.
by the inward illuminations which they had, and by this certain testimony of
Gods favor and assistance in doing miracles: as one of them writes thus; 1.
John, 1,
That which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which we have
beheld, which our hands have handled of the word of life: that we do testify
and announce unto you. And another who had S. Paul.
been a grievous persecutor, and was converted without any conference with any
Christian in the world; said, Rom, 8,
of Jesus that was dead and risen again, that neither tribulation, nor
distress, nor famine, nor beggary, nor danger, nor persecution, nor dint of
sword, could daunt him from the service of such a Master. And in another place
he says, that he esteemed al things of this world, wherein a man might glory,
to be as very dounge and detriments, in respect of the eminent knowledge, Phil.
3.
(that is his word) of his Lord Jesus Christ. In which very name he took so
exceeding great delight: as in a few Epistles which he left written, he is
observed to have used this sentence, Dominus noster Jesus Christus, above two
hundred times.

Neither endured this in these Apostles for a time only, The joyful ending of
the Apostles.
but al their lives, which as they spent the same with alacrity in the service
of Jesus, so in the end they gave up the same most cheerfully, 2, Tim, 4, 1,
These, 2,
to what-so-euer death presented it self, for confirmation and sealing of
their former doctrine; never so full of confidence, courage, and consolation, as
at that hour, nor never so boldly denouncing their Master, or talking so
joyfully of rewards, Crowns and kingdoms, as at the very last instant and
vp-shot of their worldly combat.

This then declares most manifestly, that the actions of these men, proceeded
not of humane spirit, nor could be performed by the power of man, but by the
divine force and supernatural assistance of their Lord and God, whom they
confessed,

The third Consideration.
AND thus much in brevity of Christ's Apostles. Of the Evangelists.
There ensue next his Evangelists: that is, such men as have le^t unto us
written, his birth, life, doctrine, and death. Wherein it is to be noted, that
Jesus being God, took a different way from the custom of man, in delivering
unto us his Laws and precepts. For that men, who have been Lawmakers unto
the world, knew no surer way of publishing their Law, and procuring
authority to the same, the^ to write the^ with their own hands, and in their
life time to establishe their promulgation. So Lycurgus, Solon, and others
among the Graecians, Numa to the Romans, Mahomet to the Sarasines: and diverse
other in like manner. But Jesus to show his divine power in directing the pen
and style of his Evangelists, would not leave any thing written by himself,
Jesus left nothing written by himself.
but passed from this world in simplicity and silence, with out any further
show or ostentation of his own doings: meaning notwithstanding by his eternal
wisdom, that the prophecy of Ezechiel should be fulfilled, Ezech, 1,
which fore-signified the being of his four irrefragable witnesses, which day
and night without rest, should preach, extol, and magnify their Lord and
Master to the worlds end.

Four then were fore-prophecied, The different qualities and circumstances of
the four Evangelists.
and four as we see by Gods providence, were provided to fulfill the same
prophecy. The first and last are two Apostles, that wrote as they had seen.
The two middle are two disciples, who registered things as they had understood
by conference with the Apostles. The first Gospel was written by an Apostle,
to give light and open the way to all the rest. And the last in like manner was
written by an Apostle, to give authority and confirmation to all the former.
The first was written in the Hebrewe or Jewish tongue, for that Jesus actions
were done in that country, to the end that thereby, either the whole Nation
might believe them, or the obstinate impugn them. The other three were written
in the public tongues of all other Nations, that is in the Greek and Roman
languages, if it be true ( See Armacan. lib. 9 de quest.
which diverse hold) that S. Marks Gospel was first written in Latin.

They wrote their stories in diverse countries, each one remaining far distant
from another, Circumstances of truth in our Evangelists.
and yet agreed they all (as we see) most exactly, in the very same narration.
They wrote in diverse times, the one after the other, and yet the latter did
neither correct nor reprehende any thing in the former. They published they^
stories, when infinite were alive that knew the factes, and many more that
desired to impugn them. They set down in most of their particular
narrations, the time, the day, the hour, the place, the Village, the house,
the persons, the men, the women, and other the like. Which circumstaunces, the
more they are in number, the more easy to be refuted if they were not true.
Neither did they in Jury, write of things done in India, but in the same
country it self, in Towns and Cities that were publicly known, in
Bethania and Bethsaida, Villages hard by Jerusalem: in the Suburbs and hyls
about the city, in such a street, at such a Gate, in such a porche of the
Temple, at such a fish-poole, which al people in Jerusalem did every day behold.

They published their writing in their own life time, The publishing of our
Gospels.
and preached in word, so much as in writing they had recorded. They permitted
the same to the judgment and examination of all Christ's church, especially of
the Apostles, who were able to dis^erne every least thing therein contained. So
S. Mark set forth his Gospel, Hier. in catalog scrip. Eccles.
by the instruction and approbation of S. Peter, as also did S. Luke by the
authority of S. Paul. They altered not their writings afterward, as other
authors are wont in their latter editions, nor ever corrected they one jot of
that which they had first set down. And that which never happened in any
other wrytings in the world besides, nor ever Prince or Monarch was able to
bring to pass, for c^edite of his Edicts or sanctions: they gave their lives
for de^ence and justifying of that which they had written.

The manner of style in our Evangelists.
Their manner of writing, is sincere and simple, without all Art,
amplification, or rethoricall exhortation. They flatter none, no not Jesus
himself, who^ they most adore, nor in confessing him to be their God and
Creator^ do they conceal his infirmities of flesh, Math, 21, Mark, 2.
in that he was man: as his hunger and thyrst: his being weary: John, 7.
how he wept: his passions of fear, and the like. Luke, 19.
So likewise in the Apostles that were the Governors, Superiors, and heads of
the rest: do these Evangelists dyssemble, hyde, or pass over no such things as
were de^ects, and might seem to worldly eyes to turn to their dyscredites. As
for example, how Christ rebuked them for their dulnes in vnd^rstanding: Mark,
15.
how after long instruction, John, 10, 11, and 20,
they proposed notwithstanding, very rude and impertinent questions unto him;
how Thomas would not believe the attestation of his fellows: how S. John and
S. James, the sons of Zebedee, ambiciously solicited to have the pre-eminence
of sitting nearest to Christ in his glory: which latter clause, being set
down cleerelie by S. Mark, Mark, 10,
while yet S. John the Apostle was living, the same was never denied, nor taken
ill by the said Apostle, neither was S. Marks Gospel any thing the less
approved by him, albeit he lived longest, and wrote last of all the rest.

Nay, which is more, and greatly (no doubt) to be observed; A special point to
be observed in our Evangelists.
these Evangelists were so sincere and religious in their narrations, as they
noted especially the imperfections of themselves, and of such other as they
principally respected. So S. Matthew names himself Matthew the Publican. Math,
10.
And so S. Mark, Mark, 14.
being Peter's Disciple, records particulerlie how S. Peter thry^e denied his
Lord and Master. S. Luke that was Scholar and dependent of S. Paul, Acts, 15.
makes mention alone of the differences between Paul and Barnabas, and in the
story of S. Stephens death, after al his narration ended, he adds a clause
that in humane judgment might have been left out, to wit, Saulus erat
co^sentiens neci eius, Acts, 17,
Saul was consenting and culpable of Stephens death. Whereby we may perceive
most perspicuously, that as these men were plain, sincere, and simple, and
far from presuming to devise any thing of themselves, so were they religious,
and had scruple to pass over, or leave out any thing of the truth in favor of
themselves, or of any other whatsoever.

These men's wrytings then, were published and received for undoubted truth, by
all that lived in the very same age, and were privy to the particulers therein
contained. They were coppyed abroad into infinite men's hands, and so conserved
with all care and reverence, as holy and divine Scripture. They were read in
churches throughout all countries and Nations: expounded preached and taught by
all Pastors, and commentaries made upon them by holy Fathers from time to
time. So that do doubt can be made, No doubt but that we have ye true writings
of our Evangelists.
but that we have the very same wrytings incorrupt as the Authors left them:
for that it was impossible for any enemy to corrupt so many copies over the
world, without dyscouery and resistance. And the same very text, words, and
sentences, which from age to age the learned Fathers do allege out of these
Scriptures, we find them now, as they had them at that time. As for example,
S. John that lived longest of all the Apostles and Evangelists, had among other
Scholars and Auditors, Papias, Ignatius, and Policarpus, all which agree of
the four Gospels and other writings left unto us in the new Testament,
affirming S. John to have approved the same. These me^ were Masters again to
Iustinius Martyr, Irenaeus and other, whose wrytings remain unto us. And if
they did not, yet their sayings and judgments touching the Scriptures, are
recorded unto us by Eusebius and other Fathers of the next age after, Eusebius.
lib, 5. hist. cap. 15.
and so from hand to hand until our days. So that of this there can be no
more doubt, then whether Rome, Constantinople, Jerusalem, and other such
renowned cities, known to all the world at this day, be the very same
whereof Authors have treated so much in ancient times.

The fourth Consideration.
AND thus much of Christ's Evangelists, for whose more credit, and for
confirmation of things by the^ recorded: his divine providence preordained,
that infinite witnesses (whom we call Martyrs Of Martyrs.
) should offer up their blood in the Primative Church and after. Whereas for no
other doctrine, profession, or Religion in the world, the like was ever heard
of; albeit among the Jews in the time of the Machabees, Maca. lib. 1. and 2.
and at some other times also, when that Nation for their sins were afflicted
by Heathen Princes, some few were tyrannized and injuriously put to death; yet
commonly, and for the most part, this was rather of barbarous cruelty in the
Pagans for their resistaunce, then directly for hatred of Jewish Religion. And
for the number there is no doubt, but that more Christians were put to death
within two months for their belief through out the world, then were of Jews
for two thousand years before Christ's coming: which is undoubtedly a matter
very wonderful, considering that the Jewish Religion impugned no less the
Pagan Idolatry, then does the doctrine of the Christians. But this came to
pass that Christ's words might be fulfilled, who said; I come no^ ^o bring
peace, but the sword. ^
And a^gaine, I send you ^oorth as sheep among wolves. That is to say, to be
torn and harried, and your blood to be devoured.

In which extreme and most incredible sufferings of christians, three points
are worthy of great consideration. Points ^o be considered in our Martyrs.
The first, what infinite multitudes of al estates, conditions, sex,
qualities, and age, did suffer daily, for testimony of this truth. The second,
what intolerable and unaccustomed See the narration of Phil^as, Bishop in
Africa, touching this point, alleged by Euse. lib. 8, hist. c. 11, and 12.
torments, not heard of in the world before, were devised by Tyrants for
afflicting this kind of people. The third, what invincible courage and
unspeakable alacrity, the Christians showed, in bearing out these
afflictions, which the enemies themselves could not attribute, but to some
divine power and supernatural assistance.

And for this latter point of comfort in their sufferings, I will allege only
this Testimony of Tertullian against the Gentiles, who objected, that wicked
men suffered also as well as Christians; ^he singu^er alacrity of Christians in
their sufferings.
whereto this learned Doctor made answer in these words. Truth it is, yt many
men are prone to ill, and do suffer for the same: but yet dare they not defend
their evil to be good, Tertul. in Apol. cap. 1.
as Christians do their cause. For that every evil thing by nature, does
bring with it either fear or shame: and therefore we see, that malefactors,
albeit they love evil, yet would they not appear so to the world, but desire
rather to lie in covert. They tremble when they are taken, and when they are
accused, they deny all, and do scarce oftentimes confess their doings upon
torments. And finally, when they are condemned, they lament moan, and do
impute their hard fortune, to destiny, or to the Planets^ But the Christian,
what does he like to this? is there any man ashamed? or does any man repent
him when he is taken, except it be for that he was not taken rather? if he be
noted by the enemy for a Christian, he glories in the same; if he be accused,
he defends not himself; if he be asked the question, he confesses it
willingly; if he be condemned, he yields thanks. What evil is there then in
the Christian cause, which lacks the natural sequel of evil? I mean fear,
shame, tergiuersation, repentance, sorrow, and deploration? What evil (I say)
can this be deemed, whose guiltiness is joy? whose accusation is desire? whose
punishment is happiness?

Hitherto are the words of learned Tertullian, who was an eye witness of that
he wrote, Jesus assistan^^ to his Martyrs.
and had no small part in the cause of those that suffered, being himself in
yt place and state, as daily he might expect to taste of the same affliction. To
which combat, how ready he was^ may appear by diverse places of this his
Apology, wherein he utters (besides his zeal and fervor) a most confident
security, and certain assurance of Jesus assistance, by that which he had
seen performed to infinite other, in their greatest distresses, from the same
Lord before. So that nothing does more acertaine us of the divine power and
omnipotency of JESUS, then the fortitude invisible, which above all human
reason, force, and nature, he imparted to his Martyrs.

The fifth Consideration.
AFter which consideration, there comes to be weighed, the fifth point before
mentioned, which is, of the same power and omnipotency of Jesus, declared and
exercised upon the Spyrits infernal. The subjection of Spyrits.
Which thing, partly may appear by the Oracles alleged in the end of the
former Section, (wherein those spyrits fore-tolde, that an Hebrew child should
be borne, to the utter subversion and ruin of their tyrannical dominion,) and
much more at large the same might be declared, by other answers and Oracles
uttered after Christ's nativity, and registered in the Monuments even of the
Heathens themselves. Whereof he that desires to see more ample mention
(especially out of Porphyrie who then was living,) let him read Eusebius sixth
Book, De preparatione Euangelica, where he shall find store, and namely, that
Apollo many times exclaimed^ Hei mihi, congemiscite: Hei mihi: hei mihi:
Oraculorum defecit me claritas. Woe unto m^e, lament ye with me; woe unto me,
woe unto me, for that the honor of Oracles has now forsaken me. Which
complaints and lamentations, are nothing else but a plain confession that Jesus
was he, of whom a Prophet said diverse ages before: Soph, 2,
Attenuabit omnes Deos terrae: he shall wear out and bring to beggary, all the
Gods or Idols of the earth. This confessed also the wicked Spyrits themselves,
when at Christ's appearing in Jury, they came unto him diverse times, and
besought him, not to afflict or torment them, nor command the^, presently to
return unto hell, but rather to permit them some little time of entertainment
in the Sea, or Mountains, or among heardes of Swyne, or the like. Which
confession they made in the sight of all the world, and declared the same
afterward by their facts and deeds.

For presently upon Jesus death, and upon the preaching of his name and Gospel
throughout the world, Of the myraculous ceasing of Oracles at Christ's
appearing.
the Oracles which before were abundant in every Province and Country, were
put to silence. Whereof I might allege the testimony of very many Gentiles
themselves, as that of Iuuenall. Iuuenall.


Cessant Oracula Delphis.
Saty. 6.
All Oracles at Delphos do now cease, etc.

That also of another Poet: Excessere omnes adytis,
Lucan.
arisque relictis
Dij, quibus imperium
hoc steterat, etc.


That is, the Gods by whom this Empire stood, are all departed from their
Temples, and have abandoned their Altars and place of habitation. Strabo has
also these express words. Strab lib. Geograph.
The Oracle of Delphos at this day is to be seen in extreme beggary and
mendicitie.

Plutar. de defectu Oraculo.
And finally, Plutarch that lived within one hundred years after Christ, made a
special Book to search out the causes, why the Oracles of the Gods were
ceased in his time. And after much turning and winding many ways, resolved
upon two principal points, or causes thereof. Two insufficient causes.
The first, for that in his time, there was more store of Wisemen then before,
whose aunswers might stand in steed of Oracles; and the other, that
peradventure the spyrites which were accustomed to yield Oracles, were by
length of time grown old and dead. Both which reasons, in the very common
sense of all men, must needs be false, and by Plutarch himself, cannot stand
with probability. For first, in his Books which he wrote of the lives of
ancient famous men, he confesses, that in such kind of wisdom as he most
esteemed, they had not their equals among their posterity. Secondly, in his
Treatise of Philosophy, he passes it for a ground, that spirits not depending
of material bodies, cannot die, or wexe old, and therefore of necessity he
must conclude, that some other cause is to be yielded of the ceassing of these
Oracles, which cannot be but the presence and commandment of some higher
power, according to the saying of S. John, 1. John. 3.
To this end appeared the son of God, that he might dissolve (or
overthrow) the works of the devil.

Neither did Jesus this alone in his own pers^n, but gave also power and
authority to his Disciples and followers to do the like, according to their
commission in S. Mathewes Gospel: Math, 10^
Super omnia Daemonia et spiritus immundos, etc. You shall have authority over
al devils and unclean spyrits. Which commission, how they afterward put it in
execution, the whole world yields sufficent testimony. And for examples
sake only, I will allege in this place an offer or challenge, made for the
trial or proof thereof, by Tertullian to the Heathen Magistrates and
persecutors of his time, his words are these^

Tert. in Apol. ad genesis
Let there be brought here in presence before your trybunall seats, some
person, who is certainly known to b^ possessed with a wicked spirit, and let
that spirit ^e comma^n^ed by a Christian to s^eak and he shall as truly
con^esse himself to be a de^il^ as (...) other times to you, A most co^fide^t
o^fer, made ^y Ter^u^l^an.
he will falsel^ say he is a God. Aga^ne, at (...) let there be bro^ght forth
one of these (your Priests or Prophets) that will seem to be possessed with a
divine spirit, I mean of those that speak gasping, etc. (in whom you imagine
your Gods to talk,) and except that spyrite also, (commanded by us) do
confess himself to be a devil, (being afraid indeed to lie unto a
Christian) do you shed the blood of the Christians in that very place, etc.
None will lie to their own shame, but rather for honor or advantage, yet
those spyrits will not say to us, that Christ was a Magitian, as you do, nor
that he was of the common condition of men. They will not say, he was stolen out
of the Sepulcher, but they will confess, that he was the virtue, wisdom,
and word of God; that he is in heaven, and that he shall come again to be our
Judge, etc. Neither will these devils in our presence, deny themselves to be
unclean spyrits, and damned for their wickedness, and that they expect his most
horrible judgment, professing also, that they do fear Christ in GOD, and God
in CHRIST, and that they are made subject unto his Servants.

Hitherto are the words of Tertullian, containing (as I have said) a most
confident challenge, and that upon the lives and blood of al Christians, to
make trial of their power in controling those spirits, which the Romans and
other Gentiles adored as their Gods. Which offer, seeing it was made and
exhibited to the persecuters themselves, then living in Rome, well may we be
assured, that the enemy would never have omitted so notorious an advantage, if
by former experience he had not been persuaded, that the joining herein would
have turned and redounded to his own confusion.

The wonderful authorite of christians over spyrits.
And this puissant authority of Jesus imparted to Christians, extended it self
so far forth, that not only their words and commandments, but even their
very presence did shut the mouths and drive into fear the miserable Spyrites.
So Lactantius shows, Lact. li. 2. di inst. cap. 16,
that in his days, among many other examples of this thing, a seely
Seruing-man that was a christian, following his Master into a certain Temple
of Idols, the Gods cried out, that nothing could be well done, as long as that
Christian was in presence. The like records Eusebius of Dioclesian the
Emperor, who going to Apollo for an Oracle, received answer, That the just
men were the cause that he could say nothing. Euse. li. 5, de praep. Euan.
Which just men, Apollos Priests interpreted, to be meant ironically of
Christians: and therevppon Dyoclesian began his most fearce and cruel
persecution in Eusebius days. Sozomenus also writes, Sozom. lib, 3. hist.
cap. 18.
that Julian an Apostata, endeavoring with many sacrifices and co^iurations, to
draw an answer from Apollo Daphnaeus, in a famous place called Daphne, in the
suburbs of Antioch: understood at last by the Oracle, that the bones of S.
Babylas the Martyr, that lay near to the place, were the impediment why that
God could not speak. And thereupon, Julian caused the same body presently to
be removed. And finally, hereof it proceeded, that in all sacrifices,
coniurations, and other mysteries of the Gentiles, there was brought in that
phrase recorded by scoffing Lucian, Lucian in Alex.
Exeant Christiani, let Christians depart; for that while they were present,
nothing could be well accomplished.

To conclude, the Pagan Porphyrie, Porph. lib. 1. cont. Christ. apud Eusebius. li.
5. ca. 1. de praep. Eua^^
that of all other most earnestly endeavored to impugn and disgrace us
Christians, and to hold up the honor of his enfeebled Idols, yet discoursing
of the great plague that reigned most furiously in the City of Messina, in
Cicilie where he dwelt, yields this reason, why Aesculapius the God of
Physic (much adored in yt place) was not able to help them. A marvelous
confession of Porphyrie.
It is no marvel (says he) if this City so many years be vexed with the
plague, seeing that both Aesculapius and all other Gods be now departed from
it, by the coming of Christians. For since that men have begun to worship this
Jesus, we could never obtain any profit by our Gods.

Thus much confessed this Patron of Paganism, concerning the maine that his
Gods had received by Jesus ho^our. Which albeit he spoke with a m^li^ious
mind, to bring Christians in hatred and persecution thereby, yet is the
confession notable, and confirms that story which Plutarch in his forenamed
book does report; that in the latter years of the reign of the Emperor
Tyberius, A pretty story of Plutarch.
a strange voice, and exceeding horrible clamor, with hidious cries, skryches,
and howlings, were heard by many in the Grae^ian sea, complaining that the
great GOD Pan was now departed. And this Plutarch (that was a Gentile)
affirms to have been alleged and approved, Plut. de de^ectu. oracu.
before the Emperor Tyberius, who meruailed greatly thereat, and could not by
all his Divines and Soothsayers, whom he called to that consultation, gather
out any reasonable meaning of this wonderful accide^t. But we Christians,
comparing the time wherein it happened, unto the time of Jesus death and
passion, and finding the same fully to agree, may more then probably persuade
our selves, that by the death of their great God Pan, (which signifies al) was
imported ye utter overthrow of al wicked spirits and Idols upon earth.

The sixth Consideration.
AND thus has the Deity of Jesus been declared and approved by his
omnipotent power, in subduing infernal enemies. The punishment of enemies.
Now rests it for us to make manifest the same, by his like power and divine
justice, showed upon diverse of his enemies here on earth; whose greatest
punishment, albeit for the most part, he reserueth for ye life to come, yet
sometimes for manifestation of his omnipotency, (as especially it was
behoue^ul in those first days of his appearaunce in the world) he chasteneth
them also, even here on earth in the eye and sight of al men. So we read of
the most infamous and miserable death of Herod the first, Herod Ascolonita.
surnamed Ascolonita, who after his persecution of Christ in his infancy,
Iosep. lib^ 17. antiq. ca. 10. et lib. 1. de bell. Iudai. cap. 21,
and the slaughter of the infants in Bethleem for his sake: was wearied out by
a loathsome life, in fear and horror of his own wife and children: whom after
he had most cruelly murdered, was enforced also by desperation, through his
unspeakable griefs, vexations, and torments, to offer his own hand to his
own destruction, if he had not been stayed by his friends that stood about him.

Archelaus.
After him, Archelaus his eldest Son, that was a terror to Jesus at his
return from Egypt, fell also by Gods justice into marvelous calamities. For
first, being left a King by his Father, Iosep. lib, 17, antiq. ca. 15 lib. 2.
de bell. Judah. cap. 6,
Augustus would not allow or ratify that succession, but of a King made him a
Tetrarch, assigning unto him only the fourth part of that dominion which his
father had before. And then again after nine years space, took that away in
like manner, with the greatest dishonor he could devise, seazing upon all his
treasure and riches by the way of confiscation, and condemning his person to
perpetual banishment, wherein he died most myserably in Vienna in France.

Not long after this, the second son of Herod the first, named Herod
Antipas, Herod Antipas.
Tetrarch of Galilie, who put S. John Baptist to death, and scorned Jesus
before his passion, (whereat both himself and Herodias his Concubine was
present,) was deposed also by Caius the Emperor, Iosep. lib. 18. antiq. cap. 9
lib. 2, de bell. cap. 8,
(being accused by Agrippa his nearest kinseman) and most contumeliously sent
in exile, first to Lions in France, and after that, to the most deserte and
inhabitable places in Spain, where he with Herodias wandered up and down in
extreme calamity so long as they lived, and finally ended their days
abandoned of all men. In which misery also it is recorded, that the dancing
daughter of Herodias, Herodias daughter.
who had in her iolity demanded John Baptists head, being on a certain time
enforced to pass over a frosen River, Niceph. li. 1 capit, 20.
suddenly the Ise brake, and she in her fall, had her head cut off by the
same Ise, without hurting the rest of her body, to the great admiration of all
the lookers on.

The like event had another of Herod's family, named Herod Agrippa, Herod
Agrippa.
the accuser of the forenamed Herod the Tetrarch; who in his great glory and
triumph, having put to death S. James, the brother of S. John Evangelist, and
imprisoned S. Peter, was soon after in a public assembly of Princes and
Nobles at Caesaria, stricken from heaven with a most horrible disease, whereby
his body putrified, Acts, 12.
and was eaten with vermin, as both S. Luke records, and Josephus affirms.
Iosep. lib. 19. antiq. cap. 7
And the same Josephus, with no small marvel in himself, declares: that at
the very same time when he wrote his story, Lib. 18, ca. 7
(which was about threescore and ten years after the death of Herod the first)
the whole progeny and offspring, kindred and family of the said Herod, (which
he says was exceeding great, The stock of Herod soon extinguished.
by reason he had many wives together, with many children, brothers and
sisters, besides Nephews and kins-folke) were all extinguished in most
miserable sort, and gave a testimony (says Josephus) to the world, of the
most vain confidence, that men do put in human felicity.

And as the punishments lighted openly upon Jesus professed enemies in Jury:
The punishments of the Romans.
so escaped not all the Romans their chastisement; I mean such, as
especially had their hands in persecution of him, or of his followers after
hym^ For first, of Pontius Pilate that ga^e sentence of death, Pilate.
against him, we read, that after great disgrace rec^i^ed in ^urie, Eutrop.
lib, 7, hist.
he was sent home into Italy, an^ there by mani^est dysfauours showed unto
him by the Em^erour his Master, Eusebius. lib^ 2, cap, 7, hist,
fell into such des^era^ion^ as he slew himself with hi^ ^wne h^nds.

A^^ secondly o^ the very Emperou^s themsel^es, w^o lived from Ty^^^i^s (v^der
whom jesus suffered^ unto Constantine the great, under whom Christian Religion
took dominion over the world, (which contained the space of three hundred
years) very few or none escaped the manifest scourges of Gods dreadful
justice, showed upon the^ at the knitting up of their days. For examples sake,
Tyberius, that permitted Christians to live freely, Tertul. in Apolog.
and made a Law against their molestation, (as before has been showed) dyed
peaceably in his bed. But Caligula that followed him, Caligula^
for his contempt showed against all divine power, in making himself a God,
was soon after murdered by the consent of his dearest friends.

Nero also, who first of all other began persecution against the christians,
Nero.
within few Months after he had put S. Peter and S. Paul to death in Rome,
having murdered in like manner his own Mother, Brother, Wife, and Master,
was upon the sudden, from his glorious estate and Majesty, thrown down into
such horrible distress and confusion in the sight of all men, as being
condemned by the Senate, to have ^ys head thrust into a Pyllary, and there most
ignominiously to be whypped to death, was constrained (for avoiding the
execution of that terrible sentence) to massacre himself with his own hands,
by the assistance of such as were dearest unto him.

The like may be showed in the tragical ends of Galba, Otho, Vitellius,
Domitian, Commodus, Pertinax, Many Emperors that dyed myserably.
Julian, Marcinus, Antoninus, Alexander, Decius, Gallus, Volutianus,
Aemilianus, Valerianus, Galienus, Caius, Carinus, Maximianus, Maxentius,
Lucinius and others.

Whose miserable deaths, Euagr. Scolast. lib. 3. hist. cap. 41,
a noble man and Counselor, (well near one thousand years past) did gather
against Zosimus a Heathen Writer, to show thereby the powerful hand of Jesus
upon his enemies: adding furthermore, that since the time of Constantine,
(whiles Emperors have been christians) few or no such examples can be showed,
except it be upon Julian the Apostata, Valens the Arian heretic, or some
other of like detestable and notorious wickedness. And thus much of particular
men chastised by Jesus.

But if we desire to have a full example of his justice upon a whole Nation
together, The chastisement of Jerusalem, and of the Jewish people.
let us consider what befell Jerusalem and the people of Jury, for their
barbarous cruelty practiced upon him, in his death and passion. And truly, if
we believe Josephus and Phylo the Jewish Historiographers, (who lived either
with Christ, or immediately after him,) it can hardly be expressed by ye tongue
or pen of man, what insufferable calamities and miseries, were inflicted to
that people (presently upon the ascension of JESUS) by Pylate their Governor,
under Tyberius the Emperor; and then again by Petronius under Caligula,
Iosep. lib. 19. antiq. lib. 2, et 3, de bell, ^udai. Philo in Flacco et lib. 2.
de leg. Cornel. Tac. lib. 12,
and after that, by Cumanus, under Claudius, and lastly by Festus and Albinus
under Nero. Through whose cruelties, that Nation was enforced finally to
rebel, and take Arms against the Roman Empire, which was the cause of their
utter ruin and extirpation by Tytus and Vespasian. At what time besides the
overthrow of their City, burning of their Temple, and other infinite
dys^resses, which Josephus an eye-witnes protests, that no speech or
discourse humane can declare.

The same Auth^ur likewise record^th, eleven hundred thousand persons to have
been slain, and fourscore and se^uen teene thousand taken alive, who were
either put to death afterward in public tryumphes, or sold openly for
bond-^^aues into all parts of the world.

And in this universal calamity of the Jewish Nation, H^w Christ his death
was ^unished with like circumstances upon the Jews.
b^^^^g the most notorious and grie^ous, (...) ever happened to peo^l^ ^r
Na^^on before or after ^he, (for the Romans never practiced the like upon
others) it is si^gularly to be observed, that in the same time and place, in
which they had put Jesus to death before: that is^ in the feast of the
Paschall, when their whole Nation was assembled at Jerusalem, from all parts,
Provinces, and Countries of the earth: they received this their most pitiful
subuertion, and that by the hands of the Roman Caesar, to whom by public
cry, they had appealed from Jesus, but a little before.

Yea, further it is observed and noted, that as they apprehended Ie^us, and
made the entrance to his passion upon the Mount Oliuet, Iosep. lib. 5. de bel^
ca. 8,
so Tytus (as Josephus writes) upon the same Mount planted his first siege
for their final destruction.

And as they led Jesus from Caiphas to Pilate, afflicting him in their
presence: Capit. 27,
so now were they themselves led up and down from John ^o Simon, (two
Tyrants that had v^urped dominion within the City,) and were scourged and
torm^nted before the trybunal seats. Again, as they had caused Jesus to be
scoffed, beaten, and villainously entreated by the Soldiers in Pilats
Palace: so were now their own principal Rulers and Noble men, (as Josephus
writes) most scornfully abused, beaten, and crucified by the same Soldiers.
Which latter point of crucifying, or villainous putting to death upon the
Cross, was begun to be practiced by the Romans upon the Jewish Gentry,
immediately after Christ's death, and not before. And now atthys time of the
war, Josephus affirms, that in some one day, ^yue h^ndred of his Nation were
taken and put to this opprobrius kind of punishment; in so much, that for the
great multitude he says: Lib, 5, de bell. capit. 28.
Nec locus sufficeret Crucibus, nec Cruces corporibus: that is, neither the
place was sufficient to contain so many crosses as the Romans set up, nor
the crosses sufficient to sustain so many bodies as they murdered by that
torment.

This dreadful and unspeakable misery, A marvelous providence of God, for
delivering the Christians that were in Jerusalem at the time of destruction.
fell upon the Jews about forty years after Christ's ascension, when they had
showed themselves most obstinate and obdurate against his doctrine, delivered
unto them, not only by himself, but also by his Disciples; of which Disciples
they had now slain S. Stephen and Saint James, and had driven into banishment
both S. Peter and S. Paul, and other that had preached unto them.

To which latter two Apostles, (I mean S. Peter and S. Paul) our Savior
christ appeared a little before their martyrdoms in Rome, as Lactantius
writes, and showed that within three or four years after their deaths, he
was to take revenge upon their Nation, by the utter destruction of Jerusalem
and of that generation. Lib. 4. diui. instit. ca. 21.
Which secret advise, the said Lactantius affirms, that Peter and Paul
revealed to other christians in Jury; Eusebius. lib. 3. hist. cap. 5. Nicep. cap,
3
whereby it came to pass, (as Eusebius also and other Authors do mention) that
all the Christians living in Jerusalem, departed thence, not long before the
siedge began, to a certain Town named Pella, beyond Jordan, which was
assigned them for that purpose by Jesus himself, for that it being in the
dominion of Agrippa, who stood with the Romans, it remained in peace and
sa^^ty, while all Jury besides was brought to desolation.

This then wa^ the providence of God for ye puni^hment of the Jews at that
time. The Jewish miseries after the destruction of Jerusalem.
And ever after, their estate declined from worse to worse, and their miseries
daily multiplied throughout the world. Whereof he that will see a very
lamentable narration, let him read but the last book only of Josephus hystory
De bello Iudaico, wherein is reported besides other things, that after the war
was ended, and all the public slaughter ceased, Tytus sent threescore
thousand Jews, as a present to his Father to Rome, there to be put to death in
diverse and sundry manners. Others he applied to be specta^les for pastime to
the Romans yt were present with him; whereof Josephus says, that he saw with
his own eyes, two thousand and five hundred murdered and consumed in one
day, by fight and combat among themselves, and with wild beasts at the
Emperors appointment. I^sep. lib. 7, de bello cap. 20, et 21.
Others were assigned in Antioche and other great Cities, to serve for fagots
in their famous bond-fires at ^ymes of triumph. Others were sold to be
bond-slaues, others condemned to dyg and hew stones ^or ^uer. And this was the
end of that war and desolation.

After this again under Traiane the Emperor, there was so infini^e a number
of Jews slain, The final desol^tion of the Jewish Nation.
and made away by Marcus Turbo in Africa, and Lucius Quintus in the East, (as
all Histories agree) that it is impos^ible to express the multitude. But yet
more wonderful it is, which the same Historians report: that in the eyghteene
year of Adrian the Emperor, Oros. li. 7^ ca. 13. Ariston. pellaeus in hist.
Euse. li, 4, capit. 8. Niceph. lib. 3. cap. 24.
one Julius Seuerus being sent to extinguish all the remnant of the Jewish
generation: destroyed in small time nine-tie and eight Towns and Villages
within that Country, and slew five hundred and four-score thousand of that
blood and Nation in one day: at which time also, he beat down the City of
Jerusalem in such sort, as he left not one stone standing upon another of
their ancient buildinges: but caused some part thereof to be reedified again,
and inhabited only by Gentiles. He changed the name of the City, and called
it The Emperors name was Aelius Adrianus.
AELIA, after the Emperors name. He drove all the progeny and offspring of
the Jews forth of all those Countries, with a perpetual Law confirmed by ye
Emperor, yt they should never return: no, nor so much as look back from any
high or eminent place to that Country again. And this was done to the Jewish
Nation by the Roman Emperors for accomplishing that demand, which their
principal Elders had made not long before to Pilate the Roman Magistrate,
concerning Jesus most injurious death, crying out with one consent and voice,
to wit, Let his blood be upon us and upon our posterity. Math, 25.


The seventh Consideration.
AND herein also, I mean in the most wonderful, The fulfilling of Jesus
prophecies.
and notorious chastisement, or rather reprobation of the Jewish people, which
of all the world was Gods peculier before, is set out unto us, as it were in
a Glass, the seventh and last point, which we mention in the beginning of
this Section: to wit, the fulfilling of such speeches and prophecies, as Jesus
uttered when he was upon the earth; as namely at one time, after a long and
vehement commination made to the Scribes and Pharisees and principal men of
that Nation, (in which he repeateth eight several tym^s that dreadful threat
woe,) he concludes finally, that all the just blood, injuriously shed from
the first Martyr Abel, Math, 23.
should be revenged very shortly upon that generation. And in the same place,
he menaceth the populus Ci^tie of Jerusalem, that it should be made desert.
Luke, 21.
And in another place he assures them, that one stone should not be left
standing thereof upon another. And yet further he pronounces upon the same
City these words; Luke, 1^^
The days shall com upon thee, and thine enemies shall enuiron thee with a
wall, and shall besiege thee: they shall straighten thee on every side, and
shall beat thee to the ground, and thy children in thee. Jesus speeches of
Jerusalem.
And yet more particulerly, he fore-telleth the very signs whereby his
Disciples should perceive when the time indeed was come, using this speech
unto them. Luke, 21^
When you shall see Jerusalem besieged with an Army: then know ye that her
desolation is at hand; for that these are the days of revenge, to the end all
may be fulfilled which is written. Great distress shall fall upon this earth,
and vengeance upon this people. They shall be slain by d^^t of the sword, and
shall be led as slaves into al Countries. And Jerusalem shall be trodden under feet
by the Gentiles, until the time of Nations be accomplished.

This fore-tolde Jesus of the misery that was to fall upon Jerusalem, The
circu^staunce of the time, when Jesus spoke his words, and when they were
written.
and upon that people (by the Romans and other Gentiles,) when the Jews
seemed to be in most security, and greatest amity with the Romans, (as also
they were when the same things were written,) and consequently at yt time,
they might seem in all human reason, to have less cause then ever before to
mysdoubt such calamities. And yet how certain and assured foreknowledge, (and
as it were most sensible feeling) Jesus had of these miseries, he declared, not
only by these express words, and by their event: but also by those pitiful
tears he shed upon sight and consideration of Jerusalem, Luke, 19,
and by the lamentable speech he used to the women of yt City, who wept for
him at his passion, persuading them to weep rather for themselves and for
their children, Luke, 23,
(in respect of the miseries to follow) then for him. Which words and
predictions of Jesus, together with sundry other his speeches, fore-shewing so
particulerly ye imminent calamities of y^ Nation, (and that as I have said, at
such time, when in humane dyscourse there could be no probability thereof,)
when a certain Heathen Chronicler and Mathematique, named Phlegon, Phle.
Thral, lib. annal.
about a hundred years after Christ's departure, had dilligently considered,
having seen the same also in his days most exactlie fulfilled, (for he was
servant to Adrianus the Emperor, by whose commandment as it has been said
before^ the final subversion of that Jewish Nation was brought to pass) this
Phlegon (I say) though a Pagan, The testimony of a Heathen, for the fulfilling
of Christ's prophecies.
yet upon consideration of these events, and others that he saw, (as the
extreme persecution of Christians foretold by Christ and the like) he
pronounced, that never any man foretold things so certainly to come, or that so
precisely were accomplyshed, as were the predictions and prophecies of Jesus.
And ^hys testimony of Phlegon, was alleged and urged for Christians, against
one Celsus a Heathen Philosopher and Epicure, by the famous learned Origin;
even the very next age after it was written by the Author: Orig. lib. 2, con.
Cells. sub initium.
so that of the truth of this allegation, there can be no doubt or question at
all.

Other prophecies of Jesus, fulfilled to his Disciples.
AND now albeit these predictions and prophecies, concerning the punishment
and reprobation of the Jews, fulfilled so evidently in the sight of all the
world, might be a sufficient demonstration, of Jesus foreknowledge in affairs
to come, yet are there many other things besides fore-shewed by him, which fell
out as exactly as these did, notwithstanding that by no learning, Mathematical
reason, humane conjecture, they were or might be foreseen. And as for example,
the foretelling of his own death, the manner, time, and place thereof: as also
the person that should betray him, together with his irrepentant end. The
flight, fear, and scandale of his Disciples, albeit they had promised and
protested the contrary. The three several denials of Peter. The particular time
of his own resurrection, and ascension. The sending of the holy Ghost, and many
other the like predictions, prophecies and promises, which to his Apostles,
Disciples and followers that heard them uttered, and left them written before
they fell out, and saw them afterward accomplished: and who by the falsehood
thereof, should have received greatest damage of al other men, if they had not
been true; to these men (I say) they were most evident proofs of Jesus divine
prescience in matters that should ensue.

Prophecies fulfilled in the sight of Gentiles.
BUT yet for that an Infidel, (with whom only I suppose my self to deal in
this place) may in these and the like things, find (perhaps) some matter of
cauilation, and say, that these prophecies of Jesus were recorded by our
Evangelists, after the particularities therein prophesied were effectuated and
not before; and consequently, that they might be sorged; I will allege
certain other events, both foretold and registered before they came to pass,
and divulged by public wrytings in the face of all the world, when there was
small semblance that ever the same should take effect. Such were the particular
foretellings of ye kind and manner of S. Peter's death, whiles he lived. The
peculier and different manner of S. John the Evangelists ending, from the rest
of the Apostles. The fore-s^ewing and describing to his Disciples, the most
extreme and cruel persecutions, that should ensue unto Christians for his
sake^ (a thing at that time not probable in reason, for that the Romans
permitted the exercise of all kinds of Religions;) and that notwithstanding all
these pressures and intolerable afflictions, his faithful followers should not
shrink, but hold out and daily increase in zeal, fortitude, and number, and
finally should atchiue the vict^ry and conquest o^ all the world: a thing much
more unlikely at that day, and so far passing all human probability, as no
capacity, reason, or conceit of man, might reach or attain the foresight
thereof. And with this will we conclude our third and last part of the general
division set down in the beginning, concerning the grounds and proofs of
Christian Religion.

The Conclusion. SECT. 4.
BY all that hitherto has been said, The sum of the former 3. Sections.
we have declared and made manifest unto thee (gentle Reader) three things of
great importance. First, of Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior.

By all which ways, means, arguments and proofs, and by ten thousand more,
which to the tongue or pen of man are inexplicable, the christian mind
remains settled, and most firmly grounded in the undoubted belief of his
Religion, having besides al other things, evidences, certainties, and internal
com^orts and assura^nces which are infinite: these eight demonstratiue reasons
and persuasions which ensue, Eight reasons.
for his more ample and abundant satisfaction therein.

The Prophecies.
FIrst, that it was impossible that so many things should be foretold so
precisely, with so many particularities, in so many ages, by so different
persons of al sanctity, with so great concord, consent, and unity, and that
so long before hand, but by the Spyrit of God alone, that only has the
foreknowledge of future events.

The fulfilling.
SEcondly, that it could not possibly be, that so many things, so difficult
and strange, with all their particularities and circumstaunces, should be so
exactly and precisely ^ulfilled, but in him alone, of whom they were truly
meant.

Gods assistance.
THirdly, that it can no ways be imagined, that GOD would ever have concurred
with Jesus doings, or assisted him, above al course of nature, with so
abundant miracles, as the Gentiles do confess that he wrought, if he had
been a seducer, or taken upon him to set forth a false doctrine.

Jesus doctrine.
FOurthly, if Jesus had intended to deceive and seduce the world, he would
never have proposed a doctrine so difficult and repugnant to al sensuality,
but rather would have taught things pleasant and grateful to man's voluptuous
delight, as Mahomet did after him. Neither could the nature of man, have ever
effectuously embraced such a^steritie, without the assistance of some divine
and supernatural power.

Jesus manner of teaching.
FIf^ly, for that Jesus being poorly borne and unlettered, as by his
adversaries confession does appear, and that in such an age and time, when all
worldly learning was in most flourishing estate: he could neu^r possibly, but by
divine power, have attained to such exquisite knowledge in all kind of learning^
as to be able to decide all doubts and controversies of Philosophers before
him, as he did, laying down more plainly, distinctly, and perspicuouslly, the
pyth of all humane and divine learning, within the compass of three years
teaching, (and that to auditors of so great simplicity) then did all the Sages
of the world unto that day: insomuch that even then, the most unlearned
Christian at that time, could say more in certainty of truth, concerning the
knowledge of God, the creation of the world, the end of man, the reward of
virtue, the punishment of vice, the immortality and rest of our souls after
this life, and in other such high poyn^s and mysteries of true philosophy, then
could the most famous and learned of all the Gentiles, that had for so many
ages before, beaten their brains in contention about the same.

Jesus life and manner of proceeding,
SIxtlie, if Jesus had not meant plainly and sincerely in all his doings,
according as he professed: he would never have taken so severe a course of life
to himself, neither would he have refused all temporal dignities and
adua^ncements as he did: he would never have chosen to die so opprobriously in
the sight of all men, or made election of Apostles and Disciples so poor and
contemptible in the world: nor if he had, would ever worldly men have followed
him in so great multitudes, with so great fervor, zeal, constancy, and
perseverance unto death.

The beginners and first publishers of Christian Religion.
Seventhly, we see that the first beginners and founders of Christian religion
left by Jesus, were a multitude of simple and unskillful persons, unapt to
deceive or devise any thing of themselves. They began against all probability
of man's reason: they went forward against the stream and strength of the
world: they continued and increased about human possibility: they perseuered
in torments and afflictions insufferable: they wrought miracles above the reach
and compass of man's ability: they ouerthrewe Idolatry that then possessed the
world, and confounded all powers infernal by the only name and virtue of
their Master. They saw the prophecies of Jesus fulfilled, and all his divine
speeches and predictions come to pass. They saw the punishment of their
enemies and chief impugners, to fall upon them in their days. They saw every
day whole Provinces, Countries, and Kingdoms converted to their says. And
finally, the whole Roman Empire and world besides, to subject it self to the
law, obedience, and Gospel of their Master.

The present state of the Jews,
LAstly, among all other reasons and arguments, this may be one most manifest
unto us: that whereas by many testimonies and express prophecies of the old
Testament, it is affirmed, that the people of Israel should abandon,
persecute, and put to death, the true Messiah at his coming, as before has
been showed; and for that fact, should it self be abandoned of God, and
brought to ruin and dispersion over all the world: (wherein according to the
words of Ose, Osea, 3.
They shall sit for a long time, without a King, without Prince, without
sacrifice, without Altar, without Ephode, or Images, and after this again, the
children of Israel shall return, and seek their God, in the last days.) We
see in this age the same particularities fulfilled in that Nation, and so have
continued now for these 15. hundred years: that is, we see the Jewish people
afflicted above al Nations of ye world: dispersed in seruility throughout all
corners of the earth: without dygnitie or reputation: without King, Prince, or
commonwealth of themselves, prohibited by all Princes, both Christian and
other, to make their sacrifice where they inhabit; deprived of all means to
attain to good knowledge in good litterature, whereby daily they fall into
more gross ignorance, and absurdities against common reason, in their latter
doctrine: the^ did the most barbarous Infidels that ever were, having lost all
sense and feeling in spyrituall affairs; all knowledge and understanding in
celestial things for the life to come: having among them no Prophet, no grave
teacher, no man directed by Gods holy Spyrite; and finally, as men forlorn and
filled with all kind of myserie, do both by their inward and external
calamities, preach, denounce, and testify to the world, that Jesus who^ they
crucified, was the only true Messiah and Savior of mankind, and that his
blood, (as they themselves required) lies heavily upon their generation for
ever.

The conclusion of the Chapter, with an admo^ishment.
Wherefore to conclude this whole dyscourse and treatise of the proofs and
evidences of our Christian Religion: seeing that by so manifold and invincible
demonstrations, it has been declared and laid before our eyes, that Jesus is
the only true Savior and Redeemer of the world: and consequently, that his
service and Religion, is the only way and mean to please Almighty God, and to
attain everlasting happiness: there remains now to be considered, that the
same Jesus, which by so many Prophets was promised to to be a Savior, was also
foretold by the self same Prophets, yt he should be a Judge, Jesus shall be
also a Judge.
and examiner of all our actions. Which latter point, no one Prophet that has
fore-shewed his coming, has omitted seriously to inculcate unto us. No not
the Sibyls themselves, who in every place where they describe the most gracious
coming of the Virgins son, do also annexe thereunto his dreadful
appearance at the day of Judgment, especially, in those famous Acrostick
verses, whereof there has been so much mention before; the whole discourse
upon ye words Jesus Christ the son of God, Savior and Cross, Apud Euse.
lib. 4, in vita Constable. infi.
contains nothing else, but a large and ample description of his most terrible
coming in fire and flame, and conflagration of the world at that dreadful
day, to take account of all men's words, actions, and cogitations.

To which description of these Pagan Prophets, is consonant the whole tenor and
context of the old Bible, 1, Reg, 2, Psalm, 95, Esaias, 2, 13, 26, 27, 30.
foreshewing every where, the dreadful majesty, terror, and severity of the
Messiah at that day. The new Testament also, which tends to comfort and
solace mankind, Ierem, 30, Dan, 7, Soph, 1, Mala, 4.
and has the name o^ Euangile, in respect of the joyful news which it
brought to the world, omitteth not to put us continually in mind of this
point. Math, 12.13 16, 14.25, Marke^ 13.
And to y^ end both Christ himself, amidst all his sweet and comfortable
speeches with his Disciples, Luke, 17, Rom, 2, 14.
did admonish them often of this last day, 1, Cor, 15, 2, Cor, 5.
and his Apostles, Evangelists, and Disciples after him, repeated, itterated,
1. These. 4, 5^ 2, These, 1, 1, Titus^ 2, 2, Peter, 3.
and urged this important consideration, in all their words and wrytings.

Wherefore, as by the name and cogitation of a Savior, Hebr, 9.
we are greatly styrred up to joy, Jude, 4.
alacrity, confidence and consolation, Reave, 1,
so by this admonishment of Gods Saints, and by the testimony of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ himself, that he is to be our Judge, and severe examiner
of all the minutes and moments of our life: we are to conceive just fear and
dread, of this his second coming.

An illation upon the premises, with an exhortation.
AND as by ye whole former treatise, we have been instructed, that the only
way to salvation, is by the true profession of Christian Religion: so by this
account that shall be demanded at our hands at the last day, by the Author
and first institutor of this Religion; we are taught, that unless we be true
Christians indeed, and do perform such duties as this Law and Religion
prescribes unto us, so far off shall we be from receiving any benefit by
the name, as our judgment shall be more grievous, and our final calamity
more intolerable. For which cause, I would in sincere charity, exhort every
man that by the former discourse has received any light, and is thoroughly
confirmed in his judgment concerning the manifest and undoubted truth of this
Christian Religion: to employ his whole study and endeavors for the attainment
of the fruit and benefit thereof, which is by being a true and faithful
Christi^n; for that our Savior Christ himself fore-signified; that many
should take the name without benefit or commodity of their profession.

And to the end each man may the better know or conjecture of himself,
whether he be in the right way or no, and whether he perform indeed the true
duty belonging to a faithful Christian, I have thought convenient to adioyne
this Chapter next following of tha^ matter, and therein to declare ye particular
points belonging to that profession. Which being known, and thoroughly
considered, it shall be easy for every one that is not over partial, or
wilfully bent to deceive himself, to discern clearly of his own estate, and
of the course and way that he holds.

This (I say) is a high point of wisdom for all men to do while they have
time; least at the last day, we having passed over the whole course of our
lives in the bare name only of Christianity, without the substance and true
knowledge thereof: do find our selves in the number of those most miserable and
vnfor^unate people, who shall cry lord, Lord, and receive no comfort by that
confession.

HOW A MAN MAY IVDGE OR DISCERN OF HIMSELF, WHETHER he be a true Christian
or not. With a declaration of the two parts belonging to that profession: which
are, belief and life. CHAP. V.
AS in human learning and Sciences of this world, after declaration made of
the utility, possibility, certainty, conueniencie, and other qualities,
commendations, and properties thereof: the next point is, to show the means
and ways whereby to attain the same: so much more, in this divine and
heavenly doctrine of Christian Religion, (which concerns our soul and
everlasting salvation,) for that we have showed before, not only the most
undoubted truth whereupon it stands, but also that the knowledge heerof, is
so absolutely necessary, as there is no other name or profession under heaven,
whereby mankind may be saved, but only this of Jesus: Acts. 4.
it follows by order of consequence, that we should treat in this place, The
effect of this Chapter.
how a man may attain the frui^e of this doctrine: that is to say, how he
may come to be a good Christian; or if he already possess that name, how he
may examine or make trial of himself, whether he be so indeed or not. Which
examination to speak in brief, consists wholly in consideration of these two
points. Two points
First, whether he do not only, believe

The first part, concerning belief.
AND for the first, how to examine the truth of our belief, it would be over
tedious to lay down every particular way that might be assigned for discussion
thereof: ^or that it would bring in the contention of all times, as well
ancient as present, about controuersi^s in christian Faith, which has been
impugned from age to age, by the seditious instruments of Christ's infernal
enemy. And therefore, as well in respect of the length, (whereof this place is
not capable,) as also for that of purpose I do avoid all dealing with matters
of controversy within the compass of this work, I mean only at this time,
(for the comfort of such as are already in the right way, and for some light
unto others, who perhaps of simplicity may walk awry,) to ^ette down with as
great breui^y as possibly may be, some few general notes or observations, for
their better help in this behal^e.

In which great affair of our says and belief (wherein consists as well
the ground and foundation of our eternal welfare, as also the fruit and
entire utility of Christ's coming into this world; it is to be considered,
that GOD could not of his infinite wisdom, (foreseeing all things and times
to come) nor ever would of his unspeakable goodness, (desiring our salvation as
he does) lea^e us in this life, without most sure, certain, and clear
evidence of this matter; and consequently, we must imagine, that all our errors
committed herein, (I mean in matters of faith and belief among Christians)
do proceed rather of sin, The matters of faith and belief easy among
Christians.
negligence, wilfulnes, or inconsidera^ion of our selves, then either of
dyfficulty or doubtfulnes in the means left unto us for discerning of ye same,
or of the want of Gods holy assistaunce to that effect, if we would with
humility accept thereof.

This Esaias made plain, when he prophesied of this perspicuitie, that is, of
this most excellent privilege in Christian religion, so many hundred years
before Christ was borne. For after that in diverse chapters he had declared the
glorious coming of Christ in signs and miracles, as also the multitude of
Gentiles that should embrace his doctrine, together with the joy and exultation
of their conversion: he fore-sheweth presently, the wonderful providence of God
also, in providing for Christians so manifest a way of direction for their
faith and Religion, as the most simple and unlearned man in the world, should
not be able (but of wilfulnes) to go astray therein. His words are these,
directed to the Gentiles. Esaias, 35,
Take comfort and fear not. Behold, your God shall come and save you. Then
shall the eyes of the blind be opened, and the ears of the deaf shall be
restored, etc. And there shall be a path and away: which shall be called The
direct holy way of Christians under the Gospel.
The holy way: and it shall be unto you so direct away, as fools shall not be
able to err therein. By which words we see, that among other rare benefits that
Christ's people were to receive by his coming, this should be one, and not the
least, that after his holy doctrine once published and received, it should not
be easy for the weakest in capacity or learning that might be, (whom Esaias
here notes ^y the name of Fools,) to run awry in matters of their belief,
s^ plain, clear, and evident, should the way for trial thereof be made.

God has opened himself unto us in ye holy scriptur^s, the wrytings and
doctrine of Moses and the Prophets of Christ, and his Apostles: John^ 20, 28
wherein is contained what soever is necessary for our salvation. 2, Tim, 3, 14,
15. etc.
For although the invisible things of God, Romans 1, 20,
that is, his power and God-heade, may be seen by the workmanshyp and creation
of the world, wherein, as in a book written with the hand of GOD, and laid
open to the eyes of men, Psalm. 19, 1,
the glory of God and his mighty power appears; Yet because, Abac, 2, 2,
either we read not this book at all, or if we do, we read it carelessly,
therefore it was necessary that the Lord God should add another Book, more
plain and easy to be read, so as he may run that reads it, and this is, (as
has been said) his holy will, revealed unto us in his written word. Which S.
Augustine therefore very well, August. in exposi. Psalm. 96, et Sermon, 59, ad
Fratrem. in Eremo.
calls ye Letters or Epistle of GOD, sent unto us from our heavenly Country
to teach us to live godly and righteously whilst we soiourne here in this
present world. Titus, 2, 12,


Psalm, 119, 105,
This is that Lantern whereby our feet may be directed, and that light whereby
our paths may be guided unto Christ: it is that most certain and infallible
rule and leuel of all our actions, whereby both our faith and life are to be
squared and framed. Psalm, 19, 7
Yea, it is that holy and undefiled way, and withal, that plain and easy way
denoted by Esaias, which even the very entrance thereof, gives light and
understanding (as David speaks) unto the simple. Psalm. 119, 130.


And although we must confess with S. Peter, that there are some things in the
Scripture hard to be understood, yet we may also say with the same Peter, 2.
Pet, 3, 16,
that they are hard to those that are unlearned and unstable, which pervert and
wrest them to their own destruction. So that if the Gospel of Christ be yet
hyd, 1, Cor. 4, 3, 4
it is hid unto them that perish, whose senses satan has closed, that the
light thereof should not shine unto them. And heere-hence it is that the
Apostle S. Paul, pronounces so peremptorily of a contentious and heretical
man, Titus, 3,
that he is damned by the testimony of his own judgment or conscience, for
that he has abandoned this common, direct, and public way, which all men
might see, and has devised particular paths and turnings to himself. And
heere-hence is it, that the ancient Fathers of Christ's Primative Church,
dysputing against the same kind of people, defended always, that their error
was of malice, and wilful blindness, and not of ignorance: applying these
words of prophecy unto them; Psalm, 31, 11.
They that saw me, ran out from me.

Thus then it appears, that the plain and direct way mentioned by Esaias,
wherein no simple or ignorant man can err, is the doctrine taught by the mouth
of our Savior Christ and his Apostles, which howsoever it seem to be obscure
and darksome to men of perverse minds, that are not exercised in it, yet to
the godly and studious readers and hearers, that have their eyes opened, and
their minds lightened to see the truth, it is most plain and easy to be
understood. 1, Pet, 1.19,


And this is the cause, that those holy and sage Apostles of Christ, for the
better perverting of al bie-waies, crooked paths, and blind lanes of errors
that afterward might arise, 1, Corin. 16.
(as by revelation from Jesus they understood there should do many, Gala, 5.
) so earnestly exhorted, 2, These, 2, 1, Tim, 6, 20 2, Tim, 1, Math, 7, Rom, 16,
2, Tim, 2, 3, Titus, 3,
and so vehemently called upon the people, to stand fast in the documents the^
received, to hold firmly the faith and doctrine already delivered, as a
Depositum and treasure committed, to be safely kept until the last day. And
above all other things, they most dilligentlie forewarned them, to beware of
newfangled Teachers, whom they called Heretics, who should break from the
unity of that body whereof Christ is the head, and should devise new glosses,
expositions, and interpretations of Scripture, bring in new senses, doctrines,
opinions, and deuisions, to the renting of Gods Church and city now builded,
and to the perdition of infinite souls.

The Apostle S. Paul, even whilst he lived, Gala, 1, 11,
found some of his Scholars to be removed by new fangled Teachers to another
Gospel, and the better to make them see their error, he appealeth to the
Gospel which he had taught them. The gospel he preached, was not after man,
neither received he it of man, but by revelation from Jesus Christ. He brought
them no fancies, visions, dreams, interpretations of Scripture hatched in his
own brain, but the pure and sincere doctrine, 1. Cor^ 12, 1^
received by revelation from GOD himself, and faithfully delivered unto them,
without hacke or mayme as he received it.

Therefore S. Jerome upon that place, Ierom. in Epist. ad Gal.
considering how all Heretics have iugled with the Scriptures from time to
time, says. That Marcion and Basilides, and other Heretics, (the contagious
botches and plague sores of the church,) have not the Gospel of God, because
they have not the Spyrite of GOD, without which, that which is taught, grows
to be man's Gospel. This makes that learned Father to resolve upon the matter,
that it is a dangerous thing peruersly to expound the holy Scriptures, for by
this means, that is, by wrong and perverse interpretation, that which is Gods
Gospel, is made man's Gospel, et quod peius est, and that which is worse,
(says this holy Father,) it is made the devils Gospel. For discerning
therefore of this kind of most pernicious people, and their deuilish dealing,
Ephe, 4.14,
and least we should be carried away with every wind of docdrine by the
wiliness of men, GOD has ordained in his Church, 1, Corin. 12,
Apostles, Doctors, Prophets, Pastors and Interpreters, whom he has so guyded
and governed from time to time with his holy Spyrit, that they have been able
by the Scriptures to repress and beat down whatsoever errors and heresies
have been raised up by the enemies of Gods truth, contrary to the analogy of
faith and rule of charity: that is to say, beside the true sense and meaning
of the Canonical Scripture.

No heresy finally prevailed against the scriptures.
When there rose up certain seditious fellows among the Jews in the Primative
Church, making some contention about their ceremonies, as did Simon Magus,
Nich^las^ Cerinthus, Ebion, and Meand^r, that were Heretics; They were
refelled and convinced out of the scriptures by the Apostles and their
Scholars, Martialis. Dyonisius Areopagita, Ignatius, Policarpus, and other,
who were no doubt directed and guided by the Spyrit of GOD. Afterward, when
Basilides, Cerdon, Marcion, Vale^tinus, Tatianus, Apelles, Montanus, and diverse
other troubled the Church with monstrous heresy, they were confuted by
Justinius Martyr, Dionisius Bishop of Corinth, Iraeneus, Clemens, Alexandrinus,
Tertullian, and their equales, who in all their controversies had recourse unto
the Scriptures, and being instructed and led by the spyrite of truth,
prevailed mightily against their adversaries. And so downward from age to age
unto our days, whatsoever heresy or different opynion has sprung up contrary
to the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, it has been checked and
controlled by the Watchmen, spiritual Pastors, and Governors of the Church, who
alleged always the consent of ye scriptures for decyding of al doubts, and were
most graciously guided by the Spyrite of GOD in all their actions. And hereof
it is, Ephe, 6, 17.
that the word of God is called the sword of the spirit: because, as it was
given by inspiration at the first, so being expounded by the direction of the
same Spirit, it is most lively and mighty in operation: 2. Tim. 3, 16
Hebr, 4, 12,
sharper then any two edged sword, and entering through even to the dividing a
sunder of the soul and the Spyrit, of the joints and the marrowe, and it is a
discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart.

This is that spyriual sword wherewith our Savior Christ prevailed against
satan the head Lord and master of all Heretics, Math, 4.
who notwithstanding pretended scriptures for his deuillish purposes. And the
Apostle Paul, Acts, 9,
being furnished with this only weapon, dysputed against the perverse and
ouer-thwart Jews, which dwelt at Damascus, and confounded them, proouing by
conference of Scriptures, that this was very Christ.

Now as it was expedient that the Gospels should be written, Theophilactus.
that we learning the truth foo^th of them, should not be deceived by the lies
of her^sies; so was it necessary that the same gospels should be preached for
the confirmation of faith. Hi^ronimus.
And hereof it is, that the Apostle Saint Paul, Romans 10, Rom, 10, 17
says, that faith comes by hearing the word of God, because the word
preached, is the ordinary means to beget and increase faith in us, 1, Pet, 1,
23, Ephe, 5, 26,
for the which cause also, it is called the incorruptible seed, whereby we are
borne a new, and whereby the Church is sanctified unto the Lord.

Wherefore to conclude this point, seeing that the holy Scriptures are that most
infallible and secure way mentioned by Esaias, seeing they are the rule and
level both of our faith and life, containing in them sufficient matter to
confute error and confirm the truth, able to make a man wise unto salvation,
and perfectly instructed unto every good work, this ought to be the duty of ye
faithful, (that I may use the words of Basil, 2, Tim^ 3, 15.16, 17. Basil.
mora. Regula 80, capit, 21,
) to be thoroughly persuaded in his mind, that those things are true and
effectual, which are uttered in the Scripture, and to reject nothing thereof.
For if whatsoever is not of faith be sin, (as says the Apostle) and if faith
comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God, without doubt, when any
thing is without the holy Scripture, (which cannot be of faith,) it must needs
be sin. And therefore (to speak as S. Augustine speaks) if any, August.
con. litteras petil lib, 3. cap. 6. Gala, 1, 8,
I will not say if we, but (which S. Paul adds) if an Angel from heaven,
shall preach either of Christ or of his church, or of any other thing which
pertains to faith, or to the leading of our life otherwise, then we have
received in the holy scriptures of the Law and the Gospel, let them be
accursed.

Now if forsaking al by-pathes of men's inventions and traditions, we will search
diligently in the scriptures wherein we think to have eternal life, John, 5,
39.
we shall see that they testify of nothing so much, as of the promises of God
in Christ Jesus; who as he is the end of the law for righteousness to every one
that believes; Rom, 10, 4, Gala, 3, 24
so do they send us directly, and as it were lead us by the hand like a
careful Schoole-maister unto him, teaching us to apprehend and lay hold on him
with the hand of faith, and to apply him with his gifts and graces unto our
selves, and our own salvation. So that faith is made the means, and as it were
the Conduit to convey Christ himself, his death, burial, and resurrection,
and all the rest of his benefits unto us, which the Apostle witnesses. Colos.
2.12. Ye are buried (says he) with him through Baptism, in whom ye are also
raised up together, through the says of GOD, effectually working, who raised
him from the dead. Whereof it ensues, that all the faithful do not only
obtain ye benefit of Christ's death, and burial by their Baptism, whereby
they die unto sin, but also do receive and enjoy, the fruit and effect of
his resurrection by a lively faith, whereby they are quickened and raised up unto
righteousness in this life, and are assertained of resurrection to glory in ye
life to come, by his mighty working that is able to subdue all things to
himself. Phil, 3, 21,


Seeing therefore that the sum and substance of our whole Religion, and of
our eternal salvation or damnation, consists in the knowledge of this one
virtue, it shall be worth the labor, breefely (but yet plainly) to describe
the form, force, and nature of this faith whereof we speak. Wherein you shall
not look for the diverse significations, which that word receives in
scripture, nor for any declaration of those unprofitable faythes whereof S.
James speaks, Iam, 2, 19,
which are common to the wicked, and to the devils themselves, whereby they
believe that Jesus is that Christ; Mar, 1, 24.
but here my purpose is to entreat of that lively and saving faith, which is
peculier and propper to the elect and chosen children of GOD, whereby they
believe, tha^ Christ is their Jesus, Math, 1, 21.
by whom they are saved from their sins, and from the punishment due unto
them for the same, and by whom only they are restored unto the favor of God,
and made heirs with Christ of his heavenly kingdom. Rom, 8, 17.


In the Epistle to the Hebrews, there is a notable description of that lively
faith, Hebr. 11, 1,
where it is said, to be ye ground of things that are hoped for, and the
evidence of things yt are not seen. Of which description of ye Apostle, we
may make a plain definition after this sort. Faith is an assured persuasion of
our salvation by ye means of Christ, which is grounded on the promises of God,
and sealed in our hearts by the holy Ghost. This definition is drawn from the
form and property of true faith, but the other in the Epistle to the Hebrews,
seems rather to be taken from the substance of faith, and speaks of the
object matter thereof. But both of the^ tend to one and the same thing,
namely, to express the nature of true faith, to consist in the certainty of
that eternal life, which is purchased unto us by Christ Jesus, which although
we enjoy not presently, yet by faith we are as fully assured of it, as if we
had possession and fruition thereof already. And hereof it is, Colos. 2.2,
Heb, 10, 22,
that ye Apostle calls it plerophoria, fullness or assurance of faith, when
we are persuaded that we are so highly in Gods favor, that nothing is able
to separate or remove us from the love that God bears us in his son and our
Savior Christ Jesus. This fulness of faith contains in it these three things.

First, a notice or knowledge of the merciful promises of God in Christ Jesus.
Secondly, an undoubted persuasion of the truth of those promises. And thirdly,
the applying of the same to the comfort of our souls and consciences, for our
salvation. For as it is not enough for a man to have meat, unless he also
eat it and digest it, so it is not enough for us to know the promises of God,
Hebr, 4.2,
unless we believe the same to be true, and apply them to our own selves. And
as it is not enough for a wounded man, to have a sovereign salve or Medicine
in his window, unless he apply it to his wound, so is it not sufficient for
us, to know that Christ is the Savior of the world, unless also we
acknowledge him to be a Savior unto us, and lay hold on him by the hand of
faith.

Wherefore this is the property and effect of a saving faith, even to apply
Christ with his gyfts unto every one of the faithful, and to make all
co^clusions of Gods promises particular, that is, peculier to themselves and
their own salvation. Habac. 2.
And therefore it is that faith is called the life of the soul, Rom, 1, 17,
Heb, 10, 37.
because it is the instrument, wherewith Christ the true life and food of our
soul is to be eaten. Yea it is the mouth, the tongue, the teeth, the stomach,
and that heat of our hearts and souls, whereby Christ the word of GOD, is
spiritually taken, eaten, and digested of us, with which word, or rather with
which Christ, John, 6, 51,
our souls do live: namely, with the flesh and blood of Christ which we eat
and drink, whilst we embrace and receive Christ by a lively faith. Whereupon S.
Cyprian has this sweet saying. Cypr. lib. de Caena Dom.
Quod est esca carni, hoc animae est fides. etc. That which meat is to the
flesh, that is ^ayth to the soul. That which food is to the body, that is
the word to the Spyrite. So that faith is the bond, which does so straightly
unite and knit us unto Christ, no otherwise then the members are united to the
head, whereby we partake his spiritual graces, as the members of man's body
receive nutriment from the head; and in a word, what good things soever are
necessary for our eternal life, do flow and are derived unto us from Christ,
as from a most plentiful and wholesome fountain, and are c^nueied unto us by
the instrument of faith, as by a strong and substantial Conduit-pype.

It were too long, and not so pertinent to the purpose, to re^ite all the
prope^ties of this s^^ing faith, whereof we speak: it may suffice ther^ore to
have showed you these few notes, and effects thereof, by the due consideration
whereof, it shall be easy for any to examine and try themselves as the Apostle
speaks, 2, Cor, 13, 5,
whether they be in the faith or no: and consequently, whether they be true
Christians for the first part of yt profession: namely for matters of belief,
which consists (as has been showed,) not only in believing whatsoever is
propounded unto us in the holy Scripture, (although that also be a true faith)
but also in the assurance of Gods love and favor toward us, wrought in our
hearts by the preaching of the Gospel, and sealed by the holy Ghost; whereby we
do firmly persuade themselves, that our sins are as utterly forgiven us for
Christ his sake, as if he never had committed any, and his righteousness as
perfectly imputed unto us, as if we had performed the same in our own persons.
Wherefore to conclude this first part of our present speech, Dial cont.
Lucifernanum.
he that not only protests with S. Jerome that he does abhor all sects
and names of particular men, as Marcionists, Montanists, Valen^inians, and the
like, (which like the builders of Babel) have built up Churches, Gene, 11,
Sinagogues, and Conuenticles to get themselves a name, that men might be
called after them, Marcionists, Montanists, and such others, he I say, that
loatheth and detesteth sects, and as he was not baptized in the name of
Marcion, Montan, or Valentine, but in the Name of Jesus Christ, so refuses he
to be called a Marcionist, Montanist, or Valentinian, or by any name of any man
under heaven: and therewithal rejoices in the Name of Christ to be called a
Christian, and giving al doctrines and Gospels the slyp, pitcheth him upon the
doctrine and Gospel of JESUS, taught by his holy Apostles; he that can
captiuate his understanding to the obedience of Christ, to believe humbly such
things as Christ by his Apostles proposes to him, 2. Cor, 10, 5,
albeit his reason or sense should stand against the same. And not only so,
but also persuades and assures his own heart and soul, that all the merciful
promises that God makes in his word, do belong unto him in especial, and
that he is one of that number which God has elected to salvation, and for
whose sins Christ Jesus the son of GOD was content to die, Ephe, 3, 17,
and to rise again for his justification, he that finds himself to be in
this faith, or rather this faith to be in him, and feels the fruits and
effects thereof, that is, as they are reckoned by the Apostle, Romans 5. to be at
peace with God, Rom, 5, 12.
to have an entrance unto grace, to have spiritual joy, not only in
prosperity, but even in tribulation and affliction; to have hope that makes
not ashamed; and to have the love of God shed abro^d in his heart by the
working of the holy Ghost, etc. This man, (no doubt,) is in a most sure case
for matters of his faith, and cannot possibly walk awry therein, but may
think himself a good Christian for this first point, which is for matters of
belief.

The second part of this Chapter.
THere follows the second part of Christian pro^ession, concerning life and
manners; which is a matter of so much more difficulty then the former, by how
many more ways a man may be led from virtuous life then from sincere faith,
wherein there can be no comparison at all, seeing the path of our belief is so
manifest, (as has been showed,) that no man can err therein but of
inexcusable wilfulness. Which wilfulnes of error, See S. Au. de vtil. cre cap
1. Cyp. Epist. 61.
the holy Fathers of Christ's Primative Church, did always refer to two
principal and original causes, The two causes of heresy.
that is, to pride and ouerweening in our own conceits, and to malice against
our Superiors, for not gyuing our selves contentation to the things that we
desire. Of the first do proceed new opinions, The doings of Precismatiques.
new glosing, expounding and applying of the Scriptures, pre^erring our own
judgment before all other past or present; the contempt and debasing of holy
Fathers and Councels, and whatsoever proof stands not with our own lyking
and approbation.

Of the second fountain are derived other qualities conformable to that humor,
as are the denying of jurisdiction and authority in our Superiors, the
contempt of Prelates, the exaggeration of the faults and defects of our
Governors, the impugnation of al byshoplike dignities or Ecclesiastical
eminency, and especially of that rule whereunto appertains the correction of
such like offenders: and finally, for satis-fying this deuilish and pernicious
venime of malice, those wicked ^eprobates do incite and arm the people against
their spiritual Pastors, they kindle factions against Gods faithful
Ministers, they devise a new Church, a new form of government, a new
kingdom and Ecclesiastical Hiera^chie upon earth, whereby to bring men in
doubt or staggering what or whom to believe, or whereunto to have recourse in
such difficulties as do arise.

These two maladies I say of pride and malice, have been the cause of
obstinate error in all Heretics from the beginning, as ^ul well noted that
holy and ancient Martyr S. Cyprian, when he said so long ago. The observation
of S. Cyprian.
These are the beginnings and original causes of Heretics and wicked
Scismatiques, first to please and like well of themselves, and then being puffed
up with the swelling of pride, Cyp. epist. 65 ad Rogation
to contemn their Governors and Superiors. Thus do they abandon and forsake
the church, thus do they erect a profane Altar out of the church against the
church. Thus do they break the peace and unity of Christ, and do rebel
against Gods holy ordination.

Now then, as these are the causes either only or principally of erring in
our belief, Many causes of evil life.
most facile and easy (as we see) to be discerned, so of error in life and
manners, there are many more occasions, causes, ofsprings, and fountains to be
found. That is to say, so many in number, as we have evil passions, in ordinate
appetites, wicked desires, or vnlafull inclinations within our mind, every one
whereof, is the cause oftentimes of dysordered life, and breach of Gods
commandments. For which respect there is much more set down in scripture for
exhortation to good life, then to faith, for that the error herein is more
ordinary and easy, and more provoked by our own frailty, as also by the
multitude of infinite temptations. Wherefore we read that our Savior Christ
in the very beginning of his preaching, straight after he was baptized, and
had chosen unto him S. Peter and S. Andrew, James and John, and some other few
Disciples, went up to the Mountain, The effect of Christ's Sermon.
and there made his most excellent, famous, and copious Sermon, recited by S.
Matthew in three whole chapters, Mat. chap. 5 6. and 7,
wherein he talks of nothing else but of virtuous life, poverty, meekenes,
iusti^e, purity, sorrow for sin, pati^nce in suffering, contempt of ryches^
forgiving of injuries, fasting, prayer, repentance, entrance by the straight
gate, and finally, of perfection, holiness, and integrity of conversation,
and of the exact fulfilling of every jot of Gods Law and commandments. He
assured his Disciples with great asse^eration, that he came not to break the
Law, but to fulfill the same: and consequently, who soever should break the
least of his Commandments, and should teach men so to do, that is, should
persevere therein without repentance, and so by his example draw other men to
do the like, should have no place in the kingdom of heaven. Again, he
exhorted them most earnestly to be lyghts, Math, 5, 20
and to shine by good works to all the world, and that except their justice did
exceed the justice of the Scribes and Pharisees, Math, 6, 24
(which was but ordinary and external) they could not be saved. He told them
plainly, they might not serve two Masters in this life, but either they must
forsake God, or abandon Mammon. He cried unto them Attendite, Math, 7, 13
stand attent, and consider well your state and condition, and then againe^
seek to enter by the straight gate. Math, 7, 20.
And lastly he concludes, that the only trial of a good tree, is the good
fruit which it yields, without the which fruit, let the Tree be never so
fair or pleasant to the eye, yet it is to be cut down and burned. And that
not every one that shall cry or say unto him Lord, Lord, at the last day, shall
be saved, Mat, 7, ^5.
or enter into the kingdom of heaven, but only such as did execute in deeds,
the will and commandments of his Father in this life. For want whereof, he
assured them, that many at that day, who had not only believed, but also done
miracles in his Name, should be denied, Mat, 7, 22,
rejected, and abandoned by him.

Which long lesson of virtuous life, being the first that ever our Savior gave
in public to his Disciples then newly gathered together, (as S. Matthew
notes,) (having treated somewhat before of points of faith, and by some
miracles and preaching showed himself to be the true Messiah) does
sufficiently teach us, that we must not only believe in his name and doctrine,
but conform our lives and actions also to the prescript rule of his
commandments.

For albeit in Christian Religion, faith be the first and principal
foundation, A similitude touching faith and works.
whereupon all the rest is to be stayed and grounded. Yet as in other material
buildings, after the foundation is laid, there remains the greatest labor,
time, cost, cunning and diligence, to be bestowed upon the framing, and
furnishing of other parts yt must ensue: even so in this celestial edifice or
building of our soul, having laid on the foundation and ground of true
belief, the rest of all our life, time, labor and studies, is to be employed
in the perfecting of our life and actions, and as it were in raising up the
walls and other parts of our spiritual building by the exercise of all virtues,
and dylligent observation of Gods commandments, without the which it will be
to no more purpose for us to brag of our knowledge in the scriptures, or to say
we have faith, and look to be saved as well as other men, then it will be to
purpose, to have a foundation without a building upon it, or a stock or tree yt
bears no fruit. Which thing S. James (speaking of that historical and dead
faith, whereby the wicked and the very devils themselves believe that there is
one GOD,) expresses most excellently in this fit similitude: Iam, 2, 26^
As a body without a spirit is dead, even so (says he) is faith without
works.

This point of doctrine of virtuous life, and observing of Gods commandments,
not our savior Christ alone in his Sermon, most earnestly urged, (as has been
said) but his forerunner also S. John the Baptist, and his followers the holy
Apostles, whereof the one continually called upon the people to bring forth
fruits meet for repentance; Math, 3, 8,
the other in all their writing, Rom, 12, 1.
and no doubt in all their Sermons after matter of doctrine and faith
propounded, Ephe, 4, 1,
do proceed to exhortation, and precepts of Christian life. In so much as S.
Augustine and other ancient Fathers are of opinion, that the rest of the
Apostles, S. Peter, S. James, S. John, and S. Jude, perceiving the loosenes and
security of the people in their times, directed their writings, either only or
principally to this end, even to persuade and enforce the necessity of good
life and conversation among Christians. Yea and that Saint Paul himself, Rom,
3, 28,
when he concludes that a man is justified by faith without the works of the
Law, does not exclude the works of charity, as effects and fruits of faith,
which follow him that is already justified in the sight of God, but he
excludes them as causes of salvation, which go before him that is to be
justified. Whereby it appears, that saint Paul handling the causes of our
justification in the sight of God, is not repugnant ^r contrary to S. James,
speaking o^ the notes and signs whereby we are justified: that is, (as the
word is taken Mat. 12.37.
else where) declared or known to be just or righteous before men.

The sum is, that although good works are not the causes of our salvation,
Colos, 1, 10,
yet they are the way (as it were) and the path that leads thereunto: because
by them, as by certain marks, we perceive our selves to have entered, and to
have proceeded in the way of eternal life. Yea they are the fruits and
effects, Iam, 2, 18,
whereby we testify and declare both unto our selves and to others, the truth
of that faith which we profess. And therefore our Savior Christ wills us in
ye gospel, to let our light shine before men, Math, 5, 16,
that they seeing our good works, may take occasion thereby to glorify our
heavenly Father.

And his holy Apostle Saint James, Iam, 2, 18,
byddeth those carnal and sensual Christians, that stood so much upon the
only name of faith, to show him their faith by their works, that is, they
should declare and testify unto men (as I have said) the faith which they
professed, by the fruits thereof. To men (I say (...) cause men which judge
but by (...) outward appearance only, Mat, 7, 16,
cannot know the goodness of a Tree, but by the good fruit which it yields;
they cannot discern the inward faith but by the outward works. But as for
God, that searches the secrets of the heart and raynes, it needs not that we
should show him our faith by our works, nor may we look for justification at
his hands by the best of them, Rom, 4.2,
for the^ might we have whereof to boast, but there is no boasting with God, and
therefore no justifying by works in his sight. Yet notwithstanding, the Lord
requires good works at our hands, to the end that himself might be 1. Pet.
2.12
glorified, our needy brethren relieved and 1. Cor. 9.1.23.
comforted, others gained and won by our example, to the embracing of the
same faith and Religion which we profess: our own faith exercised and
strengthened, 2, Pet, 1, 10.
and our calling and election made sure and confirmed.

And it is very requisite yt the children of God, which are bought with so high
a price, as with the blood of Jesus, 1, Pet, 1, 18.
should glorify god both in soul and body, because they are redeemed both in
soul and body, and not live unto themselves, but unto him which dyed and rose
again for them. 1, Cor, 6, 20. 2, Cor, 5, 15


This is the end of our election before the foundations of the world were
laid, as the Apostle testifies, Ephesians, 1, 4, Ephe, 1, 4,
even that we should be holy and blameless before him in love. This is the
end of our creation, as the same Apostle witnesses, Ephesians, 2, 10. Ephe,
2, 10.
Where he says that we are Gods workmanshyp created in Christ Jesus unto good
works, wherein he has ordained that we should walk. This is the end of our
redemption, as old Zachary prophesied. Luke, 1, 74, 75, Luke, 1, 74.
that being redeemed and delivered from all our spiritual enemies, and from
eternal destruction whereunto we were subject, we should serve God without
fear, in holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our life.
Finally, this is the end of our vocation. For God has not called us to
uncleanness, but unto holiness, 1, These. 4, 7
and as he that has called us is holy, 1, Pet. 1, 15,
so must we be holy in all manner of conversation. And it cannot be that they
which are truly justified, that is to say, made righteous by a lively faith in
Christ, should not also in some measure be sanctified, that is, made holy by a
faithful life in him.

Let not men therefore deceive themselves with the only name and shadow of
faith, without the nature and substance thereof. Let them not promise unto
themselves everlasting life, because they know ye true God, John, 17, 3.
and who^ he has sent Jesus Christ: but let them remember how Christ his
Apostle whom he dearly loved, expounds that saying, when he writes. By
this we know GOD (truly) if we keep his commandments: 1, Ioh, 2, 3.4
and whosoever says that ^e knows him, and yet keeps not his
commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in him. For as it is a true
saying, 1, Tim, 1, 15
and by all means worthy to be received, that Christ Jesus came into the
world to save sinners: so is it as true a saying, and no less worthy to be
affirmed, Titus. 3, 8,
that they which have believed GOD, should be careful to show forth good works.
S. Gregory upon the words of Christ to S. Thomas, Gre. in hom. 29. in Eua^.
John 20.
Blessed are they who have not seen, and yet have believed, has a notable
discourse to this purpose. If any (says he) infer hereof, I believe and
therefore am blessed, and shall be saved, he says truly, if his life be
aunswerable to his belief: for yt a true faith does not contradict in manners,
the things which he professes in words. For which cause, S. Paul accuses
certain false Christians, in whom he found no virtuous life aunswerable to
their profession; Titus, 1, 16.
that they confessed God in words, but denied him in their deeds. And S. John
auocheth, 1. John 2, 4,
that who soever says he knows God, and keeps not his commandments is a
liar. Which being so, we must examine the truth of our faith by consideration
of our life: for then and not otherwise we are true Christians, if we fulfill
in works, that whereof we have made promise in words. That is, in the day of our
Baptism, What we promised in our Baptism.
we promised to renounce the pomp of this world, together with all the works
of iniquity; which promise, if we perform now after Baptism, then are we
true Christians, and may be joyful. But contrariwise, if our life be wicked,
and contrary to our profession, it is said by the voice of truth it self. Not
every one that shall say to me Lord, Lord, Math, 7.
shall enter into the kingdom of heaven. And again, why do ye call me Lord,
Lord, and do not perform the things yt I tell you. Here-hence it is, that God
complained of his old people the Jews, saying: Esaias. 29.17
This people honors me with their lips, but their hearts are far off from
me. And the Prophet David of the same people. Psalm. 78.36, 37,
They loved him with their mouth, and with their tongues they lied unto him.
Wherefore let no man presume to say he shall be saved, if faith and good life
be divorced and put a sunder, which S. Chrysostom notes, by the woeful and
hea^y chance and judgment that happened unto him, who in the gospel was
admitted to the feast of christian faith and knowledge, but for lack of the
ornament or garment of good life, was most contumeliously deprived of his
expectation.

Of whom S. Chrisostoms words are these. Chris. hom, 9 in John.
He was invited to the feast, and brought unto the table, but for that by his
foul garment he dishonored our Lord that had invited him: he was not only
thrust from the Table and banquet, but also bound hand and foot, and cast into
utter darkness, where there is eternal weeping and gnashing of teeth.

Wherefore let us not (dear brethren) let us not I say deceive our selves,
and imagine that our dead and unfruitful faith will save us at the last day:
for except we join pure life to our belief, and in this heavenly vocation of
ours, do apparel our selves with the worthy garments of virtuous deeds,
whereby we may be admitted at the marriage day in heaven: nothing shall be able
to deliver us from the damnation of this miserable man, that wanted his wedding
weed.

Which thing S. Pa^l well notes, when having said, we have an everlasting house
in heaven, 2, Cor. 5, 1, 2
not made with men's hands, he adds presently this exception, Si tamen vestiti
et non nudi inueniamur. That is, if we be found at that day well apparrelled
and not naked. Would God every Christian desirous of his salvation, would
ponder well this dyscourse of S. Chrysostom.

And so with this alone to conclude our speech in this Chapter, The conclusion
of this chapter.
without allegation of further matters or authorities, (which are infinite to
this effect) it may appear by that which has already been set down,
wherein the true profession of a Christian consists: and thereby each man that
is not partial, or blinded in his own affection, (as many are) may take a view
of his state and condition, and frame unto hims^l^e a very profitable
conjecture, how he is like to speed at the last accounting day. That is, what
profit or damage he may expect by his knowledge and profession of Christian
Religion. For as to him that believes soundly, and walks uprightly in his
vocation, performing effectually every way his professed duty, there remain
both infinite and inestimable rewards prepared: so to him that strayeth aside,
and swerue^h from the right path o^ faith and life prescribed unto him, there
are no less pains and punishments reserved.

For which cause, every Christian that is careful of his own salvation, ought
to fix his eyes very seriously upon them both: and as in belief to show
himself constant, firm, humble and obedient: so in life and conversation, to
be honest, just, pure, innocent and holy.

And for this second point concerning life and manners, has been already
handled in my former book, (which as I understand is imprinted in England) I
shall need to wade the less in further discourse hereof. But for I have been
admonished by the wrytings of diverse, how my former book has been disliked
in two special points; first, that I speak so much of goods works, and so
little of faith: secondly, that I talk so largely of Gods justice, and so
briefly of his mercy, whereby the consciences of many have been offended: let
the last chapter going before of belief and life answer the first, and that
which immediately follows, serve for the latter objection, and so I doubt not,
but a Christian man may be thoroughly resolved.

OF THE ONLY IMPEDIMENT THAT IS WONT TO LET SINNERS FROM Resolution. Which is,
the mistrust and diffidence in Gods mercy, through the multitude and
greeuousnes of their offenses. CHAP. VI.
AMong all other the most grievous and perrilous cogitations, which in this
world are accustomed to offer themselves to a mind entangled and laden with
great sins, Despair, an ordinary temptation to the greatest sinners.
this usually is the first, (through the nature of sin it self and crafty
suggestion of our ghostly enemy,) to fa^l into distrust and despair of Gods
mercy. Such was the cogitation of most unhappy Caine, Caine.
one of the first inhabitants of the earth, who after the murder of his own
only Brother, and other sins by him committed, brake into that horrible and
desperate speech, so greatly offensive unto his Lord and Maker, Gene, 4.
Mine iniquity is greater then that I may hope for pardon. Such was in like
manner the desperate conceit of wicked Judas, Judas.
one of the first of them that were chosen to the peculier service of our
Redeemer; who feeling his conscience oppressed with manifold iniquities, and
most of all with the prodition of his own Lord and Master, took no other way
of amendment or redress, but to destroy him self both in body and soul,
adjoining only these words, full of miserable distrust and desperation, I have
sinned in betraying the innocent and just blood. Math, 27,
By which words and most wretched end, he more grievously offend^d and injured
his most loving and merciful Savior, then by all his former iniquities
committed against him.

This then (most loving brother) is the first and greatest Rock, whereat a
sinful soul ouerburdened with the charge of her own iniquities, The shypwrack
of souls ouerloden with sins.
and tossed in the waves of dreadful cogitations, by the blastes and storms
of Gods threats against sinners, does commonly make her shipwra^k. That is,
that most horrible depth and dungion, whereof the holy scripture says; Prou, 18,
The impious man, when he is come into the bottom and profundity of his
sins, conte^neth all. That is y^ remediles sore, and incurable wound,
wherewith God himself charged Jerusalem, Ierem, 3,
when he said, Insanabilis fractura tua: thy rupture is irremediable. And the
Prophet Michaeas considering the same people, through the multitude of their
wickedness, to incline now to despair of Gods goodness toward them, brake
forth into this most pitiful complaint; Mich, 1.
For this will weep and lament extremely, I will stryp off my clothes and
wander naked: I will rore like unto Dragons, and sound out my sorrow at
Struthious in the desert, for that the wound and malady of my people is
desperate.

This is that great and maine impediment, The misery of desperation.
that stops the conduits of Gods holy grace, from flowing into the soul of
a sinful man. This is the knyfe that cutteth in sunder all those heavenly and
blessed cords, wherewith our sweet Lord and Savior endeavors to draw unto
repentance the hearts of sinners, saying by his Prophet, Hosea, 11,
I will pull them unto me, with the chains of love and charity. For by this
means every sinful conscience comes to answer almighty God, as did
Jerusalem, when being admonished of her sins, and exhorted by his Prophet to
amendment of life, she said, Desperaui, nequaquam faciam, Ierem, 2.
I am become desperate, I will never think of any such thing. To which
lamentable estate when a sinful man is once arrived, the next step he makes,
is, (for avoiding al remorse and trouble of conscience) to engulfe him self
into the depth of all detestable enormities, and to abandon his soul to the
very sinck of al filth and abominations, according as S. Paul said of the
Gentiles in like case, Ephe, 4.
That by despair they delivered themselves over to a dissolute life, thereby
to commit all manner of uncleanness. Which wicked resolution of the impious, is
the thing, (as I have noted before) that most of all other offenses upon earth,
does exasperate the ire of GOD, depriving his divine Majesty of that most
excellent property, wherein he chiefly delights and glories; which is, his
infinite and unspeakable mercy. The thing wherein God most delights, is mercy.
This might be declared by diverse and sundry examples of holy writ, how beit
two only shall suffice for this present.

The first is of the people of Israel, not long before their banishment into
Babylon, who being threatened from God by the Prophet Jeremy, that manifold
punishments were imminent over their heads, for their grievous sins committed
against his Majesty, began (in sted of repentance) to fall to desperation, and
consequently, resolved to take that impious course of all dissolute life,
alleged before out of S. Paul: for thus they answered God exhorting them by
his threats to reform their wicked lives. We are now grown desperate, and
therefore we will hereafter follow our own cogitations, A desperate resolution.
and every one fulfill the wickedness of his own conceit. Whereat God stormed
infinitely, and brake forth into this vehement interrogatio^; Interrogate
Gentes, quis audiuit talia horribilia? Ierem, 18,
Ask and enquire of the very Gentiles, whether ever among the^ were heard any
such horible blasphemies.

And after this, for the more declaration of this intolerable injury herein
offered to his Majesty: he commanded the Prophet Jeremy to go forth out of
his own house, and to get him to a Potters shop^ which in ye Village was
framing his vessels upon the wheel. Which Jeremy having done, he saw before
his face a pot crushed and broken by the Potter al in pieces upon the wheel,
and thinking thereby that the vessel had been utterly unprofitable and to be
cast away, A marvelous example of Gods clemency.
he saw the same clay presently framed agai^e by the Potter into a new
vessel, more excellent then before. Whereat he meruailing, God said unto him;
Do not thou think (Jeremy) that I can do with the house of Israel, as this
Potter has done with his Vessel? or is not ye house of Israel in my hands,
as the clay in ye hands of this craftesman? I will denounce upon a sudden
against a Nation and kingdom, that I will root it up and destroy it, and if
that Nation or Kingdom do repent from their wickedness, I also will repent me
of the punishment which I intended to lay upon them. And the^ he proceeds
forward, declaring unto Jeremy the exc^eding grief and indignation which he
conceiueth, that any sinner whatsoever, should dyspaire of mercy and pardon at
his hands.

The second example is, of ye same people of Israel, during the time of their
banishment in Babylon, at what time, being afflicted with many miseries for
their sins, and threatened with many more to come, for that they changed not
the course of their former wicked conversation: they began to despair of Gods
mercy, An other example of Gods wonderful mercy.
and to say to the Prophet Ezechiell that lived banished among them, and
exhorted them to amendment upon assured hope of Gods favor toward them;
Ezech, 33,
Our iniquities and sins do lie grievously upon us, and we languishe in them:
and what hope of life then may we have? At which cogitation and speech, God
being greatly moued^ appeared presently to Ezechiel, and said unto him. Tell
this people I do live says the Lord God of hosts, I wish not the death of
the impious, but rather that he should turn from his wicked wa^es and live.
Why will the house of Israel die in their sins, rather then turn unto me. And
then he makes a large and vehement protestation, that how grievously soever
any person should offend him, and how great punishments soever he shall
denounce against him, yea, if he had given express sentence of death and
damnation upon him, yet Si egerit paenitentiam a peccato suo, feceritque
iudicium et iusticiam: that is, if he repent himself of his sins, and
exercise Judgment and justice to be used in true repentance, that is, judgment
upon our selves, and justice toward others.
judgment and justice for the time to come, all his sins that he has
committed shall be forgiven him (says almighty God,) for that he has done
judgment and justice.

And this now might be sufficient, (albeit nothing else were spoken) for
remoouing this first obstacle and impediment of true resolution, which is the
despair of Gods infinite goodness and mercy. Nevertheless, for more evident
clearing and demonstration of this matter, and for the greater comfort of such
as feel themselves burdened with the heavy weight of their iniquities
committed against his divine Majesty: I have thought expedient in this place,
to declare more at large, this abundant subject of endless mercy, toward al
such as will truly turn unto him; in what time, state, condition, or age
soever in this life, which shall be showed and set down by these four points
and parts that do ensue. Four parts of this Chapter.


The first part, touching the love that God bears toward man.
FIrst of all, by the infinite and incomprehensible love ye almighty God
bears unto man, which love is always ye Mother of favor, grace, and mercy.
If you demand of me in what sort I do prove that the love of God is so
exceeding great toward man, I answer as the Cosmographer is wont to do, who
by the greatness and multitude of ye streams and Rivers, does frame a
conjecture of the Fountain from which they flow, The proper Rivers which are
derived and do run forth of love, are good turns and benefits, which seeing
they are infinite, endless and inestimable, bestowed by God upon man, (as in
the place before has been declared, and the whole universal frame of this
world does abundantly bear witness,) it follows most evidently, that the
origin, fountain, and wel-spring of al these favors, graces, and good
turns, must needs be infinite, immeasurable, and far surpassing all compass
of man's understanding.

If you require of me the cause and reason, why Almighty God should so
wonderfully be affected toward man, I can directly yield ye none at all, but
rather marvel thereat with holy Job, Job, 7.
why so sovereign a Majesty should set his heart upon so base a subject.
Notwithstanding, the holy Scripture seems to allege one principal reason of
his love, when it says; Wisd, 11,
N^hil od^sti ^orum que fecisti, et parcis omnibus, quia tua sunt Demine, qui
diligis animas. That is, Thou (o Lord) which love souls, can not hate
those things which thou have made, but do use mercy toward all men, for
that they are thine. And the like manner of reasoning uses God himself, when
he says by the Prophet Ezechiel: The first cause why God loves us, for that
he is our Creator, and we are his own works. Ezech, 18.
Behold, all souls are mine, and heerevpon he infers a little after,
Numquid voluntatis me^ est mors impij: Can I have the will to damn a wicked
man, seeing yt his soul is mine, created and redeemed by me? as who would say,
this were a case against all order and equity. And the reason of this manner of
speech and argument is, for that every man naturally is inclined to love the
things that be of his own making. So we see, that if a man have an Orchard,
wherein be great variety of Trees and plants, yet if there be but one of his
own peculier grafting, that florisheth and prospers well: he takes more
delight therein, then in any of the rest, for that it is his own workmanshyp.
So in like manner, if a man have a Vineyard of his own planting and trimming.
Every man given to love his own.
For which respect the holy Prophet David, finding himself and the whole
kingdom of Jury in great affliction and calamity, thought no other means so
forcible to draw God to compassion and commiseration of their case, as to cry
out to him in this manner; Psalm, 79.
Thou which gouernest Israel, look toward us and be attent. Thou have brought
forth a Vineyard out of Egypt, thou have purged the same from Gentiles, and
have planted it. Thou O God of all power, turn toward us, look upon us from
heaven, and visit this thy vineyarde which thine own right hand has
planted. The like manner of persuasion used the holy Prophet Esaias to move God,
when he said; Look upon us I beseech thee, O Lord, which are the work of
thine own hands.

But above all other, the blessed man Job, Job. 10.
stands as it were, in argument and dysputation with God about this matter,
The confidence of Job, in that God had made him.
saying, have not thy hands made me? have they not framed me of clay and earth?
have not thou compacted me as cheese is made of milk? have not thou knyt my
bones and sinews together, and covered my flesh with skyn? have not thou
given me life, and conserved my Spyrite with thy continual protection? how
soever you seem to dissemble these matters and hide the^ in thy heart, yet I
know that thou remembrest them all, and art not unmindful of them. By which
words this holy man signified, that albeit god suffered him greatly to be
tempted and afflicted in this life, so far forth as he might seem to have
forgotten him, yet was he well assured that his divine Majesty could not of
his goodness forsake or despise him, for that he was his creature, and the
proper workmanshyppe of his own hands. In which very name of workmanship, holy
David took such great comfort, considering that the workman cannot choose but
be loving and favorable toward his own work, (especially so excellent and
bountiful a workman, as is almighty God, toward a work made as man is, to his
own shape and likeness,) that in all his necessities, yea even in his greatest
infirmities of flesh, and most grievous offenses committed against his
Majesty, he conceiueth most assured hope of mercy and pardon, upon this
consideration, that he was his workmanship, The assured hope David had, in that
he was gods workmanshyppe. Psalm, 102.
and consequently well known to his divine wisdom, of how brickle and infirm
a metal he was made. For thus at one time among other, he reasons of this
matter. Look how far distant the East is from the West, so far off has God
removed our iniquities from us. Even as a father does take compassion of his
own children, so does the lord take mercy upon us, for that he well knows the
mould whereof we are made, and does remember that we are nothing else but dust.

In which discourse, the holy Prophet makes mention of two things that did
assure him of Gods mercy, the one, that God was his Creator, and maker, and
thereby privy to the frailty of his constitution and nature, the other, that he
was his Father, whose property is to have compassion on his children; and this
is a second reason, The second reason of assurance of Gods love, for that he is
our Father.
more strong and forcible perhaps then the former, why every man may be most
assured of pardon that heartily turns unto almighty GOD; considering that it
has pleased his divine Majesty, not only to be unto man a Creator, (as he is
to all other things,) but also a Father, which is the title of the greatest
love and conjunction, that nature has left to things in this world. Whereof a
certain Philosopher said well, that no man could conceive the love of a
Parents heart, but he only yt had a child of his own. For which respect, our
Savior Christ to put us in mind of this most fervent love; and thereby as it
were, by one fire to enkindle another within our hearts, did ^se oftentimes and
ordinarily, to repeat this sweet name of Father in his speeches to his
followers^ Math, 5.6.7, 8, etc.
and thereupon founded diverse most excellent and comfortable dyscourses; as at
one time when he exhorted them from overmuch car^ and worldly solicitude: he
adds this reason; Math. 6.
Your Father in Heaven knows, that you have need of these things. As who
would say, he knowing your wants, and being your Father, you shall not need
to trouble your selves with too great anxiety in these matters, for that a
fathers heart cannot but be provident and careful for his children. The like
deduction makes he in the same place, to the same effect, by comparison of
the birds of the air, and other irresonable creatures; for which, if God do
make (says he) so abundant provision, as all the whole world may witness
that he does: much more careful will he b^ to provide for men that are his own
children, which are more dear unto him then any other terrestiall thing
created.

All which speeches and reasons of our Savior, are derived from the nature and
property of a Parent, What a Father God is.
which cannot but affect and love his children; especially such a Father, whom
Christ calls celestial, who in this perfection of true fatherly love, so
far exceeds all earthly Parents put together, as in power, clemency and
goodness, almighty God surpasses the infirmity of his feeble creatures. Such a
father, as has not only given life and being unto his children, but also (as
S. Paul says, Gala, 4,
) has poured into their hearts the divine spirit of his only eternal Son,
styrring them up to most assured confidence and invincible hope, in his
fatherly goodness and protection. And upon assurance of this hope, have as well
sinners as Saints from the beginning, fled unto him confidently under this
title of paternitie, and never were deceived. So the Prophet Esaias, as well in
his own name, as in the name of the sinful people of Israel, doubted not to
cry, Esaias, 63.
Thou art our Father, Abraham has not known us, and Israel is ignorant of
us: Thou O Lord, art our Father, thou art our Redeemer. And to confirm this
assurance unto us, Christ sent that most sweet and comfortable embassage unto
his Disciples, Christ's comfortable embassage.
presently upon his resurrection: John, 20.
Go and tell my brethren, that I do ascend unto my Father, and unto your
Father: unto my God, and unto your God. By which words of Father, and God, the
one of love and the other of power: the one of will, the other of ability, he
took away al doubt of not speeding, from each man that should make recourse to
this merciful Lord and Father. God himself also, after many threats used by
the Prophet Jeremy against the people of Israel for their sins, in the end,
least they should despair, turns about his talk, and changes his style,
assuring them of many graces and favors, if they would return unto him; How
greatly ye respect of a Father moves GOD.
telling the house of Israel, that he had loved her from the beginning^ and
had sought to draw her unto him by threats, to the end he might take mercy
upon her, and that now he intended to build her up again, to adorn her with
joy and exultation, to gather her children from all corners of the earth, to
refreshe them with the waters and Rivers of life, and all this (says he) Quia
factus sum Israeli Pater: for that I am become now a father to Israel. And in
the same place to wicked Ephraim (the head City of the rebellious kingdom of
Samaria,) he says, Ierem. 31.
Ephraim is become my honorable son^ my delight, and deerly beloved child,
therefore my bowels are moved with compassion upon him, and in abundance of
mercy will I take pity of him. So much attributed God to this respect of
being a father unto Israel and Ephraim, and of their being his children: that
for this cause only (notwithstanding their infinite enormous sins) his
bowels of endless mercy were moved with love and compassion toward them.

And these are those tender and merciful bowels, which holy Zachary father to
S. John Baptist, Luke. 1.
protests to be in almighty God toward man kind that had offended hym^ These
are those which were in yt good old father mentioned in the gospel, who being
not only offended but also abandoned by his younger son, Luke. 16.
yet after he saw him return home again, notwithstanding he had wasted all his
thrift and substance, and had wearied out his body with wicked life, he was so
far off from disdaining to receive him, as he came forth to meet with him,
fell upon his neck and kissed him for joy: adorned him with new apparel and
rich Jewels, provided a solemn banquet for him^ The fathers liberal heart to
the prodigal Son.
invited his friends to be merry with him, and showed more exultation and
triumph for his return, then if he had never departed from him.

By which parable, our Savior Christ endeavored to set ^orth unto us, the
incomprehensible mercy of his heavenly father toward sinners, in which respect
he is truly called by his Apostle Pater misericordiarum, 2. Cor. 1.
the father of mercies. For that (as S. Bernard well notes) this sea and Ocean
of mercies, Ber. Ser. 5, de natal.
does flow peculiarly from the heart of a Father, which cannot be said so
properly of the gulf and depth of his judgments. For which cause he is called
in scripture the God of justice and re^enge, Psalm. 35,
and not the Father. And finally, this blessed name of father in God, What the
name of father does import.
does import unto us by Gods own testimony, al sweetness, al love, al
friendshyp, all comfort, all fatherly providence, care and protection; all
certainty of favor, all assurance of grace, all security of mercy, pardon,
and remission of our sins, when soever unfeignedly we turn unto him.

And in this point his divine Majesty is so forward and vehement, to give us
assurance, that being not content to set forth his love unto us by the love of
a fathers heart, he goes further, and protests unto us, that his heart is
more tender toward us in this behalf, then the heart of any mother can be to
the only child and infant of her own womb. For thus he says to Sion, which
for her sins began to doubt least he had forsaken her; Esaias, 49.
Can the Mother forget her own infant, or can she not be merciful to the
child of her own womb? if she could, yet can I not forgette or reject thee:
behold, I have written thee in the flesh of mine own hands. And this, for so
much as GOD is called our Father.

There remains yet a third consideration, The third argument of Gods love,
the giving his son for us.
which more sets forth Gods inestimable love, then any of the other
demonstrations before handled. And that is, that he gave the life and blood of
his only begotten and eternal son, for purchasing and redeeming us when we
were lost; a price so infinite and inexpiable, as (no doubt) his divine wisdom
would never have given, but for a thing which he had loved above all measure.
Which our Savior himself that was to make the payment, does plainly signify,
and therefore also seems as it were, to wonder at such a bargain, when he
says in the Gospel; John, 3,
So dearly has God (my Father) loved the world, that he has given for it
his only begotten son. In which words he ascribes this most wonderful
dealing of his Father, unto the vehemency and exc^eding abundance of love, as
does also his dearest Disciple and Apostle S. John, 1. John, 4,
saying: In this appears the great love and charity of God toward us, that
he sath sent his only begotten Son into the world, to purchase life for us.
In this (I say) is made evident his exceeding charity, Christ was given for
love.
that we not loving him, he loved us first, and gave his own son to be a
ransom for our sins. Where unto also the holy Apostle S. Paul agrees,
admiring in like manner the excessive love of god in these words; God does
meruailously commend and set forth his great love unto us, Rom, 5,
in that we being yet sinners, he gave his son to the death for our redemption.
And in another place, framing out, as it were, a measure of Gods mercy by ye
abundance of his love, says thus; God who is rich in mercy, Ephe, 2,
through the exceeding love which he bore unto us, we being dead in sin, he
revived us in Christ, and raised us up even unto heaven, making us to sit
down there with him, to the end he might declare to all ages and worlds
ensuing, the most abundant riches of his grace and goodness toward us.

This was the opinion of that noble Apostle S. Paul, and of all his coequals,
Apostles, Evangelists, Disciples and Saints: that this work of our redemption,
proceeded only from the inflamable furnace of Gods immeasurable love. And
therefore to make no other conclusion hereof, The conclusion of this point
made by S. Paul.
then that which S. Paul himself does make, If God have not spared his own
propper and only begotten son, Titus. 3.
but has given him up to death for gayning us unto him, how can it be, that
with him he has not given us al other things. If when we were his enemies,
Romans 5.
and thought not upon him, he sent to seek us so diligently, by such a
messenger as he loved so dearly, allowing him to lay down a price for us
which he so infinitely esteemed: what shall we think that he will do unto us
now, (we being made his own by our redemption,) if we return willingly unto
him: when our receiving shall cost him nothing else, but only a merciful look
upon us: which is not so much from the infinite bowels of his bottomless
mercy, as is one drop of water from the most huge gulf of the maine Ocean
sea. And this shall suffice for the first point of Gods love, declared unto us
by the three most sweet and comfortable names and respects of Creator, Father,
and Redeemer.

The second part: how God expresses his love toward sinners.
NExt after which, we are to consider in what manner God is accustomed to
express and declare this love of his, in his dealings and proceedings toward
sinners. And first of all the wise man (having had long experience of this
matter,) begins to describe and set ^oorth in this sort, saying unto God
himself, Thou (O Lord) do dissemble the sins of men, to give unto them
time of repentance. Wisd. 11^
And then when they will not use this benefit of his forbearing, but will
needs enforce him to punish and correct them, he says further of this
correction: Such as wilfully do run astray (O Lord) and will not turn unto
thee, Wised^ 12,
thou do correct them sweetly by little and little, admonishing and exhorting
them to leave their sins, and to believe in thee. These two points then of
exceeding clemency, Two rare points of clemency in God.
by the testimony of the wiseman, are found in Almighty God; first, to wincke
at the wicked life of men, and to expect their conversion with unspeakable
patience and longanimitie, according as also the Prophet Esaias bea^eth witness,
adjoining the cause thereof in these words; The Lord does attend your
conversion, to the end he may take mercy on you, and thereby be exalted. Es^y,
30.
And secondly, for the same respect when he is enforced by reason of his
justice to chastise them, yet does he the same with such moderation and
mildnes, as always in this life he reserueth place of pardon. And to these
two we may adioyne yet a third property of his mercy, more admirable (perhaps)
then the former^ which is, (as Tertullian excelle^^ly notes, Tert, in Apol.
cap. 2.
) that he being the party offended, yet first and principally desires
reconsiliation: he having received the wrong and injury, yet does he most
busily entreat for amiti^ and atonement. God that is offended, seeks
atonement with us.
And whereas in all right and equity, he might deny us pardon, and for his
power take revenge of us at his pleasure, yet does he not only offer us peace
of his own accord, but also sueth unto us by all means possible to accept
thereof, humbling (in a certain manner) his divine Majesty to our baseness and
vilitie: and behauing himself in this respect, as a Prince that were enamoured
of his bond-slaue and abject servant.

This might be declared by many of his own speeches and doings in holy
Scripture; but one place out of the Prophet Esaias shall serve for all: where
Almighty GOD so earnestly wooeth ye conversion of Jerusalem, as no lover in the
world could utter more signs and testimonies of a heart inflamed and set on
fire with love, Gods wooing of Jerusalem.
then he does toward that City which so highly had offended him. For first,
after many thr^ates poured out against her, if she did not return, least she
might perhaps fall into despair, Esaias, 25.
he makes this protestation in the beginning of his speech, Indignatio non est
mihi, etc. Angry I am not (o Jerusalem) but whatsoever I have spoken, I have
spoken of good will and love. Secondly, he enters into this dyspute, His
protestation.
and doubt with himself about punishing her for her sins, what shall I do?
Shall I tread her under my feet and put her to the fire? or else will she stay
my puissaunt hand, His cunctation.
and make peace with me, will she (I say) make atonement with me? After which
doubt and cunctation, he resolves himself to change his manner of style, and
to ^al a little to chyde with her, and then he says; Harken O ye deaf
inhabitants of Jerusalem, look about ye, ye blind folk that will not see:
His chiding.
who is blind and deaf but my servant, that will not regard or listen to the
Messengers which I send? O thou which have open ears, will thou not hear?
And then a little after he beginn^th to smooth and speak fair again, saying;
His fair speech.
Ever since thou have been gracions and glorious in mine eyes, I have loved
thee, and for thy soul will I give whole Nations. Fear not, for that I am with
thee. Wherewith she being little or nothing moved, he returns to a sweet
manner of complaynt, saying; Thou have enthrall^d me by thy sins, and with thine
iniquities thou have greatly afflicted me. His complaynt.
Which being said, and she somewhat moved thereby to love him as it seems,
he turns unto her with this most comfortable and kind speech; His kind
speech.
I am he, I am he, which cancelleth thine iniquities for mine own sake, and will
never think any more upon thy sins. All which being done, and they now
reconciled, and made fast friends together, his divine Majesty begins a
very loving conference (as it were) and sweet expostulation with her, sayiug in
these words, His conference.
Call thou to memory the things that are past, and let us judge our selves
here together. Tell me if thou have any thing whereby thou may be justified.
Thy first Parent was a sinner, etc. Whereat she being ashamed, and having
nothing in the world to answer for her self, almighty God comforts her, and
knitteth up ye whole matter in this most kind and amiable sort. His sweet
conclusion.
Fear not, for I will pour out my spirit upon thee, and upon thy seed, and
my benediction shall be upon thine offspring; thy children shall bud up and
flourish as willoes planted by the water side. Thus says the Lord and king of
Israel, the Lord of hosts that is thy redeemer; I am the first and the last,
and besides me there is no other God. Be mindful of this thou house of Jacob,
I have dissolved and dissipated thy sins, as a cloud is dissolved in the
air; be mindful of this, and have an assured confidence. Thus far continues
the treaty between God and his City of Jerusalem.

And now tell me (dear christian brother) whether it be possible for any heart
or tongue in the world, A consideration upon the former treaty of God with
Jerusalem.
to conceive or express more ways or significations of most vehement good
will and burning affection, then of Gods part in this treaty has been
declared? What lover or enamoured person upon earth, what passionate heart could
woo more earnestly, s^e more diligently, solicit more artificially,
complain more pitifully, expostulate more amiably, confer more intrinsically,
remitte offenses more readily, offer benefits more abundantly, conclude more
sweetly, and give more pregnant testimony of unfeigned love, or more assured
certainty of eternal league and amity, then does almighty God unto this
Nation that so greeuouslie had offended him? who will not confess now with the
Prophet David, Psalm, 144.
that sweet and merciful is the Lord, and his miserations spread over all the
rest of his most wonderful works. Who will marvel if the same prophet made
a vow, Psalm, 16.
that his everlasting song should be of the mercies of this his Lord and Maker?

But yet this thing is made much more apparent, Gods tender love to Jerusalem
when he was to destroy it.
by that which his divine Majesty did afterward to the same people in the
days of Jeremy the Prophet (above an hundred years after this treaty in the
time of Esaias) at what time God being resolved to destroy them and their
City, for their obduration in their sins, when the hour of execution drew
near, his bowels of mercy were so touched with co^miseration towa^ds them, as
he called to Jeremy, and commanded him once again to go up to the Temple
gate, where all the people did pass in and out, and there with a loud voice
to cry as follows; Hear ye the word of God, Ierem, 7,
o al you of Judah, that do pass in and out by these gates: thus says the
Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, yet do you amend your ways, and I will
dwell in this place with you. etc. And when this exhortation, and blessed
endeavor of almighty God, could not move or profit them any thing at all, then
his unspeakable goodness began with sharp threats in this manner; My fury
and indignation is gathered together against this City, Ierem, 7,
and upon the inhabitants, and upon the very beasts and Cattle thereof, as also
upon the fruit and Trees of this Region. The carkases of this people, shall be
food to the birds of the air, and to the beasts of the field, Ierem. 8.
their enemies shall come and cast forth of their Sepulchers, the bones of the
Kings and Princes of Judah; the bones of their Priests, Prophets and
inhabitants; and shall dry them at the sun, and cast them out unto the
dunghill. After al which long and dreadful commination, he alters his speech
presently again, and says with a very lamentable and pitiful voice. And
will not he that is fallen (notwithstanding all this) rise up again? A
pitiful complaint.
Will not he that is departed from me, return unto me again? O, why does my
people run from me so obstinatly? By which loving complaint, and infinite
other means of mercy that God used to that people, The wonderful proceeding of
God with Jerusalem.
when no amendment at all could be procured, his divine Majesty was enforced
to call Nabuchodonoser K. of Babylon before the walls of Jerusalem, to destroy
it. But ^uen now also consider the bowels of his unspeakable mercy. For hoping
that by this terror they might perchance be styrred up to conversion, he sent
Jeremy the Prophet to them again, with this embassage, Ierem. 35.
Tell the inhabitants of Jerusalem, will ye not yet receive discipline and
obey my words? Whereat those graceless people were so little moved, as they
took Jeremy and cast him into prison for his message, and thereby exasperated
most grievously Gods further indignation against them. Notwithstanding all
which, his incomprehensible clemency would not thus abandon them: but
commanded holy Jeremy to write out all his threats and promises in a book
together, Ierem. 36.
and to send the same unto them, forth of the prison where he lay, by his
servant Baruch, to be read in their hearing; and so he did. Whereof when Ioacim
the king had understanding; he commanded Baruch to be brought into his
presence, and there to read the Book by the fire side, (as the scripture
notes.) And when he had heard but three or four pages thereof, he cut them
out with a penknife, The obstinacy of the Jewish Nation.
and threw the whole book into the fire, and so consumed it. At which
obstinate and impious dealing, albeit Almighty God were exceedingly offended,
yet commanded he the same book to be indicted and written again, in much more
ample manner then before, thereby (if it had been possible) to have stirred up
and gained that people unto him. But when this by no means in ye world could be
brought to pass: then permitted his divine Majesty, the whole City to be
destroyed, according to his former threats, and that rebellious people to be
led away captive in bondage to Babylon. In which place and misery
(notwithstanding their demerits) his infinite mercy could not forsake them,
but sent his Prophet Ezechiell, Ezech. 23.
as also Baruch unto them, with extreme complaint of their obduration^ and yet
offering unto them mercy and pardon even then, if they would repent.

And what more wonderful clemency then this, can possibly be imagined dear
Christian brother? May in reason any man ever now enter into doubt or despair
of gods mercy, Ezech. 2, Epithetons given by God to the people of God.
how great and grievous soever the burden of his sins be, when he considers
this proceeding of his eternal Majesty with the people of Israel, for so many
years and ages together: whom himself calls notwithstanding, Gentem
Apostatricem dura facie and indomabili cord: an apostalicall Nation, of a
shameless countenance and incorrigible dysposition? Can GOD devise any more
effectual and forcible means, to erect and animate a sinner confidently to
return unto him, then are these? And yet (gentle reader) for thy further
comfort and encouragement in this behalf, I will adioyne one thing more, which
does exceed and pass all reason and reach of human imagination, and this
is, A wonderful point.
that GOD promises to a sinner that faithfully will return unto him, not only
to forgette and utterly extinguish all memory of his former iniquities, but
also to make more joy and triumph at his conversion, and to love and cherish
him more tenderly at his return, then if he had never fallen or departed from
his service. This God himself signifies by the Prophet Esaias, when he says;
Call unto Jerusalem, speak unto her heart, Esaias. 40.
(that is, comfortably,) for that her iniquity is forgiven, she has received
double at Gods hands for all her sins committed. What joy there is made at a
sinners conversion. Esaias. 30.
And more plainly in another place by the same Prophet, The light of the Moon
shall be as the light of the Sun: and the light of the Sun shall be as the light
of seven days, seven times put together, when God shall bind up the wounds
of his people, and heal their sores. And to this purpose do appertain
directly those most wonderful Parables of our Savior in the Gospel,
concerning the extraordinary joy and feasting that the careful Woman made,
Luke, 15.
when she had found again her grote that was lost, and the good sheepeheard,
when he brought back the sheep that was astray: and the merciful Father when
he received home his son that before had abandoned him. And to the same
purpose does it also appertain, that in the Prophet David God glories
especially in the service of those people, Psalm, 57^
yt before had not known him.

And this shall suffice for this second point, to show what wonderful means
almighty God does use, in setting forth his mercy, for allurement of sinners
unto repentance.

The third part, what assurance God gives to them that repent.
AND so having declared what exceeding great love and mercy God bears
toward man, and how effectually he expresses the same by his suing unto
sinners for their conversion: it follows that we should in this third place,
examine somewhat more in particulers, what certain assurance his divine
Maiesti^ gives, of undoubted pardon and full remission of their sins, to all
such as unfeignedly shall resolve themselves to make their refuge unto him.

Which thing, albeit every man by that which before has been treated, may
sufficiently conceive, yet for the importance of the matter, it shall not be
amiss in this place also, to add a word or two, for more plain and evident
demonstration thereof. And this shall be done by setting down both the words
and deeds, that is, both the promises and performance which almighty GOD has
used and exercised in this behalf, to all such as have offended him whatsoever.
And for the first, which are his promises, The promises of God to sinners^ that
repent.
most apparent it is as well by the things which before have been discussed,
as also by the whole course, body, and dryft of holy scripture, yt the promises
of mercy and pardon which his divine Majesty has made to sinners, and
whereunto by his sacred word, he has in a certain manner, obliged himself,
are both manifold, vehement, absolute, resolute and universal. Whosoever shall
depart from his wicked ways and turn unto me, Ezech. 18.33, 34.37.
(says Almighty God) I will receive him. Behold the universality of all
people and persons, without excluding any. And then further, At what time
soever an impious man shall return unto me from his impiety, his wickedness
shall not hurt him, says the Lord GOD of hosts. See the universality of al
times and seasons without exception. But yet harke^ what God adds besides.
Leave off to do peruersly, Esaias. 1.
(says he to the Jews etc.) and then do you come and find fault with me if
you can. For if your sins were as red as skarlet, they shall be made as white
as snow. etc. Consider the universality of al kind of sins, be they never so
grievous, so horrible, or heinous. And finally, God talking to a soul that
has oftentimes fallen and most infinitely offended him, Ierem, 3.
he says thus; It is a common received speech, that if a woman depart from
her husband, and do join herself to another man, she may not return to her
first husband again, for that she is defiled and made contaminate. And yet
where as thou have departed from me, and have committed fornication with many
other lovers, do thou return unto me again, and I will receive thee, says
Almighty GOD.

By which words is expressed the fourth universality, containing all states,
qualities, and conditions of men, how many ways, or how oftentimes, or how
contemptuously soever they have committed sins against his divine Majesty.
And what may be added now more unto this? was there ever Prince that made so
large an offer to his Subjects? or was there ever Father that gave so ample and
universal promise of pardon unto his children? Four universalities in Gods
promises to sinners.
Who can now mistrust himself to be excluded from this assurance of mercy,
wherein all sorts of people, all kind of sinners, all times and seasons, all
states and qualities of sinners are comprehended? O most miserable and
unfortunate man, that excludes him self, who^ God excludes not. What is
there in this general and universal promises, whereof any man in the world
should have pretense, to make any least doubt or question? Of the meaning
(perhaps) and intent of him that promises, o dear brother, it is only love
and charity; and consequently cannot deceive us.

Of the truth and surety of his promises? It is infallible, and more certain
then heaven and earth put together. Of the power that he has to perform his
promises? it is infinite, and not restrained by any bounds or limitation:
Points of great comfort.
whereof then may we doubt? or in which of these three points may we not
conceive most singular consolation? Hear the comfortable meditation yt blessed
S. Bernard made upon these three particulers which we have now mentioned.
Bern. ser. in ver. Psalm. miseric. Doin ^ter. Can.
Tria considero (says he) in quibus tota spes mea consist^t, charitatem
vocationis, veritatem promissionis, potestatem redditionis. etc.

That is, I do consider three things (says this holy man) wherein al my hope
consists, and whereby it is made inuinsible. First, the exceeding love and
charity of him, that calls me to him by repentance; secondly, the infallible
truth and certainty of his promise which he makes to me of pardon and mercy;
thirdly, the endless power and ability he has to perform whatsoever he
promises. This is that triple or three^fold rope and chain, which holy
Scripture says is hardly broken, Eccle. 4,
for that by this rope let down unto us from heaven (which is our Country)
into this world, that is our prison, we may ascend and mount up (if we will)
even unto the sight and possession of Gods eternal kingdom and heavenly glory.
Thus far that blessed Father.

But now to the second poyn^, How God has performed his promises to sinners
that have repented.
if we consider how faithfully almighty God has put in execution those
promises of his from time to time, and how no one man upon earth, (so many ages
as the world has continued) was ever yet frustrate of this hope, in making his
conversion unto his Majesty, if he made it from his heart; we shall find
further cause for us to confide. For so much as it is not probable, or in
reason to be imagined, that he which never failed in times past, will break his
promise for the time to come; especially seeing now in Christianity, when we
have this advantage above other former times (as S. John does also note) that
he who was and is our Judge, 1, John, 2.
is become also our advocate to plead our cause.

Cast back thine eyes then my loving brother, and take a view of all ages,
times and seasons past and gone. Begin from the first creation of the world,
and come downwarde even unto this day: Never sinner repented that was not
pardoned.
and examine indifferently whether in all this wide compass of times, persons,
places, and most grievous offenses committed against his divine Majesty, there
were ever yet any one sinner upon earth, that returned unfeignedly and was not
received. The sin of our first Parents was presently forgiven unto them, Adam
and Eve.
upon their first signification of grief and sorrow for the same. And not
only this, but our Savior also Jesus Christ was promised to be sent, Gene. 3.
for restoring them and their posterity to the glory and felicity which by
their fall they had lost. After this, until the time of Abraham and of the
people of Israel, as some works of Gods justice are recorded in holy writ,
that were exercised upon irrepentant offenders: so are there many more
celebrated of his mercy; and only two persons in particular are mentioned, who
notwithstanding some sorrow which they seemed to have of their offenses, were
yet rejected; The reiection of Caine and Esau.
the first whereof was the murderer Caine, who at the beginning denied his
wickedness unto God, and then being convicted, dispaired of remission. The
second was Esau, Hebr. 12.
whom Saint Paul calls a Profane fornicator, who found no place of
repentance albeit with tears he sought ye same. Whereof S. Chrysostom gives
the reason in these words; Chris. hom. 80. de paenit. ad pop. Antio.
For this cause Esau obtained not pardon, for that he did not repent as he
should have done, his tears proceeding rather of anger and temptation, then
of true sorrow.

When the people of Israel came to be a distinct Nation, and to be governed at
Gods appointment, how grievously (trow you) did they offend daily, and almost
hourly his divine Majesty? And how graciously did his unspeakable clemency
remit and pardon their manifold and innumerable sins and trespasses done
against him? The infinite sins of the Jewish people, and their infinite pardons
received from God.
The whole scripture (in truth) seems nothing else, but a perpetual narration
of Gods incredible patience and infinite mercies toward them. And if I would
speak of particular persons among them, which he received to his favor after
great and manifold offenses committed: there would be no end of all that
recital^.

Let Manasses that most impious and wicked king be an example for all: of whose
enormous life and most detestable acts, whole pages are replenished, The
example of Manasses.
both in the books of Kings and Chronicles; and yet afterward
notwithstanding, 4. Reg, 21, 2, Chro. 33,
the same man falling into misery and calamity among ye Babilonians, (a
fortunate school oftentimes for Princes, who in their prosperity are wont to
contemn God,) he began to be sorrowful for his former life and actions, and
became repentant (as the scripture says) in the sight of GOD for the same.
Whereat his divine and inco^prehensible mercy was so much moved presently, as
he received him to favor, and brought him back from his prison and fetters,
to his kingdom and imperial throne of majesty.

The example also of the Ninevites is very notable and singular in this
behalf, The example of the Ninevites.
against who^ almighty God having decreed a sentence of death, to be executed
within a certain time; he commanded Jonas the Prophet to go and denounce that
sentence unto them. Jonas, 1, 2, 3, 4,
But Jonas well knowing the nature and disposition of God toward mercy:
foresawe (as afterward he signifies) that if he should go and bear that
embassage unto them, and they therevppon make change of their lives, his
Majesty would presently pardon them, and so he should be taken for a false and
lying Prophet. For avoiding which inconvenience, he chose rather to flee away
by sea to the City of Tharsis, and there to hide him self. But Almighty God
raised a tempest in that journey, and disposed in such sort, as Jonas was cast
into the sea, and there received and devoured by a Whale: from whose belly he
was commanded afterward to repair to Niniuie, and to do his former message,
which he performed. And the tennour of his message was, that within forty days
that huge City of Niniuie should be destroyed. Which he having denounced unto
them, the sequel fell out as Jonas before had suspected. For the Ninevites
believing the message, and betaking themselves to repentance, God forgave them
presently, whereat Jonas was exceedingly grieved and offended, and complained
sweetly to God of his strange dealing herein, demanding why he had enforced
him to come and preach destruction unto the^, knowing before hand that he would
pardon them. But his merciful Lord answered him fully to this point, by a
certain accident that fell out, whereto Jonas was not able to reply one word.

For so it chanced, that Jonas sitting without the walls of the City
Niniuie, under an Iuie bush, that in one night by Gods appointment was sprung
up to cover him from the sun: the same Iuie by Gods ordinance perrished upon
the sudden, and was consumed by a worm, Consider this speech of almighty GOD.
leaving the poor Prophet destitute of that consolation of shadow which he
received by it. Wherewith he being not a little disquieted and afflicted, God
said unto him; thou (Jonas) art sorrowf^ll, Jonas. 4.
and much grieved for loss of thine Iuie tree, which notwithstanding thou
did not plant or make to grow, nor ^ookest any labor at all about it. But
the same grew up in one night, and in one night it perrished again. And shall
not I then be careful to pardon my great City of Niniuie, wherein there be
above an hundred and twenty thousand innocent people, which cannot distinguish
between their right hand and their le^t? This was the answer of Almighty
GOD to Jonas, for defense of his singular inclination to mercy, in respect that
the Ninevites were his own creatures, his own workmanship, and the labors of
his own hands, as all other people also are. Of which kind of reason and
consideration, there have been diverse things said and declared In the first
part of this book.
before, for manifestations of Gods infinite mercy. And all this that hitherto
has been spoken, is of things only done in time of the old Testament,
before the appearance of Christ our Savior in the flesh. But now if we look
into the time of grace, when God incarnate came himself in person, to show the
riches of his endless mercy unto mortal men upon earth: we shall see more
examples without comparison, Examples of mercy in the new Testament.
of his exceeding clemency. For that now, our Creator and sheepeheard,
ouercom (as it were) with extreme compassion, came down into the vale of our
misery, with resolution, not only to offer pardon and forgiveness to all his
sheep yt were astray and would return: but also to follow and seek them out:
and being found, to lay them on his own shoulders, L^ke, 15,
and so to bear them back unto the fold again, and there to give his life and
blood for their defen^e against the Wolf.

O sweet Lord, what greater love can be imagined then this? John, 10, 12,
what more pregnant signification of inflamed charity, can man's cogitation
conceive or apprehend? is it marvel now if he which descended unto us with
his heart, and with these bowels of burning affection, did set open the gates of
all his treasures, favors and graces unto us? Is it marvel if the Apostle S.
Paul do say of this time Superabundauit gratia, Rom, 5,
that grace did over abound; and yet further in another place, that Christ
being very God, did in a certain sort impouerish and empty himself, Phil. 2,
with the most wonderful effusion of mercies and havoc of heaven, which at
this time and ever since he has made?

Here hence it proceeded, that all his delight and pleasure upon earth, was to
converse with sinners, and to give them comfort, courage, and confidence in
him. The wonderful clemency of Jesus our Savior.
Which he did so manifestly in ye sight of all the world, as he became very
scandalous and offensive thereby to the Scribes and Pharisees, and other
principal Rulers among the Jewish Nation. Math. 9.11, Mark, 2, Luke, 5,
Heerehence also did proceed those his most marvelous speeches and strange
inuitations of wicked men unto him as for example at one time among other, when
he cried out in public. Math, 11.
Come unto me all ye that do labor and be heavy laden, and I will refresh
you. And at another time, going into the Temple of Jerusalem upon a high
festival day, when all the people were gathered together, he stood up in the
midst of them al, and brake forth into this vehement inuitation, with a loud
voice, as S. John Evangelist records; John, 7.
If any man among you be thirsty, let him come unto me and he shall drink.
Hereby it came to pass, that his divine Majesty was termed commonly^ Math,
11.
Publicanorum et peccatorum amicus, the friend and familiar of wicked publicans
and sinners. And hereof finally it did proceed, that he received al, embraced
all, and forgave all that repaired unto him; were they Scribes, Pharisees,
Soldiers, Publicans, V^urers, Harlots, Thieves, Persecutors, or whatsoever
most grievous offenders besides; (whereof particular examples in each kind
might be alleged,) assuring us furthermore, that after his resurrection, and
blessed ascenti^n to the right hand of his Father, he would be more bountiful
yet in this manner of proceeding, and draw all men unto him: John. 12.
being at one time both our Judge and Advocate, our King and Mediator, our
God and Redeemer, our Father and brother, our Priest and Sacrifice, and he that
both pleads and determines our cause together.

What then should not we hope at this tym^ (dear Christian Brother) at the
hands of this our Lord and Master, Great and many causes of assured hope in
Christ.
which has left unto us such words, such deeds, such assured evidence of his
infallible love and abou^dant mercies toward us? why should not his dealinges
with other men before us, give us heart and courage to trust assuredly in him,
for the time present and to come? Why should not his former most infinite
mercies, be unto us odoriferous alluring savors and ointments, to make us as
the spouse did in the Canticles, Cant. 10,
follow and run after him.

Hear what devout S. Bernarde does meditate upon this passage of Christ's
fragrant ointments. Ber. Ser. 5, in Cant.
O sweet Jesus (says he) the fresh and odoriferous smell of thy wonderful
clemency, does allure us to run after thee, when we hear say, that thou
dispisest not beggars, nor abhorrest sinners^ We know right well o lord that
thou did not reject ye thief that confessed thee, nor the sinful woman
that wept unto thee, nor the Chananaean that humbled herself before thee, nor
the wicked adulteress brought unto thee, nor ye touller or tribute gatherer
that followed thee, nor the publican that repaired unto thee, nor the disciple
that denied thee, nor Saul that did persecute thee, nor thy tormentors yt did
nail thy sacred body to the Cross. O Lord, all these are fragrant smelles
and savors of thy most sweet mercy: and at the sent of these thine ointments,
we do follow and run after thee. Thus far S. Bernard.

The 4^ part: the application of all that has been said.
AND so with this to come to the fourth and last part of this Chapter, and to
apply all that has been said of Gods mercy to our present purpose; What man
is there living in the world, that reading and believing these things, can
doubt or mistrust to receive pardon for their sins? If God be he that
justifies, Rom, 8.
who is able to condemn us, says the holy Apostle S. Paul? If God be minded
to deliver us, who can take us out of his hands? John, 10,
If God protest that he will pardon us, why should we make any doubt or
question thereof at al? Why should we not join rather with that confident
and faithful servant of his S. Paul, who says unto us, and to al other
sinners living, in his Masters name; Hebr. 10. S. Paul's exhortation to
confidence.
Let us repair unto him with a true heart in fullness of faith, having purged
our hearts from an evil conscience: let us hold fast an immouable confession of
our hope, seeing he is faithful which has given unto us his promises, and let
us consider how one of us may provoke another to charity and good works. By
which words, the holy Apostle signifies, yt what sinner soever shall resolve
with himself, to purge his conscience from wickedness for ye time to come, and
to employ the rest of his life in charity and good works, he may confidently
and boldly repair unto almighty God, with most certain assurance to receive
pardon and remission.

And alas (dear brother) why the^ should any man despair? Wherefore should
any man cast away his own soul, that God so much desires to save? what a
pitiful and lamentable case is it, to behold so many Christians in the world
to go languishing in their sins, and to give themselves over to all kind of
careless and dissolute sensuality, (which by god himself is called
desperation) upon this conceit and wicked cogitation, that now they are gone
so far, and so deeply rooted and habitated in this kind of life, as either
it is impossible or in vain for them now to think of change or amendment? O
dear brother, let these men harken to this excellent discourse of holy Saint
Chrisostom, which ensues.

If thou be a wicked man, (says he) think upon the Publican. An excellent
discourse and exhortation of S. Chris. hom. 2. in Psalm, 50,
If thou be unclean of life, consider the harlot. If thou be a murderer,
remember the thief. If thou be a swearer, call to mind the blasphemer. Cast
thine eyes upon Saul and Paul, first a persecutor, and then a preacher; first
a violent robber, afterward a good steward and dispenser^ First chafe,
afterward corn: first a wolf, afterward a shepherd first lead, afterward
gold: first a Pirat, afterward a good pilot: first a disperser, afterward a
gatherer together: first a breaker down of Gods vineyard, afterward a Planter:
first a destroyer, afterward a builder. Thou have seen manifold wickedness,
but now behold unspeakable mercy. Thou have heard the pride of the
servant, consider now the love and clemency of the Master. I will not thou
say to me, I am a blasphemer, I have been a persecutor, I have led an unclean
and abominable life, and therefore I doubt least I shall not be pardoned; Say
not so unto me, for here thou have examples to the contrary, in every of these
and many other sins. Thou may safely fly to what port thou list, and that
either in the old or new Testament. For in the old, thou have David, in the
new thou have Paul. I will not have thee therefore allege excuses unto me, for
covering thine own cowardnesse. Have thou sinned, repent: have thou sinned a
thousand times, repent a thousand times unfeignedly. This is the only ointment
that may be poured into an afflicted conscience^ the torment whereof I do
well know. For the devil stands by, whetting his sword of desperatian, and
saying unto thee; The speech of the devil to a soul laden with sin.
Thou have lived wickedly all thy youth, and thy former days thou have
misspent, thou have haunted plays, and spectacles with thy companions, and
followed after loose and lascivious women; thou have taken other men's goods
from them wrongfully; thou have been covetous, dissolute, and effeminate: thou
have forsworn thy self: thou have blasphemed, and committed many other
heinous and wicked crimes, and therefore what hope can thou have of
salvation? Truly none at all. Thou art a mere castaway, and can not now
go back, and therefore my counsel is, that now thou use the pleasures and
commodities of this world, and pass over thy time in mirth of heart, without
cogitation of other affairs. These are the words of the devil (loving
brother) these are the counsels and persuasions of our enemy. S. Chrisostoms
counsel against the devils temptation.
But mine are contrary. If thou have fallen, thou may rise again. If thou
have been a lost companion, yet thou may be saved. If thou have committed
fornication and adultery in times past, thou may be continent for the time
to come. If thou have haunted plays and games, thou may draw back thy foot
from henceforth. If thou have delighted in leude and evil company, thou may
hereafter acquaint thy self with good. This only is necessary, that thou
begin thy conversion out of hand, and that thou repent, and take in hand to
reform thy self, though it be at the first but a little.

Let thine eyes begin but to shed forth one tear, enter into thy conscience,
consider thy self but indifferently, examine thine actions and what they
deserve: lay before thy face the day of judgment with the torments of hell on
the one side, and the joys of heaven on ye other. Repent, confess, amend thy
life, seek a medicine for thy wound out of hand while thou art in this life,
in what state or condition soever thou be. Yea if thou be upon thy deathbedde,
and ready to breath out thy soul and spirit, fear not to repent, No time too
late to repent.
for that Gods mercy is not restrained by the shortness of tyme^ Which I speak
unto you (my dear brethren) not to make you hereby the more negligent, but
only to stir you up to the confidence of Gods mercy, and thereby to avoid
the most dangerous gulf of desperation. Hitherto are the words of this holy
and learned Father.



In which long and large dyscourse of his, we are to note, that (together with
most excellent encouragement which he gives to all sinners, of what state and
condition soever they be, in all times and seasons to trust in Gods mercy, and
never to despair) he gives also an wholesome admonishment, that we should not
by this confidence become more negligent in reforming our lives, but rather do
it out of hand, without all delay or procrastination. Whereunto in like manner
the holy Father S. Augustine in like exhortation against despair, An
exhortation and admonition of S. Augustine, Ser, 58 de temp.
does endeavor most vehemently to stir us up, in these words. Let no man
after a hundred sins^ nor after a thousand, despair of Gods mercy, but yet so
let him not despair, as he seek presently without all stay, to reconcile
himself to God by amendment of life^ least perhaps, after that by custom he
has gotten a habit of sin, he be not able to deliver himself from the
snares of the devil, albeit he would.

And in the very same sermon he discourses yet further of the same matter, in
manner following. Not every man that has sinned, but he that perseuereth in
sin, is hateful and abominable in the sight of GOD. For that no man must
distrust of Gods mercy toward him that will amend and leave his sins. For
that God himself as a most sweet comforter, has said by his prophet. Eze^
11.33,
That the impiety of a wicked man shall not hurt him, at what time soever he
shall return from the same. But yet this great mercy of the Lord, is then only
profitable unto us, if we delay not our conversion, nor do multiply sins upon
sins. Which I will declare unto you by the example of wounds and ruptures of
our body, by which, the infirmities also of our mind and soul may be conceived.

Thus then we see, A similitude of the body to express the misery of the soul
by multipliing sin.
if a man's foot, leg, or arm be broken, with how great pain the same is
restored to his accustomed strength. But if any member of our body should be
broken twice or thrice, or more often, in one and the self same place: your
charity can imagine, how hard a thing it were for that part to recover her
perfect health again. So fares it (dear brethren) in the wounds and
rup^ures of our soul. If a man do commit sin once or twice, and do unfeignedly
without dissimulation, make his refuge to the medicine of repentance, he does
out of hand obtain health again, and that sometimes without any skar or
blemish of the disease past. But if he begin to add sins upon sins in such
sort, that the wounds of his soul do rather putrify within him, by covering
and defending the^, then heal by repentance and confession, it is to be
feared, least that heavy speech of the Apostle be fulfilled in him, to who^ he
says; Rom, 2,
Do thou not know, that the benignity of God is used to bring thee to
repentance? but thou by thy obdurate and irrepentant heart, do heap to thy
self wrath, in the day of vengeance, and of the revelation of Gods just
judgment. Thus far S. Augustine.

But now (dear Christian brother) what can be spoken more effectually; either
to erect us to hope and confidence in Gods mercy, or to terrify us from
presumption in delaying our amendment, then here has been uttered by these
noble pillars and Fathers of Christ's church, Good men's words ought to move
us greatly. Eccle, 12^
and most excellent instruments and temples of his holy Spyrit? The divine
wisdom of almighty God, in a certain place, says; That ye words of wise men,
ought to be spurs unto us, and as it were nails, driven into the depth of our
hearts, meaning thereby that we should be stirred up, and most vehemently moved,
when we hear such wise men as the holy Ghost there means (which in deed are
only they yt have the knowledge and true fear of God,) make such exhortations
unto us, and give us such wholesome admonishments, as these godly Fathers in
this great affair have done. And how is it then (dear brother) that we are
nothing styrred up thereby, nothing quickened, nothing awaked? Well, I will
conclude this whole Chapter and treatise, with another exhortation and
admonishment of S. Augustine, for that besides the grave authority of the man,
(which ought to move us much,) I think nothing can be spoken more excellently,
or more agreeing to our peculier purpose, Thus then he says. A notable
discourse of S. Augustine touching our conversion. Ser. 181, de temp.
Almighty God does never despise the repentance of any man, if it be offered
unto him sincerely and simply; nay, he accepts the same most willingly,
embraces the penitent, and endeavors to reduce him to his former state
wherein he was before he fell. And that which is yet more; if a man be not able
to fulfill the whole order of his satisfaction, yet does not God refuse the
least repentance that is, though it be done in never so short a space. Neither
does he suffer the reward to perrish of any little conversion. And this does
the Prophet Esaias seem to me to signify, Esaias. 58,
when he says in gods person to the people of Israel; I have contristed thee a
little for thy sins, I have stricken thee and turned my face from thee, thou
have been sad and have walked in sorrow, and I have comforted thee again.
These examples then of repentance (dear brethren) we having before our eyes,
let us not persevere in wickedness, nor despair or reconcilliation, but rather
let us say with a confident heart, we will turn home to our Father, and present
our selves unto our God, for truly (my brethren,) he will never turn away
from the man that turns unto him. Himself has said, Esaias, 59,
yt he is a God which draws near unto us, were it not that our sins do make
a separation betwixt him and us. Let us take away then the separation and
obstacle, and so nothing shall let our conjunction with him, which he greatly
desires. For to this end did he create us, that he might bestow upon us
eternal bliss in the kingdom of heaven. He did not make us for hell, Hell not
made for man. Math, 25,
but he made his kingdom for us, and hell for the devil. So he says in the
Gospel. Come ye blessed of my father, enjoy the kingdom prepared for you,
from the beginning of the world. And to the damned; Depart from me, ye accursed
into everlasting fire, which is prepared for the devil and his angels. If then
hell fire was prepared for the devil, and the kingdom of heaven for man, from
the beginning of the world, it remains only, that we provide, not to loose
our inheritance by persisting in sin. So long as we are in this life, In this
life repentance is auailable, but not after.
how many of great soever our sins may be, it is possible to wash them away
by true and unfeigned repentance, but when we shall once depart from this world,
albeit then we do repent, (as no doubt but we shall from the bottom of our
hearts,) yet shall it avail us nothing. And albeit our teeth do gnash, our
mouth cry out, our eyes gush forth in tears, and our hearts lament with
innumerable complaints and supplications, yet shall no man hear us, no man
assist us, nor so much as with the typ of his finger give unto us a drop of
water to cool our tongue amidst her torments, but we shall receive that
lamentable answer which the rich glutton received at the mouth of Abraham;
There is between us and you a great distance, so that none may pass from us
to you, nor from you to us.



Hitherto lasts S. Augustines exhortation. And there-withal think I it good
to conclude this Treatise.

FINIS.
The end of the second and last Book, tending to Resolution.
A necessary Table, guiding the Reader to every Chapter in this Book, as
also to every particular argument handled in each Chapter.
The first Chapter. Of the manifold perils that ensue to the world, by
inconsideration: and how necessary it is for eueri^ man, to enter into
cogitation of his own estate.
The several matters handled in this Chapter.
THE charitable proceeding of GOD by his Prophets, in foretelling men of their
wickedness, and revealing the cause thereof. page, 1, The danger of
inconsideration, declared in two special causes. eodem. The complaint of the
Prophet Jeremy, for inconsideration. page, 4, The mystery and sealed secret
of inconsideration. page, 6, Lack of consideration, cause of eternal
destruction: a point that fools will not consider. 7.8^ Inconsideration the
cause of so much sin at this day. page, 10, Wilful malice, obstinate
corruption in the vanities of this life, and idle negligence: three special
causes of inconsideration. 12, 13, 14. How we must stand upon our watch, that
consideration is the only door to our watch: with the many commodities and
effects thereof, 17, 18, That all virtues are stirred up and quickened by
consideration. page, 19, How holy men exercised themselves in consideration:
namely the three first Patriarchs. Moses, Joshua, King David, king Solomon, and
king Ezechias: as also what fruit holy Job gathered by consideration: and two
principal effects ensuing thereon. page, 20, 21, 22 The importance of
consideration breefely described. page, 26
The second Chapter. That there is a God, which rewards good and evil,
against all the Atheists of old, and of our time. With the proofs alleged for
the same, both by Jew and Gentile. The matters handled in this Chapter, are
divided into four Sections.
The first Section.
IF there be a God, he is a just rewarder. 35, The works of the world declare
the workman. page, 36 How the miracles of heaven teach to know GOD. page, 37,
In what manner the earth teaches us there is a God. page, 38, How the Sea
does wonderfully show there is a GOD. 39, The parts of man in body and soul,
do amply declare God. page, 41,
The second Section.
How the Heathen proved there was a God, by their Philosophy, 43, The three
arguments of the natural Philosopher, Ex motu, ex fine, and Ex causa
efficiente. 45, 47.48, The four arguments of the Metaphisi^k, or supernatural
philosopher. The first, ens finitum. 49, The second, that every multitude or
distiction of things, proceeds from some unity as from his fountain. page,
52, The third, subordination of Creatures in this world. page, 53 The fourth,
providence in making the very least creature in the world. 55, The fi^t,
immortality of the soul of Man. 59, And the meaning of old Philosophers
touching Anima mundi. 60,
The three Arguments of the Morrall Philosopher.
1. How in the natural inclination of Man, there is a disposition to confess
some GOD or Deity. 61, The reason why there can be but one God. 63 All old
Philosophers acknowledged one GOD. 67, Cicero his opinion of the Painime gods,
how they were made. 69 2. The second argumen^ of Morrall philosophy, de vltimo
^ine, et summo hominis bon^. 69 Every thing in this world, has a natural
desire to his end. page, 70, The contention of Philosophers about the felicity
of man. page, 72, How nothing in this life can be our felicity. page, 73, 3.
The third argument, touching reward and punishment. page, 75,
The third Section.
How the Jews were able to prove God. 78, Their first proof of scripture, is
antiquity. 80, The manner of w^yting^ authorizing, and conseruing of
Scriptures: the second proof. 82, Consideration of the particular men that
wrote them, and their sincerity: the third proof. 86, Consent and approbation
of all latter Writers of the Bible, that ensued after Moses: the fou^th proof.
page, 92, The subject handled in the Scriptures, with the end whereto they
level: the fi^t proof. 94 The peculier style and phrase which they use: the
si^t proof. 97, The contents of the Scriptures: the seventh proof. 102, The
circumstaunces of prophecies set down in the Scriptures. 107 1. The prophecy
to Abraham for his posterity. 108. 2. The prophecy for ye gouernmee^t of Iud^.
110 3. The prophecy for the greatness of Ephraim above Manasses. page. 113 4.
The foresight of Moses. 115 5. The prophecy for the perpetual desolation of
Jericho. 116, 6. The prophecy for the birth and acts of King Josias. 117, 7.
The prophecy for the destruction of Jerusalem and Babylon. page, 119. 8. The
wonderful proph^cie for Cyrus king of Persia. 121, 9. The prophecies and
doings of Jeremy in the siedge of Jerusalem. 123,
Approbation of Heathen Writers: the eight proof. page, 130, 1. The creation
of the world. 131, 2. The flood of Noe. 132, 3. The long life of the first
Fathers. 132, 4. Of the Tower of Babylon. 133, 5. Of Abraham and his affairs.
134, 6. Of Isaac, Iacob^ Joseph, Job, etc. 135 7. Of Moses, and his acts. 136,
8. The story of Joshua, the Judges, and the Kings. 137 9. The things that
ensued after King Salomons days. page, 138^

The fourth Section.
The conclusion of the Chapter with the application. page, 140^ No ^xcuse can
avail of the ignorance of God. page, 141, The application to our selves of
the premises. page, 143,
The third Chapter. Of the final end and cause why man was created by God, and
placed in this world. And of the obligation he has thereby, to attend to the
affair for which he came hither.
The matters handled in this Chapter.
How man was made to serve God, and therefore cannot be free, or at his own
appointment, 146 Man shall be accountant of every idle word he utters.
page^ 146 Profitable demaundes and considerations for a man to think upon.
148, How a man may take a scantling of his own estate with God: by following
the right course for which he was sent, and shunning the wrong and dangerous
course. 151, The reason why so few are saved, 152 A perfect example of a good
conversion. 154 The complaint of worldlings in the end of their life. 158. A
comparison expressing our grief in the end for running a wrong course. 160.
The misery of a soul that has gone awry, at the last day. pag^, 161, Two rare
examples of humane felicity, in Herod the first, and Agrippa, with their
several strange, and wonderful ends, 162, 163, 164, Error in our course of
life, is not pardoned, page, 168, A rare chance that happened to Baltazar. 169,
If God examine straightly the actions of Infidels, much more will he do of
careless Christians. page, 170, The dangerous and most dreadful division from
God, our Savior, etc. 171,
The fourth Chapter. That the service which God requires of man in this
present life, is Religion: with the particular confirmation of Christian
Religion, above all other in the world.
What special points are handled in this Chapter, and first for the foremost
part.
An answer to the demand, what service God requires of us, etc, 173, The
internal and external acts and operations of Religion. 174 No way left to
obtain this service, but the light and instruction of Chris^ian Religion. 175,
How men in old time were saved without Christian Religion. 176 The difference
between our belief and the belief of the old Fathers. page, 178, Diverse
testimonies from God of the things that we believe. 181 The principal heads
of this Chapter, divided into 3. parts, and handled in four Sections. 183^ 1.
The things that past before the nativity and incarnation of Christ. 184 2.
The things done and verified from that ^yme, until his ascension. 184 3. Such
events as happened for confimation of his Deity, after his deparure. page,
eadem,

The first Section.
How Christ was foretold both to Jew and Gentile, declared in four
considerations. 184, The first consideration, touching the Messiah promised.
185, The first covenant to Adam in Paradise, 186, The same promise to Abraham
and Isaac. 187 Jacobs prophecy of the coming of Christ, page, 188, Moses
prophecy of Christ, living in the wilderness with the people. 190, David's
prophecy of Christ, four hundred years after. page, 191. Ieremies prophecy
of Christ, four hundred years after David. 194, Ezechiels prophecy of
Christ, wherein he is called by the name of David. page, 195, The prophecy of
Esaias touching Christ. 196, Daniels prophecy of Christ, in the end of Babilons
captivity. 199,
The second consideration: that Christ should be both GOD and man, six ways
proved. 202^ 1. That he should crush the devil, and break his head. page,
202, 2. That he should be a Ruler in Israel, and his name GOD. 205. 3. That
he should be called Iehoua, with the interpretation of the Rabbines. 206, 4.
That he should be called the very Son of GOD. page, 209. 5. That he should be
the word of the Father, page, 211, 6. Learned Phylo. his discourse for the
return home of the banished Jews. 214.
The third consideration: whether Christ should change the Law of Moses or no.
215 Moses Law was an imperfect Law, bringing nothing to perfection, eodem The
new Law of Christ, and the perfections thereof. page^ 217, The reprobation of
the old Law, with a promise of a new. page, 220^
The fourth consideration: wherein all particulers are foretold of Christ, for
his incarnation, birth, life, death, and resurrection. page, 222, 223, 224, The
fifth consideration: touching the mani^estation of Christ to the Gentiles. page,
225 Three peculiar ways, whereby the Gentiles might hear of Christ. 226
Prophecies touching Christ among the Gentiles by the Sibyls. page, 230 Of what
importance and authority, the Greek verses of the Sibyls were. 231 Four
several proofs for credit of the Sibils verses. page, 233, 234, 236, Of the
confession of Oracles, concerning Christ's coming. page, 241,

The second Section.
How the former predictions were fulfilled in our Savior Christ, at his being
upon earth, 244, The first consideration: of the appointed time for Christ's
birth. 241 1. proof. The general state of the world at Christ's nativity.
page, 449 2. proof. The peace of all the world at his coming. page, 250 3.
proof. The Scepter of Judah, and most horrible murders committed by Herod, 251,
253, The prophecy of Jacob touching the Scepter of Judah. 254 That the Scepter
never failed in Judah, until Herod's time. eodem.
4. proof. The destruction of the second Temple. page. 256 The building of the
second Temple, less gorgious then the first, 257. Five special prerogatives
of the first Temple. page, 259 The second Templ^ to be destroyed, presently
after Christ's passion, 261,
5. proof. The seauentie-two Hebdomades prophesied by Daniell. 261 Why the
Angel named seauenty Hebdo^mades in this place. 263 The exact number of
weeks, from the building of the second temple, to the death of Christ,
sixtie-two. 264,
6. proof. The traditions and observations of the old Jews themselves. 266
Christ hides himself in the sea. 268
7. proof. That out of Jury should rise a general Lord of the universal
world. 269 8^ proof. The general expectation of the people. page, 270
The second consideration: concerning the birth of Christ, etc. 274, Jesus
line and stock, directly of the Trybe of Judah, and lineally by his Mother, of
the peculier house of David. page eodem. The manner of his conception, and the
message made by the Angel, etc. page, 275, Jesus nativity, and in what
manner. page, 276, The place appointed for the birth of the Messiah. page, 278
The singing of the Angels, and of the Name of Jesus. page, 280 The coming of
the three Magi, or wise men of the East. 282 Prophecies of things that should
fall out in Bethleem. 284, Heathen testimonies for the star which guyded the
Wisemen. page, 285, The presentation of Jesus in Jerusalem. 287, Christ's
flight into Egypt for fear of Herod. page, 288, The benefit that Egypt
received, by Christ's flight into it. 289,
The third consideration, showing the life, conversation, doctrine, and
miracles of Jesus. page. 290, Saint John Baptist, the Messenger of the
Testament. 291, The order of Jesus preaching and doctrine, 293, The comparison
of Christ's Law, with that of Moses. page, 294, The meaning and effect of
Christ's doctrine, page, 295, The life and conversation of Jesus, testified by
his greatest adversaries. 296 Of Jesus miracles: and of the predictions of the
Messiah his miracles. 298, The confession of Jesus miracles by his very
enemies. page, 300 The calling of his Apostles and other followers. page, 301,
External miracles done by Jesus, above all power of human capacity. 302,
The fourth consideration: delivering the passion, resurrection, and ascension
of Jesus. page, 305. Christ's ascending to Jerusalem to receive his passion,
page, 307, His barbarous abusage foretold by prophecy, as also his death most
plainly, 308, The wonderful predictions of his passion, set down by the
Prophet Esaias. 309 The particulers of his passion, fore-tolde by Sibylla, page,
311, Of the miracles that fell out in his death and passion, page, 314, His
resurrection exactly fore-tolde both to Jew and Gentile, page, 315. The
appearings which Jesus made after his Resurrection, page, 317, Circumstances
confirming the true Resurrection of Jesus, page, 320, The great change in his
Disciples, by his Resurrection, page, 322, The examination of the matter by
Pilate, 322, Pylats Letters to Tyberius and his proceeding thereupon, page,
323, The opinion of the wiser sort of Jews, touching Jesus resurrection at
that time, 325, Likeli-hoodes of truth, concerning Jesus ascension. page, 326,

The third Section.
How Jesus proved his Deity after his departure to heaven. page, 328, The
first consideration: declaring the sustentation, protection, increase, and
continuation of Christ's little Church and kingdom, etc. 330 The state of
Christ's first Church, etc, 331 The coming of the holy Ghost, and what
comforts he brought with him. etc. 332, The wonderful quick increase of
Christ his Church. 334, The increase of Christians against nature, 335
The second consideration: concerning the Apostles of Christ^ 337 The miracles
reported of the Apostles could not be fained, etc. 339, 340, The success of
the Apostles. 342, The assurance and ioy^ull ending of the Apostles. 344,
The third consideration, treating of the Evangelists. page, 346, The different
qualities and circumstaunces of the four Evangelists. 347, Circumstances of
truth in the Evangelists. page, 348 The publishing of the Gospels, and the
manner of style used by the Evangelists. 349, 350, A special point to be
observed in the Evangelists. page, 351 No doubt but we have the true writing of
the Evangelists. 353
The fourth consideration: of Martyrs, that by their blood should confirm
^hys doctrine. 354 Three points to be considered in our Martyrs, and the
singular alacrity of Christians in their sufferings. page, 355, Jesus
assistance to his Martyrs. 357,
The fifth consideration: concerning the subjection of the infernal spirits.
358, Of the myraculous ceasing of Oracles, at Christ's appearing. 359 The
wonderf^ll authority of Christians over Spyrits. page, 364
The sixth consideration: of the punishment of Christ's enemies here on earth.
page, 367, Herod Ascolonita: Archelaus: Herod Antipas: Herodias daughter: Herod
Agrippa: and the stock of Herod soon extinguished. page, 368, 369, 370. The
punishment of the Romans. 371 The chastisement of Jerusalem, and of the Jewish
people. page, 373 With what circumstaunces Christ's death was punished upon the
Jews. page, 375, A marvelous promise of God, for delivering the Christians
that were in Jerusalem. 377 The Jewish misery after the destruction of
Jerusalem. page, 378, The final desol^tion of the Jewish Nation. page, 379,
The seventh consideration: the fulfilling of such speeches and prophecies, as
Jesus uttered on earth. 380 The circumstaunces of the time when Jesus spoke his
words, and when they were written, page, 382, The testimony of a Heathen, for
the fulfilling of Christ's prophecies, page, 383, Other prophecies of Jesus,
fulfilled to his Disciples, page, 384, Prophecies fulfilled in the sight of
Gentiles. page, 385,

The fourth Section.
The sum of the three former Sections, with eight demonstratiue reasons for
better satisfaction, page, 387, 388, 389, etc, The conclusion of the Chapter,
with an admonishment, page, 395, An illation upon the premises, with an
exhortation. page, 397,
The fifth Chapter. How a man may judge or discern of himself, whether he be
a true Christian or not: with a declaration of the two parts belonging to that
profession: which are, belief and life.
The matters handled in this Chapter.
The first part, concerning our belief, how to examine the truth thereof.
page, 402, The matters of faith and belief, easy among Christians. page, 403
The direct holy way of Christians under the Gospel, page, 404, No heresy
finally prevailed against the Scriptures. page, 410, The spiritual sword,
wherewith our Savior Christ prevailed against satan, the head Lord and
^hiefe master of all heretics, 414 What the diligent reading of the
Scriptures leads us unto, forsaking the by paths of men's inventions and
traditions, page, 414, A description of the form, force, and nature of faith.
415. The fullness of faith contains in it three especial things. page, 417.
That which is meat to the flesh, that is faith to the soul. 418, A conclusion
of this first part, according to Saint Jerome. 420,
The second part of this Chapter, concerning life and manners. 422, Two causes
of heresy, according to the opinion of the holy Fathers, of Christ's primative
Church. page, 422, The doings of Precismatiques. 423, The observation of S.
Cyprian, concerning the original causes of heretics, 424. Many causes of
evil life. ^odem The effect of Christ's most excellent Sermon on the
Mountain. page, 425, A similitude touching faith and works. 428, The sum of
faith and works. 429, What we promise in our Baptism. 435,

The sixth Chapter. Of the only impediment which is wont to let sinners from
resolution: which is, the mistrust and diffidence in Gods mercy, through the
multitude and grieuousnes of their offenses.
Despair, an ordinary temptation to the greatest greatest sinners. page 439,
The shypwrack of souls ouerloden with sin. 440 The woeful mysery of
desperation. 441 The thing wherein GOD most delights, is mercy. page, 442 A
marvelous example of Gods clemency. 444 An other example of Gods wonderful
mercy. page 445, Judgment and justice to be used in true repentance. page,
446 The division of this Chapter, into four especial parts. eodem. The first
part, touching the love that God bears toward man. 447, The first cause why
God loves us: for that he is our Creator, and we are his own works. 448 Every
man is given by nature to love his own. page 449, The confidence of Job, in
that GOD made him. page, 450, The assured hope David had, in that he was Gods
workmanshyp. page, 451, The second reason of assurance of Gods love, for that
he is our Father. 452 What a Father GOD is. 453, Christ's most comfortable
embassage. 454, How greatly the respect of a Father moves GOD. page, 455. The
Fathers lyberall heart to the prodigal^ son. page, 456 What the name of Father
does import. 457 The third argument of Gods love; the giving of his son for
us. page, 458, The conclusion of this point, made by Saint Paul. page, 460
The second part; how God expresses his love toward sinners. 461, Two rare
points of clemency in God. 462, God that is offended, seeks atonement with
us. page 463, Gods wooing of Jerusalem. page, 464, A consideration upon the
former treaty of God with Jerusalem. 466, Gods tender love to Jerusalem, when
he was to destroy it. 467, A pitiful complaint used by God for the
wilfulness of his people. 468, The wonderful proceeding of God with Jerusalem.
page, 469, The obstinacy of the Jewish Nation. 470, Epithetons given by GOD,
to the people of Israel. page, 47 A wonderful point included in Gods promise
to a sinner. page, ^ad. What joy there is made at a sinners conversion, page,
472,
The third part, what assurance God gives to them that repent. 473, The
promises of GOD to sinners that repent, 474, Four universalities, in Gods
promises to sinners. page, 476. Three special points of great comfor^. 476,
How God has performed his promises to sinners that have repented, 477, Never
sinner repented that was not pardoned. page, 478, The reiection of Caine and
Esau, 479. The infinite sins of the Jewish people, and their infinite pardons
received at Gods hands, 479, The examples of Manasses and the Ninevites,
480.481, A speech of God to be heedefully considered, 483, Examples of mercies
in the new Testament. 484. The wonderful clemency of Jesus our Savior. page,
485, Great and many causes of assured hope i^ Christ, 487,
The fourth part, being the application of all that has been said before.
488, Saint Paul's exhortation to confidence, 489, An excellent discourse, and
exhortation of S. Chrysostom. 490, The speech of the devil to a soul laden
with sin, 492 Saint Chrisostomes counsel, against the devils temptations.
492^ No time too late to repent, 493. An exhortation and admoni^ion of Saint
Augustine. 494, A similitude of the body, to express the misery of the soul
by multiplying sin, 496, Godly men's words ought to move us greatly, page. 497
A notable discourse of S. Augustine, touching our conversion. 498, Hell was not
made for man, but for the devil. 499, In this ly^e repentance is auailable,
but not after. page, 500,

FINIS.

