A CHRISTIAN DIRECTORIE GVIDING MEN TO THEIR SALVATION. DIVIDED INTO THREE
BOOKS. THE first vvherof apperteining to Resolution, is only contained in this
volume, divided into two parts, and set forth now again with many
corrections, and additions by the Author him self, with reprofe of the
corrupt and falsified edition of the same book lately published by M. Edm.
Buny. THERE is added also a method for the use of al; with two tables, and a
preface to the Reader, which is necessary to be read.

Psalm. 4. v. 3. Filij hominum vt quid diligitis vanitatem. You children of men
why love you vanity. Luc. 1. v. 22. Porro vnum est necessarium. But one thing
is necessary. ANNO. 1585. AVGVSTI 30.

A TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS CONTAINED IN BOTH THE PARTS OF this book. Wherein
such as have been newly added or much altered in this edition, are noted with a
star in the margent.
In the first part are these 12.
1. Of inconsideratio^.
OF the manifold perils and inconuenie^cies that do it sue to the world by
inconsideration, and how necessary it is for every man to enter into
cogitatio^ of his own estate. Chap. 1 pa. 1. 2. That there is a God.
That there is a God which revvardeth good and evil, against al Atheistes of
old and of our time, with the most invincible proofs alleged for the same
both by Jew and Gentile. VVherin also is set down the confirmation of al
scriptures by evident demonstratio^s. Chapt. 2. page 25. 3. Why man was created.
Why God created man, and for what end he planted him in this world, and of
the obligation that man has thereby to attend to the affair for which he was
sent hither; to wit, unto the service of almighty God. ^ 4. Proofs of
Christian religion.
That this service required by God, must be in Christian religion; the
particular proofs and confirmations of which religion, are set down both by
that which passed before Christ's appearance upon earth, while he was in
this life, and after his ascension into heaven. Chap. 4. page 132. 5. Who is a
true Christian.
How a man may judge or discern of himself, whether he be a true Christian
or not; with a declaration of the two parts belonging to that profession,
which are belief and life. Chap. 5 page 298. 6. Two parts of good life.
Of the two principal points that do appertain to a Christian life; that is
to say: taresist al sin, and to exercise al kind of virtue; with the
means and method how to perform them both. Chap. 6. page 323 Of the
account which Christians must 7. Of the accompting day.
yield to God of the duties and offices before rehearsed. As also the Majesty,
severity, terror, and other circumstances of that reconing day, with two
several times appointed for that purpose. Chap. 7. page 349. Of the nature of
sin, and of the vnvvorthines 8. Of the nature of inn and inners.
of him that commits the same; for iustifyinge the severity of Gods
judgment set down and declared in the chapter going before. Chap. 8. page
378. An other consideration for the further 9. ^ Majesty and benefits.
justifying of Goas (...) (...) (...) station of our grievous offense. Taken
from the iuestimable Majesty of him whom we offend, and of the innumerable
benifices which he has bestovved. Chap 9. page 400. Of what opinion we shall
be concerning 10. Of the day of our departure.
the matters aforsaid, at the time of our diath; as also what our state shall be
at that passage, and how different our judgment from that it is now. Chap.
10 page 419. Of the great and severe pains and punishments 11. Punisheme^tes
after death.
appointed by God for sinners after this life. As also of two kinds and
sorts thereof, the one temporal for them that shall be saved, the other eternal
for the damned. Chap. 11. page 444. Of the most honorable, excellent, and
munificent 12. Of rewards after this life.
rewards and paimentes, ordained for such as truly serve God, and do employ
their time in perfourmance of his most holy commandementes. Chap. 12. page
479.
In the second part are these 8.
1. Despair of Gods mercy.
Of the first impediment that is wont to let sinners from resolution. Which
is, the mistrust and diffidence in Gods mercy, through the multitude and
grieuousnes of their offenses. Chap. 1. page 523. The second let of resolution;
which is, the suposed hardness and asperitie of virtuous life. The 2. Against
supposed difficulties.
fallacy vvherof is discovered, and the manifold helps declared, that do
make the same most easy, svveet, and pleasant. Chap. 2 p. 570. The third
impediment that stays diverse 3. Fear of persecution.
men from resolution in Gods service. Which is, the fear they conceive of
persecution, affliction loss, danger or tribulation. Chap. 3 page 631. The
fourth and greatest impediment that 4. The love of the world.
hinders resolution, to vvitte: The love and respect which men bear to the
pleasures and vanities of this world. Chap. 4. page 688. 5. Examples of true
resolution.
Examples of true resolution in the two former points; of suffering for
Christ, and contemning the world. Adioined for the better declaration and
confirmation of the two chapters next going before. Chap. 5. page 747 The fist
impediment of resolution, in the 6. Against presumption.
service of almighty God. Proceeding of over much presumption in the mercy of
our Savior, without remembrance of his justice. Chap. 6. page 793. The sixth
thing that uses to stay and hinder 7. Against delay.
men from mature resolution. Which is, the deceitful hope and persuation to
do it better or with more ease afterward. Chap. 7. p. 818 Of three other
lettes and impedimentes 8. Sloth, Negligence and obduration.
that hinder men from resolution, to wit; Slothfulnes; careless negligence; and
hardness of heart, utterly contemning al things: with the conclusion of this
first book. Chap. 8. p. 852.
THE PREFACE CONTAINING THE CAUSES AND REASONS OF this new edition, as also a
detection of the foul and false dealing of M. Edm. Buny Minister, in his late
edition of the former book.
With certain instructions very profitable to the reader.
WHEN of late I had taken in hand to finish and send unto thee (dear Christian
reader) the other two The reason of printing again this first book of
Resolution.
books, that were promised of this work, I mean those two which should treat
of the right entrance and faithful perseverance in the service of almighty
God: I was moved by diverse friends, first of al to put again in print (in some
better order then before) the first book appetteining to resolution. Whereunto
I was the more easy to be induced, for that I perceived many months before,
that all the first copies of the said former book, (though not so well done as
justly I might have wished) were wholy dispersed and none remaining to be had.

Secondly, it being now purposed that these second and third books should pass
forth in better print, paper, and character, then the former did, (wherein by
some error, as also by difficulty of the time, great defect was found:) it
seemed mere and requisice, that this first book (of which the other two do
depend) should be made correlpondent unto them in these respects also, and for
that consideration to be reprinted.

Whereunto when I had yielded; I resolved in like manner, to take the same first
book into my hands again, and to bestow a short renew upon that which already
was done, as well to polish and fill up some things, whetin before for want of
leisure and time, I could not give to my self any reasonable conteatation, as
also to a dioine certain new chapters, which partly in mine own concept, and
partly also upon New additions.
information of others, I thought not unmeet for the furnishing of this first
argument and subject of Resolution. And standing determined upon this, as also
comprehending in mind and cogitation, the whole general corpse of that which was
to ensue in the other two books: The whole work divided into two volumes.
I well saw that I should not be able (according to my first designement) to
compact the whole, in one reasonable volume; and therefore I resolved to divide
the same into two. Waerof the first should contain matter of 1. Speculatiue.
discourse, know edge, speculation, and confideration, to move us to resolve;
the second should handle things appetteining to exercise, 2. Practive.
use, and practice, for putting in execution our good desires after resolution.

This being my cogitation, and the matter now well forward for the print; I was
informed of two other editions come forth of my Two editions of the book of
Resolution without the authors knowledge.
forsaid book without my knowiedge, the one by a Catholic (as it seems)
who perceuing ai copies of the former print to be spent; for satisfying of them
that desired the book, procured the same to be set forth again, albeit
somewhat incorrected, and very disordrely, not having the consent or advise of
such, as therein should have given him best direction. The second was published
by one Edmund Bany minister at Bolton Percy (as he writes) M. Ed. Bany.
in the liberties of York; who with public license under my Lord Archbishop
of York his protection, set forth the same to the benefice of his brethren;
but yet so punished and plumed, (which he terms purged;) as I could hardly by
the face discern it for mine, when it came unto my hands, and I took no
small compassion to see how pitifully the poor thing had been handled.

Of this edition then of M. Buny, (letting Of M. Bunies edition.
pass the other as a matter only of a discretion without malice,) I have to a
laertise the reader some few things, as well for mine own discharge, wherein I am
charged by him, as also for the readers admonishment, not to think in deed
that book to be mine, which in my name this preacher has published. And for
uttering that which I have to say in some kind of order Four points of this
preface.
and conueniencie of method; I shall touch breefly in this preface those
principal points ensuing.

First, how this book came forth from me

Secondly, how it was set forth afterward

Thirdly, what he means by his treatise

Fourthly, how the same book comes

of the first edition.
TO show how this book came forth at the first; it shall be requisite, perhaps,
to repeat breefly i^ this place, the things that I said in my first preface
and induction; which preface and induction, M. Buny has left out in his
edition, protesting, That he durst not in conscience and In his preface to the
reader.
in duty toward God, commend the same in my words unto the reader. And
yet truly was there nothing in effect therein (Gentle reader) but that which
here in this place shall be repeated. First, that the primative occasion,
inducing me to think upon this work, was the sight of a book entitled, The
excrcise of a Christian life, written in Italian by Doctor Loartes of the
Society The first occasion of setting soorth the book of Resolution.
of JESUS, and translated some years since by a virtuous learned gentilman of
our country. Which book for that I understood of certainty to have profited
many, toward piety and devotion: I was moved to cause the same to be printed
again, with certain ample additions to the furnishing of some matters which
that author had omitted: dividing my whole purpose into three several books,
whereof the first was to persuade me^ unto true resolution; the second to
instruct us how rightely to begin; the third, how a man may hold but and
persevere. Secondly I showed, that being entered into the work, and having set
down an other order and method to my self, then that treatise of D. Loartes
did observe; and having begunao the first book touching resolution, whereof no
part was handled in that other treatise: I found by experience, that I could
not well conioine the one with the other, if I would satisfy either the order
or argument by me conceived: and therefore that I was enforced to resolve upon a
further labor then at the first I had intended, and this was, to draw out the
whole three books my self, not omitting any thing that was in the said
exercise, or other like good treatisses to this effect.

And all this to the end, that our countriemen might have some one sufficient
direction, for matters of spirit and virtuous life, among so many books of
controversies as have been written and are in writing daily. Which books (said
I) albeit in these our troblesome and quarrelous Books of devotion more
profitable to good life the^ books of controversies.
times, they be necessary for defense of our faith against so many seditious
innouations, as now daily are attempted: yet help they little oftentimes to good
life, but rather do fill the heads and hearts of men with a spirit of
contradiction and contention, which for the most part do hinder devotion,
which devotion is nothing else, but, A quiet, calm, and peacable state of our
soul, induced (...) a iotful promptnes The description of devotion.
and alacritis to the diligent execution of al things that do or may
apperteine to the honor and service of almightbe God. For which cause, the
holy Apostle dehorted greatly his scholar Timothy 2. Timot. 2.
from this contention and contradiction of words, affirming clearly, that it
was profitable to nothing but to subuect the hearers.

I affirmed further, that our forfathers were most happy in respect of us, who
receiving Our fathers happy that builded, and contended not about the
foundation.
with humility one uniform faith without contention or contradiction, from
their mother the holy Catholic Church, did attend only to build upon that
foundation good works and virtuous life, as holy scripture commands us to
do; whereas we, spending now al our time in iangling about this first
foundation 1. Co. 3.
of faith, have no leisure to build either gould or silver thereon, as the
Apostle exhorts us, but do weary out our selves and our own contentious
spirits, without commodity; dying with much labor and little profit, with
great disquiet and small reward. For which cause I exhorted the discret reader
of whatsoever religion and faith he were, to moderate this heat and passion of
contention, and to enter into the careful study and exercise of good deeds,
which are always better among true Christians, then words; assuring him that
this is the right way to obtain at Gods hands, the light of true belief if he
were amiss. Alleging for example thereof, the most famous conversion of
Cornelius the Gentile, whose virtuous life, prayers, and almouse deeds,
obtained at the hands of almighty God, (as S. Luke does testify) that S.
Peter was sent unto him for his instruction and establishment in right Act. 10.
faith.

I adioined moreover, that there being two parts of Christian divinity, the one
Theorike or speculatiue, belonging principally to knowledge, Two parts of
Christian aiuinisie.
discourse, and belief; the second called practique or active, appertaining
chiefly to action and execution: the first is more easy and common, then the
second, because it is more easy to know then to do; to discourse then to
Speculation easier then practice.
work; to believe as we ought, then to live as we should: and the things that
a man has to believe, are fewer then the things he has to do; learned in
shorter time and with less difficulty, the the other are executed. Even as we
see by experience, that a brief Cathechisme instructs a man sufficiently in
his faith; but all the books and sermons that we can read and hear, can not
persuade the least part of men to perform so much in life, as by their
vocation is required. For which cause I said, that both our Saucour and his
Apostles did treat much more in their speeches and writings of things to be
done, then of things to be known; of virtuous living, then of right believing.
The like I said, of Holy fathers and Doctors in the Church after them, as it
may be seen in their homilies, sermons, exhortations, treatises, commentaries,
and expositions.

For this cause I said also, that I had chosen to say some thing of this
second part of Christian divinity appertaining to manners and direction of
life, allotting to my self three principal points to be handled therein, and to
be treated in three several books. The first whereof, to contain the reasons
and motives The three books of this Christian directorie, with their
arguments.
which may stir up a Christian man to make a firm and sound resolution. The
second to prescribe the particular means, how a man without error may put in
ure and practice his resolution made. The third, to declare certain helps and
instructions, whereby to be able to persevere unto the end. The first of these
books, was then set down and published. The second and third upon necessary
causes were deferred for a time. And this is the summarie of all that was written
in my former preface and Induction, suppressed now by M. Buny for mere
conscience sake as he protests Wherein notwithstanding I do not easily see,
what may be accounted either so heinous or intolerable, as his scrupulous
conscience should be a fraide to let the same pass unto the readers ear,
except it were for that in a certain advertisement, I desired each Catholic
to pray for our persecutours; or for that (perhaps) in the lines before
repeated, I do affirm faith, and belief to be more common and easy then
virtuous life; which notwithstanding I think, many Protestants in England will
confess to be true; and will easily prove the same by the lives and actions of
their own preachers and ministers. So much then for this: now let us behold,
how M. Buny has set forth the same book with his purgation.

of M. Bunis edition.
M. Buny having taken this book into his correction, as also into my Lord
Archbishop of York his protection; gives it this title, A title given by M.
Buny.
A book of Christian exercise etc. Perused and accompanied with a treatise
tending to pacification, by Edm. Buny. And under the title, he writes this
sentence of scripture. JESUS Christ yester day and Heb. 13.
to day and the same for ever. The mystery why he set these words there, him
self alone (as I think) understands and hard it were for other men to
coniectare. If he had taken the words immediately following in the same
sentence of S. Paul; they had been more clear, if not more also to the
purpose. For they are these, Be not carried away with variable and strange
doctrines. But let us permit M. Buny to follow his An old trick of beretiques to
abuse simple people with obscure places of scripture. See Epiph. cont. here is.
and (...) Quod vult Deum.
kind. The holy fathers that write against ancient heretics, do note it
for an old trick of those companions, to delight them selves, and deceue others
with obscure places of scripture. And S. Peter expressly signifies of the same
men, that principally they used to take the said obscure sentences out of S.
Paul, whence this by M. Buny is also cited. And this for the first page.

In the next page, he places my Lord of Yorkes arms, accompanied with a pair
of goodly cross keys, and a croune set over the. Under which he writes two
latin verses, that 2. Pet. 3.
say thus much in English, These arms have been My L. of yorkes arms.
noble in times past by ancient gentry and commendation of learning; but now
they are made more noble by the honor of Peter adioined unto them. So that now
(as ye see) it is both good doctrine, and very commendable in my Lords grace of
York to clame both keys and croune, from Peter's seat, which in the Bishop of
Rome is made so heinous, and so bitterly inueighed against daily.

After the arms, insueth the dedication of the whole book, (treating of
mortification The epistle dedicaterie.
and contempt of the world) unto his good Lordship. The reason of which
dedication, M. Buny utters in these words, For that having In his Ep. dedicat.
had (says he) so long experience of the world as your Lordship have, very
liklihood teaches that needs you must grovve more and more from the love
thereof. And it is sufficiently known unto al, that having My L. of yorkes
mortificatio^ and calling upon others.
found this mercy your self, you have in like sort in this long course that God
has given you, much called on others to do the like. In which words, we see,
that touching the first point of my Lords wearines of this world, M. Buny
proves it very slenderly, by a bare likelihood only. Albeit in the second, of
his Graces calling upon others to like mortification, he alleges the common
and sufficient knowledge of al, whereunto in reason each man must yield. And in
truth I have heard, how there want not of diverse sorts and His L. hostise of
Doncaster. Sir Robert Stapleton and others.
sexes also, who can witness by experience of my Lords good mortification,
and how hotely he has poursued them of late, for such affairs; and therefore
(no doubt) but that this book was very fitly dedicated to his Lordships
protection.

After the epistle dedicatorie unto my Lord, there follows a preface to the
reader, wherein The preface to the reader.
M. Buny says, That by the little that he has bestovvedin the study of
schole men, he vvil perceaueth that this book was gathered out of them; who
living in the corrupter time of the Church (as he speaks) did most of al, by
that occasion, treat of reformation of life, when as others were rather
occupied in controversies. To which I answer, that by the little which M Banies
ignorance.
M. Buny here utters, he shows him self scarce worthy to be my Lord
Archbishops chaplain, (albeit to that dignity much learning be not required,)
for that whosoever shall look upon the homilies, sermons, commentaries, and
other works of S. Ambrose, Augustine, Gregory, Maximus, Bid, Bernard,
Anselme, and other that were not scholemen; and shall compare the same (touching
exhortation and instruction to good life.) With the questions, distinctions,
speculations and subtilties of Peter Lumbard, Hales, Scotus, Durand, Iandun
Capreolus and others of that profession; shall easily see, that in this matter
there is no comparison: and consequently that M. Bunis little study in the
scholemen is less then nothing at al, not knowing so much as the very subject
and argument which they handle, or the manner how they handle the same. But all this was spoken M. Bunies vanity.
by M. Buny, for a vain flourish, and to persuade his reader, that as him self
was very learned, so all that was in this book being taken out of Dunsies (as
now in England they term scholemen,) might appear more contemptible in every
man's judgment, and so in reason stand the more subject to M. Bunis learned
censure, to put out, cut of, mangle, change and pare away whatsoever it pleased
him. Yet protests he forsooth, very solemly, That he allows well of the
matter in general, and that he is glad that some of Ep. Dedicate.
us also, have taken pains in this kind of labor, and that others of our
prosession are sometimes occupied in reading such books. As who would say,
that this were a strange and rare matter in our behalf, either to write or
read books of this quality or argument.

But here I would demand of M. Buny in sincerite, where or when, any of his
religion did either make or set forth (of them selves) any one treatise of
this kind or subject? I mean, Only Catholics write boo kes of devotion.
of devotion piety and contemplation? Of ours I can name infinite both of
times past and present. As in times past S. Bernard, S. Bonauenture, S.
Auselme, John Gerson, Thomas de kempis, Dionisius Cathusianus, and others, whom
no man will deny to have been al of our religion. For this time present, the
most excellent writings of Ludouicus de Granada, Diegostella, Polancus,
Angerius, and this present book with infinite others, written in this kind do
testify that this argument is not strange among Catholics, but rather proper
and peculier unto them alone, seeing that M. Buny is not able to name one on his
side, from the first heretic that cuer wrote, unto this day, which of his
own accord has employed him self in this subject, except it were of envy
and malice to defile and corrupt an other man's labors, to the end they should
not work that good effect, which otherwise they would, as M. Buny has now
done mine, and as one Rogers an other like companion (whom also he names) has
corrupted in english the most excellent ^ books.
work of Thomas de Kempis of the imitation of Christ, striking out without
conscience, whatsoever he pleases; whereas the same book before, was truly
set forth in our native tongue by a Catholic. An other also of the same crew,
has used the like violence unto the holy meditations of S. Augustine and Saint
Bernard, putting out and in what liked him best, and making those blessed men to
speak like protesta^tes, against whom they were most opposite enemies.

The same has M. Buny done unto me, throughout my whole book, and to most of
the ancient Fathers therein named also, as afterward shall be declared. And this
shameless shift of corrupting other men's books, is an old occupation of
heretics from the beginning, as may appear by the often complaints of most
ancient fathers, whose works they were not ashamed to infect and corrupt whiles
they were yet living. In respect of which impudency the holy Apostle S. Paul,
well prophetied of them to his scholar Timothy, that they should have,
cauteriatam conscientiam, a seared and yronburned conscience. And again; that
they should 1. Tim. 4.
sin wilfully and damnably in their own Tit. 3.
knowledge and judgment. So we read that old heretics adventured to corrupt
not only private men's works and treatises; but also the holic Canons of
general Councels them selves, whereof therwere so many witnesses yet living to
control them. This may appear by the grievous complaint which holy Athanasius
Athanas. apolog. 2. tp ad felic.
made in his time against the Arians for corrupting the first Nicen Council,
and other fathers after him, for like heretical attemptes in their times;
especially against the sacred text of divine scripture, in corrupting whereof,
al heretics from time to time have been most malepert, bold, and impudent,
for shadowing their sects with some show of holy write.

And to the end M. Buny may not here eskape, and tell his reader that this was
a spirit That protesta^tes do follovv the same spirit of corrupting.
of heretics in old time, and not to be found in the protestants of these
days: I do refer him not only to the collections which diverse Catholics
of this age have gathered against them, touching these attemptes; but also to
the testimonies, confessions, and accusatio^s of protestants them selves, one
against and other for like impudency. Especially against the Sacramentaries,
or those that followed the opinion of Zuinglius (whereof I think M. Buny will not
deny him self to be one,) whom Martin Luther the father of al protestants does
affirm, to be the most horrible corrupters of other men's books, that ever
were; concluding his whole inuectiue against them with this sentence, Their
opinion of the Sacrament they began with lies, and Luth. in Lipist. ad Joan.
Heruagium typogra. Argent.
with lies they do desend the same; and they broch it abroad by the wicked
fraud of corrupting other men's books. The like he says and much more, of
their corrupting the holy scriptures in diverse places.

But what? was Martin Luther him self irreprehensible The new brethrens
testimonies, the one against the other. Zuing. li. de Sacra. fol. 412. 10. 2.
Bez. in resp. ad defens. Castal. Ite^ in praefat. Test. an 1556.
in this point, wherein he accuses so vehemently the Sacramentaries? No truly
if we believe Zuinglius, who terms him, both, A foul corruptour and horrible
salsifier of Gods word, one that followed the Marcionistes and Arians that
rased out such places of holy write as were against them. Beza accuses
Occolampadius together with all his brethren the divines of Basile for great
impiety i^ abusing the sacred scriptures traslated by them. The like he does,
but with much more vehemency against Castalio, an other brother, affirming his
dealing with holy scripture, to be both bold, pestilent, sacrilegious and
ethnical. Carolus Molineus was a brother also of the same blood, and yet he
confesses Mol in tra. Test. noni. part. 11. fol. 110. Item part. 64. 65. 66.
74. 99.
of Calvin, That he made the text of the Gospel to leap up and down at his
pleasure; that he used violence to the same, and added of his own to the very
sacred letter, for dravving it to his purpose. This same author testifies and
cries out of Beza, quod de facto (...) mutat, that actually he is not ashamed
to change in his translations the very text of holy scripture, when it makes
against his purpose.

I might pass on further in stirring this evil sauoured sink, of heretical
iniquity, discovered and moved by their own brethren, (for such is always
the agreement of like mates) were it not that the matter it self is unfit for
these pages, and the dealiag of M Buny with me in this book, shall easily dec
are their spirit M. Bunies particular dealing in editio^ of the book of
resolution.
and practice, if nothing therein were alleged besides. Now then I come to
show how dexterously he has behaved him self in this edition of my book.

FIRST IN A L places where conveniently he may, he makes me speak after B V
N. first devise. To MAKE his adversaries speak like Protestants.
the phrase of Protestants; as for example, page 204. of his book, where I
talk of Catholic priests that hear confessions; he makes me say, men
that be skilful to give Counsel, etc. Again page 229. where I say out of
holy scripture, here hence do proceed al those large promises, to virginity,
chastity, voluntary poverty, etc. he makes me say; hence do proceed those
promises to mortification and nevvnes of life; and he strikes out the
scriptures which I allege for the other. In like manner page 368. when I say,
penance and satissaction. He makes me say, toil of amendment. And so in
infinite other places (which were to long here to recite) M. Buny makes me to
speak like a good minister of England. Neither deals he only thus with me;
but i^ like manner also with the ancient fathers, so long as by that means he
can hold in with them, and when he can not, then he breaks of and bids
them a dieu.

Let one or two examples serve for all; page 374. he ronneth on a whole half
lease with S. Augustine, turning every where the words penance and satisfaction
into repentance, until at S. Augustine taught to speak by M. Buny.
legth S. Augustine says, that this penance must be inioined to the penitent
by the priest: and there M. Buny leapeth over that, but yet after a line or two,
ioineth with him familiarly again, and so runs on, until he comes to an
other block, that ca^ not be removed, where he is enforced again to leap
over. So in like manner page 209. where S. August. recounteth the story of S.
Antonie the monk of Egypt; M. Buny leaves out the name Monk, and teaches S.
Augustine to say; S Antonie that had professed a private and solitary life in
Egypt. And then where S. Augustine writes, that there was a Monastery of the
same monks, norished by S. Ambrose without the wales of Millan; M. Buny
makes him to leave out the names of Monks and Monastery, as also the name
and alms of S. Ambrose, and to say only that others (as he then heard) did
the like, even in Millan it self. And finally, he frames every man's speech
(where he can) to such a style as though he had been trained up in John Caluins
schole.

SECONDLY, when he has not commodity to change the very words, or else dares
BVNY second devise. To INSERT parentheses.
not for that they are scripture: then seeks he to salve the matter with
inserting some parenthesis, as though the same were of the author him self. So
page 39. I say, that our Savior being demanded by a certain prince, how he
might be saved; would give him no other hope albeit he were a prince, but, if
thou vvilt enter into life, keep the commandementes. Where M. Buny helps Math.
18. Marc 10. Luc. 19.
the matter out with this parenthesis, saying; He would give him no other hope
(so long as he sought salvation by his works) but keep the commandementes,
etc. As though this prince had sought his salvation erroniously, and that
Christ had answered him in his error, and so deceived him. In like manner page
229. where I allege out of S. Paul and out of the revelations, that men shall be
crowned in heaven according to their 2. Tim. 2. Apoc. 2.
fight in this life: M. Buny bodgeth in this parenthesis (in some good measure)
thereby to limite the Holy Ghost in his meaning. Semblably, page 229. when I
allege plainly the words of scripture, No man knovveth whether he be
vvorthie of love or hatred in Gods sight. He adds Eccle. 9.
this parenthesis (by outward things) as who would say, that by inward things
each man might know the same, which the Holy Ghost in this place did not forsee.

THIRDLY when he can not acco^modate BVN. third shift. MAROInal annotations of
diverse fortes.
the matter either by changing the words, or by putting in a parenthesis; then
makes he oftentimes certain amotations in the margent; whereof certain be
idle and foolish, some be ridiculous and absurd, and other be wicked and
tending to impiety.

Of the first kind, you may see examples page 171. where, for that I say, that
our natural Annotatio^s fond.
passions moderated, may serve us to virtue; he makes a long and fond
annotation, that we do hold that the soul does follow the temperature of the
body, and thereupon do ground that our Lady was borne without original sin;
and other such docttines, which is neither so no so; nor the good man
understands what he says in this point nor what we hold, albeit (if you
will believe him) he has studied the schoelmen. Page 228. where I say that
there was no reason in our fight, why almighty God should so much abuse his
own only son in this world, as to suffer so many indignities as he did: this
man says in a margical note, that there was great reason in it. And so
consequently, does bring the inscrutable mystery of the son of God his
abasement, (whereat S. Paul so often times wondered, and whereat the very Angels
remain astonished;) within the compass of humane wit and reason, which every
simple man by nature may comprehend.

Of the second kind, which are absurd, you may find examples page 153.
whereby a marginal 2. Annotatio^s absurd.
note he discrediteth the belief of S. Cyprian about the knowledge, that we
shall have of our fathers, mothers, and other acquaintance in heaven; as though
one Cyprian with Christian men of reason, weighed not more in the affairs of
our soul, then ten coople of Bunis, were they never so vendible. So again
page 214. upon the religious rule of life which S. Augustine reports to have
been revealed to his mother for him to follow, M. Buny writes, That it was
but a more careful endeavor in the Aug. lib.8. confess. cap. 12.
way of godliness. And page 212. he adds to the same, That it was but such,
as we al (says he) are bound unto. But yet he that shall read either S.
Augustine him self, or else Possidonius his scholar declaring the particulers
of that rule, Possid. in vita Aug.
which he saw S. Augustine observe in life, and prescribe unto others: he will
easily confess (I think) that how soever the ministers of England may be
bound thereunto by M. Bunis word in this annotation, yet that they do observe
but few parts thereof in conversation: especially touching wiuing, I am of
opinion, that M. Buny will not deny S. Augustins rule to contain somewhat
more, the^ he and his fellows at this day do practice. To like fond
absurdity appertains that which is noted by him, page 300. where I affirming
that Gods secret judgment of each man's particular predestination, is uncertain
to us, he notes in the margent, that calling and justifying are very plain
and infallible tokens thereof, and so far is it not uncertain to the faithful;
as who would say, that it were an easy matter for him that has faith, to know
who are so called or justified, as is requisite to assure a man of his
particular predestination: whereas notwithstanding, Christ says of the first,
that many are called which are not chosen, and of the second, S. Paul says in
him self that he was guilty of nothing, and yet thereby he was not justified.

Of the third kind of annotations, which 3. Annotations wicked.
are both wicked and impious, there might many examples be alleged, but these
few ensuing shall suffice to discover M. Bunies spirit. First then, page 212.
as concerning the life of that holy and most wonderful man S. Antonie the
first monk of AEgipt, whom al antiquity so much Athanas. in vita Anton. Aug
lib. 8. co^fes. c. 12.
admired, and whom S. Athanafius in writing his life, so highely extolled, and
whose doings S. Augustine so heartily reverenced, as he made the same a principal
motive and pattern to his own conversion; (especially for that he took those
words of our Savior, Go and sell al thou Mat. 19.
have and give to the poor, as spoken to him self in particular:) upon this
man's conversion (I say) and most wonderful life, M. Buny makes this scorneful
and irreligious note, that it may well be doubted, Against S. Antonie.
whether he had in that place sufficient groundvvorke of those his doings,
unless he had some other special motion besides. Condemning herin not only S.
Antonie, but also S. Athanasius, S. Hierome, S. Augustine and al other fathers,
that so highely commend S. Antonie for putting in execution those words of our
Savior.

To like purpose or rather more vvickedlie, he makes an other annotation page
308. upon Against S. Augustine.
the most famous conversion of S. Augustine recorded by the pen of that holy
father him self, to wit, that some points of the story which S. Augustine
vvriteth, are such, as a man may as well doubt they proceeded of Satan as of
God; thereby to bring in question that excellent man's conversion. But of al
other, that annotation of his, is most ridieulous Against our B. (...) die.
and yet blasphemous, where he will needs bring in our blessed Lady to have
broken four several commandments (forsooth) at one clappe, for that she
defended not her son upon the Cross. For, page 369. where I in commendation
of the confession which the thief made, said in my book, that it was at such
a time, when all the world aba^doned our Savior, and the very Apostles the^
selves either doubted or lost their faith of his Godhead: this man notes in
the marge^t, that the blessed Virgin likewise was by, and said nothing (that
we read of) in his defense: a plain breach (says he) of the first, fist,
sixth, and ninth co^mandomentes. A strange matter, that these men should be so
desirous to skore up and make Catalogues of our Ladies sins which she never
committed. But let us see with what show of reason.

He says that she brake four commandementes at one time; Let us then examine
them what they are. The first commandment (according Aug. quest. 71. in Exo.
and con. 1. in Psalm. 32.
as S. Augustine in old time, and Catholics now a days are accustomed to
number them) is; Thou shall have no strange Gods before me, nor make unto thy
self any graven Idol to adore the same. The fifth is, Thou shall not kill. The
sixth, Thou shall not commit adultery. The ninth, Thou shall not covet thy
neighbors wife. And this, as Catholics do number the commandementes. But
according as some protestants will recon the same, The fifth is, Honor thy
father and thy mother. The sixth, Thou shall not kill. The ninth, Thou shall not
bear false witness against thy neighbor. Now the^ (gentle reader) consider
with indifferency, how in reason Great absurdity and impiety of M. Buny.
it may be said, that the blessed Virgin, the sacred mother of God, for not
defending her son upon the Cross, against the Magistrates and soldiers, did
break any of these four commandementes; that is to say, did either make unto
her self any strange God or Idol, or did dishonor her father and mother; or
did commit Marvelous absurdities.
murder or adultery; or did bear false witness against her neighbor; or did
covet her neighbors mate; whether (I say) it be credible, that in not
defending her son at that instant, she committed any one of these heinous and
mortal crimes, and much more, whether she committed four of them together, as
M. Buny affirms? Let (I say) the indifferent and Christian reader judge of
this accusation, as also consider, whether M. Bun. the. devils proctor.
M. Buny be not worthio of a very good fee at the devils hands, for indeuoring
to bring into his claws, so rich a pray, as was the most excellent pure and
sacred mother of our Savior, by accusing her of four deadly sins together?

AND THVS much of annotations; passing over diverse other things that might be
BVN. third snift. THEVsting out.
examined if time and place did not prohibit. But the greatest shift of al
others which M. Buny has to rid his hands, when nether changing of the
words, not putting in of pareutheses, nor annotations in the margent will
clear and pacific the matter; is, to strike and thrust out what so ever he
misliketh, whether they be my words, or else the discourses of ancient fathers,
yet authorities them selves of sacred scripture. For understanding whereof it is
to be considered, that first, generally whersoeuer he finds the mention of
certain things that please him not, as of abstinence, fasting, chastesing the
body, penance, satisfaction, virginity, merit, hier, gayning of heaven,
laboring for reward, or the like: he commonly strikes al out together with the
Authors that treat thereof, or else so mangleth the same as is pitiful to behold.

Secondly whatsoever authority comes in his way, which he cannot mangle, out
it goes Impudent dealing in striking out. Monks.
without redemption, be it Father, Doctor, Counsel or Scripture. Hereof you may
see examples, Page 29. of his book, where he thrusts out S. Hierome and
Ioannes Cassianus, for that they me^tio^ Monks of the primative Church. So
again page 98. he thrusts out S. Cyprian and Possidonius, for that they give
testimony of an apparitio^ Apparitio^s of Christ.
which Christ our Savior made to a godly man at his death. In like manner, Page
109. he trusts out S. Ambros, S. Augustine, S. Gregory and S. Bernard
together, for that they persuade men by their examples to be affeard of
Purgatory. Further, Page 98. he strikes out S. Augustine. Purgatory.
S Gregory and venerable Bede, with their large discourses which they make
concerning appatitions of certain Angels to godly people. So again, Page
305. he thrusts out the Apparitio^s of Angels.
example of S. Paul the first heremite with the authority of S. Hierome that
wrote his life. And this in hatred of Monks and heremites. After Neremites.
that again, Page 374. he thrusts out S. Augustine with all that he ca^
allege about satissactio^ Satisfaction. Penance.
and final penance. Page 60. he thrusts out the weping, fasting, watching,
lying on the ground, wearing of sack clothe and other bodily punishme^tes
Bodily affliction.
that King David used upon him self, albeit they be recorded and set down in
holy scripture. Page 169. he thrustath out the example of S. Paul the Apostle
how he was assisted and made 2. Cor. 12.
able by Gods holy grace, to resist and overcome the temptations of the flash,
to the end (by like) Resisting of temptations.
that no man should take courage by that example, to fight and resist these
temptations as he did. Page 2. he strikes out the promises made in scripture
to virginity, chastetie, golding of Promises to Virginitis.
our selves for the kingdom of heaven, voluntary poverty and the like: al (I
say) he thrusts out, together with the scripture alleged for the same. And
finally, not to hold the reader any longer in the enumeratio^ of those things,
which he shall find almost in every other leaf of the book: Page 157. he
thrusts out not only S. Augustine talking of the price of heaven, and of the
facility to gain the same; but also strikes out in like manner the very
words of Christ's words thrust out by M. Buny. Mat. 11.
Christ him self, saying, the kingdom of heaven does suffer violence, and men
do lay handfast upon it by force. And what may be said then (gentle reader) of
these me^, who spare neither Fathers, Doctors, Prophets, Apostles, nor Christ
him self, when they stand in the way against their foolis he herefies?

AND THIS of thrusting out. But now if OF mangling. OTHER men's sayings.
I would speak of mangling. I might say much more, but that this place bears
it not, and therefore thous halt be content (good reader) to accept of one
example only among infinite that might be alleged, and by this one, thou may
make unto thy self some certain conjecture of the rest. Page 367. it is
handled and proved by me against the impediment of delay, how that we by
deferring our conversion, do always bind our selves to greater penance and
satisfaction afterward, etc. In which discourse, M. Buny first in steed of
the word, Penance, uses always the word, repentance, (as though al were
one) and so runs on smoothly so long as it will hold out. And as for the
word Satisfaction, for that he had no other word to put in for it, he
thrusts it clean out. Then comes he to S. Cyprian, who says that, a
diligint Cyp. lib. de laps. and l. 5. epist. 9. ad Corn.
and long medicine is to be used to a deep sore; which words M. Buny
admits and sets down as good and current. But the other part of the
sentence immediately following, was, that The measare of penance.
our penance must be no less the^ was our fault committed, which part M. Buny
strikes out of the text, as also all the rest ensuing, wherein S. Cyprian
prescribes, that this penance must be made with tears, watching, wearing of
hear-cloth, and the like, which seem to be things nothing pleasant to the
body of a Minister.

After S. Cyprian follows S. Augustine in the very same page, affirming; That
it is not sufficient for a sinner, to change his manners, and to leave of to
sin, except he make satisfaction also to God for his sins past by sororrful
penance, giving of alms etc. With which words M. Buny would have nothing to
do, for that they were incorrigible, and therefore he' thrust the^ quite out:
yet out of S. Hierome, that in the third place insued, he was content to admit
these words, Our body that has lived in many delights must be chastised
with affliction; our Hier. ep. 27 ad Lustoch.
long laughing must be reco^penced with much vveping. But the words
immediately following in the same seutence, ( our soft linning and fine silk
apparel must be changed into sharp hear-cloth) seemed to hard to this
delicate doctor, and therefore he thrust them quite out.

In the end of the rank, came grave S. Ambros, affirming, That unto a great
vvound, a deep Intolerable dealing.
and long medicine in needful; Which words M. Buay very quietly and
courteously let pass. But upon the other that immediately followed, he gave a
dead blow, and thrust them by head and shoulders out of the book, to wit,
Gra^de seelus, gra^de^ necessaria^ habet satisfactione^. A great offense,
requires of necessity a great satisfaction. Ambros. ad virg. Laps. cap. 8.


Now the^ (gentle reader) what shall we think or say of these me^ or of their
manner of dealing? Have they honest meaning trow you? Have A consideration upon
the premises.
they sidelitie? Have they a conscience? Have they respect of God or man, that
deal in this order? Is it hard to found any new religion, or to defend it, or
to avouch what folly or falsaood soever, by this manner of proceeding? If these
me^ had ability to do what their consciences would permit the^ in the world
abrod, what an alteration, what a subuersio^, what a metamorphosis would they
make in all matters of antiquity? If they had to them selves the setting forth
of the holy fathers and doctors works, how would they loppe and circumcise
the same? how would they set them forth in their Ierkins, yea, barehose and
doubletes, cutting of al other garments and furniture that liked the^ not, or
were not suitable to the season of these men's senses? If these men (I say) had the
keeping of al antiquities, of fathers, Councels, and scriptures, and that to
the^ selves alone in their own custody, without the knowledge or
co^tradiction of any one Catholic, for the space of only five hundred years
together, (as they grant we held the^ al in our hands for a thousand,) what
manner of books (trow you) should we find them? How current and absolute for
the protestant religion? No doubt but we should hear the^ speak eue^ as John
Calvin speaks in all matters of controversy, or rather as that good man for
the time would have them to speak, unto whose hands the last edition of such
works should be committed.

And thus much shall suffice for discovery of M. Bunies editio^ of my book,
now remains there only a word or two to be said of the treatise which he
adioined, te^ding (as he says) to Pacification.

Of M. Bunies Pacification.
AND first of al, a man would think that M. Buny did take but a very strange
way to pacification, in offering me the great injury which before has been
showed, in his editio^. But for that he pretends his peace to be toward the
general, by laboring the adversaries, as his phrase is: I shall be content to
pass over my particular, and to examine peaceably what he says, and how he
laboreth us to that effect.

But here again at the very first entrance, there rises a new stop against
al union or pacification with us, for that he is so singulerly persuaded of the
rare light and knowledge of truth which they have alone among them selves, as
he dares to pronounce, That (to their knowledge) God never yet bestovved the
like on others. Intolerable pride of beretiques.
In which asseueratio^ for that he excepteth neither the fathers or doctors of
the primative Church, nor yet the Apostles them selves, whom we hoped to have
had at least wise for judges and arbiters in making this peace: what
probability can there be of union or composition among us, seeing that at the
very first word, he makes his cause better, not only then ours, but also then
the case and condition of any other whatsoever, since Christ's departure from
earth or before? But yet this I will let pass also, as a vaunt proceeding of an
humor peculier to me^ of his stamp. For if you go to all the petie sects of
these our times, or of any other times that have been from the beginning: each
one will sing the self same song, affirming every other bodies candel to be out,
but only theirs. And if they should not say so, they were not sects or
sectaries, for that they acknowledged not their true mother, which is pride,
and singularity.

After this his proud entera^ce, he begins, his seely discourse: and for
methodes sake, makes many divisions and subdiuisions, every thing running
therein by couples, wherein he is so fertile and abundant, as by method he
confounds al memory. But yet as I may, I will here recite the cheef points
thereof.

First then he says, that there is great reason why we should join with them,
and none at al why they should yield to us. The first he proves, for that it
becomes the Church of God to be at Why we should join with protestants.
unity in it self. Which reason how far it proves his purpose, the reader can
consider. The second he declares, for that the gain that they should receive
by coming to us, in his opinion should be very small, both touching Why they
vvil not join with us.
matters of religion as also of state. For in religion he makes his account,
that they should have nothing more the^ now they have, except only certain
Sacraments, Images, and ceremonies (which he calls representations,) al
which he esteems of small avail. In matters of state likewise, he supposes
the commodities would be few and little: as namely to be delivered from the
Popes curse, which he says, they find now by experience, not to be so
hurtful, as hertofore it was esteemed; which reason (as you know) may as well
serve against Gods curse also, for that it does not always show forth
presently his sensible effect.

Next after this, he declares how that by Their hurtes in yelding to us.
yelding to us, they should not only not receive gain, but also great hurtes,
and that in double manner. First in religion, wherein among other things they
should be bound to coafession and penance, which things (says he) are
burdensome and So much the more certain to proceed of grace and of Gods
special ordinance, for that otherwise men would never have received the^.
abhorring from man's nature. Then in state, for that by this mean, they should
come under the government of the Byshope of Rome, which he estemeth
intolerable: adding further, that this only reason of state holds many of
their side, from coming to us, who otherwise in conscience would-haue no
scrupule at al; which is such a confession, as I meruail that ever my Lord
Archebishope would let it pass in print. For howsoever this poor Minister to
terrify the common people, deuiseth bugges upon the Ecclesiastical authority
of the bishope Note this.
of Rome, if it should be restored in England again, yet every man of reason
can consider with him self, that the Emperor, the kings of Spain, France,
Polonia and other Princes, admitting the-same authority, do find no such
inco^uenie^ces, as neither our Princes of England ever did, for so many ages
together, when they were more potent and glorious then they have been since the
suppression thereof. Wherefore if this reason only do stay so many from us, as
M. Buny affirms, it is very like we shall have the greater part shortly, when
God shall open their understanding in a matter that in it self is so plain and
palpable.

This being done, he comes to show the commodities that we should receive by
ioining with them, and those also (after his manner) he The commodities offered
to us in ioining with the^.
makes of two sorts. First in religion, and the^ in our civil state. In
religion (says he) we should first receive, the free use of holy seriptures,
(as though among us now there were no use thereof,) and then also we should be
delivered from the burden of confession and penance, as also from religion.
al vows of chastity, poverty, and obedience. And finally we should so
cleave to Christ alone (says he) as we should abandon al other helps both in
heaven and earth, of Angels, Saints, other men, as also our own. Which
(says he) were a great advantage. And then he makes a solemn protestation in
these words. If any people can be found The Protostantes protestation.
in the world, that do more aba^done al other means in heaven and earth,
then we do, then we must pronounce against our selves, that in this respect
they are nerer to this advantage then we art. Unto which protestation
notwithstanding, I doubt M. Buny (if he should be well urged) would be very much
ashamed to stand and cleave. For albeit I confess, that he and his fellows do
very little in deed whereby to help them selves by their works, yet by this
reason they should do far better, i^ doing nothing at al. For he that should
never pray, nor desire other men to pray for him, he that should never fast or
do other good deed, but should rather defy the same, and lay al upon
Christ's passion, he should more abandone al other helps and means both in
heaven and earth besides Christ, then many of the best protestants do.

Next in our civil state, he says that we should greatly be bettered by
joining with Commodities by yelding, in our civil state.
them, being made partakers of the blessedness of England, which is greater (as
he says) at this time, then ever it was since the land was first inhabited.
Whereof he seems to allege two reasons or causes. First, for that
Protestants in Intellerable lying flattery.
these temporal affairs are always prosperous, for (says he) how soever it
go with others that are not frindes to the ghospel, yet shall the favorers
thereof always How do they prosper at this day in France and Fla^ders?
prosper: howsoever it be with the residue of the children of Israel, yet the
tribe of Judah shall always flourish. The other places the people are going under
their burdens, but in England al is mirth and saftie. The second cause of this
blessedness of England is, for that England (says he) is governed by a Prince
of their own country, one that deals mildly with them, one that sends not
there pleas abrod to other co^sistories, one that dries them not up with
exactions. And when convenient collections are made, the money that is exacted
of subjects is not sent (says he) Note this blessedness.
out of the realm to the maintenance of foreign powers, but is employed at
home, to their honor and defense. Wherein notwithstanding it seems that this
good man, talks rather by meditation or fiction, then by any great
intelligence he has in such affairs.

After all this, he goes about to remove certain grave impedimentes, which he
imagines The removing of impediments.
do let many Catholics from coming unto their side. For which cause he
shows, first, that we Catholics should not leese altogether our credites by
making us Protestants, or at least wise we should not leeso the same Of
discredit.
with them that be good and of their side: or if we did somewhat impare the
same, yet patience were to be used, for the Ghospels sake. In like manner he
shows that the holy saints of heaven would not be angry with us (as we
seem to doubt) for leaui^g their patronage. Also that keruers, kandlemakers,
belcasters, organistes, and other such like, who might fear Of hurtes.
to want by following the Ghospel, albeit in truth they should leese no small
part of their gain, yet might the matter be eased, and they comforted
otherwise.

Thus discourses this wise man in very great sadues. And after all this, he
ha^dleth diverse other points both of controversies in religion, and of the
hard dealings of the Protestant magistrate toward Catholics in England,
wherewith he supposes many are stayed from coming unto them, but al, with as
great discretion and foundation as he has done the former, demanding of us in
very good earnest, why we should stand so much upon Limbus Patrum, upon
Christ's descending into hell, upon real presence, freedom of will, and merit of
works, upon traditions, preestood, and sacrifice, upon worshipping of Saints
and Images, marriage of priests, inherent justice, and the five Sacraments
that we number more then they do? why (I say) we should so rely and stick
upon these things, as for their sakes not to join with the^ and be
Protestants, whereas notwithstanding al these things, the Protesta^tes says
(as he says) Atheism.
and ours is al one in substance, and we al are members of one true Catholic
and Apostolic Church, albeit some of us be somewhat better members in that
Church then others.

And this last point of the Church (thereby How by N. Buny we are al of one
Church.
to allure us the more) he urges very often and earnestly: to wit, that we are
al members of one true Church, reprehending greatly his fellow Ministers and
brethren, who, upon indiscrete Zeal (as he says) urged first this separation,
and did write in not so sensed a manner as they Page 108.
ought to have done, adding further; we are to justify that of departing from
the Church, there ought to be no question at al among us. But what is the cause
(think you) of this so great and sudden courtesy which now at length M.
Buny against al custom of his brethren does offer unto us? you shall hear it
uttered (if you please) in his own words, for by cons^^^ing so far with them
(says he) as to grant that we are not both of one Church; we bring our
selves to needles trouble. For that it is great probability with them, that
so we make our selves aunsvverable for to find out a several and distinct
Church from them, from which we descend, which has continued from the
Apostles age to this present, else that needs we must acknovvledge that our
Church is sprung up of late, or at least, since there is: This is his confession;
which Why protesta^tes are now so kind as to make atonement with us.
we having heard, we need not stand any longer in doubt, wherefore he is
become so kind, as at length to make us al of one true Catholic and
Apostolic Church with them, whom hitherto they have detested as the Sinagogue
of Antechrist. Why also M. Buny took in hand to write this treatise of
pacification, to wit, for that in deed (as he confessed before) He now
perceaueth that men held with them, rather for respect of state and civil
commodities, then of conscience and belief. Which The only motive to
protestant religion in England.
regard of temporal commodity in very truth (Gentle reader) is the only
reason or bait that they can lay before us at this time, whereby to move us to
come unto their part. Which respect and motive notwithstanding, our Lord
knows how bare and brickle a matter it is, and how long or little while it
may endure. But this only thing set a side, in all other respects, reasons,
allurementes, motives, or considerations, which heaven or earth can yield,
whereby to stir a Christian mind to embrace any religion, they are al for us,
and none for them; as perhaps hereafter may be declared more largely, in some
special treatisse, which by occasion of this may be taken in hand. In the mean
space let this suffice for answer of so much as M. Buny has written in his
pacification.

Of this present edition with certain instructions to the Reader.
THERE remains now then (gentle reader) for the ending of this preface, to
admonish the only in a word or two, what thou have in this later edition more
then in the former, and how thou may reap the commodity that is intended
and wished to the therein. First, the whole book has been reuewed, and both
amplified and bettered in diverse 1. The whole book reuevved.
points throughout all the chapters that do remain as before. Secondly, the
title thereof is altered as may appear in the beginning for that the other
book of Christian exercise, 2. The title altered.
since the first edition thereof, has been set forth a part by it self.

Thirdly, diverse treatises and chapters have been wholly altered, especially in
the first 3. Diverse treatisses altered.
part, where, upon a purpose of great brevity which in the beginning was
conceived, (but afterward could not be held) many things were shifted over,
and diverse discourses knit up with more imperfection then in the second part
thereof.

Fourthly, sundry new chapters and treatises have been added in this edition.
And these 4. New chapters added and why.
partly of mine own liking, imagining that the matter might (perhaps) affect
other men as much as it did me; among which I may account the chapter of
examples of true resolution, and some other: Partly also upon advertisement of
good and reverend Catholic priests that live in England, who finding by
their experience in dealing with men's souls, (as my self also did,) that this
long time of schism and sects, wherein they hear nothing but weangling and
contradictions in matters of courtouersies, (their life in the mean space
running at al liberty without discipline, and loding their consciences with
infinite burden of sin;) has wroght in men's minds a certain contempt and
carles insensibilitie in these affairs, esteeming al things to stand upon
probability only of dispute to and fro, and so by little and little, does The
grievous temptations of faith that come by heresy.
bring them also to think the same of Christian religion it self, imagining
that the Jews, Turks, Saracens and other enemies thereof, (being worldly wise
men) may have as great reason perhaps to stand against the same, as these
later learned men of oar owae time have, to staud in so many ranks and
divisions of sects against the Catholic faith, and as the old Philosophers
pretended to have against the being of one God him self.

These things (I say) being so; (which is always the effect of division and
heresy,) those virtuous and discrete men were of opinion The reason of
particular chapters added of new.
that it should not be amiss in this second edition to adioyne two chapters of
the certainty of one God, and of our Christian faith and religion. Besides
this, I was admonished by the writings of our adversaries since the publishing
of my first edition, how they misliked two principal points in that book.
First, that I speak so much of good works and so little of faith: secondly,
that I talked so largely of Gods justice and so breefly of his mercy. In both
which points, albeit an indifferent man might have been satisfied before, and
easily perceive that the adversary does but pick quarrels of calumniation:
yet to give more full contentement in this matter, even unto our enemies: I have
besides that which is spoken else where, (and namely in the 2. and 4. chapters
touching faith,) adjoined also a special chapter of the two several parts of
Christian profession, which are belief and life. And for the second, I have
framed a whole new chapter in the begiuning of the second part, entitled;
against despair of Gods mercy. Those were the causes of my large and ample
additions in this book.

And yet was there besides al these, one cause more, which also I conceived by
information An other cause of the amplificatio of tins book.
of others. An I this was, that diverse persons (as I was told) having desire
in them selves to read the former book, but yet being weak and feartul to be
touched so nere in conscience, as they imagined this book would do; durst
never intermedle therewith, being informed that there was nothing in the same
wherewith to intertaine them selves, but only such vehement matter of
persuasio^, as would troble and afflict thom. For remedy of which
inconueniencie (if it were an inconueniencie,) I have inserted diverse chapters
and discourses of matters more plausiole, and of them selves more indifferent,
whervvith the reader may solace his mind, at such times as he finds the same
not willing to feel the spur of more earnest motion to perfection.

And to the end he may the better be able to serve him self at al times and to
al purposes, The reason of the method adioined in the end.
of whatsoever is contained within this book; I have thought good to set down
in the end of al, a short draught or method for the particular use of every
part and parcel thereof; how it may sorue either to prayer or meditation, or else
to instruction, exhortation, consolation, or other effect according to the time
and place, or to the need, state, condition and other qualetie, of the person
that shall come to read the book.

Now then (good reader and my dear Christian brother) having nothing else at
this time to admonish the of; I will end this preface The conclusion with
certain instructions.
and remit the to the reading of the book it self that follows; exhorting
the most earnestly for thine own souls sake in the tender bowels of our sweet
Savior JESUS, that thou read the same with attention, as matter that
appertains nearest of al other unto the, and with all to yield most hearty and
humble thanks to almighty God, that in his Catholic Church fails not from
time to time to send diverse strange and strong means, whereby to stir up
men to consideration of their estate, and to the gain of their salvation in
the life to come. This (I say) by almighty Gods divine goodness and providence,
is ordinary in his True treating of demotion only in the Catholic Church.
spouse the Catholic Church, where his spirit abides until the worlds end:
and it is so in her alone, as it is her proper and peculier possession, and
never truly to be found in them, who live out of her, albeit for a time and
in some points they may have a show or shadoe thereof. This we see fulfilled
in all heretics and sectaries both of old and of our days, who albeit some
times they will seem to writ books, of institutions to manners and good life;
yet their doctrine therein being as wild, as their faith is wandering; they
never bring any thing to pass, but from worse to worse, whereof the whole world
at this day does give experience. The reason of this in general, Why no
heretic treats sincerly of devotion.
may be taken from the nature and spirit of heretics, described unto us for
our admonishment in holy scripture, whereof one principal point is, that they
shall be as S. Paul says, Sine pace, without al rest or peace, and consequently,
2. Tim. 3.
alvvaies learning and never attaining to the knowledge of truth. They shall
bestow al their time in iangling and quarreling, and in the mean space, as S.
Peter well notes, they shall walk according to their own concupiscences,
albeit 2. Pet. 3.
they talk never so much of mortification and of their quickening spirit, for
which cause he calls them also, illusores, mockers and deceauers; that is, as
S. Paul seems to interpret the same; fellows that with seigned words
shall make their own gain, and which having a show of piety, shall (in
life) deny the force or virtue thereof.

And this why heretics in general can neither teach true piety and devotion,
not Why protestants of alother sectaries can not teach true piety.
yet give example thereof in their own lives. But now if we look into the
particular sects that are of this our most unhappy time; we shall find a more
peculier reason why they in special, much less may doc the same. For that in
truth the very grounds of their opinions doc resist altreating of such
affairs; neither can you urge almost any one point of true piety, but that
(...) must impugn some principal article of their doctrine. As may appear by
that which has been declared before, concerning the places both of fathere and
scriptures thrust out by M. Buny in my former book, whereof also it were not
hard to make diverse most cuident demonstrations in this place.

For, if (for example sake) you exhort men to labor for their own salvation,
as S. Paul Examples bovv protestants can not teach piesie of life without
imparing their doctrine.
did, Philip. 2. ver. 12. then you teach them to put confidence in their own
works, which with protestants is abominable. If you encourage men to suffer
in respoct of reward, as Christ did, Matthew. 5. ver. 12. then fall you flatly
upon the doctrine of merit. If you tell them that heaven is put in their own
hands to gain, as our Savior did, Math. 11. ver. 12. then allow ye not only
of morite, but also of free will. If you wish men to live in fear and trembling
in respect of Gods secret judgments, and of the uncertainty of our salvation,
as S. Paul did, Phi. 2. ver. 12. Hob. 3. ver. 14. and S. Peter. 2. ep. 3. ver.
17. then impeach you the certainty of protestants predestination. If you
counsel men to make amends by good works forth (...): evil life past, as S.
John Baptist did, Luke 3. ver. 8. then you reach satisfaction. If you terrify
them with the fear of hell, and with the declaration of the pains in the world
to come, as Christ did, Math. 8. ver. 12. then with them you offer injury to
Gods infinite mercy. If you exhort men to fasting, praying, love of virginity,
desire of poverty, chastesing their own bodies, restitutio, penance, and the
like, as all the course of holy scripture does: then run you into plain and
open papistrie.

And then (dear Christian brother) what treating can there be of pietic in
life, where No effect of verme sollovveth upon the prating of protestants.
none of these important matters may be once named? Truly (good brother) well may
a man vainlie talk in the air of a quick ening spirit and mstrification, as
they are wont in pastime to do; but nothing in sinceritie-wil ever be brought
to pass, where these weighty points be not soundly and seriously handled. For
take away the mention of these things forth of holy scripture it self,
together with the large and frequent exhortations that therein are made unto
them; and very little will remain about other affairs; the chief endeavor of
Gods holy spirit being bent (as is manifest) to the setting forth and
inculcating of these matters, above al other, unto Christian people.

Which spirit of almighty God, the Catholic Church his holy and dear
spouse, The spirit of the Catholic Church.
taking upon her to imitate; after the foundation of true faith once laid,
calls upon her children both daily and hourly by infinite ways and mianes, to
remember and put in ure these points of virtuous life, while her enemies in the
mean space, do lie wrangling and cauiling about contradictions in belief.
And therefore in the Catholic Church only (gentle reader) shall thou find
the true spirit of teaching, and of execution of these points touching piety:
within the lap and bosom whereof if thou already be, thou have humbly and
heartily to thank God for the same, and with all sollicitous diligence and care
to make thy gain of such helps as she offers the for attayning thy
salvation. But if thou find thy self in other estate (as alas many may at this
day in our poor afflicted country;) then I beseech the tender marcie of our
Sovereign Lord and Savior, that by readings of this present book, thou may
the sooner be moved to make thy self partaker both of the one and of the other
benefit; that is to say; not only to enter into the union of his Catholic
Church, but also (which more imports) to lead a true Christian and virtuous
life within the same. And so to our Lord JESUS I commit the. At S. Omer in
Artoys this present xxix. of Iulie 1585. Being the day of the holy virgin S.
Martha.

Thy hearty well vviller and servant in JESUS Christ. R. P.

OF THE MANY-FOLDE PERILS THAT ENSVE TO THE world by inconsideration. And how
necessary it is for every man to enter into cogitation of his own estate.
CHAPT. I.
THE Prophets and Saints of God, The charitable proceeding of God by Int.
prophctes.
who from time to time have been sent by his merciful providence, to advertise
and warn sinners of their perilous estate and condition for sin; have not
only fortold them of their wickedness and imminent dangers for the same; but
also have reueiled the causes thereof, whereby they might the easyer provide
remedy for the inconuenie^ces to come.

Such is the charitable proceeding of our most merciful Lord with the
children of me^. And among other causes, none is more general or more often
alleged, then the lack of consideration, by which as by a The danger of
inconsideration.
common snare and decept of our adversary, most men fall into sin and are
holden also perpetually in the same, to their final destruction and eternal
perdition.

So Esaias the prophet speaking of the careless nobility and gentry of Jury,
that gave them selves to ba^ketting and disporte, without consideration of
their duties toward god; repeateth often the threat of vvoe against them, and
the puts down the cause i these words: The Esa. 5.
lute, and harp, and tymprel, and shalme, and good wine, abounds in your
bankettes, but the The sensual life of the Iuis he (...)
works of god you respect not, nor have you consideration of his doings. And
then insueth: Therefore has hell enlarged his soul, and opened his mouth
without all measure or limitation, and the stout, and high, and glorious of
this people shall descend into it.

Here are two causes (as you see) and two effects lynked together, of these
Jews damnation, the one depending of the other. For as good cheer and
sensuality brought these men to inconsideratio^ of gods works and proceedinges
toward sinners: so Incosideratio^ brought them to the mouth and pittes brymme
of hell. I say, that inconsideration of gods works toward sinners, brought
them to this peril, for that it follows in the very same place; And the Lord
of hosts shall be exalted in indgeme^t, and our holy god shall be sanctified in
justice; as if he had said, that albeit you will not consider now gods
iudgemetes and justice, amiddest the heat and pleasure of your seastinges: yet
shall he by excercising the same upon you hereafter, be known, exalted, and
sanctified throughout the world.

The like discourse makes God him self by the same prophet, to the daughter of
Babylon, and by her, to every finful and Esa. 47.
sensual soul figured by that name. Come down (says he) and sit in the
dust thou daughter of Babylon: thou have said, I shall be a Lady for ever, and
have not put upon The daughter of Babylon forgets her end.
thy heart the things thou should, nor have thou had remembrance of thy
last end etc. Now therefore harcken thou delicate (daughter) which dwell so
co^fide^tlie: there shall come upon the, an euel, whereof thou shall not know the
ofspringe, and a calamity shall rushe upon the, from which thou shall not be
able to deliver the. A misery shall overtake the upon the sudden, which thou
shall not know. etc.

Holy Jeremy, after he had weighed with him self what miseries for sin the
prophets Esaias, Amos, Ozee, Joel, Abdias, Michaeas, Nahum, Sophonias and him
self (all which prophets lived within the compass of one hundred years) had
fortolde to be imminent upon the world; not only to Samaria and the ten
tribes of Israel, which were now alredie carried into banishment to the furthest
parts of the east: but also to the states and countries 4. Reg. 15. and 17.
that most flourished at that time, (as by name to Babylon, Egypt, Damasco,
Tyrus, Sidon, Moab, and finally to Jerusalem and Iudaea it self, which he
forsaw should soon after most pitifully be destroyed:) when he saw also by
long experience, that nether his words, nor the The complaint of Ierenue for
inconsideration.
words and cries of the other forenamed prophets, could any thing move the
hearts of wicked men: he brake forth into this most lamentable complaint;
Desolatione desolata est omnis terra, quia nulius Iere. 12.
est qui recogitet cord. The whole earth falls into extreme ruin and
desolation, for that there is no man which considers deeply in his heart.

This complaint made good Jeremy in his days for compassion of his people,
that ran miserably to perdition for want of consideration. And the same
complaint with much more reason may every good Christian make at this time,
for the infinite souls of such as perish daily by inco^sideration. Whereby as
by a general and remediless inchantement, many thousand souls are brought a
sleep, and do synde them selves within the gates of hell, before they misdoubt
any such inconuenie^ce, being led through the vale of this present life as it
were blyndfolded, with the veil of careless negligence, (like beasts to the
slaghterhouse,) and never permitted to see their own danger until it be to
late to remedy the same.

Propterea captiuus ductus est populus meus, quia Esa. 5.
non habuit scientiam, says god by the mouth of Esaye. Therefore, and for this
cause, is my people led away captive in all bondage and slavery to perdition,
for that they have no knowledge, no understanding of their own estate, no
forsight of the times to come, no consideration of their danger. Herehence
flows all the misery of my people, and yet this is a mystery that all men
will not know.

Will you see what a mystery and sealed secret this is? harcken then how one
describes The mystery of inco^sideration. Job. 4.
the same, and with what circumstances. Furthermore (says he) a certain
hydden word was spoken unto me, and mine ear as it were by stealth received
the veins of his whyspering: it was i^ the horror of a vision by night, when
dead sleep is wont to possess me^. Fear came upon me and tre^bling, and
all my bones were extremely terished. At length a spirit past by, in my
presence, whereat the hears of my flesh stood up in horror. There stood
before me one whose face I knew not. His image was before mine eye. and I hard
his voice as the sound of a soft air.

Hitherto is described in what manner and order this secret was reueiled: but
now what said this vision or spirit (think you) at the last? truly, he made a
short discourse to prove by the fall of the a^gels for their sin, that much
more, qui habitant domos luteas, and terrenum habeut fundamentum, co^sumentur
Job. 4.
velut a tinea, and de mane vsque ad vesperam succidentur. They who dwell in A
collectio^ to be noted.
houses of mortar, (as all mortal men do whose bodies are of flesh), and
they, which have their foundation of earth, (as most folk of this world have
that putt their confidence in things of this life;) they must all consume by
little and little, as tho cloth does by the mothe, and at length they must upon
the sudden, (within less space perhaps the^ is from morning to night) be cut
down and dispatched, when they think least of it.

And to show that herein stands a point of high secrecy, (I mean to
consider and ponder well this discourse) he makes his conclusion in these
words immediately following; and quia nullus intelligit, in aeternum peribunt.

And for that few or none of those men before mentioned, who have such earthly
foundatio^s, do understand Lack of consideration cause of eternal destruction.
this point aright, (I mean of their sudden death, and cutting of from this
world,) therefore must they perish eternally, and this is a secret which few
men will belyeue. Vir insipiens non cognoscet, (says David) and stultus no^
intelliget haec: an unadvised man will not learn these things, nor will a fool
understand them: but what things? Psalm. 91. A point that fools will not
consuler.
it inseweth in the same place: how wonderful the works of god and how deep
his cogitations are about sinners, who spring up as grass (and flourish in
this world) vt intereant in seculum seculi, to the end they may perish for
ever and ever.

The prophet Daniel had many visions and strange reuelatio^s of great and high
mysteries: but one amongst all other (and this the least,) of the most
dreadful judgments of god upon sinners in the end of the world. The vision
was by the great river Tigris; where, as diverse angels were Dan. 10.
attending about the banks; so upon the water it self, stood one in the
likeness of a A most terrible vision of Daniel vvheri^ he savv Christ.
man, of exceeding dreadful majesty; his apparel being only lynninge,
through which his body shyned like precious stone; his eyes like burnig
lamps, his face like flashinge lightening, his arms and legs like brase
inflamed, and his voice as the shoot of a whole multitude of people that
should speak together.

This was Christ by all interpretation: at whose terrible presence when Daniel
fell down dead, he was erected again by an Angel and made strong to abide the
vision, and so having heard and seen the most wonderful things that i^ his
book he recompteth; he was bold to ask a question or two, for better
understanding thereof, and his first question was, how long it should be, ere
these most vvo^derful things took Dan. 12.
their end? Whereunto the man upon the water answered, by stretching out both
his brazen arms to heaven, and swearing strau^gelie, by him that lived for
ever and ever; that it should be a time, and times, and half a time. Which
answer, Daniel not understanding, began to question further, but he was cut of
with this dispatch: Go thy A secret.
way Daniel, for these speeches are shutt up and sealed until the time
preordained. And yet for his futher instruction it was added in the same place;
Impie agent impij, nec intelligent. Wicked men will always do wickedlie, Dan.
12. VVilfull ignorance.
and will not understand these mysteries, albeit we should never so much
expound them.

Whereby as by all the rest that hitherto has been alleged, is made apparent,
that inconsideration, negligence, careless ignorance, and lack of
understanding in our own estates, and in gods judgments and proceedinges
with iniquity and sin, has been a bane, and a common perdition of
rechelesse men, from time to time.

And if we will turn our eyes to this our age much more shall we see the same
The cause of so much sin at this day.
to be true. For what is the cause (think you) why at this day, we have so
many of those people, whom holy Job does call abominable, that drink up
iniquity as beasts due water, that, committ all sin, all injustice, Job.
15.
all turpitude, without remorse or scruple of conscience? what is the cause of
this (I say) but lack of consideration, lack of understanding, lack of
knowledge? for as Christ said to Jerusalem touching her destruction, si
cognouisses and tu, etc. if thou also (o sinful soul) did Luc. 19.
know, what hangs over thy head for this careless life of thine: if thou
(daughter of Babylon) would remember and ponder in thy heart what shall be the
end Es2. 47.
of these thy delights: thou would not live so pleasantly as thou do,
Nunc autem abscondita sunt haec ab occuiis tuis. But now (says Christ) these
things are hydden Luc. 9.
from thy ne eyes.

Not, but that thou may have known them if thou would, but for that thou
Voluntary inconsideration.
art one of them, who say to god, scientiam viarum tuarum nolum', we will not
have understanding of thy ways; one of them, Job. 21.
qui sunt rebels lumini, that are rebellious against the light and
illuminatio of gods Job. 23.
grace; one of the, qui nolu^t intelligere vt been egant; that will not
understand to do well. And finally one of them, qui declinant aures, Pro. 28.
ne audiat legem, that turn away their ears to the end they may not hear
gods law: quorum oration est execrabiiis, whose not only Ibid.
life, but also prayer is execrable and detestable in the sight of their maker.

Truly, nothing in reason can be less tolerable in the presence of gods
Majesty, then whereas he has published a law unto us with so great charge to
bear it in mind, to ponder in heart, to studdie and Dent. 6. and 11. Iosue 1.
Psalm. 118. Eccle. 6. and 22.
meditate upon it both day and night, at home and abroad, at our vpry singe and
at our down lyinge; to make it our cogitatio, our discourse, our talk, our
exercise our rumination, and our delight: that we should notwithstanding so
contemn the same, as to make it no part of our thought, but rather to flee the
knoledge thereof, as we see most men of the world do, for not troubling their
consciences.

But the holy Ghost has laid down the reason hereof long ago in these
words: cum sit timida nequitia, dat testimoniu^ Ecclo 17.
condemnationis. For that wickedness in it self, is alwayes' fearful, it
gives witness The first cause why men sly consideration.
against it self of damnation, when so ever it thinks of the law of god, or
of honesty. So Felix the governor of Jury when S. Paul began to talk of
justice, chastity, and gods judgments before him; he was wonderfully a
feared, and said to Act. 24.
Paul, that he should depart for that time: and that he would call for him
again afterward, when occasion should require. But he never did, and what
was the cause? For that (as Josephus testifies) he was a wicked man Joseph.
li. 20 antiq. cap. 5.
and Drusilla his fair lady that was with him at S. Paul's speech, was not
his true wife, but taken by allurement and violence from an other, and therefore
it offended them both to hear preaching of chastity.

This then is one principal cause, why men of this world will not enter into
consideration of their own estate, and of gods co^mandementes, least they
should read and see their own faults, and bear witness against the^
selves, of their own condemnation. Whereunto the scripture annexeth an other
cause, not far unlike to this, which is, that worldly men do so dro vne them
selves in the cares and cogitations The second cause why men slye
consideration.
of this life, as they leave in their minds no place to think upon gods
affairs, which are the busynes of their own souls. This expresses Jeremy
the prophet most effectually, when having made his complaint, that not
withsta^nding Iere. 7.
his preaching and crying in the templegate, for long time together, where all
the people passed by him and heard him; yet no man (says he) would enter into
consideration, or say with him self, what have I done? whereof he adds
presently the cause and reason; omnes enim conuersi sunt Ierem. 8.
ad cursum suum, quasi equus impetu vedens ad praelium. All men are set upon
their own courses and ways, and do run in the same, with as great
veheme^cie and fearse obstination, as a furious armed horse, when he hears
the trompett in the beginning of a battle.By which comparison the holy ghost
expresses very lyuelie, the irrecouerable state of a settled worldly man,
that follows greedily his own designmentes in the negotiation of earth.

These are two of the chyefe causes of inconsideration, I mean, wilful malice,
and obstinate occupation in the vanities The third cause of inco^sideratio^.
of this life. And yet me^tioneth the scripture, a third sort also of
inconsiderate men, who nether of direct malice, nor yet of great occupatio^ in
worldly affairs, do neglect consideration, but rather of a certain
lightenesse and idle negligence, for that they will not trouble their heads
with any thing but disporte and recreation, of whom it is written:
aestimaueru^t Sap. 15.
lusum esse vita^ nostra. They esteem this life of ours to be but a plai-game.
And in an other place of the same me^: ita securi Eccle. 8.
viuunt quasi iustorum facta habeant. They live as securely and considentlie
without care or cogitation, as if they had the good works of just men to stand
for them. But as the holy Ghost pronou^ceth in the same place; hoc vanissimum,
this is vanity and folly in the highest degree.

For as in things of this life, he were but a foolish merchant, that for
quietness A comparison.
sake would never look into his acco^ptbookes whether he were behind hand or
before: and as that ship-master were greatly to be laughed at, that for
avoiding of care, would set down and make good cheer, and let the ship go
whether she would: so much more in the business of our soul is it madness and
folly, to fly consideration for eschuyng of trouble, seeing in th end this
negligence must needs turn upon us much more trouble and irremediable
calamity.

For as Jeremy says to all such men, in nouissimo dicrum intelligetis ca, in
the end Iere. 30. and 23. In the end ynel men shall understand whether they
will or no.
of your days, you shall not choose but know, and see, and understand these
things which now for delicacie you will not take the pains to think of. But
when shall this be trow you? he tells plainly in the same place: when the
fury of our lord shall come forth as a vvhirle vvinde, and shall rushe and
rest upon your heads as a tempest; then shall you know and understand these
things.

It seems that the Babylonians were The example of the Babylonia^s.
a people very faulty in this point of consideration (as all wealthy people
are,) not only by that which before has been touched of the daughter of
Babylon, that would not consider her endinge days; Esa. 47.
but also, for that not long before the most terrible destruction of that
great City, by the Medes and Persia^s, God cried unto her in these words: My
deerlie beloved Esa. 21.
Babylon, put aside the table and stand upon thy watch: rise up you princes
from eating and drinking; take your targetes in your hands; go, and set a
watcheman upon the walls, and what so ever he sees, let him tell you.And
then was there a watcheman set upon the wales, and a Lyo^ to denounce with
open mouth, what soever danger he saw coming toward them. And God taught the
people to cry in this sort to their sentinel or watchman: Esa. 21.
Custos quid de nocte? custos quid de nocte? Thou watcheman, what see thou
coming toward us by night? what espyest thou (o sentinel) drawing on us in
the darkness?

By all which circumstance, what else is We must stand upon our vvatch
insinuated, but that god would have us stand upon our watch, for that his
judgments are to come upon the world by night, when men least think thereof?
Luc. 12.
they are to come as a these at midnight, as also in an other place we are
admonished: and therefore happy is the man that shall be found watcheful.

But now the door and sole entrance Consideration the only door to our vvatch.
into this watch, whereof the security of our eternal life depends, can be
nothing else but consideration. For that, where no consideration is, there can
be no watch, nor foresight, nor knowledge of our estate; and consequently no
hope of salvation, as Bern. lib. 1. de consid.
holy S. Bernard holds; which thing caused that blessed man to write fine
whole books of consideration to Eugenius.

Consideration is the thing which brings us to know both god and our selves.
And touching god, it lays before us his Majesty, his mercy, his
judgments, his commandments, his promises, his threatninges, his proceeding
with other men before us, whereby we may gather what we also in time must expect
at this hands.

And for our selves, consideration is the keye that opens the door to the
closet The many commodities of consideration.
of our heart, where all our books of account do lie: it is the looking
glass, or rather the very eye of our soul, whereby she takes the view of her
self, and looks into all her whole estate: Into her riches, her debtes, her
duties, her neglige^ces: her good guiftes, her defectes, her saftie, her
danger; her way she walks in, her course she follows, her pace she holds,
and finally, the place and end whereto she draws. And without this
consideration, she runs on hedlong into a thousand brakes and briars,
stumbling at every step into some one inconvenience or other, and
continually in peril of some great and deadly mischief.

And wonderful (truly) it is, that in all other business of this life, men can
see and confess, that nothing may be either begun, prosecuted, or well ended
without consideration, and yet in this great affair, of gayning heaven, or
falling into hell, few think consideration greatly necessary to be used.

I might stand here to show the infinite other effects and commodities of
consideration, as that it is the watch or Effects (...) consideration.
l'arme-bell, that stirs up and awaketh all the powers of our mind; the
match or tynder, that co^ceyueth and nourishes the fyar of devotion; the
belloes that enkyndleth and inflameth the same; the spur that pricketh
forward to all virtuous, zealous, and heroical acts; and the thing in deed,
that gives both light, and life, and motion to our soul.

Our Faith is confirmed and increased by consideration of gods works and
miracles; our Hope by consideration of his promises, How all virtues are
stirred up and quickened by consideration.
and or the true performance thereof to all them that ever trusted in him: our
Charity or love of god, by consideration of his benefits and innumerable
deserts toward us: our Humility, by consideration of his greatenesse, and
of our own infirmity: Our Courage and Fortitude, by co^te^plation of his
assistance in all causes for his honor: our Contempt of the world, by
consideration of the joys of heaven eternal: and so all other virtues both
moral and divine, do take their heat, and quickening, and vital spirit from
consideration.

By the exercise of consideration and meditation holy David says, that he
felt a Psalm. 38.
burning fyar to flame within his breast; that is, the fyar of zeal, the fyar
of fervor in religion, the fyar of devotion, the fyar of love toward god and
his neighbor. And in an other place he says, that by the same exercise, he
svvept and purged his own spirit, which is to be understood, Psalm. 76.
from the dust of this world, from the dregs of sin, from the co^tamination
and coinquination of human creatures, for that consideration in deed is the
very fan that seuereth and drives away the chafe from the corn.

For which cause we shall never read of any holy man from the beginning of
the world, nether before Christ or after, The exercise of holy men touching
consideration.
who used not much and familiarlie this most blessed exercise of
consideration and pondering. And for the first three Patriarchs, it shall be
sufficient to remember the custom of young Isaac recorded in Genesis. Which
was, to go forth toward Genesis 24. The first three Patriarchs.
night into the fields, ad medita^dum, that is, to meditate, consider, and
ponder upon the works and judgments, and comma^demetes of god. And this he
did being yet but a child and unmarried (far different from the custom of
young getleme now a days who frequent the fields to follow their vanities):
And as little Isaac could not have this custom but from his father Abraham, so
(no doubt) but he taught the same to his son Jacob, and Jacob again to his
posterity.

And as for Moses and his successor Iosue, it may easelie be imagined how they
Moses and Iosue.
used this exercise, by the most earnest exhortations, which they made thereof
to others in their speech and writings. The Deuteronomy. 6. and 11.
good kings of Judah also, notwithstanding their many great temporal affairs,
do testify of them selves concerning this exercise; Ios. 1.
as David almost every where, that the commandementes of god were his daily
meditation, not only by day and that, K. David.
tota die all the day, and per singuios dies, every day, and in matutino, in
the morning, and septie Psalm. 38. 62. and 118.
in die, seven times a day: But also he insinuates his custom by night;
meditatus sum nocte cum cord meo, I do meditate by night in Psalm. 76.
my heart upon thy commaundementeso Lord; signifying hereby, both his
watchfulnes by night, when other men were a sleep, and the hearty care that he
had of this exercise which we esteem so little.

Solomon also king Dauides son, so K. Salomo^.
long as he lived in the grace and favor of god, observed this exercise of
his father, and exhorts other men, to have continual Eccle. 6.
and daily cogitation in this affair. Which if himself had continued still,
it is liklie he had never fallen from god by women as he did. The good king
Ezechias is reported K EZechias.
to have meditated like a dove, that is, in silence and solitarines with
himself alone, which is the true way of profitable Esa. 58.
meditation. Esaye testifies of his own watching by night in this exercise,
and Esa 26.
how he did the same with his spirit alone in the very bowels of his heart.

Holy Job makes mention not only of The consideration that Job used and the
seuites thereof.
his manner of considering, but what also he considered, and what effect he
found in him self by the same. First he considered (as I said) the ways,
foot-stepes, and co^mandemetes of god, and the his dreadful power to wit; how
no man was able to auerte or turn away his cogitation, but that his soul did
what soever it pleased, and by this (says he,) considerans eum timore
solicitor. Job. 23.
I am made sollicitous or watcheful with fear. when I do consider him. In
which words he insinuates two most excellent effects of consideration;
first, the Two effects of consideration. Esa. 32.
fear of god, of which it is written, salutis the saurus timor Drnini, the
fear of God, is the treasure of salvation; and the second that by this fear
he was made sollicitous, watchful, and diligent in gods service, of which the
prophet Micheas says thus. I vvil tell the (o man) what is good Mich. 6.
and what our Lord requires at thie hands: to wit, to do judgment, and
love mercy and to walk sollicitous and vvatchfull with thie God.

But o thou holy and blessed man Job, A consideration upon the doings of Job.
Job. 9.
did this exercise of consideration, bring forth in thee so great fear and
terror of god? and so careful watchfulnes for observing his co^mandementes?
now I see well the cause, why thou wrytest of thv self, that thou dydste doubt
and fear all thy works and actions, were they never so circumspect. But what
shall we say now a days (most happy Saint) who do not doubt so much as our
own dissolute, careless, and inordinate actions, who feel no terror of God at
all, nor do use any one jot of watchfulnes in observing his commandementes?
truly, this proceeds of nothing else, but of inconsideration: it proceeds
of lack of knowledge both of god and of our selves. For (doubtelesse) if we
knew either of these two things a-right, (as in deed neither of them can be
well understood without th other,) it could not be, but that many of us would
change our wrong courses.

O merciful Lord, what synful ma^in the world would live as he does, if he knew
either thee or himself as he should do? I mean, if he considered what thou
art, and what thou have been to other that lived and continued in sin as he
does? Not without great cause, cried so often and earnestly to the, that holy
Doctor of thy church, for obteyninge of these two poynctes at thie hands: vt
cognoscam te, vt cognoscam me, that Augustine. in lib. co^fess.
I may know thee, and that I may know my self, says he: that is, that I may
consider, and feel the true knowledge hereof, for many men do know, but with
little commodity.

We know and believe in gross the mysteries of our faith, that there is a god
Knowledge and belief in gross.
who rewards good andeuel, that he is terrible in his councels upon the
sons of men; that there is a hell for sinners, a heave for good lyuers, a
most dreadful day of judgment to come, a strait account to be demanded, and
the like. All this we know and believe in general, as merchandise wrapped up
together in a bundle. But for that we unfold not these things, nor rest upon
them in particular; for that we let them not down into our hearts, nor do
ruminate on them with leisure and attention; for that we chue them not well in
mind by deep consideration, nor do digest them in heart, by the heat of
meditation: they remain with us as a sword in his scaberde, and do help us
as little unto good life (for which they were reueiled) as a preservative in our
pocket A similitude.
never applied, can help our health. We bear the general knowledge of these
mysteries locked up in our breasts, as sealed bags of treasure that we never
told nor opened, and consequentelie, we have nether feeling, sense, or motion
thereby; even as a man may carye fyar about him in a flynt stone without heat,
and perfumes in a pommander without smell, except the one be beaten and the
other chafed.

All stands then (good reader) in this one poinct, for direction of our
selves in The importance of consideration.
this life, and for reaping benefit by the mysteries of our faith and
religion; that we allot our selves time to meditate, ponder, and consider what
these things do teach us. For as the sick man, that had most excellent
remedies and precious potions set before him, could expect no profit or ease
thereby, if he only did look upon them, or smeld them, or took them into his
mouth alone, or should cast them forth of his stomache again, before they
were settled or had time to work there operation: even so is it in this case of
ours. And therefore with great reason said S. Paul to Timothy, after he had
taught him a long lesson. Haec meditare. 1. Tim. 4
Meditate, consider, and ponder upon these things which I have showed you: as
if in other words he had said, all that hitherto I have told you or written
for your instruction, and all that ever you have heard or learned besides, will
avail you nothing for your salvation, except you meditate and ponder upon the
same, and do suck out the iuyse thereof, by often consideration.

Wherefore to conclude this chapter, my dear and well beloved brother, for that
The conclusion of the chapter.
consideration is so precious, and profitable, so needful and necessary a
thing as has been declared; I thought it convenient in this first front and
entrance of my book, to place the mention and diligent recommendation thereof,
as of a thing most requisite for all that insueth. For without consideration,
nether this that I have said already, nor any thing else that shall or may be
said hereafter, ca^ yield thee profit, as by most lamentable experience we see
daily in the world, where many millions of men, pass over their whole The
misery of the world.
age without taking profit of so many good books, so many preachinges so
many virtuous examples, so many terrible chastismentes of God upon sinners
which every where they see before their face. But yet, for that they will not,
or have not leisure, or dare not, or have no grace, to enter into consideration
thereof: they pass over all, as sickmen do pills, diuertinge as much as they
may, both their eyes and cogitations, from all such matters as are ungrateful
unto them.

But as good Jeremy says, the time will come, when they shall be enforced to
see Iere. 30. and 23.
and know and consider these things, when perhaps it will be to late to reap
great confort or consolation thereby. Wherefore (dear brother.) that which
perforce thou must do in time to come, and that perchance to thy greater
damnation, (I mean to enter into consideration of thine own estate:) do that
now willingly to thie conforte and merit, for preparinge the way to thy
salvation. Prevent the day and redeem the time, according to S. Paul's wise
council: run not headlong Ephesians. 5.
with the world to perdition: stay some time as holy Jeremy admonishes
the, and say to thy self, what do I? whether Ierem. 7.
do I go? what course hold I? what shall be mine end? Take some time from thy
pleasures, and from the company of thy pleasant friends to do this,
although it be with some loss of pastyme and recreation: for I assure the, it
will recompense it self in the end, and make the merye when thy laughinge
fryndes shall weep.

The effect of all the considerations that The effect of all the chapters
follovvinge.
insewe, is, rightly to know god, for by knowinge him, we shall know our
selves, and all things else which are necessary for us to know; and without
knowinge him all knowledge i^ the world is vanity and mere follve. haec est
vita eterna (says Christ to his father) vt te cognoscant solum Deum verum. Et
quem misisti Iesan Christian. Ioh. 17.
This is life ever lasting, that man know thee, which art only true god, and
Jesus Christ whom thou have sent.

Gods nature and essence we can not know in this life; but the only mean to
know god in this world, is, to know his Majesty, to know his mercy, to know
The way to know god in this life.
his justice, to know his judgments; to know his hatred to sin, his favor
to the good, his benefits, and promises, to all: his grace, his threats,
his ways, his co^mandemites, his dealinges toward other men before us; all
which things the considerations followinge do set before our eyes, and
consequentelie, they do teach us to know god a-right. Read them therefore
(dear brother) with attention and rememember the words that God uses to us
all; vacate and videte quoniam Psalm. 45.
ego sum Deus. Take leisure, and consider that I am a God. It must not be done
in haste, nor (as the fashion is) for curiosity only, to read three or four
leaves in one place, and so in an other: but it must be done which such serious
attentio, as appertains to so great a busynes which (in truth) is the
weightiest that possibly under heaven, may be taken in hand. It is the business
whereof Christ meant especially, when he said, vnumest necessarium, one only
thing is necessary. For that all Luc. 10.
other things in this world are but trifles to this, and this alone of it
self, of more importance, then they all.

THAT THERE IS A GOD, WHICH REWARDS. GOOD AND EVYLL, against all Artheistes
of old, and of our time. With the proofs alleged for the same, both by
Jew and Gentile. CHAPT. II.
IT is a thing both common and ordinary A common: custom in sciences, to,
suppose principles.
in sciences and arts who^ they are learned or delivered by other; to suppose
diverse poi^tes and principles, and to pass them oaer without proof, as either
known before to the learner, or else so manifest, casie, and evident of them
selves, as they need no other proof, but only declaration.

So when we take in hand to instruct a An example in cheualrie.
man in chvualrie, or feats of arms; we do sappose that he knows before
(were he never so rude,) what a man, what a horse, what armor, what fighting
means: as also that war is lawful and expedient in diverse cases; that
princes of the world may wage the same; that soldiars have to live in order and
discipline under their regiment; 2nd that kings for this cause do hold their
Generales, Lieutenantes, Coronels, Captains, and other like officers in their
bands, garrisons, camps, and armies.

In manual arts and occupations likewise, it is evident, that diverse things
must In handycraftes.
be presupposed to be foreknowen by the learner, as in husbadrie or
agriculture; in buylding, in paynting, and other such excercises, when a man is
to be taught or instructed, it were not convenient for the teacher, to stand
upon every point or matter that apperteineth to the same, but must leave and
pass over many things as apparent of them selves, or easily to be discerned
of every learner by nature, sense, reason, or common experience.

But yet in liberal sciencies and professions of learning, is this more
apparent, In liberal sciences.
where not only such common and vulgar poi^tes are to be presumed, without
proof or discourse; but also certain propositio^s are to be granted in the
beginning, as Growndes to be granted in sciences. In logic.
growndes wheruppon to build all the rest that insueth. So the Logitian (for
example) will have you yield ere he enter with you; that contradictorie
propositions can not be together either false or true, nether, that one thing
may be affirmed and denied of an other in one and the self same respect and
time.

The Moral philosopher will have In Moral Philosophy.
you grant at the beginning, that there is both: good and evil in men's
actions: and that the one is to be follovved and the other refused. The Natural
Philosopher will have you confess, In natural Philosophy.
that all physical bodies which depend of nature, have motion in themselves
and are subject to alterations, and what soever is moved, is moved of an
other. The Mathematique at his first entrance, will In the Mathematiks.
demand your assent, that every whole is bygger then his part; as also, the
Metaphysique or supernatural Philosopher, that nothing can be and not be, at
one time. And so In Metaphysike.
other such like principles and common growndes, in these and all other sciences
are to be demanded, granted, and agreed upon at the beginning, for the better
pursuit and establishment of that which has to follow, being things in them
selves (as you see,) either by nature, common sense, or experience most clear
and manifest.

And is not this also in divinity, (trow you,) and in the affairs that we
have now In Divinity.
in hand? yes truly, if we believe S. Paul who writes thus to the hebrews:
Credere oportet accede^tem ad Deum, quid est, and inquire^tibus Heb. 11.
se remunerator sit. He that is in coming toward God, must believe that
there is a God, and that he is a rewarder to such as seek him. Behold here two
principles, wherein a man must be resolved before he Two principles in
diuiritie.
ca^ seek or draw near unto god. The one, that there is a god, and the other,
that the same (...). (...).
god is just to revvard every man that seeks him according to his deserts.

Which two principles or general grounds are so evident in deed of their own
natures, and so ingrassed by gods own hand, into the mind and understanding
of every particular man, at his nativity, (according to the saying of the
prophet: the light of thy countenance is sealed upon us, o Lord,) that were not
the times we live Psalm. 4.
in, to-to wicked, and the shameless induration of sinners intolerable: we
should not need to stand upon the proof of these points, for confirmation of
our cause that we now entreat, of resolution: but rather, supposing and
assuring our selves, that no reasonable creature living, could doubt of these
principles; should pursue only the consideration of other things that might
stir up our wills to perfourmance of our duties toward this God that has
created us, and remains to pay our reward at the end.

But for so much as iniquity has so aduau^ced her self at this day, i the
hearts The cause of this chapter.
of many, as not only to contemn and offend their maker, but also to deny
him, for patronage of their evil life, and for exstinguishing the worm of
their own afflicted and most miserable consciences: I am enforced before all
other things, to discover this fond and foul error of theirs, and to remove
also this refuge of desperate iniquity, by she wing the invincible verity of
these two pri^ciples, the one depending of the other, in such sort, as the
first being proved, the second has of If there be a God, he is a just revvarder.
necessity to follow. For if once it be manifest, that there is a God, which
has care and providence of all those, whom he has created and governs; the^
must it ensue by force of all consequence, that he is also to reward the same
men according to their merits and deserts of this life.

First then to prove this principle, that there is a God, I need use no other
argument, or reason in the world, but only, to refer each man to his own
See Lactantius at large in his book of the vvorkma^shipe of the world.
sense, in beholding the world, whereof every part and portion is a most
clear glass, representing God unto us, or rather a sayre table wherein God
has drawn and imprinted The works of the world do declare the workman.
himself, in so manifest characters and legible letters; as the simplest man
living may read and understand the same.

In respect hereof said the wise man so long ago. That vain and foolish
were all those who considering the works that are seen in this world, could not
thereby rise to understand the worke-man. And he Sap. 13.
gives this reason, a magnitudine enim speciei creaturae, cognoscibiliter
poterit Creator horum videri. For that by the greatenes of beauty in the
creature, may the Creator thereof be seen and known. Which S. Paul confirms
when he says, that the invisible Romans 1.
things of God, may be seen and known by the visible creatures of this world.
Which is to be understood in this sense, that as a prisonner in a dungeon may
easily by a little beam that shyneth in at a chyncke, conceive there is a
sun, from whence that beam descends: and as a trauailer in the wilderness
that falls upon some channel or brook, may ascend by the same to the well
or fontaine: even so, he that beholds and co^sidereth the wonderful works of
this world, may thereby conceive also the wonderful Artificer or workman that
made them.

If a man should pass by sea into some A Similitude.
foraine, strange, and sauuage country, where nothing else but birds and
beasts did appear; yet if he should epsy some exquisite building or other
work of art and reason in the place; he would presentelie assure himself,
that some men dwelt or had been in that country, for that such things could
not be done by beasts or unreasonable creatures: eue^ so in the view and
consideration of this world.

If we cast our eyes upon the heavens; we remain astonished, with the miracles
The Heavens teach God.
that we behold: but who made them? we see the skies of exceedi^g huge
highenes; distinguished with colors and beauty most admirable; adorned with
stars and planetes innumerable, and these so qualified with their diverse and
different and unequal motions, as albeit they never move or go together: yet
do they never give let or hynderance the one to the other, nor change there
course out of order or season.

Quis enarrabit caelorum rationem, and concentum caeli, quis dormire faciet?
Who is able to Job. 28.
declare the reason of these heavens, or who can make cease or sleep the
uniform course of their motion; says God to Job? As who would say, that
because no man or mortal creature can do this; therefore may we imagine of what
power and perfection their maker is. Which king David had done when he
pronounced, caeli enarrant Psalm. 18.
gloriam Dei, and opera manuum eius, annunciat firmamentum. The heavens declare
the glory of God, and the firmament does preach the works of his hands unto
us.

If we pull down our eyes from heaven, The earth teaches us God.
to earth; we behold the same of an infinite bigness, distinguished with hills
and dales, woods and pastures; covered with all variety of grass, herbs,
flowers and leaves; moistened with rivers, as a body with veins; inhabited by
creatures of innumerable kinds and qualities; enriched with inestimable and
endeles treasures: and yet it self standing, or hanging rather with all this
weighte and poise, in the midst of the air, as a little balle without proppe
or pillar. At which devise and most wonderful miracle, God him self, as it
were, glorying, said unto Job. Where Job. 38.
were thou, when I laid the foundations of the earth? Tell me if thou have
understanding, who measured it out, or drevv his line upon the same?
VVheruppon are fastened the pillars of his foundation, or who laid the first
corner stone thereof?

If we look nether up nor down, but cast our countenance only a side: we
epsy The Sea shows God.
the sea on each hand of us, that invironeth round about the land. A vaste
crcature, that contains more wonders theu man's tongne can express. A
bottemlesse gulf, that without running over, receaueth all rivers which
perpetually do flow. A resteles fight and turmoile of waters, that never
repose netherday nor night. A dreadful, raging, and furious eleme^t, that
swells, and roareth, and threateneth the lade, as though it would devour it
all at once. And albeit in situation it be higher then the earth, as the
philosopher shows, and Aris:. lib. de mirabilibus.
do make assaults daily toward the same, with most terrible cries and
waves mounted even to the sky: yet when it draws near to the land, and to
his appointed borders; it stays upon the sudden, though nothing be there to
let it, and is enforced to recoile back again, mur muring as it were, for
that it is not permitted to pass any further.

Of which restrainte, God asks Job this question. Who has shutt up the sea
with gates, when he breaks forth in rage as Job. 38.
from his mothers womb? Whereunto no man being able to give answer, God
ansuereth him self in these words. I have limited him with my bounds, and I
have set him both a dove and a bar, and have said unto him, hitherto shall
thou come, and shall not pass further; here shall thou break thie swelling
waves.

This in sum, is of things without us. But if we should leave these, and
enter The things in man declare God.
to seek God within our own selves, whether we consider our bodies or our
souls, or any one part thereof, we shall find so many strange things, or
rather so many seas of miracles and wonders, that preach and teach their maker
unto us; as we shall not only perceive and see God most evidently, but rather
(as a certain Iamblicus de Mist. cap. 1.
old heathen has written,) we shall feel and handle him in his works. Which
kind of speech also S. Paul him self doubts not to use, affirming, that God
has given space to every man in this life to seek him, siforte attractent cum
aut inueniat, if perhaps they would handle him, or Act. 17.
find him out. Which manner of words do siguifie, that by consideration of
gods creatures, and especially of the wonders in man him self, we may come to
see and perceive the Creator so cleerlie; that in a sort we may be said to
feel and handle him. So iointelie do all things concur to the
manifestatio^ of their maker: So manifestelie and effectually do they teach
and demonstrate, and painte out God unto us: nothing being so little, that
declares not his greatness, nothing so great, which acknowdlegeth not his
soueraitie, nothing so low, that leads us not up to behold his majesty,
nothing so high, that descends not to teach us this verity.

It were a labor without end, to go about in this place to allege what
might he said in the proof of this principle, that there is a God; seeing there
was never yet learned man in the world, either Gentile or other, that
acknowledged and confirmed not the same, being driven thereunto by the manifest
euidencie of the truth it self.

If you object against me Diagoras, Protagoras, Theodorus Cyrenensis, Bion
Borysthines, Old Atheistes.
Epicurus, and some few others that were open Atheistes and denied God: I
answer, that some of these were utterly unlearned, Laertius lib. 2. and 4. de
vit. philos.
and rather sensual beasts then reasonable men; and consequently might deny
any thing, according to the saying of holy David: the fool said in his heart,
there is no God. Psalm. 13. and 52.
Others that had some smacke of learning, rather iested at the falshode of
their own Panisme idols, then denied the being of one true God.

But the most part of these me^, in deed, and such others as in old times were
accounted Atheistes, denied not. God so much in words, as in life and factes;
such as S. Paul called Atheistes in his days, that Romans 1. Philip. 3.
obeyed their bellies, and followed their pleasures in sin and sensuality,
not vouchsafing to think of God in this life, (such was the Epicure, and many
other are at this day of his profession:) but yet, (as Lactantius well notes)
when the same Lact. lib. 3. institut.
men came to be sober, and speak of judgment (as at their death or other time
of distress and misery;) they were as redye to confess God as any other what
soever.

But for learned men, and people of diseretion, sobriety and judgment, there
was never yet any (were he Jew or were he Gentile,) that doubted in this
verity, but had means of probation to confirm the same, as more
particulerlie in the rest of this chapter shall be declared.

How the heathens proved there was a God. Sect. 2.
AMONG the Gentiles or heathen people, those men were all ways of most credit
and estimation, that professed the Philosophers.
love of wisdom, and for that respect were termed philosophers. Who being
divided into diverse sorts and sects, had four principal sciences, whereof
they made profession, each one of these having other lower sciences comprehended
under it.

The first of these four, is called Natural Four pri cipal sciences.
philosophy; the second, Moral; the third; Supernatural, or Metaphysicke; the
fowerth, Mathematique. And for the first three, they have each one their proper
means and peculier proofs, whereby to convince, that there is a God. The
fouerth, which is the Mathematique, for that it The Mathematique proves not
God.
has no consideration at all of the efficient or final cause of things,
(under which two respects and considerations only God may be known and
declared to me^ in: his world:) therefore this science has no proper mean
peculier to it self, for proving this verity, as the other sciences have, but
receaueth the same as borrowed of the former.

THE NATURAL phisosopher among THE Natural philosopher.
the Gentiles, had infinite arguments to prove by the creatures that there was
a God, but all he reduced to three pricipal and general heads, which he termed
exMotu, ex Fine, and ex Causa Efficie^te. That is, argumets drawn from the
Motions, from the Ends, and from the Cause efficient of creatures that we
behold; which terms the examples solowinge, shall make clear and manisest.

The argument of Motion, stands vppo this general ground in philosophy, that
The first argument in natural Philosophy. Arist. lib. 7. and 8. phy.
what soever is moved, is moved, if an other. Wherein also is observed, that in
the motions of creatures, there is a subordinatio^ the one to the other. As for
example; these inferior bodies upon earth, are moved and altered by the air
and other elements; and the elements are moved by the influence and motion of
the Moon, Sun, and other heavenly bodies; these planets again are moved
from the highest Orb or Sphere of all, that is called, the first mouable,
Primum mobile.
a boue which, we ca^ go no further among creatures.

Now then asks the philosopher here who moves this first moveable? for if
you say that it moves it self; it is against our former ground, that nothing
is moved in nature, but of an other. And if you say, that some other thing
moves it; then is the question again, who moves that other? and so from one
to one, until you come to some thing that moves, and is not moved of an
other, and that must be God which is above all nature.

This was the common argument of Plat. l. 10. de legib. Arist. lib. 8. phys.
cap. 5.
Plato, and of Aristotle, and of all the best philosophers. And they thought it
a demonstration unavoidable, and it seems they were admonished of this
argument by consideration of the clock, whose hammer when it stryketh, shows
the next wheel whereby it is moved: and that wheel, shows an other wheel;
An argument taken from the clock.
and so from one to one, until ye come to him that was the first cause of
motion to all the wheels, that is, to the clockemaker himself.

Aristotle, to king Alexander, uses this pretty similitude. That as in a Quyar
of Arist. lib. de mu^do.
singers, when the foreman has given the first tune or note, there insueth
presently a sweet harmony and consent of all other voices, both great and
small, sharp A similitude.
and mean: So God in the creation of this world, having given once the first
pushe or motion to the highest heaven, called primum mobile, there ensue upon
the same, all other motions of heavens, planetes, elements, and other bodies,
in most admirabile order, concord, and congruetie, for co^seruation and
government of the whole. And thus is God proved by the argument of motion.

The other two arguments of the End, and The second argument of natural
philosophy.
of the Cause Efficie^t of creatures, are made evident in a certain manner by
this that has been spoken of Motion. For seeing by experience, that every
thing brought forth in nature, has a peculier End appointed, whereto it is
directed by the self same nature, (as we see the bird is directed to build
her nest by nature, the fox to make his den, and so the like in all other
creatures:) the philosopher asks here, what thing is that, which directs
nature her self, seeing each thing must have somewhat to direct it to his End?
And no answer can be made, but that the Director of Nature, must be some thing
above Nature, and that is God himself. This argument of Philo. l. de opificio
mundi.
the final End is most excellently handled, by Philo Iudaeus in his learned
treatise of the vvorkemanshipe of the world.

From the Cause efficie^t, the Philosopher disputes thus. It is evident by all
reason, The third argument of natural Philosophi^e.
in respect of the corruptions, alterations, and perpetual motions of all
creatures, that this world had a beginning; and Vide Plutarch de placitis
Philosoph.
all excellent philosophers that ever were, have agreed theruppon, except
Aristotle for a time, who held a fantasy, that the world had no beginning, but
was from all eternity, albeit at last in his old age, he confessed the
contrary, in his book to king Arist. l. 8. phys. and l. de Genesis and corrup.
Arist. l. de mundo and vide plotin. l. de mundo.
Alexander.

This then being so, that this world had 3 begi^ni^g, it must needs follow
also, that it had an Efficient cause. Now then is the question, who is that
Efficient cause that made the world? if you say, that it made it self; it is
absurd: for how could it have power to make it self, before it self was, and
before it had any being at all? if you say, that some thing within the world
made the world: that is, that some one part of the world, made the whole:
this is more absurd, for it is, as if a man should say, that the fingar (and
this before it was a fingar, or part of the body,) did make the whole body.

Wherefore we must confess by force of this argument, that a greater and more
excellent thing, then is the whole world putt together, or then any part
thereof, made the world, and was the Cause efficient of the frame that we see;
and this ca^ be nothing else but God that is above the world. So that hereby we
see, how many ways the Natural philosopher is fraught with arguments, to prove
there is a God, and that by reason only, without all light or assistance of
faith.

BUT THE Metaphisique or Supernatural THE Metaphysique and his arguments.
Philosopher among the Getiles, as he to whom it appertained most in special,
to handle these high and supernatural affairs, had many more arguments and
demonstrations, to prove and convince the being of one God.

And first of all he said, that it could not The first argument in Metaphysique.
stand with any possibility in his science, that eus finitum, a thing finite,
or closed within bosides and limits, (as this world and every creature therein
is,) could be, but from some Maker or Creator. For (says he,) the thing that
in it self is not infinite, has his bounds and limmites, and co^seque^telie
there must be some thing, that assigned these bounds and limits. And seeing i^
this world there is no creature so great, which has not bounds and limits:
we must of necessitic imagine some infinite supreme Creator or Maker, that
limited these creatures, even as we see, that the potter at his pleasure, gives
bounds and limits to the pot that he frames.

This argument the Metaphisique confirms by a ruled principle in his science,
Ut maxia in Metaphysique.
that every thing which is by participation, must be reduced and referred to
some other thing, that is not by participation, but of it self. And he calls
a thing by participation, which is Arist. li. 2. Metaph. cap. 2.
not in the fullest or highest degree of perfection in his kind, but may have
addition made unto it. As for example; water, or any thing else that is heated
by the fiar, is hoate by participatio^, and not of it self, for that it may
alvvayes be hoater, and have addition of heat made unto it: But fiar is hoate
of it self, and not by participation, for that it has heat in the highest
degree, and in that kind can receive no addition; wherefore the heat of all
other things, which are hoate by participation of fiar, are reduced (concerning
their heat) to the heat of fiar, as to their original.

Now then (says the Metaphisique) we see by experience, that all the
creatures and parts of this world, are things by participation only, for
that they are finite in nature, and have limitations in all their perfections,
and may receive additions to ^
the same, and consequentelie, they must of necessity be referred to some
higher cause that is infinite in perfection, and consists of it self alone,
without participation from others; and this is God, who being absolute,
endeles, and without all limitation of perfection in him self deriueth from
his own incomprehensible infinitenes, certain limited natures and perfectio^s
to every creature, which perfections in creatures, are nothing else, but little
particles and participations of the botto^les sea of perfectio^s in the
Creator, whereunto they are to be referred and reduced, as the beam to the
sun, and the brook to the fountain.

A second argument uses the Metaphisique The 2. argument in Metaphysique.
Multitude. Plat. in Parmen.
grounded upon certain rules of unity, whereof one principale is, that every
multitude or distinction of things, proceeds from some unity, as from his
fountain. This he shows by many examples of things in this world. For we
see by experience, that the diverse motions or mouinges of the lower sphers or
bodies celestial, do proceed of the moving of one highest Primum Mobile.
sphere, and are to be referred to the same, as to their fountain. Many rivers
are reduced to one well or offspring: innumerable beams to one sun: all the
boughs a of tree, to one stock.

In the body of man which for his beauty MICRO COSMOS.
and variety is called, the little world, the veins which are without
number, have all one beginning in the liver; the arteres, i^ the heart; the
sinowes, in the brain. And that which is more, the infinite actions of life,
sense, and reason in man, as generatio^s, corruptions, nourishementes,
digestions, The infiite things bat prosede from be soul.
and alterations: Eeeling, smelling, tasting, seeing, hearing, moving, speaking,
thinking, remembering, discoursing, and ten hundred thousand particular actions,
operations, and motions besides, which are excercised in man's body under these
or other such names and appellations: all these, (I say,) being infinite in
number, most admirable in order, and distinct in every their office and
operation; do receive not withstanding, their beginning from one most simple
unity, and indivisible substance, called the soul, which produces,
governs, and directs them all, to so innu nerable, different, and contrary
functions.

By this concludes the Metaphisique, that as among the creatures, we find
this most excellent order and connection of things, whereby one brings forth
many, and every maltitude is referred to his unity: so much more in all
reason, must the whole frame of creatures contained in this world (wherein
there are so many millio^s of multitudes with their unities,) be referred to
one most simple and abstract unity, that gave beginning to them all, and this
is God.

A third argument uses the Metaphisique, The 3. argument in Metaphysike.
Subordination.
derived from the subordination of creatures i^ this world; which subordination
is such, and so wonderful; as we see no creature by nature serves itself, but
an other, and all together do conspire in serving the common.

We see the heavens do move about continually without ceasing, and this not
to serve them selves, but inferior creatures less excellent then them selves.
We see that water moystneth the ground, the aver cools, openneth, and
cherysheth the same, the Sun heateth and quic keneth it, the Moon and
Stars power forth their influe^ce, the winds refreshe it, and all this, not
for them selves, but for other. The earth again, that receaueth these services,
uses not the same for her self, or for her own commodity, but to bring
forth grass wherewith to feed cattaile, and they feed not for them selves,
but to give nourishement unto man.

Now then (says the Metaphisique,) A similitude.
if a man that stood a farreof upon a mountain, should see in a field under
him, a great, huge and maine army of souldiars, most excellent well appointed;
each one in order agreing with the other; divided into Rancks, Squadro^s,
Companies, and offices; subordinate the one to the other by degrees; and yet
all tending one way, all their faces bent upon one place, all mouinge,
marching, and turning together, all indeuoringe with allacritie toward the
perfourmance of one common service, bymutual assistance, without dissension,
discord, difference, or clamor: he that should see this (says the
metaphisique,) as he could not but imagine some general high Captain to be
among these soldiars, whom all obeyed, and from whose supreme commandment and
order this most excellent subordination, agreement, and union proceeded: so
much more, upon consideration of the former coherence, consent, and miraculous
subordination of creatures among them seiues in their operations, must we
infer, that they have some general comaunder cuer the^ all, by whose supreme
dispcsition, each creature has his charge and peculier task appointed, which
he must perform, for the co^man and universal service of the whole.

The fouerth reason or argument alleged The 4. argument in Metaphysique.
Providence.
by the supernatural philosopher, is, of the marvelous providence, art and
wisdom, discovered in the making of every least creature within the world. For
seeing there is nothing so little, nothing so base or co^temptible, within the
compass of this heaven that covers us, but if you consider it, you find,
both art, order, proportion, beauty, and excellency in the same: this can not
proceed of fortune as foolish Lucreti^us made diverse books against the
vvorkemanshipe of the world.
Lucretius and some other would have it; for that fortune is casualtie without
order, rule, or certainty, and therefore needs it must come from the wisdom,
and providence of some omnipote^t Creator.

If you take a fly, or a flea, or a leaf fro a tree, or any other the least
creature that is extant in the world, and consider the same attentively: you
shall find more miracles, the^ parts therein; you shall find such proportion
of members, such variety of colors, such distinction of offices, such
correspondence of instruments; and those so fit, so well framed, so coherent,
so subordinate: as the more you contemplate, the more shall ye marvel, nether
is there any one thing in the world, more effectual to draw a man to the love
and admiration of his Creator, then to exercise him self often in this
contemplation; for if his heart be not of stone, this will move his affection.

We read of Galen a profane and very Galen enforced to confess gods
providence.
irreligious Physician, who as himself confesses in a certain place, taking
upon him to consider of the parts of man's body; and fynding much wisdom in
the order, use, and disposition of the same, sought Galen. I. 5. de vsu part.
first to give the praise and glory thereof to nature, or to some other cause,
then to God. But I process of time, being oppressed, as it were, with the ey
ceding great wisdom, cunning, and providence which he discovered in every
least parcel and particle of man's body, wherein nothing was redunda^t, nothing
defective, nothing possible to be added, altered, or better devised: he brake
forth into these words: Compono hic profecto ca^ticum in Creatoris nostri Lib.
3. de vsu part.
laudem, quod vltrares suas ornare voluit, melius quia vlla art possent. Here
truly do I make a song in the praise of our Creator, for that of his own
accord, it has pleased him to adorn and bewtifie his things better, then by
any art possible it could be immagined

Hereby then does the Metaphisique gather and conclude most evidently, that
there is a God, a Creator, a most wise and powerful artificer that made all
things: Such a one, as exceeds all bounds of nature, and of humane
ability. For if all the world should join together, they could not make the
least creature which we see in this world. He concludes also, that the
forsight and providence of this Creator is infinite, for things to come in all
eternity; and finally, that his wisdom and cogitatio^s are inscrutable. And
albeit some time, he reueile unto us some part thereof; yet often again we
err therein. For which cause a wise heathen Platonic concludes thus, after
long search about these affairs. I will praise God (says he) A vvonderfull
speech of a heathen.
in those things I understand, and I will admire him in those which I
understand not. For I see, that my self oftentimes, do things where in my
servants are blind and conceive no reason: As also I have seen little
children, cast into the syar Jewels of Plotin. li. de proui.
great price, and their fathers writings of great learning and wisdom, for
that they were not of capacity to understand the valor, and worthiness of the
thing.

One argument more will I allege of The 5. argument in Metaphysique.
Immortality of the soul. Plat. l. 10. de repub.
the Methaphisique, grounded upon the immortality of man's soul; which
immortality, is proved with one consent of all learned men (as Plato
alleges,) for that it is a spirit and immaterial substance, whose nature
depends not of the state of our mortal body; for so by experience we see
daily, that in old me^ and withered sickly bodies, the mind and soul is
more quick, clear, pregnant, and lively, then it was in youth, when the
body was most lusty.

The same also is proved by the vnque^cheable desire which our mind has of
learning, knowledge, wisdom, and other such spiritual and immaterial things,
wheri her thirst by nature is so great, as, it can not be satisfied in this
life, nether can the obiectes of sense and bodily pleasures, or any other
commodity or delight of this material world, content or satiate the restles
desire of this im naterial crea When the desire of our soul shall be satisfied.
ture. Which is an evident argument to the Philosopher, that some other object
and contentatio^ is prepared for her in an other world, and that of such
excellency and supereminent perfection, as it shall have in it all wisdom,
all learnig, all knowledge, all beauty, 'and all other causes of love, joy, and
contentation, wherein our soul may rest for ever.

This being so (says the Philosopher) that the soul and mind of man, is
immortal: of necessity it mast ensue, that an immortal Creator sent the same
into our bodies, and that to him again it must return after her departure
from this life here. This was the true meaning in deed ( The mid. in lib. de
anima.
how soever some later interpreters have misunderstood the same,) of that
ancient doctrine of old philosophers, which Plutarche alleagethe out of
Pythagoras and Plato, afirming; that all particular Plut. de placit. Philoso.
souls of men, came sent from one general and common soul of the whole world,
as sparcles from the fyar, and beams from the common sun: and that after
their separation from their bodies, they shall return again, to that general
soul, called The meaning of old philosophers touching Anima mundi.
Anima mundi, the soul of the world, (for that it gives life and being to the
world) and so to remain with that general soul eternally.

This was the doctrine of old philosophers, which seems in deed, to have
been nothing else (though deliueredi other words) but that which Salomo^ him
self affirms, in plainer spech, and spiritus redibit ad Deum, qui dedit
illum: and our soul or spirit, shall return to God that gave it unto Eccle.
12.
us. And this may suffice for a taste of that which the Metaphysique or
Supernatural philosopher can say for proof, that there is a God.

THERE REMAINS yet a third part of humane wisdom or philosophy, called
Moral, whose reasons and arguments THE Moral philosopher.
for proof of this verity, I have of purpose referred to the last place, for
that they be more plain and easy the^ the former, and more sensible to the
capacity of every simple and unlearned reader.

For first of all, he observes in the very natural inclination of man (be
his The first argument of Moral philosophy.
manners otherwise never so euel,) that there is a certain propension and
disposition to confess some God or Deity; as by example he proves in all
nations, were they never so fearce or barbarous; yet always confessed they
some God by nature, though no man did teach or instruct them therein. The same
is confirmed, by the common use of all heathens, in Tertulian handlech this
point excelle^the in Apolog.
lifting up their eyes and hands to heaven, in any sudden distress that
comes upon the^. Which imports, that nature her self has ingrated this
feeling, that there is a God. Yea, further he alleges, that by experience of
all ages, it has been proved, that Atheistes them selves, that is, such men,
as in their health and prosperity, for more liberty of sinful life, would
strive against the being of any God; when they came to die or fall into great
misery, they of all other men, would show them selves most fearful of this
God, as Seneca declares, and as Suetonius shows in the example Seneca li. 1.
de ira. Sueton. in Callig.
of Calligula. Which is a token, that their conscience enforced them to
believe a Godhead.

Nay, Zeno the Philosopher was wont to say, that it seemed to him a more
substantial The saying of Zeno touching the deaths of Atheistes.
proof of this verity, to hear an Atheist at his dying day, preach God
from a pair of galloes, or other such place of misery, (when he asks God
and nature forgyuenes;) the^ to hear all the philosophers in the world dispute
the poite; for that at this insta^te of death and misery, it is like, that
such good fellows, do speak in earnest and sobriety of spirit, who before
in their wantonness, impugned God either of vanity, ambition, sensuality, or
dissimulation.

Now then, when the Moral Philosopher has proved by this natural inclination
of man, that there is a God, which has imprynted in us such a feeli^g of him
self, as no conscience can deny him, when it comes to speak sincerely: the^
steppeth he a degree further, and proves, that this god which is acknouledged,
ca^ be but one; The reason why there can be but one God.
for that, if he be God, he must be infinite; and if he be infinite; he can
have no compagnion: For that two infinite things can not stand together,
without impeachement, the one of the others infinity.

He proves the same by the custom of most gentiles, who (as Lacta^tius well
notes Lact. lib. 2. divine. instit. cap. 2.
in his time) when they swore, or cursed, or prayed, or wished any thing
heartily, (especially in affliction, that lyghteneth the understanding;) then
fashion was to say, God, and not, the Gods. And for the Deus and non dij.
learnederforte of them, how so ever they dissembled, and applied them selves
outwardly to the error of the common people: yet in earnest they never spoke
of more the^ of one God, as Plato signifies of him self to Dionysius king of
Sicilie, in a certain letter wherein he gave him a sign when he spoke in
earnest and when in jest. Hinc disces tu, scribamego serio, nec ne. Cum serio,
Plato ep.' 13. ad Dionys.
ordior epistolam ab vno Deo, cu^ secus, a pluribus. By this sign shall ye
know, whether I write in earnest or not. For when I write in earnest, I begin
my letter with one God: and when I write not in earnest, I do begine my letter
i^ the name of many gods.

Iulia^ the apostata in his three most scornful Cyrillus lib. 2. co^tra Iulia^.
books that he wrote against us Christians, (whom contemptuously he called
Galilaeans,) endeavoring by all means to advance and set forth the honor of
paganism, alleges this Plato for a cheef pillar and father thereof, and
dares prefer Plotinus. Ennea. 1. L 8. 1. 2. and Eu. 6. l. 4. c. 12. 3. 4.
Porphy. l. 2. de abst. and lib. de occa. c. 21. Procl. in theolog. Platon. and
l. de anima and Daem. 1. 31. 42. 53. Socrates. Apuleius, Agellius, and Laertius
in vita Socratis.
him before our Moses: And yet you see what he testifiethe of himself. And
that this was his perpetual opinion, three of his worthiest scholars, I mean,
three of the most learned that ever professed the Platonique sect, Plotinus,
Porphyrius, and Proclus, al heathens themselves, do testify and prove in
diverse parts of their works, assuring, that both they and their master Plato,
never believed in deed, but only one God. And as for Socrates that was Platos
master, and pronounced by the oracle of Apollo, to be the wisestman of all
Greece; the world knows, that he was putt to death for jesting at the
multitude of gods among the Gentiles.

Aristotle that ensued after Plato, began the sect of Peripatetickes, and
was Aristotle and the Peripatetiquos.
a man so much given to the search of Nature, as in many things he forgate
the author of nature, or at least wise, he treated little, and very
doubtefullie thereof, yet in his old age, when he came to write the book of the
world to king Alexander, Justin. in Apolog.
(which book S. Iustine the martire esteemed greatly, and called it the
epitome of all Aristotle's true philosophy;) he resolves the matter more
clearlie, saying thus of God he is the father of gods and men, he is the
Arist. l. de mundo.
maker and conseruer of all things that be in the world. And he adds
further in the self same place, that the multitude of many Gods, was
inverted to express the power of this one God, by the multitude of his Theo.
in metaph. Alex. Aphrod. l. de provident.
ministers: so that he makes all Gods to be servants besides only one.
Which sentence of their master, Theophrastus and Aphrodiseus, two pri^cipal
Peripatetiques, do confirm at large.

Zeno the chief and father of all the Zeno and the stoikes. Plat. de oracul.
defect. de tra^quil. de quae^^. Plat. Seneca de vita beat. de prouid. in epist.
Stoikes was wont to say, as Aristotle reports, that, either one God, or no
God. Which opinion is auerred every where, by Plutarch and Seneca, two most
excellent writers, and great admirers of the Stoicke severity. And before
them, by Epictetus, a man of singular account in that sect, whose words were
esteemed oracles. Dicenaum ante omnia, vnum esse Deum, omnia regere, omnibu^
Epist. apud Arrianum.
prouidere. Before all things (says he,) we must affirm that there is one
God, and that this God governs all, and has providence over all.

As for the Academikes, who made the The Academikes.
fowerth division or sect of Philosophers, it is sufficient, which I have
mentioned before, that Socrates their fownder was causedto dye for his opinion
in this matter; albeit it seem, that such as insued in that sect, whose
profession was to dispute and doubt of every thing, So in thy time of va
rietie of Sects.
came at length by their much iangling and disputing, to believe and hold
nothing. Whereof Cicero him self may be an example, who in his books de Natura
deoru^, follows so far the academical vein of doubtful disputing to and
fro about the nature of Gods: as he may Arnob. co^tra ge^tes.
seem (and so did he to diverse Christians of the primative church,) to be
very irresolute whether there were any God or no. Albeit in the end he make
show to conclude very plainly and peremptorily with the Stoikes.

All the four sects of Philosophers then, who in their times bare the credit
All old Philosophers acknowledged one God.
of learning and wisdom, made profession of one God, when they came to speak
as they thought. But if we asce^de up higher to the days before these sects
began, that is, to Vide apud Plutarch de placitis Philos. Trismeg. i^
Paema^d. and in Asclep.
Pythagoras and Archytas Tare^tinus; and before them again, to Mercurius
Trisinegistus that was the first parent of philosophy to the Egyptians: we
shall find them so resolute and plain in this point, as no Christian can be
more. Whereof he that desires to see innumerable examples, as well of these men's
sainges, as of other learned heathens of all ages: let him read, but S.
Cyrils first book against Julian the apostata, or Lactant us first and second
books against the Gentiles, and he shall remain satisfied.

This then is the Moral Philosophers The recollectio^ of the first argument in
Moral Philosophy.
first argument; the inclination of all people to believe a Godhead; the
instincte of nature to confess it, the force of man's conscience to fear it,
the custom of all nations to adore it. And finally, the consent and full
agreement, of all learned and wise men, in applying this Godhead not to many,
but to one only, that made this world, and governs the same. Non hominibus,
non daemonibus, Trismeg. in Paema. ca. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. etc. in Asclep. cap. 1.
2. 6. and. c.
non diu ipsis, quos non Naturae ratione, sed honoris causa Deos nominamus. We
do not attribute the appellation of true God, (says Trismegistus) either unto
men, or unto devils, or unto the multitude of other gods themselves. For that
we call the gods, not in respect of their natures, but for honors sake. That
is, we call the^ gods to honor the^ for their famous acts, and not for that
we think them in nature true gods. Which Cicero confirms in these words:
the life of man and common custom, Ciceros opinion of the multitude. of Panime
gods how they were made.
has now received, to lift up to heaven by fame and good will such men, as
for their benefits are accounted excellent. And herehence it. comes, that
Hercules, Castor, Pollux, Aesculapius, and Liber, are now become gods, and
heaven almost is filled with mankind.

The second argument of Moral Philosophy, is, devltimo fine, and summo hominis
The. 2. argument of Moral philosophy.
bono, that is, concerning the last end of man, and of his highest or supreme
felicity, whereby the being of God is also confirmed. And albeit I have said
some what of man's end before; yet that which in this place I am to add, is
more proper and peculier to Moral philosophy. For as other sciences may and
do consider the final ends of other creatures, which are diverse, and yet all
concur for the service of man: so this science of Moral philosophy does
properly consider the final end of man him self, calling it, summum bonum,
his greatest and highest happiness, whereunto he was created, and whereunto he
tends in this life, and wherein he rests and reposeth without further Motion
or appetit, when he has obtained it.

For better understanding whereof, it is Every thing in this world has a
natural desire to his end.
to be considered, that every thing in this world has some particular end,
together with an appetite and desire ingraffed by nature to that end; which
desire cease, when the end is obtained. As for example: a stone has a
natural appetite to go downwarde to the Center or middie of the earth, and so
it rests in no place, (except by violence it be stayed,) until it come
thither. On the countrary, fyar, reposeth no where (except it be restrained)
until it mou^te above the air to his peculier and natural place of abode,
where, of it self it rests. And so in other things that are without sense,
their is a certain natural appetite and desire to their end, which end beig
once obtained, that desire and appetite of it self reposeth.

In beasts likewise we behold, that they have a desire to fill their bellies,
and to satisfy their other senses, which being satisfied, they remain
contented, and desire nothing else, until the same appetite of sense want his
object again. Whereby we perceive, that sensuality or contentation The
felicity of beasts.
of the senses, is the final end desired of beasts, and their very summum
bonum, or supreme felicity.

But in man, albeit for maintenance of the body, there be this appetite also
to satisfy his senses, according to the lower portion of his mind, that is
called sensatiue; yet according to the other higher part of his mind, whose
name is Reason, or the reasonable part, (which is the only part in deed,
that is peculier to man, and distinguishes him from unreasonable beasts;) he
has an appetite of some more high and excellent object, then is the
contentation of these senses; for that by experience we see and feel, that
often times, when the senses be all satisfied, yet is the mind not quiet,
which argues, that sensuality, or sensual delectation, is not our summum
bonum, wherein our mind must rest and enjoy here felicity.

Here upon have Philosophers and wise men fallen to dispute in all ages, what
should be the final felicity, and summum bonum of mankind? And Cicero says,
Cic. li. de finib. bonorum and maloru^.
that this point, is, cardo totius philosophy, the hook or hyndge whero^ all
philosophy hangs; for that this being once found out, clear it is, that
all other things and actions are to be referred to th obteining of this end
and happiness. And therefore about this point, there has been marvelous
contention and fight The contention of Philosophers, about the felicity of man.
among Philosophers; the Stoikes refuting the Epicures, and the Peripateticues
resuting again the Stoikes, and the Platoniques, (who went nearest the truth)
impugning and refuting both the one and the other; and this dissentio^ went so
sarre forth, the one part assigning one thing, and the other an other, to be
this felicity, or summum bonum; that Marcus Varro a most learned Roman.
gathered two hundred fowerskore and eight diferent opinions Aug. l. 19. de
ciuit. cap. 1.
(as S. Augustine notes) about this matter.

And finally when all was said and examined, Plato found, that nothing which
might be named or immagined in this life, could be the felicity or summum
bonum, of man, for that it could not satisfy the desire of our mind. And
therefore he pronounced this general sentence. It is The sentence of Plato, in
Phadon.
impossible that men should synde their felicity, or (summum bonum) in this
life, seek what way they will, but in the next life without all doubt it
must be found. The reason of which sentence and determination was, for that
Plato was able to refute any thing, that the other Philosophers did or could
name to be our felicity and final end in this life, were it Riches, Honors,
Pleasures, moral virtues, or the like, which each sect did assign.

As for example; he proved that riches How nothing in this life can be our
felicity.
could not be our sammum bonum or happiness, for that they are uncertain,
vndurable, vain, variable, and things that bring with them more danger often
times and trouble of mind, the^ does poverty. Honors he refelled, for that
besides their vanity, they depend of the mouth and minds of other men, who
are changeable and inconstante. Pleasures of the body and voluptuousnes, for
that they are common to us with beasts, and always have annexed their sting,
and discontentation, when they are paste. Moral virtues, for that they consist
in a certain perpetual fight and war with our own passions, which never
give us rest or repose in this life. Finally, whether so ever we turn our
selves, or what soever we lay our hands upon, in this life, to make it our
felicity, or summum bonum; it fails us (says Plato,) nether gives it any
durable contentation to our mind; wherefore, this felicity is to be sought and
obtained in the life to come.

Thus far arriueth Moral philosophy Hovvfarre Moral philosophy reaches in
determining man's felicity.
by reason, to prove, that man's felicity or final end, can not be in any
thing of this life or world. It proves also by the same reason, (as in part
it has been touched before,) that this felicity of our mind in the life to
come, must be a spiritual and immaterial obiecte, for that our mind and soul
is a spirit: it must be immortal, for that our soul is immortal. But what?
goes yet humane philosophy any further? or can Plato assign the particular
point wherein it stands? Hear his words, and confess, that not without
reason he was called, Divine. In this it consists (says he,) vt coniungamur
Deo qui Plato in Phaed.
omnis beatutidinis, fastigiu^, meta, finis. That we be joined to God, who is
the top, the butte, and the end of all blessedness. And can any Christian
(think you) say more then this? yet harcken what a scholar of Platos says,
for explication of his masters sentence. Supremus hominis finis, supremum
Plotinus Enu. 1. llb. 4. cap. 1.
bonum, idest Dens. The final end of man whereto he tends, is a supreme or
sovereign good thing, and this is God him self. By which words we see that
these heathens, by the end of man, could find out God, which was the second
argument propounded in Moral philosophy.

A third argument uses the Moral The 3. argument in Moral philosophy
touching revvard and punishment.
Philosopher, for proof of God, (which shall be the last I will allege in this
place) deduced from consideration of good and euel, vice and virtue; and
especially of the reward which by nature, reason, and equity is due to the
one; as also of the punishment belonginge to the other. For (says he) as in
all other things, creatures, and actions of this world, that pass from the
Creator, we see proportion, order, justice, wisdom, and providence observed;
so, much more must we assure our selves, that the same is observed in the same
Creators actions and proceedinges toward man, that is the chief and
princiral of all his other creatures.

Now then we see and be hold, that all other creatures, are directed to their
ends by nature, and do receive comfort and contentation as long as they
hold that course: And loss, disease, and gricfe, as soon as they break or
swerve from the same. Only man has reason given him whereby to know and judge
of his End; as also free will and election whereby he may either direct his
way to the same by virtue, or turn a straye by following of wickedness. When
upon it insueth, that in all equity and instice, there must remain rewaide
for such as do well, and follow the right pathe assigred the to their end and
felicity, which is by good lyse: and punist on ente forth' other that abandone
the same for pleasure and sensualitic.

But we see in this world, (says the Thilosopher,) that most wicked men do
receive least punishment; and many there be (as princes and high
potentates,) whose lives and actions, be they never so vicious, yet are they
above the correction of moitall men: and many poor men in the contiarie
part, who for their virtue, patience, and honesty, receive nothige in this
life, but envy, malice, co^tempte, reptoche, despite, and oppression.

See of this matter, Socrates, in apologia. Plato. in Cratyl. and in Gorgia.
and in phaed. and in I. 10. de legib. Plut. de Sera numinis vindicta. and
others.
Wherefore, (says he) either wants there providence and equity in the
government and dispositio of these great affairs, which we see not to want in
things of lesser moment: or else must there be a place of punishment and
reward in the life to come, upon the souls of such as pass from hence, and a
just and powerful judge to make recompense of these inoqualites and iniustices
permitted in this world. Which judge, can be none but the Creator him self.

And so hitherto have I declared, how every particular science among the
Gentiles had particular means and ways to demonstrate God, by co^templation
of his creatures, and by force of reason, which no man could deny. Now
remains it to show, how the Jew or faithful Israelite, before Christ's
appearance, was able to confirm this verity to a heathen, which, shall be the
subject of the sectio^ insueinge.

How the Jews were able to prove God. Sect. 3.
THe people of Israel that for many The people of Israel Gods partage.
years and ages, were the peculier people and partage of God; as they dwelt
environed with Gentiles of each side that impugned their religion and worship
of one God, an I had many weakelinges. among them selves that were often
tempted to doubt of the same religion, by the example of so many nations and
countries about them, that made profession of a contrary religion: so had the
divines and learned me^ of this people, diverse forcible proofs and most
reasonable arguments peculier to themselves, (besides the gift of faith or
any other demonstration that hy thereto has been alleged,) to confirm their
brethren in the belief of one God, and to co^ui^ce all atheistes or infidels in
the world.

And albeit these proofs which they used were many, as the Creation of the
world Diverse things vvherby the Jews shevve God.
by one God; the deriuing of the hebrew religion from the beginning; the
conversation of God with Abraham, of whom the Jews descended; the miraculous
delivering of that nation from Egypt; the law received from gods own mouth by
Moses; the strange entrance of Jews into the land of promise; the
extinguishig of the Gentiles which before inhabited there; the erectio^ of the
Iuishe Monarchy, and protection thereof against all other nations; the
miraculous deeds and sayings of Prophets, and a thousand things and reasons
besides, which confirm most euide^telie, that the Jews God was the only true
God: yet for that all these things and sayings with an infidel, had no more
credit then the writings or scriptures wherein they were recorded; hereby it
came to pass, that all which a Jew could say for proof of God, more then a
Ge^tile, depended only upon the authority of his scriptures; And for this
cause, he referred all his proofs and arguments to make evident the truth
and certainty of these scriptures, which thing once performed, the being of one
God can not be called in controversy; for that these scriptures are nothing else
but a narration of the acts and gestes of that only one God, which the Jews
profess.

We are now to see then, what the Jew was able to say for proof of his
scriptures, and consequentelie, for demo^stration of God, and of his
judgments Co^sortabla to hear the certainty of scriptures declared.
declared theri. Which discourse, as it was profitable in old time, for stay
and confirmation of all such, as were or might be tempted with infidelity: So
can it not be but very comfortable to us Christians of these days, to behold
the certaitie of these scriptures laid before us, upon which the foundation of
our whole faith depends.

FIRST THEREFORE, the Jew for THE. 1. proof of scripturs, Antiquity.
proof of his scriptures, alleagethe the great and wonderful antiquity
thereof. For as God (says he) was before idols, and truth before falshod; so
was the scripture, which is the story of the true God, long before the
wrytinges of Panymes or infidels. Josephus I. 10. cont. Appione^, ha^dleth this
at large.
Nay, further he shows, that the most part of things recompted in the
Bible, were done before most of the Panime Gods were exstante, and that the
very last writers of the Hebrew Canon, which are Esdras, Aggaeus, Zacharias
and Malachie ( Eusebiua assigns them. 570. in Chron.
almost six hundred years before the coming: of Christ, when the second
Monarchy of Persia^s began,) were before the most of heathen ancient
historiographers, to wit, before Hellanic', Herodot', Pherecides, Thucy dides,
and Xenophon.

And albeit the Getils had some Poets before, as Orpheus, Homer, and Hesiod;
and Lycurgus the Lawmaker that lived a good while after: yet the eldest of
these, arrived no higher then the days of king Salomo, which was five hundred
years after Moses, the first writer of the Bible. After whose time, the most
part of heathen gods were long unborn, as Ceres, Vulcan, Mercury, Apollo,
A Elculapiu, Castor, Pollux, and Hercules, as the Gentiles themselves in their
Genealogies do Euphemerus Messen. in Genealo. Deorum.
confess. And as for Abraham that lived five hundred years before Moses, he
was not only elder the^ these lesser Gods, which I have named; but also the
Jupiter, Neptune, Plato, and such other, who for dignities sake and antiquity,
are called by the Gentiles, Dij maiorum gentium, the Gods of greater Nations.
And yet before Abraham, Cic. de natura Deorum.
do the scriptures contain the story of two thousand years or there about.

So that by this it is evident, that the wrytinges of heathes and the multitude
of their gods, are but late fables i^respect of the old and venerable
antiquity of Hebrew scriptures, and consequetelie, the authority of these
scriptures, must in reason be greater then of all other writings in the world
besides, seeing they were exstant before all others, in those first times of
simplicity and sincerity, and were in part translated into diverse liguages
before the Monarchy of the Persians, that is, before Euse. li. 9. de praep.
any story of the Gentiles were written, as Eusebius out of many heathen
authors Eua^g. 23.
declares.

NEXT TO the reason of antiquity, is alleged the manner of writing,
authorizing, ^
and coseruing these scriptures, which is such, as greatly confirms the
certainty of things contained therein. For first, what soever is set down in
these wrytinges, was either taken immediately from the mouth of God, as were
the propheties and books of the law; or else collected from time to time by
general consent, according as matters and miracles sell out, as were the book
of judges, the books of Kings, and Chronicles, and some other that contain
records and histories of times. Which books were not gathered by some one
private man, upon hearsaye or by his own imagination, long after things
done, as heathen histories and other profane records and monumtes are; but,
they were written by general agreement, in the self same days, when things
were in sight and knowledge of all men, and so could not be seigned.

Secondly, when books were written, How Scriptures (...) (...)
they were not admitted into the canon or authority of scriptures, that is, of
gods word or divine writings, but upon great deliberation, and most evident
proof of their undoubted verity. For, either the whole co^gregatio or Synagoge,
who had the approving here of, (and among whom commonly were diverse
prophets,) did know most certainly the things and miracles to be true (as
did also the whole people) that were recorded in these writings, containing
histories: or else they saw the same confirmed from God, by signs and wonders,
as in the books of their prophets, and of their-law gyuer Moises, it fell out.

Thirdly, when any thing was written and admitted for scripture, the care of
co^seruation thereof was such, and the reverence The care of co^seruatio^.
of Jews thereunto so great; as may easily assure us, that no corruption or
alteration could happen unto it. For first the thig was copied out into twelve
Autentical Copies for all the twelve tribes; and then again in every tribe
there were so many Copies made, as were particular synagoges within that tribe.
All was done by special Notaries, Scribes, overseers and witnesses. The Copies
after diligent renew taken, were laid up by the whole Congregation in the
treasure-howse of the temple under diverse locks and keys, not to be touched,
but by men appointed, nor to be used but with singular reverence. To add,
diminish, corrupt or alter, was present death by the laws of the Nation. And
how then was it possible (says the Jew,) that among these writings, either
falshode should creep in, or truth once received, could afterward be
corrupted?

It is not possible (says he) in reason: and therefore observes he an other
thing in this case, which i^ truth is of very great consideration; to wit,
that no other Nation under heaven did ever so much esteem The estimation that
Jews had of their scriptures.
their own writi^ges, that they would offer to die for the same, as the Jews
were redieto do for every sentence and syllable of their scriptures. Whereof
also it did proceed, that in all their miseries and afflictions, (wherein they
were a spectacle to all the world;) in all their flightes and banishementes, to
Egypt, Babylon, Persia, Media, and other corners of the earth; in all their
spoils, assaults, and deuastations at home; they yet ever had special care to
conserve these writings, more then their own lives, and so have kept the
same without may me or corruption, more ages together, then all Nations in the
world have done any other monumentes.

THE THIRD persuasion which is used by the Jew for the verity of his THE 3.
proof of scripturs. The sincerity of the vvriters.
scriptures, is, the consideration of the particular men that wrote them; who
were such, as in reason can not be suspected of decept or falshod. For as I
have said, the Stories of the Bible, were written from time to time by public
authority, and by the testimony of all men that saw and knew the things that
are rehearsed. The books of propheties, were endited by the prophets them
selves, who were plain, simple, and sincere me^, authorized from God by
continual miracles, and yet so scrupulous and timorous of their own speeches,
as they durst say nothing, but only, our Lord says this; the God of Hosts
commands that. etc.

And when they had preached and read their writings in the hearing of all
the people; they protested, that it was not man's word, but gods, and that for
such they left it in the public treasury of their Nation, until by tracte
of time, the event and fulfilling of their propheties should prove the^ true
(as always it did,) The lives and deaths of the prophets.
and their own both lives and deaths declare, that they meant no falshode;
their lives being such, as were not subject to the corruption, pride, vanity,
or ambition of this life, (as other profane and heathen writers were,) and
their deaths for the most part, offered up in holy martyrdom, for defense
of that truth which they had preached and written: as appears See Epiphan de
vitis prophetarum.
in Esaias, that was sawed in pieces by king Manasles: in Jeremy, that was
stoned to death by the common people: in Ezechiel, that was slain by the
captain of the Jews at Babylon: in Amos, whose brains were beaten out by
Amasias the wicked and idolitrous priaest in Bethel: in Micheas, whose neck
was broken by prince Ioam son to king Achab: in Zachary, that was slain at
the Altar, and the like.

And this for the Prophets of later times A peculier consideration of Moises,
first writer in the Bible.
among the Jews. But now if we consider the first Prophet of all that wrote
among that people, I mean Moses, that was not only a Prophet, but also an
Historiographer, a Law giver, a Captain, and a Priest: the first that ever
reduced that people to a common wealth, and the first that putt their acts and
gestes in writing, or rather the acts and gestes of almighty God toward
them: this man (I say) if we consider him only, (I mean the circumstances of
his person:) the Jew thiketh this a sufficient motive, to make any man of
reason believe what so ever he has left written in the Bible, without further
confirmation.

And first for his antiquity, I have spoken before, and the heathe^s do
confess it: and Eusebius. l. 9 and 10. de praep. Euang. Joseph. l. 1. cont.
Appio. and L. 2. anti.
for miracles done by him, the greatest ennemies that ever he had in the
world, that is, Appio^ in his fowerth book against Jews, and Porphirie in his
fowerthe book against Christians, dee acknowledge them; and Porphirie
adioyneth more for proof thereof, that he fownde the same confirmed by the
story of one Saconiatho^ a Gentile, who lived (as he says) at the same time
with Moses. But what? all those miracles (say they) were done by artemagicke
and not by the power of God, as Moses boasted.

But the^ asks the^ the Jew, where Moises a shepherd, could learn so much
magic? or why could not the Magitians of Pharao, whose study was in that
profession from their infancy, either do the like, or Exodus 3. 4. 8.
at least wise deliver them selves from the plagues of Egypt? why did they
cry out, The miraculous. works of Moses. Exodus 14.
the fingar of God is here? where did you ever hear such works done by
magic as Moses did, when he divided the red sea? when he called into his
ca^pe so many Quayles upon the suddayne, as sufficed to Exodus 16.
feed six hundred thousand men, besides women and children? When he made a
Number. 11.
rock to yield forth a fountain? when he caused a dew to fall from heaven
that nourrished Iosue 5. Psalm. 77.
his whole camp for forty years together? when he caused the ground to open
and swalloe down alive, three of Number. 16.
the richest noble men of all his army, together with their tabernacles, and
all other bags and baggage? When he caused Joseph. li. 4. antiq. cap. 2. and 3
a siar to come from heaven, and consume siftie gentlemen of the former
Rebels adhere^tes, without hurting any one that stood about them?

These things did Moses and many other, in the sight of all his army, that
is, in the sight of so many hundred thousand people, among which, there were
diverse his emulators and sworn enemies, as by the story and icripture it self
appears. Core, Number. 16. Deuteronomy. 11. Psalm. 225.
Dathan, and Abiron with their faction, sought in all things to disgrace him,
and to deminishe his credit; and therefore if any one point of these miracles
had been reprouable; Moses would never have durst to putt the same in
writing, nor would the people have stood with him, and much less have
received his writings for divine, and for gods own words, (being solicited
against him by so potent means;) had not they known all things to be most
true therein contained, and had seen his strange miracles, and familiarity
with God.

But he dealt plainly and simply in this behalf; he wrote the things of
The plain and sincere proceeding of Moses.
his own doings, which every man present, did know to be true; and of Gods
speeches and communicatio^s to him self, he wrote so much as he was commanded,
whereof both God, and his conscience did bear him witness. He caused the whole
to be read unto the people, and laid up in their Sacred Arcke and Tabernacle,
as gods own writing, and covenant with that nation. He caused all the whole
army to swear and vow the obserua^ce thereof. And the^ drawing toward Nu.
20. and 27. Deuteronomy. 31.
his death, he made a most excellent exhortation unto them, persuading them
sincerlie to the service of their God; and confessing his own infirmities, and
how for his oftences he was to die, before their entrance to the land of
promise. He co^cealed Exodus 32. Genesis 49. Nu. 12. Deuteronomy. 14.
notth' offenses of his brother Aaron, of his Grandfather Leui, of his sister
Marie, and other of his kindred, (as worldly princes for their honors are
wont to do;) nether did he go about to bring in government after his
disceasse, any one of his own sons, (which is greatly to be observed;)
notwithstanding he left Number. 27. Deuteronomy. 3.
behind him goodly gentlemen fit for that room, and him self of power to
place them, if he had endeavored: But he left the government to a stranger,
named Iosue, as God had commanded him.

All which things (says the Jew) do prove sufficientelie that Moises was
no man of ambition or of worldly spirit, but a true Scruaunt of God, and
conseque^tlie, that he wrought not by magic or falshod, but by the only
power of his Lord and Master, and that his writings are true, and of the same
authority, that in his life and death he affirmed them to be, that is, the
undoubted word of almighty God.

THIS HE confirms yet further by a fowerth reason, which is, the consent THE.
4. proof of scripturs. Consent.
and approbatio^ of all later writers of the Bible, that insued after Moses.
For as among profane writers of worldly spirit, it is a common fashion for
him that follows, to reprehende the former, and to hunte after praise by his
ancetours disgrace: so in these writers of the Bible, it is a most certain
argument that all were guyded by one spirit from God, that in continuance of
so many ages and thousand years, no one yet ever impugned the other, but
always the later supposing and approving the former for true, does build
thereupon, as upon a sure fondatio^. So the writings of Iosue, do confirm and
approve the writings of Moises; and the records of the Judges, do reverence
and allow the book of Iosue. The Story of kiges and chronicles, does refer
it self to the story of judges. One Prophet confirms and other. And
finally, Christ approves the^ all, by the known division of law, psalms, ad
Prophets, which is a demonstration that all their spirits agreed i one.

And thus hitherto have been declared 4. Considerations external.
these four considerations, that are external or without the Bible: to wit,
the antiquity and continuance of the scriptures; the manner of their writing
and preserving Considerations internal.
that which therein is contained: you shall see gods own hand, gods own
characters, gods own sign, and seal, and subscription to the paper. You
shall see Gods omnipotency, Gods spirit, Gods providence, no less in these
letters of his book, then you beheld the same before, in the tables of his
creatures. Nay, much more (says he,) for that these letters were devised for
declaration of those tables, to the end, that such as for their blyndnes, could
not see him in his creatures; might learn at least to read him in his
scriptures.

CONSIDER the^ first (says he,) the subject or argument which the scriptures
THE. 5. proof of scripture. Their argument and End.
do handle, together with the scope and end, whereto they do level. You
shall find, that the first is nothing else but the acts and gestes of one
eternal God, as before has been mentioned; and the second nothing else, but the
only glory and exaltation of the same great God, together with the salvation
of mankind upon earth. And shall you find any writings in the world
besides, that have so worthy an argument, or so high an End? Read all the
volumes and Monumentes of the Pagans; turn over all their authors of what
kind, or name, or profession soever, and see what mention they make of these
two things, I mean, of the honor of God, and of the salvation of man? Read
their Philosophers, and see, whether ever they name or pretend these things.
Read their Historiographers, Philosophers.
and mark how many battails and victories they attribute unto God? They will
describe to you often the particular co^me^datio^ of every Captain;
Historiographers.
they will defraude no one soldier of his praise in the victory; they will
attribute much to the wisdom of the general; much to his courage; much to his
watchfulnes; much to fortune. They will attribute to the place, to the wind,
to the wether, to the shining of the sun, to the raising of the dust in the
enemies eyes, to the flying of some little bird in the air, and to a thousand
such petie obseruatio^s besides; but to God nothing. Where as contrary wise in
the scriptures, it is in every battle recorded. God delivered them into their
enemies hands: God ouertbrevv them:. God gave the victory.

Again, consider the laws and law makers among the Gentiles, as Lycurgus,
Heathen Lavvmakers.
Solon, Draco, Numa, and the like, and see whether you may find any one such
law, or tending to such an end, as this is of the Jews: thou shall love thie
God with all Deuteronomy. 6.
thie heart, and with al thie soul; and shall love thy neighbor as thie self.
Consider in all the Prophets and Southsayers.
Southesayers and Diuiners among the Gentiles, whether they used to say i^
their predictions, as the prophets of Israel did, Dominus dixit, our Lord has
spoken it; or else, Ego dico, I do speak it. Compare their Versifiers and
Poets.
Versifiers and Poets, with those of the scripture, and see, whether they have
labored in the praise of men, or of God. And where as heathen Poets, have
filled up their books (as also the most part of ours at this day,) with
matter of carnal love: mark whether any of the^ ever brake forth into such
pangues of spiritual chaste love, as Holy David did, when he said: I will love
the, my God, my strength, my firmament, my refuge, my deliverer, Psalm. 17.
my helper, my protector, and the horn The vehement love of David. Psalm. 72.
of my salvation. And again in an other verse. What have I desired upon earth
besides thee? my flesh and heart have fainted for thee, thou God of my heart,
thou God that art my part and portion everlasting?

By all which is evident, that as profane Profane writings treat only of
men.
writings and writers, which do treat of men, extol men, seek the grace of
men, refer all to the commodity and good liking of men, do proceed of the
spirit of man, and are subject to those infirmities of falshode, error, and
vanity, wherewith man is intangeled in this life: so the scriptures, which
handle matters above the compass of flesh and blood; that refer all to God,
and supernatural ends; could not proceed of nature or of humane spirit. For
that by nature, the Jews were men as the Gentiles were, and had their
infirmities of flesh and blood, as the other had. And therefore it must needs
be concluded, that these high and supernatural writings among them, proceeded
from God that specially directed them, and gave them light of understanding,
above all other nations and people in the world.

NEXT AFTER the argument and End of the scriptures, the Jew wills us to
consider the peculier style and phrase THE. 6. proof of scripturs. Their style.
which they use; for that (says he) it being different from all other manner
of writing in the world, and inimitable to man: it does discover the fingar of
God, by which it was framed. See 3. Augustine of this at large, lib. 12 de ciu.
Dei.
For where as humane writers doc labor much in adorninge their style, and in
reducing their words to number, weight, measure, and sound, with addition of
many figures, and other ornaments, for allurement of the reader: the
scripture takes quite an other course, and uses a most marvelous simplicity,
thereby to accommodate it self Simplicity.
to the capacity of the weakest; but yet, always carrying with it so great
profunditie, as the best learned, in search thereof, shall confess their own
ignorance. Profundity.
For examples sake; consider but the very first words of the Bible; In the
beginning, God created heaven and earth; and the earth was empty and void,
and darkness was Genesis 1.
upon the face of the depth; and the spirit of God was carried upon the
waters; and God said, let light be made, and light was made, etc. What can
be more plain and simple then this narration, to instruct the most unlearned
about the beginning and creation of the world? and yet, when learned men come
to examine every point thereof, how and what, and where, and in what manner,
and when, things were done; it astonisheth them all, to consider the
difficulties which they find, and the depthe of so infinite inscrutable
mysteries.

Besides this, there goes in the same simplicity, a strange Majesty and
gravity The gravity and Majesty of speech i^ the scriptures.
of speech, declaring sufficiently from how great and potent a prince it
proceeds. For as great Monarchs in their edictes and proclamations, are
wont to speak unto their subjects, not in figures and rhetorical phrases,
but plainly, breeflie, and peremptorily, to show their authority: so the
scriptures, to declare whose edictes they be, do use the like manner of phrase
and style to all the world, without alluring or flattering any man, and
without respect of Monarche, Emperor, prince, or potentate. Fac hoc and viues,
do this and thou shall live: Si peccaueris in Deuteronomy. 4. 16. 22.
me, morieris in aeternum, if thou sin against me, thou shall die
everlastingly.

And albeit (as I have said) the scripturs do use this simplicity of speech,
and do not admit that kind of painted and artificial style, which humane
writers dos so much covet: yet in persuading, instructing, The force of the
scriptures in moving affections.
moving of affections, and all other effects which speech or writing can
work; there is no comparason, (a thing most wonderful,) between any other
writings in the world, and these. Whereof I. could allege many proofs and
examples, but that it were to long. Let any: man read attentively, but the
first chapter of the prophetie of Esaias, and compare it with any one part or
parcel of Tullies or of Demostines oratio^s, and see whether the difference of
words, be as great as the difference of motions? Let diverse hymns and holy
psalms of the scriptures, be co^ferred with the most pathetical poemes that
man's wit has inverted, and see, whether there be any comparason in styrring
and fiaring of affections, or no?

This am I sure, that Josephus the Jew, Faluins. Josephus de Antiq. Iudaic. See
S. Hiero n. lib. de script. Eccl.
who for glory of his eloquence, had his image of metal, erected by Titus the
Emperor i^ the market place of Rome, wrote the same story, which the
scriptures contain, and bestowed much labor and humane cunning therein. But
yet even in those places, when he endeavored most to show his art, as in the
sacrifice of Isaac by his Genesis 22.
father, and in the meeting of Iephte with his only daughter, which by vow he
Iudic. 11.
was constrained to put to death; the scriptures are able to pearse the heart,
and wring out tears of the reader, whom Josephus will not greatly move with
his rhetorical narration, though otherwise very learned and artificially
penned.

Aristaeus that learned Ge^tile, of whom Two miracles reported by Aristaeus.
we have made mention before, who was in special favor with Ptolomie the
second great Monarche of Egypt, (about 300 years before Christ's nativity,)
and a chief doer in procuring the translation of the Hebrew. Bible into the
greek language, reported of his own knowledge Aristaeus libello de translat
Bibliorum and apud Euse. 1. 8. de praepeua^g. ca...
to that king two strange accidents which had happened in his time, and which
he had understood of the parties themselves, to whom they had happened. The
first was, of Theopompus an eloquent Historiographer, who having Theopo^pus.
translated certain things out of the Bible, and endeavoring to adorn the
same with vain colors of eloquence; could not perform his desire, but was
stroke^ with a sudden maze and gyddines in the head, and was warned in his
sleep, not to proceed further in that work after that sort, for that such
manner of style, was to base for so high matters, as the scriptures contained.

The other example was of one Theodectes, a writer of tragaedies, who told
Theodectes.
Aristaeus, that once he attempted to bring certain matters out of the Jews
Bible; into a pagan tragedy, and that theruppo^ he was presently strike^
bli^d; wherewith, he being asto nished, and falling to repentance for that he
had done, and decisting from the enterprise, (as also Theopompus did:) they
were both of them restored again to their healthes. And thus much did these
three Paganes confess, of the authority, divinity, and peculier sacred style
of our scriptures.

BUT NOW further it insueth in order, that after the subject and phrase, we
THE. 7. proof of scripturs. The Contents.
should consider a little the contents of these scriptures, which will
perhaps, more clearlie direct us to the vewe of their author, then any thing
else that hitherto has been said. And for our present purpose, I will note
only two special things contained in the Bible. The first High doctrines.
st albe certain high and hidden doctrines, which are above the reach and
capacity of humane reason, and conseque^tlie, could never fall into man's
brain to invent the^. As for example; that all this wonderful frame of the
world, was created of nothing, where as philosophy says, that of Nothing,
nothing can be made: that Angels, being created spirits, were damned
eternally for their sins: that Adam, by disobedience in Paradise, drew all
his posterity into the obligation of that his sin; and that, the womas seed
should deliver us from the same: That God is one in substance, and three in
persons: that the second of these persons, beig God, should become man and die
upon a Cross for mankind: that after him, the way to all felicity and
honor, should be by contempt, suffering, and dishonor. These doctrines (I say)
and many more, contained in the Bible, being things above man's capacity to
devise, and nothing agreinge with humane reason: most evidently do declare,
that God was the author and enditer of the scripturs, for that by him only,
and from no other, these high and secret mysteries, could be reueiled.

The second thing contained in scriptures, The propleties in scripture declare
their author. Esa. 41. 23.
that could not proceed but from God alone, are certain propheties or
fortellinges of things to come. Wherein God himself provoke the Idols of the
Gentiles, to make experience of their power, in these words: Declare unto us
what shall ensue hereafter, and thereby we shall know that you are Gods in
deed. Which is to be understood; if they could fortell particulerlie and
plainly, what was to come, in things meerlie contingent or depending of man's
will: they should thereby declare their power to be divine.

For albeit these Idols of Gentiles, as How the devils, and other creatures,
may fortell things to come.
Apollo and other that gave forth Oracles, (which were nothing else in deed,
but certain wicked spirits that took upon them these names,) did some times
happen upon the truth, and fortel things to come; as also some Astrologers,
Southsayers, and Magitians do, either by forsight in the stars and other
elements, or by the assistance of these wicked spirits and devils: yet are the
things which they pronosticate, either natural and not contingent; and so may
be forseene and fortolde in their causes; (as rain, heat, cold, wi^des, and
the like:) or else, if they be mere accidental; these predictions of theirs are
only conjectures, and so, most incertaine and subject to errors.

This testifies Porphyrie the great patron of Paganism, in a special book
of The opinion of a healthe^ touching the propheties of his Gods.
the answers of his Gods, wherein he swears that he has gathered truly
without addition or detraction, the Oracles that were most famous before his
time, with the false and uncertain event thereof; In consideration of which
event, he sets down his judgment of their power in predictions, after this
manner. The Gods Porphy. li. de resp. and oracu.
do fortell some natural things to come, for that they do observe the order
and coniunctio^ of their natural causes: But of things that are continge^t, or
do depend of man's will, they have but conjectures only, in that by their
subtilitie and celeritic, they prevent us. But yet they often times do lie,
and deceive us in both kinds: for that, as natural things are variable; so
man's will is much more mutable.

Thus far Porphyrie of the propheties of his Gods, whereunto agrees an
other heathen of great credit, among the Graecians, named Oenomaus, who for
that he had been much delighted with Oracles, and Oenomaus de falsitate
oraculoru^ and de artificibus maleficiis.
more deceived: wrote a special book in the end, of their falshod and lies;
and yet shows, that in many things wherein they deceived, it was not easy
to convince them of open falshod, for that they would inuolue their answers (of
purpose,) with such obscurities, generalities, equiuo cations, and
doubtefulnes; as always they would leave them selves a corner wherein to save
their credites, when the event should prove false. As for example, when Craesus
that famous and rich Monarche of Deceptful. Oracles.
Lidia, co^sulted with Apollo, whether he should make war against the
Persia^s, and thereby obtain their Empire or no? Apollo, desirous of bloodshed,
(as all wicked spirits are;) gave his oracle in these words, for deceauing of
Craesus. If Craesus without fear, shall pass over Halys; (this Eusebius. li.
(...) de praep. eua^. ca. 10.
was a river that lay between him and Persia,) he shall bring to confusion a
great rich kingdom: Upon which words, Craesus passed over his army, in
hope to get Persia, but so one after, he lost Lidia, by euel understanding of
this doubteful prophetie.

This then is the imbecilitie of both humane The circumstances of Propheties;
set down in the scriptures.
and angelical power, i^ pronosticatig things to come, which are mere
co^tinge^t. In which kind, not withstanding, seeing that the scriptures have
many and almost infinite propheties, fort old many years, (and some times
ages) before they came to pass; set down in plain, particular, and resolut
speech; at such times as there was nether cause to conjecture them,
nonprobabilitie that ever they should be true; delivered by simple and
unlearned persons, that could forsee nothing by skill or art; and yet that all
these by their euentes have proved most true, and never any one jot in the
same have failed: this (I say) alone, does convince most apparentlie, (all
proofs and reasons, and other arguments laid a side,) that these scriptures
are of God and of his eternal and infallible spirit. And therefore of these
propheties, will I allege in this place, some few examples.

Abraham the first father and special Patriarche of the Jews, had many
propheties 1. The prophetie to Abraham for his posterity. Genesis 12. 13. 15. 17.
18. etc.
and predictions made unto him, as of his issue, when he had yet none, nor ever
like to have; of his inheritinge the land of Canaan, and the like. But this
which follows, is wonderful, of his posterities descent into Egypt; of their
time of servitude and manner of deliuerauce thence; (the same being fortolde
more the^ four hundredth years before it was fulfilled;) and at that time when
no likelihode thereof i^ the world appeared. The words are these. Know thou
before hand, that thy issue shall be a stranger in a foreign land, and they
Genesis 15.
shall subject them to servitude, and shall asstict them for four hundred
years; but yet I will judge the nation unto whom they have been slaves, and
ester that, they shall depart thence with great riches. This is the
prophetie; and how exactelie it was afterward fulfilled, by the ruin of the
Egytians, and deliverance of the Israelites, even at that Exodus 12. Gal. 3.
time which is here appointed: not only the book of Exodus does declare,
where the whole story is laid down at large: but also the consent of Porphv.
li. 4. co^t. Chri. Appio^. l. 4. co^t. Iudaeos.
heathen writers, as before has been touched. And it is specially to be
noted, that this prophetie was so common and well known among all Jews, from
Abraham's time down unto Moses, and so delivered by tradition from fathers to
their children: as it was the only comfort and stay, not only of all that
people in their servitude of Egypt: but also of Moses and others, that
governed the people afterward, for forty years together in the deserte, and
was the only mean in deed, whereby to pacify them in their distresses and
miseries; and therefore Moses in every exhortation almost, makes mention of
this promise and prophetie, as of a thing well known unto them all, and not
devised or inverted by him self or any other.

Long after this, Jacob, that was Abraham's 2. The prophetie for the government
of Judah.
nepheue, being in Egypt, and making his testament; said of his sowerth son
Judah. Judah, thie brothers shall praise thee, and the children of thie father,
shall bow unto the etc. the Scepter shall not be taken from Judah, until he
come, that is to be sent, and he shall be the expectation of nations. Which
later part of the Genesis 49.
prophetie, all Hebrews do expound that it was meant of the coming of
Messiah, which was fulfilled almost two thousand years after, at the coming of
Christ, as shall be showed in an other special chapter. For at that time, king
Herod, 2 stranger, putt out quite the line of Judah, Joseph. de antiq. li. 14.
from the government of Jury. But for the first part, touching Judas scepter;
it is wonderful to consider the circumstances of this prophetie.

For first, when it was spoken and uttered by Jacob, there was no probability
of any Scepter at all, to be among the Jews, for that the Israelites or
sons of Jacob at that day, were poor and few in number, and never like to
be a distinct nation of themselves, or to depart forth of Egypt again. And
secondly, if any such thing should come to pass, as they might be a people,
and have a scepter or government of their own: yet was it not lyklie, that
Judah and his posterity should possess the same, for that he had three elder
brothers, to wit, Ruben, Simeo^, and Levy, who in Vnlikelihodes of this
prophetie.
all likelihode, were to go before him. And thirdly, when Moses recorded and
putt in writing this prophetie, (which was diverse hundredth years after Jacob
had spoken it,) it was much less likely that ever it should be true, for
that Moses, then present in government, was of the tribe of Levy, and Iosue
designed by Godfor his successor, was of the tribe of Ephrai, Exodus 2. Iosue.
19.
and not of Judah. Which makes greatly for the certainty of this record. For
that it is most apparent, that Moses would never have putt such a prophetie
in writing, to the disgrace of his own tribe, and to the prejudice and offense
of Rube^, Simeon, Ephraim, and other tribes; nether would they ever have
suffered such a derogation, but that it was evident to them by tradition, that
their Grandsire Jacob had spoken it, albeit then presentelie, there was no
great likelihode, that ever after, it should come to be fulfilled.

And this was for the time of Moses: but yet consider further, that from
Moses to Samuel, (that was last of all the Judges,) there passed four
hundredth years more, and yet was there no appare^ce of fulfillinge 1. Reg. 1.
and 8.
this prophetie in Israel; for that the tribe of Judah was not established in
government. At length they came to have kings to rule, and then was there
chosen 1. Reg. 9.
one Saul to that place, not of the tribe of Judah, but of Benjamin, and he
endued with diverse children to succeed him. And who would then have thought
that this prophetie could ever have been fulfilled? but yet for that it was
gods word, it must needs take place; and therefore when no man thought thereof,
there was a David.
poor shepherd chosen out of the tribe of Judah, to be king, and the regiment
and scepter so established in his posterity; that albeit 1. Reg. 16.
many of his descendentes offended God more greeuouslie, then ever Saul did,
who was putt out before: and albeit ten tribes 3. Reg. 12. 2. Para. 11
at once brake from Judah, and never returned to obedience again, but conspired
with the Gentiles and other enemies of The wonderful providence of God
toward the house of Judah.
every side, to extinguishe the said kingdom and regiment of Judah: yet for
the fulfilling of this prophetie, the government of Judah held out still, for
more then a thousand and two hundred years together, until Herodes time as I
have said. Which is more, then any one family in the world besides, can show
for his nobility Eusebius. in Chron.
or continuance in government.

The same Jacob when he came to bless his little nepheues Manasses, and
Ephraim, 3. The prophetie for the greatenes of Ephraim above Manasses.
that were Joseph's children; though him self were now dim of sight, and could
not well discern them, yet did he putt his right hand upon the head of the
youger, and his left hand upon the elder, and that of purpose, as it proved
afterward. For when Joseph their father misliked the placing of their
Gra^d-fathers hands, and would have removed the right hand fro Genesis 48.
Ephraim, and have placed it upon the head of Manasses, that was the elder:
Jacob would not suffer him, but answered. I know my Jonne, I know, that
Manasses is the elder; and be shall be multiplied into many people; but yet
his younger brother shall be greater then be. Which afterward was fulfilled, for
that Ephraim was always the greater and Iosue 16. and 17.
stronger tribe, and in fine, became the head of the kingdom of Israel, or of
the ten tribes, whereof there was no suspicion or Eccle. 47. Esaias. 7. and 28.
Icrem. 31. Ezec. 37. Oze. 5.
likelihode, when Jacob spoke this, or when Moses recorded it. And how then
came Jacob to forsee this, so many hundred years before? as also to forsee
and fortell the particular places of his childrens habitations, in the land of
promise? as Zabulon at the sea side; Aser in Genesis 49.
the fertile pastures; and other the like, Iosue. 14. Exodus 12. Gal. 3. Act. 13.
four hundred years, and more. Wherhence had he this (I say) to fortell what
lottes so long after should appointe, but only from God, who governed their
lottes?

The like might be asked concerning 4. The forsight of Moses. Nu. n. 34. 35.
36. Iosue. 15. 16. 17.
Moses, who before his death in the desert, divided out the land of Canaan,
to every tribe, eue^ as though he had been in possession thereof, and as
afterward, it fell out by casting of lottes, as in the book of Iosue it does
appear. And could any humane wit or science (think you) forsee, what each
tribe should attain (after his death) by drawinge of lottes? Again, the same
Moses forsawe and fortolde in public hearing of all the people, how in times
to come, long after his death, the Jews should forsake God, and for their
Deuteronomy. 31. and 32.
sins be cast into many banishementes, and finally be forsaken, and the
Gentiles received in their room, as in deed it Deuteronomy. 32. v. 21.
came to pass. And whence (trow you) could he learn this, but from God alone?

In the book of Iosue, there is a curse 5. The prophetie for the perpetu^al
desolation of Jericho. Ios. 6.
laid upon the place where Jericho stood, and upon what soever person should
go about to rebuild the same; to wit, that in his eldest son, he should lay
the foundations, and in his youngest son, should he build the gates thereof:
which is to say, that before the foundations were laid, and gates builded, he
should be punished with the death of all his children. Which thing was
fulfilled almost five hundred years after, in one Hiel, who presumed under
wicked king Achab to rebuild Jericho again, and was terrified from the same,
by the sudden death of Abiram and Segub his children, as the book of kings
reportech, 3. Reg. 16
according to the word of our Lord, which he had spoken in the hand of
Iosue, the fonne of Nun; And since that time to this, no man either Jew or
Ge^tile, has taken upon him to raise again the said City, albeit the
situation be most pleasant, as by relation of Stories and Geographers appears.

In the third book of kings, it is recorded, 6. The prophetie for the birth
and acts of Iosues. 3. Reg. 12
that when Jeroboam had withdrawn ten tribes from the obedience of Roboam,
king of Judah; to the end they might never have occasion to reunite the^
selves again to Judah, by their goinge to sacrifice in Jerusalem, (as by the
law they were appointed:) he builded for them a goodly gorgeous high Altar
in Bethel, and there commanded them to do their devotions. And when he was one
day thero present himself, and offering his incense upon the said Altar, and
all the people lookinge on; there came a man of God (says the scripture) and
stood before the Altar, and cried out aloude, and spoke these words: O
Altar, Altar, this 3. Reg. 13
says our Lord; behold, a child shall be borne of the house of David, whose
name shall be, Josias, and he shall sacrifice upon thee, these idolatrous priests
that now burn francomsense upon the, and he shall burn the bones of men upon
thee.

Thus spoke that man of God, in the presence and hearing of all the people
more then three hundred years before Josias was borne; and it was registered
prosentelie, (according to the manner of that time, which I have noted before,)
and with the same, were registered also the miracles which happened about that
fact; as that, the Altar clefte in two upon the man's words; and Jeroboam
extendinge out his hand to apprehend him, lost presentelie the use and feeling
thereof, until it was restored again by the said holy man's prayers; who
notwithstanding, Disobedience punished greenouslie in Gods dearest.
for that he disobeyed Gods commandment in his return, and did eat with a
prophet of Samar a, (which was forbidden him:) he was slain in his way
homeward by a Lion, and his body was brought back again and buried in
Bethel, nigh the said Altar, amongst the sepulchers of those idolatrous
priests of that place; but yet with a superscription, upon his tomb,
containing his name, and what had happened.

There passed three hundred years, 4. Reg. 23
and Josias was borne, and came to reign in Judah; And one day coming to
Bethel to overthrow the Altar, and to destroy the sepulchers of those
idolitrous priests that had been buried i that place; when he began to break
their tombs; he fownde by chance; the sepulcher of the said man of God, with
the superscription upon it. By which superscription, and by relation of the
citizens of Bethel, when he perceived that it was the sepalcher of him that had
fortolde his birth, his name, and his doings, so many hundred years before he
was borne: he let the same stand untouched, as the fowerth book of kings
does declare. Cap. 23.


Now consider, whether among any people in the world, but only among the
Jews, there were ever any such prophetie, so certain, so particular, so long
fortolde before the time, and so exactelie fulfilled? But yet the holy
scriptures are full of the like, and time permits me only to touch some few
of the principal.

Esaias the prophet, is wonderful in fortelling the mysteries and acts of the
Messiah; his nativity, his life, and all the particulers that happened in his
passion. In so much, that S. Jerome says, he may seem rather to write a
story of deeds past, Micron. in Prolog. Galeat.
then a prophetie of euentes to come. But yet among other things, it is to be
noted, 7. The prophetie for the destruction of Jerusalem and Babylon.
that he living in a peaceable and prosperous time in Judah, when the Jews were
in amity and great security with the Babylonia^s; he forsawe and fortolde
the destruction of Jerusalem by the said Babylonians, and the grievous
captivity of Jews under them, as also the destruction of Babylon again by
Cyrus king 4. Reg. 20 v. 16. Esaias. 5.
of Persia, whose express name and greatness, he published in writing, almost
two hundred years before he was borne; saying in the person of God; First, to
Ezechias king of Judah, that reioysed in the frindshippe he had with Babylon:
behold 4. Reg. 20
the days shall come, when all that thou and thye fathers have laid up,
shall be carried away to Babylon, and thy children shall be eunuchs in the king
of Babylons Palace. And next, to Babylon he said; the destruction of Babylon,
which Esaias Esaias. 13.
the son of Amos savve etc. houle and cry, for that the day of our Lord is
at hand: etc. And thirdly, to Cyrus, (not yet borne,) who was preordained to
destroy the same, and to restore the people from banisheme^t, and to rebuild
the temple in Jerusalem, he says thus: I say to Cyrus; thou art my shepherd,
and Esaias. 24.
thou shall fulfill all my will. I say to Jerusalem; 8. The wonderful
prophetie for Cyrus king of Persians. Esaias. 25.
thou shall be builded again. I say to the temple; thou shall be founded
again. This says our Lord, to my amointed Cyrus; I will go before thee, and
will humble the glorious people of the earth, in thy presence; I will break
their brazen gates, and crushe in pieces their iron bars; for my servant
Jacobs sake have I called thee by thie Name, and have armed the, vvher as thou
This he says, for that Cyrus was an infidel.
know not me.

Can any thing be more clearlie or miraculouslie spoken in the world, then to
name a heathe not yet borne, that should conquerre so strong a Monarchy as
Babylon was, at this time, and should build again the temple of Jerusalem,
which others of his own religion had destroyed before him? what cause, what
reason, what lykeliehode, could be of this? yet Esaias speaks it so
confidentelie, as he Esaias. 13.
says, that he savve it: and he names two witnesses thereof, that is, Vrias
and Zacharias, that were not borne in many years after, saying; and I took
unto me two faithful vvitnesses, Vrias the priest, and Zacharias Esaias. 8. v.
2.
the son of Barachias. Whereof the first was a Prophet in Ieremies time, a
hundred years after Esaias; and the second lived fowers Iere. 26. v. 20.
kore years after that again, in the days of pari', as by the beginig of his
prophetie appears; and yet both (as you see) were Zac. 1. v. 1
distinctely named by Esaias so long before.

And whereas this book of Esaias was pronounced ope^lie to the people (as other
Circumstances of certain truth.
propheties also were) and published into many thousand hands before the
captivity of Babylon fellowt: and then carried also with the people, and
dispersed in Chaldea, and other parts of the world: there can be no possible
suspicion of forgerie in this matter; for that all the world both saw it, and
read it, many years before the thing came to pass; yea, when there was no
opinion of such possibility.

The same captivity and destruction of Jerusalem, by the Babyloniens, was
prophetied 9. The propheties and doings of Jeremy in the siege of Jerusalem.
by Jeremy, a hundred years after Esaias, and a little before the matter came to
pass. Yea whiles the Babylonians were about the walls of Jerusalem, and
besieged the same for two years together, Jeremy was within and told every
man that it was but in vain to defend the City, sor that God had now
delivered it. And albeit he were accounted a traitor for so speaking,
(especially when by an army of Egypt that came to the aid of Jerusalem from
Pharao, the siege of Babylonians was raised for a certain time:) yet Jeremy
continued still his asseueration, and said to Zedechias the king, thou shall
Ierem. 37. v. 16.
be delivered into the hands of the king of Babylon. And to the people; haec
dicit Dominus, tradendo tradetur haec ciuitas, etc. this says Ierem. 38 v. 3.
our Lord, this City most certainly shall be delivered into the hands of the
Babylonians. And so he continued, notwithstanding he were putt in prison, and
whipped, and threatened daily to be hanged; until in deed the City was taken,
and Zedechias Ierem. 39. 4. Reg. 24 and 25.
eyes pulled out, his children slain before his face, and all other, things
performed, which Jeremy had prophotied and fortolde them before.

And which is yet more marvelous, Jeremy did not only fortell the
particulers of this captivity, but also the determinate time, how long it
should endure, saying: And all this land of Jurie shall be into wilderness,
and astoniednesse; and all this people Ierem. 25. v. 11. The years fortolde of
the captivity of Babylon.
shall serve the king of Babycon for threescore and ten years, and when three
scare and ten years shall be complete, I will visit upon the king of Babylon,
and upon that Nation, says our Lordo, and I will lay the same into aeternal
desolation. Eut upon Judah, will I cast my pleasant eyes, and vvil bring them
back to this land again, etc. In which prophetie is contained, first the
Ierem. 24. v. 5. etc. 29. v. 10.
particular time, how long this captivity should endure. Sechdlie, the
destruction of Babylon, and of that Monarchy, by the Persians: and thirdly
the returning home of the Jews again; which three things to have been after
fulfilled, not only Esdras, 1. Esd. 1. and 2. 3. Esd. 2.
that lived at that time, and was an actor in perfourmaunce of the last; but
all other heathen writers besides, do record and testify.

And this prophetie of Jeremy, was so famous and certainly believed amongst
all the Jews, in the time of their captivity: as when the day of expiration
drew near, Daniel writes thus of him self: In the first year of Darius, I
Daniel, understood in the scriptures, the number of the seue^tie years, Dan.
9. v. 1.
vvherof God spoke to Jeremy, that they should be fulfiled, touching the
desolation of Jerusalem; and I turned my face to my Lord God, and besoght him,
in fasting and sakcloth, etc. Mother only the Jews understood and believed
this Gentiles believed the scripture.
prophetie; but even Cyrus him self, that was a Ge^tile, gave full credit there
unto, and thereby was iuduced to restore the Jews; as appears both by his
own words 1. Esd. 1. 3. Esd. 2.
and proclamation, set down by Esdras, that executed the same; and by his
deeds also, in restoring home the Jews, and rebuilding their temple at his
own great charges, as all historiographers of the heathens do confess.

I might here allege infinite other examples, and make no end, if I would
follow the multitude of propheties which are dispsed throughout the whole
scripture? I might show how Daniel fortolde The propheties of Daniel.
to Balsasar king of Babylon, in the myddest of his triu^phe, and in the
hearing of all his peers, the destruction which in Dan. 5.
sned upon him the very same night after.

I might allege how the same Daniel in the first year of Darius the Median,
in Dan. 11.
the beginning of that second Monarchy of Medians and Persians, fortolde
Behold three kings shall yet stand in Persia, and the fovverth shall be rich
above all the rest.
how many kings should regine after in Persia, and how the last (who was the
fowerth after him, and his name also Darius,) should fight against the
Graecia^s, and be overcome by a Graecia^ king (which was Alexander;) and how
that kingdom also of Greece, should be divided and torn in pieces, after Dan.
11. v. 2.
Alexanders death, and not pass to his posterity, as Iustine and other
heathen writers Instin. hist. l. 12. and 13.
do testify that it was, by Antigonus, Perdiccas, Seleucus, Antiochus,
Ptolomaeus and other Captains of Alexander, that, divided the same among them
selves, above a hundred years after Daniel was dead.

I might declare how the same Daniel The sour Monarchies of Assyrians,
Persians, Graecians, and (...) Romans.
forsawe and fortolde, the four great Monarchies of the world, and described
the same as distinctelie, as if he had lived in them all, and as by experience
we find since to be true. I might allege, the particular description of the
fight between Darius Dan. 2. Dan. 8. The fortelling of great Alexander. Joseph.
l. 1. de antiq. Iudaic. (...).
and Alexander, set down by Daniel under the names of the great Ram and
the fearce Goat with one horn, which Goat, himself interprets to be meant
of a Grecian king that should conquer the Persians. And therefore Alexander
(as Josephus reports) coming to Jerusalem about a hundred years after, and
reading this prophetie of Daniel interpreted unto him by Iaddus the high
priest; assured him self that he was the man therein signified, and so, after
sacrifice do^ne to the God of Israel, (of whom he affirmed, that he had
appeared unto him in Macedonie, and had exhorted him to take this war in
hand,) and after he had bestowed much honor and many benefits, upon the high
priest and inhabitans of Jerusalem: he went forward in his war against Darius
with great alacrity, and had that famous victory which all the world knows.

A hundredth such propheties more, which are as plain, as evident, and as
distinct as this, I might allege of Elias, Elizaeus, Samuel, David, Ezechiel,
the twelve lesser prophets, and of other which I have not named. And in very
truth the whole scripture is nothing else, but a divine kind of body
replenished throughout with the vital spirit of prophetie, and every day some
prophetie or other is fulfilled, (though we mark it not) and shall be to the
worlds end.

And the miracle of this matter is yet more increased, if we consider what
manner What manner of persons our prophets were.
of people they were for the most part, by whom these propheties of hydden
thiges were uttered: to wit, not such men as could gather their forsight of
things by Astronomy or Astrology, that is, by contemplation of the stars,
as some fond Gentiles did prete^de, (though Ptolomie deny that such things
can be Ptolo. in l. de fructu.
forrolde but only by inspiratio^ from God;) nether yet were they so sharp
witted, as to attain to prophetie by strong imaginations, Moses Narbon. in
lib. Abubacher and (...).
as most vainlie Auerroes and his followers hold that some man may; nor
finally, were they so delicatelie fed as by exact diet and rules of Alchymie,
to come to prophetie, as Alchymists dream that a man may do, and that
Apollonius Thyanaeus did, who by Stellified meats Roger. Baco. l. de sex.
scie^t. experimentalib.
(as they speak) came to be Stellified him self, and so by help of his glass
called Alchymusi, to fortell some matters and affairs to come. Our prophets
(I say) knew none of these fantastical devises, being for the most part,
poor, simple, and unlearned men, as in particular is recorded, that David was
a shepherd, and Amos was a keeper of Oxen; yea, often times Amos 1.
they were women, as Marie the sister of Aaron, called in scripture by the name
of Exodus 15.
Prophetess. Debora the wife of Lapidoth; Anna the mother of Samuel; Elizabeth
the mother of John Baptist; Anna Iudic. 5. 1. Reg. 2.
the daughter of Phanuel; and finally, the most holy and blessed virgin
Marie, with the daughters of philippe, and many such Luc. 1. etc 2.
other both in the old and new testament, Act. 21.
who prophetied stranglie, nor could possibly receive such forknowledge of
things to come, but only from the spirit of God, and by inspiration of the
Holy Ghost, which is a manifest demonstration, of the excellency of Holy
write, and of the certainty contained therein.

AND NOW albeit, this might seem THE. 8. proof of scripturs. Approbatio^ of
heathen vvriters.
sufficient in the judgment and conscience of every reasonable man, (as the
Jew supposes) to prove that the scriptures be only from God, and
co^sequentlie by the^, that there is a God: yet has he one reason more to
confirm their sincerity, which I will allege in this place, and therewith
make an end. His reason is, that although these Holy writings which proceed
of Gods spirit, do not take their testimony or confirmation from man: yet
for more euidencie of the truth, God has so provided, that all the principal
and most strange and wonderful things recompted in scripture, should be
reported also, and confirmed by insidels, Paga^s, Gentiles, and heathen writers
them selves; albeit in some poynctes, they dyffer from the scripture in the
manner of their narration, for that they adioine superstitions thereunto. Which
makes the more for approbation of the things, for that hereby it appears,
they took not their stories directelie from the Bible, but by tradition and
most ancient antiquities of their own.

First then he shows, that the creation of the world, which is the marvel
of all I. The creation of the world. Genesis 1. and 2.
maruailes, with the infusio^ of man's soul from God, is both granted and
agreed upon, by all those heathen Philosophers which I have cited before,
(albeit the particularities be not so set down by them, as they are in the
scriptures,) and by all other, that do sce in reason, that of necessity, their
must be yielded some Creator of these things. Next to this, the flud 2. The slud
of Noe.
of Noe is mentioned by diverse most ancient heathen writers; as by Berosus
Chaldaeus, Ieronymus Egyptius, Nicolaus Damascenus, Genesis 6 7. 8.
Abydenus, and others, according as both Josephus and Eusebius do prove. And
in Bresile and other countries Iosep. lib. 1. antiq. Iudaie. Eusebius. li. 9. de
prap. Eua^g. ca. 4.
discovered in our age, where never teachers were known to be before, they
talk of a certain drownig of the world, which in times past happened; and
do say, that this was left unto them by tradition from time out of mind, by
the first inhabitants of those places.

Of the long life of the first Patriarchs, 3. The long life of the first
fathers.
according as the scripture reports it, not only the former authors, but
also Manethus, that gathered the history of the Egyptia^s; Molus Hestiaeus,
that wrote Genesis 5. and 10. and 11.
the acts of the Phaenicians; Hesiedus, Hecataeus Abderida, Helanicus,
Acusilaus, and Ephorus, do testify, that these first inhabitants of the world
lived commonly a thousand years a piece, and they allege the reason thereof to
be, both for the multiplication of people, and for bringing all sciences to
perfection, especially Astronomy and Astrology, which, (as they write,) could
not be brought to sufficient perfection, by any one man that had lived less
then 600. years, in which space the great year (as they call it) returns
about.

Of the Tower of Babylon, and of the confusion of tongues at the same, Eusebius
4. The Toure of Babylon.
cites the testimonies at large, both of Abydenus that lived about king
Alexanders time, and of Sibylla, as also the Genesis 11.
words of Hestiaeus, concerning the land Enseb. li. 9. de praepar. cap 4.
of Sennaar, where it was builded. And these Gentiles do show by reason, that
if there had not been some such miracle in the division of tongues; no doubt,
but that all tongues, being derived of one, (as all Mark this reason.
me^ are of one father,) the same tongues would have retained the self same
roots and principles, as in all dialectes or deriuations of tongues we see
that it comes to pass. But now (say they) in many tongues at this day, we
see that there is no likelihode or affinity among them, but all different the
one from the other, and thereby it appears, that they were made diverse and
distinct even from the beginning.

Of Abraham and his affairs, I have 5. Of Abraham.
alleged some heathen writers before, as Berosus, Hecataeus, and Nicolaus
Damascenus. But of all other, Alexander Polyhist Genesis 11. 12. 13. 14. etc.
or alleges Eupolemus most at large of Abraham's being in Egypt, and of his
teaching them Astronomy there; of his Alex. Polyhist. lib. de Iudaica historia.
fight and victory in the behalf of Lot; of his entertainment by king
Melchisadech; of his wife and sister Sara; and of other his doings,
especially of the sacrifice of his son Isaac. To whom agrees Melo, Melo,
li. de fraudibus
in his books written against the Jews, Iudaeorum. Artaban in Iudaeorumhist.
and Artabanus. And of the strange lake wherinto Sodoma and Gomorra were
turned by their destruction called mare mortuum, the dead sea, wherein nothig
can live; Gal. de simplic. pausan. in Eliae. Solin. in Poli. hist. Tacit. li.
vlt. hist.
both Galen, Pausanias, Solinus, Tacitus, and Strabo, do testify, and show
the particular wonders thereof.

From Abraham down to Moses, writes very particulerly the fornamed
Alexander, 6. Of Isaac, Jacob, Job, Joseph etc.
albeit he mingle some times certain fables, whereby appears, that he took
his story not out of the Bible wholly. And he alleges one Leodemus, Genesis 15.
16. 17. 18. etc.
who (as he says) lived with Moses, and wrote the same self things that
Moses did; so that these writers agree almost in all things, touching Isaac,
Jacob, Joseph, and all their affairs, even unto Moses; and with these do
concur also Theodotus a most ancient Poet, Artabanus and Philon, Gentiles.
Aristaeus in like manner about Aristotle's time, wrote a Aristaeus. li de Job.
book of Job.

Of Moses and his acts, not only 7. Of Moses. Exo. 2. 3. 4. 5. etc.
the fornamed, (especially Artabanus in his book of the Jews) do make
mention at large; but many other also, as namely Eupolemus, out of whom
Polyhistor recites very long narrations of the wonderful and stupe^dious
things done by Moses in Egypt, for which he says, that in his time, he was
worshipped as a God in that country, and called by many, Mercurius. And that
the Ethiopians learned circuncisio^ of him, which afterward always they
retained, and so do until this day. And as for his miracles done in Egypt;
his leading the people thence by the read sea; his living with them forty
years in the desert; the heathen writers agree in all things, with the
scriptures, saving only that they reco^pt diverse things to the praise of
Moses, which he has not written of him self, adding also his description, to
wit, that he was a long taule man, with a yeolowe bearde, and The description
of Moses person out of heathen vvriters.
long hear. Wherewith also accords Numenius Pythagoricus, touching the acts
of Moses, whose life he says, that he had read in the auncientest records,
that were to be had.

But the fornamed Eupolemus, goes yet 8. The story of Iosue, the Judges, and
the kings.
forward, and pursues the story of Iosue, of the Judges, of Saul, David, and
of Salomo^, eue^ unto the building of the temple, which he describes at large,
with the particular, letters written about thatmatter, the king of Tyrus, which
Josephus says Iosep. lib. 8. de antiq. cap. 2.
were in his days kept in the records of the Tyri^a^s. And with Eupolemus,
agree Polyhister and Hecataeus Abderita, that lived and served i^ war with
king Alexander the great, and they make mention amongst other things, of the
inestimable riches of Salomo^, and of the treasures which he did The treasures
hidden in the sepulcher of David.
hyde and bury, (according to the fascion of that time) in the sepulcher of
his father David: which to be no fable, (though not mentioned by the
scripture,) Josephus well proves, for that Hircanus the high Priest and king
of Jury, being besieged Joseph. l. 13 de antiq. cap. 16.
in Jerusalem by Antiochus, surnamed Pius, not many years before Christ's
nativity; to redeem him self and the city, and to pay for his peace, The
same thing attempted Herod in his time, as Josephus says. l. 18. antiq.
opened the said sepulcher of David, and fecht out of one part thereof, three
thousand Talentes in ready money, which amounte to six hundred thousand powndes
English, if we account the talentes, but at the least size, of talentum
Haebraicum.

And as for the things which ensued after Solomon, as the division of the
tribes 9. The things that ensued after Salomons days.
among them selves, and their diverse wars, afflictions, and transmigrations
into other co^tries; many heathen writers do mention and record them, and
among other, Herodotus and Diodorus Sieulus. And the fornamed Alexander
Polyhistor, talking of the captivity of Babylon, says, that Jeremy a
Prophet, told Ioachim Iere. 37. 4. Reg. 4
his king, what would befall him, and that Nabuchodonosor hearing thereof, was
moved thereby to besiege Jerusalem.

Of the flight of Senacharib, from the Os Senacherib.
siege of Jerusalem, and how he was killed at his return home, by his own
children in the temple, according to the prophetie Esa. 31. and 33. and 36.
of Esaias, and story of the book of kings, for that he had blasphemed the
Lord God of Israel, Herodotus witnesses, and that 4. Reg. 9.
after his death he had a Statua or image of metal erected in his memory, with
this Hero. l. 2.
inscription in greek. He that beboldeth me, let him learn to be godly.
Confer Xenophon also in his seventh book de Cyropaedia, and you shall see
him agree with Daniel in his narrations of Babylon. Dan. 16.


And finally, I will conclude with Josephus the learned Jew, that wrote
imediatelie after Christ's ascension and protests, that the public writings
of the Syriaus, Chaldaeans, Phenicians, and Joseph. l. 1. de Antiq. Iudaica.
innumerable hystories of the Graecians, are sufficient to testify the
antiquity, truth, authority, and certainty of holy scriptures, if there
were no other proof in the world besides.

The conclusion of the chapter, with the application. Sect. 4.
THus far have I treatede of the ways and means, which have been left to
the world from the beginning, thereby to know and understand their Maker. In
treating which point I have stayed my self the longer, for that it is the
ground and foundation of all that is or may be said hereafter. It is the
first, and final, and chiefest principle of all our eternal salvation or
damnation, and of the total weal or woe, that must befail us and possess us
for ever.

Which ground and verity, if it be so certain and evident as before has
been showed by all reason and proof both divine and humane; and that the
matter be so testified and proclaimed unto us, by No excuse of the ignorance of
God.
all the creatures of heaven and earth, and by the mouth and writing of our
Creator himself, as no ignorance or blindness can excuse the same; no
slouthfulnes dissemble it, no wickedness deny it: what remains then, but to
consider with our selves, what service this God requires at our hades? what
gratitude, what duty, what honor for our creation? to the e^de, that as we
have proved him a most bountiful Creator, so we may find him a propitious
judge, and munificent rewarder. For it is not probable, that his divine
majesty which has appointed every other creature to some action for his own
glory, (as has been declared at large before;) should leave mankind only,
which is the worthiest of all the rest, without obligation to his service.

In which one point not withstanding, though never so clear, (such is the The
error of the old Philosophers. Romans 1. and 2.
fondness of our corrupt nature without gods holy grace;) failed those
ancient wise men of the world, of whom S. Paul speaks so much in his epistle
to the Romans, taking compassion of their case, and calling them fools and
all their great learni^ge and philosophy mere fondness; for that, vvheras
(by the means before mentioned) they came to know God; they did Romans 1.
not seek to glorify him, as appertained unto God, not yet did render him due
thanks, but vanished away in their cogitations; etc. That is, they took no
profitt by this knowledge of theirs, but applied their cogitations upon the
vanities of this world, more then upon the honor and service of this Romans 1.
v. 28.
their God. For which cause, S. Paul adioyneth presentelie in the same place,
that forso much as they did thus, and did not show forth by their life and
works, that they had the knowledge of God in deed: God delivered them over to
a reprobate sense, and suffered them to fall into horrible sins, which S.
Paul does name and detest in all that chapter; and finally concludes, that
their everlasting perdition ensued principally upon this one point; that
whereas, they knevv the justice of God, (by all the ways and arguments Romans 1.
E v. 32.
that before have been declared:) yet would they not understand (says he) that
death was due to all such, which lived in wickedness, as they did.

And the same Apostle, upon consideration A general sentence pronounced by S.
Paul.
of these matters, wherein he stands long for the importance thereof,
pronounces in sine this general sentence, with great asseueration and
vehemency of spirit: that the wrath of God is reucaled from heaven Romans I. V.
18.
upon al impiety and injustice of those men, who hold the knowledge of God
in unrighteousness. that is, who beig endued with the knowledge of God, do live
notwithstanding vnrighteouslie, or, (as he saidbefore) do consume their days
in vanity, not maki^g account of the service, which they do owe to that God
for their Creation and other benefits. Which thing, if S. Paul might truly
say unto these Gentiles before his time, who had only natural knowledge and
understanding of God; that is, so much as by his creatures was to be gathered:
what may or shall be said unto The application to our selves.
us, who have not only that light of nature which they had; but also the
wrytinges and law of God himself, communicated specially unto the Jews; and
above that also, have heard the voice of his only son upon earth, and have
received the doctrine of his most holy ghospel, and yet do live as
negligentelie (many of us) as did the very heathens, touching good life and
virtue?

Surely, in this case, I must denounce against my self, that if it be true,
(as it can not be false,) which this blessed Apostle affirms here of these
heathen philosophers, that by that little knowledge they had of God, they were
made inexcusable: then Romans 1. v. 20.
by the most just and certain rule of Christ, laid down in S. Luke, cui
multum datum est, multum quaretur ab eo, that of every man Luc. 12.
which has received much, a greater account shall be taken for the same: we are
forced to infer, that our account shall be greater, and our selves much more
inexcusable before his divine majesty, the^ the very Gentiles and heathens
are; if after all our knowledge and manifest understanding of his Godhead and
justice, we vanishe away in our cogitatio^s, as they did, and as most part
of the world at this day are seen to do; that is, if we apply our cogitatio^s
and cares, about the vain affairs of this temporal life and tra^sitorie
commodities, which we should bestow upon the service and honor of this our
Lord and Creator.

OF THE FINAL END AND CAUSE WHY MAN WAS CREATED BY GOD and placed in this
world. And of the obligation he has thereby, to attend to the affair for
which he came hither. CHAPT. III.
BY the Chapter precedent, I nothing doubt (getle reader,) but, if thou have
seen and perused the same, thou remainest sufficiently informed of thy
Creator. Now follows it by order of good consequence, that we consider with
some attention, (for that it stands us much upon,) A necessary Consideration.
what intent and purpose God had in creating us and this world for our sakes,
and in placing us therein as Lords of the same? By the former considerations we
have learned, that as among other creatures, nothing made it self; so nothig
was made for it self, nor to serve it self. The heavens (we see) do serve the
air, the air serves the earth, the earth serves beasts, the beasts serve
man; and then is the question, whom man was made to serve? For in him also,
holds the former reason, that seig he was not made by him self: it is not
likely that he was made to serve him self

If we consult with the scripture herein; we find a general sentence laid
down without exception; Vniuersa propter semetipsum Prou. 16.
operatus est Dominus, our Lord has made all things for him self. And if
all; the man likewise (no doubt,) who is Man made to serve God.
not the least of the rest which he has made. And hereby it comes to pass,
that man can not be said to be free, or at his own appointement or disposition
in this world, but obliged to perform that thing, for which he was sent into
this habitation. Which point holy Job declares plainly, in a certain
inuectiue that he makes against such men as were careless and negligent in
consideration of this affair. A vain man (says Job. 11.
he) is lifted up in pride, and thinks him self to be borne as free, as the
colt of a vvilde ass. That is, he thinks him self bound to nothing, subject
to nothing, acco^ptable for nothing that he does in this life: but only borne
free, to pass his time i^ disporte and pleasure, as a wild colte in a desert,
that has no Master to tame him. Which in other words, the wise man utters
thus: He estremeth Sap. 15.
this life of ours, for aplaigame, and therefore cares not how he lives or
wherein he sped and passe-ouer the time. And this of the man, who the scripture
calls Vain.

But now for the sooer, wise, and discrete, of whom it is written, the way of
life is upon the learned, to the end they may decline Pro. 15.
from the lowest hell: they are far from so great folly, as to imagine
that no account shall be demanded of our being in this world; for that they
have read, that God shall bring into judgment, what so ever is Eccle. 11.
and 12.
done, for every fault that is committed. And the Christian man knows
further by the mouth and asseueration of his Save our Mat. 12.
and Redeemour, that he shall be accomptant for every idle word that he
misvttereth; and finalie, there is no man that is either of reason, or
conversant in the writings Account to be re^dered.
and testament of his Creator, but remembers well, that among all other
irritations, whereby the wicked man is said to provoke Gods patience to
indignation, none is more often repeated or more greeuouslie taken, then, that
he said Psalm. 9. 43 and 141.
in his heart, God will as ke no account.

With these men then alone, shall be my speech in this present chapter, who
have a desire to discharge well this account. For attayning whereof (truly,) I
can give them no better counsel, instruction, or advise, then to do in this
case, as a good marchant-factour is wont to do, when he arriueth in foreign
Countries, or as a soldier or Captain sent by his prince to some great
exploite, is accustomed, when he comes to the place appointed: that is, to
weigh and consider deepolie, for what cause he came thither? why he Profitable
(...) and considerations.
was sent? to what end? what to attempt? what to prosecute? what to
perform? what shall be expected and required at his hands, (upon his return,)
by him that sent him thither? For these cogitations (no doubt) shall stir him
up to attend to that, for which he came, and not to employ his time in
impertinent affairs. The like would I counsel a Christian to putt in ure,
concerning the case proposed, and to demand of himself, between God and his
conscience, why, and wherefore, and to what endo, he was created and sent hythe:
into this world? what to do? wherein to bestow his days? etc.

And then shall he find, that for no other cause, matter, or end, but only to
serve God in this life, and by that service, to gain heaven and salvation in
the life to come. This was the condition of our Genesis 14: Deuteronomy.
creation, as Moses well expresses; and this was the consideration of our
redeeming, fortolde by Zachary, before we were yet redeemed; that we being
delivered Luc. 1.
forth of the hands of our enemies, should serve God, inholines and
righteousness, all the days of our lives.

Of this consideration do ensue two The. 1. consequence upon due
consideration, of our end.
consequentes to be observed. Whereof the first is, that saying our end and
final cause of being in this world, is to serve God, and thereby to work our
own salvation: whatsoever thing we do, or bestow our time in, which either
is contrary or impertinent, or not profitable to this end, (though it were to
gain kingdoms,) it is vanity and lost labor, that will turn us in time to
grief and repentance, (if we change not our course,) for that it is not the
matter for which we came i^to this life, nor whereof we shall be demanded an
account, except it be to receive judgment and punishment for the same.

Secondly it follows of the same consideration, that seeing our onli^e
business The 2. consequence.
and affair in this world, is to serve our Maker, and save our own souls;
and, that all other earthelie creatures are put here to serve our uses to that
only end: we should for our parts be indifferent to all these creatures, as
to riches or poverty; to health or sickness; to honor or co^tempte; to little
learning or much learning: and we should desire only so much or little of
either of them as were best for us to the attainement of our said end and
Butte pretended; that is, to tho service of God and the weal of our souls.
For who so ever desires, seekthe, loves, or uses these creatures, more the^
for this: ru^nneth from his end for which he came hither.

By this then, may a careful Christian How each (...) may take a sca^teling of
his estate.
take some scanteling of his own estate with God, and make a conjecture
whether he be in the right way, or no. For if he attend only or principally
to this end, for which he was set hither; if his cares, cogitations, studdies,
endeavors, labors, talk, conversation, and other his actions, do run upon
this matter, and that he cares no more for other creatures, as honors,
riches, learnig, and the like, the^ A right course.
they are necessary unto him for this end that he prete^deth: If his days
and life be spent in this studdie of the service of God, and procuring his own
salvation in carefulnes, fear, and trembling, as the Apostle advises him:
then is he (doubteles) Philip. 2.
a most happy and blessed man, and shall at length attain to the kingedome
which he expects.

But if he^ find him self in a contrary A vvrong and dangerous course.
case and course; that is, not to attend in deed to this matter for which
only he was sent hither; nor to have in his heart and study this service of
God and gayning heaven, but rather some other vanity of the world, as
promotion, wealth, pleasure, sumptuous apparel, gorgeous buildinges, beauty,
favor of princes, or any other thing else, that apparteineth not unto this
end: if he spend his time about these trifles, having his cares and
cogitations, his talk and delight, more in these things, then about the other
great business of gayning Gods eternal kingdom, for which he was made and
placed in this would: Then is he (I assure him) in a peri lous way, leading
directelie to perditio, except he alter and change his course. For, most
certain it is, that who so ever shall not attend unto the service he came for;
shall never attain therewarde assigned and promissed to that service.

And for that, the most part of all this world (not only of infidels but
also The reason why so fevv are saved.
Christians,) do ru^ne amiss in this point, and do not take care of that
affair and business, for which alone they were created and placed here: hence
it is, that Christ and his holy Saints, both before and after his
appearance in flesh, Mat. 7. 20 and 22. Lut. 13.
have spoken so hardly and severely, of the very simal number that shall be
saved (even among Christians,) and have uttered certain speeches, which seem
very rigourous to flesh and blood, (and to such as are most touched therein)
scarce credibile, albeit they must be fulfilled. As among other things, that a
lover of this Jacob. 4. Mat. 19. Marc. 10.
world can not be saved; that rich men do enter as hardly into heaven, as a
Camel through a Needles eye, and the like; The reason of which manner of
speeches does stand in this, that a rich man or worldling, attending with all
his industry to heap riches (as the fashion is,) can not attend, (nor ever
does,) to that for which he came into this world, and consequentelie, can never
attain heaven, except God work a miracle, and thereby do cause him to spend
out his riches to the benefyte of his soul, (as some times he does,) and so
do lessen the Camel in such sort, as he may pass the Needles eye. Whereof we
have a very rare Luc. 19.
example in the Gospel, of Zachaeus, who being a rich man did presentelie
upon the entering of Christ into his house, (and much more as appears into
his heart,) resolve him self, to change his former A perfect example of a good
conversion.
course touching riches, and at one blow to begin withal, gave away half
of all he possessed to the poor; and for the rest, made proclamation, that who
soever had received any wrong at his hands, (as comonlie many do by them
that are rich,) he should come and receive four times so much amends. By
which alms and restitution, he delivered him self from the Camels gibbe or
bunch on his back, that let his passage through the Needles eye. And this
extraor dinarie favor and grace he received, by the fortunate presence of his
most blessed and bountiful Guest, who had signified before in an other place,
that him self was able, so to draw the Camel, as he should pass the Needles
eye; for that things impossible to man, were possible to Mat. 19. Marc. 10.
God.

But to leave this, and to go forward in our former purpose; no mauaile it
is, if in the world abroad, so few be saved, seeing that of thousands, skarse
one does account of that business, which of all other, is the chief and
principal. Consider you the multitude of all sort of people upon earth, and
see what their trafike and negotiation is? see whether they treat this affair
or no? see wherein The vvro^g course of the world.
their care, and study, and cogitation consists? How many thousands find
you in Christiandome, who spend not one hour of four and twenty, nor one
half day of forty, in the service of God, or business of their soul? how
infinite have you, that break their brains about worldly commodities, and
how few that are troubled with this other cogitation? how many find time to
eat, drink, sleep, disporte, deck and trim ne them selves to the view of
others; and yet have no time to bestow in this greatest business of all other
business? how many pass over whole days, weeks, months, and years, (and
finally their whole lives,) in hauki^g hu^ting, and other pastimes, without
regard of this importa^t affair? how many miserable women have you in the
world, that spend more days in one year in pricking up their apparel and
adorning their carcass, then they do hours i prayer for the space of all
their life? And what (alas) shall become of this people in the end? what will
they do or say at the day of account? what excuse will they allege? what
way will they turn them? A Comparison expressing theranitie of our
occupatio^s.


If the marchand-factour, which I mentioned before, after many years spent in
foreign countries upon his Masters exspences, should return at length, and
give up his accomptes, of so much time and money spent in singinge; so much in
daunsinge; so much in fencinge; so much in Courtig: who would not laugh at so
fond a reco^ning? but being further demanded of his master, what time he had
bestowed upon the merchandise and affairs for which he was sent; if the man
should answer, that he had not leisure to think upon that thing for the great
occupation which he had in the other: who would not esteem him worthy of all
punishment and confusion? And much more shame and confusion (no doubt,) shall
they sustain at the last dreadful day, in the face and presence of God and
all his. Angels, Math. 16.
who being sent into this world to traffic so rich a marcha^dise as is the
kingdom of heaven; have neglected the same, and have bestowed their studdies,
upon the most vain tryfles and follies of this world, without cogitation or
care of the other.

O ye children of Adam, (says the spirit Psalm. 4. Hiere. 2.
of God) why love you so vanity, and seek after lies? Why leave you the
fountain, and seek after Cesternes? If a golden Game of inestimable value,
should be proposed to such as would ru^ne and could win the same; and when
the course or A Comparison.
raze were begun, if some should step aside and follow flies or feathers
that passed in the air, without regard of the price and Goule proposed: who
would not marvel and take pity of their folly? Even so is it with men of
this world, if we believe S. Paul, who affirms, that 8. Cor. 9.
we are all placed together in a Course or raze, and that heaven is propounded
unto us for the Game or Price: But every man (says he) arriueth not thither;
and why? for that most men do step a side and leave the marcke. Most men do
run awrie, and do follow feathers up and down in the air; most men do
pursue vanities, and do weary them selves out in the pursuit thereof, until
they can nether run, nor go, nor move their limbs any further; and then
for the most part it is to late to amend their folly. Will you hear the
lamentations of such unfortunate men? These are their own words recorded by
scripture. We are wearied out in the way of iniquity and perdition; and the
way Sap. 5. The complainte of vvorldli^gs, in the end of their life.
of God we have not known. What profitt have we received of all our pomp and
pride, and vaunting riches? what good have they done us? They are now past
away, as a shadoe, and as a messenger that rides in post, and we are consumed
in our own iniquities.

This is the lamentable complainte of such men, as ran awrie and followed a
wrong course in their actions of this life. These are they, who pursued riches,
honor, pomp, and like vanities, and forgate the business for which they were
sent. These are they, who were esteemed happy men in this world, and thought to
run a most fortunat course, in that they heaped much riches together;
advanced them selves and their families to great The fond judgment off the
world.
dignities; became gorgeous, and glorious, and dreadful to others; and
finally, obtained what so ever their lust and concupiscence desired. This made
them seem blessed to earthelie cogitations, and the way wherein they rane, to
be most prosperous and happy. And I make no doubt, (by experience of these our
times) but they had admirours and enuiours in great. abundance, who burned in
desire to obtain the same course. And yet when I hear their complainte in
this place, and their own confession wherein they say expresselie, we
senseles men did err from the Sap. 5.
way of truth: when I consider also the addition of scripture, Taliadixerunt
in inferno, they spoke these things when they were in hell:I can not but
esteem their course for most miserable, and condemn wholly the judgment of
flesh in this affair.

Wherefore (my brother) if thou be wise, yield not to this decept of worldly
lips and tongues, that use to bless and sanctific such as are in most
danger and nearest Psalm. 10
to perdition. Lean rather to the sincere council of S. Paul, who wills the
Gal 6.
to examine vprightlie thy own works and ways, and so to judge of thie self
without decepte. If thou walk the way of Babylon, most certain it is, that
thou shall never arrive at the gates of Jerusalem, except thou change thie
course. O (my brother) what a gryese will it be unto thee, when after long
labor and much toil, thou shall find thie self to have gone a wrie? if a man
had travailed A comparyson expressing our gryese in the end, for our running a
wrong course.
but one whole day, and thereby made weary, should understand at night, that
all his labor were lost, and that his whole journey was out of the way; it
would be a marvelous affliction unto him (no doubt,) albeit no other
inco^uenie^ce were therein, but only the loss of that days travail, which
might be recovered and recompensed in the next. But if besides this, his
business were great; if it lay upon his life to be at the place whether he
goes, at a certain hour; if the loss of his way were irrecouerable; if the
punishment of his error, must be death and confusion; and him self were so
weary that he could stir no one foot further: imagine then, what a gryeuous
message this would be unto him, to hear one say: Sir; you are amiss, and have
ridden wholly besides your way?

So then will it be unto the, (my soul,) at the day of death and separation
The misery of a soul that has gone avvrie at the last day.
from my body, if in this life, thou attend not to thy salvation for which
thou were created, but shall pass over thy days in followinge of vanities.
Thou shall find thy self a straye at the end of thy iournei; thou shall find
thy self weary, and enforced to say with those miserable damned spirits, I
have vvalked hard and craggie Sap. 5.
vvayes, for that in deed the way of wickedness is full of thorns and stones,
though in show it be covered with fair grass and many flowers. Thou shall
find at that day, that thou have lost thy labor, lost thy time, lost all
opportunity of thy own commodity. Thou shall find thie error to be
irrecouerable, thie danger unavoidable, thie punishment insupportable, thie
repentance unprofitable, and thie grief, and sorrow, and calamity
inconsolable.

Oh, he that could behold and feel the inward cogitations of a worldly man's
heart at that instant, after all his honors and pleasures were past; no doubt,
but he should find him of an other judgment and opinion in things, then he
was in the ruff and heat of his ioylitie. He does well perceive then, the
fondnes of those triffles which he followed in this life, albeit it were to
make him self a Monarche. If a man did know the cogitations Alexa^ders death.
that Alexander the Great had, when of poison he came to die, after all his
victories and incredible prosperity; if we knew the thoughts of Julius Caesar
at Iul. Caesar death.
the day of his murder in the Senate house, after the conquest of all his
enemies, and subjection of the whole world, to his own only obedience: we
should well perceive, that they took little pleasure in the ways they had
walked, not withstanding they were esteemed most prosperous and happy, by men
of this world. Two rare examples.


Josephus the Jew, recompteth two very rare examples of humane felicity, in
Herod the first, and Agrippa his Cosine: Joseph. l. 14 15. and 18 de antiq.
Iudaica. and de bell. Iud. l. 2
whereof the one by Antonie the Triumuir, and the other by Caligula the
Emperor, (both of them being otherwise but private gentilmen, and in great
poverty and misery when they fled to Rome,) were exalted upon the sudden,
to unexpected great fortune, and made rich Monarchs and glorious Potentates.
They were endued (at several times) with the kingdom and crown of Jury, and
that in such ample sort, as never any of that Nation after them had the like.
For which cause they are called in the Hebrew story, for distinctions sake,
Herod the Great, and Agrippa the Great. They ruled and commanded all in their
days: they wanted nether silver nor gold, nor pleasures, nor pastimes, nor
friends, nor flatterers. And besides all these gifts of fortune, they abounded
also in ornaments and excellency of body and wit. And all this was
increased and made the more admirable by reason of their For envy only of
Agrippa his fortune, Herodias did ruin her self and her husband, as Joseph
says. l. 18. antiq. cap. 8. 9. 15. Her husband was Herod An tipas, that
slew. S. John Baptiste and was son to Herod the first. Luc. 3. Mat. 14.
base and low estate before, in respect whereof, their present fortune was
esteemed for a perfect pattern of most absolute felicity.

This they enjoyed for a certain space, and to assure the^ selves of the
continuance; they bent all their cares, cogitations, and studdies, to please
the humors of the Roman Emperors, as their Gods and authors of all their
prosperity and felicity upon earth. In respect of whose favors (as Josephus
notes,) they cared little to violate their own religion of the Jews, or any
thing else that was most Sacred. And this (forsooth) was esteemed of many, a
most wise, politic, prosperous, and happy course. But what was the end and
consummation of this their raze?

First, Herod fell sick of such an incurable Herodes death. Iosep. l. 15.
antiq.
and lothesome desease, and was tormented in the same with so many terrors,
and horrible This Herod was called Ascolonita, and slew the infantes in
Bethlem. Matthew 2.
accusations of his conscience; as he pronounced him self to be the most
miserable afflicted creature, that ever lived; and so calling one day for a
knife to pare an aple, would needs have mundered him self with the same, if his
arm had not been stayed by them that stood by. And for Agrippa, Josephus
reports, how that upon a certain day which he kept festiual, in Caesarea,
for The death of Agrippa. Iosep. l. 19. cap. 7.
the honor of Claudius the Roman Emperor; when he was in his most extreme
pomp and ioylitie, in the midst of all his Peers, Nobles and Damsels,
coming forth at an hour appointed, (all glittering in gold and silver,) to
make an oration unto the people: his voice, gesture, countenance, and apparel
so pleased; as the said people began to cry (being solicited there unto by
some flaterours,) that it was the voice of God, and not of man; wherein Agrippa
taking pleasure and delectation; S. Luke says, he was stroke by Gods Angel.
Act. 12. And consider how Ioseph'agreeth with that Narration.
was stoocken presently from heaven, with a most horrible putrefaction of all
his body, whereof he died, repeating only to his friends these words, in the
midst of his torments. Behold ye me, that do sent to you a God, how
miserably I am Enforced Eusebius. l. 2. hist. cap. 9.
to depart from you all.

Now then would I demand of these two so fortunate men, who laying a side all
care of God and religion, did follow the prefermentes of this world so
freshelie, and obtained the same so luckelie: how they liked of this their
course and raze in the end? Truly, I doubt not, but if they were here to
answer for them selves; they would assure us, that one hour bestowed in the
service of God, and of their salvation; would more have comforted them at that
last instant, then all their labors and toiles which they took in their
lives, for pleasing of Emperors, and gathering the grace and good likinge of
mortal men.

Use then (o Christian,) use this experience Sincere and profitable counsel.
to thy commodity: use it to thy instruction; use it to thy forwarning. That
which they are now, thou shall be shortly; and of all follies it is the
greatest, not to profit or flee dangers by the example of others. The
difference between a wise man and a fool, is, that the one provides for a
mischief while time serves, and the other would do, when it is to late. If
thou might feel now, the state and case wherein thy poor heart shall be at the
last day, for neglecting the thing that of all other it should have studdied
and thought upon most: thou would take from thy meat, and sleep, and other
necessaries, to repair that is past. Hitherto thou have time to refourme thy
course, if thou please, which is no small benefit, if all were known. For in
this sense (no doubt,) is it most true, which the wise man says; that better
it is Eccle. 4.
to be a living dog, then a dead Lyo^. For that, while the day time of this
life indureth; all things amiss may easelie be amended. But the dreadful
night of death will Ioh. 9.
overtake thee shortly, and then shall there be no more space of reformation.

Oh that men would be wise and forsee Deuteronomy. 32.
things to come, says one prophet. The greatest wisdom i^ the world (dear
brother,) is to look and atte^de to our own salvation. For as the scripture
says most truly; he is a wise man in deed, that is wise to Eccle. 37.
his own soul. And of this wisdom it is written in the very same book, as
spoken by her self. In me is the grace of all life and Eccle. 24.
truth, and in me is the hope of all life and virtue. In moral actions and
humane wisdom, we see that the first and chyefest circumstance is, to regard
well and consider the end. And how the^ do we omit the same, in this great
affair of the kingdom of heaven? If our end be heaven, what mean we so much
to affect our selves to earth? if our end be God; why seek we so greedily
the worldly favor of men? if Great folly and errous.
our end be the salvation and eternity of our soul; why do we follow
vanities and temporalities of this life? why spend Esa. 55.
ye your money, and not in bread? says God by Esaias: why bestow ye your
labor i things that will not yield you savuritie? If our inheritance Ephe. 1.
1. These. 2. 2. Pet. 1.
be, that we should reign as kings; why putt we our selves in such slavery
of creatures? if our birth allow us to feed of bread in our fathers house;
why delighte we in husks provided for the Luc. 15.
swine?

But (alas) we may say with the wise man in scripture. Fascinatio nugacitatis
obscurat Sap 4.
bona. The bewitching of worldly trifles does obscure and hyde from us the
things that are good and behouesull for our souls: o most dangerous
inchantement. But what? shall this excuse us? no truly: Error in cur course
of life is not pardoned. Ose. 4.
for the same spirit of God has left recorded: Populus non intelligens
vapulabit. The people that understands not shall be beaten for it. And an other
prophet to the same effect pronounces. This people is not Esa. 28.
wise, and therefore he that made them, shall not pardon them, neither shall
he that created them take mercy upon them. It is written of fools: ventum
seminabunt and turbinem metent. They shall sow and cast their seed upon the
winds, and shall receive for their harvest nothing else but a storm or
tempest. Whereby is signified, that they shall not only cast away and leese
their labors, but also be punished and chastened for the same.

Consider the^ I beseech the, (my dear A profitable forevvarning.
brother) atte^tiueiie, what thou will do or say, when thie Lord shall come
at the last day and ask the an account of all thy labors, actions, and time
spent in this life? when he shall require a reco^ning of Math. 25.
his talentes lent unto the? when he shall say, as he said to the Farmour or
Steward in the Gospel. Read rationem villicatiouis Luc. 16.
tuae, give account of thie Stewardshippe and charge committed unto the? what
will thou say, when he shall examine and weigh and try thie doiges, as gold
is examined and tried in the furnace, that is, what end they hade? whereto they
were applied? to what glory of God? to what profit of thie soul? what
measure, and weight, and substance they bear? Balsasar king of Babylon,
sitting at his banquet merry upon a time, espied suddenly, certain fingares
without a hand, that A rare chance that happened to Balsasar K. of Babylon.
wrote in the wall over right against his table, these three Hebrew words,
MANE, THEKEL, PHARES. Which three words Daniel interpreted in three sentences
to Balsasar, Dan. 5.
it his manner. MANE; God has numbered thee (Balsasar) and thie kingdom.
THEKEL; he has weighed they the Goldsmiths bala^ce, and thou art found to
light. PHARES; for this cause, has he divided thee from thie kingdom, and
has given the same to the Medes and Persians.

Oh, that these three golden and most siggnificant words, engraven by the angel
upon Balsasars wall, were regestred upon every door and post in
Christia^dome, or rather imprinted in the heart of each Christian; especially
the two first, that importe the numbering and weighing of all our actions, and
that, in the weightes and balance of the Goldsmithe, where every grain is
espied that wants. And If God examine straightly the actions of infidells,
much more of Christians is they be careless.
if Balsasars actions, that was a Gentile, were to be examined in so nise and
delicate a pair of balance, for their trial; and if he had so severe a
sentence pronounced upon him, that he should be divided from life and kingdom,
(as he was the same night followinge) Quia inuentus est minus habens, for that
he was found to have Dan. 5.
less weight in him, then he should have: what shall we think of our selfs
that are Christians, of whom it is written above all others; I will search the
sins of Jerusalem Sopho. 1.
with a candle? What shall we expect, that have not only less weight the^ we
should have, but no weight at all, in the most of our actions? what may such
men (I say) expecte, but only that most terrible threat of division made unto
Balsasar, (or rather A dreadful division.
worse if worse may be,) that is, to be divided from God and his Angels; from
participation with our Saueour; from communion of Saints; from hope of our
inheritance; from our portion celestial, and life everlasting? according to
the express declaration, made hereof by Christ him self in these words, to the
negligent servant: The Lord of such a servant, shall com' at a Math. 24.
day when he hops not, and at an hour that he knovveth not; and shall
divide him ovvt, and assign his part with hypocritos, vvher shall be weeping
and gnashing of teeth.

Wherefore (dear brother) to conclude The conclusion.
this chapter, I can say nothing more in this dangerous case, wherein the world
so runs awrie, but only exhort thee (as Romans 12.
the apostle does,) not to conform thy self to the common error that leads
to perdition. Fall at length to some reconning and account with thy life, and
see where thou stand, and whether thou go. If hitherto thou have wandered
and gone a straye: be sorry for the time lost, but pass no further. If hitherto
thou have not considered the weightines of this affair: serve thy self of
this admonition, and remember that it is written, that a wise man Pro. 5.
profits by every occasion. Esteem thy resolution in this one point, the
chiefest menage that ever shall pass through thy hands in this world, albeit
thou were 2 Monarche and Ruler of ten worlds together. And finally, I will
end with the very same words, wherewith the wise man concludes his whole
book. Deum Eccle. 12.
time, and mandataeius obserua; hoc est enim omnis homo. Fear God, and observe
his commandments, for this is every man.That is; in this does all and every
man consist: his end, his beginning, his life, and cause of being: that he
fear God, and direct his actions to the observance of his commandments;
for that without this, he is no man, in effect, seeing that he loses all
benefit, both of his name, nature, redemption, and creation.

THAT THE SERVICE WHICH GOD REQVIRETH OF MAN IN this present life, is religion.
With the particular confirmations of Christian religion, above all other in
the world. CHAPT. IIII.
HAVINGE prouedi^ the former chapiters, that there is a God, which created man;
and that man in respect hereof, and of other benefits received, is bound to
honor and serve the same God: the question may be made in this place, what
service this is that God requires, and wherein it does consist? Whereunto the
answer is brief and Of religion.
easy, that it is Religion; which is a virtue, See S. Tho. 2. 22. quest. 81.
82. 83.
that co^teyneth properly, the worship and service that we owe unto God:
even as Piety is a virtue, containing the duty Piety.
that children do owe unto their parents: and Observance an other virtue,
that Obserua^ce.
comprehe^deth the regard, that scholars and servants bear unto their
masters. In respect of which comparison and likeness between these virtues, God
faith by a certain Malac. 1.
Prophet. The fonne honors his father, and the seruat his master: if the^ I
be a father, vvher is my honor? if I be a Master, vvher is my fear?

The acts of Religion are diverse and different; The actis and operations of
Religion.
some internal, as devotion and prayer; some other external, as adoration,
worship, sacrifice, oblations, vows, and such like, that are declarations
and protestations of the internal. It extends it self also, to stir up and
putt in ure the acts and operations of other virtues for the service of God;
in which sense S. James names it Pare and unspotted religion, to Jacob. 1.
visit Orphans and Widow in their tribulation, and to keep our selves
undefiled from the wickedness of this world. Finally, how so ever some
heathens did use this word Religion to some other significations: yet, (as S.
Augustine well notes,) August. lib. 10. de ciuit. cap. 1.
the use thereof among the faytheful, has always been, to signify thereby the
worship, honor, and service that is due unto God: so that if in one word
you How much it imports to be religions.
will have it declared, what God requires of man in this life: it may be
rightly said, that all stands in this, that he be Religious.

Hereof it proceeded, that what so ever sort or sect of people in the world,
professed reverence, honor, or worship to God, or to Gods, or to any divine
power, essence, or Nature what soever; (were they Jews, heathens, Gentiles,
Christians, Turks, Moors, Heretics, or other:) they did always call their
said profession, by the name of their Religion. In which sense also and
signification of the word, I am to treat at this time of Christian religion,
that is, of the substance, form, manner, and way reueiled by Christ and his
Apostles unto us, of persourning our duty and true service toward God.
Which service, is the first point necessary to be resolved upon, by him that
seeks his salvation, as in the Chapter that goes before has been declared.
And The necessity of Chri stia^ religion.
for obteyning this service and true knowledge thereof, no mean upon earth is
left unto man, but only by the light and instruction of Christian religion,
according to the protestation of S. Peter to the governors of the Jews, when
he said. There is no other name under beauen given unto men Act. 4.
vvherby to be saved, but only this of Christ and of his religion.

If you obiecte against me, that in former times before Christ's nativity, as
under the law of Moses for two thousand How men were saved in old time
without Christian religion.
years together, there were many Saints that without Christian religion
served God vprightelie, as the Prophets and other holy people; and before
them again, in the law of Nature, when nether Christian nor Iuishe religion
was yet heard of, for more then other two thousand years, there wanted not
diverse that pleased God and served him truly, as Enoche, Noe, Job, Abraham,
Jacob, and others: I answer, that albeit these men (expeciallie the former, that
lived under the law of nature;) had not so particular and express knowledge of
Christ and his mysteries as we have now; (for this was reserved to the time of
grace, as saint Paul in diverse Gal. 3. and 4 Ephesians. 3. Colos. 1. See S.
Angust. li. 19. cont. Fanst. cap. 14.
places at large declares:) that is albeit they knew not expresselie, how and
in what manner Christ should be borne; whether of a virgin or no; or in what
particular sort he should live and die; what sacraments he should leave; what
way of publishing his ghospel he should appointe, and the like; (whereof not
withstanding very many particulers were reueiled to the Jews from time to
time, and the nearer they drew to the time of Christ's appearance, the more
plain revelation was made of these mysteries:) yet (I say) all and every one
of these holy All old Saints believed in Christ, and were saved by Irym.
Saints, that lived from Adam until the coming of Christ, had knowledge in
general of Christian religion, and did be lieue the same: that is, they
believed expresselie, that there should come a Saueour and Redeemer of
mankind, to deliver them from the bondage contracted by the sin of Adam.

This was reueiled straight after their fall, to our first parents and
progenitors in Paradise; to wit, that by the vvomans Genesis 3. v. 15.
seed, our redemption should be made. In respect whereof it is said in the
revelations, that Christ is the Lamb that has been slain from the beginning
of the Apoc. 13.
world. And S. Peter in the first general Council holde^ by the Apostles,
affirms, Act. 15. v. 11.
that the old ancient fathers before Christ's Nativity, were saved by the
grace of Christ, as we are now; which S. Paul confirms Romans 5. Ephe. 8.
in diverse places. And finally, the matter is so clear in this behalf, that
the Read S. Thom in 1. 2. qu est. 103. art. 4. and August. l. 18. de ciu. c.
47. and ep. 49. and 157. and tract. 45. in Ioh. Cle. Alex. lib. 6. strom. and
Hieron. in cap. 3. ad Gal. The differences between our belief and the old
fathers. Esaias. 7. Genesis 49.
whole school of divines accords, that the faith and religion of the old
fathers, before Christ's appearance, was the very same in substance that ours
is now, saving only, that it was more general, obscure, and confuse then ours
is, for that it was of things to come, as ours is now of things past and
present.

For example; they, believed a Redeemer to come; and we believe that he is
alredie come. They said, virgo concipiet, a Virgin shall conceive; and we say
virgo concepit, a virgin has conceived. They had sacrifices and caeremonies
that presigured his coming for the time ensuinge; we have sacrifice and
sacraments that represent his being for the time present. They called their
Redeemer, the expetatio^ of Nations; and we call him now, the salvation of
Nations. And finally, there was no other difference between the old faith of
good men from the beginning, and ours; but only in the circumstances of time.,
clearnes, particularitie, and of the manner of protesting the same, by owtwarde
signs and ceremonies. For that in substance they believed the same Redeemer
that we do, and were saved by the same belief in his merits, as we are. For
which cause (...)
Eusebius well notes, that as we are called now Christians; so they were
called then Christi, Psalm. 104. that is, anointed, i^ prefiguratio^ of the
true Christ, in whom they believed, as the first and head of all other
anointed, and who was the cause and author of their annoynting.

By this then it is most manifest, that not only now to us that be Christians,
but at all other times from the beginning of the world, and to all other persons
and people what so ever, that desired to save their souls, it was necessary
to believe and love Christ, and to profess in heart his religion. For which
consideration, I thought it not amiss in this place, after the former grounds
laid, that their is a God; and that man was created and placed here for his
service: to demonstrate The causes of this Chapter.
and prove also this other principle, that the only service of this God, is by
Christian religion. Wherein, albeit I do not doubt, but that I shall seem to
many, to take upon me a superfluous labor, in proving a verity, which all
men in Christendom do confess: yet, for the causes before alleged in the
second chapter, which moved me in that place to prove, there is a God: that is
to say, first, for the comfort, strength, 2nd confirmation of such, as
either from the enemy may receive temptations, or of them selves may desire to
see a reason of their belief: and secondly, for awakening, stirring, or
stingig of others, who either of malice, carelesnes, or sensuality, are fallen
in a slamber, and have lost the feeling and sense of their belief, (for many
such want not in these our miserable days:) it shall not be (perhaps) but to
very good purpose, to lay together in this place, with the greatest breuity
that possibly may be, the most sure grounds and invincible evidences, which
we have for declaration and confirmation of this matter.

For albeit, as the Apostle S. Paul declares, Heb. 11.
the things which we believe, be not such in them selves, as may be made
appare^t by reason or humane arguments, for that our faith, that is, the
assent of our judgment to the things propounded by God unto us, must be
voluntary, to the end it way be meritorious: yet, such is the goodness and
most sweet proceeding of our merciful God toward us; as he will not leave him
self without suficient testimony both inward and owtward, as the same Apostle
in another place does Act. 14.
testify. For that inwardly, he testifies The diverse testimonies from God of
the things that we believe.
the truth of such things as we believe, by gyuing us light and
understanding, with internal joy and consolation in believing them. And
owtwardle, he gives testimony to the same, with so many conueniences,
probabilites, and arguments of credibilitis, (as Divines do call them:) that
albeit the very point of that which is believed, remain still with some
obscurity, (to the end there may be place for our will and merit:) yet are
there so many circumstances of likelihodes, to induce a man to the belief
thereof; 'as in all reason it may seem against reason to deny or mistrust them.

This shall easelie appear by the treatise following of Christ and
Christianity, and of the foundations of our religion, which shall be confirmed
by so many pregnant reasons, and most manifest circustaces of euidet
probability: as I doubt not, but the zealous Christia shall take exceedig
comfort therein, and esteem himself happy, to have a lottei^ that faith and
religion, where he shall see and feel so much reason, proof, and conueniencie
to concur and show it self, for his satisfaction.

And to this effect, it shall be of no mean moment, that I have proved before,
the certainty, divinity, and infallible truth of the Jews scriptures, or old
testament; which writings we having received from that Nation, that does (as
it were) profess enimitie against us; and the same being written so many ages
before the name of Christianity was known in the world: it can not be but of
singular authority, what so ever shall be alleged out of those records for our
purpose. And therefore as before, in proving our first principle, that there is
a God, we used only the testimony of such witnesses, as could not be partial:
The undoubted vvitnesses to be alleagea in this chapter.
so much more in this confirmation of Christian religion, shall we stand
only, either upon the confessions of such as are our enemies; or upon the
records of others, who must needs be indifferent in the cause, for that they
lived before either cause or controversy in Christianity was known or called
in question.

My whole purpose shall be then, to make manifest in this chapter, that Jesus
Christ The drifte of this chapter.
was the Saueour and Redeemer of mankind, fore-promissed and expected from the
beginning of the world; that he was the son of God, and God him self; and
consequentelie, that what so ever he has left us in his doctrine and
religion, is true and sincere, and the only way of Salvation upon earth. For
clearer proof and declaration whereof, I will reduce what soever I have to say
herein, unto three The principal heads.
principal heads or braunshes, according to the order of three distinct times
wherein they fell out: that is to say; in the first place shall be considered,
the things that

In declaration of which three general poinctes, I hope by the asistance of him
whose cause we handle, that so many clear demonstrations shall be discovered;
as shall greatly confirm thie faith (gentle reader) and remove all occasions
of temptations to infidelity.

How Christ was fortolde to Jew and Ge^tile. Sect. 1.
FIrst then, for such things as passed before Christ appeared in flesh, and
do make for proof of our Christian religion; it is to be noted, that they are
of two sorts, or at leastwise, they are to be The Jew and Ge^tile.
taken from two kinds of people, that is, partly from the Jews, and
partly from the Gentiles. For seeing that Christ was appointed from the
beginning, yea, before Ephesians. 1. 1. Tim. 2. Tit. 1. 1. Pet. 1.
the world was created, (as S. Paul affirms,) to work the redemption both of
Jew and Gentile, and to make them both one people in the service of his
father: herehe^ce it is, that he was fortold Esa. 2. 11. 19. Icrem. 9. 12. 16.
and presignified to both these Nations; and diverse forwarninges were left among
them both, for stirring them up to expect his coming, as by the
considerations following shall nost euidentelie appear.

AND TO begin with Jews; no man can deny, but that throughout the whole
THE. 1. consideration. THE Messiah promissed.
body and course of their scriptures, that is, from the very beginning to the
last ending of their old testament, they had promissed to the^ a MESSIAH, which
is the same thing that we call, CHRIST, that is to say, a person anointed and
sent from God to be a Saueour, a Redeemer, a Pacifier of Gods wrath, a
Mediator between God and man, a Satisfyer for the sins and offenses of the
world, a Restorer of our innocence lost in Paradise, a Master, an Instructour,
a Lawgyuer, and finally, a spiritual and eternal king, that should sit and
rule and reign in our hearts, to conquer the power and tyranny of Satan, that
ouer-came our first parents, and assaileth us daily.

This is evident by the first covenant of 1. The first covenant to Adam. Genesis 2.
all, that ever God did make with man, when he said to Ada^ our first father in
Paradise; In what day so ever thou shall eat of the tree that is forbidden,
thou shall die. Which covenant being after broken, on the part of our said
progenitour: he received his judgment; but yet with a most benign promise of
redemption for the time to come: for thus God said to the devil or serpent that
had deceived him: The seed of the woman shall crushe thy head, and thou shall
lie in Genesis 3.
wait to hurt his heel. That is, one shall proceed in time of the seed of
the woman, who shall co^quer death and sin (that are thy weapons,) and shall
not care for thy te^ptatio^s, but shall tread them under his feet, and this
shall be Christ the Messiah of the world. Thus did not only the Rabbi Mose. Ben
maimon, in hunc locu^.
eldest Jews and Rabbines understand this place, (what so ever the latter have
dreamed, that there Messiah should be only a temporal king:) but also the old
Chaldie paraphrase (named, Thargum Hierosolymitanum) expounds it plainly i^
these words, appli^ed unto the devil that had deceived Adam. They have a Tharg.
Hie. ros. in Genesis 3.
certain and present remedy against the (o devil,) for that the time shall
come, when they shall treat the down with their heels, by the help of
Messiah which shall be their king.

The same thing is confirmed by the very same promise seven times repeated and
To Abraham and Isaac.
established unto Abraham, that lived very near two thousand years after
Adam: and again to Isaac his son after him: In (...) tuo benedicentur omnes
gentes terrae. Genesis 12. and 18. and 22.
All nations of the earth shall be blessed in thy seed. Which had been in deed,
but a very small benediction to Abraham, or to other Jews after him, (that
never saw this Messiah actuallie,) if he had been only to be a temporal king;
And much less blessing had it bone to Gentiles and other nations, if this
Messiah of the Jews, must have been a temporal and worldly Monarche to
destroy and subdue them to the servitude of Jury, as fondly these later
teachers of that nation do contend.

This yet makes the Patriarche Jacob 3. Jacobs prophetie of Christ. Genesis 49.
more plain, who prophesing at his death of the coming of Christ, has these
words: the scepter (or government) shall not be taken from the house of Judah,
until be come that is to be sent, and he shall be the expectation of Nations.
Which later words, the fornamed Tharg. Hie ros. and Onkelos in hunc locu^.
Chaldie paraphrase, as also great Onkelos, (both of singular authority
amongst the Jews,) do interpret thus: Donee Christus seu Messiah veniat,
etc. until Christ or the Messiah come, (which is the hope and expectation of
all Nations, as well Gentiles as of us that are Jews;) the government shall
not cease in the house or tribe of Judah. By which sentence of scripture, and
interpretation of the Jews the^ selves, we come to learn, (besides the
promise for the Messiah,) two co^sequences in this matter, against the Jews
of later times. First, that if their Messiah must be The Messiah must be a
spiritual and not a temporal king.
the hope and expectation as well of Gentiles as of Jews: then can he not be a
temporal king to destroy the Gentiles, (as the latter Jews would have it,)
but a spiritual king to reign over them, and to bring in subjection their
spiritual enemies for them, (I mean the flesh, world, and devil,) as we
Christians do beloeue. Secondly, if the temporal kingdom of the house of
Judah, (where of Christ must come) shall cease and be destroyed at the coming
of Messiah, (as this scripture avouches:) how then can the Jews expect yet a
temporal king for their Messiah, as most fondly they do?

But to leave this controversy with the later Rabines, and to go forward in
declaration of that which we took in hand, that is, to show how Christ was
fortolde and fore-promissed to the Jews: it is to be noted, that after the
death of Jacob last mentioned, there is little recorded in scripture of the
doings of his people, during the four hundred years of their bondoge in
Egypt. But yet the tradition of that Nation teaches, that as soon as The
tradition of the Jews in Misdrasch Thehilim.
they were delivered out of Egypt, and were in the desert toward the land of
promise; the three sons of Chore, called Aser, Eleana, and Abiasaphe, (of
whom there is mention in the sixth chapter of Exodus and other where;) made
diverse songs and Psalms, in the praise and expectation of the Messiah to
come; and that the holy men of that time, did solace the^ selves with singing
the same; and that king David afterward in the second part of his Psalms,
beginning from the 41. unto See the titles of these psalms. 41. 44 45. 46. 47
48. 82. 84 86. 87.
the 87. gathered the most part of those old songs together, as yet they are
to be seen in his psalter.

But Moses, who lived with that people, and governed them in the wilderness,
had a clear revelation from God of this Messiah, in these words. I will raise
up a Prophet to 5. Moses prophetie of Christ. Deuteronomy. 13.
this people from amongst their brethren, even as thy self; and I will putt
my words in his mouth, and he shall speak unto them all things which I shall
ordain unto him: and he that shall refuse to hear the words which he shall
speak unto the^ in my name; I will he revenged upon that man. Which words;
that they can not be understood of any other Prophet that ever lived after
Moses among the Jews, but only of Christ; it appears plainly by this
testimony of the holy ghost. And Deuteronomy. 34
were arose not any other Prophet in Israel, like 6. David's propheties of
Christ.
unto Moses, etc.

After Moses about four hundred years, ensued David, who for that he was a
holy man, and the first king of the house of Judah, out of whose lineage the
Messiah was to come: the particulers of this mystery, were more abundantly
and manifestly reueiled unto him, then unto any other. And first, for
assurance that Christ should be borne of his stock and lineage, these are the
words of God unto him: I have sworn to David my servant: I vvil Psalm. 88. 2.
Reg. 7. 1. Para. 22
prepare thie seed for eternity, and will build up thie seat to all
generations. Which words, albeit the later Jews will apply to king Solomon,
that was Dauides son; (and in some sense they may so be; for that Solomon
was a figure of Christ to come:) yet properly these words, and his kingdom
shall Psalm. Reg. 5. 1. Para. 22
stand for ever, and for all eternity, which are so often repeated in this and
other places of scripture; can not be verified in Salomo^, whose earthelie
kingdom was rent and torn in pieces straight after his death, 3. Reg. 12
by Jeroboam, and not long after, as it were extinguished; but they must
needs be understood of an eternal king, which should come of David's seed; as
must also these other words of God in the psalms; Thou art my son, this day
have I begotten the, Psalm. 2. 45. 47. 67. 72.
I will give unto thee the Gentiles for thine inheritance. Which was never
fulfilled in Solomon, nor in any temporal king of Jury after him. And much
less these words that follow: He shall endure with the sun, Psalm. y 1.
and before the moon, from generation to generation. There shall rise up in his
days, peace, until the moon be taken away: he shall reign from sea to sea,
unto the ends of the world: All kings shall adore him, and all Nations shall
serve him: for that he shall deliver the pooreman that had no helper; he shall
save their souls, and deliver them from usury, and from iniquity: all tribes
of the earth shall be blessed in him, and all Nations shall magnisie him.

These words of Christ's eternal kingdom; of his enduring to the worlds end;
of his universal reign over Jew and Gentile; of his adoration by all Nations;
of his delivery of souls from bondage of iniquity; and finally, of his
making blessed all tribes of the earth: can not possibly be applied to any
temporal king that ever was among the Jews, or ever shall be, but only to
Christ.

This promise made unto David for 7. Ieremies prophetie touching Christ.
Ierem. 23 and 33.
Christ to come of his seed, is repeated after his death by many prophets,
and confirmed by God, as in Jeremy, where God uses these words: Behold, the
days come on, and I will raise up to David a just seed, and he shall reign a
king, and shall be wise, and shall do judgment and justice upon earth. And in
his days shall Judah be saved, and Israel shall dwell confidentlie, and this is
the name that men shall call him. OUR JUST GOD. All this was spoken of David's
seed, above four hundred years after David was dead. Which proves
manifestly that the former promises and speeches, were not made to Dauide for
Solomon, or for any other temporal king of David's line, but for Christ, who
was called so peculierlie the son and seed of David, for that David was the
first king of the tribe of Judah, and not only was Christ's Progenitor in
flesh, but also did bear his Type and Figure in many other things.

For which cause likewise in the prophet Ezechiel (who lived about the same 8.
Ezechiels prophetie of Christ.
time that Jeremy did,) the Messiah is called by the name of David him self.
For this God spoke at that time, unto Ezechiel. I vvil save my slocke; nor
shall they be any longer lest to the spoil. etc. I vvil raise over Ezec. 34.
them, ONE PASTOR, which shall seed them; my servant DAVID, he shall seed
them; and he shall Christ is called David.
be their Shepherd, and Prince, and I will be their God, and vvil make with
them a conenant of peace, etc. In which words, not only we Thalm. tract.
Sanh. ca. helec.
that are Christians, but the later Jews also them selves do confess in
their Thalmud, that Messiah is called by the name of David, for that he shall
descend of the seed of Dauide; as by reason also it must needs be so, for
that king David being dead four hundred years before these words were spoken,
(as has been noted;) could not now come again, to feed gods people or
govern them him self.

Esaias the prophet, who Iyued about a The propheties of Esaias touchi^g Christ.
Esa. 2.
hundred years before Jeremy and Ezechiel, had marvelous for knowledge of the
Meisias and his affairs, and describes him very particulerlie, beginning i
this manner. In the later days, the HILL of gods house, shall be prepared upon
the top of mountains, and all Nations (or Gentiles) shall flow unto him.
And many people shall say; come and let us ascend to the HILL of our Lord,
and he shall teach us his vvayes, and we shall walk in his paths: it shall
judge Nations. etc. Which very Mich. 4.
words are also repeated in Micheas the prophet, and are applied there, (as
also here,) unto the Messiah, and can have no other meaning, by the judgment
of the Jews and Hebrews themselves. And Esaias does prosecute the same matter
afterward, in diverse chapters. As for example, in the sowerth, talking of the
same Messiah, which before he calls the HILL of Gods house; he adds these
words. In Esaias. 4. v. 2.
that day, shall the issue of our Lord, be in (...) and glory; and the
fruit of the earth, in (...), and exultation, to all such as shall be saved of
Israel. In which words, he calls the Messiah, both the issue of God, and the
fruit of the earth, for that he should be both God and man. And in the nynthe
chapter Esa. 9. v. 6.
he calls him by these terms: Admirable: Councelour: God: Strong: Father of
the future world: and, Prince of Peace.

In the eleventh chapter, he describes him most wonderfully in these words;
there shall go soorth a bransh of the stock of Iesse, Esa. 11. v. 1.
(which Iesse was David's father;) and out of the root of that branche, there
shall mount Psalm. 71. Ecclc. 45.
up a flovver, and the spirit of our lord shall rest upon him; the spirit of
vvisdome and of understanding; the spirit of council and sortitude; the spirit
of knowledge and piety: he shall not judge VVo^nderful properties of Christ.
according to the sight of (fleshely) eyes, nor yet condemn according to the
hearing of (fleshely) ears; but he shall judge poor men in justice, and shall
dispute in equity for the mylde men of the earth. He shall strike the earth
with the rod of his mouth, and with the spirit of his lips shall he flea
the wicked man. Justice shall be the girdle of his loins, and faith shall be
the band of his reins. etc. Hitherto are the words of the Prophet; wherein
nothing truly can be more plain and evident, then that by the rod or
branche of Iesse, is meant the Virgin Math. 1. Luc. 3. Act. 13. Romans 15.
Marie, who directelie descended of the lineage of Iesse; and by the flovver
ascending from this branche, must needs be understood Christ, that was borne
of her, and had all those excellences and privileges above other me^, which
Esaias in this place, assigns unto him.

Whose further graces yet, and special Other properties of Christ. Esa. 25. v.
8.
divine properties, the same Prophet expresses more particulerlie in the
chapters following, where he says: he shall for ever overthrow and destroy
death; he shall open the eyes of the blind, and the ears of the deaf; he shall
not cry nor co^te^de, nor shall he accept the person of Esa. 35. v. 5. Esa. 42.
v. 2.
any man; but in truth shall he bring forth judgment. He shall not be
sorrovvful nor turbule^t. etc. And finally, in the forty and ninthe chapter
he alleges the words of God the father unto Christ, touching his commission
in this sort: it is too little, that thou Esa. 49. v. 6. Act. 13. 47.
be to me a servant, to raise up the tribes of Jacob, and to convert unto me
the dregs of Israel. Behold, I have appointed thee also for a light unto The
commission of Christ.
the Gentiles, that thou he my salvation unto the uttermost parts of all the
earth.

And to conclude this matter, without alleging more propheties for the same;
10. The prophetie of Daniel touching Christ.
(which in truth are infinite throughout the Bible;) Daniel that lived in the
end of the captivity of Babylon, a little before Aggaeus, Zacharias and
Malachias (who were the last Prophets that ever flourished amongst the Jews,
almost five hundred years before the nativity of Christ:) this Daniel (I say)
reports of him self, that being in Babylon, and having fasted, worn
heare-cloth, and prayed long unto God: there came the Angel Gabriel unto him,
at the time of Evening sacrifice, and fortolde him, not only of the
deliverance of the people of Israel from the captivity of Babylon out of
hand, (for that the seventy years of their punishment, fortolde by Jeremy,
were now expired:) but also he told him further, that the time of the
universal deliverance of mankind, from the bondage and captivity of sin;
was now shortened, and that after seventy hebdomades, (which, as shall be showed
after, make up just the time that passed from the rebuilding of the temple of
Jerusalem after their deliverance from Babylon, unto the birth of Christ:)
there should be borne the Saueour of the world, and be putt to death for
redemption of mankind.

The Angels words are these. I am come to show unto thee, o Daniel, for that
thou art a Dan. 9. v. 23.
man of good desires. And therefore do thou mark my speech, and understand
this vision. The seue^tie hebdomades are shortened upon thie people, and upon
thie holy City; to the end preuarication may be consumed, and sin receive
an end: to the end iniquity may be blotted out, and eternal justice brought
in her place: and to the end visio^s and propheties may be fulfilled, and the
SAINT OF SAINTS anointed. Know thou therefore and mark, that from the
end of the speech, for rebuilding of Jerusalem, unto Christ the CAPTAINI;
there shall chebdomades seven, and hebdomades sixty two: and after sixty
two hebdomades, Christ shall be putt to death, and the people which shall deny
him, shall not be his people.

I might pass on futher to other Prophets and propheties, and make no end,
if I would allege what might be said in this behalf; for that the whole
scripture runs all to this one point; to fortell and manifest Christ, by
signs, figures, parables, The Butt of all scripture.
and propheties; and for this cause was it principally written. But that which
is alredie spoken, shall be sufficient for our first consideration, whereby is
seen, that among the Jews, from age to age, Christ was prophetied and
fortolde, together with the eternite of his kingedome that should be spiritual.

NOW FOLLOVVETH there a second consideration of the quality of Christ's THE.
2. Consideration.
person, no less of importance then the former, and wherein the later Jews do
THAT Christ should be God and man.
more dissent from us; and that is, of the God hode of the Messiah promissed. I
say the later Jews or Rabines are different herein from us, as also they are
in many other points and articles, wherein their ancestors (that were no
Christians) did The custom of Heretics.
fully agree. Even as all Heretics are wont to do, that first break in
one point, and then in an other from the Catholic faith; and so do run
on, from one to one, making them selves in all things as dislike as they can,
for hatred of that unity, where unto their pride will not suffer them to
return. So is it in the generation of this reprobate people, who first agreed
with us in all, or most points, touching Christ to come, and denied only the
fulfilling or application thereof, in Jesus our Saueour: But afterward, their
ungracious offspring, being not able to stand in that issue against us, devised
a new plea, and be took them selves to a far higher degree of impiety,
affirming, that we attributed many things unto Jesus, that were not fortolde
of the Messiah to come; and among other, that he should be God, and the son
of God, and the second person in Trinity, etc.

But herein (no doubt) these obstinate and graceles men, do show them selves
both ignorant of their own scriptures, and disagreing from the writings of
their own forefathers. For as for scriptures, it is evident by all or most of
the propheties alleged before, that Christ (or the Messiah) That Christ must
be both God and man. Genesis 3. r. 15.
must be God, and the son of God, endued with man's nature; that is, both ma
and God. So i^ Genesis, where he is called, the seed of the woman; it is
apparent, that he shall be man; and in the same place, when he is promissed, to
crushe the devil and break The. 1. proof. Esa. 4. v. 2.
his head; who can do this but only God? Likewise, when he is called Germen
Iehouae, the seed of our Lord God; his Godhood is signified: as is his
manhood also, when in the same place he is named; the fruit of the earth. Who
can interpret these speeches; that his kingedome shall be everlasting; That, he
Esa. 9. Psalm. 71.
shall endure until the Moon be taken away and after; That, God begat him
before Lucifer was created; That, no man can tell or recumpte his Psalm. 109.
generation; That, all Nations and Angels must Esa. 53. Psalm. 96. Heb. 1. Psalm.
110.
adore him; That, he must sit at the right hand of God, and many other such
speeches pronounced directelie and expressie of the Messiah; who (I say) can
understand or interpret them, but of God, seeing that in man they can not be
verified?

And as for the last of these testimonies, concerning Christ's sitting at his
fathers right hand: three of our Evangelists do Math. 2. Marc. 12. Luc. 20.
report, that Jesus did blancke diverse of the learned pharisees with
alleging only these words of David: The Iehoua in Hebrne. Psalm. 110.
Lord said to my Lord, sit at my right-hande, until I putt thie enemies as
thy footest role. For, (said Jesus,) if Christ be David's son; how did David
call him his Lord? signifying hereby, that albeit the Messiah was to be David's
son, according to his manhood: Rab. Ionath. lib. collect. and Misdrasch.
Tehilim in psalm. 2. v. 7.
yet was he to be David's Lord, according to his God head. And so do both Rabbi
Jonathan, and the public commentaries of the hebrews, interpret the place.

Micheas is plain; And thou Bethleem; The. 2. prose. Mich. 5.
out of the, shall proceed a RVLER in Israel; and his going forth, is from
the beginning, and from the days of eternity. This can not be understood of
any mortal man, that ever was or shall be. But yet Esaias goes further when he
says. A little child is borne unto us, and a young son is given unto us, and
his principality is upon his own shoulder, and his name shall be Esa. 9.
GOD; the father of the future world ( So is it in the hebrew.
or of eternity;) the Prince of peace, etc. In which words, we see that
Christ is called God. But if the Jew do cauil here and say, that El, or
Elohim, the hebrew words, which we An objection ansvvsred. Exodus 15. v. 11.
interpret God i this place, may some time be applied to a creature, (as in
Exodus once El signifies an Angel, and Elohim at othertymes, is applied to
Judges:) then mark and consider this discourse of David touching the Meisias,
to whom he says; Thou art beautiful in form above the children Psalm. 44.
of men; grace is spread in thie lips, and therefore has God blessed thee for
ever, etc. Thie seat o God, is for ever and ever; the rod (or scepter) of
thie kingedome, is the rod of direction: thou have loved justice and hated
iniquity; therefore o God, thie God has anointed thee with oil of joy
above thie partners. Here the Messiah is called God twice, by the same word
Elohim, as God his father is; and therefore as the word signifies true God in
the one, so must it also in the other.

But to remove all ground of this refuge The. 3. proof.
touching El, and Elohim, that are names of God, which may be communicated
some times and upon some occasions to Creatures: most apparent it is, that the
name IEHOVA, which is called, Tetagrammation, and which is so peculiar to God
Christ is called Iehoua.
alone, as never it may be communicated to other: this name (I say) which is
of such reverence among the Jews, as they day not pronounce it, but in place
thereof, do read Adonai, that signifies Lord: is every where almost in
scripture, attributed to Christ, See Esa. cap. 18. v. 7. and cap. 28. v. 5.
namely where the latin interpretour has translated, Lord: as for example,
in two diverse places of Jeremy, after the long description of the Messiah,
which before I have recited; he concludes thus: hoc est nomen quod vocabunt
eum, Iehoua iustus noster, this is the name which they shall Iere. 23. v. 7.
and ca. 33. v. 16.
call him OUR JUST IEHOVA, or as the Hebrew has word for word, Iehoua our
justice. And so do the ancient hebrew expositours Rab. Abba coment in Thren.
v. 16
confess upon these places of Jeremy, namly Rabbi Abba, who asks the
question what Messiah shall be called? and then he answers out of this last
place; he shall be called the eternal Iehoua. The like Misd. Thehilim in Psalm. 20
v. 1
does Misdrasche gathervpo^ the 20. Plasme, and Rab. Moses Hadarsan expounding
a place of the Prophet Sophonie cap. 3. v. Rab. Mos. Hadars. in Genesis ca. 41.
9. concludes thus: in this place Iehoua signifies nothing else but the
Messiah.

Whereby appears, that as well in scripture, as also in the opinion of old
hebrew expositours, the Messiah was to be true God and man. And I might allea
ge many other testimonies of ancient Rabbines, if it were not to long:
especially, if I would enter among that kind of expositours, whom they call
Cabalistes, (who Two sorts of Hebrew expositours, Cabalistes and Thalmudistes.
are more ancient and less brutishe then are the other sort, which are
termed Thalmudistes,) I should find many clear and manifest declarations
against the Jews doctrine and error of later times. And among other, (for
example only of Cabalistical expositions,) I refer the reader to the
discourse of Rabbi Hacadosch (which in Hebrew signifies the holy Rabbine, and
lived not long after Christ,) Iere. 23. v. 7.
upon the words of Jeremy before recited; in which, for that he finds the
Messiah to be called Iehoua, which word in hebrew is compounded of the three
letters Iod, and Vau, and He twice repeated: this doctor makes his discourse
by art Cabalist in this manner.

Even as (says he) the letter He in Iehoua, is compounded of two other
letters named Daleth and Vau, (as appears by their form:) so shall the
Messiah (that Rab. Hacadosch. in ca. 9. Esa.
is signified by this word Iehoua,) be made of two natures, the one divine, and
the other humane. And as in Iehoua, there is twice A Cabalistical discourse.
He, and consequentelie two Daleths and two vaus contained therein: so are there
two birthes, filiations, or chyldehodes in Messiah; the one, whereby he shall be
the son of God, and the other whereby he shall be the son of a virgin, which
Esaias calls Esa. 8.
the Prophetise. And as in Iehoua the letter He is twice putt, and yet both Hes
do make in effect but one letter: so in Messiah there shall be two distinct
natures, and yet shall they make but one Christ. Thus plays this Cabaliste
upon the letters of Iehoua (according to the manner of their divinity,) and
draws great mysteries (as ye see) from letters ends. In which kind of
reasoning, albeit we putt no ground or strength at all: yet is it sufficient
to show, that among the elder Jews it was a known and confessed doctrine,
that Christ should be both God and man, and have two natures conjoined
distinctelie in one person, which is the same that we Christians do affirm.

Nay, I will add further (and this is The. 4. proof.
greatly to be observed;) that the self same ancient Jews (as some also of
the later) do hold, and prove by scripture; that christ shall be (for always
they speak of the Messiah to come,) the very son of God, and verbum Dei
incarnatum, and the word of Christ called the son of God.
God incarnate, or made flesh. And for the first, that he shall be the son
of God; they prove it out of diverse places alleged by me before: as for
example; out of Genesis, where the latin text has; the scepter of Judah shall
not be taken away; until he come, Genesis 49. v. 10. Rab. David Kimhi in l.
radicum.
that is to be sent: the Hebrew has, until Silo come; which Silo; Rabbi Kimhi
proves by a long discourse, to signify so much, as silius eius, his son;
that is, the son of God. The same they prove by the place of Esaias, where the
Messiah is called, germen Iehoua, Esa. 4. v. 2
the seed or son of Iehoua. Which the Chaldaye Paraphrase turns, the
Messiah of Iehoua. They prove the same also, out of Tharg. in hunc loca.
diverse Psalms where Christ is called plailie the son of God; as where it is
said: he Psalm. 49.
shall say unto me, thou art my father, etc. I will put him, my eldest son,
more higher then all the kings of the earth. etc. Iehoua said unto me, thou
art my son, this day have I begotten thee. etc. Kiss the This is according
to the Hebrew text. Iere. 17.
son ye kings and judges of the earth, Psalm. 2.
and happy are all they, that place their hope in him. Which last words, can
no way be understood of the son of any man, for that it is written, cursed
is the man, that puts his trust in man. Wherefore Rabbi Jonathan, Rabbi
Nathan, Rabbi Selomoth, Aben Ezra, and others, do conclude by these and other
places which they allege, that the Messiah must be the very son of God.

And for the second point, they go The. 5. proof.
yet further, affirming, this son to be verbum patris, the word of God the
father. Which the forsaid Jonathan in his Chaldaye Paraphrase does express in
many translations: as for example; where Esaias Christ the word incarnate.
says, Israel shall be saved in Iehoua with eternal salvation, (which Iehoua
signifies Christ, as all men confess;) In the chaldaye paraphrase. Osee. 1.
Jonathan turns it thus: Israel shall be saved by Gods Esa. 45. v. 17.
word. So again, where God says by Osee; I vvil save the house of Judah by
Jehoua their God; (which is by Christ:) Ionatha^ tra^stateth it thus: I will
save Judah by the word of their God. In like manner; where David writes, Iehoua
said to my Lord, sit at my right Psalm: 11 (...)
hand. etc. Ionatha^ expresses it thus: Iehoua said unto his word, sit at my
right hand. So Rabbi Isaac Arama writing upon Genesis, Rab. Isaac. com. in cap.
47. Genesis Psalm. 106. v. 20. R. Simeon. Ben. Iohai. com. in cap. 10. Genesis Job.
19. v. 26.
expounds this verse of the psalm, he sent his word and healed them, etc.
to be meat of Messiah, that shall be Gods word. And Rabbi Simeon the chief of
all the Cabalistes, upon those words of Job, I shall see God in my flesh,
gatheretn, that the word of God shall take flesh in a woman's belly. So that
this doctrine was nothing strange among the ancient Rabines.

For further confirmation whereof also, (seeing the matter is of so great
importance,) consider what is recorded in a R. Simeon in Zohar.
treatise called Zoar, of high authority among the Jews, where Rabbi Simeon
that was last before alleged, cites a place out of old Rabbi Ibba, upon
these words in Deuteronomie, Iehoua our Lord, is one Iehoua. Which words the
said ancient Dcut. 6. v. 4.
Rabbi Ibba interprets thus: by the first Iehoua in this sentence, (being the
incommunicable name of God,) is signified The blessed Trinity proved by an
ancient Rabbine.
(says he) God the father, prince of all things. By the next words, ( our
Lord,) is signified God the son, that is fountain of all sciences. And by
the second Iehoua in the same sentence, is signified God the holy Ghost,
prooceeding of them both. To all which is there added the word ( One,) to
signify, that these three are indivisible. But this secret shall not be
reueiled until the coming of Messiah. Hitherto are the words of Rabbi Ibba,
reported in Zohar by Rabbi Simeo^; where also the said Rabbi Simeon
interprets these words of Esaias, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Sabbath, in
this manner. Esa. by repeating three times holy, (says he) does as much as if
he had said. Holy father, holy son, and holy spirit, which three holies,
do make but one only Lord God of Sabbath.

Finallte, I will conclude this controversy The. 6. proose.
between the later Jews and us, with the authority of learned Philo, who
lived in the very same time with Christ, and was sent Ambassador twice to
Rome Philo lib. 2. legate. Ruff. l. 1. hist. 1. 6. Euscb. in Chion.
in the behalf of his Nation in Alexandria; that is, first in the. 15. year of
Tyberius the Emperor, (which was three years before Christ's passion, and the
very same year wherein he was baptized by S. John:) and the second time about
eight years after, to wit, in the first of the reign of Caligula. This man,
that was the learned that ever wrote among the Jews, after the writers of
holy scripture ceased; made a special book of the banishment of his
countrymen, where he has this discourse insueing.

What time may be appointed (says Philo li. de exulibus.
he, for the return home of us baninshed Jews; it is hard to determine. For
by tradition we have, that we must expect the death of a high priest. But of
those, some die quickelie, and some live longer. But I am of opinion, that this
high priest shall be, the very word of God. Which shall be void of all sin,
both voluntary and involuntarie; whose father shall be God, and this word
shall be that fathers wisdom, by which all things in this world-were created.
His head shall be anointed with oil, and his kingedome shall florishe and shine
for ever. This wrote Philo at that time, when he little imagined, that the same
high priest, whom he so much expected, and the same word of God, whose kingdom
he describes, was now alredie come into the world. And this shall suffice for
our second consideration, what manner of Messiah the Jews did expect.

NOW IN THE third place comes THE. 3. Consideration. Whether Christ should
change the law of Moses. Gal. 3. and 4. Heb. 7.
it to be considered, what authority and power the Messiah should have at his
appearance upon earth, and whether he should change and abrogate the law of
Moyfes or no? wherein there is no less controversy between us and the later
Jews, then in the former point of his divinity. For we hold with S. Paul,
that the law of Moises was given unto the Jews but for a time, to entertain
that people withal, and by the outward signs 1. Cor. 10
and ceremonies which it had, (whereof the most part, or all, prefigured Christ
to come;) to be their schoolmaster and leader to the times of faith, wherein it
should be abrogated, and a far more perfect law set down by Christ in place
thereof. The law of Moses imperfect. Heb. 7.


This we prove first, for that the law of Moses was an imperfecte law,
bringing nothing to perfection, as S. Paul well notes. It was (as S. Peter
says) a burdensome law, which the Jews them selves Act. 15.
were not able to bear, for the multitudo of ceremonies therein contained. It
was a carnal and servile law, consisting most in the external. It was a law of
terror and fear, more then of love and liberty Gal. 3.
of spirit. It was a law (as I said before) of signs and figures for things
to come, and consequentelie to cease, when those things which it prefigured,
should come to be present. It was a law peculier and properfor Deuteronomy. 15.
the Jews alone, without respect of all the rest of the world; and the
exercise thereof was allowed only in the country Deuteronomy. 13. and 14. Leu. 5.
and 23. Exo. 23. Deuteronomy. 27.
of Jury; and that which is more, it was not pmitted, but i^ one place only
of that country, that is, in Jerusalem, whether every man was bound to
repair three times a year, to wit, at the Pasqua, at the Pe^tecoste, and at
the feast of Tabernacles; and in that place alone, to make their sacrifices,
and in no other country or place besides.

Now then reasons the learned Divine; Good reasones.
if this law of Moses were for the Jews and Jury only: how could it serve
for the time of the Messiah, who was to be king, as well of the Gentiles, as
of the Jews; and to rule all people in the world Psalm. 2. 21. 26 Esa. 2. 11.
19.
that should believe in him, under one law? If the exercise of this law, were
allowable only, and lauful in Hierusalemt how could it possibly be
fulfilled by Christians, that are dispersed over all the world? As for example;
how could they repai^re to Jerusalem thrice every year? how could every
woman that should dwell in England or India, repair to Jerusalem for her
purification after Leuit. 12. Exodus 13. Number. 8.
every childebirth, as by the law she was commanded? Most evident it is then,
which we said before, that this law was given but to idure for a time. And to
use S. Paul's own words, it was but, introductio melioris Heb. 7.
spci, an introduction to a better hope. It was but an entertainment of that
people, (which by their being among the Egyptians were prone to idolatry,)
until Christ should come and ordain a perfect law. That is, a law of spirit
and internal The new law of Christ and the perfectio^s thereof.
affection: a law of love and liberty: a law that should be common to all men,
serve for all countries, times, places, and persons: a law that should be
written in the bowels of our hearts: a law that should be tolerable, easy,
sweet, plain, light, brief, and factible, as well to the poor as to the
rich: a law (to conclude) that should consist in charity.

This signified Moses, when he said to his people, after he had delivered the
former law unto them: your Lord shall raise unto you a Prophet of your own
Nation, and Deuteronomy. 18.
from among your own brethren, as my self: him shall you hear. As though he
had said; you shall hear me but until he come, that must be a law gyuer as my
self; but yet of a more perfect law; and therefore more to be heard and obeyed.
And then he adds; who so ever shall refuse to hear the words of this
Prophet, I my self will revenge it, says our Lord God. Which words can not
be verified in any other Prophet after Moses until Christ; for that of those
Prophets the scripture says, there arose no Deuteronomy. 34.
Prophet like unto Moses in israel. Which is to be understood, that they had
no authority to be Lawmakers as Moses had, but were all bound to the
observation of that law only which Moses left, until Christ came, whom
Moses here calls a Prophet as him self, that is, a Lawmaker, and exhorts
all men to hear and obey him.

This yet is made more plain by the prophetie of Esaias, who says; out of Sion
Esa. 2.
shall come a law, and the word of God out of Jerusalem. Which can not be
understood of Moses law, that had been published A new law prophetied.
800. years before this was spoken, and that, from the mount Sinai, and not
from Sion: but Christ's law began from Sion and Jerusalem, and from thence was
spread into all the world. Which the same Esaias forsawe when talking of the
coming of Messiah, he says. In that day there Esa. 15.
shall be an Altar to God, in the midst of the la^d of Egypt. And the title of
our Lord at the end thereof, etc. and God shall be known to the Egytians at
that day, and they shall honor him with sacrifices and oblations. Which
words could not be verified i the old law of Moses, for that by that law the
Egyptia^s could have neither altar nor sacrifice; but at Christ's coming it
was fulfilled, when the Egyptians were made Christians, and enjoyed both the
Aulters and sacrifices that Christians do use.

The same thing was fortolde by God in Malachie, where he says to the Jews
and of the Iuishe sacrifices. I have no pleasure Malac. 1.
in you, neither will I receyne oblations at your hands. For that from the
vprising of the The reprobation of the old law with a promise of a new.
sun, unto the going down thereof, my name is great among the Gentiles, and
they do sacrifice unto me every vvher, and do offer unto my name a pure
oblation, says the Lord God of hosts. In which worlds we see first, a
reprobation of the Iuishe sacrifice, and consequently, of the law of Moses,
which depended principally of that sacrifice. Secondly we see, that among the
Gentiles, there should be a pure manner of sacrifice, more grateful unto God,
then the other was, and such, as might be performed in every place of the
world, and not be tied to one place only, as the Mosaical law and sacrifice
was.

And finally, I will conclude this whole matter, with the express words of
God him self, concerning the ceremonies and precepts of the old law. Dedreis
praecepta Ezec. 20.
non bona, and iudicia in quibus non viuent. I gave unto them precepts that
were not good, and judgments wherein they shall not live. That is, they were
not good to continue perpetually, nor shall they live in them for ever, but
until the time by me appointed; of which time, he determines more
particulerlie by Jeremy the Iere. 3.
prophet, in these words. Behold the days shall come, and I vvil make a new
Covenant or Testament with the house of Israel and Judah: A new Testament
promissed.
not according to that Covenant, which I made with your fathers, vvhe^n
brought them forth of the land of Egypt. Where you see, that at the coming of
Christ into this world, (for of him and his birth, he talks at large in all
this chapter;) there shall be a new Testament, containing a different law from
that of the old testament, which was given to the Jews at their going forth
of Egypt.

Thus much then hitherto has been The sum of that which has been said.
showed, that Christ in all ages was fortolde and promissed: that he should be
God: and that his authority should be to change the law of Moses, (that was
given but for a time,) and to establishe a new law, and Covenant, and a new
Testament of his own, that should endure and continue for ever.

AND ALBEIT these things be THE 4. Consideration. AL PARticulers fortolde of
Christ.
very wounderfull, and sufficient to establishe any man's belief in the world,
when he shall see them fulfilled, (which shall be the argument of my second
Section:) yet rests not the scripture here, but passes further, and
fortelleth every particular act, accident, and circumstance, that shall fall
out of importance about the Messiah in his coming, incarnation, birthe,
life, death, and resurrection. As for example; at what particular time and
season he should appear. Genesis 49. v 10. Dan. 9. v. 26. Math. 1. v. 26.
That he should be borne of a virgin. Esaias 7. v. 14. That the place of his
birth should be the Town of Bethlee^. Mic. 5. v. 1. Luc. 2. v. 21. Mat. 2. v.
16. Mat. 2.
That at his birth all the infantes round about Bethleem should be slain for
his sake. Ierem. 31. v. 15. That the kings of the east, should come and adore
him, and offer gold, and other gifts unto him. Psalm. 71. v. 10. That he should
be presented by his mother in the Temple of Jerusalem. Malach. Luc. 2.
3. v. 1. That he should flee into Egypt, and be recalled thence again. Osee
11. v. 2. Esa. 19. v. 1. That John Baptiste should go before him and cry in
the desert. Esa. 40. v. 3. Malach. 3. v. 1.

After this, that he should begin his own preaching with all humility,
quietness, Mat. 5.
and clemency of spirit. Esa. 42. v. 2. That he should do strange miracles
and heal all diseases. Esa. 29. v. 8. and 35. v. 5. and Mat. 4. and 8. Marc. 8.
61. v. 1. That he should die for the sins of all the world. Esa. 53. Dan.
26. That he should be betrayed by his own disciple. Mat. 27.
Psalm. 40. v. 10. and 54. v. 14. and 108. v. 8. That he should be sold for
thirty pieces of silver. Mat. 16. Mat. 27.
Zach. 11. v. 12. That with those thirty pieces there should be bought
afterward a field of Potshards Jerem. 30. That he should ride into Jerusalem
upon an ass before Mat, 21. 7.
his passion. Zacha. 9. v. 9. That the Jews should beat and buffet his face,
and defile the same with spitting upon him. Esa. 50. Mat. 26. 67.
v. 6. That they should whippe, and tear, and rent his body before they putt
him to death. Esa. 53. v. 2. Psalm. 37. v. 18. That they should putt him to
death among thieues Luc. 22.
and male factours. Esa. 53. v. 12. That they should give him vineager to
drink, divide Mat. 27.
his apparel, and cast lottes for his upper garment. Psalm. 68. v. 22. and 21.
v. 19. That Mat. 28.
he should rise again from death the third day. Psalm. 15. v. 19. Osee. 6. v.
3. That he should ascend to heaven, and sit at the right Luc. 24. Act. 7.
hand of God his father for ever. Psalm. 67. v. 19. and 109. v. 1.

All these particularites and a number more, were reueiled in scripture touching
the Messiah, some four thousand years, some two thousand, some a thousand, and
the last of all, above four hundred years before Christ was borne. Which if
we lay together, and do consider withal, how exactelie they were fulfilled
afterward in the person of Jesus, as in the next section shall be declared: if we
add also to this, that we have received these prophesies and predictions, from
a Nation that most of all other does hate us, and that the same are to be seen
and read in their Bibles, even word for word as they are in ours: if you
hold in memory also, what invincible proofs were alleged before in the
second chapter, for the infallible truth and certainty of those Hebrew
scriptures: you shall find, that hardly, any thing can be imagined for
manifestation of a truth, before it come to pass, which God has not observed
in forshewing the Messiah. THE. 5. Consideration.


AND ALL THESE considerations are touching the Jews. There remains some what
to be said of the Gentiles. Who MANIFEstation of Christ to the Gentiles.
albeit they were to receive their principal knowledge in this affair from the
Iuishe Nation, to whom the Messiah was first and principally promissed, and
from whom the Gentiles had to expecte both their Save our and his Apostles; as
also the scriptures for testimony and witness of them both; and finally all
their certain knowledge and sound understanding in the mysteries of Christ:
Yet had they also among them selves, some kind of notice and forwarning in
this matter, which being joined with that, which I have set down before of
the Jews, and examined at the light of Gods divine propheties before alleged:
it will make very much for confirmation of our Christian verity. And
therefore this last consideration, shall be of the foreknowledge of Gentiles in
this behalf.

For better understanding whereof; it is to be noted, that besides all knowledge
of the Messiah, that diverse Gentiles might have by the Hebrew scriptures,
which ( Chap. 1.
as I have showed before,) were in the Greek language, diverse ages before
Christ was borne: or by the instruction and conversation of Jews, with whom
many Pagans did live familiarlie: there remained Three peculiare vvayes
vvherby Gentyles mighth care of Cbrist.
three ways peculier to Gentiles, whereby they received some understanding and
forwarning of this great mystery. The first was, by tradition and writings of
their ancestors. The second, by propheties of their own. The third, by
admonishement of their Idols and Oracles, especially when the time of
Christ's appearance drew near.

And for the first way, it is evident, that The first way.
as the Jews received diverse things by succession from their forfathers; and
they again from Moses; and Moses from the Patriarchs, Jacob, Isaac, and
Abraham, (who was the first man, from whom that whole nation proceeded, and in
who^ they were distinguished from all other people in the world:) so had the
Gentiles and other Nations their succession also of doctrine and Tradition of
learning among Jews and Gentiles.
monume^tes, even from the beginning; albeit the lower they went, the more
corrupt they were, and more obscured in divine knowledge, by their exercise i^
idolat ie. So we know that the Romans had their learning from the Grecians;
and the Graecians from the Egyptians; the Egyptians, from the Chaldaeans, who
were the first people that received instruction in divine matters from Adam,
Methusalem, Noe, and others of those first and ancient fathers.

Now then it is to be considered, that Eusebius. in Chron.
by consent of writers, there were three famous men that lived together in
those ancient times; to wit; Abraham, (who Abraham. Job. Zoroastres.
descending from HEBER, was the father and beginner of the Jews or Hebrews:)
And with him, Job, and one Zoroastres, that were not of that lineage of Heber,
but as we call them for distinctio^s sake, either heathens or Gentiles, albeit
that difference was not then in ure. And of Job, we know by the testimony of
his book, that he was a most holy and virtuous man. Of Zoroastres, we know
only, that he was greatly learned, and left monume^tes thereof unto his
posterity.

This Zoroastres, living in Abraham's time, might by account of scripture, see
or speak with Noe. For that Abraham was borne above three skore years before
Noe disceassed. And Noe was borne above five hundredth years before Methusalem
dyed; which Methusalem, had lived two hundred and forty years with our first
father Adam, that had enjoyed conversation both with God and Angels. And thereby
(no doubt,) could tell many high and secret mysteries, especially touching
Christ, in whom all his hope for redemption of his posterity, did consist.
Which mysteries and hidden knowledge, it is not unlike, but that Abraham, Job,
Zoroastres, and others, who lived at that time with them, might recevue at the
third hand, by Noe and his children, I mean The Jews have a tradition, that
Abraham served Sem. 15. years in (...).
Sem, Cham, and Iaphet who had lived before the Fludde, and had seen
Methusalem, which Methusalem lived (as I said,) so many years with Adam.

Herehence it is, that in the writings of Zoroastres which are yet exstant,
See Clem. Alex. lib. 1. strom. and Orig. l. 6. con. Celsu. and Procl. l. 2. and
in Part. Plaltonis.
or recorded by other authors in his name, there are found very many plain
speches of the son of God, whom he calls, Secundam mentem, the second
mind. And much more is it to be seen in the writings of Hermes
Trismegistus, (who lived after in Egypt, and received his learning from this
Zoroastres;) that these Trisinegistus.
first heathen philosophers had manifest understanding of this second person in
Trinity, whom Hermes calls; the first begotten son of God; his only
son; his dear, eternal, immutable, and incorruptible son; who. Mercurius
Herm. in Paema^d c. L and deiceps.
Sacred name is inessable: those are his words. And after him again among the
Graecians, were Orphens, Hesiedus, and others, that uttered the like specches
of the son of God; as also did the Platonistes, whose Graecians.
words and sentences were to long to repeat in this place. But he that will
see them gathered together at large, let him read either Origin against
Celsus the heathen, or else S. Cyril in his first book against Julian th
Apostata. And this shall suffice for this first way, whereby the Gentiles had
understanding of Christ.

For the second thing which I mentioned, it is to be understood, that among
the Gentiles, there were certain prophetisses or women prophets, called
Sibyllae; The propheties touching Christ among the Gentiles.
which in the greek tongue (as Lactantius gathers,) may signify so much,
as either Councelours to God, or Reutilours of Gods Council. And these women
being endued (as it seems) with a certain spirit Lact. lib. 1. (...).
instit. cap. 6.
of prophetie, did utter from time to time, (though in such terms as most
Gentiles understood them not;) most wonderful particularities of Christ to
come, agrei^g (as it were) wholly, with the prophets of Israel, or rather
setting down Of the Sibylles.
many things in much more plain and evident speech, then did the other: the
one of them beginning her greek meerer in these very words: know thie God,
which is the son of God, etc. An other of the^ makes a whole discourse of
Christ in greek verses called Accrostichi; for that the begi^ning Lact. lib.
4. instit. ca. 6.
of every verse, is by some letter appointed in order, forth of some one
sentence, that runs through the whole. As for example; the sentence that
passed through the beginning of those verses which now we talk of, was this.
S. Augustine translateth all the verses. l. 18. de Ciuitat. Dei ca. 23.
Jesus, Christ, Son of God, Saueour, Cross. And there were so many verses
in the whole discourse, as there are letters in this sentence. The total
argument being, of the incarnation, life, death, glory, and judgment of the
son of God. And the last two verses of all the meeter, are these; He that has
been here described by our Accrossike verses; is an immortale Saueour, and a
King, that must suffer for our sins.

And for that these propheties of the Sibylls, are of marvelous importance to
confirm the verity of our Christian religion; and are alleged often for that
purpose, by The greek verses of the Sibylles, of what importance and
authority.
the most grave and learned fathers of our primative church: as for example;
by Justinius the martyr, in his apology for Christians; by Origin, against
Celsus; by Arnobius, and his scholar Lacta^tius, against Gentiles; by S.
Cyril, against Julian the apostata; by S. Augustine, in his City of God; by
Eusebius, and Constantine the Emperor, and others: I will say somewhat. in
this place, for the authority and credit of these verses, least any man
perhaps might imagine, (as some Gentiles in old time would seem to do:)
that they were devised or invented by Christians. And the most of my proofs,
shall be out of a learned See this Oration in Eusebius l. 4. ca. 32. de vita
Constantini. at the onde.
oration, written in latin by the foresaid Emperor, to a Council of Prelates
in his days; wherein he indeuoureth to show, the undoubted authority of these
Sibyll propheties, which he esteemed so much (after diligent search made for
their credit and sincerity;) as they seem to have been a great cause of his
constant zele and fervor in Christianity.

First then he shows, that these predictio^s of the Sibylles, could not be
devised or seigned by Christians, or made after The. I. proof sop credit of the
Sibylverses. Varro lib. de rebus divine. ad C. Caesarem. pont. max.
the time of Christ's natiuicie; for that Marcus varro, a wost learned Roman,
who lived almost a hundrethe years before Christ, makes mention at large of
these Sibylles, (who in number he says were ten,) and of their writings,
countries, and ages: as also of the writers or authors, that before his time,
had left memory of them. And both he and Fenestella, (an other heathe,) do
affirm, that the writings of these Sibilles, were gathered by the Romans from
al parts of the world, Fenest. c2. de 15. viria
(where they might be heard of,) and laid up with diligence, and great
reverence in the Capitole, under the charge and custody of the high priests
and other Officers, in such sort, as no man might see or read them, but only
certain Magistrates called the, Fistine, and much lesie might any man come to
falsify or corrupt them.

Secondly he shows, that Sibylla Erythraea, who made the former Acrostike
verses of Christ, restisicth of her self, that The. 2. proof.
she lived about 600. years after the fludde of Noe, and her countriman
Apollidorus Erythraeus and Varro do report, that she lived before the war
of Troie, and pro phetied to the Graecians that went to that war, that Troie
should be taken. Which was more then a thousand years before Lact. l. 1.
instit. cap. 6.
Christ was borne. Cicero also, that was slain more then fortye years before
Christ's nativity; translated into Latin, Cicero.
the former See Cicero of this Acrostike verses of Sibylla, l. 2. de
diuinatione.
Acrostike verses, as Constantine says, which translation was to be seen in
his works, when Constantine wrote this oration; so that by no means they
could be devised or brought in by Christians.

Thirdly he shows, that the same Cicero, The. 3. proof.
in diverse places of his works, besides the mention of these Acrostike verses,
insinuates also an other prophetie of Sibylla, touching a king that should
rise over all the world, wherewith him self and the Romans were greatly
troubled: and therefore in one place, after a long inuectiue against his enemy
Antonie, that would seem to give credit to that prophetie; or rather as Cicero
does urge against him, would have had the same fulfilled in Julius Caesar: he
concludes thus: let us deal with the prelates of our religion, to Cicero l:
2. de divine. paul post medium.
allege onle one thing rather out of the books of Sibylla, then a KING,
whom nether the Gods nor yet men, came suffer hereafter to be in Rome.

The like prophetie of Sibylla touching Cic. l. 1. ep. fam. ep. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5.
6.
a king, is insinuated by the same Cicero in his first book of Epistles to
Lentulus; to wit, that See lib. 2. oraculorum Sibyl.
when the Romans should restore a king in Egypt by force; the^ should ensue the
universal king, that should be Lord over Romans and all other. Which prophetie,
being much urged by Epist. 5.
Cato the Tribune, against the restoring of He was father to Cleopatra.
Ptolomaeus Auletes late king of Egypt, that for his evil government was
expulsed by his subjects: the matter was to be of such weight by all the Roman
Senate, (I mean the sequel of this prophetie:) that whereas otherwise for many
respects, they were greatly inclined to have restored the The scare which
the Romans had of the universal king, prophetied by Sibylla.
said Ptolomie: yet in regard of this, religion, (as they called it,) they
changed their minds. But what? could they alter by this, the determination of
God? No truly; for sone after, king Polomie perceiving the Senators minds to
be altered; fled secretly from Rome, to one Gabinius Dion. l. 39. hist.
that was Governor of Siria; and for five Millions of gold, that he promissed
him, he was by the forces of Gabinius restored; and so not long after, was
Christ borne, according to the meaning of the Sibyl prophetie.

Fowerthlie, the say de Emperor Constantine proves the authority of these
Sibylles verses, for that Augustus Caesar before Christ was borne, had such
regard The. 4. proof.
of them, that he laid them up, in more strait order then before, (according
as Suetonius a heathen, in his life reports,) under the Alter of Apollo, in
the hill Palatine; where no man might have the sight Suet. tranq. ca. 3. de vita
Augusti.
of them, but by special license; which license, Constantine proves, that
Virgil the Poet had, for that he was in high favor with Augustus. And
therefore in a certain Ecloge, or composition of verses, that he made in praise
of a young child named The propheties of Sibylla alleged by Virgile.
Saloninus, newly borne to Asinius. Pollio, Augustus great friend; or (as
other take it,) of Marcellus, a little boy, that was nephue to Augustus by his
Sister Octauia; or rather of them both, for adulation of Augustus: he applies
(I say) to one, or both of these young infantes, the whole prophetie, which he
had read in the verses of Sibilla, touching the birthe of Christ, and of the
peace, grace, and golden world, that should come with him. Upon which subject
he begins thus. Virgil. Eclog. 4. Christ's preordination.


Vltima Cumaei venit iam temporis aetas;
Magnus ab integro saeculorum nascitur ordo;
Iam redit and virgo; rediunt Saturnia regna.
That is; now is come the last age prophetied by Sibylla called, Cumaea: now
comes to be fulfilled the great ordinance and providence of God, appointed
from the beginning of the world; (these were Sibylles words:) now comes the
virgin; and the first golden days of Saturnus, shall return again.

Thus much translated Virgile out of Sibylla, touching the eternal
determination of God, for Christ's coming into this world; as also of his
mother the virgin; and of the infinite blessings that should appear with him.
Now ensues in the same Poet, what Sibylla had said for Christ's actual
nativity. Christ's birth.


Iam noua progeniescaelo dimittitur alto:
Chara Deum soboles. etc.
Now a new progeny or offspring, is sent down from heaven; the dearly beloved
issue or child of the Gods. And note here, that Sibilla said plainly; chara
Dei soboles, the dearly beloved son of God, and not of Gods; but that
Virgile would follow the style of his time. And thirdly, he sets down out
of Sibylla, the effect and cause of this son. of Gods nativity, in these
words. Christ's cause of coming.


Te duce, si qua manent, sceleris vestigia nostri;
Irrita perpetua, soluent formidine terras.
That is; thou being our leader, or Captain; the remnant of our sins,
shall be made void, or taken away, and shall deliver the world for ever, from
fear for the same. These are virgils words translated (as I said,) out of
Sibilla. And now consider you in reason, whether these propheties might be
applied (as Virgile applied them,) to those poor children in Rome or no, who
died soon after this flattery of Virgile, without doing good either to them
selves or to others? Albeit (perhaps) in this point, the Poet be to be
excused, in that he being not able to imagine, what the Sibyl should mean:
made his advantage thereof, in applying the same to the best pleasing of
Augustus.

These then are the proofs, which Censtantine uses for the credit and
authority of the Sibyl verses. And of Sibilla Erithraea in particular, that
made the Acrostik verses before mentioned, of Christ's death and passion; he
concludes in these words. These are the things which sell from Co^sta^tines
opiniou of the spirit of Sibyila Erythraea. orat. ad caetum Sanct. cap. 18.
heaven into the mind of this Virgin to surtell. For which cause, I am
induced to account her for blessed, whom our Saucour did voutel safe to choose
for a prophet, to denounce unto the world, his holy providence toward us.
And we may consider in this whole discourse of Constantine, for authority of
these verses. First, that he uses only the testimony of such Lactantius, that
was Master to his Lacta^tius.
son Crispus, and who most of any other author, recites and confirms the
said Sibyls verses: and Eusebius Caesariensis, that wrote the ecclesiastical
history, and See Eusebius. l. 4. cap. 32. de vita Co^stantini^ how this oration
was first written in latin and translated into greek.
records this oration of Constantine therein. And finally, we may consider
that Constantine was the first public Christian Emperor, and lived within
300. years after Christ; when the records of the Romans were yet whole to be
seen. He was a religious, wise, and grave Emperor; and therefore would never
have bestowed so much labor, to confirm such a thing, at such a time, to
such an audience; had not the matter been of singular importance. And thus much
of the second point touching prophets among Gentiles.

There remains only a word or two Of the confession of Oracles, co^cerninge
Christ's coming.
to be spoken of the third; which is, of the confession of devils and Oracles,
concerning Christ's coming; especially, when the time of his appearance drew
near, and that they began to forefeele his power and virtue. Wherein, as I
might allege diverse examples recorded by the Gentiles them selves: so for that
I have been somewhat long in the former points, and shall have occasion to
say more of this matter, in an other place hereafter: I will touch only here
two oracles of Apollo, concerning this matter. The one whereof; was to a priest
of his own, that demanded him of true religion, and of God; to whom he
answered thus in greek: o thou unhappie priest, why do thou ask me of
God, The first Oracle.
that is the father of all things; and of this most renoumed kings dear and
only son; and of the spirit that contains all etc. Alas, that Suidas in
Thulis. and Porphy. and Plutarch. de oracul.
spirit will enforce me shortelie, to leave this habitation and place of
oracles.

The other oracle, was to Augustus Gaesar, even about the very time, that
Christ was ready to appear in flesh. For where as The second Oracle.
the said Emperor now drawinge into age, would needs go to Delphos, and
Suidas i. vita August. Niceph. l. 1. bist. cap. 17.
there learn of Apollo, who should reign after him, and what should become of
things when he was dead: Apollo would not answer for a great space;
notwithstanding, Augustus had been very liberal, in making the great
sacrifice called Hecatombe. But in the end, when the Emperor began to iterate
his sacrifice again, and to be instant for an answer: Apollo, (as it were)
enforced, uttered these strange words unto him. An Hebrew child, that rules
over the blessed Gods, commands me to leave this habitation; and out of
hand to get me to hell. But yet do you'departe in silence from our Aulters.
Thus much was Apollo enforced to utter of his own misery, and of the coming
of the Ebrue boy that should putt him to banishment. But yet the deceptful
spirit, to hold still his credire, would not have the matter reueiled to many.
Whereupon, Augustus falling into a great musinge with him self, what this
answer might importe: returned to Rome and builded there an Altar in the
Capitole, with this latin inscription, (as Nicephorus affirms;) Ara
primogeniti Dei. Niceph. l. 1. hist. cap. 17.
The Altar of Gods first begotten son.

Thus then have I declared how that The conclusion of this first Sectio^.
the coming of Gods son into the world, was for told both to Jew and
Gentile, by all means that possibly in reason might be devised: that is; by
propheties, signs, figures, ceremonies, tradition, and by the confession of
devils them selves. Nor only, that his coming was fortold: but also; why, and
for what cause he was to come; that is; to be a Saueour of the world; to die
for sin; to ordeine a new law, and more perfect common wealth. How also he
was to come: to wit; in man's flesh; in likeness of sin; in poverty, and
humility. The time likewise of his appearance was foresignified, together with
the manner of his birth, life, actions, death, resurrection, and ascensio^. And
finally, nothing can be more desired for the fore knowledge of any one thing
to come; then was delivered and uttered co^cerni^g the Messiah, before Christ
or Christians were talked of in the world. Now the^ remains it to consider
and examine, The argument of the two sectio^s follovving.
whether these particularities, fortolde so long ago of the Messiah to come,
do agree in Jesus, whom we acknowledge for the true Messiah. And this shallbe
the subject and argument, of all the rest of our speech in this chapter.

How the former predictions were fulfilled in Jesus, at his being upon earth.
Sect. 2.
ALbeit in the points before recited, which are to be fulfilled in the Messiah
at his coming; we have some controversy and disagreeme^t with the Jew, as
has been showed: yet our principal contention in them all, is with the Gentile
and heathen, that believes no scriptures. Our controversy with Gentiles.
For that in diverse of the fornamed articles, the Jew stands with us, and
for us; and offers his life in defense thereof, as far forth, as if he were
a Christian. In so much, that the Ge^tile often times, is enforced to marvel,
when he sees a people, so extremely bent against an other, as the Jews are
against Christians; and yet to stand so peremptorily, in defense of those very
principles, which are the proper causes of their disagreement.

But hereunto the Jew makes answer; that his disagreement from us, is in the
application of those principles. For that in no wise he will allow, that they
were, or may be verified in Jesus. And herein he stands against us, much
more obstinately then does the Gentile. For that the Gentile, as soon as he
comes Our controversy with the Jews.
once to understand and believe the propheties of scripture; he makes no
doubt or difficulty in the application thereof; for that he sees the same
most euidentelie fulfilled in our Saueour. Which is the cause, that few or no
Gentiles since Christ's appearance, have come to be Jews, but that presentelie
also they passed over to be Christians.

But the Jew, by no means will be moved to yield, albeit he have neither
scripture, The obstinacy of the Jews.
nor reason, nor probability for his defense. Which among other things, is a
very great argument to prove, that Jesus was the true Messiah in deed, seeing
that among the marks of the true Messiah set down by Gods Prophets, this was
one; that he should be refused by the Iuishe Nation. Herehence are those words
of Psalm 113. Esa. 28.
the Holy Ghost so long before uttered. The stone which the The builders are
the Jews, who take upon the^ to build Gods house. Math. 21. Esa. 6. Deuteronomy. 28.
builders refused, is made the head stone of the corner: this is done by God,
and is maruailous in our eyes. Hence is that great complainte of Esaias, touching
the incredulity and obstinacy of this people, against their Messiah at his
coming; which Moses also long before Esaias, expressed most effectually.

It makes then, not a little for our cause, (gentle reader,) that the Iuishe
Nation is The Jews obstinacy against (...), (...) (...) for us.
so wilfully bent against us; and that they refused Christ so peremptorily,
at his being among them. For whom so ever that Nation should receive, and
acknowledge: it were a great argument by scripture, that he were not in deed
the true Messiah. But yet to demonstrate (...) world, how little show of reason
they have, in standing thus against their own salvation, and in refusing
Jesus, as they do: I will in as great brevity as I may, run over the chief
points that passed at his being upon earth, and thereby examine by the
testimonies of his greatest enemies, whether the forsaid propheties and all
other signs, which have been from the beginning, to fortell unto us the true
Meisias; were fulfilled in him and his actions or no.

And for that the matters are many and diverse, that will come herein to be The
division of this Section into sour Considerations.
handled: I will for order sake, reduce all to four considerations. Whereof the
first shall be, touching the time foreprophetied of the coming of Meisias, and
whether the same agreed with Christ's Nativity or no. The second shall be, of
diverse particulers that passed in Christ's incarnation, birth, circumcision,
and other accide^tes, until the time that he began to preach. The third
shall be, of his life, conversation, miracles, and doctrine. The fowerth and
last, of his Passion, death, resurrection, and Ascensio^. In all which (as I
said before,) I will use no one Author or testimony The testimonies here
used.
of our own side, for proving any thing that is in controversy between us:
but all shall pass by trial, either of their own scriptures; or of manifest
force and consequence of reason; or else by express record of our professed
enemies.

FOR THE first then, concerning the time, which is the principal and head of
THE 1. Consideration. THE time appointed
all the rest; it is to be noted, that by consent of all writers both Pagan,
Iuishe, and Christian; Jesus, (whom we believe and confess to be true Christ,)
was borne the 25. day of December, in the end of the 41. year of the
Emperor Augustus reign, which was 15. years before his reign ended. Also in
the beginning of the 33. year of Herodes reign in Jury, which was 4. years
and more before his death. And from the beginning of the world, as See Eusebius. i
chro.
some account; 5199. And as other; 4089. for that in this point between the
Hebrews and Graecians, there is a difference of some little more then a hundredth
years, concerning their reconinge.

The state of the world at Jesus Nativity, The general state of the world at
Christ's coming.
was this. The three Monarchies of the Assyrians, Persians, and Graecia^s, were
past over, and ended: and the Romans were entered into the fowerth, that was
greater then any of the rest, according to the prophetie of Daniel, 500 years
before. Dan. 2.
Octauius Caesar, surnamed Augustus, after five civil wars by him self waged,
and after infinite broils and bloodshed in the Suetom tranq. and Aurel. victor.
and alii, in vita Augusti.
world, reigned peaceably alone, for many years together: and in toke^ of an
universal peace over all the earth: he caused the temple gates of IANVS to be
shutt, according to the custom of the Romans in such cases; albeit this had
happened but twice before, from the buylding of Rome unto that time. And the
very same day that Christ was borne in Jury, Augustus commanded in Rome (
Oros. l. 6. hist. ca. 22.
as afterward was observed,) that no man should call him LORD, thereby to
signify the free liberty, rest, joy and security, wherein al me^ were, after
so long miseries, which by continual wars the world had suffered.

By this we gather first, that this time of Jesus birth, agreed exactelie with
the The. 1. proof. The Roma Monarchy
prophetie so long before set down in Daniel, (who lived in the first
Monarchy;) that after his time, there should be three Monarchies more, and the
last, biggest Dan. 2. v. 31. 34. 44.
of all; at whose appearinge, the Messiah should come, and build up Gods
kingdom throughout all the world.

Secondly, we see that fulfilled, which Esaias above a hundredth years before
Daniel, The. 2. proof. The peace of all the world. Esa. 9. v. 6. 7 and cap.
32. v. 18.
fortold; that at the coming of Christ; people should sit in the beauty in
peace. And again; there shall be no end of peace. And yet further: he shall be
Prince of peace. And king David, long before him again; in his days there
shall rise justice, and abundance of peace. Which thing, though especially it
be to be understood, of the internal peace Psalm. 71.
and tranquillity of our minds and souls: yet, considering that external
peace also was necessary for a time, for the quiet plantinge and publishinge
of Christ's Gospel: and saying that the same wa^s brought to pass most
miraculouslie upon the sudden, when in reason men least might expect the same,
for the infinite wars wherein the world a little before had been; and by
reason of the Roman Monarchy so freshelie established; (which in their
begininges are wont to be troublesome:) this peace (I say,) can not be, but, a
great argument, that this was the proper time of the Messiah his coming. And
this, for the state of the world in general.

But now for the particular state of The. 3. proof. The scepter of Judah.
Jury, at Jesus nativity; thus it was, according as Josephus the Jew, (who
was borne within five years after Christ his passion,) describes the same.
One Herod a stranger, whose father called His gra^dfather was a Sextane in
Apollos temple, and his father was brought up among thieues in Idumaea.
Eusebius. l. 1. cap. 6. ex Aphricano. Joseph. l. 14 antiq. ca. 2.
Antipater, came out of Idumaea, was risen to acquaintance and favor with the
Romans, partly by his said fathers means, who was (as Josephus words are,)
a well monicd man, industrious, and sactious; and partly also by his own
diligence and ambition; being of himself, both witty, beautiful, and of
excellent rare qualities. By which co^mendatio^s, he came at length to marry
the daughter of Hyrcanus king of Jury, that was descended liniallie of the
house of David, and tribe of Judah. And by this marriage, obtained of his
father-in-law to be Governor of the province of Galilie, under him. But
Hyrcanus afterward, fallinge into the hands of the Parthyians, that carried
him into parthia: The first rising of Herod Ascolonita.
Herod ran away to Rome, and there, by the help and special favor of
Antonie, that ruled in company together with Octauius: he obtained to be
created king of Jury, without all title or interest i^ the world. For that
not only his said fatherinlaw Hyrcanus was yet a live in Parthia; but also his
younger brother Aristobulus, and three of his sons named Antigonus, Alexander,
and Aristobulus, and diverse other of the blood Royal, in Jury.

Herodthen, having procured by these means to be king of Jury; procured
Joseph. l. 15 antiq. c. 9. 11.
first to have into his hands the forsaid king Hyrcanus, and so put him to
death; as also he brought to the same end his younger brother Aristobulus,
together The most horrible murders, committed by Herod.
with all his three sons. He putt to death also, his own wife Mariamnes that
was king Hyreanus daughter, as also. Alexandra her mother; And soon after,
two of his own sons by the said Mariamnes, for that they were of the blood
Royal of Judah. And a little after that again, he put to death his third son
named Lib. 17. ca. 10.
Antipater. He caused to be slain at one time 40. of the chiefest noble men of
the tribe of Judah. And, as Philo the Jew Lib. 15. c. 1.
writes, (that lived at the same time with him,) he putt to death all the
Sanhedrin, that is, the seventy and two Senators Philo li. de tempore.
of the tribe of Judah, that ruled the people. He killed the chief of the sect
of Pharisees. He burned the genealogies of all the kings and princes, of the
house of Judah; and caused one Nicolaus Damascenus Joseph. l. 14 cap. 2.
an Historiographer that was his servant, to draw out apetidegree for him and
his line, as though he had descended A pattern of an ambitio^s Tyra^t.
from the ancient kings of Judah. He translated the high priesthode and sold
it to strangers. And finally he so rased, dispersed, and mangled the house of
Judah; as no one jot of government, dignity, or principallitie remained
therein. And when he had done all this: then was Jesus, of the same house and
line, borne in Bethlee^, the proper City of David, which David was the
founder and first author of Regalitie in Judah.

Now then, consider the prophetie of Jacob concerning the particular time of
The prophetie of Jacob, touching the scepter of Judah. Genesis 49.
Christ's appeara^ce, almost two thousand years before these things fell out.
Come hither my children (said he,) that I may tell you the things which are
to happen in the later days. etc. The scepter shall not be taken from Judah,
until he come, who is to be sent; and he shall be the expectation of Nations.
Which prophetie, that it was fulfilled now at Christ's Nativity, when Herod
had extinguished all government in Judah; no man can deny, that will
acknowledge the things set down before, which are recorded by writers both
of that time, and of the Iuishe Nation and religion. And that it never was
fulfilled from David's days, That the scepter never failed in Judah, until
Herod came. 1. Reg. 16
(who began the government to the house of Judah,) until this time: appears
plainly by all histories and records, both Divine and Profane. For that from
David, (who was the first king,) unto Zedechias, that was the last, and died
in the Captivity of Babylon: the Scripture shows how all kings descended of
the 4. Reg. 29 Iere. 37.
house of Judah. And during the time of the captivity in Babylon, (which was 70
years;) the Jews were always permitted to choose to them selves a governor
of the house of Judah, whom they Thalm. in tract. Sanhed. cap. Dinei Ma^monoth.
Rab. Moses Egyp. in praefat. Maimonim Esd. l. 1. c. 1. 2. 3.
called RESCHGALVTA. And after their delivery from Babylon, Zorobabel was
their Captain of the same tribe; and so others after him, until ye come to
the Machabies, who were both Captains and priests; for that they were by the
mothers side, of the tribe of Judah, and by the fathers side, of the tribe of
Leui, as Rabbi kimhi holds. And from these men down to Match. l. 1. c. 2. 3.
Rab. Kimhi com. in Agg. Joseph. l. 13 and 14. anti.
Hyrcanus and Aristobulus, whom Herod slew; there continued still the same line,
as Josephus declares. So that by this prophetie it is evident, that Jesus was
borne at the propper time appointed for the Messiah, when there was neither
king, nor Captain, nor high priest, nor Councelour, nor any one governor
of the house and tribe of Judah, left in Jury.

An other prophetie there is, no less evident then the former, wherein it is
affirmed, The. 4. proof. The destruction of the second Temple.
that the Messiah shall come before the second Temple of Jerusalem, (that was
builded by Zorobabel after the Jews return from their captivity in Babylon,)
should be destroyed by the Romans. For 3. Reg. 6. and 7. 2. Para. 3. Eusebius. in
Chron. Clem. l. 1. strom. 4. Reg 25 1. Esd. 1. 3. 4.
better understanding whereof, it is to be noted, that the Temple of Jerusalem
was builded twice: first by Solomon, which lasted about 442. years; and then
it was burned and destroyed by Nabuchodonosor, king of Babylon. Wherefore
about seue^tie years after, it was builded again, by Zorobabel, who reduced
the Jews from Babylon, and so it continued, until it was destroyed the second
time by Titus son to Ve: pasian the Roman Emperor, about forty years after
Christ's Ascension. At what time, it had lasted from Zorobabel, almost six
hundred years: And from Solomon, above a thousand.

And as in time of the second building, the people of Israel were poor, and
much 1. Esd. 5. and 6. The building of the second Temple, less gorgeous the^
the first
afflicted in respect of their late long banishement, (though much assisted
to this work by the liberality and munifice^cie of Darius king of Babylon:)
so was the building and workman hippe of this second temple, nothing
comparable, for excellency, to the first building of Salomo^, when the Jews
were in the flower of their glory and riches. This testifies Aggaeus 1. Esd.
5.
the Prophet, who was one of the builders; and he testified the same to
Zorobabel and to the rest of those that were with him, by Gods own
appointement, in these words. The word of God was made Agg. 2. v. 4
to Aggeus the Prophet. Tell Zorobabel the son of Salathiel Captain of Juda,
and Jesus the son of Iosedec high priest, and the rest of the people. Who
is there lest of you, that savv this temple in his first glory, (before our
transinigration,) and what say you to this, which Now we see? is it not in
our eyes, as though it were not at all? that is, is it not as though it were a
thing of nothing, in comparison of the former temple, which Solomon builded?

Thus said Aggaeus by Gods commission, of the material building of this second
Temple. And yet, to comfort the Jews withal, he was commanded presentelie in
the sane chapter to say thus. Comfort thie self Zorobabel, and comfort thie
self Jesus son of Iosedec high priest, and comfort your selves all ye Agga. 2.
people of the earth, says the Lord God of hosts: do ye the things which I
couenanted with you, when ye came forth of the land of Egypt, and fear not,
for that my spirit shall be among you. Thus says the Lord of hosts; This he
says for that the 3. Monarchies issued, vvherin there was continual war
and bloodshed.
a little time yet remains, when I will move both heaven and earth, both sea
and land, with all countries in the world. And then shall come the DESIRED
OF ALL NATIONS; and I will fill this house (or temple) with glory, says
the Lord of hosts. Silver is mine, and gold is mine, says the Lord of
hosts: great shall be the glory of this ast house or temple, more then of the
first, says the Lord God of hosts. Hitherto are the words of God by
Aggaeus, and the often repetition, of the Lord God of hosts, is to signify
the certainty and great weight of the matter promissed.

Now consider then, that where as God had said immediately before, that this
second temple was nothing in respect of the first, for pomp and riches of the
material building, (which the old men in the book of Esdras did testify, by
their weeping, 1. Esd. 3.
when then they saw this second, and remembered the first:) yet now God says
that, Gold and seluer is his own, (as though he made no account of the
abundance thereof in the former temple, or of the want of the same, in this:)
and that not withstanding the poverty of this second building; yet, shall it
be filled and replenished with glory, and that in such sort, as it shall
far pass in glory, the former; and that shall be, (as both here is
expressed, and other where most plainly,) by the coming of This was
fulfilled when Christ was personally, and taught in the Temple. Luc. 1. 2.
19 Mat. 21. 26. etc.
Christ into the second temple, which shall be a greater dignity, then any
dignity what soever was found in the first building of Salomons temple.

Concerning which point, it is to be considered, that the learned Jews,
besides Prerogatives of the first Temple. Rab. Samuel tract. Sanhed. in Thalm.
Hierosol. Rab. Aba in l. dicru.
the material difference of building before mentioned, do note five things of
great importance to have been wanting in the second temple, which were in the
first. To wit; the fire sent from heaven to burn the Holocaustes: The glory
of God (or Angels) appearing among the images of Cherubins, that stood in the
temple: The manifest inspiration of Gods spirit Vrim and Thumim. All which
great wantes Malac. 3.
temple was in buildinge, confirms yet more expresselie in these words.
Behold I send my This Christ interpreted of S. John Baptiste. Math. 11.
Angel, and he shall prepare the way before my face. And straight after, shall
come to his temple, the Lord or ruler whom you seek, and the MESSENGER OF THE
TESTAMENT, whom you desire. Behold (...) comes comes says the Lord of
hosles, and who ca imagine the day of his coming? or who can stand or abide
te see him? for he shall be as a purging fire. etc.

By all which is made evident, that Christ must come and appear in the second
temple, before it be destroyed; (as Jesus did,) and therefore he can not be new
to come, seeing the laid temple was destroyed above 1500. year past by the
Romas, as has been said. Which destruction and final desolation, was
prophetied by Daniel to ensue soon after the birth and death of Christ, in
these words. After sixty and two heb (...), Dan. 9. The second Temple to be
destroyed presently after Christ's Passion.
Christ shall be slain; And a people with their Captain to come, shall
destroy the City, and the Sanctuary, and the end thereof shall be vastitie or
spoil. And after the war ended, there shall ensue the appointed desolation.
Which prophetit to have fallen out lytterallie, about forty years after Jesus
was put to death, when Jerusalem was destroyed, and the temple overthrown by
Titus; the story of Josephus the learned Jew, who was a Captain against
Titus in that Joseph de bello ludiaco lib. 6.
war; does manifestly and at large declare.

AND for that we have made mention here, of Daniels prpohetie, concerning The.
5. proof. The 72. Hebdomades.
the particular time of Christ's coming, and of his death; which confirms the
purpose we treat so perspicuouslie, as nothing can be said more evident: it
shall not be amiss, to examine the same before we pass any further. For
better conceyuinge whereof, it is to be understood, that this greek word
Hebdomada, (signifying seven,) does sometime importe a week of seven days,
according to our common use; and then it is called in scripture Hebdomada Tvvoe
kinds of weeks.
dierum, a week of days; as Dan. 10. v. 2. where Daniel says, that he did
mourn three weeks of days. But at other times, it signifies the space of
seue years, and is called in Scripture Hebdomada annorum, a week of years.
As in Leuiticus where it is said: Thou shall number Leui. 25. vide etiam cap. 23
and alibi passim
to theoseuen weeks of years, that is, seven times seven, which make forty
and Nine years.

Now then it is certain, that Daniel in the prophetie before alleged, where
he assigns 62. weeks to the time of Christ's death, could not mean weeks
of days; for that he appoints only seven weeks, to the rebuilding of the
city of Jerusalem; of the Temple; and of the walls about; which were not
ended but in forty and nine years after, as may be gathered Lib. 1. and 2.
by the books of Esdras: which 49. weeks, do make just seven weeks of
years. And therefore it is certain, that such Hebdomades of years are mea^t
here by Daniel, in all the prophetie.

First then, when the Angel came to comfort him, and to open unto him secrets
for the time to come: he said these words. Mark my speech and understand the
vision. The Dan. 9. v. 23.
seventy hebdomades (or weeks) are shortened (or hastened) upon thy people,
and upon thie holy City; to the end all preuarication and sin may take an
end, and iniquity be blotted out, and everlasting justice be brought in place
thereof; to the end that visions and propheties may be fulfilled, and the HOLY
OF HOLIES, may be anointed. In which words, it seems that Ierem. 25. and 29.
the Angel did allude by naming seventy, unto the seue^tie years of
captivity, prophetied by Jeremy; after which ended, the Why (...) Angel
names 70. Hebdomades in this place.
people should be delivered from their temporal bondage in Babylon. And
therefore Daniel now being i^ that place, and perceauing the same time to be
expired; prayed to God with great instance, to fulfill his promise made by
Jeremy. Whereto the Angel answered, that it should be done. And as after the
expiration of seventy years, God was now to deliver them, from the bodily
captivity of Babylon: so was he also after seventy hebdomades more, to
deliver them from bondage of sin and preuarication, and that by the anointed
MESSIAH which is indeed the Holy of all Holies.

This (I say) may be the reason of naming seventy hebdomades, thereby to allude
to the number of the seventy years of that Babylonical servitude. For that
immediately after the Angel appoints the whole exact number, to be three
skore and nine hebdomades; that is, seven to the building of the city and
temple, and three skore and two, from that, to the death of Dan. 9. v. (...) 5.
Christ, in these words. Know thou and mark, that from the end of this
speech, to the time that Jerusalem shall be builded, and unto The exact number of
weeks, from the building of the second Temple to the death of Christ. 62
Christ the Captain, there shall be hebdomades seven, and Hebdomades sixty
two; and the streets and wales (of Jerusalem) shall be builded again though
with much difficulty of the times: and after sixty and two Hebdomades,
Christ shall be slain. And the people that shall deny him, shall not be his. etc.
And then unto consummation and end, shall persevere desolation.

Now then if we putt these years together, which are here mentioned by Daniel:
that is, first the seven Hebdomades, which make forty and nine years; and
then the three skore and two from the restauratio^ of Jerusalem, which make
four hundred thirty and four more: we shall find the whole number to be The
account of Daniels weeks.
483. years. Which being begone from the first year of Cyrus, as some will,
(for that he first determined the Jews reduction:) or from the second year of
Darius, as other will, (for that he confirmed and putt the same in execution:)
or from the twe^teth year of the said Darius, for that then, he made a new
edicte in the favor of Nehemias, and sent him into Jury: every way they
will end in the reign of Herod and of Augustus, under whom Christ was borne;
or in the reign of Tyberius Caesar, under whom he suffered. And by no
interpretation in the world, can it be avoided, but that this time appointed by
Daniel, is now out, above a thousand and five hundred years past, while yet
the temple stood, and was not putt to desolation. And therefore of necessity
Christ must be come about that time, and never more hereafter to be looked for.

THE traditions and observations of the old Jews the^ selves, do marvelously
The. 6. proof. The traditions of Rabines.
confirm this belief of ours, for that they all did run to this one point,
that about the time of Augustus his reign, (wherein Jesus was borne,) the
Messiah should appear. It is often repeated in the Thalmud; that one Elias
left this tradition, that the world should endure six thousand Thalm. tract.
Sa^dr. cap helec. and alibi.
years; two thousand before the law of Moses; two thousand under the same
law; and two thousand after that, under the Messiah. Which last two thousand
years, by all computation, could not begin much from the birth of Jesus. And
the Rabbines a great while gone, complained in their Talmud, that there Thalm.
in tract. Auodazara.
seemed to them in those days, seven hundred and fourtiene years past, since
Christ by the scriptures, should have appeared; and therefore they do marvel
why God so long deferreth the same.

Another observation they have upon the words of Esaias; paruulus natus est
nobis, Esa. 9. v. 6. An observation of the Cabalistes.
a little child is borne unto us. In which words, for that they find the
Ebrue letter, MEM, to be shutt in the midst of a word; (which is strange in
that tongue, for that MEM is wont to be open in the midst of words, and
shutt only in the end:) they gather many secrets. And among other, that
saying MEM signifies six hundred years; so long it should be Th. lm. in lib
Sabbath. and in tract Sanhedrin.
after Esaias, until the time of Christ. Which account of theirs, falls out
so just: that if you recone the years from Achaz king of Judah, in whose time
Esaias spoke these words, until the time of king Esa. 7.
Herod, under whom Christ was borne: you shall perceive the number to fail
in Mat. 2.
little or nothing.

A much like observation has Rabbi Moses the son of Maimon, (whom the The
observation of Rab. Moses.
Jews do hold in extreme great reverence, calling him the doctor of
justice,) in his epistle to his countrymen of Africa, concerning the time of
Christ's appearance. Rab. Mos. Ben. Maimon. ep. ad Iudaeos African.
Which he thinks to be past, according to the scriptures, above a thousand
years, in his days: (he lived about the year of Christ. 1140:) but that God
deferreth his manifestation for their sins. To which purpose also
apperteineth the Rab. Iosue. ben. leui. in Thal. tract. Sanhed. c. helec.
tradition of one Elias, (as Rabbi Iosue reports it i^ the Thalmud,) that the
Messiah was to be borne in deed, (according to the scriptures,) before the
destruction of the second temple; for that Esaias says of the Synagoge; before
she was with child, Esa. 66. v. 7.
she brought forth; and before the grief of travail came, she was delivered
of a man child. That is, (says he,) before the Synagogue was afflicted and
putt to desolation, by Christ hydeth him self in the sea.
the Romans; she brought forth the Messiah. But yet (says he) this Messiah
for our sinues, does hyde him self for a time, in the sea and other deserte
places, until we be worthy of his coming.

To the like effect, is the observation of The observation of the Talmud. Talm.
tract. Sanhed. c. helec. Rab. Iohanan. Rab. Judah Rab. Nehorai. etc.
the Talmud it self, and of diverse Rabbines therein, concerning the wicked
manners of men that should be at Christ's appearance upon earth, of whom they
do pronounce these words. The wise men in Israel, shall be extinguished: the
learning of our Scribes and Pharisees shall be putrisied; the scholles of
Divinity shall be stevves at that time. Which thig Josephus, that lived in the
same age with Christ, affirms to be fulfilled in the time of Herod; in so
much that if the Romans Joseph. l. 20 antiq. cap. 6 and 8. and lib. 6. de bello
Iud. 15. and lib. 7. c. 9.
had not destroyed them; without doubt (says he) either the earth would have
opened and swallowed the^ down, or else fire from heaven would have consumed
the^.

All then runs to this end, both by scripture, tradition, observation, and
instincte The. 7. proof Forebodi^g.
of God him self: that about Herodes time, the true Messiah should be borne.
And hereof came that common Tacit. l. 21. Sueton. in vita Vesp. Joseph. de
bello Iudai. I. 7. c. 12.
and public fame, that is recorded by Tacitus, Suetonius, and Josephus,
(which was also written in open sight, upon the chiefest Tower of the City of
Jerusalem;) that out of Jury should rise, a general Lord of the universal
world. Which prophetie as the Romans either contemned, or turned an other
way, applying the same afterward to Vespasian: so the Jews understood it of
their Messiah, and Herod feared the matter greatly, and for that, was so
watchefull to exstinguishe the line of Dauide as has been showed.

Hereof also it did proceed, that the The. 8. proof. The general expectation
of the people.
Magi, or wise men of the East, attended so diligentelie about that time, to
expect the Star that Balaam had promissed at the coming of this king.
Herehence also it was, that the whole people of Jury, remained so attent at
this time, more then ever before or sense, in expecting the Messiah. Where upon
as soon as ever they heard of Ihon Baptist in the desert; they ran unto him,
askinge if he were Ioh. 1.
Christ? As afterward also they flocked to Jesus, demau^ding, art thou he
which is to come; or do we expect an other? Which words importe, the great
expectation wherein that people remained in those days. Nether wanted that
expectation in the chief governors the^ selves; as may appear, by that speech
of theirs to Jesus; how long Ioh. 10.
vvilt thou kill us (with this expectation?) if thou he Christ; tell us
plainly.

Of which fame, expectation, and greedy Diverse false Christ's did rise in
luric.
desire of the people, diverse deceyuers (...) occasion to call them selves the
Messiah, in those days; and the people followed them presentelie; which thing
had not happened in any age before. And among other, there is named one Judas
Gaulonites, or Galilaeus (as S. Luke calls Act. 5. Joseph. l. 17 c. 8. and l.
18. c. 1. and 2. and l. 20. c. 2. and 6.
him;) and an other Judas, the son of Ezeehias, both of them very wicked and
lice^tious fellows. One also called Ato^ges, a Shepherd; and two other named
Theudas and Egyptius, most notable deceyuers. And above all, there was one,
Barcozbam, who (as the Talmud says) for thirty years together, was received
for the Messiah, Talm. tract Sanh. cap. helec. Rab. Mos. Ben. Maim. in
Sententiis.
by the Rabbines them selves, until at last they slew him, for that he was not
able to deliver them from the Romans. Which facility in the people, when
Herod saw: he caused Nicolaus Damascenus (as I noted before,) to devise a
petigree Nicol Damascenus. Joseph. 1 14 antiq. c. 2.
for him from the ancient kings of Judah: And so he, as well as other, took
upon him, to be the Messiah, whom-diuers carnal Iowes, that expected the
Messiah to be a magnificent king, (as Herod was,) would seem to believe, and
diuulgate abroad; and thereof in the Gospel, they are thought to have been
called, Herodiani; that is, Herodians Mat. 22. Marc. 3. and 12.
or followers of Herod, who came to tempt Christ, with the scribes and
pharisees.

Wherefore to conclude at length, this weighty point of the time of Christ's
The co^clusio^ of this first consideration of the ryme.
appearing; seeing that about the birth of Jesus under Herodes reign, there
co^curred so many signs and arguments together; as the general peace of the
Roman Empire; the defection of the line and regiment of Judah; the open decay
of the second temple; the just calculation of Daniels hebdomades; the
attestation of Oracles; the observation of Rabbines; the public fame and
expectation of all the Jews; together with the palpable experience of more
then fiftien hundredth years past, since Jesus appeared, wherein we see the
Iuishe people, in vain to expect an other Messiah; they being dispersed over
all the world, without temple, law, sacrifice, Prophet, or promise, for their
redemption; (which never happened to them, until after Jesus death, for that
in all other their banishementes, captiuities, and afflictions, they had some
prophetie, consolation, or promise, for their deliueric:) These things all (I
say) considered, and putt together: we may most undoubtedly and assuredly
conclu le, that Jesus was borne at the just time appointed, and fortolde by
Gods holy spirit; and consequentelie, that he only was the holy true
Messiah, and Saueour of the world, which vet shall better appear by
examination of other things, that are to follow.

IN THE SECOND consideration there THE. 2. Consideration. Christ his Birthe.
come to be weighed, these points follo ving; the Line and stock of Jesus; his
manner of conception; the place of his Birth; his Circumcision and name; his
adoration by the Magi; his presentation in the temple; and his flight to Egypt.

FOR his Line and stock; there was never 1. Jesus Lym.
man denied or doubted, but that Jesus was directetie of the tribe of Judah, and
descended lineallie by his mother, of the peculiar ho use of David, ( 3. Reg.
7. Psalm. 30. Esa. 11.
according as it was fortolde that the Messiah should do;) which is proved
most clearlie, by the two genealogies and petidegrees, set down Mat. 1. Luc.
3.
by S. Matthew and S. Luke, of the blessed virgins whole descent, from David to
Iosephe, that was of the same tribe and kindred with her. And it is confirmed by
their repairinge to Bethleem; (when proclamation was made by Of this matter,
vvri teth Josephus l. 18. c. 1. antiq.
Cyrenius in Augustus name, that every person should repair to the head
City of their tribe and family, to be cessed for their tribute;) seeing that
Bethleem was the proper City only of them, that were of the house and line
of David; for that king David 1. Reg. 17 2. Reg. 2.
was borne therein. And finally, it is evident by that the Scribes and
Pharasies, who obrected matters of much less importance against Jesus then
this, (as that he was a Carpenters son, thereby to debase him for his
poverty;) yet never objected Mat. 13. Luc. 6.
they against him, that he was not of the house of David. Which they would
never have omitted, if they might have done it with any color; for that it
would have weyed more against him, then all the rest, and would have in one
word dispatched the whole controversy. Nay, I add further, that it remains
registered in the Jews Thalmud it self, that Jesus of Thal. tract. Se^h. c.
Nigmar had.
Nazareth Crucified, was of the blood Royal from Zorobabel, of the house of
David.

FOR the manner of his conception, and 2. The manner of his conception. Luc. 1.
of the message or annunciation made unto his mother, by the Angel; albeit it
depend principally, upon the relation and credit of the virgin her self, who
only was privy there unto; and upon the testimony of Iosephe, to whom it was
reueiled by the same Angel afterward: yet, he^ that Mat. 1.
shall consider the circumstances of the thing it self: as first, the
simplicity of both the reporters. Then, how that it is not likely, that
Iosephe being just, (as he is described,) would have co^cealed a thing so much
against him self, and against the law, if he had not some way been assured of
the ttuth. Thirdly, the innocent age of the blessed virgin, (who was not past
14. years old at that time, as S. Augustine Augustine. Lib. 4. de Trin. c. 5.
and l. cont. Iudzos c. 5. Chrysostom. in cap. 1. Luc.
and other ancient fathers do prove by manifest arguments:) All these things
(I say) do make it improbable, that she would invent such a matter of her
self. And finally, the strange prophetie, which she uttered in here Canticle
of MAGNIFICAT, and which we see now fulfilled, (albeit at that time very
vnliklie;) to wit, that all generations should call her BLESSED: These
circumstances, he that shall consider; can not but see that the matter must
needs be true.

AND as for the kind and manner of his Nativity; most manifest it is by
scripture, 3. The manner of Jesus nativity. Esa. 7.
that the Messiah was appointed to be borne of a virgin; for so says Esaias
plainly; Behold, a virgin shall conceive, and bring forth a son. And Esaias
appoints this to king Achaz, for a wonderful and strange sign from God.
Which he could not have done in reason, if the Hebrew word in that place,
might have signified a young woman only, (as some later Rabines will affirm;)
for that it is no sign nor strange thing, but very common and ordinary, for
young women to conceive and bring forth children. Wherefore the Septuagint do
very well translate it in greek, by the proper name of Virgin, and so also
did the elder Jews understand it, as Rabbi Parthenm.
Simeon well notes. And Rabbi Moses hadarsan of singular Credit with the Rab.
Simeo^ Ben. Iohai in cap. 2. Genesis
Jews, upon the words of the Psalm; Truth shall budde forth of the earth
etc. (...) thus: here Rabbi Io^^n notes that it is Rar Mos. (...) in (...) 14,
v. 12.
not said, truth shall be engendered of the earth; But, truth shall budde frorth;
to signify thereby, that the Meisias, (who is meant by the word, Truth,) shall
no be begotten(as other men are) in carnal population. Thus far Rabbi Moses;
who in an other place, that is, upon the 25. chapter of Genesis, alleges
Rabbi Berachias to be of the same opinion, and to prove it out of the 109.
Psalm verse. 4.

The same is proved also, by the plain words of Jeremy. God has created a
new thing upon earth; A woman shall inuiro: (or Iere. 31. v. 22.
enclose) a man. That is, she shall enclose him in her womb, and bring him
fourth, after a new and strange manner, without generation of man. And
finally, Rabbi Hacadosch proves by Cabala out of many Rab. Hacad. quest. 3.
in E a. c. 9.
places of scripture, not only that the mother of Meisias shall be a virgin,
but also that her name shall be Mary. All the ten Sibyls in like manner,
(according as Betuleius Betuleins in l. de car. Sibyl.
sets out their propheties,) do make special mention of the mother of
Messiah, that she shall be a most pure and holy virgin; so that this matter was
reueiled very clearlie, both to Jew and Gentile before it came to pass. And
Clemens Alexandrinus writes, that Simon Magus, to the end he might not seem
inferior to Jesus, in this point; feigned, that Clem. in recognit.
he was also borne of a virgin, as Jesus was.

THAT Bethlee^, where Christ was borne, 4. The place appointed for the birth of
the Messiah. Mich. 5.
was the peculier place preordained by God, for the birth of the Messiah; the
prophet Michaeas fort old plainly, when he uttered diverse ages before Christ
was incarnate, these words. And thou Bethleem Ephrata, art but a little one (in
respect) of thousands in Judah; (and yet,) shall there come forth of thee, one
that shall be the RVLER of Israel; and his coming forth is from the beginning,
and FROM THE DAYS OF ETERNITY. By which words is plainly expressed, that
albeit Bethleem were but a little poor Town (as in deed it was,) in comparyson
of many other in Judah: yet therein should be borne temporallie that Governor
of Israel, whose divine birth was before the worlds foundation, and from all
eternity. And so do interpret this place, both Jonathan Ben vziel the great
Author of the Chaldaie paraphrase, (who died 28. years before Christ was
borne,) and also R. Selomoh and Hacadosch in their come^taries upon this place
of Michaeas.

The same thing fortolde David, of Ephrata, or Bethleem, (for both names do
signify one thing, as appears by the former place of Michaeas, and Genesis 35.
and 48. 1. Para. 2. Psalm. 131.
others,) when talking of the Messiah, and being desirous to know where he
should be borne: says; I will not go into the tabernacle of my house, nor
into my bed; nor will I gyne my eyes sleep, or rest to the temples of my
head; until I find out the place, that is appointed for my Lord; the
tabernacle (or house) for the God of Jacob. And then, the mystery being
reueiled unto him; he says presentely: Behold we have heard of it (now) in
Ephrata (or Bethleem:) we have found it out in the fields This he says for
that in Danites time, Bethleem stood nigh unto vvoods Math. 2.
of wood. And to show how he reverenced the place for that cause; he adds
immediately: we will adore in the place vvher his seete have stood. Whereby
he for prophitieth, not only the adoration used after in that place unto Jesus
by the Magi, or three kings of the east: but also of all other adoration used
in the same place in the memory of Jesus, by other devout Christians until
this day. For which respect Orige^ says, that the place of Bethleem was
Orig. cont. Cells.
most famous and renoumed in his days.

For the Angels appearing to the shepheardes, 5. The Angels singinge.
in the night of the Nativity; there can be no more said, but the credit,
honesty, and simplicity of them, that reported it; and likely it is they
would never feign a thing, that might have been refuted by testimony of the
sheapheards them selves, if it had been false. 6. The name Jesus.


Of the name of JESUS, given to him in his circumcision; it was to be seen
set down in a book, that how so ever it were not scripture; yet was it
extant in the world, before Christ was borne. I mean the fowerth book of
Esdras, which has these words in the person of God the father. Behold the
time shall come, when the signs shall appear that I have told 4. Esd. 7.
etc. And my son JESUS, shall be reueiled, with these who are with him etc.
And after those years my son CHRIST shall dye, and the earth shall render
those that sleep therein. Rabi Hacadosch also proves by art Cabalist, out of
many places and textes of scripture, that the Messiah name at his coming,
shall be, Rab. Haca in Esa. 9. Genesis 49 and psalm 71. and 95.
JESUS. And among other, he adds this reason; that as the name of him who
first brought the Jews out of bondage into the land of promise, was Jesus,
or Iosue, (which is al one:) so must his name be Jesus, Note this reason.
that shall the second time deliver the^ from the bondage wherein they are, and
restore them to their old and ancient possession of Jury, which is the
chief benefit they expect by the Messiah.

Finally, it is not probable that the virgin Marie should feign this name of
her self, for that among the Jews there were many other names of more honor
and estimation, at that time; as Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, and David. And
therefore if she would have feigned any; it is like she would have taken one of
the^, as soon as this, which had not been the name of any great Patriarche.

THERE follows the coming of the three Magi or wise men, from the east; 7.
The coming of the three kings. Mat. 2.
of whom Cypr. ser. de Bapt. and ide^ Tert. l 3. co^t. Marcion. hillar. l. 4 de
Trin. los. 12.
Cyprians words are; it is an old tradition of the church, that the Magi of
the east, were kings, or rather little Lords of particular places. Which is
to be understood, such little kings, as Iosue slew thirty in one battle. And
it is to be noted, that S. Matthew makes mention of the coming of these kings
to Jerusalem, as of a known and public matter, whereof all Jerusalem and
Jury was able to bear him wituesse. For he talks of their open coming to
Jerusalem; and of their inquiry for the newborn king; of their speech and
conference had with Herod; as also of Herodes consultation with the Scribes and
Pharasies, about the place of the Messiah birth. And finally, he shows the
most pitiful murder that insued of almost 14. Thousad, as says the Lyturgie
of the AEthiopians, and Calend. Gracorum.
infinite infantes, in all the circuit of Bethleem for this matter. Which
could not be a thing unknown to all Jury, and much less feigned by S.
Matthew, for that he should have given his adversaries the greatest advantage in
the world; if he had begun his Gospel with so notorious and open an
untruth, which might have been refuted by infinite persons that were yet a live.

Epiphanius is of opinion, that these Bpiph. haeret. 51.
kings arrived in Jerusalem two years after Christ's Nativity; for that
Herod slew all infantes of that age. But other hold more probably, that the
star appeared Ammon. Alex. in (...).
unto them, two years before Christ's Nativity, so that they came to Bethlee^,
the thirtienth day after Christ's Niceph. l. 1. c. 13.
birth, according as the Church does celebrat the epiphanie. S. Basil thinks,
that Basil. ser. in nati. dom.
they were learned men, and might by their learning, and art magike, (wherein
those countrymen at that time were very skilful;) understand and feel, that
the power of their heathen Gods, was greatly deminished and broken. They
might also be stirred up with that common brute, and general prophetie, spread
over all the east in those days, as both Suetonius Suet. in Vespas. c. 4.
Joseph. l. 7. de bell. c. 12. Number. 24.
and Josephus do record; that out of Jury should come, an universal King
over all the world. By these means (I say,) and by the prophetie of Balaam,
left a nonge them from Moses time, (for he was a Ge^tile) whereby was
signified, that a star should rise and declare a great and mighty king in
Israel; they might be induced, at the sight of this Star, to take so long a
journey as they did, toward Jury.

This Star (as I have said,) was fortold Propheties of things that should
fall out in Bethleem. Number. 24. Psalm. 71. v. 10. Iere. 31. v. 15.
by Balaam a heathen Prophet, above 1500. years before it appeared. And after
Balaam again it was prophetied by David, that kings of Arabia, Saba, and
other Eastren countries, should come and adore Christ, and offer both gold and
other gystes unto him. The murder also of those infantes of Bethleem, was
presignified by Icremie, in the weeping of Rachel, for thee slaughter of her
children: Genesis 35. v. 18.
which Rachell was buried in Bethleem, and for that cause, those infantes, were
called her children, albeit she were dead above 2000. years before they were
slain, and above 1500. before Jeremy wrote the prophetie. Amongst which
infantes, Herod also for more assurance, slew an infant of his own. For that
(as Philo notes) he was descended by his Philo l. de temp.
mother of the line of Judah. Which cruelty coming to Augustus ears, he said
(as Macrob. l. 2 Saturnal. cap. 4.
Macrobius reports,) that he had rather be Herod's swyne, the^ his son; for
that, he being a Jew, was forbidden by his Augustus speech of Herod.
religion to kill his swine, though not ashamed to kill his son.

The same Star whereof we speak, is mentio^ned by diverse heathen writers; as
Plin lib. 2. cap. 25.
by Pliny, under the name of a Comete, (for so they termed all extraordinary
Heathen testimonies for the Star which guided the wise men.
Stars;) which appeared in the later end of Augustus days, and was far
different from al other, that ever appeared. And therefore, contrary to the
nature of those kind of Stars, it was adjudged by the whole college of
Southsaiers, to portend universal good unto the earth; and for that cause, had
an image of metal erected to it in Rome, and (as Plinies words are,) Is Cometa
vnus, toto orb colitur: that only Comete, is worshipped throughout the whole
world.

Origin also, writes of one Chaeremon Origin. co^t Celsum.
a Stoike, that was much moved with the consideration of this star; and for
that after the appearance thereof, he perceived the power of his Gods, decayed;
took a journey into Jury, (in company of other Astronomers,) to inform him
self further of the matter. Whereunto Chalcidius, Chalcid. apud Marsil. Ficin.
tract. de stella. Mag.
a Platonike does add, that the Chaldaean Astronomers did gather by
contemplatio^ of this Star, that some God descended from heaven to the
benefit of mankind. And finally, the Sibyls talking of the coming Sybil.
Samia apud Betul.
of Christ; affirmed plainly; Rutilans cum sydus monstrabit; a blasing Star
shall declare his coming. Which prophetie Virgile the Poet having read in
Augustus time, and soon after having seen the same fulfilled: applied it (as
I showed before of all the rest,) to the flattering of Caesar, and therefore he
says in the place before alleged.

Ecce Dionaei, processit Caesaris astrum. Eglog. 4.


Behold the Star of Caesar (descended of Venus,) has now appeared; which
Star in deed, was the Star of Caesar's Lord and Master.

AFTER forty days past over, S. Luke Luc. 12.
reports; how Jesus by his mother was presented in the temple of Jerusalem;
and 7. The presentation of Jesus in Jerusalem.
there withal recounteth two strange things that happened at the same time:
to wit; that two grave and reverend persons, Simeo^, surnamed Just; and Anna,
the Prophetess; (both of singular sanctity amongst the Jews;) co^mig into the
Temple, at the very time, when Jesus was there in his mothers arms: took
notice of him, and acknowledged him publicly for the Messiah and Save our of
the world. Fortelling also, by the spirit of prophetie, diverse particular
things that were to ensue, both to Christ and Christians, and especially to
his mother the blessed Virgin. Which things being published at that time, and
confirmed afterward by the event: do well declare, that this narration of S.
Luke, could not be forged; as do also the number of particular circumstances
set down about the time, place, and persons, most notoriously known to al
Lerusalem. For, as for Anna, she had lived from her youth until four skore
years of Anna the prophetisse. Simeon.
age in the temple; and thereby was known to the most part of Jury. And as
for Simeon, he was the scholar of the most famous. HILLEL, and co^disciple to
Jonathan Thal. tract. pitkei Auoth.
maker of the (...) paraphase, of who^ I spoke before; and the Jews Thalmud
confesses, that by the death of these two Thal. tract. Ioma cap. Tereph.
Eccalpi.
me^ (but especially of Simeon,) failled the spirit of the great Synagogue,
called Sanhedria; which after the captivity of Babylon, until Herod's time,
supplied (in a sort) the spirit of prophetie, that was expressly in Israel
before the said captivity.

OF CHRIST'S flight into Egypt for fear of Herod, S. Luke well notes, that 9.
Christ's flight into Egypt. Luc. 2. Osee 11.
it was prophetied by Osee long before; that God would call his son out of
Egypt. And the prophet Esaias describes the same very particulerlie, when he
says; Behold, our Lord Iehoua, shall ascend up, (or ride) upon a light
cloud; (which was his flesh or humanity;) Esa. 19.
and shall go down into Egypt; and all the idols of Egypt, shall shake at
his presence. Which later point, Eusebius shows, Eusebius. li. 6. them. c. 20.
and l. 9. c. 2. 3. 4.
that it was fulfilled most evidently, in the sight of all the world; for
that no Nation came to Christian religion with so great celeritie, or with so
great fervor, as did the Egyptians; who threw down their Idols before any
other heathen Nation. And as they had been the The benifite that Egypt received
by Christ's flight unto it.
first in idolatry to other countries: so were they the first, (by Christ's
coming unto them,) that afterward gave example of true return to their
Creator. It follows in Esaias: And I vvil give up Egypt into the hands of
cruel Lords; and a Pote^t king shall take dominion over them. Which was
fulfilled about the very time wherein Christ was to come. For that then, after
many spoils and cruelties excercised upon Egypt by the Roman Lords and
Princes, Pompey, Caesar, Antonie, and others: in the end, Cleopatra their
Qiene, (that was the last of all the blood and line of the Ptolomces,) was
enforced to slay her self; and so Augustus the Emperor, took possession of
all Egypt, and subjected it as a province, to the Romans Empire.

But consider you, how Esaias concludes the matter, after all these temporal
afflictions, threatened against Egypt; and confess, that such adversity, is
no sign of Gods disfavor to them who receive it. For thus says God, after
all his cominations. In that day, there shall be an Altar of Iehoua in the
midst of Egypt; they shall cry to God in their tribulation, and he shall send
them a SAVEOVR etc. Blessing shall be in the midst of that land, to whom our
Lord God of hosts has given his benediction, saying; Blessed is my people of
Egypt. And here we make an end of our second consideration.

IN THE THIRD PLACE, there comes to be considered, (according to our former
THE. 3. Consideration.
division,) the life; conversation, doctrine, and miracles of Jesus. And first,
touching THE LIFE and Actions of Jesus.
things done by him after his coming out of Egypt, (which might be about the
sixth or seventh year of his age,) until his Baptism by S. John, (which was
the 30.) there is little recorded, either in Profane or Ecclesiastical writers.
For that, as S. Justin, S. Chrysostom, Just. in Tripho. Chrysostom. in Johan. Aug.
l. 4. de Trinit. c. 5.
S. Augustine, and others do write; he bestowed that time in the common
exercises and labors of man's life; thereby to show himself trueman, and give
demonstration how much he detested idleness.

OF S. John Baptist, all Hebrew writers of that time do make mention, with
exceeding 1. Of S. Iolm Baptiste.
praise and admiration of his holiness; especially Josephus, that lived
i^mediately after Christ's days, says; hewas, Vir optimus; Iudaeos excitans
ad virtutum studia. Joseph. l. 18 antiq. ca. 7.
A most excellent man, stirring up the Jews to the exercise of virtue. He
adds also, that partly for fear of the great concourse of people, which
flocked unto him; and partly by the solicitation of Herodias, co^cubine and
brothers wife to Herod Antipas, the great Herodes son; (for whose cause he
had turned of his own wife, daughter of Areta king of the Arabians:) he was
apprehended, and imprisoned in the Castle of Acherun, and therein soon after,
put to death. Which murder, Joseph esteemed to be the cause of all the misery
which ensued afterward to Herod and his whole family.

Of this man, it was written by Malachie the prophet: Behold, I send my
messenger (or Malac. 31
Angel) before me; and he shall prepare the way before my face: and presently
shall come to his Temple, the RVLER whom you seek, and the MESSENGER OF THE
TESTAMENT, which you desire. Which prophetie was fulfilled most evidently,
when upon the preaching of S. John's behavior toward Christ.
S. John, Christ came unto him: and albeit S. John had never seen him before;
yet he acknowledged him for the Messiah, in the presence of infinite people;
and his acknowledgment was confirmed by the visible descending of a dove and
voice from heaven, in the sight and hearing of all the Math. 3. Marc. 1. Luc. 3.
people present; according as three of our Evangelists do report. Which
they would never have presumed to do; had not the matter been most evident,
and without al compass of denial or co^tradiction.

And truly, no one thing in all this story of Jesus life, does more establish
the certainty of his being the true Messiah; then that John Baptiste, (whose
wisdom, learning, virtue, and rare sanctity, is confessed and recorded by the
writings of al our adversaries:) should refuse the honor of Messiah offered to
him self, and lay it upon Jesus: as also, should direct those disciples that
depended of him, to the only following and embrasing of Jesus doctrine. Which is
most evidently proved that he did; for that fo so many folowers and disciples
as him self had; no one appeared ever after, that was not a Christian.

WHEN Jesus was baptized, he began to preach; and his whole doctrine was
directed 2. The preaching and doctrine of Jesus. Deuteronomy. 6. Met. 2.
to the manifestation of his Fathers will, and amendment of man's life. It
tended all, to this one ground and principle: thou shall love thy Lord, with
all thy soul; and thy neighbor as thy self. It was plain, easy,
perspicuous, and evident, though it treated of most high mysteries. It had
nether po^pe nor pride of Rhetorical words, nor flattering Heathen doctrine.
of man's wickedness, as the doctrine of many Philosophers had. Neither
consisted it, of vnpro ficable external ceremonies, Iuishe ceremonies.
(is the later observations of the Iewishe lay did;) nor was it fraught with
carnalitie and spirit of this world; as the Turkishe Alcoran, and other
sectaries Turkish Alcoran.
doctrine is. But all was simplicity, all was spirit, all was truth, all was
honesty, all was humility, all was charity. The comparison of Christ's law
with that of Moses. Mat. 5.


It took away or disanulled, no one perfect or spiritual point of Moses
law; but rather revived, interpreted, fulfilled, and made perfect the same For
whereas that commannded external observance, this added also, internal
obedience. Whereas that said, love your frie^des; this adjoined, love also your
enemies. Whereas that commanded, we should not kill; this further commands,
to speak no angry words. Whereas that prohibeted to committ actual adultery;
this also forbids to covet in mind. Whereas that said, take no interest or
usury of a Jew that is thy cou^trie-man; this says, take it of no man what
soever. Whereas that accoumpted every Jew only to be thy neighbor; this
teaches every person living to be thy brother. Whereas that taught thee, to
offer up a calse or a sheep, or an ox, for thy finnes; this instructs thee,
to offer up a contrite heart, in the blood of him that died for all, with a
firm purpose of amendment of life. And finally, this doctrine tends
wholly, to The effect of Christ's doctrine.
the true, sincere, and perfect service of God thy Lord, that made and redeemed
thee: to the exaltatio^ of his only name, power, goodness, and glory: to the
depression of man's pride, by discovering his misery: to the contempt of this
world, and vain pomp thereof: to the mortification and subdueing of our
sensual appetit: to the true love and unfeigned charity of our neighbor: to
the stirring up of our spirit to celestial cogitations: to peace of
conscience, tranquillity of mind, purity of body, consolation of our soul.
And in one word, to reduce mankvnd again to a certain estate of innocence,
simplicity, and Angelical sanctity upon earth, with his eye fixed only, in
the eternal inheretaunce of Gods kingdom in heaven.

THIS was the doctrine delivered by Jesus; which is the same, that Gods
Prophets fortolde, should be delivered by the Messiah. And as for his life and
conversation, 3. The life and conversation of Jesus.
by the testimony of his greatest adversaries, it was more admirable, then his
doctrine; his life being a most lively table, wherein the perfection of al his
doctrine was expressed. A man of such gravity; as never in his life he was
noted to laugh: of such humility; as being the son, of God, he scarce used
in this world, the dignity of a servant: of such sweet and mylde behavior; as
all the injuries of his ennemies, never wreested from him one angry word.
Finally, he was such an one, as he was described by Esaie, so many ages before
he was borne, in these words: he shall not cry nor contend, nor shall any nan
hear his Esa. 42.
voice in the street: he shall not crush a broken read, nor tread out a little
flax that lies smoking on the ground. And an other Prophet, not long after
him, brake forth into, this speech, upon consideration of the behaueour Zach.
9.
that should be in the Messiah; Rejoice thou daughter of Sion; trjumphe thou
daughter of Jerusalem; for behold, thy king shall come unto the, thy just
savior: he is poor and humble, etc. And as these Prophets did foretell the
virtue and sanctetie of the Messiah: so the devils the^ selves could not but
confess the same, to have been fulfilled in the person of Jesus; as is most
evident by the testimony of Porphyrie, a professed enemy of the Christian
name. Who after consideration of diverse Oracles uttered by his Idols, touching
Jesus: he breaks into this confession. It is exceeding wonderful, what
testimony Porphyr. li. de laud. Philos.
the Gods do give of the singular piety and sanctity of Jesus; for which
they auovvch him revvarded with i^mortalitie: but yet these Christians are
deceived, in calling him God. Thus much Joseph. l. 18 antiq. c. 7.
writes Porphyrie. And last of al, Josephus the Jew, that was borne
imediatlie after him, writes of him thus. There was at this time one Jesus, a
wise man, if it be laufull to call him a man; a worker of most wonderful
miracles, and a Master and teacher of al such men, as willingly were content
to embrase the truth.

IN WHICH testimony of Josephus, we 4. Of Jesus Miracles.
see mention also of Jesus miracles, which is the next thing whereof we are to
consider. And as Josephus in this place, being a Jew, bears witness that
Jesus performed many strange miracles: so most apparently, and according to
the interpretation of Josephus in this place, were the same miracles fortolde
by the Prophets of God, that they should be done by the true Messiah. So,
Esaie in his 35. Predictions of the Messiah Miracles.
chapter describes at large, how the Messiah at his coming, shall declare his
commission by gyuing sight to the blind, hearing to the deaf, speech to the
dombe, and agilitie of body to the Lame and Cripple^. And that which is more
maruailous; God revealed this point very particularly to the Gentiles by the
Sibyles, among who one of them wrote thus of Christ to come, as Lactantius
records. He shall do al by his Lact. I 4. diuina. Instit. cap. 15.
only word: he shall cure al infirmities; he shall raise the dead; he shall make
the lame to run and skippe; the deaf shall hear; the blind shall see, and the
dombe speak. In five loaves and two fishes, five thousand persons shalve
satisfied: and the fragmentes shall fill twelve baskets, to the hope of many. He
shall command the vvindes, and walk upon the furious sea, with his feet of
peace. And after diverse other greek verses to this purpose, she concludes in
these words: Me^ shall say, that I am a mad and lying Prophetess; but when
at these things shall come to pass: then remember me; for then shall no man say
more, that I was a liar, but rather the Prophet of the great Gad.

To these predictions of Prophets in Jury, and among the Gentiles, do agree
the Doctors of the Jews them selves, in many places of their Thalmud: to
Thal. tract. Beracoth. ca. Mermathas Colin.
wit; that the Messiah shall be most wonderful in working miracles. And in
their public commentary upon Ecclesiastes, they have these words. All the
former miracles Misdrasch Coheleth. cap. 1.
of Prophets and Saints, shall be nothing to the miracles of the Messiah, when
he comes. And thus much of the fortelling of Christ's miracles. But now for
the fulfillinge thereof in Jesus; that is, how these predictions were performed
in the stupendous works and actions of our Saueour: there is no difficulty.
For that besides the former testimony of Josephus, (which were sufficient in
this case;) the The confession of Jesus miracles by his enemies. Thalm. in
tract. Auoda. Zara. Misdrasch, Coheleth. Alcoran. Azoar. 1. 4. 11. 13.
Jews them selves, do grant and record Jesus miracles in diverse treatises
of their Tha'mud: yea, they make mention of many wonderful things which Jesus
did, that are not written by our Evangelists. The same does Mahomet in his
Alcorane; affirming, Jesus the son of Marie, to have been a great prophet;
and to have wrought his miracles by the only power and spirit of God: and that
him self was sent to confirm Jesus doctrine, saving only in the point of his
godhead; wherein he says, that Jesus went to far, and had a check for the
same at Gods hand, when he returned to heaven.

Thus much do these enemies confess of Jesus miracles. Which, as it is much,
coming from such witnesses: so if they would either deny, or dissemble the
same; they might be proved against the^ by most evident reasons; especially in
two points, wherein there can be no probablitie of denial.

The first is, the calling and retaining of his apostles and other followers,
The calling of the Apostles.
(whereof Josephus also in the place before alleged, makes mention, as of a
great miracle;) who were of diverse callinges, states, conditions, trades, and
occupations Iosep. li. 18. antiq. c. 4
in the world. And yet all, upon the sudden, left both father, mother, wife,
children, and other temporal respects; and followed him, who had nothing to
give or promise them in this world. A man, that never spoke them fair, nor
uttered doctrine, that was not repugnant to the sensuality of this life, as
may appear by their own writings and testimonies of him. A man, that was
contened by the better sort, as then it might seem; that is, by the wise and
learned of that country; and especially misliked by them, that were in
government, as a dangerous and troublesome man to the state. One, that had
neither friends in the world to bear him out, nor house to put his head in.
And yet, not withstanding all this, that worldly men and women, and some such
also, as were great sinners, and loose livers before, should leave all their A
great Miracle.
worldly hope, stay, and condition, to follow such a man, with so great
inconuenie^ces, losses, dangers, and disfavors as they did; and should
continue with him in all his afflictions, and be content to die and lose their
lives; rather then forsake him, or abandone his service; this (I say) is such
a miracle, as never in the world fell out the like, and must needs be granted
by the enemy, to be supernatural. The miraculous facts of Jesus.


The second point is of external things and factes done by Jesus, above all
power of humane ability, in the sight and knowledge of all the Jews; which
factes were published by our Evangelists, and especially by S. Matthew, in the
Hebrew tongue, while yet the persons were alive upon whom they were wroughte,
or infinite other that might be witnesses thereof. As for example; the raising
of Lazarus in Bethania, that was a village, but a mile or Ioh. 11.
two distant from Jerusalem; at whose death and burial, (being a Gentleman)
many Scribes and Pharysies must needs be present, (according to the Iuishe
custom Joseph. l. 17 antiq. c. 11.
at that time reported by Josephus;) and they saw him both disceassed,
interred, and the funeral feast observed for him; as also raised again by
Jesus after four days of his burial. With whom they did both eat and drink,
and converse after his return to life, and every day might behold him
walking in the streets of Jerusalem. This story (I say) how could it be
feigned?

So in like manner the raising of the Math. 9. Marc. 5.
is affirmed to be Iairus, with diverse other circumstances that do make the
thing most notorious. The raising of the wydows son, before the gare of the
City of Luc. 7.
that bare the Corpse, and stood about it. The healing of the Cripple in
Hierusale, Probatica: which mira Ioh. 5.
cle was done also in the sight of almost infinite people. The casting out of
a legio^ Mat. 8. Marc. 5.
the sea and drowned them. Whereupon the whole country about of the people
called, Gerasines, being stricken with fear upon sight of the fact: besought
Jesus most humbly, to depart from their borders. The feeding and filling of
more then 5000 Mar. 14. Luc. 9.
five barlie loves and two fishes only. The turning of water into wine, at the
marriage Luc. 14.
this at the table of a principal Pharisie, and in the sight of all that satt
at dinner with him.

These (I say,) and diverse other such miracles, which were done in the
presence and sight of so infinite people, and recorded by our Evangelists at
such time, when many desired to discredit the same, and might have done
easelie, by many witnesses and authority, if any part thereof had been
subject to calumniation: can not in reason or probability, be doubted of. And
therefore I must conclude, that seeing these things are above all power of humane
The conclusion of this consideration.
nature, and could not be done, but by the fingar and virtue of God him self:
considering also, that it is impossible, that God should assiste, or give
testimony to falsehood: it must needs ensue, that all was true and sincere,
which Jesus affirmed; and consequentelie, seeing he affirmed him self to be the
son of God, and the true Messiah: it must needs follow by these miracles,
that he was so in deed; which is the ground of that speech of his, to the
faithless Pharysies, if you will not believe my Ioh. 10.
words, believe my deeds. And thus much of Jesus life, doctrine,
conversation, and miracles.

THERE REMAINS now only, the THE. 4. Consideration.
sowerth and last consideration of this section; which is, the passion,
resurrection, and ascension of Jesus. And about his passion, THE Passion and
Resurrection.
there is little or no controversy; for that all his enemies do agree and
grant, that he was betrayed by his own disciple; apprehended, afflicted, and
delivered up by the Jews; and finally putt to death upon a Cross, by the
Gentiles. The testimony of Josephus may suffice for all herein. whose words
are; that the principal Jews Joseph. l. 18. antiq. c. 4.
ofbis country, having accused and delivered over Jesus to Pilat, (that was
Governor of Jury for the Roman Emperor;) he adjudged him to the Cross. The
same do all other Jews and Gentiles record; and in this they take great
offense and scandale, that we should attribute divinity, unto a man that had
suffered on the Cross.

But if we show, that this was the eternal preordination and appointement of
God, for saving of mankind; and that the same was fortolde both to Jew and
Gentile from the beginning; and so understood also, by the Iuishe Doctors of
elder times: then every reasonnable man (I trow) will remain satisfied, and
prefer Gods divine wisdom, before ma^s folly.

First then, consider, that when Christ had ended his preaching, and wrought so
Christ's ascendinge to Jerusalem to receive his passion. Math. 20. and Marc.
8. Mat. 21.
many miracles as seemed sufficient to his eternal wisdom; and when the time
was come preordained for his passion, (whereof he told publicly his
disciples before;) he went up to Jerusalem of purpose, to receive his death;
and made a solemn entry into that City upon an ass; which was prophetied of
him by Zachary many years before. Rejoice daughter of Zach. 9.
Sion. Bcholde thie I VST KING and SAVEOVR shall come unto thec upon an ass.

And after his abode some days in that place; he was betrayed and sold by his
Mat. 10. and 16. Psalm. 40. 54. 108.
own disciple, as David beforehande in many places had foretold should come
to pass. Then followed his apprehension and most servile abusage by the Jews,
where of it was foreprophitied in his person by Esaias: I gave my body to them
that beat Esa. 50.
it; and my cheeks to them that bussited the same. I did not turn my self
away from them that reproched me; nor yet from them that did spitte in my
sace.

After this barbarous entreaty by the Jews; they delivered him over to Pilat
a Gentile, and never ceased to solicit and pursue their vnquenshable hatred
The barbarous abusage of Jesus fortolde by prophetie.
against him, until they saw him on the Cross. Where also he was used in the
highest degree, of spiteful deali^g. Whereof the foresaid David, made mention
long before, in the person of the Messiah, when he said: they pearsed my
hands and seete; they Psalm. 21.
divided among them my apparaile; and upon my (upper) Garmente they did cast
lottes. And aganie, of another cruelty he co^plaineth saing: they gave me
Gaul to eat, and in my (...) they refreshed me with vinegar.

And finally, that Christ should die for Christ's death most plainly fortolde.
the sins of mankind, is a common principle both prefygured and foretold
throughout all the old scripture. Prefigured; by the sacrifice of Isaac: by
the raising up of the Brazen Serpent; and by all Genesis 21. 22.
other sacrifices that were in that law. Fortolde; not only by the scriptures
before Number. 21.
aleadged, but also must plainly by Daniel, who was told by an Angel, that
after a certain time, by him there appointed; vngetur sanctus senctorum. The
Saint of Saints shall be anointed, and occidetur Christus; Dan. 9.
this anointed Saint or Christ, shall be put to death.Zachary also about the
same time, does not only fortel his death; but also the kind thereof, and from
what people he should receive the same: for thus he says in the person of
Christ him self. The Zach. 12.
inhabitants of Icrusalem at that day shall look upon me, whom they have
Crucisied.

But if ye will read the whole story of Christ's passion set down at large,
The most wonderful predictio^ of Christ his passion by Esaias. Esa. 17.
600 years before it fell out: I refer you to a narration of Esaias, who to
signify the straungnes of the case, begineth with this preface: who will
give credit to that we shall report? etc. And then after a little, he goes on
in these words. He shall mount up as a tvvigge from a dry earth. He has no
form or beauty upon him. We beheld him, and there was no countenance in
him; we savve him the Christ's deformity upon the Cross.
most contemtible and despised man in the world.

A man full of pains, and experienced in infirmity. His countenance was
obscure and despicable, and we made no account of him. Truly, he took upon
him self our greefes, and did bear our pains. We accounted him as a leaper;
and as a man stricken and punished by God. But he was vvounded for our
iniquities, and crushed in peaces Christ appointed to die for our sins.
for our wickedness. The discipline (or correction) of our peace lies upon
him: and by his wounds, we are made whole. We have all erred, and gone
astraye, like sheep, every man after his own vvayes; and God has laid upon
him, the iniquity of us all. He was offered up for us, because he would so;
he shall be led le to his slaughter, as a sheep; and as a Lamb he shall be silent
before his Shearours.

For the sins of my people, have I stricke thyn, says God. He has done no
iniquity; neither was there decepte found in his mouth. Yet would our Lord
crush him in infirmity. But if The increase of Christ's Kingdom after his
resurrection.
he shall give his life for sin: then shall he see a long seed (or
generation,) and the will of our Lord shall be derected in his hand. And for so
much, as his soul has sustained labor: it shall see and be filled. And this
MY JUST SERVANT, That is, in making him self knovve^, or reucilinge the
knowledge of him self, to the world.
in his knowledge, shall Justify many, and bear their iniquities. And I vvil
allotte unto him very many people, and he shall divide the spoils of the
stout, for that he has delivered his soul unto death, and was accounted
among the wicked, and prayed for his transgressors.

Thus particularly (as ye see) was the death and Passion of Christ foretold
by the Prophettes of Israel, to that Nation. ^
Now hear ye the prophetie of Sibylla, if ye please, wherein she foreshewed the
same to the Gentiles. These are her words set down by Lacta^tius. He shall
appear miserable, Ignominious, and descurmed; to the (...) (...) may give hope
unto the miserable. Afterward he shall come into the hands of most wicked
(...) faithless men: they shall busset him with their sacrilegious fistes, and
shall spitte upon him with there unclean mouths. He shall yield his innocent
back to the vvhippe, and shall say nothing while he receives the stripes, to
th end he may speak to those that are dead. He shall (...) Crown of thorns;
and they shall give him Gaul to eat, and vinegar to drink. And this shall be
the hospitality he shall find among them. What thing can be more plainly
described then this?

Neither do the Ancient Rabbines and teachers among the Jews, dessent from
this. For that in their Talmud, that The consent of Rabynes Thal. tract.
Saphed. c. helec. Misdrasch. Ruth. Rab. Joseph. in I. Siph. Rab. Jacob and R.
Hanina in cap helec.
was gathered above 1200. years gone; the plain sentence of diverse are set
down, that their Messiah at his coming, shall be put to death. And as for
Rabbi Jonathan Author of the Chaldaie paraphrase, who died a little before
Christ was borne; he applies the whole narration of Esaias before recited, (as
needs he must) to the murder of the Messiah, by the Jew. Whereupon,
RabbiSimeon that liked the Fsay. (...). Rab. Simeo^ Ben. Iohai l. b. de spc.
next age after, writes these words following. We be to the men of Israel,
(...) that they shall slay the Messiah. God shall send his son in man's flesh
to wash them, and they shall murder him. Whereto agrees Rabbi Hadarsan Rab.
Hadars. in Dan.
and others, and do prove further out of the forealleadged prophetie of
Daniel, Chap. 9. verse. 27. that after Messiah shall have preached half seven
years, he shall be slain. For that Daniel says, in half Dan. 9. v. 27.
of seven years, the Host and Sacrifice shall cease. Upon which words they
comment thus: three years and a half, shall the presence of God in flesh cry
and preach upon the Mount Oliuet, and then shall he be slain. Which words the
Jews ordinary commentary upon the Misdrasch Tehilim.
Psalms, does interpret to be meante of Christ's preaching three years and a
half, before his passion. Which disagreeth very little or nothing from the
account of us Christians, and of our Evangelists.

And so we see by all that hitherto has Of the Miracles that fell out in
Christ his death and Passion.
been said, that the very particulers of Christ's whole death and Passion,
were foretold most plainly both to Jew and Gentile, and acknowledged also by
the ancient Doctors of the Jewish nation, before the effectuatio^ thereof came
to pass. And Sibylla adds further two particular miracles, that should fall
out in the said Passion of the Messiah: to wit; that the Lacta^. li. 4. Divine
instit. cap. 19.
veil of the Jews Temple should break in two, and that at middaye, there
should be darkness for three hours, over all the world. Which thing to have
been fulfilled at the death of Jesus, not only S. Matthew does assure us Mat.
17.
in his Gospel: but also Eusebius affirms, that he had read the same, word
for word recorded in diverse heathen writers. Eusebius. in Chron. An. Domi. 3. 2.
Phleg. Trallian. Li. 14. Chron. An. 4. Olim. 202.
And amongst other he cites one Phlego^, an exact Chronicler, that reports
the same in the 4. year of the 202. Olympias; which agrees just with the 18.
year of Tyberius reign, wherein our Saueour suffered. And he goes so nighe,
as to name the very hours of the day, which our Evangelists do. See Orig.
cont. Cells. l. 6. and Suid. in verbo Jesus. and Tere. in Apolog.
AEsculus also an old Astronomer, does confirm the same, and proves
moreover, by the situation and constitution of the Sun and Moon at that
time, that no Eclipse could then be naturally. Which thing in like manner,
Dionysius Areopagita did observe in the Dionys. Areop. in cp.
very day of Christ's Passion, being at that time but 25. years old, and yet
well studdied in Astronomy, as him self testifies. And finally, Lucianus a
learned priest of Lucian. praesb. apud. Eusebius.
Antioche, was accustumed to provoke the Gentiles to their own comentaries and
stories, for record and testimony of those things.

There ensues now, for ending and confirmation of all that has been said and Of
Jesus resurrection.
proved before, to add a word or two, of Jesus Resurrection. Which point, as
of al other it is of most importance: so was it most exactly fortolde both to
Jew and Gentile, and promised by Christ him self in all his speeches, while he
was upon earth. And among the Jews, it was assured by all the propheties before
recited, which do promise so great abounda^ce of glory, joy, and triumph,
to Christ's. church after his passion. Which never possibly could be fulfilled;
onles he had risen from dearh again. And therefore the said Resurrection was
prefigured in Jonas, Jonas. 2.
together with the time of his abode in the Sepulcher. It was also expressle
forshewed by David, affirming, that God would Psalm. 15.
not permit his holy one, to see corruption. And after him again, more
plainly by Osee; Osee 6.
he shall quicked us again after two days: in the third day he shall raise us,
and we shall live in his sight. And to the Gentiles, Sibyllaieft written, Lact.
lib. 4. Inst. Divine. cap. 19.
not far from the same time: he shall end the necessity of death, by three
days sleep: and then returning from death to light again, he shall be the
first, that shall show the beginning of Resurrection to his chosen: for that by
conquering death, he shall bring us life.

Thus much was promissed by Prophets, before Christ's appearance. And Jesus to
comfort his Disciples and folowers, reiterated Mat. 12. 16. 17. 20. Mar. 8. 9.
10. Luc. 11. 18. Johan. 2.
this promise again of him self in many speeches, albeit oftentimes his
meaning was not perceived. Which promise of return from death, if it had been
made for some long time to come, (as Mahomet promissed his Sarasins after 800.
years to reuisite them again;) albeit the performance were never meante: yet
might Mahom. in Alcor. Azoar. 17.
the salshode lurk in the length of time. But Jesus, assuring all men, that he
would rise again, within three days: it can not be imagined, but that he
sincerely purposed to perform his promise, for that otherwise, the fraud
must soon have been discovered. Now then, let us consider what manner of
performance Jesus made hereof.

And first the persons most interessed in the The appeari^gs which Jesus made
after his resurrection.
matter, as they whose total hope, stay, refuge, and felicity, depended
hereof; I mean his appaled, dismayed, and afflicted disciples, do recount
twelve sundry apparitio^s, which Jesus made unto them in flesh, after his
resurrection. The first, was to Mat. 16.
Salome and other women, went and remained with ointments about the Sepulcher.
The second, was to all the forsaid Mat. 28.
who also were permitted to embrase his feet. The third, was to Simon 1. Cor.
15. Luc. 24.
in their journey to Emaus. The fifth, was to all the Apostles, and other
disciples Ioa. 20.
after eight days, when Thomas was 1. Cor. 15. Ioa. 20.
eat and drink, and suffered his body to be handled among them. The seventh,
was Ioa. 21.
disciples, when they were in fishing; at what time also he vouchsafed to eat
with Mat. 28.
at one time, upon the mount Thabor in 1. Cor. 15.
hundredth brethern at one time, as S. Paul Ibid.
same Apostle records. The eleventh, Act. 1.
together, upon the mount Oliuet by Jerusalem, when in their presence, he
ascended up to heaven. The twelueth and 1. Cor. 15.


Al these apparitions are recorded in Scripture, as made by Jesus after his
Resurrection, to such as by his eternal wisdom, were preordained to be
witnesses of so glorious a spectacle. To whom as S. Act. 1.
Luke affirms, he shevved him self alive by many arguments, for the space of
40 days together, and reasoned with them of the kingdom of his father. And
why any man should mistrust the testimony of these men that saw him, conuersed
with him, eat with him, touched him, and heard him speak; and whose entire
estate and welfare depe^ded wholly of the certainty hereof: I see no reason.
For what comfort had it been or consolation to these men, to have devised of
them Circumstances that co^f^me the true Resurrection of Jesus.
selves, these former apparitions? What encourageme^t might they have taken, in
those doleful times of desolation and affliction, to have had among them, the
dead body of him, on whose only life their universal hope and confidence
depended? The Scribes and Pharisees, being a stonished with the sudaine news
of his rising again, confirmed unto them by their own souldiars that saw it:
found no other way to resist the fame thereof, but only by saying, (as also
their posterity do unto this dave,) that his disciples came by night, and
stole away his body, whiles the soldiers were a sleep. But what likelihood
or possibility can there be in this? For first, it is evident to all the world,
that his Apostles themselves, (who were the heads of all the rest,) were so
dismayed, discomforted, and dejected at that time; as they durst not once go
out of the door. For which cause, only those seely women, who for their sex
esteemed them selves more free from violence; presumed alone to visit his
Sepulcher, which no one man durst for fear of the soldiers; until by those
women they were informed, that the forsaid band of soldiers were terrefied
and put to flight by Christ's Resurrection.

And how then was it likely, that men Great improbabilitics.
so much amazed and overcome with fear, should adventure to steal a body
from a Guarde of Soldiers that kept it? Or if their hearts had served them to
adventure so great a danger: what hope or probability had there been of
success? especially, consideringe the said body lay e in a new sepulcher of
stone, shutt up and locked, and fast sealed by the Magistrate? How was it
possible (I say) that his disciples should come thither? break up the
Monument? take out his body? and carry the same away, never after to be seen
or found, without espial of some one amongst so many that attended there? Or
if this were possible, (as in reason it is not;) yet what profit, what
pleasure, what comfort, could they receive hereby? We see that these apostles
and disciples of his, who were so abandoned of life and heart in his Passion:
after two days only, they were so changed; as life and death can be no more
contrary.

For, whereas before they kept home in The great change in Jesus disciples, by
his resurrection.
all fear, and durst appear no where, except among their own private
frie^des: now they came forth into the streets and common places, and
avouched with all alacrity, and irresistible constancy; even in the faces and
hearing of their greatest enemies; that Jesus was risen from death to life;
that they had seen him; spoken with him; and enjoyed his presence. And that for
restimonie and confirmation hereof, they were most ready to spend their lives.
And could all this (trow you) proceed only, of a dead body, which they had
gotten by stealth into their possession? Would not rather the presence and
sight of such a body; so torn, mangled, and deformed as Jesus body was both
upon the Cross and before; have rather dismayed them more, then have given
them comfort? Yes truly. And therefore Pilat the Governor, considering these
circumstances; and that it was unlikely, that either the body should be
stolen without priuitie of the Souldiars; or if it had been; that it should The
examination of the matter by Pilate.
yield such life, heart, consolation, and courage to the stealers: began to
give ear more diligentelie to the matter; and calling to him the Souldiars
that kept the watch, understood by them the whole truth of the accident: to
wit; that in their sight and presence, Jesus was risen out of his sepulcher to
life, and that at his rising, there was so dreadful an earth-quacke, with
trembling and opening of sepulchers round about; such skriches, cries, and
co^motion of all elements: as they durst not abide longer, but ran and told
the Iuishe magistrates thereof, who being greatly discontented (as it seemed)
with the advertisement; gave them money to say, that while they were sleeping,
the body was stolen by his disciples from them.

All this wrote Pilate presently to his Lord Tyberius, then Emperor of Rome.
Pylates letter to Tyberius, and his proceeding thereupon.
And he sent withal, the particular examinations and confelsions of diverse
other, that had seen and spoken with such as were risen from death at the same
time, and had appeared to many of their acquaintance in Hicrusalem, assuring
them also, of the resurrection of Jesus. Which informations when Tyberius the
Emperor had considered, he was greatly moved therewith, and proposed to the
Senate, that Jesus might be admitted among the rest of the Roman Gods;
offering his own consent, with the privilege of his supreme royal suffrage to
that decree. But the Senate in no wise would agree thereunto. Whereupon Tyberius
being offended, gave license to all men to believe in Jesus that would; and
forbydde upon pain of death, that any officer or other, should molest or
trouble such as bare good affection, zeal, or reverence to that name. Thus
much testifiethe Tertulian against the Tertul. in apolog. pro Christian.
Gentiles of his own knowledge; who living in Rome, a learned man, and pleader
of causes, diverse years before he was a Christian; (which was about 180. years
after Christ's Ascension;) had great ability by reason of the honor of his
family, learning, and place wherein he lived, to see and know the records of
the Romans. And the same does confirm also Egesippus, Egesip. l. 1. hist.
Eusebius. l. 4. c. 21. Rutsin. l. 1. c. 22.
an other Ancient writer, of no less authority then Tertulian, before whom
he lived.

Neither only diverse Gentiles had this opinion of Jesus resurrection again
from death, but also sundry Jews of great The opinion of the vviser sort of
Jews touching Jesus resurrection i^ that time.
credit and wisdom at that time, were enforced to believe it; notwithstanding
it pleased not God to give them so much grace, as to become Christians. This
appears plainly by the learned Ioiephus, who writing his story not above
forty years after Christ's Passion, took occasion to speak of Jesus and of
his disciples. And after he had showed how he was Crucified by Pilat, at the
instance of the Jews; and that for all this, his disciples ceased not to love
him still: he adioyneth forth with these words. Idcirco iliis tertio die vita
resumpta, denuo apparuit. That Joseph. l. 14 antiq. c. 4.
is, for this love of his disciples, he appeared unto them again the third
day, when he had resumed life unto him. Which express, plain, and resolute
words, we may in reason take, not as the consession only of Josephus, but as
the common judgment, opinion, and sentence of all the discrete and sober men
of that time, laid down and recorded by this Historiographer. In whose days
there were yet many Christians a live, that had seen and spoken with Jesus
after his resurrection; and infinite Jews, that had heard the same protested
by their fathers, brethren, kinlfolke, and friends, who had been them selves
Eyewitnesses thereof.

AND thus having declared and proved the resurrection of our Save our Jesus,
Of Jesus Asce^sion.
both how it was forshewed, as also fulfilled: there remains nothing more of
necessity to be said in this Section. For that, who soever sees and
acknowledges, that Jesus being dead, could raise him self again to life:
will easily believe also that he was able to ascend to heaven. Whereof,
notwithstanding, S. Luke alleges Act. 1.
six skore witnesses at the least, in whose presence he ascended from the
top of the mount Oliuet, after 40 days space which he had spent with them,
from the time of his resurrection. He alleges also, the appearing of two
Angels among Lykelihodes of truth.
all the people, for testimony thereof. He names the day, and place, when, and
where it happened. He recompteth the very words, that Jesus spoke at his
Ascension. He tells the manner how he ascended, and how a cloud came down
and received him into it. He declares what the multitude did, whether they
went, and in what place they remained after their departure thence. And
finally, he sets down so many particulers; as it had been the easiest
matter in the world, for his enemies to have refuted his narration, if all had
not been true. Neither was there any to receive more do^mage by the falsehood
thereof, then him self and those of his profession, if the matter had been
feigned.

Wherefore to conclude at length this treatise of the Birth, Life, Doctrine,
Actions, The conclusion of this second sectio^.
Death, Resurrection, and Ascencio^ of Jesus: seeing nothing has happened in
the same, which was not fortolde by the prophets of God; nor any thing
forshewed by the same prophets concerning the Messiah, which was not
fulfilled most exactly, within the compase and course of Jesus abode upon
earth: we may most certainly assure our selves, that as God can neither
foretell an untruth, nor yield testimony to the same: so can it not be, but
that these things which we have showed to have been so manifestly
fore-prophesied, and so evidently accomplished: must needs a-certaine us, that
Jesus was the true Messiah. Which thing shall vet more particulerly appear, by
that which ensewed by his power and virtue, after his Ascension; which shall be
the argument of the section that follows.

How Jesus proved his Deity after his departure to heaven. Sect. 3.
AS BY THE DEEDS AND Actions of Jesus while he was upon earth, compared with
the predictions of Gods prophets from time to time; he has been declared in
the former sections, to be the true Messiah and Savior of the world: so The
conte^tes of this third sectio^
in this that now we take in hand, shall the same be showed by such things, as
ensued after his Ascension and departure from this world. Wherein his power and
Deity appeared more manifestly (if it may be,) then in other his works which
he wrought in this life. In which kind, albeit I might treat of many and
almost infinite branches: yet for order and breuities sake, I mean only to
take in consideration, these few that ensue. Wherein not only the power of
Jesus, but also his love, his care, his providence, and most perfect
accomplishment of all his promises; and finally, the justification of all his
speeches, prophesies, and doctrines upon earth, have been declared.

And to reduce what is to be said herein, to some order and method; it is to
be noted, that in the first place shall be considered the sustentation,
protection, increase, and The division of the particular considerations
insuinge.
continuation of Jesus little Church and kingdom, that him self first planted
and left upon earth. The second consideration shall be, of his Apostles and their
actions. The third, of his Evangelists. The fourth, of his witnesses and
Martyrs, throughout the world. The fifte, shall treat of the kingdom of
infernal powers, beaten down by his virtue. The sixth, of the punishment and
inst revenge that lighted upon his enemies, who most impugned his divine person
in this world. The seventh and last, shall declare the fulfilling of all such
propheties and predictions, as proceeded from his divine mouth, while he was
conversant upon earth.

NOW THEN for the first, it is to be THE. (...) Consideration. CHRIST'S.
Church.
considered, that at Jesus departure out of this world from the Mount Olieut,
S. Luke reports, that all the multitude of his folowers, which there had
beheld his Ascension into heaven, returned back together into the City of
Jerusalem, and there remained in one house together; continuing in prayer and
expectation, what should become of them. The whole City was bent against them:
them selves were poor and simple people; and diverse of them women: Lands or
Revenues they had not to maintain them; nor friends in Court to give them
countenance against their enemies. The name of Jesus was most odious; and who
soever did favor him, was accounted a Traitor and ennemie to the state. There
wanted not (perhaps) among them, who considering the great multitude, would
imagine with themselves, what should become of them; where they should find to
maintain and sustain them; what should be the end of that The state of
Christ's first Church.
feeble congregation? For abroad they durst not go, for fear of persecution:
and continue long together, they might not, for want of necessaries. Besides
that, every hour they expected to be molested and drawn forth, by Catchpoles
and Officiers. And albeit, in these distresses, the fresh memory of Jesus, and
his sweet promises made unto them at his departure; as also the delectable
presence of his blessed mother, and her often evhortations and encouragements
unto them, did comfort them greatly, as well may be supposed: yet to him that
by humane reason, should ponder and weigh their present state and condition: it
could not choose but seem hard, and no ways durable.

But be hold upon the sudaine, when they had continued now ten days together,
The Coming of the Holy Ghost, and what comfortes he brought with him. Act.
2.
and might by all probability find them selves in very high degree of temporal
distresses: Jesus performed his promise of sending them a COMFORTER, which was
the Holy Ghost. By whose coming, besides the internal joy, and incredible
alacrity and exultation of mind; they received also fortitude, and audacitie,
to go forth into the world. They received the gift of tongues, enabling them
to converse and deal with all sorts of people. They received wisdom and
learning, with most wonderful illuminatio^ in highest mysteries, whereby to
preach, to teach, and convince their adversaries. They received the gift of
prophetie to foretell things to come; together with the power of Working
Signs and Miracles, whereby the whole world remained astonished. And for a
taste or earnestpenie of that which should ensue, concerning the infinite
increase of that little congregation: they saw three thousand of their
adversaries converted to them in one day, by a sermon of S. Peter.

Which increase went on so fast, for the time that ensued: that within forty
years after, the Gentiles them selves confess, that the branches of this
congregation, were spread over all the world, and began to put in fear the
very Emperors Sueton. in vita Nero. Corn. Tac. l. 5. (...).
them selves. Whereof not long after, a man as learned, as ever was any
converted from paganism to Christianity, bears record in his defense to an
Emperor and his officers, who according to the nature of persecutours,
accounted Christians for Traitors to his state and dignity. Which vulgar
objection, this forsaid learned man refuteth in these words.

If we were enemies to your estate; you Tertulia^ in Apolog. ad gentes.
might well seek new Cities and Countries whereof to bear government; for that
you should have in your Empire, more ennemies then Citizens. We have filled
your Towns, your Cities, your Provinces, your Ila^des: your Castles, your
Forteresses, your Tents, your Camps: your Courts, your Pa laces, your
Senates, and your market places. Only we have left your idolatrous temples unto
your selves; al other places are full of Christians. If we were enemies, what
dangerous wars might we make against you (albeit our number were far
less,) who esteem so little of our lives, as to offer our selves daily to be
slain at your hands? This then is your safety in very deed; not your
persecuting of us, but that we are honest, patient, and obedient; and that it
is more lauful in Christian religion, to be killed, then to kill. By which
words of Tertulian, in this The vvonderfull quick increase of Christ's Church.
first beginnings and infancy (as it were) of Christian religion, (for he
lived in the second age after Christ;) we see how this little flock and
kingedome of Jesus was increased, not withstanding all the resistance and
violence of the world against it. Which appears by the same Tertulian, In
praesae. Apolog.
to have been such; and was even at that time when he wrote those words; (the
fowerth persecution being then in most fury:) as all the malefectours of the
world together, had not so much rigor showed against them; as had the most
innocent Christian that lived, for confeising only that name and religion.

This then declared must apparentelie, that it could not proceed, but of some
divine power and supernatural assistance, that in so short a space; amiddest
the contradiction and opposition of so many aduersaires; among the whippes,
and swords and tortures, of so great, potent, and violent persecutours: this
poor, simple, and feeble congregation, should pearse through, and augment it
self so strongelie. Especially if we consider the outward means The i^crease
of Christians against nature.
of this increase; wherein there was nothing to allure or content man's nature:
nothing gorgeous, nothing delectable, nothing to please or entertain
sensuality.

We read of an Emperor, that taking in hand to conquer the world, made this
Plutarch. in Apoth. Prisc. regum. The proclamation of Cyrus Monarche of Media.
Proclamation for winninge men unto his party. Who soever will come and be my
Servant; if he be a footeman, I will make him a horsman. If he be a horsman, I
will make him ride with Coches. If he be a Farmour, I will make him a
Gentleman. If he possess a cotage, I will give him a village. If he have a
village, I will give him a City. If he be Lord of a City, I will make him
Prince of a regio^ and country. And as for Gold, I will power it forth unto
them by heaps and weight, and not by number.

This was Cyrus edict and proclamation to his followers: very glorious (as we
see) in pomp of words and ostentation Jesus proclamation.
of style. Let us now compare the proclamation of Jesus, whose entrance and
preface was; Paenite^tia^ agite: do ye penance. Math. 3. Ioh. 16.
And then it followed; In hoc mundo pressuram habebitis: In this world you
shall receive affliction. And then after again; they shall vvhippe and murder
you. And yet further: you shall be hateful in the sight of all Math. 10.
me^, for my sake. The^ is there adioy ned: he that Luc. 9.
loves his life, shall loose his soul. After that ensweth: he that vvil
follovv me, must bear his Cross. And finally the conclusion is: he that Luc.
1.
comes to me, and does not hate his father, his mother, his wife, his
children, his brethren, his sisters, as also his own life; he is not vvorthie
to be my servant.

This was the entertainment proposed by Jesus, to such as would come and serve
under his Banner: with express protestation, that him self was sent into the
world, Math. (...)
not to bring peace, rest, and ease to flesh and blood, but rather to be the
cause of sword, fire, tribulation, combat, and enmity. And yet, with these
cold offers, presented to the world by poor, abiecte, and most contemptible
officers; and by this doctrine, so Cross and opposite to man's nature,
inclination, and sensual appetite: he gained more hearts unto him, within the
space of forty years, as has been said; then ever did Monarche in the world
possess loving subjects, by what soever temporal alluremente they did or
might propose. Which argues most evidently, the omnipotent puissance of him,
that contrary to man's reason, could bring to pass so miraculous a conquest.

THERE FOLLOWS in order, the consideration THE. 2. Consideration. OF Christ's
Apostes.
of Christ's Apostles; which in some respect, may be said more strange and
wonderful, then the former, in that they being both rule, and simple, and
vnletteredmen, (and for the most part, of the baser sort,) should be chosen
and assigned to so great a work, as was the conversion of all Countries and
Nations; and to stand in combat with the power, learning, and wisdom of all
the world. Neither only had they to contend and fight against their enemies,
but also to direct and govern and menage al those, who should be adjoined to
their masters kingdom. To which charge they seemed so unto ward and
insufficient, in all that time wherein they lived with him upon earth: as by
their questions and demandes made unto him 2 little before his passion: they
might appear to have learned very little, in three whole years conversation and
instruction; and in very deed, to be incapable of so high mysteries and
functions.

Yet notwithstanding, these men who of them selves were so weak and impotent;
after strength and confirmation received by the descending of Gods holy spirit
into them; became so perfect, able, and most excellent men: as they brought the
whole world in admiration of them. Not only, by the most exquisite perfection
of their doctrine, (wherein of a sudaine, without study, they excelled and
convinced the greatest Philosophers then living;) but also, and that
especially, by the rare and stupendous Miracles, which they wrought in the
sight of al men. The contemplation whereof, as S. Luke reports, Act 2.
drove the beholders not only into great marvel, but also into fear and
exceeding terror.

And for example, he recompteth the The apostles Miracles.
restoring of a lame man at the Temple gate of Jerusalem, which had been a
Criple for the space of forty years or more, and the miracle do^ne and
testefied, in the presence and knowledge of all the City. He records also,
the dreadful death of Ananias Act. 3.
and Saphira by the only speech and voice of S. Peter: as i^n like manner, the
heali^g of infinite sick people, by the presence and Act. 5.
shadow of the same Apostle. He reports the most wonderful deliverance of
the said S. Peter out of the hands and prison of Herod by an Angel. The
variety of la^guages, which all the Apostles spoke The visible descending of
the holy Ghost upon al such, on whom the said Apostles did but lay their
hands. The miraculous conversion of S. Paul, by Christ's appearing 1. Cor. 15.
2. Cor. 12. Act. 9. 22. 26.
unto him in the way when he went to persecute. Of which miracle, S. Paul
protested in every place afterward, and once especially, in open audience and
judgment before Agrippa the king, and Festus Governor of Jury.

These miracles and many more are recorded by S. Luke; whereof some part were
seen by him self, and the rest most evident to all the world, as do^ne in
public before infinite witnesses. Neither is it possible they could be
forged, for that (as in the like I have noted before,) it had been most easy
to have refelled them, and thereby to have discredited the whole proceedings of
Christian religion, in those first beginnings. As for example; if the miracle of
Peter's delivery forth of the hands The Miracls reported of the Apostles, could
not be feigred.
and prison of Herod Agrippa, had any way been to be touched with falsehood:
how many would there have been of Herodes Officiers, Courtiars, servants, or
friends, that for defense of their Princes honor, (so deeply tainted by this
narratio^ of S. Luke, published not long after the thig was do^ne:) how many (I
say) would have offered them selves to refuce and disgrace the writer thereof,
having so pregnant means by public record to do the same? So again, whereas
the same Luke reports of his own knowledge, that in a City of Macedonie,
named Philippi, S. Paul and Silas after many miracles do^ne, Act. 16.
were whipped and put in prison, with a dilligent guarde in the lowest prison of
al; their feet locked fast in stocks of timber; and that at midnight when
Paul and Silas began to pray, the whole prison was shaken, and all the doors
thrown open; as also the gyues, not only of those two, but of all the other
prisoners upon a sudaine burst in sunder; and that thereupon, not only the
Iayler cast him self at the feet of Paul, but the Magistrates also, (who the
day before had caused them to be whipped,) came and asked them pardon, and
entreated them to depart from their City: This story (I say) if it had been
false; there needed no more for consutatio^ thereof, but only to have examined
the whole City of Philippi, which could have testified the contrary.

And yet amongst so many adversaries, None ever durst impugn the Miracles of
our Apostles, but by calumniation.
and eager impugners of Christian religion, as Gods enemy stirred up in the
primative Church, of all sorts and sects of people: no one ever appeared,
that durst attempt to take in hand, the particular improouing of these or the
like miracles; but rather confessing the factes; sought always to discredit
them, by other sinister calumniations: namely and commonly; that they were
wrought by the deceits and sleights of art magike. Thus said the Jews of the
miracles of Jesus; and so Mat. 12.
said Julian the Apostata, of the wonderful Apud Ciryl. li. 1. co^t. Iulia.
Aug. lib. de vera Relig.
strange things done by S. Peter, and S. Paul; affirming them to have been
the most expert in Magike, of any that ever lived; and that Christ wrote a
special book of that profession, and dedicated the same to Peter and Paul;
where as notwithstanding, it is most evident, that Paul was a persecutour diverse
years after Christ departed. One Hierocles also wrote a book, Eusebius. lib.
co^t. Hiero.
wherein he feigneth Appolonius Tyanaeus to have done the like miracles by
Magic, which Christ and his Apostles did by divine power. And finally, it is
a general opinion, that both Nero and Julian gave them selves so extremely to
the study of that vain science, as no men ever did the like; upon emulation
only of the miracles done in Rome by Peter and Paul when Nero lived, and by
other Saints and disciples, in the time of Julian.

But what was the end? Pliny that was a Pagane, writes thus of Nero; that
Plin. lib. 30. Not. hist. cap. 1.
as no man ever labored more then he in that science: so no man ever left a
more certain testimony of the maruailous exceeding vanity thereof. The like
in effect Zosimus in cit. Iulia.
writes Zosimus of Julian, albeit him self a malicious heathen. And if it were
not written; yet their several extraordinary calamities, and most miserable
deaths, which by all their Magike they could not forsee: does sufficiently
testify the same unto us; especially the last words of Julian; Vicisti
Galilae, vicisti. Thou have woune Niceph lib. 10. cap. 35. histo.
(o Galilaean,) thou have gotten the victory. Acknowleging thereby, as well the
truth of Christ's miracles and of his folowers, as also the vanity, folly, and
madness, of his own endeavors.

Thus then went foreward Christ's The success of the Apostles. Marc. 16.
Apostles, and preached him every where throughout the world: Domino cooperate,
and sermonem confirmante, sequentibus signis, that is, (as S. Mark affirms;)
Our Lord Jesus working with them, and confirming their preaching by signs and
miracles. In respect of which benign assistance of Jesus in their actions; S.
Luke says further; they Act. 14.
dealt most confidently in our Lord; his word of grace giving testimony to
their doings, and shevving forth signs and most prodigious wonders hy their
hands. No pers cution, no terror, no threats of enemies, no difficulty, or
danger that might occur; could stay them from their course of setting
forth Christ's name and glory. And they were so assured of the truth, by the
inward illuminations which they had, and by this The (...) of the (...)
certain testimony of Gods favor and assistance in doing miracles: as one of
the^ writes thus: That which we have eard, which we have seen with our
eyes, which we 1. Ioh 1.
have beheld, which our hands have handled of the word of lise: that we
do testesie and announce unto you. And an other, S. Paul.
who had been a grievous persecutour and was converted without conference with
any Christian in the world; said, of Jesus Christ that was dead, and resen
again; that, (...) (...) Romans 8.
bulatio^, nor distress, nor sainine, nor beggarie, nor danger, nor
persecution, nor dint of svvorde, could daunt him from the service of (...) a
master. And in another place, he says, that he esteemed all thing of this
world, wherein a man might glory; to be as (...) Phil. 3.
dunge and detrimentes, in respect of the eminent knowledge, (that is his
word) of his Lord Jesus Christ. In which very name, he took so exceedig
great delight; as in a few Epistels which he left written; he is observed to
have used this sentence, Dominus noster Jesus Christus, above two hundred times.

Neither endured this in these Apostles, for a time only, but all their lives,
which The joyful andinze of the Apostles.
as they spent with alacrity in the service of Jesus: so inthe end they gave
up the same most cherefully, to what soever death presented it self, for
co^formation and sealing of their former doctrine; neuerso full of confidence,
courage, and consolation, as at that hour; nor ever so boldly denouncing 2.
Tim. 4. (...). These. 2.
their Master, or talking so joyfully of rewards, Crounes, etc Kigdomes; as
at the very last instant and vpshot of their wordly combat. This the declares
most manifestly, that the actions of these men, proceeded not of humane spirit,
nor could be performed by the power of ma; But by the divine force and
supernatural assistance of their Lord and God, whom they confessed.

AND THVS MVCHE in brauitie, of Christ's Apostles. There ensue his Evangelists;
that THE. 3. Consideration. OF the Eua^gelistes.
is, such men, as have left unto us written, his birth, life, doctrine, and
death. Wherein is to be noted, that lesus being God, took a different way from
the custom of man, in delivering unto us, his laws and precepts. For that
men, who have been lawmakers unto the world, knew no surer way of publishing
their laws, and procuring authority to the same; then to write them with
their own hands, and in their life time to establishe their promulgation. So
Lycurgus, Solon, and others among the Grecians: Numa to the Romans: Mahomet to
his Sarasins: and diverse other in like manner. But Jesus to Jesus lest nothing
written by him seif.
show his Divine power in directing the pen and style of his Evangelists,
would not leave any thing writing him self, but passed from this world in
simplicity and filence, whithout any further show or ostentatio^ of his own
doings; meaning notwithstanding, by his eternal wisdom, that the prophetie of
Ezechiel should be Ezec. 1.
fulfilled, which foresignified the being of his four irrefragable witnesses,
which day and night without rest, should preach, extolle, and magnify their
Lord and Master, to the worlds end.

Four then were fore-prophetied, and four (as we see) by Gods providence The
different qualities, and circumstances of the 4. Eua^gelists.
were provided, to fulfill the same prophetie. The first and last, are two
Apostles, that wrote as they had seen. The two middle, are two diseiples, who
registered things, as they had understood by conference with the Apostles. The
first Ghospel was written by an Apostle; to give light and open the way to all the rest: And the last, in like manner was written by an Apostle; to give
authority and confirmation to all the former. The first was written in Hebrew
or Jewish tongue, for that Jesus actions were done in that country; to the
end that thereby, either the whole Nation might believe them, or the obstinate
impugn them. The other three, were written in the public tongues of al other
nations; that is, in the Greek and Roman languages: if it be true ( See
Armacan. l. 9. de quaest.
which diverse hold,) that S. Marcs Ghospel was first written in Latin.

They wrote their stories in diverse countries, each one remaning far distant
from Circumstances of truth in our Eua^gelistes.
an other; and yet agreed they al (as we see) most exactly, in the very same
narration. They wrote in diverse times, the one after the other; and yet the
later, did neither correct nor reprehend any thing ithe former. They published
their stories, when infinite were alive that knew the factes, and many more
that desired to impugn them. They set down in most of their particular
narrations, the time, the day, the hour, the place, the village, the house,
the persons, the men, the women, and other the like. Which circumstances, the
more they are in number, the more easy to be refuted, if they were not true.
Neither did they in Jury write of things done in India; but in the same
country it self; in Towns and Cities that were publicly known; in
Bethania, and Bethsaida, villages hard by Jerusalem; in the Suburbs and hiles
about the City; in such a Street, at such a Gate, in such a Porch of the
Temple, at such a fishpoole, which al people in Jerusalem did every day
behold.

They published their writings in their own life time; and preached in word,
so much as in writing they had recorded. The publishing of our Ghospelles.
They permitted the same to the judgment and examination of al Christ's church;
especially of the Apostles, who were able to discern every least thing therein
contained. So Mark set forth his Ghospel, by the instruction and approbation
of S. Peter: as also did Luke, by the authority of Hieron. in catalog. Script.
Eccles.
S. Paul. They altered not their writings afterward, as other authors are
wont, in their later editions: nor ever corrected they any one jot of that
which they had first set down. And that which never happened, in any other
writings in the world besides; nor ever Prince or Monarch was able to bring to
pass, for credit of his edictes or sanctions: they gave their lives, for
defense and iustefying of that they had written.

Their manner of writing is sincere and simple; without al art, amplification,
or The manner of style in our Eua^gelistes.
Rhetorical exornatio^. They flatter none; no not Jesus him self, whom they
most adore; nor in confessing him to be their God and Creator, do they
conceal his infirmities of flesh, in that he was man; as Mat. 21. Marc. 2.
John. 7. Luc. 19.
his hunger and thirst; his being weary; how he wept; his passions of fear;
and the like. So likewise, in the Apostles that were the governors,
superiors, and heads of all the rest; do these Evangelists dissemble, hide, or
pass over no such things as were defects and might seem to worldly eyes, to
turn to their discredites. As for example; how Christ rebuked them for their
dulnes in understanding: how after long instruction, they proposed
notwithstanding very rude and impertinent Marc. 15. John. 10. 11. and 20.
questions unto him: how Thomas would not believe the attestation of his
fellows: how S. Ihon and S. James the sons of Zebedee, ambitiouslie
solicited to have the pre-eminence of sitting nearest to Christ i^ his glory.
Which later Marc. 10.
clause, being set down clearly by S. Mark, while yet S. Ihon the Apostle was
living: the same was never denied nor taken ill by the said Apostle, neither S.
Marks Ghospel the less approved by him, albeit he lived longest, and wrote
last of all the rest.

Nay, which is more, and greatly (no A special point to be observed in our
Evangelists.
doubt) to be observed; these Evangelists were so sincere and religious in
their narrations: as they noted especially the impersections of them selves,
and of such other, as they principally respected. So S. Matthew, names him self
Matthew the Publican. And so S. Mark, being Peter's disciple, Mat. 10. Narc. 14.
records particulerly, how S. Peter thrice denied his master. S. Luke, that
was scholar and dependent of S. Paul, makes mention alone, of the little
differences between Paul and Barnabas; and in the story Act. 15.
of S. Stephens death, after al his narration ended; he adds a clause that in
humane judgment might have been left out, to wit; Saulus erat consenties neci
eius. Saul was Act. 7.
co^senting and culpable of Stephens death. Whereby we may perceive most
perspicuouslie, that as these men were plain, sincere, and simple, and far
from presuming to devise any thing of them selves: so were they religious, and
had scruple to pass over or leave out any thing of the truth, in favor of
them selves, or of any other whosoever.

These men's writings then, were published and received for undoubted truth, by
all that lived in the very same age, and were pryuie to the particulers therein
contained. They were copied abroad into infinite men's hands, and so conserved
with all care and reverence, as holy and divine scripture. They were read in
churches, throughout all countries and Nations; expounded, preached, and taught
by all pastors; and commentaries made upon No doubt, but that we have the
true writings of our Eua^gelistes.
them by holy fathers from time to time. So that no doubt can be made, but
that we have the very sa ne writings incorrupt, as the authors left them:
for that it was impossible for any enemy to corrupt so many Copies over all the world, without discoucrie and resiitance. And the same very text, words,
and sentences, which from age to age, the learned fathers do allege out of
these scriptures, we find them now, as they had them at that time. As for
example; S. John that lived longest of all the Apostles and Evangelists, had
among other scholars and auditors, Papias, Ignatius, and Policarpus; al
which agree of the four Ghospels, and other writings left unto us in the new
Testament; affirming S. John to have approved the same. These men were masters
again to Justinius Martyr, Irenaeus, and other, whose writings remain unto
us. And if they did not; yet their sayings and judgments touching the
Scriptures, are recorded unto us by Eusebius and other fathers of the next age
after, and so from Fuseb. li. 5. hist. cap. 15.
hand to hand until our days. So, that of this, there can be no more doubt,
then whether Rome, Constantinople, Jerusalem, and other such renoumed Cities
known to all the world at this day; be the very same, whereof Authors have
treated so much in ancient times.

AND THVS MVCHE of Christ's Evangelists; THE. 4. Consideration. OF Martyrs.
for whose more credit, and for confirmation of things by them recorded; his
divine providence preordained, that infinite witnesses, (whom we call Martyrs,)
should offer up their blood in the primative Church and after. Whereas for no
other doctrine, profession, or religion in the world, the like was ever heard
of, albeit among the Jews, in the time of the Machabies, and at some other
Machab. li. and 2.
times also, when that nation for their sins were aff^icted by Heathen
Princes, some few were tyrannized and injuriously put to death: yet commonly,
and for the most part, this was rather of barbarous fury in the Paganes for
their resista^ce, the^ directly for hatred of Iuishe religion. And for the
number, there is no doubt, but that more Christians were putt to death, within
two months for their belief throughout the world; then were of Jews in two
thouland years before Christ's coming. Which is undoubtedly a matter very
wounderful; considering, that the Iuishe religion impugned no less the Pagan
Idolatry, then does the doctrine of the Christians. But this came to pass,
that Christ's words might be fulfilled, who said; I come not to bring peace,
but Mat. 5.
the svvorde. And again; I send you forth as Math. 10.
sheep among wolves. That is to say; to be torn and harried, and your blood
to be devoured. Three points. to be considered in our Martyrs.


In which extreme and most incredible sufferinges of Christians, three points
are worthy of great consideration. The first, what infinite multitudes of al
states, conditions, sex, qualities, and age, did suffer daily fortestimonie
of this truth. The second; See the narratio^ of Philaeas by shope in Africa
touching this point, alleged by Eusebius. l. 8. hist. cap. 11. and 12.
What intolerable and unaccustomed torments, not hard of in the world before,
were devised by Tyrants for afflicting this kind of people. The third; what
invincible courage, and unspeakable alacrity the Christians showed, in bearing
out these afflictions, which the enemies themselves could not attribute, but to
some divine power and supernatural assistance.

And for this later point of comfort in their sufferings, I will allege only
this The singu ler alacri tie of Chri stians, in their suffe ringes. Tertul. in
apolog. c. 1.
testmonie of Tertulia^ against the Gentiles; who objected, that wicked men
suffered also, as well as Christians. Whereto this learned Doctor made answer
in these words. Truth it is, that many men are prone to ill, and do suffer for
the same: but yet dare they not defend their evil to be good as Christians do
their cause. For that every evil thig by nature, does bring with it either
fear or shame: and therefore we see, that malefactors, albeit they love evil;
yet would they not appear so to the world, but desire rather to lie in covert.
They tremble when they are taken; and when they are accused, they deny all, and
do scarce oftentimes confess their doings upon torments. And finally, when
they are condemned, they lament, moan, and do impute their il fortune to
destiny, or to the planets. But the Christian, what does he like to this? Is
their any man ashamed? or does any man 'repent him when he is taken, except it
be for that he was not taken rather? If he be noted by the enemy for a
Christian; he glories in the same: if he be accused; he defends not him
self: if he be asked the question; he confesses it willingly: if he be
condemned; he veldeth thanks. What evil the^ is there in this Christian cause,
which lacks the natural sequel of evil? I mean, fear, shame,
tergiuersatio^, repentance, sorrow, and deploration? what evil (I say) can this
be deemed, whose guiltines is joy? whose accusation, is desire? whose
punishment, is happiness?

Hitherto are the words of learned Tertulian, who was an eye-witnes of that
Jesus assistance to his Martyrs.
he wrote, and had no small part in the cause of those that suffered, being him
self in that place and state, as daily he might expect to taste of the same
affliction. To which combat, how ready he was, may appear by diverse places of
this his Apology, wherein he utters, (besides his zeal and fervor,) a most
confident security, and certain assurance of Jesus assistance, by that which
he had seen performed to infinite other in their greatest distresses, from the
same Lord before. So that nothing does more a-certaine us of the divine power
and omnipotency of Jesus; then the fortitude invincible, which above al humane
reason, force, and nature, he imparted to his Martyrs.

AFTER WHICH consideration, there THE. 5. Consideration. THE subjection of
spirits.
comes to be weighed, the fifte point before mentioned, which is, of the same
power and omnipote^cie of Jesus, declared and exercised upon the spirits
insernal. Which thing, partly may appear by the Oracles alleged in the end
of the former section, (wherein those spirits foretold, that an Hebrew Child
should be borne, to the utter subversion and ruin of their Tyra^nical
dominion:) And much more at large the same might be declared, by other answers
and Oracles uttered after Christ's nativity and registered in the monumentes
even of the heathens them selves. Whereof he that desires to see more ample
mention, (especially out of Porphyrie, who then was living,) let him read
Eusebius sixte book de preparatione Euangelica, where he shall find store; and
namely, that Apollo many times exclamed Hei mihi, congemiscite: Hei mihi; hei
mihi; Oraculorum defecit me claritas. Woe unto me; lament ye with me: woe unto
me; woe unto me; for that the honor of Oracles has now foresake^ me. Which
co^plaintes and lamentations, are nothing else but a plain confession, that
Jesus was he, of whom a prophet said diverse ages before, Attenuabit omnes Deos
terrae: he shall weareout and bring to beggarie, all the Gods or Soplo. 2.
Idols of the earth. This confessed also the wicked spirits them selves, when
at Christ's appearing i^ Jury, they came unto him at diverse times, and besought
him, not to afflict or torment them, nor command them presently to return to
hell; but rather, to permit them some little time of entertainment, in the sea or
mountains, or among heardes of swine, or the like. Which confession they made
in the sight of all the world: and declared the same afterward by their
factes and deeds.

For presently upon Jesus death, and upon Of the miraculous ceasinge of Oracles
at Chrisis appearinge.
the preaching of his name and Ghospel throughout the world, the Oracles which
before were abundant in every province and country, were put to silence.
Whereof I might allege the testimonies of very many Gentiles them selves, as
that of Iuuenal: Iuuen.


Cessant Oracula Delphis. Saty. 6.


Al Oracles at Delphos, do nowcease: etc. That also of an other Poet:

Excessere omnes adytis, arisque relictis

Dij, quibus imperium hoc steterat. etc. Lucan.


That is: the Gods by whom this empire stood, are al departed from their
temples, and have abandoned their Altars and places of habitatio^. Strabo also
has these express words: The Oracle of Delphos at Strab li. 9. Geograph. 169
Plutar. de defectu Oracul.
this day, is to be seen in extreme beggarie and me^dicitie. And finally,
Plutarche that lived within one hundredth years after Christ, made a special
book, to search out the causes, why the Oracles of the Gods were ceased in
his time. And after much turning and winding many ways, resolved upon two
principal points, as causes thereof. The first, for that in his time, there was
more store of wise men then before, whose answers might stand in stead of
Oracles: and the other, that peradventure the Two insufficient causes.
spirits which were accustomed to yield Oracles, were by length of time grown
old and dead. Both which reasons in the very common sense of al men, must
needs be false; and by Plutarch him self, can not stand with probability. For
first; in his books which he wrote of the lives of ancient famous men, he
confesses, that in such kind of wisdom, as he most esteemed, they had not
their equals among their posterity. Secondly, in his treatises of
Philosophy, he passes it for a ground, that spirits, not depe^ding of
material bodies, can not die or wax old: and therefore, of necessity we must
conclude, that some other cause is to be yielded of the ceasing of these
Oracles, which can not be but the presence and commandment of some higher
power, according to the saying of S. John: To this end appeared the 1. Ioh. 3.
son of God, that he might dissolve (or overthrow) the works of the devil.

Neither did Jesus this alone, in his own person, but gave also power and
authority to his disciples and folowers to do the like; according to their
commission in S. Matheus ghospel; Super omnia Demonia Mat. 10.
and spiritus immundos etc. You shall have authority, over al devils and
unclean spirits. Which commission, how they afterward put in execution, the
whole world yields testimony. And for examples (...) only, I will allege in
this place, an offer or challenge made for proof thereof, by Tertullian to the
heathen magistrates and persecutcurs of his time: his words Tertul. in Apolog.
ad gentes.
are these. Let there be brought here in presence before your tribunal seats,
some person who is certainly known to be possessed with a wicked spirit: and
let that spirit be commanded by a Christian, to A most confident offer made
by Tertulian.
speak, and he shall as truly confess him self to be a devil, as at other
times to you, he will falselie say that he is a God. Again at the same time;
let there be brought forth one of these (your priests or Prophets) that will
seem to be possessed by a divine spirit; I mean of those, that speak gasping
etc. (in whom you imagine your Gods to talk,) and except that spirit also,
(commanded by us,) do confess him self to be a devil, (being indeed afraid
to lie unto a Christian:) do you shed the blood of the Christians in that
very place, etc. None will lie to their own shame, but rather for honor or
advantage: yet those spirits will not say to us, that Christ was a Magician, as
you do; nor that he was of the common condition of men. They will not say, he
was stolen out of his sepulcher; but they will confess, that he was the virtue,
wisdom, and word of God; that he is in heaven, and that he shall come again
to be our judge etc. Neither will these devils in our presence, deny them selves
to be unclean spirits, and damned for their wickedness; and that they expect
his most horrible judgment, professing also, that they do fear Christ in God,
and God in Christ; and that they are made subject unto his servants.

Hitherto are the words of Tertullian, containing (as I have said) a most
confident challenge, and that upon the lives and blood of al Christians, to make
trial of their power in controlling those spirits, which the Romans and other
Gentiles adored as their Gods. Which offer, seeing it was made and exhibited to
the persecutors them selves, then living in Rome; well may we be assured, that
the enemy would never have omitted so notorious an advantage, if by former
experience he had not been persuaded, that the ioining herein would have turned
and redounded to his own confusion.

And this Puissant authority of Jesus, The vvonderfull authority of
Christians over spirits
imparted to Christians, extended it self so far forth; that not only their
words and commandeme^tes, but even their very presence did shut the mouths,
and drive into fear these miserable spirits. So Lactantius shows that in his
days, among many other examples of this thing, a seely Lact. lib. 2. divine.
Instit. c. 16.
seruing-man that was a Christian, following his master into a certain temple
of Idols; the Gods cried out, that nothing could be weldone, as long as that
Christian was in presence. The like records Eusebius of Diocletian the
Emperor, who going to Apollo for an Oracle; Euse. l. 5. de prap. Eua^.
received answer, that the just me^ were the cause that be could say
nothing. Which just men, Apollos priest interpreted, to be meant ironically of
Christians: and thereupon, Diocletian began his most cruel and fearce
persecution, in Eusebius days. Sozomenus also writes, that lulia^ the
Apostata endeavoring with many sacrifices Sozom. l. 3. hist. ca. 18.
and coniurations, to draw an answer from Apollo Daphnaeus, in a famous
place, called daphne, in the suburbs of Antioche: understood at last by the
Oracle, that the bones of S. Babylas the Martyr, that lay nere to the place,
were the impediment why that God could not speak. And thereupon, Julian
presently, caused the same body to be removed. And finally, here of it
proceeded, that in all sacrifices, coniurations, and other mysteries of the
Gentiles, there was brought in, that phrase recorded by scoffing Lucian; Exeant
Christiani; let Christians depart; for that while Lucian. in Alex.
they were present, nothing could be well accomplished.

To conclude; the Pagane Porphyrie, that of al other, most earnestly endeavored
to impugn and disgrace us Christians, and to hold up the honor of his
enfeebled Porph. li. 1. co^t. Christ. apud Euse. li. 5. c. 1. de prae. Eua^g.
idols; yet discoursing of the great plague that reigned most furiously in the
City of Messina, i Cicilie where he dwelt; yields this reason, why
Aesculapius the God of Physike, (much adored in that place.) was not able to
help them. It is no maruailes says (...) this City so many years be vexed
with the plague, seeing that both Aesculapius A marvelous consession of
Porphyrie.
and al other Gods, be now departed from it, by the coming of Christians.
For since that men have bigunne to worship this Jesus, we could never obtain
any profit by our Gods. Thus much confessed this Patron of paganism,
concerning the mayme that his Gods had received by Jesus honor. Which albeit
he spoke with a malicious mind, to bring Christians in hatred and persecution
thereby; yet is the confession notable, and confirms that story which
Plutarch in his forenamed book, does report; that in the later years of
Tyberius A pretty story of Plutarche.
reign, a strange voice and exceeding horrible clamor, with hideous cries,
skriches, and houlinges were heard by many, in the Grecia^sea, complaining that
Plutar. de defectu Oracul.
the great God PAN was now departed. And this Plutarch (that was a Ge^tile,)
affirms to have been alleged and proved, before the Emperor Tyberius; who
maruailed greatly, and could not by all his divines and South sayers, whom he
called to that consultation, gather out any reasonable meaning of this
wonderful accident. But we Christians, comparing the time wherein it happened,
unto the time of Jesus death and passion; and finding the same fully to agree:
may more then probably persuade our selves, that by the death of their great
God PAN (which signifies all,) was imported the ruin and utter overthrow of
all the wicked spirits and Idols upon earth.

AND THVS HAS the Deity of Jesus been declared and proved by his THE. 6.
Consideration. THE punishment of enemies.
omnipotent power in subduing infernal enemies. Now rests it for us to make
manifest the same, by his like power and divine justice, showed upon diverse of
his enemies here on earth; whose greatest punishment, albeit for the most part,
he reserueth for the life to come: yet sometimes, for manifestation of his
omnipote^cie, (as especially it was behoueful i those first daics of his
appeara^ce in the world,) he chasteneth the^ also even here on earth, in the
eye and sight of al men. So we read of the most in famous and miserable death
of Herod the first, surnamed Ascolonita, 1. Herod Ascolonita.
who after his persecution of Christ in his infancy, and the slaughter of the
infantes in Bethleem for his sake; was wearied out by a loathsome life, in fear
and horror Joseph. l. 17 antiq. c. 10. and lib. 1. de bell. Iudai. ca. 21.
of his own wife and children; whom after he had most cruelly murdered; was
enforced also by desperation, thorough his inspeakable vexations, grieves, and
torments, to offer his own hand to his own destruction, if he had not been
stayed by friends that stood about.

After him, Archelaus his eldest son, that was a terror to Jesus at his
return 2. Archilam.
from Egypt, fell also by Gods Justice, into maruailous calamities. For first,
being left as king by his father; Augustus Joseph. l. 17 antiq. c. 15. l. 2. de
bell. Judah. c. 6.
would not allow or ratefie that succession; but of a king, made him a
Tetrarch, assigning to him only the fourth part of that dominion, which his
father had before. And then again, after nine years space, took that away in
like manner, with the greatest dishonor he could devise, seazing upon al his
treasure and riches by way of confiscation, and condemning his person to
perpetual banishment, wherein he died most miserably, in Vienna in France.

Not long after this, the second son 3. Herod Antipas.
of Herod the first, named Herod Antipas, Tetrarch of Galiley, who put S.
Ihon Baptist to death, and scorned Jesus before his passion, (whereat both him
self and Joseph. l. 18 antiq. c. 9. l. 2. de bell. c. 8
Herodias his concubine were present;) was deposed also by Caius the Emperor
(being accused by Agrippa, his nearest kinseman,) and most contumeliously sent
in exile; first, to Lions in France, and after that, to the most desert and
inhabitable places of Spain, where he with Herodias wandered up and down, in
extreme calamity, so long as they lived; and finally ended their days,
abandonned of al men. In which misery also it is recorded, that the Niceph. l.
1. cap. 20.
daunsing daughter of Herodias, who had in her Iolitie demanded John Baptists
Head, being on a certain time enforced 4. Herodias daughter.
to pass over a frosen river, the yse brake, and she in her fall, had her head
cut of by the same yse, without hurting the rest of her body, to the great
admiration of all the lookers on.

The like event had an other of Herod 5 Herod Agrippa.
family, named Herod Agrippa, the acculer of the fornamed Herod the Tetrarch;
who in his great glory and triumph, having yut to death S. James the brother
of S. Ihon Evangelist, and imprisoned S. Peter: was soon after in a public
assembly of Princes and Nobles, at Caesarea; stricken from heaven, with a most
horrible disease, whereby his body putrified, Act. 12. Joseph. 1. 19. antiq. c.
7.
and was eaten with vermin, as both S. Luke reports, and Josephus
confirms. And the same Josephus, with no small Lib. 18. c. 7.
marvel in him self, declares; that at the very time when he wrote his
story, (which was about 70 years after the death of Herod the first:) the
whole progeny and offspring, kindred, and family of the said Herod, (which he
says was exceeding great, by reason he had niene The stock of Herod soon
extinguished.
wives together, with many children, brothers, sisters, nephews, and
kinsefolke,) were all extinguished in most miserable sort, and gave a
testimony (says Josephus) to the world, of the most vain confidence, that
men do put in humane felicity. The punishment of Romans.


And as these punishements lighted openly, upon Jesus professed enemies in
Jury: So escaped not also the Romans their chastissement; I mean such, as
especially had their hands in persecution of him, or of his followers after
him. For 5. Pilate.
first, of Pontius Pilate, that gave sentence of death against him, we read,
that after great disgrace received in Jury; he was (...). lib. 7. hist. Eusebius
l. 2. c. 7. hist.
sent home into Italy, and there by manifold disfavors showed unto him by the
Emperor his master, sell into such desperation, as he slew him self with his
own hands. And secondly, of the very Emperors them selves, who lived from
Tyberius (under whom Jesus suffered,) unto Constantine the great, under whom
Christian religion took dominion over the world, (which contained the space of
three hundredth years;) very few or none, escaped the manifest scourges of Gods
dreadful justice, showed upon them at the knitting up of their days. For
examples Tertul. in Apolog.
sake; Tyberius, that permitted Christians to live freely, and made a law
against their molestation, as before has been showed, died peaceably in his
bed. But 6. Calligula.
Caligula that followed him, for his contempt showed against al divine power, in
making him self a God; was soon after murdered by the co^spiracie of his
dearest friends. Nero also, who first of al other 7. Nero.
began persecution against the Christians; within few months after he had
put S. Peter and S. Paul to death in Rome, (having murdered in like manner his
own mother, brother, wife, and master;) was upon the sudaine, from his
glorious estate and majesty, thrown down into such horrible distress and
confusion, in the sight of al men; as being condemned by the Senate, to have
his head thrust into a pillorie, and there most ignominiously to be whipped to
death: was constrained, for avoiding the execution of that terrible sentence,
to massacre him self with his own hands, by the assistance of such as were
dearest unto him.

The like might be showed in the tragical 8. Many Emperous that died
miserablic.
ends of Galba, Otho, Vitellius, Domitian, Commodus, Pertinax, Julian,
Macrinus, Antoninus, Alexander, Maximinus, Gordianus, Aurelianus, Decius,
Gallus, Volutianus, Aemilianus, Valerianus, Galienus, Caius, Carinus,
Maximianus, Maxentius, Licinius, and others, whose miserable deaths, a noble
man and Counselor well near a thousand years past, Euagrius Scolast. l. 3.
hist. ca. 41.
did gather against Zosimus a heathen writer, to show thereby the pouerful hand
of Jesus upon his enemies; adding further more, that since the time of
Constantine, whiles Emperors have been Christians, few or no such examples can
be showed, except it be upon Julian the Apostata, Valens the Arrian heretic,
or some other of like detestable and notorious wickedness. And thus much of
particular men chastised by Jesus.

But if we desire to have a full example 9. The chastisment of Jerusalem and
of the Iuishe people.
of his justice, upon a whole Nation together: let us consider what befell
Jerusalem and the people of Jury, for their barbarous cruelty practiced upon
him, in his death and Passion. And truly, if we believe Josephus and Philo the
Iuishe historiographers, (who lived either with Christ or immediately after
him;) It can hardly be expressed by the tongue or pen of man, what
insufterable calamities and miseries, were inflicted to that people
(presentelie upon the Ascension of Jesus,) by Pilat their governor, under
Tyberius the Emperor; and then again by Petronius, under Caligula; and after
that, by Cumanus, under Claudius; and lastly, by Festus and Albinus, under
Nero. Through Joseph. lib. 19. antiq. li. 2. and 3. de bell. Iudai. Philo in
Flacco and l. 2. de leg. Cornel. Tac. lib. 12.
whose cruelties that nation was enforced finally to rebel and take arms
against the Roman Empire, which was the cause of their utter ruin and
extirpation by Titus and Vespasian. At what time, besides the overthrow of
their City, burni^g of their Temple, and other infinite distresses, which
Josephus an eye-witnes protests, that no speech or discourse humane can
declare: the same author records eleue^ hundredth thousand persons to have
been slain, and four skore and seuentiene thousand taken alive, who were
either put to death afterward i^ public triumphs, or sold openly for
bondslaues into all parts of the world.

And in this universal calamity of the Iuishe Nation, being the most notorious
and grievous that ever happened to Nation or people, before or after them, (for
the Romans never practiced the like upon How Christ his death was punished
with like circumstances upon the Jews.
others) it is singulerly to be observed, that in the same time and place, in
which they had put Jesus to death before; that is, in the feast of their
Paschal, when their whole Nation was assembled at Jerusalem, from al parts,
Provinces, and Countries of the earth: they received this their must pitiful
subversion, and that by the hands of the Roman Caelar, to whom by public
cry, they had appealed from Jesus but a little before. Yea, further it is
observed and noted, that as they apprehended Jesus, and made the e^tra^ce to
his passion upon the mount Oliuet: sp Titus (as Josephus writes,) upon Joseph.
li. 5. de bell. c. 8.
the same mount planted his first siege for their final destruction. And as
they led Jesus from Caiphas to Pilate, afflicting him in their presence: so
now were themselves led up and down, from John to Simon, (two tyrants that
had usurped Cap. 27.
dominion within the City,) and were scourged and tormented before their
tribunal seats. Again, as they had caused Jesus to be scoffed, beaten, and
vilanously entreated by the soldiers, in Pilates Palace: so were now their
own pri^cipal rulers and noble me^, (as Ioseph' notes,) most scornesully
abused, beaten, and crucisied by the same soldiers. Which later point of
crucising, or villainous putting to death upon the Cross, was begun to be
practiced by the Romans, upon the Iuishe Gentry, immediately after Christ's
death and not before. And now at this time of the war, Josephus affirms,
that i^ some one day, 500 of his nation were taken and put to this opprobrious
kind of punishment; in so much, that for the great multitude (says he,) Nec
locus suff^eret Crucibus, Lib. 5. 2e bell. c. 28.
nec crucis corporib^^ that is; nether the place was sufficient to contain so
many Crosses, as the Romans set up; nor the Crosses sufficient to sustain so
many bodies, as they murdered by that torment.

This dreadful and unspeakable misery, fell upon the Jews, about forty
years after Jesus Ascension, when they had A marvelous providence of God for
delivering the Christians that were in Jerusalem at the time of the
destruction.
showed them selves most obstinate and obdurate against his doctrine, delivered
unto them, not only by him self, but also by his Disciples; of which disciples
they had slain now S. Stephen and S. James, and had driven into banishment,
both S. Peter and S. Paul, and other that had preached unto them. To which
later two Apostles, (I mean S. Peter and S. Paul,) our Savior Jesus appeared
a little before their martirdomes in Rome, (as Lacta^tius writes,) and showed,
that within three or four years after their deaths, he was to take revenge
upon their Nation, by the utter destruction of Jerusalem, and of that
generation. Which secret advise, the said Lactantius affirms, that Peter and
Lib. 4. divine. Inst. ca. 21. Eusebius. li. 3. hist. cap. 5. Niceph. c. 3.
Paul reueyled to other Christians in Jury; whereby it came to pass, (as
Eusebius also and other authors do mention,) that all the Christians living in
Jerusalem, departed thence, not long before the siege began, to a certain
town named Pella, beyond Jordan, which was assigned unto them for that
purpose, by Jesus himself, for that it being in the dominion of Agrippa, (who
stood with the Romans,) it remained in peace and safety, while al Jury
besides was brought to desolation.

This then was the providence of God for the punishment of the Jews at that
time. And ever after, their estate declined The Iuishe miseries after the
destruction of Jerusalem.
from worse to worse; and their miseries daily multiplied throughout the world.
Whereof he that will see a ver lamentable narration; let him read but the last
book only of Josephus history de Bello Judaico, wherein is reported besides
other things, that after the war was ended, and al public slaughter
ceased: Titus sent sixtie^ thousand Jews, as a present to his father to Rome,
there to be putt to death in diverse and sundry manners. Others he applied to be
Spectacles for pastyme to the Romans that were present with him; whereof
Josephus says, that he saw with his Joseph. li. 7. de bell. c. 20 and 21.
own eyes, two thousand and five hundredth murdered and consumed in one day, by
fight and combat among them selves, and with wild beasts at the Emperors
appointement. Others were assigned in Antioche and other great Cities, to serve
for faggots in their famous bonefires at times of triumph. Others were sold
to be bondslaues: others condemned to dig and show stones for ever. And this
was the end of that war and desolation.

After this again under Traiane the Emperor, there were so infinite a number
of The final desolatio^ of the Iuishe Nation.
Jews slain and made away by Marcus Turbo in Africa, and Lucius Quintus in
the East: as al histories agree, that it is impossible to express the
multitude. But yet more wonderful is it, which the same historians do report;
that in the 18. year of Adrian the Emperor, one Iullus Seuerus being sent to
extinguishe all the remnant of the Iuishe generation: destroyed Oros. lib. 7.
cap. 13. Ariston pel laeus in hist. Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 8. Niccph. lib. 3. c.
24.
in small time 980 Towns and villages within that country, and slew five
hundredth and four skore thousand of that blood and nation in one day: at
which time also he beat down the City of Jerusalem in such sort; as he
lest not one stone standing upon an other of their ancient buildinges; but
caused some part thereof to be reedefied again, and inhabited by only
Gentiles. He changed the name of the City, and called it The Emperors name,
was Aclius Adrianus.
AFLIA, after the Emperors name. He drove all the progeny and offspring of the
Jews forth of all those countries, with a perpetual law confirmed by the
Emperor, that they should never return; no, nor so much as look back from
any high or eminent place, to that country again. And this was done to that
Iuishe Nation by the Roman Emperors, for accomplishing that demand, which
their pri^cipal elders had made not long before to Pilate the Romau
Magistrate, concerning Jesus most injurious death, cryinge out with one consent
and voice; to wit: Let his blood be upon us, and upon our posterity. Mat. 25.


AND HEERIN ALSO, (I mean in the most wonderful and notorious chastisment,
THE. 7. Consideration. THE fulfilling of Jesus propheties.
or rather reprobation of this Iuishe people, which of all the world was Gods
peculier before,) is set out unto us, as it were in a glass, the seventh and
last point, which we mentioned in the beginning of this section: to wit, the
fulfilling of such speeches and propheties, as Jesus uttered when he was upon
earth: as namely at one time, after a long and vehement commination, made to
the Scribes, Pharisees, and principal men of that Nation, (in which he
repeateth eight several times the dreadful threat woe:) he concludes finally,
that all the just blood, injuriously shed, from the first Martyr Abel, should
be revenged very shortelie Mat. 23.
upon that generation. And in the same place, he menaceth the populous City of
Jerusalem, that itshould be made desert. And in an other place, he assures
the^, that one Luc. 21.
stone should not be left standing thereof upon an other. And yet futther he
pronounced upon the same City, these words. The days shall come upon thee, and
thy enemies shall enuiron thee with a wal, and shall besiege Luc. 19.
thee; they shall straiten the on every side, and shall beat the to the
ground, and thy children in thee, Jesus speeches of Jerusalem.
And yet more particulerly, he foretells the very signs, whereby his
disciples should perceive when the time in deed was come; using this speech
unto them. When you shall see Jerusalem besieged with an Luc. 21.
army; then know ye, that her disolation is at hand; for that these are the
days of revenge, to the end al may be fulfiled which is written. Great
distress shall fall upon this earth, and vengeance upon this people. They shall be
slain by dint of the svvord, and shall be led as slaves into al countries. And
Jerusalem shall be trodden under seete by the Gentiles, until the times of
Nations be accomplished.

This foretold Jesus of the misery that was to fall upon Jerusalem, and upon
that The circumstance of the time, when Jesus spoke his words, and when
they were written.
people (by the Romans and other Gentiles,) when the Jews seemed to be in
most security and greatest amity with the Romans, (as also they were, when
the same things were written,) and consequently, at that time, they might seem
in all humane reason, to have less cause the^ ever before, to misdoubt such
calamities. And yet how certain and assured foreknowlege, (and as it were most
sensible forefeeling) Jesus had of these miseries, he declared, not only by these
express words Luc. 19.
and by their eue^t: but also by those pitiful tears he shed upon sight and
consideration of Jerusalem, and by the lamentable speech he used to the women
of that City, who wept for him at his Passion, persuading them, to weep
rather for the^ selves and for their children, (in respect Luc. 23.
of the miseries to follow,) then for him.

Which words and predictions of Jesus, together with sundry other his
speeches, fore showing so particularly the imminent calamities of that Nation,
(and that, as I have said, at such time, when in humane discourse there could be
no probability thereof;) when a certain heathen Chronicler and Mathematique,
named Phleg. Thralli. lib. annal.
Phlegon, about an hundredth years after Christ's departure, had diligently
considered, having seen the same also in his days most exactelie fulfilled,
(for he was servant to Adrianus the Emperor, by whose commandment, as has
been said before, the final subversion of the Iuishe The testimony of a
beathe^, for the fulfilling of Christ's propheties.
nation was brought to pass:) this Phlego^ (I say) though a Pagan, yet upon
consideration of these euentes, and others that he saw, (as the extreme
persecution of Christians fortold by Christ and the like:) he pronounced, that
never any man foretold things so certainly to come, or that so preciselie were
accomplished, as were the predictions and propheties of Jesus. And this
testimony of Phlegon, was alleged and urged for Christians, again't Orig.
lib. 2. cu^t. Celsum sub initiu^.
one Celsus a heathen Philosopher and Epicure, by the famous learned Origin,
even the very next age after it was written by the author; so that of the
truth of this allegation, there can be no doubt or question at all.

And now albeit these predictions and Other propheties of Jesus fulfilled to his
Disciples.
propheties, concerning the punishment and reprobation of the Jews, fulfilled
so evidently in the sight of all the world, might be a sufficient demonstration,
of Jesus for knowledge in affairs to come: yet are there many other things
besides foreshewed by him, which fell out as exactly, as did these;
notwithstanding that by no learning, mathematical reason, or humane conjecture,
they were or might be forsene. As for example; the foretelling of his own
death; the manner, time, and place thereof: as also the person that should
betraie him, together with his irrepentantende. The flight, fear, and scandal
of his disciples, albeit they had promissed and protested the contrary. The
three several denials of Peter. The particular time of his own resurrection,
and Ascension. The sending of the Holy Ghost; and many other the like
predictions, propheties, and promises, which to his Apostles, Disciples, and
folowers, that heard them uttered, and left them written before they fell out,
and saw them afterward accomplished; and who by the falsehood thereof should
have received greatest do^mage of all other me^, if they had not been true: to
these men (I say) they were most evident proofs of Jesus divine prescience in
matters that should ensue.

But yet for that an Infidel, (with whom only I suppose my self to deal in
this place,) may in these and the like things, find perhapes some matter of
cauillation; and say, that these propheties of Jesus were recorded by our
Evangelists, Propheties fulfilled in the sight of Gentiles.
after the particularities therein prophetied were effectuated, and not before;
and consequently, that they might be forged: I will allege certain other
euentes, both foretold and registered, before they came to pass; and diuulged
by public writings in the face of all the world, when there was small
semblance that ever the same should take effect. Such were the particular

And with this will we conclude our third and last part of the general division
set down in the beginning, concerning the grounds and proofs of Christian
religion.

The Conclusion. Sect. 4.
BY ALL that hitherto has been said, The sum of the sormer three Sections.
we have declared and made manifest unto the, (gentle reader,) three things of
great importance. First, that from the beginning and creation of the world,
proofs; and by ten thousand more, which to the tongue or pen of man are
inexplicable, the Christian mind remains settled, and most firmly grounded
in the undoubted belief of his religion; having besides al other things,
euide^ces, certainties, and internal comfortes and assurances, which are
infinite: these eight demonstratiue Eight reasons.
reasons and persuasions which ensue, for his more ample and abundant
satisfaction therein.

First; that it was impossible that so many 1. The propheties.
things, should be foretold so precisely, with so many particularities, in so
many ages, by so different persons al of sanctity, with so great concord,
consent, and unity, and that so long before hand, but by the spirit of God
alone, that only has foreknowlege of future events. Secondly; 2. The
fulfillinge.
that it could not possibly be, that so many things, so difficult and strange,
with all their particularities and circumstances, should be so exactly and
preciselie fulfilled, but in him alone of whom they were truly meant. Thirdly;
that it can no ways be imagined, that God would ever 3. Gods assistance.
have concurred with Jesus doings, or assisted him, above all course of
nature, with so abundant miracles, as the Gentiles do confess that he
wrought, if he had been a Seducer, or taken upon him to set forth a false
doctrine. Fourthly; if Jesus 4. Jesus doctrine.
had intended to deceive and seduce the world; he would never have proposed a
doctrine so difficult and repugnant to al sensuality; but rather would have
taught things pleasant and grateful to man's voluptuous delight, as Mahomet did
after him. Nether could the nature of man, have ever so affectuously embrased
such austeritie, without the assistance of some divine and supernatural power.
Fistly; 5. Jesus manner of teachinge.
for that Jesus being poorly borne and unlettered, as by his adversaries
confession does appear, and that in such an age and time, when all worldly
learning was in most flourishing estate: he could never possibly but by divine
power, have attained to such most exquisite knowledge in all kind of learning,
as to be able to decide all the doubts and controversies of Philosophers
before him, as he did; laving down more plainly, distinctly, and
perspicuously, the pithe of all humane and divine learning, within the compass
of three years teaching, (and that to auditors of so great simplicity;) then
did all the Sages of the world, until that (...), in so much that even then, the
most unlearned Christian of that time, could say more in certainty of truth,
concerning the knowledge of God, the Creation of the world, the end of man,
the reward of virtue, the punishment of vice, the immortality and rest of our
soul after this life, and in other such high poinctes and mysteries of true
philosophy: then could the most famous and learned of all the Gentiles, that
had for so many ages before, beaten their brains in contention about the same.

Sixtlie, if Jesus had not meant plainly 6. Jesus life and manner of proceedinge.
and sincerely in all his doings, according as he professed; he would never
have taken so severe a course of life to himself, neither would he have refused
al temporal dignities and aduanceme^ts as he did; he would never have chosen to
die so opprobriously in the sight of al men, nor made election of Apostles and
Disciples so poor and contemptible in the world; nor if he had; would ever
worldly men have followed him in so great multitudes, with so great seruour,
zeal, constancy, and perseuera^ce unto death Seventhly, we see that the first
7. The beginners and first publishers of Christian religion.
beginners and founders of Christian religion left by Jesus, were a multitude
of simple and unskillful persons, unapt to deceive or devise any thing of them
selves. They began against al probability of man's reason: they went forward
against the stream and strength of all the world: they continued and increased
above humane possibility: they perseuered in torments and afflictions
insufferable: they wrought miracles above the reach and compass of man's
ability: they overthrew Idolatry, that then possessed the world, and
confounded al powers infernal, by the only name and virtue of their master.
They saw the propheties of Jesus fulfilled, and al his divine speeches and
predictions come to pass. They saw the punishment of their enemies and chief
imnugners to fall upon them, in their days. They saw every day whole
Provinces, Countries, and kingdoms converted to their faith. And finally, the
whole Roman Empire and world besides, to subject it self to the law,
obedience, and Ghospel of their master.

Lastly; among all other reasons and arguments, this may be one most manifest
8. The present state of Jews.
unto us; that whereas by many testimonies and express propheties of the old
Testament it is affirmed, that the people of Israel should abandone, persecute,
and put to death the true Messiah at his coming, as before has been showed;
and for that fact, should it self be abandoned of God, and brought to ruin
and dispersion over all the world; (wherein according to the words of Osee; they
shall sit for a long time, Osee 3.
without king, without prince, without sacrifice, without Altar, without
Ephode, or images; and after this again shall return and seek their God, in
the last days:) we see in this age the very same particularities fulfilled in
that Nation, and so to have continued now for these fiftiene hundredth years:
that is; we see the Iuishe people abandoned and afflicted above al Nations of
the world; dispersed in seruilitie throughout al corners of other Nations;
without dignity or reputation; without king, prince, or common wealth, of them
selves; prohibited by all Princes, both Christian and other, to make their
sacrifices, where they inhabit; deprived of al means to attain to knowledge
in good literature, whereby daily they fall into more gross ignorance and
absurdities against common reason, in their later doctrine; then did the most
barbarous infidels that ever were; having lost al sense and feeling in
spiritual affairs; al knowledge and understanding in celestial things for the
life to come; having among them no Prophet; no grave teacher; no man directed
by Gods holy spirit: and finally; as men forlorn and filled with all kind of
misery, do both by their inward and external calamities, preach, denounce,
and testify to the world, that Jesus whom they Crucified, was the only true
Messiah and Saucour of mankind, and that his blood, (as they required,) lies
heavily upon their generation for ever.

Wherefore to conclude this whole The conclusion of the Chapter with an
admonishement.
discourse and treatise of the proofs and evidences of our Christian religion;
seeing that by so manifold and invincible demo^stratio^s, it has been declared
and laid before our eyes, that Jesus is the only true Saucour and redeemer of
the world, and consequently, that his service and religion is the only way and
mean to please almighty God, and to attain everlasting happiness; there
remains now to consider, that the same Jesus, which by so many Prophets was
promised to be a Saucour; was also foretold by the self same Prophets, that
he should be a Judge and Jesus shall be also a Judge.
examiner of al our actions. Which later point, no one Prophet that has
forshewed his coming, has omitted seriously to inculcate unto us. No, not the
Sibyls them selves, who in every place where they describe the most gracious
coming of the Virgins son, do also annexe thereunto his dreadful appearance
at the day of judgment; especially in those famous Acrosticke verses, whereof
there has Apud Euse. lib. 4 in vit. Constable. in si.
been so much mention before; the whole discourse upon the words, Jesus, Christ,
the son of God, Saucour, and Cross, contains nothing else, but a large and
ample description of his most terrible coming infire and flame, and
conflagration of the world at that dreadful day, to take account of all men's
words, actions, and cogitations.

To which description of these Pagane Prophets, is consona^t the whole tenor
1. Reg. 2. Psalm. 95. Esa. 2. 13. 26. 27. 30 Iere. 30. Dan. 7. Sopho. 1. Malac.
4. Mat. 12. 13. 16. 24. 25. Mar. 13. Luc. 17. Romans 2. 14. 1. Cor. 15. 2. Cor.
5. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 5.
and co^text of the old Bible, foreshewing every where, the dreadful Majesty,
terror, and severity of the Messiah at that day. The new Testament also,
which tends wholly to comfort and solace mankind, and has the name of
Euangile, in respect of the joyful news which it brought to the world;
omitteth not to put us continually in mind of this point. And to that end,
both Jesus him self, amiddest al his sweet and comfortable speeches with his
Disciples, did admonish them often of this last day; and his Apostles,
Evangelists, and Disciples after him, repeated, iterated, and urged this
important consideration, in all their words 2 Thessalonians. 1 1. Tit. 2. 2. Pet. 3.
Heb. 9. Iud. 14. Apoc. 1.
and writings.

Wherefore as by the name and cogitation of a Saueour, we are greatly stirred up
to joy, alacrity, confidence, and consolation: so by this admonishment of
Gods Saints, and of Jesus himself, that he is to be our Judge, and severe
examiner of all the minutes and moments of our life: we are to conceive just
fear and dread of this his second coming. And as by the whole former treatise
we have been An illatio^ upon the premises with an exhortation.
instructed, that the only way to salvation is by the profession of Jesus
religion: so by this account that shall be demanded at our hands at the last
day, by the Author and first institutour of this religion, we are taught,
that onles we be true Christians indeed, and do perform such duties as this
law and religion prescribes unto us; so far of shall we be from receiving any
benefit by the name; as our judgment shall be the more grievous, and our final
calamity more intolerable. For which cause, I would in sincere charity,
exhort every man, that by the former discourse has received any light, and is
confirmed in his judgment concerning the truth of Christian religion; to employ
his whole endeavors for the attaineme^t of the fruit and benefit thereof:
which is, by being a true and real Christian: for that Christ him self
foresignified, that many should take the name without commodity of their
profession. And to the end each man may the better know or conjecture of him
self, whether he be in the right way or no, and whether he perform in deed
the duty required of a true Christian: I have thought convenient, to adioyne
this chapter next following of that matter, and therein to declare the
particular points belonging to that profession. Which being known, it shall
be easy for every one that is not over partial, or wilfully bent to deceive
him self, to discern of his own estate, and of the course and way that he
holds. Which is a high point of wisdom for all men to do while they have
time; least at the later day, we having passed over our lives in the bare name
only of Christianity, without the substance: do find our selves in the
number of those most unfortunate people, who shall cry Lord, Lord, and receive
no comfort by that confession.

HOW A MAN MAY IVDGE OR DISCERN OF HIM SELF, WHETHER HE BE a true Christian
or not. With a declaration of the two parts belonging to that profession;
which are, belief and lyse. CHAPT. V.
AS IN humane learning and sciences of this world, after declaration made of
the utility, possibility, certainty, conueniencie, and other qualities,
co^mendations, and proprieties thereof; the next point is, to show the means
and way whereby to attain the same: so much more, in this divine and heavenly
doctrine of Christian religion (which concerns our soul and everlasting
salvation;) for that we have showed before, not only the most undoubted truth
whereupon it stands, but also that the knowledge thereof is so absolutely
necessary, as there is no other name or profession under heaven, whereby
mankind can be saved, but only Act. 4.
this of Jesus: it follows by order of good consequence, that we should treat
The effect of this chapter.
in this place, how a man may attain the fruit of this doctrine: that is to
say; how he may come to be a good Christian; or if already he profess that
name; how he may examine or make trial of him self, whether he be so in deed or
not. Which examination (to speak in brief,) consists wholly in
consideration of these two Two points.
points. First; whether he believe unfeignedly the total sum of docume^ts and
mysteries,

AND FOR THE FIRST, how to THE. 1. part, concerning belief.
examine the truth of our belief; it would be over tedious to lay down every
particular way, that might be assigned for discussion thereof: for that it
would bring in the contention of al times, as well ancient as present, about
controversies in Christian faith, which has been impugned from age to age, by
the seditious instruments of Christ's infernal enemy. And therefore, as well in
respect of the length, (whereof this place is not capable,) as also for that of
purpose I do avoid al dealing with matters of controversy, within the
compass of this work: I mean only at this time, for the comfort of such as
are already in the right way, and for some light to others, who perhaps of
simplicity may walk awrie; to let down with as great brevity as possibly
may be, some few general notes or observations, for their better help in this
behalf.

In which great affair of our faith and belief, (wherein consists as well
the ground and foundation of our eternal welfare, as also the fruit and entire
utility of Christ's coming into this world;) it is to be considered, that God
could not of his infinite wisdom, (forseeing al thigs, and times to come;) nor
ever would of his unspeakable goodness, (desiring our The matters of faith and
belief easy among Christians.
salvation as he does;) leave us in this life, without most sure, certain, and
clear euidencie in this matter: and consequently, we must imagine, that all
our errors committed herein (I mean in matters of faith and belief among
Christians) do proceed rather of finne, negligence, wilfulnes, or
inconsideration in our selves; then either of difficulty or doubtfulnes in the
means left unto us for discerning the same, or of the want of Gods holy
assistance to that effect, if we would with humility accept thereof.

This Esaias made plain, when he prophetied of this perspicuitie; that is, of
this most excellent privilege in Christian religion, so many hundred years
before Christ was borne. For after that in diverse chapters he had declared the
glorious coming of Christ in signs and miracles, as also the multitude of
Gentiles that should embrace his doctrine, together with the joy and
exultation of their conversion: he forsheweth presently the wonderful
providence of God also, in prouidinge for Christians so manifest a way of
direction for their faith and religion; as the most simple and unlearned man in
the world, should not be able (but of wilfulnes) to go astraye therein. His
words are these, directed to the Gentiles. Take comfort and Esaias. 35.
fear not: behold your God shall come and save you. Then shall the eyes of
the blind be opened, and the ears of the deaf shall be restored etc. And there
shall be a path and way; and it shall be called The direct holy way of the
Catholic Church.
THE HOLY WAY: and it shall be unto you so direct a way, as fools shall not
be able to err therein. By which words we see, that among other rare benefits
that Christ's people were to receive by his coming; this should be one, and
not the least; that after his holy doctrine once published and received, it
should not be easy for the weakest in capacity or learning that might be,
(whom Esaias here notes by the name of fools,) to run awrie in matters of
their belief; so plain, clear, and evident, should the way for trial thereof
be made.

Here hence it is, that S. Paul pronounces so peremptorily of a conte^tious
and heretical man, that he is damned by the testimenie Tit. (...).
of his own judgment or conscience; for that he has abandoned this common,
direct, and public way, which all men might see, and has devised particular
paths and turninges to himself. See S. August. tract. 1. in epist. Johan. and
li. de un. Eccl. cont. Petilian. ca. 14.
Herehe^ce it is, that the ancient fathers of Christ primative Church,
disputinge against the same kind of people; defended always that their error
was of malice and wilful blindness, and not of ignorance; applyinge those words
of prophetie unto the^, they that savve me, rannc out from me. That is, says
S. Augustine, they which saw and Psalm. 30.
beheld the Catholic Church of Christ, Concion. 2. in Psalm. 30.
(which is the plain way denoted byEsay, and the most emine^t mountain
described by Daniel; as also by Esaias himself in an other place, and expounded
by Christ Dan. 2. Esa. 2. Math. 5.
in S. Mathewes Ghospel:) this Church (says he) wicked heretics beholding,
(for that no man can avoid the sight thereof, but he that most obstinately
will shut his eyes;) yet for hatred and malice, do they run out of the same,
and do raise up heresies and schisms against the unity thereof.

Thus much says this holy doctor: by whose discourse we may perceive, that
the plain and direct way mentioned by Esaias, wherein no simple or ignorant man
can err, is the general body of Christ's visible Church upon earth, planted
by his Apostles throughout al countries and Nations, and co^tinuinge by
succession, unto the worlds end. In which Church, whosoever remains, and
believes al things that are taught therein; ca^ not possibly fall The way of
avoiding error in belief.
into error of faith. For that this church or universal body, is guided by
Christ's spirit, who is the head thereof, and so no ways subject or withi
compass of error. For which cause, S. Paul names it, the pillar and
sirmament of truth. And the same 1. Tim. 3.
Church, is so manifest and evident, (and shall be so to the worlds end, as the
same Aug. tract. in epist. Ioha^. Chri, hom. 4. de verb. Isai. vidi Dn^m.
learned Doctor, and other his equals do prove:) that it is more easy to
find it out; then it is to see the Sun or Moon, when it shy neth brightest,
or to behold the greatest hill or mountain in the world. For as S. Augustines
words are, albeit particular hills in one country, may be unknown in an
other; as Olympus in Greece, may be unknown in Africa, and the mountain
Giddaba of Affrike, may be unknown in Greece: yet (says this holy father) a
mountain that passes throughout all Countries and fills up the whole world
(as Daniel prophetied Dan. 2.
Christ's Church should do;) can not be but apparent to the sight of al men,
and consequently must needs be known of al men, but only of such, as
wilfully do shut their eyes from sight thereof.

For declaration of which reason, argument, and discourse of Holy-Fathers, A
declaration of the fathers argument. Mat. 5. 18 20.
(being also the discourse of Christ him self in the Ghospel, when he remitteth
me^ to the visible Church, that is placed on an hill;) it is to be noted, that
in the time from Christ's ascension, until the 14. year of Neroes reign, who
first of the Roman Emperors, began open persecution against the
proceedinges of Christians, and put to death S. Peter and S. Paul: In this time
(I say) of tolleration under the Roman Empire, (which contained the space of
37. years;) Christ's Apostles and Disciples had preached and planted one
uniform Gospel thoroughout all the world, as both by their acts and gestes
recorded, as also by the peculier testimony of S. Paul to the Romans may
appear. Romans 1.
Which thing being done most miraculoussie, by the power and virtue of their
Master; and Bishops, pastors, and other governors, being ordained in every
Church and country, for guiding and directing the same by them selves and
their successors to the worlds end: this (I say) being once brought to pass;
and the little stone that was cut out of a hill without hands, being now made a
huge mountain that had spreed it self over the whole face of the earth,
according to Daniels prophetie: the^ those holy and sage Dan. 2.
Apostles for preventing of al new doctrines and false errors that might
afterward arise, (as by revelation from Jesus, they understood there should
do many:) most earnestly exhorted, and with all possible veheme^cie called upon
the people, 1. Cor. 16. Galat. 5. 2 Thessalonians. 2.
to stand fast in the documents and traditions then received; to hold firmly
the faith and doctrine already delivered, as a Depositum and treasure committed
to be safely kept until the last day. And above 1. Tim. 6. 20. 2. Tim. 1. Mat.
7. Romans 16. 2. Tim. 2. 3. Tit. 3. 2 Thessalonians. 3 2. Ioa. 7. Apoc. 2.
all other things, they most diligently forewarned them to beware newfangled
teachers, whom they called Herctiques; who should break from the unity of
this universal body, already made and knit together; and should devise new
gloses, exposition, and interpretations of Scripture; bring in new senses,
doctrines, opinions and divisions; to the renting of Gods Church and City now
builded, and to the perdition of infinite souls.

For discerning of which kind of most pernicious people, (as S. Austen and
other Aug. (...) vera (...).
holy fathers do note;) and for more perfect distinction between them and
true Christians; the said Apostles invented the name Catholic, and set down
in their common Creed, that clause or article, I believe the Holy Catholic
Church. By which The first invention of the name Catholic.
word Catholic (that signifies universal,) they gave to understand to al
posterity, that whatsoever doctrine or opinion, should be raised afterward
among Christians, disagreeing from the general consent, doctrine, and tradition
of the universal Church: was to be reputed as error and heresy, and utterly
to be rejected. And that the only Anckor, stay, and security of a Christian
man's my nde in matters of belief for his salvation, was to be a Catholic;
that is, See S. Hie (...) cont. Laciferian. Vincen. liri. l. co^t. here is. Aug.
(...). cp. Man.
(as all ancient fathers do interpret the same,) one, who layi^g aside al
particular opinions and imaginations, both of him self and others, does subject
his judgment to the determination of Christ's universal visible and known
Church upon earth, embrasing whatsoever that believes, and aba^doning
whatsoever that rejects. And this is that plain, direct, sure, and
infallible way among Christians, whereof we spoke out of Esaie and other
prophets and Saints of God before, wherein no man can err though never so
simple, but only of wilful and obstinate malice; which is declared in this
manner followinge.

The Ghospel of Christ being once preached, and received uniformly over all the
Why he that leans to the Church, can not be deceived.
world, and Churches of Christianity erected throughout all Countries,
Provinces, and Nations in the Apostles time, as has been said: it is to be
considered, that this universal church, body, or kingdom, so gathered,
founded, and established, was to continue visibly, not for one or two ages, but
unto the worlds end. For so it was foreshewed and promissed most
perspicuouslie by Daniel, when he foretelling the sour great Monarchies, that
after him should ensue, adioineth these evident words, of the church and
kingdom of Christ: In the days of these kingdoms, shall Dan. 2.
God raise up a Celestial kingdom, which shall endure for ever, without
subuersio^; and that kingdom shall not be delivered over to any other people.
By which last words, as also by diverse promises of Christ him self in the
Math. 16. (...). 28.
Ghospel, we are acertained, that the very same visible congregation, Church,
body, common weal, government, and kingdom, which was established by the
Apostles in their time, should endure and continue by succession of folowers,
unto the worlds end: neither should it pass over or be delivered to any other
people; that is, no new teachers or later doctrines dissenting from the first,
should ever finally prevail against it. Which prophetie to have been
fulfilled from that day unto this, is made evident and most apparent, by the
records of al ages; wherein, albeit diverse errors and heresies have sprung up,
and made great blustering and disturbance for a time: yet have they been
repressed and beat down again, by the same Church, and her visible pillars
in the end.

For examples sake; in the first age, there rose up certain seditious fellows
among No Heresy ever (...) again, the Church.
the Jews, making some contention about their ceremonies, as also did Simon
Magus, Nicolaus, Cerinthus, Ebion, and Menander, that were heretics. Against
who^, (besides the Apostles,) stood i^ defense of that which was published
before, their Disciples, S. Martialis, S. Dionisius Areopagita, Ignatius,
Policarpus, and others. In the second age, rose up Basilides, Cerdon, Marcion,
Valentinus, Tacianus, Apelles, Montanus and diverse others: against whom stood
in the battle, Justinius Martyr, Dionisius bishop of Corinth. Irenaeus,
Clemens Alexandrinus, Tertulian, and their equals. And so douneward from age to
age unto our days, whatsoever heresy, or different opinion has been raised
contrary to the general consent of this universal body; it has been checked
and controlled by the watchme^, pastors, and chief governors of this body;
and finally, has been condemned and anathematized by their general assemblies,
consent, and councelles, gathered from time to time, as occasions served in all
parts of the world. Whereby it is most manifest, that he, who relieth upon this
general consent of Christ's Church in A secure way.
earth, and adhereth to nothing against the judgment of the same; ca^ not
possibly err in matters of belief, but walks in that sure, secure, and
infallible path, wherein Esaye says, that a very fool can not Esa. 52.
go amiss.

Wherefore, to conclude this first part of our present speech, concerning the
trial The conclusion of the first part.
of our faith and belief: he that is a true Catholic, and holds him self
within the obedience of this general and universal Church, which has descended
by succession from Christ and his Apostles: that is, as old Vincentius said
eleven hundred years ago, in his most excellent treatise Vincent. lirin. li
cont. here is.
against innouations of heretics: he that Ioueth the Church and body of
Jesus Christ so much, as he prefers nothing in the world before the
Catholic and universal doctrine thereof: not any private man's authority, love,
wit, or eloquence; not reasons of nature or pretense of scriptures, against
that which before him was believed by all men: he that follows universality,
antiquity, and consent in his belief; and stands firmly to that faith,
which has been held from time to time in all places, in all seasons, by all or
the most part of Bishopes, Priests, and Doctors in Christianity: he that
ca^ say with S. Augustine, that he truly follows that universal Church,
which had her beginning Aug. cont. epist. Manachaei cap. 4. and lib. de vera
relig. cap. 7.
by the enteringe in of Nations, got authority by miracles, was increased by
charity, and established by continuance: which has her succession of bishopes
from the Chair of Peter until our time: that Church, which is known in the
world by the name of Catholic, not only to her friends, but also among her
enemies, for that even heretics in common speech do term her so, having no
Mark this reason of S. Austen.
other means to distinguishe themselves and their followers from her, but by
calling them reformers, Illuminates, unspotted brethren, and such other names
that are different from Catholics:

He that protests with S. Ierom, that he does abhor all sects and names of
particular men; as Marcionistes, Montanistes, Valentinians and the like: he
that Hieron. Dialog. cont. Luciferian. Cyprian. epist. 50. ad Cornel. epis.
Romans Gal. 5.
does confess sincerlie with blessed Cyprian, that one priest for the time, is
to be obeyed by gods ordinance, as judge in Christ's room, by the universal
brotherhode of al Christianity: he that is modest, quiet, sober, void of
conte^tion, and obedient, Phil. 1. Tit. 3. Romans 12.
as S. Paul describes a true and good Catholic: he that is humble i his own
co^cept, and aggreinge to humble things; firm in faith, and not variable, nor
delighted with new doctrines: he that can captiuate his understanding Ephesians.
4. Heb. 13. 2. Cor. 10.
to the obedience of Christ, which is, to believe humbly such things, as
Christ by his church proposes unto him, albeit his reason or sense should
stand against the same: And finally, he that can be content at Christ's
commandment, to hear the Church in all things, without Mat. 18. Mat. 23.
doubt or exception, and obey the Governors thereof, albeit in life they be
Scribes and Pharisees; and consequentelie, can say truly, and sincerlie, with
the whole Ambros. ep. 81. ad Syricium. Hieron. ad Pamach. Aug. sermon. 81. de tep.
College of Christ's Apostles together, Creda sanctam Ecclesiam Catholicam, I
do believe the holy Catholic and vniue: sal Church, and what soever that
Church does set forth, teach, hold, or believe: that man (no doubt) is in a
most sure case for matters of his faith, and can not possibly walk awry
therein; but may think him self a good Christian, for this first point, which
is, for matters of belief.

THERE FOLLOVVETH the second THE. 2. part of this chapter. OF good syfe.
part of Christian profession, concerning life and manners; which is a matter
of so much more difficulty then the former, by how many more ways a man may
be lead from virtuous life, then from sincere faith. Wherein there can be no
comparison at all, seeing the pathe of our belief is so manifest (as has
beneshewed,) that no man ca^ err therein, but of inexcusable wilfulnes. Which
wilfulnes in error, the holy See S. Aug. lib. de vtilit. cred. c. 1. and
tract. 1. in epist. Johan. Cyprian. ep. 61
fathers of Christ's primative Church, did always refer to two principal and
original causes; that is, to pride or ouerweening in our own concepts; and to
malice against our superiors, for not giving us contentation in things that we
desire. Of the first do proceed, the devising of new opinions; new glosing,
Two causes of heresy.
expounding, and applying of Scriptures; the calling of holy writ it self in
question; the contempt of ancient customs The doings of heretics.
most pernicious vein of malice, those wicked reprobates, do incite and arm
the people against their spiritual pastors; they enkindle factions against
Gods anointed substitutes; they devise a new Church, a new form of
government, a new kingdom, and ecclefiastical hierarchy upon earth, whereby to
bring men in doubt and staggering, what or whom to believe, or whereunto to have
recourse in such difficulties as do arise.

These two maladies (I save) of Pride The observation of S. Cyprian.
and Malice, have been the two causes of obstinate error in all heretics from
the beginning; as full well noted that holy and ancient martyr S. Cyprian, when
he said Cyprian. epist. 65. ad Rogatian.
so long ago: These are the beginnings and original causes of heretics and
wicked schismatsques: first, to please and like well of them selves; and then,
being puffed up with the swelling of pride, to contemn their governors and
superiors. Thus do they abandone and forsake the church: thus do they erect
a profane Altar out of the church, against the church: Thus do they break
the peace and unity of Christ, and do rebel against Gods holy ordination.

Now then, as these are the causes, either only or principal of erring i^ our
belief; Many causes of evil lyse.
most facile and easy (as we see) to be discerned: so of error in life and
manners, there are many more occasions, causes, ofspringes, and fountains to be
found. That is to say, so many in number, as we have evil passions, inordinate
appetites, wicked desires, or unlawful inclinations within our mind; every one
whereof, is the cause oftentimes of disordered life, and breach of Gods
commandementes. For which respect, there is much more set down i^ Scripture,
for exhortation to good life, then to faith; for that the error herein is more
ordinary and easy, and more provoked by our own frailty, as also by the
multitude of infinite temptations. Wherefore we read that our Saueour Jesus in
the very beginning of his preaching, straight after he was baptized, and had
chosen unto him S. Peter and S. Andrew, James and The effect of Christ's first
sermon. Math. 5. 6. 7.
John, and some other few Disciples, went up to the mountain, and there made
his first most excellent, famous, and copious sermon, recited by S. Matthew in
three whole chapters; wherein he talks of nothing else, but of virtuous life,
poverty, meekenes, justice, purity, sorrow for sin, patience in suffering,
contempt of riches, forgyuing of injuries, fasting prayer, penance, entering by
the strait gate; and finally, of perfection, holiness, and integrity of
conversation; and of the exact fulfilling of every jot of Gods law and
commandments.

He assured his Disciples with great asseueration, that he came not to break
Math. 5. v. 20.
the law, but to fulfill the same; and consequentelie, whosoever should break
the least of his commandments, and should so teach men to do; that is,
should persevere Math. 5.
therein, without repentance, and so by his example draw other men to do the
like: should have no place in the kingdom of heaven. Again, he exhorted the^
most earnestly to be lights, and to shine by good works, to all the world,
and that except their justice did exceed the justice of Scribes and pharisees,
(which was but ordinary and external,) they Ibid. v. 21.
could not be saved. He told them plainly, they might not serve two masters in
this life, but either must forsake God or abandon Mammon. He cried unto them,
Attendite, stand attent, and consider well your Cap. 6. Cap. 7.
state and condition: and then again; seek to enter by the strait gate. And
lastly, he concludes, that the only trial of a good tree, is the good fruit
which it yields; without which fruit, let the tree be never so fair or
pleasant to the eye, yet, is it to be cut down and burned; and that not every
one who shall say or cry unto him, Lord, Lord, at the last day should be
saved, or enter into the kingdom of heaven; but only such, as did execute in
deeds, the will and commandments of his father in this life. For want
whereof, he assures them, that many at that day, who had not only believed,
but also done miracles in his name, should be denied, rejected, and abandonned
by him.

Which long lesson of virtuous life, being the first that ever our Saueour
gave in public to his Disciples then newly Faith is not sufficient without
vvorckes.
gathered together, as S. Matthew notes; (having treated very little of points
of faith before, but only in general by some miracles and preachinge, having
showed himself to be the true Messiah:) does sufficiently teach us, that it
is not enoughe to believe in Jesus, and to make profession of his name and
doctrine; except we conform our lives and actions according to the prescript
of his commaundmentes. For albeit in Christian religion, faith be the first and
principal foundation, whereupon all the rest is to be stayed and grounded: yet
as in other material buildinges, after the foundation is laid, there remains
A similitude touching faith and works.
the greatest labor, time, cost, cunning, and diligence, to be bestowed upon
the framinge and furnishinge of other parts that must ensue: even so in this
celestial edifice or buildinge of our soul, having laid once the foundation
and ground of true belief, (which a Christian oftentimes dispacheth in the
space of In learning over his Catechism.
one weeks learning;) the rest of al our life, time, labor, and studies, is
to be employed in the perfecting of our life and actions, and as it were, in
raising up the walls and other parts of our spiritual buil ding, by the
exercise of al virtues, and diligent observation of Gods commandments.
Without the which, our faith is to no more purpose or profit, then is a
foundation without a building upon it, or a stock or tree that bears no
fruit. Which thing S. James expresses most excellentelie in this fit
similitude. Even as a body without spirit is dead; so is says without Iac.
2.
works.

Which necessary point of virtuous life and observing Gods commandments, for
that certain carnal and sensual Christians An ancient error of sensual men
about faith and works
in the primative Church, even yet whiles the Apostles the^ selves were aline,
would in no wise understand aright; but for pleasing their own appetites,
devised upon certain dark and hard speeches of S. Paul, that only faith was
sufficient to save them: S. Austine and other ancient fathers were of opinion,
that not only these last words of S. James, and the whole discourse which he
makes of this matter in that chapter; but also both his and all other Apostles
writings, set forth and published after S. Paul's epistles, were prin cipally
to repress this most absurd and pernicious error. For declaration whereof, I
will allege only these words of S. Augustine following, expressly written in a book
for this purpose, entitled of faith and good works. Thus then he begins.

For that this wicked opinion of only faith, was sprung up in the Apostles
time, by ill understanding of S. Paul; all the other S. Austem discourse.
Apostolical epistles which ensue, of S. Peter, S. John, S. James, and S. Jude,
were directed principally to this end, to prove (...) de (...). and oper. cap.
14.
with all vehemency, that faith without good works is nothing worth. Even as
in deed S. Paul him self did not define every manner of faith, whereby we believe
in God; but only means that profitable and euangelical faith, which has
works annexed, proceeding of charity. And as for Gal. 5.
that faith, which is without works, and yet seems to these men to be
sufficient for their salvation; he protests, that it is so unprofitable, as
he doubts not to save of him self; If I should have all faith, in 1. Cor. 13.
such sort, is I were able to move mountains, and yet had not charity; I
were nothing. By which charity (no doubt) good life is meant, for that, as in
an other place it is said: Charity Romans 13.
is the fulfilling of all the law. Wherefore S. Peter most evidently, in his
second epistle, having exhorted men to holiness of life and manners; shows,
that certain wicked persons took occasion by some obscure sentences of S.
Paul, to promise them selves security of salvation, by only faith. Which hard
sentences, S. Peter affirms, that these miserable me^, perverted to their own
destruction, as they did also other holiescriptures; seeing that S. Paul was of
the very same opinion, that the other Apostles were concerning life
everlasting to be obtained by none, but by such only, as joined virtuous life
with their belief. But S. James of al other, is most vehement against al such,
as think that faith can suffice to salvation without good works; in so much,
as he compares them to the devils the^ selves, saying: Do thou believe that
there is one God? thou doestvvel: Jacob. 2.
the devils also do believe the same and tremble. What could be spoken more
truly, briefly, and vehemently then this? seeing in the Ghospel we read, that
the devils made the same confession of Christ's deity, that Marc. 1. Mat. 16.
did S. Peter, and yet Christ commended the one, and reprehended the other.
etc. Wherefore, let not simple minds be deceived, Ibid. c. 22
and think that they know God, if they confess him with a dead faith; that
is, with a faith void of good works as devils do, for that they read
(perhaps) in scripture these words of Christ; this is life everlasting, that
men know thee the true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent: Ioa. 17.
Let them not (I say) be deceived with this; but let them remember, how
Christ's Apostle expounds that saying, when he writes; By this we know
God (truly,) is we keep his Commandments; and who soever 1. Ioh. 2.
says, that he knovveth him, and yet keeps not his Commandments: he is a
liar, and the truth is not in him. Thus far S. Augustine, declares this
verity out of the scriptures; and he adds Enchirid. cap. 67.
further in an other place, the testimony of S. Paul for comprobation hereof,
who admonished the people of Corinthus in these words: Deceive not your selves:
nether fornicatours, nor adulterours, nor 2. Cor. 6.
thieves, nor covetous persons, nor backbiters, nor drunckards, shall obtain
the kingdom of God. Which S. Augustine proves, that S. Paul in truth could
never have avouched; if the Corinthians by only faith might have escaped
damnation.

The very same discourse makes S. Gregory the great, out of holy write The
proose used by S. Gregory.
upon this point. For having considered those most confortable words of
Christ to S. Thomas, blessed are they who have not seen, and yet have
believed: he annexeth as John. 20.
follows. Perhaps here, every Christian will say within him self, I do
believe and therefore I am blessed, and shall be saved. Greg. hom. 29. in Eua^.
Wherein he says truth, if his life be answerable to his belief. For that a
true faith does not contradicte in manners, the thiges which it professes in
words. For which cause, it was said of certain false Christians, by S. Paul;
that they confessed Tit. 1. 1. Ioh. 2.
God in words, but denied him in deeds, and by S. John; that who soever
says, he knovveth God, and keeps not his commandments, is a liar. Which
being so; we must examine the truth of our faith, by consideration of our life:
for then, and not otherwise, are we true Christians; if we What we promissed
in Baptism.
fulfill in works, that whereof we have made promise in words: that is; in
the day of our baptism, we promissed to renounce the pomp of this world,
together with all the works of iniquity; which promise, if we perform now
Li. 33. moral. cap. 7.
after baptism; the^ are we true Christians, and may be joyful. And in an
other place the same holy father adds this. For that diverse men, are
Christians in profession and faith only, and not in life: herehence it is
said, by the voice of truth it self; Not every one that shall say to me Lord
Math. 7.
Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven. And again: why do you call
me Lord, Lord, and do not perform the things that I tell you? Herehence it
is, that God complained of his old people the Jews, saying; this people ho
Malac. 7.
noureth we with their lips, but their heart is sarre of from me. And the
Prophet David of the same people: they loved him with their Psalm. 77.
mouth, and with their tongues they lied (...) him. Wherefore, let no man
trust that his faith may save him without good deeds, seeing that we know it is
written expresselie; that faith without works is dead: and Jacob. 2.
consequentelie, can not be profitable, or save us from damnation. Hitherto S.
Gregory.

Which very conclusion S. Chrysostom makes with great vehemency, upon
consideration The testimony and exhortation of S. Chrysostom. Math. 25.
of that woesull chance and heavy judgment, that happned unto him, who in the
Ghospel, was admitted to the feast of Christian faith and knowledge, but for
lack of the ornament or garment of good life, was most co^tumeliouslie
deprived of his expectation; of who^ S. Chrysostoms words are these. He was
i^uited to the feast and brought into the table; but for that by his foul
garment, he dishonored our Lord that had i^uited him: hear how miserable and
lamentable a punisheme^t he suffered. He was not only thrust from the
Chryshom. 2. in Johan.
table and banquet; but also bound hand and foot, and cast into utter
darkness, where there is eternal weepinge and gnashing of teeth. Wherefore, let
us not, dear brethren, let us not (I say) deceive our selves, and immagine,
that our faith will save us without good worckes. For except we join pure life
to our belief, and in this heavenly vocation of ours, do apparel our selves
with worthy garments of virtuous deeds, whereby we may be admitted at the
marriage day in heaven: nothing shall be able to deliver us from the damnation
of this miserable man, that wanted his weddinge weed. Which thingt S. Paul
well notes, when having said; we have an everlasting house in heaven, not
made by man's hands: he adds presentelie 2. Cor. 5.
this exception; sitamen vestiti and non nudi inueniamur, that is, if we be
found at that day, well apparreled and not naked.Would God every Chistian
desirous of his salvation, would ponder well this discourse and exhortation of
S. Chrysostom.

And so with this alone, to conclude our speech in this chapter, without
allegation The conclusion of this chapter.
of further matter or authorities, (which are infinite to this effect;) it may
appear by that which has already been set down, wherein the true profession
of a Christian consists; and thereby each man that is not partial, or blinded
in his own affection, (as many are,) may take a vewe of his estate and
condition, and frame unto him self a very probable conjecture, how he is like
to speed at the last accompting day; that is; what profit or do^mage he may
expect, by his knowledge and profession of Christian religion. For as to him
that walks uprightly in that vocation, and perfourmeth effectually every
way his professed duty; there remain both infinite and inestimable rewards
prepared: so to him that strayeth a side, and swarueth from the right path of
life or faith prescribed unto him; there are no less pains and punishments
referued. For which cause, every Christian that is careful of his salvation,
ought to fix his eye very seriously upon them both; and as in belief to
show him self constant, firm, humble, obedient, and in one word, Catholic:
so in life and conversation, to be honest, just, pure, innocent, and holy.

And for that, this second point concerning life and manners, is of more
difficulty (as has been showed) then the other of belief, (whereof
notwithstanding we have also treated sufficiently in the former chapters:) the
rest of this whole work, shall tend to the declaration of this later part, I
mean of good life; thereby to stir up and awake, (if so it may please the
merciful goodness of our blessed Saueour;) the slouthful hearts of Christians,
to the cogitatio^ of their own estate, and make them more vigilant in this
great affair, whereon depends their endless woe or welfare.

ANNOTATION.
THE PRINT BEING come to this place, M. Bunneys edition of this book was
delivered to me, out of whose infinite corruptions, maymes, and ma^glinges,
diverse things shall be noted hereafter in the margent.

OF THE TWO PRINCIPAL POINTS THAT DO APPERTAIN TO A Christian life; that is
to say: To resist all sin, and to exercise all kind of virtue; with the
means and method how to perform them both. CHAPT. VI.
SVPPOSINGE that in the parts of this book which ensue, we are to deal only
with such, as are instructed and settled in true Christian faith; (whereunto we
have The reason of this Chapter.
proved before, that virtuous life and good deeds are necessarily to be
adioined,) it seems convenient in this place, to treat of the points or
pri^cipal parts belonging thereunto. Which parts, are briefly prescribed by
God him self, in the writings of David, Esaie, and other prophets Psalm. 36.
Esa. 1.
of the old testament, exhorting men, to decline from vice, and to embrace
virtue. But much more plainly by S. Peter, S. Paul, and other Apostles of the
Euangelical law: the first affirming, that the fruit and effect of Christ's
death and passion was; that we being dead to sin: should live to 1. Pet. 2.
Tit. 2.
Justice: and the other adioining; that the grace of God our saueour, appeared
to al men, instructing us to this end, that we renouncing al vvickeanes,
should live justly and godly in this world.

By which testimonies of holy write, The two parts of good life.
is made clear and evident, that the whole duty of a good Christian, is
reduced to these two heads or principles; to wit, to the resistance of al evil,
and to the exercise of al pretty and virtue. In respect of the first whereof,
our life is called in holy scripture, a warfare upon earth; and virtuous Job.
7. 2. Cor. 10.
me^ are termed soldiers; for that, as good soldiers do lie in continual
wait to resist their ennemies: so vigilant Christians do carefully stand upon
their watch, for resisting the suggestions and temptations of sin. In
regard of the second Mat. 9. 10 20. Tim. 5.
point, we are named laborers, husbandmen, sowers, marcha^tes, bankers,
stewards, fermers, and the like; and our whole life is termed a mart and
trafique; for that, as these kind of people, do atte^d with diligence to their
gain and increase of temporal riches in this life: so ought we to apply our
selves wholly, in the continual exercise of good works, for augme^tation of our
merit and treasure in the world to come.

These then are the two parts of a good Christian life; the two principal
points whereupon we should meditate; the exercises wherein we should be
occupied; the two legs whereupon we should walk toward our Country; the two
arms wherewith we should lay faste-hand on Gods eternal kingdom; the two
wings whereby we must fly and mount up to heaven. So that, whosoever does want
any one One of these parts not auailable without the other.
of these two parts, albeit he had the other; yet can he never ascend to Gods
bliss; no more then a bird can fly, being maimed of one of her wings. My
meaning is; that neither integrity of life, is sufficient without good works;
nor good works auailable, without a pure and undefiled life. The later is made
clear by Gods own speeches, to the people of Israel; whose sacrifices,
oblations, prayers, and other such works; that were commended and commanded
by himself, he oftentimes rejected, and accounted abominable, for that the
presentours and exhibitours Esa. 1. Iere. 6. Amos. 5.
thereof, were men of impious and wicked conversation. The former also is
apparently showed, by Christ's parable of the foolish virgins; who albeit they
were Virgins, and incontaminate from sin: yet because they lacked the oil of
good works, to give light in their lamps: they were excluded from the marriage
banquet, as also that other most unfortunate Mat. 25. Luc. 13.
fellow was, who wanted his wedding ornament. Both these points then are
necessary to a Christian man's salvation, and that so necessary; as the one
without the other is not auailable.

AND FOR THE FIRST, which is resisting of sin; we are commanded by THE. 1.
part of resisting sin.
Gods holy word, to do it manfully, vigilantly, and constantly. And S. Paul
adds moreover; that in this resistance, we ought to strive even unto death,
and to the Heb. 10. Ephe. 5. Iac. 4. 1. Pet. 5.
shedding of our last blood, if occasion do require. The same are we taught by
diverse other Apostles and Saints in Christ's Church, exhorting and instructing
us to this fight and co^bat with the flesh, world, and devil, that entice us to
sin. For proof whereof, it shall suffice in this place, to allege those last
words of Job, which do conclude his large discourse of the most dreadful
power and cruelty of Leuiatha^; Memento belli; be not vnmindeful of the Job.
40.
war, which thou wagest with this ennimy.

Which war and resistance, is to be How perfect our resista^ce must be.
performed with such exquisite diligence, and firm resolution on our behalf:
as it behooves us, not only to withstand the committing of any one actual
sin; but also the very consent of mind thereunto. For so we are commanded
expressly; bevvare least at any time, thou give consent unto Tob. 4.
any sin. Concerning which thing, it is briefly to be noted, that sin may
be committed either in deed or in will alone. And to this later kind, al
divines agree, and prove it by S. James, that there are three Jacob. 4.
degrees; to wit; Suggestion, Delectation, Aug. l. 1. de ser. do. cap. 23. and
li. 12. de Trin. cap. 12.
and Consent. Whereof, as the first is of the ennimie; the second. of our
sensuality; the third, of reason: so may the first be without fault; the
second includes (for the most part) some negligence; the third Three degrees
to sin. Greg. ad inter. 11. August. (...)
conuinceth us always of iniquity. Or to use the very words of S. Gregory
the great. In Suggestion, is the seed of sin; in Delectation, the
norrishment; in Consent, the persection. So that, who soever does but only
yield consent of mind to the perfourmance of any unlawful act, so far forth,
as he would committ the same, if he had time, place, and ability thereunto: is
condemned by holy write, in the guilt of that sin, as deeply, as if in deed
he had now actuallie committed the same. So Christ Mat. 5.
him self, in the matter of adultery expressly pronounced, and long before
that, Exodus 12. Deuteronomy. 5.
by the mouth of Moses, he determined the like in other offenses of the people
of Israel.

In consideration of which severe determination, it is most wonderful and
dreadful to consider, (our selves being so The diligence of ancient ancient
in resisting sin.
negligent herein as we are,) what great attention, watch, care, and fear,
holy Saints of God in times past had, in this point of resisting sin, and
the very first motions and temptations thereof. In times past (I say) in those
blessed days of antiquity, when the spirit of God was yet hoate and boiling
in the breasts of his devout servants, and when recheles sensuality had not
so overwhelmed the world as now it has. We read of the just and most blessed
man Job, that notwithstanding all his integrity and perfection Of Job.
of life; yet did he diligently discuss and fear every the least of his own
Job. 9.
actions; being well assured (as he protests,) that God does not pardon such
as are negligent, and do offend him therein. Holy David also, though he were a
king; yet did he every night, brushe or svveepe his Of David.
spiri e, by dilligent examination or the very Psalm. 76.
cogitations and inward motions of his heart. In which exercise S. Paul, that
most Of S. Paul.
worthy Apostle and exact obseruer of his masters commandments, was so
precise and careful; as albeit he were assaulted with many strong and violent
temptations of the flesh, by Satan's suggestion: yet by his own diligent
resistance together with the assistance of Gods holy grace, 1. Cor. 4.
which was given unto him particularly for that combat; he preserved his mind
so pure and unspotted from al blot of consent: as after the victory obtained,
he durst affirm of him self, that to his knowledge, he was guilty of no fault
or 2. Cor. 12.
offense.

For better obtaining of which victory, it is most probable, that he used
External helps for the resisting of sin. 2. Cor. 6. 11. 1. Tim. 1.
those external helps and remedies of much fasting, long praying, paineful
watchig, and rigourous chastising of his own body, which he mentions in his
writings. To which end appertained in like manner, the same and like exercises
recorded by S. Paul and other writers, to have been 1. Cor. 9.
used by the rest of the Apostles; that is to say, These things Bunney
clippeth as not so necessary for Ministers.
diverse and frequent austerities, and bodily mortifications, thereby to bring
their flesh in subjection to their spirits, and to make them selves more able
to withstand al sinful temptations and suggestions of the adversary. So
Egisippus, Eusebius, and others do make wonderful Egis apud Enseb. li. 2.
lust. cap. 23. Of S. James
narrations of the strait diet, apparel, and form of life used by S. James
the just, in whom they record among other things, that with continual praying
upon his knees, the skine thereof was made so hard as the braune of a Camels
knee. The like or rather more strange things, does Philo Philo. lib. 4. de
vit. contempt. Of S. Mark
the Jew set forth in the life and exercises of S. Mark, and of his
disciples that lived in Alexandria, who by their exquisite severity in this
behalf, drove into admiration even those, that were adversaries of their
religion. By imitation of which first and perfect Christians, in this combat of
resisting sin, diverse other did afterward take in hand that strait course of
life, whereof we read with admiration in ancient writers, as Bunney doubts
whether S. Anthony had sufficii^t groundvvorke of his dainge; but Athanasius
doubted not.
S. Anthony, whose life is recorded by holy Athanasius; Paul and Hilarion, whose
wonderful acts are set down by S. Jerome; and infinite other, whose most
admirable and rare austerities are described by Cassianus, almost twelve 10.
Cass. de Inst.
hundred years gone.

Al which exercises tended to this only. end, to enhable them selves the
better to stand in the fight and bataile against al wickedness and sin. This
was the beginning of austeritie of life, in those first fathers and founders of
our religion. This was the cause of first leaving the world The reason of
Monastical life in the beginning.
and flying to the desert. This was the origin of al Monasteries, Cloisters,
Eremitages, Celles, and Solitary habitatio^s. And finally, this was the reason
of al breach and separation from flesh and blood, and from al wordly
conversation; thereby to eschew al occasions of external temptations, and by
that means, to gather the more force and strength, for resistance of the
internal. In which internal conflict not with standing, the combat oftentimes
was so sharp and vehement; as it is most wonderful to consider, what is
recorded by the forsaid writers, touching assaults endured in this behalf, by
those ancient Saints that had left the world, and what extreme pains and
afflictions they sustained willingly, for continuing their resistance against
their spiritual adversary. Which things were set down (no doubt) and left
written to us by Gods holy providence, for our confusion that now live, who are
so careless and negligent in resustinge the assaults and temptations of sin
as we make no account or estimation there of at all.

S. Jerome in a certain epistle bears A (...) example of 5. Ierom.
witness of him self, that having aba^doned the world, and retired him self into
a wild desert of Syria: was most terribly tempted (not unlike to S. Paul,)
with suggestions 2. Cor. 12.
of the flesh. But what did he for resisting of this temptation? and what
success had he therein? You shall hear reported by this his own declaration. O
(says Hiero. epi. 22. ad Eust.
he,) how often being in the wilderness and vaste desert, burnt up and scorched
by the extreme heates of the Sun, (wherein the Mou^kes of my time had their
ugly habitations,) was I tempted with cogitations of Roman delights? etc. I
sat alone, for that I was replenished with sorrow and bitterness. The parts of
my body were now become deformed, and ugly with continual wearing of my
sack: and my skin was as black, as the skin of an Ethiopian. I wept daily
and passed my time continually in groaning: And when at length, sleep came upon
me against my will; I laic down and did beat my bare bones, scarce hanging
together, against the ground. Of my meat and drink I will The auste risie of
old Mounkes.
say nothing; whereas in this place, we that are Monks, do use only cold
water even when we be sick, and do think it a great delicacie to taste any
one thing that sauoureth of the fire.

I therefore being in this case, and having shut my self up in this prison for
fear of helfire, and for avoiding of sin; being fellow now only to scorpions
and wild beasts, and wholly worn out with continual fasting: yet could I not
avoid the temptations of the flesh etc. Wherefore I did cast my self down at
the feet of Jesus: I did bathe the ground about me with S. Ieroms co^bat with
tentatio^s of the flesh.
tears, and dried the same up again with my own hear. I did repress my
rebellious flesh, with continual abstinence of whole weeks together. I am not
ashamed to confess this misery of my wretched estate. I remember that I cried
unto Jesus whole days and nights together, and ceased not to beat and
knock my breaste, until he arose and rebuked my enemy, and thereby restored to
me my former tranquillity. I perseuered in prayer in that forlorn and sauuage
desert, (being angry and rigourous against my self,) and I hampered with
imprisonment my miserable flesh, as our Lord is my witness, until at length
after infinite tears shed, and my very sight dazeled with long looking up
and beholding the heavens, I seemed The consolation of stryuinge, in stryuinge
end.
again to be restored to the company and fellowship of Ange^ls. Wherewith being
made exceeding joyful, and replenished (as it were) with all kind of divine and
Celestial solace; I began to sing again within my self, that most pleasant
song: we shall now ru^ne after the svvet savor of thy Cant. 1.
fragrant ointments, O Lord.

Thus did these blessed fathers and Saints of God behave them selves: and thus
did The miserable state of mosie Christians at this day.
they esteem them selves bound to do, for resisting of sin, and for
maintenance of their integrity, against the wicked assaults of their ghostly
enemy; remembering well how it is written; fight valiantly for thy soul, and
strive unto death for maintenance of justice. But (alas) dear brother, Eccle.
4.
how do we behave our selves in this importa^t business? what do we? what
pains take we? what attention, what vigilance do we hold upon our thoughts,
words and actions? what caution do we use? what resistance do we make? Is
there any man that flies the occasions of sin, or rather provoke not the
same? is there any now adays that mortisieth his flesh, or rather does not
cherishe and pamper it to wickedness? is there any man that represseth his own
appetites? that stands in fight against sensual suggestions? nay rather, does
not all the world run after their own concupiscences? do they not yield them
selves as slaves to every temptation that does arise? to every assault that the
enemy makes? do they not devour every hook which the devil lays for
their intrappinge, and swalow down every poisonned bait, that is cast for
their destruction? O merciful Lord, what a pitiful state of the world is this?
harcken (good Christian) how this case of a careless sensual man is described,
even by the very fingar of God him self. I looked forth through the bars of
my wi^dowe (says The description of a man than follovveth his concupiscence.
Prou. 2.
the divine wisdom of God;) and I saw and considered a fond young fellow, who
walked by corners of the streates i^ darkness, etc. And there ran unto him a
woman, decked up like an harlot, and prepared to deceive souls, etc. she
enticed him by flattery, and many sweet speeches, and entangled him with
strong allureme^tes. Presently, he followed her as an ox led unto the
slaughter, and as a wanton skippinge lamb that is carried to the shambles; like
a bird that makes haste to the snare; so follows he, not knowing seely
sotte, that he is drawn to fetters, and that the danger of his soul
depends thereon, until his heart be strocken through. etc.

This is the description which the holy The bondage and danger by yeldinge to
our concupiscence.
Ghost uses, to set out unto us the miserable condition of a dissolute and
recheles Christian, which has no care of resisting temptations, but follows
every suggestion of his own sensual appetite, and thereby, not only wounds to
death his own heart and soul, by every consent he yields: but also, (as the
Scripture here notes,) enthralleth him self in such miserable bondage and
captivity, and casts him self into so strong bands and inextricable fetters
of his ennimie; as he can not possibly afterward deliver him self, but by
some wonderful extraordinary miracle wrought by God. For as truly Christ's
Apostle writes; he that yields to (...); Ioa. 8.
becomes the bondslaue of sin. And the holy spirit of God in an other
place, says; the wicked man is vvrapt in the bades or chains Pro. 5.
of his own wickedness. Which bands and chains, are so nexed, knit, and
strongly lincked together in a sensual man; that, being once entangled within
the compass thereof, he is drawn from lincke to The Chains of sin.
lincke, and compassed about with so many foldes; that he seldom can escape,
until he come to the end thereof, which is fastened even in hell it self. This
thing do the holy See (...). Greg. lib. 4. Moral. c. 27. Isod. li. de sum.
bono. cap. 23.
Fathers of Gods Church express by this deduction: to wit, that in careless and
negligent Christians, Suggestio^ (which is the beginning of this dangerous and
infernal chain,) draws after it cogitation; cogitation, draws affection;
affection, delectation; delectation, consent; consent, operation; operation,
custom; custom, desperation of Gods mercy; desperatio^, brings in the
defending of sins committed; after which follows immediately both
vau^tinge, bosting, and glorying in wickedness, which is the next inseparable
lincke to damnation it self.

To these miseries (lo) and inexplicable The miseries of them that resist not
sin.
calamities, is the world brought, by not resisting the temptations of sin,
but yielding to every unlawful motion of our sensual appetites. According as it
was foretold so long ago, If thou permit thy soul Prou. 7.
to have her concupiscences; she will make thee a joy and pray to thy
enemies. Oh ye children of Adam, why consider ye not this thing? o
worldlinges, o careless Christians, why forget ye this point so necessary to
be pondered? is it possible that men should be so negligent, in their own
apparent, and irremediable dangers? The world is come now to that desperate
condition described by Job, wherein men drink up sin as beasts do water:
that is, without all difficulty, scruple, remorse Job. 15.
of conscience, fear of hell, care, doubt, examination, or cogitation. We are
now come to that obstinate contempt foreprophetied by Daniel; wicked men vvil
do Dan. 12.
vvickedlie, and will not understand. Nay, the most part of men are entered
into that dreadful and most horrible plight, whereof the wisman said. The
wicked and impious man Pro. 18.
when he is come to the deapthe of wickedness, contemns all. But what are
the words immediately ensuinge? His ignominy shall follovv him. Which S. Paul
expounds more plainly in this manner. Whose end Philip. 3.
shaibe death or destruction with confusion.

Wherefore, he that is a good Christian in deed, and desires to enjoy the
fruit The conclusion of this part.
of that vocation: let him beware of this perilous laberinthe, and learn to
resist his fleshly appetites betime. Let him crushe the head of the serpent
at the first entrance of unlawful suggestions, as in the second part of this
directorie, he shall more particule lie be instructed to do. In the mean (...)
this alredie spoken shall be sufficient to declare the great importance, weight,
and necessity of this affair, and the manifold mischiefs which ensue unto
the world for want of watchefulnes and diligence in this war.

AND THVS HAVING showed THE. 2. part. OF laboring i good works.
how evil souldiars we are in resisting our enemy; it remains to consider,
how prudent marcha^tes and laborers we are for increase of our gain and
spiritual riches, by the exercise, negotiation, and trafique of good works.
About which point is to be observed, that man from his first fall in paradise,
was assigned to travail and take pains in this kind of exercise, and in no
sort to be idle. For so it is plainly set down in the book of Genesis; man
was placed in paradise to labor. And after Genesis (...)
that, in diverse other places of the old testainent, the spirit of God
exhorted men Pro. 12. Eccle. 20. Iere. 4.
to be paineful, industrious, and diligently to til such land, as God has lent
them for their gain. Which the prophet Osce interprets thus; Seminate vobis
Iustitiam, enrich Osee. 10.
you selves by sowing justice. And the wise man more plainly; what soever thy
hand Eccle. 9.
can do, do it instantly. The reason of which exhortation, is set down by
the same instrument of Gods spirit, in an other place: Anima operantium
impinguabitur. The soul of such as labor and take pain, shall be fattened;
And again: Seminanti Institiam, merces sidelis. To him that sows iusticc or
good deeds, there remains a faithful and sure reward. In respect whereof in the
description of a blessed and fortunate man, it was put for one principal
quality by the prophet; that he received not his soul in Psalm. 23.
vain, but labored and employed the same to his greatest benefit. And this
in the old testament.

But in the new, wherein the most excellent Of laboring in the new. testament.
merits of Christ, do yield inestimable dignity to al good works that are
done in his name, this precept of laboring, has much more place, and is more
seriously recommended; for that by Christ's spirit and abundance of grace,
we are more enhabled to perform the same; as may appear by the words of God
him self in Ezechiel, where foretelling the times of the Messiah to come,
says. At that day, vvil I place my spirit in Ezech. 36
you, and vvil bring to pass, that you shall walk in my commandments, and
shall labor and take pains. Which labor is to be understood, in performance
of good works, according as S. Paul describes the condition of Christian
people, when hecalleth the^, an acceptable people, cleansed by Christ's blood,
to Tit. 2. The definition of a good Christian. Ephe. 2.
be a folovver of good works. And in an other place he defines a good
Christian to be, the had work of God, created i^ Christ, to walk in good
works. And yet further Christ him self in the Ghospel declares plainly, what
the state and condition of Christians is in this life, by the parable wherein he
likeneth him self to the rich banker, who committed diverse sums of money to
his servants, with this charge; Negotiamini dum venio. Make ye your trafique
Luc. 19.
and commodity, until I come and call for an account.

By all which is most manifest, that the life and vocation of a Christian in
this The vocation of a Christian.
world, is to labor and make his gain by the talentes that God has lent him;
and to fructesie in all good works, as S. Paul exhorts Gal, 6.
us. Hereby also does appear, that the time of this our life, is nothing else
but a certain season allotted us, wheri to sow and plant; nothing else, but a
fayer or mart wherein to trafique, negotiate, and make our exchange for the
kingdom of heaven. In which affair and negotiation, he that is diligent,
painful, and industrious, is accounted a wise man, even by Gods own mouth: as
on the contrary part, the Pro. 10.
careless, slouthful, and negligent man, is called the child of confusion,
void of wit, and subject to al misery, contempt, and beggarie. Herehence are
those speeches of holy Scripture, Manus sortium dominabitur: Pro. 12.
The hand of him, that labors with courage, shall prevail and be potent.
And again; Robusti habebunt diu. tias. The stout and Pro. 11.
painful shall have wealth at will. And yet further; he that diligently tilleth
his soil, shall advance to great hight his rickes of corn. And to Eccle. 20.
the negligent it is said on the other side, Egestatem operata est manus
remissa. The lazy Pro. 10.
and slouthful hand, does work unto his master nothing else but beggarie. And
finally, the more to confound our folly and lazines in this point, and to make
deeper impression thereof in our hearts, we are by holy writ referred, even unto
the school and instruction of unreasonable creatures in this behalf. Go thou
slouthful and lither sellovv, (says the wisdom of God) unto Pro. 6.
the Ant or emmote, and consider his vvayes, and by him learn vvisdome. He
has neither governor nor master to teach him, and yet does he in summer make
provision of soode whereon to live and sustain him self in vvinter. By which
words we are admonished, not only what is our duty in this life, concerning
labor and travail in good works: but also, that the most excellent and
supreme point of wisdom, which possibly can be imagined, is, to gather store
in this time present, for the time to come, and to make our bancke here in this
world, whereon to live in the country whereunto we take our journey.

This is that great and rare wisdom, which is called in scripture, the
vvisdome of Christian vvisdome vvherin it consists. Prou. 9. Romans 11. 2. Cor.
1. Esa. 33. Eccle. 6.
Saints, or rather as S. Paul terms it, the wisdom of God him self, not
known to the world. That wisdom, which Esaias calls diuitias salutis, the
treasure of salvation. That, whereof the wise man says; cogitare de illa sensus
est consummatus, to think only and ponder upon this kind of wisdom, is most
perfect understanding and prudent knowledge. And again: God loves no man but
him that dwells or remains Eccle. 7.
with vvisdome. And finally, to stir us up to this kind of wisdom, he
makes an ample exhortation, with a declaration of the nature, dignity, and
utility thereof, in these words. Come to this wisdom, as he Eccle. 6.
that sows upon hope of harvest; and have patience for a time, to expect her
fruits. Thou must labor and take pains a little in her work, and soon after
shall thou taste of the commodities she brings forth. Oh how ungrateful is
she to the ignorant; and a fool will not abide her. She is not reueiled to
many; but to whom she is once known, with them she remains, until she
bring them unto the sight and presence of God him self etc. Harken therefore my
son, and follow her ways with all thy force etc. For that, at the last day,
thou shall find rest in her, and she shall turn thee to great joy and
consolation.

This was that blessed and wise man's counsel: and for fulfilling of this
counsel, as also for obtaining the rest, joy, and final consolation whereof
here is mention; S. Paul cries so vehementelie unto us, exhorting us every
where to do good works, and that abundantelie, instantelie, Gal. 6.
in all times, to all men, upon al occasions, with immovable constancy;
assuring 1. Cor. 15.
us, that our labor herein shall not be lost, but that the time shall come,
when we shall reap incessantly. To which purpose also, appertains the
parable propounded by our Saueour of the prudent Steward, with a very
effectual exhortation Luc. 16.
in the end, that in this life we should purchase our selves friends, by the
use and distribution of our wicked mammo^, which friends may afterward make
us place in heaven. To this effect are directed all those admonitions of holy
scripture. Work your own salvation: And again; brethren, be ye careful to
make your vocation Philip. 2. 2. Pet. 1.
and election sure by good works. And yet further S. Paul adioyneth an other
circumstance, thereby to move us the sooner, saying; VVbile we have time let us
do good works; insinuating hereby, that this time Gal. 6.
present was allowed us only for that purpose, and that this time being past,
there would be no more place for such matters, a cording to that sage
admonishement of our Saueour him self; the night Joan. 6.
will come, when no man can work any more.

For preventing of which night, and The diligence of (...) Christians to
work while they had time.
to take the time while it served, very strange it is to consider, the
pains, watchfulnes, and diligence, which ancient holy Christians in former
ages did use, and the sensles forgetfulness wherein we pass our days now. They
imitated the good husbandman, who is careful to cast his seed into the ground
whiles fair wether lasts; and the diligent marcha^t, who ever stippeth not
to lay owe his money while the good market e^dureth. They knew the time would
not be long, which they had to work in, and therefore they bestirred the^
selves seriously whiles opportunity was present. Hereof among other things,
proceeded all those goodly (...) of almes-deedes and charitable works, yet
exstant to the world, as witnesses of their exercise in this kind of wisdom.
So many common wealths established, so many churches builded and endued with
abundant maintenance; so many All these (...) (...) for the Church (...) (...)
(...) as no good deeds, though he do dedicate the book to an Archbishop, and
do seed of the rentes him self. So leaves he (...) also hospitals. etc.
By shopprickes, deanries, Archedeaconries, Chanonries, Prebendes, Chantries,
and Benefices. So many Hospitales and houses of Orphans and fatherles
infantes, as also for the relief of other poor impotent and distressed
people. So many Seminaries, Schools, Halles, Colleges, and Universities, for
increase of learning. So many Bridges, highe-wayes, Caussies, Townhouses, and
other public commodities. So many places of prayer and devotion; as
Monastaries, Abbayes, Priories, Couuentes, Nunries, Eremitages, Cells,
Oratories, and other like, for repose of virtuous people that would leave the
world, and betake them selves only to contemplation of heavenly things, and
exercise of a more holy and retired life.

Al which charitable deeds and many The charitable deeds of our ancestors and
vva^t thereof in us.
more that can not be recounted, came out of the purses and coffers of godly
Christians in ancient times; who very often gave not only of their abondance
and superstuities; but spared also from their own sustenance and necessary
relief; as also took away and aliened many things from their own children
and posterity, to emploie the^ in these charitable uses, for the benefit of
their souls. Whereas on the contrary side, we that now live in this miserable
corrupt time, are so far of from giving away our necessaries, and plucking
from our own bodies to these offices of charity: that we make no scruple at
all, to spoil the poor and godly of these benefits and releefes, which were
left unto them by our holy forefathers. And as for our own superstuities and
excesses, we seek commo^lie to emploie them, rather on hawks, and dogs, and
other brute beasts, (as sometimes also upon much more vile uses,) then in
charitable deeds to the relief of our poor brethern, and to the ease of our
own souls in the life to come. So utterly fails the whole world at this
day, in performing this point of doing good deeds.

Wherefore to draw to a conclusion of this whole chapter: it may appear by The
perfection of Christian vocation, if it were fulfilled.
that which hitherto has been said; first, what a perfect and most excellent
creature a good Christian is; whose life is nothing else but a continual warfare
and resista^ce of al sin, both I thought, word, and deed; and an incessant
exercise of al piety and good works, which his hand or heart may possibly
perform. Which kind of life, if it were exactly fulfilled, in such sort as it
was prescribed by Christ the author of our profession: most evident it is,
that the common weal of Christianity, should be a most heavenly, blessed; and
Angelical estate upon earth, wherein no fraud, no deceit, no malice, no
contention, no wickedness, injustice, or violence should raigue: and
consequently, either few or no temporal laws should be necessary for
punishment of the same. For that by the only law of religion and conscience,
al would be simplicity, al purity, al truth and honesty, concord, love, and
charity, one toward the other; eue^ as we read, that it fell out in the first
days and ages of Christian religion, when this law of conscience was yet
observed. But now, for that the world has abandoned commonly in every place,
these two principal parts of Christian duty, (I mean the resistance of sin,
and performance of good works:) the most part of Christians are become more
sensual, and dissolute in manners and life, then ever were the more civil part
of Gentiles and Infideles; which is a most intolerable and supreme dishonor
to our Saueour, that gave his life for reducing us to a better conversation.
For which cause, in all reason, right, and equity, the punishment of such
unworthy Christians, must needs be far greater at the later day, then of
the verse Paganes, who had not that light and assistance for their direction;
according to that speech of Christ to certain ungrateful Towns and places
wherein he had preached: woe be to thee Corozain: woe be to the Bethsaida; for
that, if the like things Mat. 11. Luc. 10.
had been done in Tyrus and Sidon (which are heathen Cities,) that have been
done in the: they would have repented; and therefore I tell you, that it shall be
easier for them in the day of judgment, then for you. Which point, would God
that men now adays would attentively consider. The difference of the virtuous
and wicked in this world and in the next.


Secondly; it may appear by these, and other things before set down, what a
marvelous different life the good and evil do pass in this world; and
consequently, how different a lot they are to receive in the next, from him
that rewards each man (as S. Paul says) according to his actions, Romans 2.
2. Tim. 4.
either good or evil. For first, the virtuous Christian, does not only abstain
from committing sin, (especially that which divines call mortal, and which
each man by Gods assistance may eschew,) but also by continual resisting and
fighti^g against the same, he increases daily and hourly his Note that Bunny
thrusts out this word MLRIT not only here, but in all the book besides,
which is almost in every leaf of ancient fathers vvry tinges, as also
expresselie Eccles. 16. v. 15. and the value thereof, which is retribution for
good works, (...) in every place of scripture. Genesis 4. v. 4. Exodus 1. 20.
Leu. 11. 43. Psalm. 118. 112. Mat. 5. 12. 2. Tim. 4. 8. Heb. 11. 26. etc.
merit, for the Crown of heaven. But the careless man, by yielding consent of
heart to every leude concupiscence that offers it self; does not only not
gain any merit at al, but heapeth up sin upon sin without end or number.
Again, the careful man besides avoiding sin, and the gain which he
gathers by fighting in that combat; performs also infinite good works, at
lest wise in heart and desire, which is accepted by God for deeds, where further
ability fails. But the lose Christian, neither in heart or deed does any
good at al; but in place thereof commits infinite evils: so that, as the one
employeth his whole mi^de, heart, words, and hands, with all the forces, and
other habilities that God has lent him, to the doing of good and resisting of
evil: so the other bends al his powers both of body, mind, and fortune, to
the service of vanities, the world, and of his own flesh, and to the increase
of Christ's enemies kingdom. And hereby, as the former increases hourly in
merit before God, (whereunto by his holy promise belongs increase of grace
in this life, and of glory in the life to come:) so the later continually, by
all his thoughts, words, deeds, and endeavors, does multiply in stane from
time to time, whereunto of Gods justice do appertain both vengeance and
damnation, with the tormente of hell. And in this contrary course, they pass
over their lives, for twenty, thirty, forty, more or fewer years, and so
come to die, each man with his contrary account: which being such as I have
said; can it be maruailous to any man living, if there be so great diversity
in their pavementes, and everlasting conditions for the world to come; seeing
their dealinges and reco^ninges were so opposite and unequal in this life
present?

Learn then (my dear brother) if The conclusion with an exhortation
thou be wise; by these and like considerations, to awaken thy self while thou
have time. If thou find by examination of the two forsaid parts of Christian
duty, that hyterto thou have walked avvrye, and have not performed the life
required in that vocation: thank God for this so great a benefit, as is the
reuciling of thy danger while yet there is time and place to make amends. Many
(no doubt) are this day in torments, and shall be everlastingly, who passed
over their lives without ever thinking of these affairs, and if they had
received so special favor as thou do now, in having these matters so
particulerlie laid before the; perhaps they had escaped those eternal
calamities, wherein now they are fallen without possibility of redress. Use
then Gods mercy to thy gain (dear Christian) and not to thy greater and more
intolerable damnation. Cast not away wilfully that most precious Inel thy
soul, which Christ has bought so dearly, and which he desires so
vehementelie to save, and enriche with grace and ever lasting glory; if thou
would yield the same into his hands, and be content to direct thy life
according to his most hoiie and sweet commandments.

OF THE ACCOUNT WHICH CHRISTIANS MVST YIELD TO GOD of the duties and offices
before rehearsed. As also the Majesty, severity, terror, and other
circumstances of that reconinge day, with two several times appointed for
that purpose. CHAPT. VII.
AS IN every office and charge committed to a servant A points of great
vvisdome.
in this life, it is a principal point of wisdom, to consider and bear in
mind, what account and reckonig shall be demanded thereof by him who placed him
in that room; as also, what nature and disposition his master is of in taking
his audite; that is, whether exact or remiss, facile or rigorous, mild or
stern; and whether he have power to punish at his pleasure if he find him
faulty: even so it behooves a careful Christian man, in the charge of his life
and duty before mentioned and declared, very diligently to waighe and ponder
with him self, what manner of reckoning his Lord and Saueour will require at his
hands, and in what terms, either of rigor or lenity, facility or
severity, he will proceed with him in that account or audite. Which thing a
prudent man may easelie conceive by consideration of these two points which
ensue.

First; if he waighe the manner, order, and circumstances, whereby his charge,
How the law of good life was published. Exodus 19. and 20.
that is, the law and rule of his conversation was published and proclaimed by
God unto the world. Which thing is set forth at large in the book of Exodus,
where is described with what marvelous and dreadful majesty, fear, terror,
thunder, and sound of trumpets, the ten commandments of God (which contain
the perfect form of a virtuous Act. 7.
life) were pronounced by Angels unto the people of Israel. Which terror and
majesty, S. Paul applies expressie to this Heb. 12.
meaning, that we should greatly tremble to violate or transgress this law,
which was delivered with such circumstance of dread and horror: seeing that the
laws of great princes and potentates, are exacted commonly and executed upon
the offenders, with much more terror then they were proclaimed.

Secondly; the same in part may be conceived; if we consider what Judge or
Auditour Who and what manner of auditour shall receive our accomptes. 2. Cor.
5. Luc. 12. 16. 19. 20.
we shall have in this account. Which S. Paul declares plainly in these words.
We must al be sommoned before the tribunal seat of Christ, and every man
receive either good or evil, according as he has behaved him self vvbiles he
lived upon earth. Which thing Christ him self confirms in diverse parables,
when he promises to take account of al his talents lent unto his servants in
this world. And in S. Mathews Ghospel he expresses the particular manner Mat.
16.
of that account, saing: The Son of man shall come with his Angels in the
glory of his Father to take an account, and then shall he give Mat. 16.
unto every man according to his works. And yet more particularly and
severely of the same matter and day: I say unto you, that every idle word
that men shall speak, they shall give account thereof in the day of judgment. By
Mat. 12.
which speech of our Saueour we are admonished, not only that we shall give an
account of our doings, but also that we shall yield the same to him self, who
says in an other place, Ego sum Iudex and testis, I am both Judge and witness
in this account. Iere. 29.
We are instructed also, that this account shall be most exact and exquisite, not
omitting the least errors and offenses that have passed in our life: That
particular reward or punishment shall be assigned to each man, co^fourme to the
quality of his account: And finally, that this account or day of reconning,
(for declaration of the terror and majesty that shall be used therein,) is
called here by Christ, a judgment and tribunal, wherein sentence of life or
death is to be pronounced.

Of which iudgmente or accompting day, the scripture notes unto us two Two
days of Judgment.
kinds. The first whereof is called a particular judgment, for that it is
exercised upon every soul immediately after her departure from the body,
according to the words of holy S. Paul; It is appointed 1. Particular. Heb.
9. 2. General.
for every man once to die, and after that to have his judgment. The second is
called a general judgment, for that it shall be executed upon all the world
together at the last day, when mankind shall be translated from this
terrestrial habitation. And of this judgment, are to be understood as well those
former words of Christ, touching his coming in glory, as also infinite other
places and passages of Scripture, which do forewarne and admonish us of this
most dreadful day. And albeit in the first particular judgment, each soul
that departs hence, receives an irrevocable sentence, either of life or
death eternal, (as may appear by the examples of Lazarus Iuc. 16.
and of the rich glutton, whereof the one was determined to everlasting repose,
and the other to eternal torments immediately upon their separation from this
world:) yet are there alleged by the holy Saints of God, diverse most clear,
facile, and evident reasons, why his divine wisdom, besides that first private
and particular day of trial, has ordained also this second, which shall be
public, manifest, and universal.

The first whereof, is; that the body of Four reasones why there is a second
judgment.
may be partaker of eternal punishment or glory with the soul, even as in
this life, it was participant of the virtues or vices which the soul did
exercise. The second reason is; for that as Christ was exhortatio^s, and other
like means, whereby good or evil may proceed after their departure. The reward
whereof, can not so conveniently be assigned unto the^ whiles this world
endures, for that their joys or punishments in the places where they are, may
daily be augmented, by the hurt or good that may be wrought in the world, by
those means which they left behind them.

So divines do hold, (for examples Oh that me^ would consider well this
reason.
sake) that the glory of S. Paul is increased daily in heaven, and shall be unto
the worlds end, by reason of them that daily do profit by his writing and
rare examplar life upon earth: as also on the contrary part, that the
torments of Arrius, Sabellius, and other wicked heretics; Heretics.
are continually augmented, by the numbers of the^ who from time to time are
corrupted with their seditious and pestilent writiges. The like they hold of
dissolute Loose Poets.
Poets and other loose writers, which have left behind them lascivious, wanto^,
and carnal devises; as also of negligent parents, masters, or teachers, who by
Evil Parents.
their rechelesnes and evil examples gave occasion to corrupt the children,
cholers, or servants committed to their government and instruction. But after
this general day of judgment once past, their shall be no more place of meriting
either good or evil; for that the world then and there shall receive an end, and
a final sentence be pronounced of what soever has passed from the first
foundation and establishment thereof.

Of this last and general judgment then, which contains a confirmation or
ratefying of the particular going before, as also a final conclusion, clearing,
and knitting up of al accomptes and reckonings with ma^kinde, for his trafique
and stewardship in this worldly pilgrimage: The How necessary the (...) is
of the last day of judgment.
holy Scripture of God amoni heth us most carefully to have continual
remembrance and consideration, as of the greatest and most important business
that ever we shall deal in, and as the forceblest means to restrain us from
sin. that possibly may be devised among (...) men in this life. For of this
were uttered those words especially, bear in mind the last end of all
things, and thon shall jot sin everlastingly. Eccles. 7.
Which holy David seemed to have experienced in him self when he wrote as
follows. I have observed the vvayes of my Lord, neither have I committed
wickedness against Psalm. 57.
my God; for that his judgments were alvvaye in my sight, and his justice I
have not cast out of my mind. And (by these means) I shall be unspotted in his
presence, and will keep my self from committing iniquity. Hence it is that
the blessed Prophet Moses when he saw the people of Israel careless in
committing sin, cried out in zeal; o^ foolish Nation without Deuteronomy. 32.
wisdom or council; would God they had wit and understanding, and would
forsee the end of things to come. As who would say; if they had so much wit
as to consider this, and what account they must give to God at the last day of
their doings; they would not offend him as they do. But as the scripture
says in an other place, for that this day of reconing is disterred; and for
that Gods judgment is not pronounced presentelie Eccles. S.
against the wicked: the children of men do commit wickedness daily without
ail fear. We have then to consider in this place, for our own instruction and
good admonishement in life, what manner of accompting day this shall be, whose
remembrance is so much and often commended unto us in holy scripture. For
better conceyuing (...) poi^ts of this chapter.
whereof, we shall divide this chapter into three principal heads or points.

The first whereof, shall be of preparatio^s or

The second, of things that shall pass

The third, of that which is to ensue

CONCERNING THE FIRST, it is THE. 1. part. OF preparations.
to be noted, that for the more dread and Majesty of this great day, the
eternal wisdom of God has ordained and revealed unto us, that before the
coming thereof, when it approaches nere, thershal most wonderful and horrible
preparations, signs, and tokens appear in the world. The first whereof, shall be
the garboiles, tumultes, and commotions of all Nations, kingdoms, and people
upon earth. Which our Saueour himself described in these words to his Apostles:
When you shall hear the fame or brute of vvarres and vprores; be not afraid:
for that these things must be, and yet presently the end of the world shall not
ensue. One nation shall rise Luc. 2 ^
against an other, and one kingdom shall impugn another: there shall be great
earthquakes, pestilence, and famine; most terrible signs and tokens from
heaven. Upon which words of our Saueour Greg. hom. 35. in Eua^.
the blessed father S. Gregory has this discourse. The last tribulation must
have many tribulations going before it; and by these manifold afflictions
precede^t, are declared the eternal afflictions that must ensue. And therefore
Christ said, that after wars and vprores, the end should not immediately
follow: for that, it behooves that many transitory calamities should go
before; to denounce unto us the endless woes which are to come after.

These wars, tumultes, and most dreadful confusions here signified by Christ,
are specified more plainly in other places of holy writ; but especially by
Ezechiel, Ezech. 38 Dan. 7. Apoc. 13. See S. Jerome com. in cap. 7. Dan.
Daniel, and S. Ihon in his revelations. Where it is prophetied, that a little
before the last general day of judgment, there shall be revealed the man of
sin, called Antechrist; who after the conquest of many kings and kingdoms,
shall make him self the Monarch and absolute owner of the world; and shall
exercise upon good Christians more barbarous cruelty, and shed more innocent
blood, within the space of three years and a half (which shall be the term of
his outrageous tirannie, Dan. 12.
) then al other ennimies of God have done from the beginning. The matter is
described most strangely by the Prophet Ezechiel. Who after declaration of one
most bloody bataile to be fought by Jerusalem, wherein he says figuratively,
that the weapons of such as shall be slain, shall be sufficient to make fire for
seven years after: he adioyneth in the person of God this narration. I have
spoken in my zeal, and in the fire of my wrath have I promised, that in the
last days when Ezech. c. 38. and 39.
Gog and Magog shall come into the world (by these names are signified the army
of Antechrist,) there shall be a great commotion A most wonderful prophetie of
the slaugoter to be committed by Antechrist.
upon the earth, and the fish of the sea, the birds of the air, the beasts
of the field, and all that crecpeth on the ground, together with all humane
generation which lives upon the face of the earth, shall be in an uproar before
my face. Hills shall be ouerturned; hedges shall be broken down; and every strong
wall shall fall to the ground. I will call against them the sword, from the tops
of al mountains; and every man's sword shall be bent against his own brother. My
judgment shall be in pestilence, and blood, and vehement storms, and in huge
stones that shall fall down. I will rain fire and brimstone. etc. And thou son
of man tell unto all the fowls and birds of the air, and to all the ravenous
beasts of the field: assemble your selves; make haste; come together, from al
quarters, to feed of the sacrifice which I shall prepare unto you: a great
sacrifice, upon the mountains of Israel. You shall eat the flesh of stout
champions, and shall drink the blood of Princes. You shall feed of their fat
until you be cloide, and you shall drink their blood til you be druncke. You
shall be filled at this my table, and al Nations shall see this my judgment that
I have exercised, and in what manner I have stretched out my potent hand upon
them.

Thus much has the word of God, and much more, (which for brevity I do The
2. Kind of preparations.
omit.) of the great miseries and co^fusions that shall be among men, some little
time before the day of judgment. Which time being expired; there shall ensue
other preparations in the heavens and eliments of the world, much more dreadful
then these. Which by Christ him self and his Saints are described in this
manner. At that day there shall be signs in the Sun, in the Luc. 21. Mat. 24.
Mar. 13. 2. Pet. 3.
Moon, and in the stars. The sun shall be darkened; the moon shall give no
light; the stars shall fall from the skies; and all the powers of heaven shall be
moved. The firmament shall forsake his situation with great violence; the
elements shall be dissolved with heat; and the whole earth with all that is in it,
shall be consumed with fire. The firm land shall move and leave her place, and
shall fly away like a doae; the pressures of Nations upon earth shall be
inestimable, by reason of these things) and through the confusion of hideous
noise from the sea and floudes; and men shall wither away and dry up for fear
and expectation of the things, which at that day shall happen to the universal
world. Thus far out of the Ghospel.

But S. John the dearly beloved disciple of our Saueour, sets out the same
Apoc. 6. A most wonderful revelation of S. John.
more at large, according as it was revealed unto him, i this manner. I heard
(says he) a voice like the sound of a thunder, saing; come and see; and I did
see. And behold, a white horse and one that sat upon him that had a bow; and
he went to conquer. After which followed a black horse, and he that rode upon
him had a pair of balance in his hand. After him passed forth a pale horse,
and he that sat upon him was called, DEATH, and Death. Hell.
HELL followed behind him; and he had authority given to him, to slay by sword,
by death, and by the beasts of the earth. The earth did shake; the sun grew
black like a sack; the moon like blood; the Stars fell from heaven; the
sky doubled it self like a folded book; every hill and Island was moved from
his place: the kings of the earth, and princes, and tribunes, and the rich
and stout hid the^ selves in dens and in the rocks of hills. Then appeared
there seven Angels Seven tru^petes and seven blastes.
with seven trumpetes, and each one prepared him self to blow his blast. At
the first blast, came there hail and fire mixed a whole mountain of burning
fire into the sea, and the third part of the sea was made blood. At the third
blast fell there a Absinthiu^, burning like a torch, and infected the rivers and
fountains. At the fourth blast

At the fifte blast fell an other star from Apoc. 9.
heaven, which had the keye of the pit of VVo^derful locustes.
barbed horses, with Crounes on their heads. Their faces like men, their hear
like women, their teeth like lions, and the noise of their wings, like the
noise of many chariotes running together; their tales like scorpio^s, and their
stinges were in their tails: their king was an Angel of hell, named Abbado^;
which signifies an utter destroier. At the sixth blast these horses were as
lions, and out of their mouths came fire, smoke, and brimstone, whereby they
slew the third part of men which had not repented; and their strength was in
their tales, which were like serpents. Then was there an Angel which putting
one foot upon the sea, and an other upon the land, did swear by him that
lives for ever and ever, that after the blast of the seventh trumpet, there
should be no more time. And so when the seventh Apoc. 11.
from heaven, saying; the kingdom of this world is made to our Lord and his
Christ, and he shall reign forever. And I heard a great voice saying to the
seven Angels; go and pour out seven Apoc. 16. The seven cups of Codesire.
cups of Gods wrath upon the earth; and so they did. And the first brought
forth cruel wounds upon men. The leco^d turned the sea into red blood. The
third turned the rivers and fountains into like blood. The fourth, afflicted
men with fire and made them blaspheme God. The fifte made them eat their own
tongues for sorrow. The sixth dried up the water. And I saw three foul
spirits like frogs, issue out of the mouth of a dragon. And finally the
seventh cup being poured out, there came a mighty voice from the throne of
God, saying; it is dispatched. And there followed lightenings, and thunders, and
voices, and earthquakes, such as never were since men dwelt upon the earth.
Thus far this Apostle, Euange list and prophet S. John.

And now tell me, (my good Christian brother,) is it possible for any tongue
either A inconsideratio^ upon the (...).
humane or Angelical, to express a thing more forceblie the^ this is here set
down? what mortal heart can choose but tremble, even at the reading and
remembrance only of these inspeakable and incomprehensible terrors? What manner
of day will that be (trowest thou,) when the heavens shall mourn, the whole
earth shall shake, the sun and moon loose their light, the Stars fall down,
the sea and floods forsake their channels and natural courses, all the elements
be dissolved, the face of the earth ouerflowed with blood, and the universal
world on a flaming fire? Is it marvel now, if the Scriptures Sopho. 1. Psalm.
74.
avouch that the just men and Angels them selves shall be afraid of that day?
And then to reason as S. Peter does; if innocence and 1. Pet. 4.
Justice shall scarsely esteem them selves secure in that fearful trial: what
shall become of sin and iniquity? what shall become (I say) of the careless
and dissolute Christian, when he shall see so infinite a sea of miseries rushe
upon him? O that me^ would think upon this day while they have yet time! O
that they would awake and prepare them selves by virtuous life to stand secure
and confident at this woeful hour. Who is there now a day which takes that
care that holy Jerome did, who was wont to say (having much less (...). (...)
14. ad (...).
cause then we,) that he did never eat, nor drink, nor sleep, nor take any
other action in hand, without the fearful remembrance of this accompting day.
And this of the preparations. There follows the execution of things done in
that judgment.

WHEN THE FORMER preparations THE. 2. part. OF things that must pass in
this Judgment.
shall be fulfilled and finished, and the whole world brought to that pitiful
state and plight, which I have described; then (says the Scripture) shall the
sign of the fonne of man appear in the sky; and all the tribes of the earth
shall see him coming in the clouds of heaven, amiddest Mat. 25. Iuc. 21.
al his Angels, with much power and glory, in great authority and majesty.
And there in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, he shall send his Angels with
a 1. Cor. 13.
trumpet, and with a great cry at midnight, and they shall gather together his
elect from the four parts of the world, even from heaven to earth. Hitherto
are the words of holy Scripture. Wherein is set down the first act of this
dreadful judgment, which is the coming of the Judge to his throne and tribunal
seat; so much the more terrible and full of majesty in this The coming of the
Judge.
his second appeara^ce, by how much more contemptible he was and despised in
his first being upon earth for the work of our redemption. So S. John
affirmed, that Apoc. 5. and 13.
he which was siaine as a lamb, should come again to judge as a Lion. Of
which coming, the Prophet Malachies words are. Behold our Lord shall come
and who shall be Mal. 3.
able to abide the day of his coming? And the Prophet Esaie adds further
touching the same coming; that the very mountains Esa. 64.
shalmelt at that day before his face. And yet further he describes the same
in an other place thus. Behold our Lord shall come in strength and sortitude,
as a storm of hail, and as avvhyrle vvinde breaking and throvving down what
soever stands in his way; as a rage of Esa. 28.
many waters that ouer-stovve and rushe together etc. Whereunto the Prophet
David annexeth, that burning fire shall run before his Psalm. 49.
face, and on every side of him, a violent tempest.

This terrible Judge then being set, and The manner of the Judgment.
al creatures of the world conuented before him; the Scripture lays down
unto us, the order of that judgment, described by Daniel in these words. I
stood (says Dan. 7.
he) with attention; and I savve certain seats placed, and the Ancient of
years sat down in judgment. Thousand thousands were attendant to serve him;
and ten hundredth thousand thousands, stood waiting before him. The judgment
was settled, and the books were opened. Thus much was reueyled to Daniel,
without declaration what books those were. But to S. John the same were made
manifest; who expounds the matter thus: I savve Apoc. 20.
(says he) a great bright throne, and one that sat upon the same, before
vvhos face both heaven and earth did tremble. etc. And I savve al those that
were dead, both great and small, standing before the throne. And the books
were there opened, and al those that were dead had their judgment, according
to the things which were written in those books; every one according to his
works. By which words we are give to understand, that the books which at
that day shall be opened, and whereby our cause must be discerned, shall be the
evidences of our deeds and actions in this life, recorded in the testimony of
our own consciences, and in the infallible memory of Gods inscrutable
wisdom. Wheru^to shall give witness in that place against the reprobate, The
store of vvitnesses against as at the last day.
both heaven and earth which were created for them; the Sun and Moon with
all the stars and planetes, which from the beginning of the world have served
them; the elements and other creatures inordinately loved and abused by them;
their compagnions there present with whom they sinned; their brethern whom they
afflicted; the preachers and other Saints of God whom they contemned; and above
al other things, the ensign and standard of their redemption, I mean the
triumphant Cross of Christ, which shall at that day be erected in the sight of
all the world. Al these (I say) with infinite other things, shall the^ bear
witness against the wicked, and condemn them of intolerable ingratitude, in
that they offended so gracious and bountiful a Lord, as by so manifold
benefits allured The considence of the good, and terror of the wicked.
them to love and serve him.

At this day, (says the Scripture,) shall the just stand in great constancy
against those by whom they were afflicted, and oppressed in this life. And the
wicked seeing this, shall be surprised with a horrible Sap. 5. Luc. 25. Apoc. 6.
fear, and shall say unto the hills, fall upon us and hide us, from the face
of him that fitteth upon the throne, and from the indignation of the Lamb; for
that the great day of wrath is now come. O merciful Lord, how great a day of
wrath shall this be? how truly said thy Prophet in his meditation of this day;
who can conceive the Psalm. 89.
power of thy wrath, or who is able for very scare, to recount the greatness
of thine indignation? This is that day of thine, whereof thy servant said so
long before; that thy zeal and Prou. 6.
surie should spare none in this day of revenge, nether should yield or be
moved with any man's supplication; nor should admit rewards for the delivery
of any man. This is that most dreadful day of thine, whereof thy holy Prophet
admonished us, when he said; Behold Esa. 13.
the day of our Lord shall come; a cruel day, full of indignation, wrath, and
surie, to bring the earth into a wilderness, and to crushe in pieces the
sinners thereof. And an other Prophet of the self same day: behold the day of
our Lord dot bcome; a day of darkness and dimnes; a day of Joel. 2.
clouds and storms; a most terrible day, and such an one, as was never from
the beginning of the world, nor shall be after in all eternitic. This is Godsday.
thy day (o Lord) and so properly thou will have it called; like as it
pleases thy goodness to term the course of this present life, the day of man.
For that as in the time of this present world, thou art content Man's day.
to hold thy peace and be patient, and suffer sinners to do their will: even
so. at this last day, thou will rise up and plead for thine own glory, and
wilt make thy self known to the terror of thine enemies, according as thy
servant David foretold of the when he said; Cognescetur Dominus iudicia
faciens. God will be know, Psalm. 9.
when he shall come to do judgment.

Good God, what a maruailous day shall this be, when we shall see all the
children A dreadful day.
of Adam gathered together from al corners and quarters of the earth; when (as
S. John says) the sea and land shall Apoc. 20.
yield their dead bodies, and both hell and heauenshal restore the souls which
they possess, to be united to those bodies? What a wonderful meeting will this
be, (dear Christian,) how joyful to the good, and how lamentable, doleful, and
terrible to the wicked? The godly and righteous, being to receive the bodies
wherein they lived, into the league and fellowship of their eternal bliss; shall
embrase them with all possible swetnes and delight, singing with the prophet;
Behold, how good and pleasant Psalm. 132.
a thing it is, for brethern (or parteners) to dwell together in unity. But
the miserable damned spirits, beholding the carcaies which were the
instruments and occasios of their sin; and well knowing that their inspeakable
torments, shall be encreated by their mutual conjunction and association: shall
abhor and utterly derest the same, and curse the daic that ever they were
acquainted together; inueighing most bitterly against all the parts and semes
thereof, as against the eyes, for whose curious delighte so many vanities were
seught; the ears, for whose pleasure and daliance so great variety of sweet
sounds and melody was procured; the mouth and taste, for whose contenteme^t and
fond satisfaction, so innumerable delicacies were devised. And to be short, the
back and belly with other sensual parts, for contentatio of whose riotous
volupteoulnes, both sea and land were sifted and turmoiled.

This shall be the most sorrowful condition of these unfortunate souls at that
day: but this sorrow shall not avail them. For the judgment must pass on. And
then (says the Scripture) shall christ separate Mat. 25.
the sheep from the goats, and shall place his sheep on the right hand, and
the goats on the lest. O most dreadful separation: what would Alexander,
Caesar, Pompeie, and other To late to repent at the day of judgment.
such potentates of the earth give at that day, to have but the lowest room
among them of the right hand. They (I say) who had all the room of this world
at their pleasure, and al dignities under their own commandrie, would now make
more account of the meanest place and corner among Gods elect, then of all the
pomp and bravery of ten thousand worlds, if they were to live again: their
cogitatio^s at this day, being far different from that they were upon earth,
and their judgments wholly contrary. But (alas) there is no time of alteration or
amendment now. They must stand to that which is past, and according to their
former demeanours they must receive their doom. They have a Judge present,
whose power they can not avoid; whose wisdom they can not deceive; whose
equity they can not bow; whose severity they can not mollefie; whose
indignation they can not appease; whose determination they can not alter; and
from whose sentence they can not possibly appeal.

O my dear and loving brother; no tongue of man (believe me) can express, The
treasure of a good conscience at the day of judgment.
what a singular treasure a good conscience will be at this day, when thou
shall see all the Princes and Monarchs of this world stand there naked,
trembling, and appalled; being utterly destitute of an answer to the whole
multitude of their most secret sins, displaied openly before their faces An
vnspottel conscience (I say) at this instant, shall be a greater consolation,
then all the dignities or pleasures of a thousand worlds. For wealth will not
help; the judge will take no gifts; our own submission will not be admitted;
entreaty of frie^des will not prevail; intercession of Angels and other
Saints shall have no place; for that their glory shall be at this day (as the
prophet says) to bind kings in fetters, and noble princes in iron manacles,
to execute upon them the judgment Psalm. 149.
prescribed. Alas, what will al those delicate and dainty people do at this
instant, who live now in ease and pleasures, and can take no pain in the
service of God, nor abide to hear the naming of this day? what shift (I say)
will they find out i^ those extremities? whether will they tur ne the^? whose help
will they crave? They shall see al things cry vengeance round about the^; al
things yield them cause of fear and horror; but nothing any one sparcle of
hope or consolation. Above them, they A most (...) case and condition.
shall behold their Judge offended with their wickedness; beneath them, hell
open, and the cruel furnace ready boiling to recevue them to torment. On the
right hand, shall be their sins accusing them; on the left hand, the Devils
ready to execute Gods eternal sentence upon them. Within them, shall lie their
conscience gnawing; without them. al damned souls bewailing; on every side the
whole world burning.

O merciful Jesus, which art to behold this ruful spectacle; what a passage
shall Attend negligent Christian.
this be? what will the wretched sinner do, say, or think when he shall be
environed with these inexplicable miseries? how will his heart sustain these
anguishes? what way will he take? To go back is impossible; to go foreward
is intolerable; to stand there still is not permitted; what then shall he do,
but as thou (O Marc. 14.
Lord) with thy sacred mouth have foretold; that he shall dry and wither up for
very fear; seek death, and death shall fly from him; cry and beseech the
hills and Apoc. 6. and 9.
mountains to fall down and cover him, and they refusing to do him that
relief, or afford him so great a comfort; he shall stand there, as a most
desperate, forlorn, and miserable catise, until he receive that dreadful and
irreuocable sentence of thine; Go ye accur sed into everlasting fire. Math.
25.


THIS SHALL BE THE LAST act and conclusion of this woeful tragedy. For THE. 3.
part of this chapter. OF the end and that which shall ensue.
so it is recorded by the Judge him self. Then shall the son of man say to
those on his right hand. Come ye blessed of my father, and possess the
kingdom which is prepared for you, from the beginning of the world. I was
hungry and you gave me to eat; I was a stranger and you gave Math. 25.
me harbor; I was naked and you clothed me; I was sick and you visited me; I
was in prison and you came to comfort me. And to them on his left hand he shall
say. Depart from me ye accursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil
and his Angels; for I was hungry and you fed me not; I was a stranger and
you harbored me not; I was naked and you clothed me not; I was sick and in
prison, and you visited me not. Then shall they say unto him; O Lord when have
we seen the hungry, thirsty, or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or in
prison, and did not minister unto the? And he shall answer: I tell you, for that
you have not done these things to one of these lesser (your brethern;) you have
not done them to me. And then these wicked shall go into eternal punishment, and
the just into life everlasting. Hitherto are the words of Christ him self.

In which may be noted, first; that in recounting the causes of these miserable
Notes upon Christ's last sentence.
men's damnation, our Saueour alleges not lack of belief, or that they were
not faithful; whereof the reason may be that, which him self utters in an
other place 1. Ioa. 3.
of Infidels, saying; he that believes not, is already judged. And S. Paul of
an heretic; that he is condemned by his own proper judgment. Tit. 3. 2.
Secondly; he obiecteth against them, not any actual enormous sins; whereof
(per haps) may be assigned for a reason, which S. John does insinuate and
signify, that 1. Ioa. 3. and 5.
such kind of manifest and deadly sinners, are now evidently appertaining to
the dominion of Satan. Wherefore Christ urges only against these reprobates,
certain omissions of good works and charitable deeds, commended unto us by
the rule of Christian perfection. Mask well this point, o carles Christian.
And for these, he pronounces against them, his most dreadful sentence of
everlasting damnation. Which sentence being once passed the Judges mouth, and
recevued in the ears of all that infinite assembly there present: imagine thou
my soul, what an universal shoute and outcrie will thereupon straight ensue:
the saved; rejoicing and singing eternal praises in the glory of their
Saueour; the damned, bewailing, blaspheming, and cursing the day of their
nativity; the Angels, commending and extolling the equity of that judgment,
against which the parties that are convicted, shall not be able to find any
lest exception. Consider the intolerable vpbrading of those most insolent
infernal spirits, against the miserable condemned souls that are delivered to
their pray: with how bitter scoffs and tantes, will they traile them to their
torments? with what intolerable insultation will they execute the sentence of
God against them? Consider, the eternal separation that now must be made of A
vveeful separation.
Fathers and children, of mothers and daughters, friends and companions; the
one to glory the other to misery, without any hope ever to hear or see any
more the one the other. And that which shall be as great a grief as any of the
rest; the son or daughter going to rest and joy, shall not take pity of
their own parents or friends that are carried to calamities: but rather shall
rejoice thereat, for that it redoundeth to Gods glory, for execution of his
Justice.

O my soul, which now art here considering of these things a far of, and
the^ shall be present to see them actuallie before thine eyes; what a doleful
separation will this be? what a fare-wel? what a parting? whose heart would not
break at that day, to abide this intolerable seuering, if a heart could then
break, and thereby make some end of his pains? But so much ease The vandtie
of al worldly preferme^tes as the List.
will not be permitted. O ye children and lovers of this world; where will al
your delights, recreations, and vanities be at this day? Al your pleasant
pastimes; al your pride and bravery in apparel; your glistering in gold; your
sweet savors of perfumes; your honors of cappe and knee; your adulation of
flatterers? your delicate fair and dainty dishes; your music; your wanton
daliances, and pleasant entertainments? Where are all your good frie^des and
merry compagnio^s, accustomed to laugh and disport the time with you? Are al
now gone. O vanity of vanities; now when you have most need of them, they are
furthest of from you, and the remembrance thereof shall do nothing but torment
you. O my dear brethern, how sour will all the pleasures past of this world
seem at that hour? How doleful will the cogitation thereof be unto us? how
frivolous a thing will al our dignities, riches, offices, and other preferments
appear, wherein we take such excessive delight now, and do weary out our
spirits for gaining the same? And on the contrary side, how joyful will that
man be at this instant, who has attended to lead a virtuous life, in resisting
of finne and doing good works, albeit it were with much pain and contempt in
this world? Most happy creature shall he be, that ever he was borne; and
ouer-whelmed with all joy that ever he took that path in hand; and no tongue
but Gods, can express his happiness.

Wherefore here (my loving brother) The co^clusio^ of the vvbel chapter.
to make an end, and to frame no other conclusion of all this whole
declaration, but only that which Christ himself does make unto us (who being
the chief actour that shall deal in this affair, knows best of al other what
counsel to give:) let us consider with our selves, eue^ in the very botto^ of
our hearts, how easy a matter it is now in this life, with a little pain and
diligece, to avoid the danger of this most dreadful day. For which cause also
it is most certain, that the same is foretold us, and so often urged in holy
write to our remembrance; as in like manner, so particulerly described by our
most merciful judge and Saueour, to the end we should by these severe and
earnest admonishmits, be stirred up to prepare our selves for it. So Christ
himself does most evidently declare, when after al his former threatniges he
concludes in these most sweet words of exhortation. Look about your selves;
Marc. 13.
watch and pray; for you know not when the time shall be. But as I say to you,
so I say to al men: be watchful. And yet further Math. 24.
in an other place he adioineth. Atte^d unto your selves, that your hearts be
not overcome with eating, and drincking, and with the cares of this life, and
so that daio overtake you upon the sudden. etc. Be you therefore watchful, and
always pray, that you may be worthy to escape althes things which are to
come, and to stand confidently before the son of man at that day.

These are the words and forewarnings of thy Judge and Saueour, unto thee my
soul. And what more friendly and fatherly The svveet and fatherly dealing of
Christ with us. 2. Pet. 3.
exhortation could thou desire; Can thou plead ignorance in this affair
hereafter? If thou think so; hear yet a further admonishment of his chief
Apostle. The day of our Lord (says he) shall come as a thief (when men
think not of it,) In which the heavens and elements shall be dissolved; and all the earth with her inhabitants shall be consumed with fire. Which being so; what
manner of men ought we to be in holy conversation and piety, expecting and
going on to meet with this day of our Lord etc.? In which words of S. Peter,
is diligently to be noted, that this meeting with the day of Judgment,
whereunto he exhorts us, is How we may go and meet with the day of the
judgment.
nothing else, but the due examination of our present perilous estate, and the
speedy amendment of our life, to the works of piety and holy conversation:
which in deed, is that only sovereign remedy, whereof the wise man forwarneth
us, when he says; Provide a medecin before the Eccle. 18.
malady, and examine thy self before judgment, and so shall thou find favor
in the sight of God. Whereunto S. Paul well agrees saying; If I. Cor. II.
we would judge our selves, we should not be judged. But for that no man
enters into this due judgment of himself, his life, state, and actions: here
of it comes, that so few dot prevent this dangerous day; so few prepare
themselves; so few do accept of the good counsel of Christ; so feweare
watchful; and so infinite do fall a sleep in the ignorance of their own
peril, to their remediles destruction and unavoidable damnation. Our blessed
Lord give us his holy grace to look better about us.

OF THE NATVRE OF SIN, AND OF THE VNVVORTHINES OF HIM that commits the
same. For iustifyinge the severity of gods judgment setdoune and declared in
the chapter going before. CHAPT. VIII.
TO THE end that no man may justly complain of the severe accoumpte, which
God is to take of us at the last day, or of the rigor of his judgment, set
down in the chapter before: it shall not be amiss to consider in this place,
the cause why God does show such severity against sin and sinners; as both
by that which has been said may appear that he does, as also by the whole
Gods hatred against sinners.
course of holy scripture, where in every place almost, he denounces his
extreme hatred, wrath, and indignation against the same: as where it is said
of him, that he Psalm. 5.
hates al those that work i^iquitie. And again: that both the wicked man
and his wickedness, are Sap. 14. Prou. 15. Job. 11. Esa. 1. Psalm. 13. Psalm. 49.
Eccle. 15.
hateful in his sight. And finally, that the whole life of sinners, their
thoughts, words, yea and their good actions also, are abominations unto him,
whiles they live i sin. And that (which yet is more) he can not abide nor
permit the sinner to praise him, or to name his testament with his mouth, as
the Holy Ghost testifies. and therefore no marvel if he show such severity
against him at the last day, whom he so extremely hates and abhors in
this life.

Of which great hatred there might be many reasons alleged; as the undutiful
transgressio^ and co^te^pt of gods co^mandementes; the great ingratitude of a
sinner in respect of his divine benefits, and such other: which might justify
sufficiently his indignation and severe hatred against him. But there is one
reason above all the rest, which opens the very fountain The reason why God
so hates a sinner.
and origin of the matter; and this is, the intolerable injury done unto
almighty God, in every mortal sin that we commit: which in deed is so
opprobrious and abominable an injury; as no mean worldly potentate could
bear the same at his subjects hands, and much less God him self (being the
omnipotent Lord of al glory and Majesty,) may in reason tolerate an outrage
so often iterated against him, as is sin daily committed by the wicked.

For the better understanding of which injury, we are to consider, that every
time we commit a mortal sin, there does pass thorough our heart and mind
(though we mark it not,) a certain practik discourse of our understanding,
(as there does also in every other election,) whereby we lay before us on the
one side, the profit of that sin which we are tempted to commit; that is to
say, the pleasure which allureth us thereunto: and on the other part, the
offense of God, which is, the leesinge of his grace and frie^dshippe by that
sin, if we yield unto it. And thus having as it were the balances there
before us, and setting God in one end thereof, and in the The injury done to
God by sin.
other the aforesaid pleasure; we stand in the midst deliberatinge and
examininge the weight of both parts; and finally do make choice of the
pleasure, and reject almighty God: that is; we choose rather to loose the
favor of God, together with his grace, and whatsoever he is worth besides,
then to lack that pleasure and delectation of sin. Now then, what can be
more opprobrious and horrible then this? what ca^ be more reprochful to God,
then to prefer a most vile pleasure before his infinite Majesty? is not this
far more intolerable, then the disgrace offered to him by the Jews, when
they made choice of Barrabas the murderer, and rejected Mat. 17. Marc. 15.
Jesus their Saueour? surely, how hamous soever that sin of the Jews were,
yet in two poites this does seem to exceed the same. First, in that the Jews
knew not whom they refused in their choice, as we do. Secondly, in that they
refused Jesus but once, whereas we refuse him both daily and hourly, whenever
in our hearts we give consent unto mortal sin.

And is it marvel then, that God deals so severely and sharplye with
sinners in the world to come, who do use him so opprobriouslie and
contemptuously in this life? Undoubtedly the malice of a sinner is great
toward God, and he does The malice of a sinner toward God.
not only dishonor him by contempt of his commandments, and by preferring
most vile creatures before him: but also bears a secret hatred and grudge
against his majesty, and would (if it lay in his power) offer his endeavor to
pull him out of his seat, or (at the least wise) (...) in his heart, there were
no God at all to punish sin after this present life. Let every sinner
examine the botome of his conscience in this point, whether he could not be
content, there were no immortality of the soul, no reckoninge after this
life, no judge, no punishment, no hell; and consequentlye no God at al; to the
end he might the more securely enjoy his pleasures?

And because God (who searches the heart and reins) seethe well this most
Sap. 1. Romans 8. Psalm. 7.
undutiful and traiterous affection toward him, lurking within the bowels of
sinful men, (how smoth so ever their words may be:) here of it comes, that
in the whole course of holy Scripture, he denounces them for his enemies, and
professes open war and hostility against them. And then suppose yoa, what a
pitiful Romans 5. Lacob 4. 1. Ioh. 3.
case these unfortunate men are in, (being but seely worms and wretches of the
earth,) when they have so puissant an enemy to fight against them, as does
make the very heavens to tremble at his look. And yet that the case is so;
hear what himself says, what he threatens, what he thundreth out against
them. After he had by the mouth of Esaye the Prophet re peated many sins
abominable in his sight, as the taking of bribes, oppressing Sinners enemies
to God and God to them.
of poor people, and the like: He defieth the doers thereof, as his open
enymies, saying: This says the Lord God of hosts, the strong Lord of
Israel: Behold I wi. be revenged upon mine enemies, and will comfort my self
in their destruction. And the Prophet David, as he was a man in most high
favor with God, and made preuie to his secrets above many other: so he (more
than any other,) does express this severe meaning of God, and his infinite
displeasure against sinners; calling them his enemies, vessels of his wrath,
and ordained to eternal ruin and destruction; and complains that the world
will not believe this point. An unwise man (says he) will not Psalm. 90.
learn this, neither will the fool understand it. And what is this o holy
Prophet? it follows; That siners and workers of iniquity (after they have
appeared i the world) do perish everlastingly. And what is the reason of
this? he answers immediately: because toy enemies (o Lord,) thy enemies (I
say) o Lord, shall perish, and til they that vvoreke iniquity shall be cosumed.
Whereby we see, that all sinners be enemies to God, and God to them, as also
upon what ground and reason.

But yet (for the further iustifyinge of gods severity,) let us consider in
what measure his hatred is toward sin; how great; how far it proceeds;
withi what bounds it is comprehended; or whether it have any limits or bonds
at all, or rather be infinite and without limitation. And to utter the matter
as in truth it stands; Godshatred is infinite against sin and why.
if all the tongues in the world were made one tongue, and all the
understandings of all creatures (I mean of Angels and men) were made one
understanding: yet, could nether this tongue express, nor this understanding
conceive, the great hatred of gods heart toward every mortal sin which we
commit. And the reason hereof stands in two points. First, for that God by
how much more he is better than we are: by so much more he loves goodness and
hates sin, than we do. And for that he is infinitely good: therefore his
love to goodness is infinite, and his hatred to evil, immesurable; and
consequently, his rewards to them both, are infinite; the one in hell, with
everlasting misery; the other in heaven, by eternal felicity.

Secondly; we see by experience, that how much more great and worthy the Why
every sin deserves infinite punishment.
person is, against whom an offense is committed; so much greater is always
the offense: as for example, the self same blow or injury offered to a
bond-slaue and to a prince, differs greatly in quality and in the nature of
offense; and consequently, deserves far different hatred and punishment.
And for that every mortal sin which we commit, is done directly against
the person of God him self, as has been declared before, whose dignity is
infinite: therefore the offense or guilt of every such sin is infinite, and
consequently, deserves infinite hatred and infinite punishment at gods hands.
Hereof follows the reason of diverse things both said and done by God in the
scriptures, and taught by divines towching the punishments of sin, which
seem very strange unto the wisdom of the Romans 8. 1. Cor. 1.
world, and in deed to them scarce credible. As first of al; the most dreadful
punishment of eternal and irreuocable damnation of so many thowsandes, or
rather millions of Angels, that were created to The punishment of Angels.
glory with almost infinite perfection, and that for one only sin, but once
committed, and that only in thought, as divines are of opinion.

Secondly, the rigourous punishment Of Adam and Eu
of our first parents Adam and Eve, and al their posterity, for the eatinge of
a seely aple; for which fault, besides the chastisinge of the offenders
themselves, and all the creatures of the earth for the same, and al their
children and offspring after them, both before our redemption and after; (for
albeit we are delivered from the guilte of that sin, yet temporal
punishme^tes do remain upon us for the same, as hunger, thirst, cold,
sickness, death, and a thousand other miseries:) besides also the infinite
souls, damned for the same before the coming of Christ, by the space offower
thousand years; as also since, as well, infidels, which are not baptized, as
others: besides all this I say, (which in ma^s reason may seem severe enough:)
gods wrath and justice could not be sufficiently satisfied, except his own
only son had come down into the world, and taken our flesh upon him, and
by his pains and death made satisfaction for the same. And when The value of
Christ's satisfaction.
he was now come into the world, and had in our flesh subjected him self unto
his fathers justice; albeit the love his father bare unto him, were infinite,
and every little pain that he endured for us, or at leastwise every drop of
blood which he shed for our cause, had been sufficient for the whole
satisfaction; (for that his flesh being united to his godhead, made every
such satisfactorie action of his, of infinite value and merit, and
consequently of infinite satisfaction, correspondent to the infinity of our
first parents sin:) yet to the end that God might show the greatness Esa. 53.
of his hatred and justice against the said sin and al other; he never ceased
to add affliction to affliction, and to heap torments upon the body and
flesh of this his most dear and blessed son, (for by Esaye, he says, that
him self was the doer thereof;) until he had brought him unto that most rueful
plight, that his flesh being all mangled and most lamentably torn in pieces,
retained no one drop of blood within it. He spared him not (I say) even
then, when he beheld him sorrowful unto death, and bathed in that agony of
blood and water, when he hard him utter those most dolorous and compassionable
speeches, O my father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me. And
after that Mat. 26. Mar. 14. Luc. 22.
again, much more pitifully upon the Cross: O my God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? Notwithstanding al which cries and lamentatio^s, his most merciful
father, (loving him as he did,) would not deliver him; but for satisfying of
his Justice, laid upon him stripe upon stripe, pain upon pain, torment after
torment, until he had Mat. 27. Psalm. 21. Esa. 53.
rendered up his life and soul into his said fathers hands: which is a
wounderful and dreadful docume^t of gods hatred against sin.

I might here mention the sin of Esau The sin of Esan.
in selling his inheritance for a little meat: of which S. Paul says, he
found no place of repentance after, though he sought the same Genesis 25. and 27.
Heb. 12. of Saul. 1. Reg. 15 and 16. 1. Reg. 9. and 15. and 16.
with tears. Also the sin of Saul, whose sin being but one, and that
only of omissio^, in not killinge Agag the king of Amalech and his cattle, as
he was willed: was notwithstanding utterly cast of by God for the same,
(though he were his anointed and chosen servant before;) and could never get
remission thereof, albeit both he and Samuel, Gods holy prophet, did greatly
lament and bewail, and made intercession in that behalf.

In like manner might I allege the example of king David, whose two sins 2.
Reg. 12 Psalm. 5. 34. 68. 108. 101. 29. 2 Reg. 12
albeit upon his hearty repentance God forgave; yet notwithstanding the said
repentance and sorrow, and all the All these bedilie punishments Bun. leaves
(...), yet with standing they be set down in scripture.
weepinge, fasting, watchinge, lyinge on the ground, wearinge of sackloth,
and other bodily chasticementes, which this holy prophet records that him
self did put in ure: God punished him besides, with marvelous severity; as by
the death of his dearly beloved child, and by many other continual
afflictions, and temporal punishementes, during the raze of his whole life. And
all this to show his hatred against sin, and thereby to terrify us from
committinge the same.

Of this also do proceed, al those hard Hard speeches in scripture against
sinners.
and severe speeches of holy write touching sinners, which coming from the
mouth of the Holy Ghost, (and therefore no doubt both true and certain,) may
justly yield great cause of fear, to al such as live in sinful state; As for
example, Eccle. 40.
where it is said: death, blood, contention, edge of svvorde, oppression,
hunger, contrition, Psalm. 10.
and vvhippes; all these things are created for wicked sinners. And again:
God shall rain Psalm. 9.
snares of fire upon sinners; brimstone with te^pestuous vvindes, shall be the
portion of their cup. And yet further i^ many other places, these most dreadful
speeches and comminations Psalm. 3. Psalm. 9. Psalm. 36. Psalm. 144.
are to be found: God will be known at the day of judgment upon the sinner,
who shall be taken in the works of his own hands: many whippes belong unto a
sinner; let sinners be turned into hell; God shall scatter al sinners, and shall
dash there teeth out of their mouths; God shall scoff at a sinner when he sees
his day of destruction comes on; the sword of sinners shall turn into
their own Psalm. 57. Psalm. 36. Psa^. 103.
hearts: The arms of sinners shall be crushed and broken, and they shall wither
and dry up like hay from the face of the earth: desire not the glory and
riches of a sinner, Psalm. 140.
for thou do not know the sudden subversion which shall come upon him;
Eccle. 2. Psalm. 72. Esa. 13.
for God has given him riches, to deceive him therewith; behold the day of
our Lord shall come; a cruel day, and full of indignation, wrath, and fury, to
make desolate the earth, and to crush in pieces her sinners within her. The^
shall the just man rejoice saying this revenge, and shall wash Psalm. 7.
his hands in the blood of sinners. These lo, my dear brother, and
innumerable other such sentences of scripture, pronounced by the holy spirit
of God against sinners, may instruct us of their pitiful estate, and of the
unspeakable hatred of his divine Majesty against the^, so long as they persist
in their sinful life and conversation.

Of all which considerations, the self same holy scriptures, do gather
certain conclusions greatly to be observed. whereof the first and more
general is; that sin brings al people to misery; secondly Prou. 14. Psalm.
10.
and more particulerlie: that he which loves sin, bateth his own soul; Or
as the Angel Raphael utters the same i^ otherwordes; Tob. 12.
they which commit sin, are enemies to their own souls. Wherefore they
lay down to al men, this general, severe, and most necessary commandment,
upon all the pains before recited. Flee from sin, as from the face of a
snake. And again: Bevvare thou never Eccle. 21. Tob. 4.
consent to sin. For how soever the world may make little accounte of this
matter, by whom (as the scripture notes) the sinner is praised in his lusts,
and the wicked man Psalm. 9.
is blessed for his wickedness: yet most certain it is (for that the spirit
of God avouches it,) that he which commits sin, is of the devil, 1. Ioh.
3.
and therefore is to receive his portion among devils and damned spirits, at
the latter day.

And is not all this sufficient (most dear brother) to breed in us a
detestation of The obstinacy of sinners.
sin, with fear and horror to commit the same? Is not this of force and
strength sufficient, to shake the hearts of them that wallowe perpetually in
the pudle of sin? and do commit the same daily without scruple, remorse, or
consideration? what desperate obstinacy and obduration is this? Surely we find
now by experience, that the holy Ghost prophesied full truly of these men,
when he said; sinners alienated from God, are possessed with a surit like a
serpent, and like a deaf cocatrise which stops her ears, against the
enchaunter. This surie (I say) is the fury or madness of Psalm. 17.
wilful sinners, which stop their ears like serpents, to all the holy
enchauntmentes that God can use unto them, for their conversion; that is, to
all his internal motions and good inspirations; to all remorse of their own
consciences; to all threatninges of holy scriptures: to al admonishmentes of
gods servants; to al examples of virtuous livers; to all the punishementes
that light upon the wicked; and to all the other means which God can use for
their salvation.

Good Lord, what man would commit a mortal sin, for the gayning of ten The
losses that come by every mortal sin.
thowsande worlds, if he considered the infinite do^mages, hurtes,
inconveniences, and mileries, which do ensue by committing of the same? For
first, who soever sins Esa. 11. and Icro. Ibid.
the virtues infused, and the seven gifts of the Holy Ghost, whereby the sowie
was beautified in the sight of her spouse, and armed against al assaults of
her ghostly enemies. Secondly, he leeseth the favor

Thirdly, he leeseth all his inheritance, Romans 6.
which is due only by grace, as S. Paul well notes; and consequently, he
depriueth him self of all dignities and commodities depending thereupon in this
life; as are the condition and high privilege of being the son of God; the
communion of Saints; the protection of holy Angels, and the like. Fourthlie,
he loses byndeth him self to althose miseries and inconveniences, whereunto
the reprobate are subject; that is to say, to be an inheritour of hell and
damnation; to be in the power of the devil and his Angels; to be thral to
sin and every temptation Esa. 13.
thereof; and his soul (which was before the temple of the holy ghost, the
habitation of the blessed Trinity, the spouse of God, and place of repose for
holy Angels to visit:) now to be a de^ne of dragons, The leesing of Christ by
sin.
a nest of scorpions, a dongeo^ of deuilles, a sincke and swine-stie of al
filth and abomination, and him self a companion of the miserable damned
spirits.

Lastly, he abandoneth Christ, and renounceth all the interest and portion he
had with him, treading him under his feet, defiling his most precious blood,
and Crucifying him again (as S. Paul avouches,) in that he sins against
him, who died for sin, and makes him self a persecutour of his redeemer. For
which cause Heb. 10. Heb. 6. Romans 6.
the same Apostle pronounces a most hard and heavy sentence against such men,
in these words: If we sin vvillfullye now Heb. 10. Romans 26.
after we have received knowledge of the truth: there remains no more
sacrifice for sins, but rather a certain terrible expectation of judgment,
and rage of fire, which shall consume the adversaries. To which S. Peter
agrees, 2. Pet. 2.
when he says: It had been better not to have knovve^ the way of justice,
the^ after such knowledge, to slide back again from the holy commandment
which was given.

This being so; let sinful worldlinges go now and solace them selves in their
Fond excuses of sum.
vanities and wato^nes, as much as they lift. Let them excuse and pleasantlye
defend the same, by saing; pride is but a point of gentrye; glouttonie, good
fellowship; anger and revenge, but an effect of courage; lecherye and
wantonness, a trycke of yowth: they shall one day find, that these excuses
will not be received: but rather that al such pleasant devises and toies, will be
turned into tears; al such fond concepts into doleful lamentations. They shall
prove to their great cost, that God will not be iested with, but that he is the
Gal. 6.
same God still, and will ask as severe accounte of them, as he has done of
other before; although now it pleasenot them to keep any accounte at al of
their life and actions; but rather to turn all to disporte and pleasure,
persuading them selves, that how soever God has dealt before with other; yet
unto the^ he will pardon al. But this is a mere madness, and a voluntary
deluding of our selves; for that God him self by his sacred word, instructs
us to reason after an other sashion. Which I will here breefly touch, exhorting
every prudent Christian seriously to examine the same.

At what time the great Apostle of the Gentiles S. Paul; took upon him to make
a Romans 11.
comparison between the grievous sins of his nation the Jews (for which
they were rejected and made reprobate by God,) and those which Christians do
commit after their Redemption; he framed this collection concerning Gods
justice due unto them both, saing: If God spared not the natural boughs; take
heed least he spare not thee. And there-vpon he infers Romans 11.
this admonition, noli altum sapere, sed time, Be not high minded, but fear.
Again, he reasons thus upon the old and the new law. He that brake the
law of Moses, being convicted by two or three witnesses, Heb. 10.
died for the same without commiseration or mercy: and how much more grievous
punishment then does he deserve, who breaking the law of Christ by wilful
sin, treads the Son of God under his feet, polluteth the blood of the
new testament, and reprocheth the holy Ghost? In like manner reasons S. Peter
and S. Jude towching the sin of Angels and ours. If God spared not the Angels
2. Pet. 2. Ep. Iud.
when they sinned, but did thrust them down to hell, there to be tormented,
and to be reserved unto judgment with eternal chains under darckenes: how
much less will he spare us? And again; if the Angels which pass us in power
and 2. Pet. 2.
strength, be not able to bear gods horrible judgment against them: what
shall we do?And yet further in an other place, the same Apostle reasons
thus: if the just man shall hardly be saved, where shall the wickedman and
sinner appear?

By all which examples, we are instructed, 1. Pet. 4.
how to reason maturely and sincerely in our own cause. As for example, each A
good manner of reasoninge.
man may truly say thus unto him self: if God have punished so severely one
sin in the Angels, in Adam, and in others before Math. 7. Luc. 13.
hard, and the gate narrow whereby men go into heaven, and that they shall
answer for every idle word before they Mat. 12.
enter therein: what shall become of me that do live so easy a life, and do
keep no accounte at al of my deeds, and much less of my words? If good men
in old time did take such pains for their salvation, and yet (as S. Peter
says) the very just were scarcely saved: what a state am I in, which take no
pain at al, but do live in all kind of pleasure and worldly contentations?

These arguments, consequentes, and conclusions, are more true (good
Christian,) and would prove more profitable unto us, if we would exercise our
selves therein, and thereby enter into some cogitation of our own dangers, and
into just fear of Gods severe judgments, without flatteringe or deceyuinge
our selves. For want whereof either only or principally, the most part of
enormous sins from time to time are committed, according as holy David most
evidently declares, when Two prin cipal causes of deceaui^g our selves.
having showed and detested the multitude of sins which the world commits;
he reduces (al as it were,) unto two prin cipal causes. Whereof the first is,
that men deceive them selves and others, by vain flattery, in deminishing
their sins; of whom he says: they are taken in their own devises, for that
they praise the wicked man in the lusts and desires of his own mind. The
second Psalm. 9.
is, for that this deceit and flattery is referred commo^lie by the vicious
man, to the driving of Gods judgments out of his memory, to the end he may
sin with less fear and scruple. For so says the prophet expresselie; The
sinner has exasperated God against him, (in that he has said,) god in the
multitude of his wrath, vvil not require an accounte of my doings. But what
effect ensues of this? hear the words immediately following: he has not God
before his eyes; his vvayes are filthy from time to time. And what is the
cause of all this? for that thy judgments (o Lord) are removed from his sight:
that is; for that he will not see, he will not behold, he will not hear, he will
not consider or bear in mind thy judgments, o Lord, but will needs flatter,
delude, and deceive him self. Hereof it comes, that he never makes an end of
his filthy life and wicked ways, but exasperateth thie justice o Lord,
against him, until it be over late to repent or amend. Thus said this holy
Saint, of wicked sinners: but what of him self? hear his words (dear
brother) and imprint them in thie memory. I have kept the vvayes of my Lord,
(says he,) and have not done vvickedlie in the sight of Psalm 17.
my God, for that al his judgments are before my eyes, and I have not taste his
justices from me. Behold the virtuous life of king David, and The remembrance
of Gods judgments, cause of virtue.
behold the cause thereof. For that Gods judgments were continually before
his eyes; therefore was his life pure, and void of wickedness; or as in other
words at an other time he expresses; I vvil confess unto Psalm. 118.
the (o Lord) in the direction (or purity) of my heart, for that I have learned
the judgments of thie justice. And again in the same place: I have chosen to
walk the way of truth, for that I do not forget o Lord thy judgments:
that is, (as a little after he expounds the same,) for that I do fear and
tremble at thy judgments. O most excellent effect of the fear of Gods
judgments. No marvel though it be called the beginning of al wisdom, and
the very door and entrance to eternal salvation: no marvel if the same holy
prophet in the very same psalm do pray so heartily; strike through my flesh,
with thy fear, o Lord.

S. Paul after he had showed to the Corinthians, How the Apostles did persuad
us to fear. 2. Cor. 5.
that we must al be presented before the tribunal of Christ, every man to
receive according to his merits; he makes this conclusion. We knovving
therefore these things (dear brethren) do persuade the fear of our Lord unto
al men. And S. Peter having made a long declaration of the Majesty of God,
and of Christ now raining in heaven; concludes thus: if then you call him
father, which does judge every man according 1. Pet. 1.
to his works, without exception of persons: do you live in fear, during
the time of this your habitation upon earth. A necessary lesson (no doubt) for all men, but especially for such, who by reason of their sinful life, do
remain in displeasure and hatred of almighty God, and hourelie do stand
obnoxious (as I have showed) to the severity of his most dreadful judgments.
wherinto if once they fall; (especially by departure from this life:) the
matter remains remediles for all eternity insuinge, as God him self has
forwarned us. Which thing being so: what man of wisdom would not fear? what
Christian that is careful of his own estate, would eat or drink, or take his
repose with quiet, until by hearty repentance, and other such means of holy
Sacraments, as God has left for this purpose in his Church, he had discharged
his conscience of the burden of sin, and made an atonement between his soul
and Saueour? O merciful Lord, how dangerous is his estate, until he have done
it? how many ways may he fall into those heavy hands of his eternal judge,
whereof S. Paul conceived horror in only thinking? One little stone, falling
from the house top as he passes by; one slip of his horse, as he rides;
one assault of an enemy, when he thinks not upon him; one poor ague by a
surfect or other diste^perature; one sudden mischance of a millio^ that may
fall unto him; is able to bereave him of this life, and to cast him into those
terms of everlasting calamity, wherehence the whole world shall not be able to
deliver him. And is not this then a matter to be feared? is not this a case to
be prevented? O how truly says the holy scripture; blessed is the man which
alvvaies is fearful, and he that has a hard heart, Pro. 28.
shall fall into perdition.

Our Lord God of his mercy, give us his holy grace, to fear him as we
should, and to make such accounte of his judgments and justice, as by
threatening the same, he would have us to do, for the avoiding of sin. And
the^ shall not we delay the time, but shall resolve our selves to serve him,
whiles he is content to accept of our service, and to pardon us al our
offenses, if we would once firmly make this resolution from our heart.

AN OTHER CONSIDERATION FOR THE FVRTHER IVSTIFYING OF Gods judgments and
manifestation of our grievous offense. Taken from the inestimable Majesty of
him whom we offend, and of the innumerable benifites which he has
bestovved upon us. CHAPT. IX.
ALBEIT the most part of Christians through their wicked life, arrive not to
that state when holy David was, when he said to God; thy judgments Psalm. 118.
o Lord, are pleasant unto me; (as in deed they are to all those that live
virtuously and have the testimony of a good conscience:) yet at leastwise,
that we may be enforced to confess with the same Prophet; that, the
judgments of our Lord are true, Psalm. 18.
and justified in them selves: I have thought expedient, to add a reason or
two in this chapter, whereby it may appear, how great our offense is, in
sinni^g against God as we do; and how righteous his judgments and justice
are against us, for the same.

AND FIRST OF AL IS to be considered, the majesty of him, against THE. 1.
part. MAJESTY of God.
whom we sin. For most certain it is, (as I have noted before,) that every
offense is so much the greater and more grievous, by how much greater and more
noble the person is, against whom it is done, and the party offending, more
base and vile. And in this respect, almighty God (to terrify us from
offending him,) names him self oftentimes with certain great and dreadful
titles of majesty; as to Abraham: I am an omnipote^t Lord. And Genesis 17. Esa.
66.
again to Esaias; heaven is my seat, and the earth is my footestole. And at an
other time he commanded Moses to bear to the people in his name, this
embassage: harden not your necks any longer, for that your Lord and God, is
Den. 10.
the God of gods, and the Lord of lords, a great God, both potent and
terrible, which accepts nether person nor bribes.

First then I say, consider (gentle Christian) of what an infinite majesty he
is, whom thou a poor worm of the earth, have so often and so contemptuously
offended i^ this life. We see in this world, that no man dares to offend
openly, or say one word against the majesty of a temporal Prince, within his
own dominions: But what is the majesty of all earthly princes put together,
if it be compared to the thousand part of Gods incomparable and inestimable
majesty, who with one word made both heaven and earth, and all the creatures
therein, and Psalm. 148.
with half a word could annihilate and destroy the same again. Whom all the
creatures which he made, both Angels, heavens, Stars, and elements, do
serve at a beck, and dare not once offend; and under whom (as holy Job
says) do croucb and tremble, eue^ they that bear up and sustain the
world. Only a sinner is he, which emboldeneth Job. 9.
him self against this majesty, and fears not to offend the same, whom ( See
Cvr l. Catech. 3. Chrv. hom. 26. in Genesis Clem lib. 8. cap. 16.
as the holy Catholic Church does profess day lie, in her preface to the
blessed sacrifice,) the Angels do praise, the dominations do adore, the powers
do tremble, and the highest heavens, together with Cherubins and Seraphins,
thrones, and al other multitudes of celestial spirits, do continually praise
with hymns of glory.

Remember then (dear Christian brother,) that every time thou do commit a
capital sin, thou gyuest (as it were) a blow in the face to this great God
of eternal majesty, whose mansio^ (as S. Paul describes,) is in a light
inaccessible such as no man in this world can endure to behold. Whereof S. John
the evangelist gives 1. Tim. 6.
good testimony, by his own experience; who notwithsta^dig he were an
Apostle, and most dearly beloved of his God and master; yet when Christ
appeared unto him after his Resurrection, with certain sparcles only of his
dreadful gloric, uttering Certain de clar. ilio^s of Gods Majesty.
words of most sweet consolation unto him; he was for all that, so astonished and
oppressed with fear, that he fell down stark dead, as him self confesses,
until the same his Lord and Master, vouchsafed to raise him up again. The
like trial of this inexplicable majesty, had Moses the familiar friend and
trusty servant of God; who after many conferences, desiring once in his life
to see him, whose words he had so often heard; made humble petition for the
same. But God answered, that no man might see him and live. Yet
notwithstanding, to satisfy his request, and to show him in part what a
terrible and maiesticall God he was: he promised Moses, that he should see
some part of Exodus 33.
his glory; how beit he added, that it was needful he should hyde him self
in the hole of a rock, and be covered with Gods own hands for his defense,
whiles he, (or rather his Angel as divines do interpret,) did pass by in
glory. Who being once past; God removed his hand, and suffered Moses to
behold the hinder parts only of the Angel, which was notwithstanding most
terrible and dreadful.

The same majesty was revealed also in some part to Daniel, who saw God (as
he writes) placed upon a most glorious Dan. 7.
throne; his apparel was as whit as snow; bis bear like unto fine vvoolle;
bis throne was of a flame of fire, and his chariottes were a burning furnace;
a swift flud of fire ran from his face; thousand thousands did serve him,
and ten thousand hundred thousands did assist him: All this and much more is
recorded in holy scripture, to admonish us thereby, what a wonderful prince of
majesty he is, whom a sinner does offend. Which thing that just and holy man
Job considering; and hearing but one word uttered by his friend which in his
conceit did savor of presumption Job. 26.
against this God; burst forth into these words. Whom will thou teach (my
friend?) will thou teach him which has inspired breath into man? which has
stretched out the heavens over the vacuitie of this world, and has hanged up
the earth in the air without stay? before whom hell is wide-open and there is
no covering from perdition? The pillars of heaven do tremble and quake at his
only fight. And if we should hear but the lest whispering of his speech; who
should be able to abide the thunder of his majesty's greatness?

Imagine then now (my loving brother, A contemplation of Gods Majesty.
) after althes testimonies, that thou see before thy face, this great and
mighty king sitting in his chair of majesty, with chariottes of fire,
unspeakable light, and infinite millions of Angels about him. Imagine further,
(which also is most true,) that thou see all the creatures in the world stand
in his presence, and trembling at his majesty, and most carefully attending
to do that, for which he created them: as the heavens to move about: the
Sun, moon, and Stars to geeue light and influence: the earth to bring
forth her sustenance: and every other creature diligently to labor for
perfourmance of the duty assigned unto him. Imagine besides, that thou see
al these creatures (how big or little soever they be,) to hang and depend
only of the power and virtue of this God; and thereby only to stand, move, and
consist; and that there passes from God to each creature in the world, yea to
every part that has motion or being in the same, some beam of his virtue:
even as from the sun, we see infinite beams pass into the air. Consider (I
say) that no one part of any creature in the world, (as the fish in the sea,
the grass on the ground, the leaves of How al creatures depend upon the
Creator.
trees, or the parts of man upon the face of the earth,) can grow, move, or
consist, without some little stream of virtue and power derived to it
continually from God. So that, thou must imagine God to stand as a most
glorious and resplendent Sun, in the middle or center of al things created,
and from him, to pass forth innumerable beams and streams of virtue, to all
the creatures that are either in heaven, earth, the air, or waters, and to
every part and particle of the same; and that upon these beams of his divine
virtue, all creatures do depend; in so much, as if he should stop or divert
but any one of them al; it would destroy and annihilate presently some
creature or other.

This I say, if thou shall consider touching the majesty of God, and the
infinite dread that all creatures have of him, except only a sinner, (for the
devils also do fear him as S. James affirms:) thou Iac. 2.
wilt not marvel at the severe judgment appointed for his offense. For sure
I am, that very shame of the world makes us to have more regard in offending
the poorest friend we have in this life, the^ a wicked man has in offending
almighty God: which is an intolerable contempt of so great a majesty; and
such a contempt in deed as God him self does account to pro ceede of plain
infidelity. For whereas at a certain time, he had declared his own Lack of
fear proceeds of Infidelity.
great power, by the mouth of Jeremy, and threatened many punishments to the
Jews for their wickedness: they werenothig moved therewith. Whereupon he
commanded hi^ to return again unto the^, and to say these words. Hear thou
folishe people, which have no heart; you that have eyes and see not, ears and
Ierem. 5.
hear not. And vvil ye not then fear me? vvil ye not tremble in my sight?
which have set the sands for a bound unto the sea, and have given him an
eternal precept which he shall not break? etc. This people has a faithles
heart etc. Which is as much as if he had said, that this lack of fear in the
Jews, proceeded of their defect of faith. For if they had believed him to be
in deed so powerful, terrible, and full of majesty, as the holy scripture
sets him down; they would have conceived more fear in offending him.

BUT NOW IF WE adioine to THE. 2. part. GODs benefits.
this contemplation of majesty, an other consideration of his benefits
bestowed upon us: our default will grow to be far greater. For that to injury
him, who has done us good; is a thing most detestable even in nature itself.
And there was never yet so fearce a heart, no not among brute beasts, but that
it might be won with courtesy and benefits. But much more among reasonable
creatures does beneficence prevail, especially if it come from great
personages, whose love and friendship (declared unto us but in small gifts)
does greatly by nde the hearts of the receyuers to love them again.

Consider then (dear Christian) the infinite good turns and benefits which
thou have received at the hands of this great God, thereby to win the to his
love, and that thou should leave of to offend and injury him. And albeit
no tongue created either of man or Angel, can express the one half of these
gifts which thou have received from him, or the value thereof, or the great
love and hearty good will, wherewith he bestowed the same upon the: yet for some
better helping of thy memory, and stirring up thine affection to be grateful;
I will repeat certain general and principal points thereof, whereunto the
rest may be easily referred.

First then, call to mind, that he has bestowed THE. 1. benefit. Or creation.
upon thee the benefit of thy creation; whereby he made the of nothing to the
likeness of himself, and appointed the to so noble an end, as is to serve him
in this life, and to reign with him in the life to come; having furnished thee
besides, for the better attainme^t thereof, with the use, service, and
subjection of al his other creatures. The greatness of which benefit may partly
be conceived, if thou do imagine thy self to lack but any one part of thy
body, as a leg, an arm, an eye, or the like: and that one should freely
even of pure good will and love, supply thy want, and give the same unto thee.
Or if thou want but any one of thy senses, as that thou were deaf, blind,
or dumme; and some man should restore thy sight, hearing, or fpeech unto thee:
how would thou esteem of this benefit? how much would thou profess
thy self beholdig unto him for the same? And if the gift of one of these parts
only, would seem unto thee so singular a benefit: how greatly ought thou
to esteem the free gift of so many parts together?

Add now hereunto, (as I have said) that he has created the, to thee lyknes
of no other thing, but of him self; to no other end, but to be his honorable
seruante in this world, and his compartener in kynglie glory, for all
eternity to come: and this he has done to the, being only a piece of earth or
claye before. Now ymagine then, of what sea of love all this proceeded. But yet
add further, how he has created all this magnifice^t world for the, and all
the creatures thereof to serve thee in this business: the heavens to govern the
and to geeue the light: the earth, air, and water, to minister most infinite
variety of creatures for thy behoof and sustenance: and of al these has made
the Lord and master, to use them for thine avail and benefit in his service.
Which gifts being so manifold and magnificent as they are; I appeal to thine
own conscience (good Christian brother) how intolerable an ingratitude it is,
so greatly to dishonor and injury the giver, as to apply these gifts to his
offense, which he bestowed upon the for his service.

Next after this ensues the benefit of thy redemption, much more excellent
and The 2. benefit. OF redemption.
bountiful the^ the former; the effect whereof is, that whereas thou had lost
al those former gifts and benefits, and had made thy self guilty by sin
of eternal punishment and damnation, (whereunto the Angels were now delivered
for their sin committed before:) God chose to redeem the, and not the
Angels; and for satisfying of thine enormous fault, vouchsafed to deliver his
own only soon to the most opprobrious death of the Cross. O Lord God, what
heart can possibly conceive the greatness of this benefit? Suppose with thy self
(gentle Christian) for better understanding of this benefit; that thou being a
poor and abject person, under the dominion of some great and mighty Emperor,
had with some of his principal Peers, committed grievous crimes A supposition
for expressing the greatness of this benefit.
against his Emperial Majesty; thou oftentimes, and they but once; and being
both by law convicted, and ready to suster Justice for the same; so singulerly
should the Emperors favor extend it self in thy behalf, as deliuerig over
those other great princes to execution for their demerites; he conceived a
desire to save and pardon thee. And finding no other convenient means in
respect of his Justice, how to do the same, should upon his only son and
heir of al his Empire, lay the pains, shame, and torments of death due unto
thy trespasses. Tell me now, if being so abject and co^temptible a creature,
thou should receive so great a grace of a mighty Emperor, who had for fewer
offenses, even in thy sight, put to death great and glorious princes; (as God
did those principal Angels:) how wonderfully would thou think thy self
bound and beholden unto him for the same? But if further, this son and heir
of this noble Monarch, refusing to speak one word for those great princes,
should not only accept willingly this dishonor and punishment laid upon him by
his father, for thy sake, but also should offer himself thereunto, and crave
most instantly, that he might by his death make satisfaction for thine
offenses, and not only this, but also to derive unto thee the participatio^ of
his inheritance, making thee of a bondslaue, heir apparent to so Puissant an
Emperor, and coheire to him self: could thy heart possibly conceive so great a
benefit? were it possible, that thy powers of body and soul should not
dissolve in the cogitation of so inspeakable a grace? would not thy bowels
burst in sunder with the vehemency of love toward such a benefactour? Or can
any man of reason, ever imagine, that thou would willingly for a thousand
worlds, offend any more so gracious a Lord? And yet is this benefit of thy
redemption (dear brother,) by infinite degrees surpassing both this and al
other temporal graces, that man's wit can imagine, in all and every circumstance
that before has been mentioned.

In the third place do come to be considered, THE. 3. and 4. benefits. OF
vocation and justification.
two other benefits named vocation and Justification. The first whereof is,
that, whereby God of his infinite depth of mercies, has called us from
infidelity, to the state of Christians; and thereby made us partakers of this
our redemption last mentioned, which infidels are not. For albeit he paid the
ransom for all in general; yet has he not imparted the benefit thereof to al,
but to such only as best it pleased his divine goodness to bestow it upon.
After which grace of vocation, and Romans 8. 1. Cor. 1.
our acceptance thereof, insued immediately our justification whereby we were not
only set sree from al our sins committed before, and from al pain and
punishment dew to the same: but also our souls were beutified and enriched by
the infusion of his holy grace inherent, accompanied Romans 5. 1. Cor. 13. Esa.
11.
with the virtues theological, as faith, hope, and charity; and with the most
precious gifts of the Holy Ghost: and by this grace, we were made just and
righteous in the sight of God, and entitled to the most blessed inheritance of
the kingdom of heaven, the worthiness of which gift, no tongue of man or Angels
can express.

After these do ensue a great number of benefits together, apperteining
properly The 5. benefit. OF the Sacraments.
to such as are made the children and true friends of God; every one whereof in
it self is of most infinite price and value. Among which are in the first place
to be nombred, the holy Sacraments of Christ's Church, left unto us for our
comfort and preservation after we be entered into the bosom thereof. They being
nothing else in deed, but certain sacred co^duits to co^uaie unto us the holy
grace of God: especially those two which appertain to al men in general, I
mean, the holy Sacraments of penance and of the blessed body and blood of our
Savior: whereof the first, is to purge our sowles from sin so The use of
Sacraments
often as she falls; the second, to feed and comfort the same after she is
purged. The first, is as a bathe made of Christ's own precious blood, to wash
and cle^se our wounds therein: the second as a most comfortable and rich
garment, to cover our soul after she is washed. In the first, Christ has left
with his spouse the Church, al his authority, which he has in heaven or earth
to remit sins: in the second, he has left him self, and his own flesh and
blood, to be a precious food, wherewith to seed and cherish our soul after
her sins be remitted.

Besides al these; there yet remains an other benefit which we call the
benefit The 6. benefit. Of preservation and inspiratio^.
of Preservation; whereby God has kept and preserved us from infinite dangers,
wheru^to many others before us have fallen, and into which our selves had
fallen in like manner, if gods-holie hand had not stayed us: as from heresy
and infidelity, and many other grievous sins: but especially, from death
and damnation, which long a go by our wickedness, we deserved to have been
executed upon us. Whereunto may be annexed also the most singular benefits of
godly inspirations and admonitions, whereby God has often both knocked
inwardly at the door Apoc 3.
of our conscience, and warned us outwardly by so many ways and means, as are
good books, good sermons, good exhortations, good company, good example of
others, and a thousand other most merciful means besides, which at diverse times
he has used and does use, thereby to gain us and our sowles unto his eternal
kingdom, by stirring us up to abandon vicious life, and to betake ourselves to
his holy and sweet service.

Al which most rare and excellent benefits, being measured either according
Circumstances of benefits.
to their inestimable value in themselves, or according to the love of that
heart from which they do proceed, or else if we respect the majesty of the
giver, or meanness of the receyuer: ought in reason to move us most vehemently
to gratitude toward so bountiful a benefactour. And this gratitude should
be, to resolve ourselves at length, to serve him vnsaynedlie, and to prefer
his favor before al wordlie or mortal respects whatsoever. Or if we can not
obtain so much of ourselves; yet at leastwise not to offend him any more by
our sins and wickedness.

There is not so fearse or cruel a nature in the world, (as I noted before,)
but is mollisied, allured, and wo^ne by benefits: And stories do make report
of strange A Flian. in (...). animal.
examples in this kind, even among brute beasts; as of the gratitude of
lions, dogs, and other like, toward their masters and benefactours.
Onliean obstinate sinner is he, among all the sauuage creatures that are, whom
neither benefits can move, nor curtisies can mollify, nor promises can
allure, nor gifts can gain, to the faithful service of God his Lord and
master.

The greatest sinner that is in the world, if he geeue his seruante but twenty
nobles a year, or his tennant some The intolerable ingra titude of a sinner
toward God
little farm to live upon; if they for this, should not serve him at a beck;
he cries out of their ingratitude. But if they should further malitiouslie
seek to offend him, and to join in amity with his professed enemy: how
intolerable a matter would this seem in his conceit? And yet him self,
dealing much more ingratfullie and injuriously with almighty God, esteemath
it a matter of small consideration, and easily pardonable. He deals (I say)
far more ingratfullie with God; for that he has received a thousand fold for
one, in respect of all the benefits that one mortal man can give unto an
other. Seeing, that of God, he has received al in all; the bread which he
eats, the ground he treads, the light he beholds, the air he enjoys,
and finally, what so ever he possesses either within or without his body: as
also the mind with all her spiritual endume^tes, whereof each one is more worth,
then ten thousand bodies.

Of this extreme ingratitude and injury, God himself is enforced to complain
in Gods complainte of sinners.
diverse places of holy scripture, as where he says; they repaied me evil for
good. And yet much more veheme^tlie in an other place, Psalm. 34.
he calls the heavens to witness of this iniquity crving out: Obstupescite
caeli super Iere. 20.
hoc. O you heavens be you astonished at this. As if he should say by a
figurative kind of speech; go out of your wits you heavens with marvel,
at this incredibile iniquity of man to wards me; For so he expounds the
whole matter more Esa. 1.
at large in an other place: Audite calls and auribus percipe terra, etc. Harken
oye heavens, and thou earth bend hither thine ears: I have nourished up
children and have exalted them, and now they do contemn me. What a lamentable
complaint is this of almighty God against most vile and base worms of the
earth? But yet he amplifieth this iniquity more vehemently by certain
examples and comparisons. The ox (says he) knovveth his owner, and the ass
knovveth the manger of his Lord and master: but yet my people knovveth not me.
VVoe be to this synful nation, to this people laden with (...), to this
noughtie seed, to wicked children. What complaint can be more vehement then
this? what threatening can be more dreadful then this woe, coming from the
mouth of him which may punish us at his pleasure?

Wherefore (dear brother) if thou have The conclusion.
grace, cease to be ungrateful to God any longer: cease to offend him which
has by so many ways prevented the with benefits: cease to render evil for
good, hatred for love, contempt for his father lie affection toward the. He
has done for the Isa. 4.
all that he can: he has geeuen the all that thou art: yea and (in a certain
manner) all that he is worth him self: and means besides, to make the partaker
of al his glory in the world to come, and requires no more for all this at thy
hands, but love and gratitude. O my loving brother why will thou not yield
unto him this his desire? why will thou not do as much to him, as thou would
have an other man to do to the, for less then the ten thousand part of these
benefits which thou have received? for I dare bouldly say, if thou had
given but an alms to a poor man at thy door, thou wooldest thike him bound
to love the for it, al beit besides this, there were nothing in the that greatly
might deserve his love. But thy Lord and master (setting a part al his gifts
bestowed upon the) has infinite causes to draw thy love unto him, that is to
say, all the causes which any thing in the world has in it to purchase love,
Causes of love in God besides his benefits.
and infinite more besides. For, if all the perfections of things created both
in heaven and in earth, that may procure love, were joined together in one: as
al their beauty, al their virtue, al their wisdom, al their sweetness, al
their nobility, al their goodness, and other like excellencies: yet thy Lord
and Sauy our whom thou contemnest, surpasses all these, and that by infinite
and infinite degrees: for that he is not only all these things together: but
morouer he is very beauty it self, virtue it self, wisdom it self,
sweetenes it self, nobility it self, goodness it self, and the very fountain
and welspring, from which by litles pieces and parcels al these things are
derived unto his creatures.

Be a shamed then (good Christian) of this thine ingratitude, to so great, so
good, and so bountiful a Lord: and resolve thy self for the time to come, to
amend thy course of life, and former behavior toward him. Say at length
with the Prophet, (having considered thine own ingratitude:) O Lord pardon me
mine offenses, for they are great in thy sight. I know there is nothing (o
Lord) which does so much Psalm. 24.
displease the, or dry up the fountain of thy mercy, or so byndeth thy
hands from A brief Co^ fession and Petition to God.
doing good, as does ingratitude in the receyuers of thy benefits. Wherein
hitherto I have exceeded al others. But I have done it (o Lord) in mine
ignorance, not considering thy infinite gifts bestowed upon me, or what
account thou would demand again of the same. But now, seeing thou have
vouchsafed to make me worthy of this special grace also, whereby to see and
know mine own error and default: I hope hereafter by direction of the same
grace, to show my self a better child toward the. O my God, I am vanquished
at length with consideration of thy love: and how can I have the heart to
offend thee hereafter, seeing thou have prevented me so many ways with
benefits, even when I demanded not the same? Can I have hands evermore to
sin against thee, which have given up thine own hands, to be nailed on the
cross for me? No, no, it is to great an injury against thee (o Lord,) and woe
worth me that have do^neit so often heretofore. But by thy holy assistance, I
trust not to return to such iniquity for the time to come, to which I
beseech the for thy mercy sake, from thy holy throne of heaven, to say.

Amen.
OF WHAT OPINION WE SHALL BE CONCERNING THE MATTERS AFORsaid, at the time of our
death. As also what our state shall be at that passage, and how different our
judgment from that it is now. CHAPT. X.
THE holy scriptures do teach us, and experience makes it plain, that during
the time of this The induration of some hearts.
life, the commodities, prefermentes, and pleasures of the world, do possess
so strongly the hearts of many men, and do hold them chained with so
forcible enchauntmentes, being forsaken also upon their just deserts of the
grace of God: that say and threaten what a man can, and bring against then all
the whole scripture, even from the beginning of Genesis to the end of the
Apocalips, (as in decde it is al against sin and sinners:) yet will it
prevail nothing with them, being in that lamentable case, as either they
believe not, or esteem not, what so ever is said to that purpose, against
their settled life and resolution to the contrary. Of this we have infinite
examples in scripture: as of Sodom and Gomorra, Genesis 19.
with the cities there about, which would not hear the warninges that good I ot
gave unto the^. Of Pharao also and his court, whom all that ever Moses Exo. 6.
7. 8. 9.
could do, either by signs or sayings, moved nothing at al. Of Judas in like
manner, who by no sweet means or sharp Math. 26.
threatninges, used to him by his master, could be brought to change his
wicked resolution. But especially the holy Prophets sent by God, from time to
time, to dissuade the people from their noughtie life, and consequently to
deliver them from the plagues that hanged over them; do give abundant
testimony of this matter, complaining cuerie where, of the hardness of sinners
hearts, that would not be moved with all the exhortations, preachings, promises,
allurementes, exclamations, threatenings, and thunderinges, that they could use.
The Prophet Zachary shall testify for all in this behalf; who faieth of the
people of Israel a little before their destruction. This says the Lord of
hosts, judge iustije: whereunto presently he adds: And they would not
attend, but turning their backs Zach. 7.
went away, and stopped their ears, to the end they might not near; and
they did obdurate their hearts as an adamant stone, to the end they might not
hear the law, and the words. which God did send in his spirit, by the
hands of the former Prophets, vvherby gods great indignation was stirred up
against them.

This then is, and always has been, the manner of dissolute worldlinges and
reprobare people; to harden their hearts as an adamant stone, against any thing
that can be told them for the amendment of their lives, and for the saving of
their souls. Whiles they are in health and prosperity, they will not know God,
as in an Esa. 1.
other place himself complains. But yet as the Prophet says: God will have
his day, with these men also, when he will be known. And this is, cognoscetur
Dominus Psalm. 9.
iudicia sacie^s. God will be known when he begineth to do judgment, which is,
at the day of their death; being in deed the next door to their judgment,
according as S. Paul testifies, saying; it is appointed for all Heb. 9.
men once to die, and after that ensevveth judgment.

This (I say) is the day of God, most terrible, Isa. 2. 13. 34. 37. 61.
sorrowful, and full of tribulation, to the wicked; wherein God will be known to be
a righteous God, and to restore to every 2. Cor. 5.
man according as he has done while he lived: or as the Prophet describes
it; he will be Psalm. 75.
known then to be a terrible God, and such as one, as takes away the
spirit of princes; a terrible God to the kings of the earth. At this day, as
there will be a great change in all The great change of things at the day of
death.
other things, mirth being turned into sorrow, laughinges into weepinges,
pleasures into pains, stoutnes into fear, pride into despair, and the like:
so especially will there be a strange alteration in the judgment and opinion
of men: for that the wisdom of God, whereof I have spoken in the former
chapters, and which (as the scripture says) is accounted folly by the wise
of this world; will then appear in 1. Cor. 2.
her likeness, and, (as it is in very deed,) will be confessed by her greatest
enemies, to be the only true wisdom; and al carnal wisdom of worldlinges,
to be Romans 8. 1. Cor. 1.
mere folly, as God calls it.

This the holy scripture sets down clerelie, when it describes the very
speeches and lamentations of the wise men of this world, at the last day,
concerning the state of holy men whom they despised in this life. We senseles
me^, did esteem their life to be mere madness, and their end to be
dishonorable: but look how they are now acconnted among the children Sap. 8.
of God, and their portion is with the saints. We have erred from the way of
truth, and the light of righteousness, has not shined before us, nether has
the sun of understanding appeared unto us. We have weried out our selves, in
the way of iniquity and perdition, and we have walked craggie paths: but the
way of our Lord we have not known. Hitherto are the words of holy
scripture: The lame^tation of wicked me^ in the end.
whereby we may perceive, what great change and alteration of judgment there
will be at the last day, from that which men have now: what consessing of folly,
what acknowledging of error, what hearty sorrow for labor lost, what
fruiteles repentance for having run a-wrie. O that men would ponder and
consider attentively these things now. We have vveried out our selves (say
these miserable men) in the vvayes of iniqnitie and perdition, and we have
vvalked craggie paths. What a description is this of lamentable wordlinges,
who beat their brains daily, and weary out them selves, in the pursuit of
vanity and chasse of this world, for which they suffer notwithstanding more
pain often times, then do the just in purchasing of heaven? And when they
arrive at the last day, to the gate of death, weried and worn out with
trouble and toil; they find that al their labor is lost, all their vexation
taken in vain. For that the little pelf which they have scraped together in
this world, and for which they have struggled and drudged so extremely; will
avail the^ nothing at that instant, but rather increase exceedingly the burden
of their afflictions. Three causes of great misery in death.
Which afflictions shall be so manifold, grievous, and intolerable in the
wicked: as no mind created may perfectly conceive the same, but he that seeleth
them; albeit in part some small conjecture may be made thereof by these three
general points ensuing, whereunto the rest may be referred.

THE FIRST IS, THE excessive pains which commonly me^ suffer in the THE. 1.
matter. OF misery in death.
separation of their souls and bodies; which having lived so long time
together, united as two dear friends in love and pleasure, are now most loath
to part, were it not that violently they are enforced thereunto. This pain may
partly be conceived; if we would drive out life, but from the least part of
our body, as for example, out of our little fingar, like as surgeans are wont
to do, when they will mortify any one place, to make it break. What
intolerable pain does a man suffer, before this member be dead? what raging
grief does he abide? If then the mortifying of one little part only, do so
much afflict us: Imagine, what the violent mortifying of all the parts together
will do. For we see that first the soul is driven by death to leave the
extremest parts, as the toes, feet, and fingers: then the legs and arms,
and so consequently one part dies after an other, until life be restrained
only to the heart, which holds out longest as the principal part; but yet
finally must be also constrained to render it self, though with never so much
pain and resistance. Which pain how great and strong it is, may appear by
the breaking in pieces of the very stringes and holds wherewith it was
environed, through the excessive vehemency of this deadly torment.

Nevertheless, before it come to this point of yelding; no man can express the
cruel conflict that is betwixt death and her, and what distresses she abides
in the time of her agony. Imagine that a A similitude expressinge the pains
of death.
prince possessed a goodly city in all peace, wealth, and pleasure, and
greatly frinded of al his neighbors round about him, who promised to assiste
him in all his needs and affairs; and that upon the sudden, his mortal enemy
should come and besiege this city, and taking one hold after an other; one
wall after another; one castle after an other; should drive this prince only
to a little tower and besiege him therein, al his other holds being beaten
down, and his men slain in his sight: what fear, anguishe, and misery woold
this afflicted pri^nce be in? How often would he look out at the windows and
loope holes of his tower, to see whether his friends and neighbors would
come to help him or no? And if he saw them all to abandone him, and his cruel
enemy even ready to break in upon him; would he not (trow you) be in a most
pitiful plight? Even so then fares it with a poor soul, at the hour of
death. The body wherein she reigned like a iolie princess in all pleasure,
whiles it flourished; is now battered and overthrown by her enemy, which is
death: the arms, legs, and other parts wherewith she was fortified as with
walls and wards during time of health, are now surprised and beaten to the
ground, and she is driven only to the heart, as to the last and extremest
refuge, wherein also she is most fearcelie assailed in such sort, as she can
not possibly hold out long. Her dearest friends who soothed her in time of
prosperity, and promised assistance, as youth, agilitie, strength, courage,
diet, physic, and other humane helps; do now utterly abandone her: the
enemy will not be pacified or make any league at al, but night and day
assaulteth this Turret wherein she is retired, and which now begins to shake
and shiuer in pecees, in such sort, as she expects hourelie when her enemy
in most raging and dreadful manner, will burst in upon her.

What think you is now the state of this afflicted soul? It is no marvel if
a wise man become a fool, or a stout worldling most abject in this instant of
extremity, as we often see they do, in such sort, that they can dispose of
nothing well either toward God or the world at this hour. The cause whereof
is, the extremity of pains oppressing their minds, (as S. Auste^ well notes)
giving An admonition of S. Augustine.
us there withal a most excellent fore-warning of this day, if men were so
happy as to follow it. When you shall be in your last sickness dear brethren
(says he) o how hard and painful a thing will Ser. 48. ad Frat. in Ercmo.
it be, for you to repent of your faults committed, and of good deeds
omitted? and why is this? but only, for that all the intention of your mind
will run thither, where all the force of your pain is? Many impedimentes
shall let men at that day. As the pain of the body, the fear of death, the
sight of children, for the which their fathers shall often times think the^
selves damned; the weeping of the wife, the flattery of the world, the
temptation of the devil, the dissimulation of physicians for lacre sake, and
the like. And believe thou (o man) which read this, that thou shall
quickelie prove all this true upon thy self; and therefore I beseech the, that
thou will do penance before thou come unto this last day. Dispose of thy
house, and make thy testament while thou art whole, while thou art wise, while
thou art thine own man: for if thou tarry until the last day, thou shall be
led whether thou would not.Hitherto are S. Austens words.

THE SECOND THING which THE. 2. matter. OF misery in death.
shall make death most terrible and grievous to a worldly man; is the sudaine
parting, (and that for ever and ever) from all the things which he loved most
dearly in this life; as from his riches, possessions, honors, offices, fair
buildinges, goodly apparel, and rich jewels: as also from wife and children
kindred and frindes, and al other earthly delights and commodities, wherewith
in this life he thought him self a most happy man. And now to be plucked from
these upon the sudaine, without hope ever to see or use them again, and that
often times when he least doubts any such matter: must needs be a point of
extreme grief; especially, if he be in the state which holy Job describes
when he says. The wicked Job. 21.
man dies when he is strong and whole of body, rich and happy; while
his entrals are full of fat, and vvhiles his bones are well vvatred with
marooe. O Jesus, what a griping grief, how intolerable a torment vvil this be?
O how true an oracle is that of God which says: O mors, quam amara est
memoria tua, homini pacem habenti in substantiis suid? Eccle. 41.
O death, how bitter is thy memory unto a man, that has peace and rest in his
substance and riches? as who would say, there is no greater bitterness or grief
in the world to such a man, then to remember or only think on death; but much
more to taste and try it himself, yea and that immediately, when it shall be
said unto him, as Christ reports it was unto that great wealthy man in the
Ghospel, which had his barnes full, and was now come to the highest top of his
felicity; Thou soole, even Luc. 12.
this night thy soul shall be taken from the; and then who shall enjoy all that
which thou so painfully have scraped together?

O dear Christian, it is impossible for any The sorrow of leavinge al.
mortal tongue to express the doleful state of a worldly man in this instant
of death, when nothing of all that he has gathered together with so much labor
and toil, and wherein he was wont to repose so great affiance, will now avail
him any longer, but rather afflict his soul with the memory thereof,
considering that now he must leave al to others, and go him self to give
accounte for the gathering and using of the same, (and that perhaps to his
eternal damnation,) whiles in the mean time other companions in the world, do
live merrily and pleasantly upon that he has gotten; little remembringe and
less caring for him, that perhaps lies burning in vnque^cheable fire for those
riches unrighteously heaped and left unto them. This undoubtedly is a most
woeful and lamentable point, which shall bring many a man, to great sorrow and
anguishe of heart at the last day; when al earthly joys must be left, al
pleasures and commodities forever abandoned. O what a doleful day of partinge
will this be? what will thou say, (my friend) at this day, when al thy glory,
al thy wealth, al thy pomp, is come to an end? What art thou the better now to
have lived in credit with the world? in favor of princes, exalted of men;
feared, reverenced, and honored of al sorts; seeing at this instant al thy
iolitie, pride, and pomp is at an end, al thy former felicity is arrived now
to her everlasting periode?

BUT NOW BESIDES all this; THE. 3. matter.
there is a third thing which more then all the rest, will make this day of
death to be OF misery in death.
most dreadful and miserable unto a worldly man: to wit, the consideration
what shall become of him, both in body and soul. And as for his body; it
will be no small horror, to think upon that saying of holy scripture; the end
of the wicked (...) Eccle. 10.
flesh, shall be fire and vermin, and his inheritance shall be serpents,
beasts, and worms; that is, it must be thrown out to be the food of
vermin. That body, I mean, which was before so delicatelie entertained, with all variety of meats, soft pillowes, and beds of down; so trimly set
forth in apparel, and other ornaments; whereupon the wind might not be su
fred to blow, nor the sun to shine: that body (I say) of whose beauty
there was so much pride taken, and whereby so great vanity and sin was daily
committed; that body, which in this world was accustomed to all pampering and
nicenes, and might abide no austeritie, or discipline at al: must now be
forlorn and abandoned of all men, and left only for apraie to be devoured of
worms. Now the time is come, when those words of God must be fulfilled which
he uttered by his Prophet against delicate people: In that day God shall pull of
al ornaments, chains, braselets, Esa. 3.
ringes, Iuels, pomanders etc. and then shall be, in steed of svveet savors,
stinch; i^ place of rich girdles, (...) for could hear, (...). etc. Al which
bodily disgrace and misery, albeit it can not but breed much horror in the
heart of him that lies a dying: yet is this nothing in respect of the dreadful
cogitations, Cogitations of him that lies in dying.
which he shall have touching his soul: to wit, what shall become thereof;
whether it shall go after her departure out of the body? And then considering
that she must appear before the judgment seat of almighty God, and there
receive sentence, either of unspeakable glory, or insupportable pains: he
falls to consider more in particular, the danger thereof, by comparing gods
justice and threats (set down in holy write against sinners,) with his own
life: he begineth to examine the witues, (which is his conscience,) and finds
the same ready to lay infinite accusations against him, when he comes to
the place of justice.

And now (dear Christian brother) begins in deed the inexplicable misery
of this poor afflicted man; now do all the multitude of his sins present
the^ selves before his face; now does he in deed see verified that sentence of
sacred Scripture; In fine hominis denudatio operum. Eccle. 11.
The works of every man are laid open at his end.Now do master before his
eyes all Gods threats against wicked livers; nether is there any one severe
saying of holy writ pronounced against sinners, which now does not offer it
self unto his mind. Our ghostly enemy which in this life labored to keep
al these things from our consideration, thereby the more easily, to entertain
us in sin and pleasure; will now lay al and more, before our face, amplifying
and urging every point to the uttermost, and alleging our conscience in every
thing for his witness. Which when the poor soul in dying can not deny; she
must needs thereby most vehemently be terrefied: and so we see it daily come to
pass, even in many most virtuous and holy men: whereof S. Jerome reports
Ierom in vita Hilarionis abba.
a very memorable example of blessed S. Hilarion, whose soul being greatly
frighted with these confiderations, and exceeding loath to depart from his body;
at length after long conflict, he took heart and said, go forth my soul, go
forth, why art thou so sore afraid; thou have served Christ almost threescore
and ten years, and art thou now so fearful to depart? To like effect also the
holy martyr of god S. Cyprian tells of avertuous Cyp. lib. de mortalit.
and godly bishop, which dyinge in his time, was greatly terrified at the
hour of death, notwithstanding he had lived very vettuouslie; until at length
Christ Note here that Bun. rejects not only these authorities of S. Cypria^
and Possidonius, but also she whole discourses following of S. Augustine, S.
Gregory, and of venerable Bede: for that they talk of apparitions.
appearing unto him in the form of a goodly young man, rebuked him in these
words; you are afraid to suffer, and out of this life you vvil not go; what
the^ shall I do unto you? which words and example S. Austen did often use to
recount talking of this matter, as his scholar Possidonius records in his
life.

Now then, if good men and saints are so a fearde at this passage, yea such as
had served God with all purity of life, and perfect zeal for the space of
three score and ten years together: what shall they be, which scarcely have
served him in deed one day in all their lives, but rather have spent their
years in sin and vanity of this world? shall not these me^ (trow you) be in
great extremity at this passage? Surely S. Augustine describes the same
very effectuously in one of his sermons, and (according to his manner) does
give a notable exhortation upon the same. If you will know dearly beloved
(says he) Ser. 50. ad fiatres in Eremo, and cap. 1. de vanitate seculi.
with how great fear and pain the soul of man does pass from the body:
mark diligently what I shall say unto you. The Angels at that hour, shall come
to take the soul and bring her before the judgment seat of a most dreadful
judge: and then she calling to mind her wicked deeds shall begin
exceedingly to fear and tremble, and would gladly fly and leave her deeds
behind her, seekinge to entreat the Angels, and to request but one hour
space of delay. But that will not be granted: and her evil works crying out
al together shall speak against her, and save, we will not stay behind or
part from the, thou have done us, and we are thy works, and therefore we will
follow the whether soever thou go, yea even unto the seat of judgment.
This (lo) is the state of a sinners soul, which partinge from his body with
most horrible fear, goes onwardes to judgment laden with sins, and with
infinite confusion. Contrariwise the just man's soul goes out of his body
with great joy and comfort, the good Angels accompaininge her, with
exultation. Wherefore (brethren) saying these things are so; do you fear
this terrible hour of death now, to the end you may not fear when you come
unto it. Foresee it now, that then you may be secure. Thus far S. Augustine.

And for that this holy father and learned Doctor in Christ's Church, makes
mention in this place of good and evil Angels which are ready at the hour of
death Appearing of Augels at the hour of death.
to receive the souls of such as depart out of this life: it shall not be from
our purpose to note, that oftentimes God does permit the apparitions of Angels
both good and evil, as also of other saints, to some men lyinge on their death
beds, for a taste either of comfort or sorrow, touching that which shall ensue
in the world to come. And this is also one singular privilege, among other
belonging to this passage. And concerning the just, I have showed before an
example out of S. Cyprian and S. Augustine touching one to whom Christ
appeared at the hour of his death. And S. Lib. 4. ca. 11. 12. 13. 14. etc.
Gregory the great, has diverse like narratio^s to that purpose i the fourth
book of his dialogues. As for example sake, of one Vrsinus, to whom the
blessed Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul appeared. But as concerning evil
spirits and wicked Angels, which showed the^ selves unto diverse sinners at the
hour of death, and denounced unto them their eternal damnation, and horrible
torments appointed in hell: we have many and most terrible examples, recorded
in many grave and ancient writers. As among other, that recorded by S.
Gregory of one Chrisorius Lib. 4. diad. cap. 38.
a great rich man, but as full of sin as of wealth, to whom lying on his
deathbed, the infernal fiendes in most ugly manner appeared, showing how now
he was delivered into their power, and therefore would never depart from him
until he dying, left his soul unto the^ to be carried to eternal torments.

The like examples does venerable Bede recount to have happened in our country
Lib. 5. hist. Angl. c. 14.
about his time. And among other, of a certain wicked Courtier in great favor
with king Coenride, to whom lying in the panges of death, and being now a little
recovered; both the good and evil Angels appeared visibly; the one laying
before him a very small book of his good deeds, the other a great huge
volume of his enormous crimes. Which after they had caused him to read; by the
permissio^ of the good Angels, they seized upon him, assignig also unto him the
certain hour of his departure, according as both him self confessed openly,
to all that came to visit him; and as by his horrible and desperate death
ensuinge (at the very hour by them appointed,) he manifestly confirmed. The
like story records he in the chapter following, of one whom he knew Beda lib.
5. cap. 15.
him self; and (as both he, S. Gregory, and S. Cyprian also do note,) al
these and such other visions, were permitted for our sake which do yet live,
and may take commodity by the same; and not for their good that died, whom
they nothing at al auailed.

Which being so dear Christian brother; The application of all that haith been
said.
that is, this passage of death being so terrible, so dangerous, and yet so
inevitable as it is: seeing so many me^ do perish and are over whelmed daily
in passing over this perilous gulf, as both holy scriptures and ancient
fathers do testify by examples and records unto us: what man of discretion
would not learn to be wise by other men's dangers? or what reasonable creature
would not take heed and look about him, being warned so manifestly and
apparantlie, of his own peril? if thou be a Christian, and do believe in
deed the things which Christian faith does teach the: the^ do thou know an
I most certainlic believe also, that of what state, age, strength, dignity, or
condition, so ever thou be now; yet must: hy self (which now in health and
mirth do real this point, and think the same little appertainig unto thee)
one of these days, (and that perhaps very shortly after the readinge hereof,)
come to prove al these thing, in thine own person: that is; thou must with
sorrow and grief beenforced to thy bed, and there after al straggliges with the
darts of death, thou must yield thy body which thou love now so dearly, to
be the bait of worms, and thy soul to the trial of justice, for her doings
in this life.

IMAGINE THEN (my friend,) eue^ thou I say, which art so fresh and froelicke A
VERY profitable consideration. UPON he premises.
at this instant, that the ten, twenty, or two years, (or perhaps two months
or days,) which thou have yet to live, were now come to an end, and that thou
were even at this present, stretched out upon a bed; wearied and worn with
dolor and pain; thy carnal frindes about the weepinge and howlinge and
desiring thie goods; the physicians departed with their fees, as having given
the over; and thou lyinge there alone mute and dumme in most pitiful agony,
expecting from moment to moment, the last stroke of death to be given unto the.
Tell me in this instant, what would all the pleasures and commodities of the
whole earth avail the? what comfort or ease would it be unto the now to have
been of honor in this world; to have gathered wealth and purchassed much; to
have borne office, and enjoyed the princes favor; to have left thy children
and kindred in abundance; to have trodden done thine enemies; to have stirred
much, and borne great swaye in this life? what pleasure (I say) or benefit
would it be to the, to have been beautiful, to have been gallant in apparel,
goodly in personage, glittering in gold? would not al these things rather
afflict then profit thee at this instant?

No doubt but now, thou should well see and thoroughly perceive the vanity
of The cogitation and speech of the soul at the last day. Prou. 11.
these trifles; thou should prove true the saying of the wise man; non
proderu^t diuitie in die vltionis, riches will profit nothing in the day of Gods
revenge. That most excellent demand of holy Job, would oftentimes offer it
self unto thie remembrance; Quid ad cum pertinet de domo sua, post se? What
Job. 21.
has a man to do with his house, family, or kindred after he is gone; what
good, what comfort shall he take thereby? Who Iere. 15.
vvil have mercy of the, (says God to Jerusalem by his prophet Jeremy,) or
who vvil be sorovvful for the at this day? who vvil go to entreat for thie
peace? Thou bast abandoned me, says God; thou have gone from me; and now vvil
I strech out my hand, and kill the. And yet further by an other prophet he
dema^deth of wicked men; What vvil ye do in this day Esa. 10.
of my visitation, and of calamity that comes upon you? to whose help vvil
ye fly? vvher vvil ye leave your glory? And in an other place expressi^g yet
more effectually their state and misery, he says: they shall cry to the
Iere. 11.
Gods whom they served in this life, and they shall not save them, in this
time of affliction: that is, they shall cry and call upon their fre^des,
acquaintance, wealth, honor, and other idols which they served more then God
in this life, but they shall receive no help or comfort from them.

O dear Christian brother, what difference of cogitatio^s, what change of
judgments, what discovery of vanities will this day bring? Thy heart within
thee will now begin to reason; Lo, here is an A lamentable complaint.
end now of al my delites and worldly prosperities. Al my joys, al my
pleasures, al my mirth, al my pastimes, are now finished. Where are my friends
that were wont to laugh with me; my servants wont to attend upon me; my
children wont to disporte the time with me? where are al my coches and horses,
wherewith I was wont to make so goodly a show; the cappes and knees of people
accustomed to honor me; the troops of suitors following me? where are al my
daliances and tricks of love; al my pleasant music; al my gorgeous
buildinges; al my costly feasts and banquettinges? And above al other, where
are now my dear and sweet frindes, who seemed they would never have forsaken
me? But (alas) al are now gone, and have left me here alone to answer the
reckoninge for all, and none of them will do so much as to go with me to
judgment, or to speak one word in my behalf. Woe worth me, that I had not
foreseen this day rather, and so have made better provision for the same. It
is now to late; and I fear me, I have purchased eternal damnation, for a little
pleasure; and have lost unspeakable glory, for a fleetinge vanity. O how
happy, and twice fortunate are they, who so live as they may not be a fearde
of this day? I now see the difference betwixt the ends of good and evil, and
marvel not though the scriptures say of the one, the death of saints are
precious: And of the other, the death of sinners is miserable: O that I had
lived so virtuously, as some other have done; or as I had often inspirations
from God to do; or that I had done the good deeds I might have done: how
sweet and comfortable woold they be to me now in this my last, and extremest
distress?

To these cogitations and ruful speeches (my loving brother,) shall thie soul be
The Conclusion.
driven at this last howr of her departure, if now thou prevent it not, by
wisdom and diligence. For which prevention, To mea^s to prevent the terror of
death.
the spirit of God has reueiled unto us two principal means: the first whereof,
is, the diligent exercise of good works in this life, whereunto Christ him
self assures they shall now rest and repose from their labors; for that their
good deeds do follovv Apoc. 14.
them. And holy David the prophet, expresses the manner of a good man's
departure more in particular, saying: Dominus opem seret illi super lectum
doloris cius. God Psalm. 4.
shall help and assist him upon the bed of his sorrow; that is, upon the bed of
his last departure, which to a worldly man, may rightly be called the bed of
sorrow, for that it is nothing else, but a collection and heap of al sorrows
together.

The second mean whereby to prevent this sorrowful day, is, continually to
premeditate all the days of my life, do I attend the coming Job. 14.
of my change or departure from this world. Out of which atte^tion and
premeditation, do proceed sundry most excellent effects and fruits, for
prevention of al evil that may ensue at that day. The first whereof, that the
fear of death was Psalm. 54.
fallen upon him. Out of which fear does proceed a second effect of great
weight in by consideration, he was Job. 23.
made sollicitous with scare, and thereupon he adds further, that he doubted
al his Job. 9.
works. In which case S. Paul also signifies him self to be, when he
exhorted al men to be careful to do good vvorkee vvhiles 1. Cor. 7.
they have time; and, for that this time is but short; so to use this present
world, as though they used it not. The third effect that follows by the
meditation of death, is the understanding Except you be reprobates you know
your selves. For he 1. Cor. 7.
that thinks often upon the state of a dead man, shall easily confess with
saint Jacob. 4. Esa. 4.
James, that our life is a vapor; and with Esaias; that all the glory of man, is
but as a flovver of the field. And will finally say to him self with the wise
man. Quid superbit terra and Eccle. 10.
cinis? Why does earth and dust ware proud, and take so much upon it?

These are three most excellent effects God has given (or permitted) to the
sinner, Eccle. 2.
affliction and superfluous care to scrape and gather together, to leave it to
such as to God it shall best please. And out of this effect, is inge^dred I do
Phil. 8.
esteem al things as dunge, for the gaining of Christ. And from this
proceeds an other (which is the sixth and last,) called the contempt, or
rather the love and desire of death. Which S. Paul also had attained unto, when
he said of him self. I do desire to be dissalued, and to be with Christ. And
the holy prophet David, who said in the beginning (as you have heard,) that
the fear of death was fallen upon him: came at length to Psalm. 41.
cry out; my soul does thirst after God, that is the lively vvel-spring;
when shall I come, and appear before the face of God? So that from the fear
of death, (which is the first effect that springs of the remembrance The
highest felicity of Saints in this life.
and meditation thereof,) he was come now to the love and most earnest desire of
the same, which is the highest degree of comfort, and the most supreme
felicity that saints do arrive unto in this life.

Endeavor then (my dear Christian brother) by frequent and diligent
premeditation The conclusion of al.
of this passage, to attain to this felicity, or at least wise, to some part
or degree thereof. Fear death now, that thou may not fear it then. For as
God by his holy spirit assures the; he that fears Eccle. 1.
now, shall be in security at the last, in the day of his departure. Nay, as
holy Job further describes Job. 5.
the matter; he shall laugh at that day when other me^ are in spoil and famine;
he shall not fear the beasts of the earth; his legue shall be with the stones
of Nations; that is, he shall be no more moved or terrified with coming of
death, then stones are; he shall see, that his tabernacle shall be that day in
peace; he shall enter into his sepulcher, in all abundance, as a mow of corn in
the harvest time: that is; he shall depart hence in abundance of al grace and
merit at the hour of his death, which to a virtuous man, is the day of
harvest, wherein he shall reap the rewards of his good deeds which he has
sown in this life.Thus describes Job the blessed departure of a godly man,
co^cluding his whole discourse with this admonition and exhortatiue clause;
Ecce, hoc ita est; quod auditum, mente pertracta Behold, this thing is as I
have said; which Job. 5.
thou having understood, pass it not over slightly, but reuolue and
discuss the same diligently in thie mind.

OF THE GREAT AND SEVERE PAINS AND PVNISHMENTES APPOINted by God for sinners
after this life. As also of two kinds and sorts: hereof, the one temporal for
them that shall be saved, the other eternal for the damned. CHAPT. XI.
AMONGST all the means which God uses toward the children of men in this
life, to move them to the resolution, whereof I entreat; the stro^gest and most
forcible is, the consideration of punishments prepared by him for rebellious
sinners and transgressors of his co^maundeme^ts. Wherefore he uses this motive
often, as may appear by all the prophets, who do almost nothing else but
threaten plagues and destruction to offenders. And this mean has oftentimes
The force of fear.
prevailed more then any other that could be used, by reason of the natural
love which we bear toward our selves; and consequently the natural fear
which we have of our own danger. So we read Ion. 5.
that nothing could move the Ninevites so much as the fortelling them of their
imminent Math. 3.
destruction. And S. John Baptist, albeit he came in a simple and contemptible
manner: yet preaching unto the people the terror of vengeance to come, and that
the Marc. 1.
axe was now put unto the tree, to cut down for the fire al such as
repented not: he moved Luc. 3.
the very publicanes and soldiers to fear, (being otherwise people of very
hard metal) in such sort, as they came unto him upon this terrible embassage,
and asked what they should do to avoid these punishments?

For which cause, having now considered in the former chapters of death, and of
gods severe judgment ensuing thereupon, (wherein every man has to receive
according to his works in this life:) it follows 2. Cor. 5.
that we consider also of the punishments which are appointed for the^ that
shall be found faulty i^ that accounte, hereby at leastwise (if no other
consideration will serve,) to induce Christians to this resolution of seruinge
God. For as I have noted before, if every man have naturally a love of him
self and desire to co^serue his own ease: then should he also have fear of
peril, whereby he is to fall into misery and calamity. This expresses S.
Bernard very excellently according to In sermon. de primordii.
his wont. O man (says he) if thou have left al shame, (which appertains
to so noble a creature as thou art:) if thou feel no sorrow (as carnal men do
not:) yet loose not fear also which is found eve in brute and savage beasts.
We use to load an ass and to werie him out with labor, and he cares not,
because he is an ass: but if thou would thrust him into fire, or flinge him
into a ditch, he would avoid it as much as he could, for that he loves life
and feared death. Fear thou then, and be not more insensible tha^ a beast:
Fear death, fear judgment, fear Prou. 9.
hell. This fear is called the beginning of wisdom, and not shame or sorrow;
for that the spirit of fear is more potent to resist sin, then the spirit
of shame or sorrow. Wherefore it is said, remember the Eccle. 7.
end and thou shall never sin; that is, remember the final punishments
appointed for sin, after this life.Thus far S. Bernarde.

First therefore to speak in general of Three conjectures of shegreatnes of
Gods punishme^tes.
the punishments reserved for the life to come: if the scriptures did not
declare in particular their greatness unto us; yet are there many reasons to
persuade us that they are most severe, grievous, and intolerable. Psalm. 71.
Deuteronomy. 10.
For first, as God is a God in all his works, that is to say, great,
wounderful, and terrible: so especially he shows the same in his
punishments: being called Psalm. 4. Psalm. 93.
for that cause in holy scripture, Deus iustitiae, God of justice: as also,
Deus vltionum, God of revenge. Wherefore seeing al his other works, are
maiestical and exceeding 1. His Majesty.
our capacities: we may likewise gather that his hand in punishment, must be
also most wonderful. God himself teaches us to reason in this manner, when he
Iere. 5.
says: And vvil ye not then fear me? and vvil ye not tremble before my face?
who have set the sand, for limits to the sea; and have given the waters a
commandment never to pass the same; no not then, when they are most
troubled, and the waves thereof most outrageous? As who would say; if I be
wonderful and do pass your imagination, in these works of the sea and other
of this world, which you behold daily: then have ye just cause to fear me,
considering that my punishme^tes are like to be correspondent to the greatness
of my other actions. 2. Gods mercy.


An other conjecture of the great and severe justice of God in punishing, may
be the consideration of his infinite and unspeakable mercy; which, as it is
the very nature it self of God, and consequently, without end or measure, as
his godhead Psalm. 84.
is: so is also his justice. And these two, are the two arms (as it were) of
his divine Majesty, embracing and kyssing one the other, as the scripture
says. And therefore as in a man of this world, if we had the measure of one
arm, we might easily conjecture the length of the other: so beholding daily
the wounderful examples of gods infinite mercy toward them that do repent:
we may thereby conceive the severity of his Justice toward such as he
reserueth to punishment in the life to come, and whom for that cause, he
calls in holy writ, Vasa furoris; that is, vessels, Esa. 13. Psalm. 7.
of fury, whereon to exercise the rage of his dreadful and most terrible
indignation. Gods patience.


A third consideration to induce us to the understanding of the greatness of
Gods punishments in general; may be his maruailous patience, and long
suffering of sinners in this life. As that (for example) he permits diverse
me^ from sin to sin, from day to day, from year to year, from age to age,
to live continually in the contempt of his Majesty, and transgression of his
commandments; refusing al persuasions, allurementes, good inspirations, or
other means of grace and favor, that his merciful goodness can devise to offer
for their amendment. And what man in the world could suffer this? or what
mortal heart were able by inestimable suffera^ce and for bearing in this life,
to show such patience? but now if all this should not be requited with severity
of punishment, in the world to come: it might seem to be against the law of
justice and equity, and so one arm in God to be longer then the other. S.
Paul touches this reason in his epistle to the Romans, where he says: duest
thou not know that the benignity of God is Romans 2.
used to bring thee to repentance? and thou by thy bard and impenitent heart,
do heap up vengeace unto thy self, in the day of wrath and appearance of
Gods just judgments, which shall restore to every man according to his
works. In which sentence S. Paul uses the phrase of heaping wrath or
ve^gea^ce, to signify thereby, that like as the covetous man, does lay up
money daily to make his heap increase; so the irrepentant sinner does heap
sin upon sin: and God on the contrary side, heapeth vengeance to vengeance,
until his measure be full, to restore in the end, measure against measure, as
Esa. 27.
the prophet says, and to pay us home according to the multitude of our own
abominations. Iere. 16. Genesis 15.


This was the meaning of almighty God when he said to Abraham that the
iniquities of the Amorrheans were not yet complet: As also in the revelations
unto S. Ionn Evangelist, when he used this conclusion of that book: He that
does evil, let him do yet more evil: and he that lies in filth, let him yet
Apoc. 22.
become more filthy: for behold I come quickly, and my revvard is with me,
to render to every man according to his deeds. By which words God
signifies, that his forbearance and tolleration with sinners in this life, is
an argument of his greater severity in the life to come: which the prophet
David does insinuate in like manner, when talking Psalm. 36.
of a careless sinner, he says: God shall deride him for that he sees before
hand, that his day vvil come. Which day (no doubt) is to be understood the
day of account and punishment after this life; for so does God more at large
declare him self in another place, in these words. And thou son of Ezech. 7.
man, this says thy Lord God: the end is come; now (I save) the end is come
upon the. And I will show on the my fury, and will judge the according to thy
ways. I will lay against the al thine abominatio^s, and mine eye shall not spare
the, nether will I take any mercy upon the, but I will lay thine owae ways
upon the, and thou shall know that I am the Lord. Behold affiction comes on,
the end is come, the end (I say) is come: it has watched against the, and
behold it is come: destruction is now come upon the: the time is come; the
day of slaughter is at hand. Shortly will I power out my wrath upon the, and I
will fill my furic in the, and I will iadge the according to thy ways, and I will
lay al thy wickedness upon the: mine eye shall not pity the, nor will I take any
compassion upon the, but I will lay thy ways upon the, and thy abominations in
the midst of the, and thou shall know that I am the Lord that strikes.
Hitherto is the speech of almighty God delivered by the mouth of his holy
Prophet.

SEEING THEN we now understand OF hell.
in general; that the punishments of God in the life to come are most certain
to be OF pains in particular. AND of two sorts, thereof. Heb. 10.
great and severe, to al such as fall into the^ (for which cause S. Paul
affirms, that it is a horrible thing to fall into the hands of the living
God:) Let us consider some what in particular, what manner of pains and
punishments they shall be. For better conceyuing whereof, it is to be noted, that
there be two sorts of sinners in this world: the one, which die in the guilt
of mortal sin, and in the disfavor and hatred of almighty God, of whom it
is said, Apoc. 21.
the portion of wicked men, shall be in the lake burning with fire and
brimstone, which is called the second death. The other, which have the guilt
of their sin pardoned by their repentance in this life, but yet have not made
that temporal satisfaction to gods justice, nor are so thoroughlie purged in
this world, as they may pass to heaven without punishment: and of these it is
written; 1. Cor. 3. Aug. in Psalm. 37.
They shall suffer detrime^t but yet they shall be saved as by fire. Upon which
words of S. Paul, the holy father S. Austen writes thus. Because S. Paul
says that these me^ The pains of Purgatory and the greatness thereof.
shall be saved by fire; therefore this fire is contemned. But surely, though they
shall be saved by it: yet is this fire more grievous then whatsoever a man can
suffer in this life: albeit you know how great and intolerable things men
have or may suffer. The same S. Augustine in an other place Hom. 16. ex 50.
homi.
expounds yet further the words of the said Apostle i this manner; They which
have done things worthy of temporal punishment (of whom the Apostle says,
they shall be saved by fire,) must pass 1. Co. 3.
through a fiery river, and most horrible shallowes of burning flames,
signified by the prophet, when he says; and a fludd of Dan. 7.
fire went before him; and look how much matter there is in their sins; so
long must they stick in passing through; how much the fault requires, so
much shall the punishment of this fire revenge. And because the word of God does
compare the soul of a sinner, to a pot of brass, saying: put the pot empty
upon the coals, until all the rust be melted of: therefore in this fire al idle
speeches, al filthy cogitations, al light sins, shall boil out and consume,
which by a short way might have been separated from the soul in this life,
by alms and tears. Hitherto S. Augustine.

And the same holy father in an other place has these words. If a sinner by
his August. de vera and falsa poenitentia. cap. 18.
conversion escape death, and obtain life, yet for all that, I can not promise
him, that he shall escape al pain or punishment. For he that differred the
fruits of repentance until the next life, must be perfited in purgatory fire:
and this fire (I tell you) though it be not everlasting, yet is it passing
grievous; for it does far exceed al pains that man can suffer in this life.
Never was there found out yet so great a pain in flesh, as that is, though
martyrs have abidden strange torments, and many wicked me^ have suffered
exceeding great punishments.

To like effect does S. Gregory write Gregor. in Psalm. tertis. paenitent.
Psalm. 27.
of the severity of this punishment, expounding those words of David. O Lord
rebuke me not in thy surie, nor correct me in thy wrath. This is as if he said
(says S. Gregory) I know that after this life, some must be cleansed by
purging fire. And other must receive sentence of eternal damnation. But because
I esteem that purgi^g fire (though it be transitory) to be more intolerable,
then all the tribulation which in this life may be suffered: therefore I do not
only desire, not to be rebuked in the fury of eternal damnation; but also I
greatly fear to be purged in the wrath of transitory correction. Thus far S.
Gregory. And I might add a hundred like other sayings out Note that Bun.
turns of here, these and al other fathers that speak of Purgatory. He is not
of their opinion.
of the ancient holy fathers, touching the extreme severity of this purging
fire after death, and of the great fear which they had thereof. But that this
already spoken may be sufficient to give admonishment to Catholic men that
agree with these Saints in belief of this doctrine, more carefully to look unto
them selves, for avoiding the rigor of this fire especially by these two
principal means of Almes-deedes and tears, whereunto S. Augustine most
earnestly exhorts August. in Psalm. 37.
them in the place before alleged; where also he frames this notable
collection. We see (says he) what men do or may suffer in this life: what
racking, what tearing, what burning and the like: and yet all this is nothing in
respect of that fire. These things therefore which we suffer here, are much
more easy then that fire: and yet you see, that men will do any thing rather
then suffer the same: how much more then ought we to do that little which. God
commands us, to avoid that fire, which is by many degrees more grievous?
This was the feeling which learned S. Augustine had in these affairs.

And truly it is very strange and wonderful The fear that old saints had
of the fire of Purgatory. Sermon. 55. in cant.
to consider, how great fear and terror holy men of ancient time conceived
at the very cogitation of this fire, and how slenderly we pass the same over
now a days, having infinite more cause to fear then they had. Among other
that blessed devout man S. Bernard, who lead so examplar and strict a life as
the world does know; entering into contemplation of this matter, brake forth
into these words ensuing. O would God some man would now before hand, provide
for my head abundance of water, and to mine eyes a fountain of tears; for so
perhaps the burning fire should take no hold, where running tears had cleansed
before. And again; I tremble and shake for fear, of falling into Gods hands.
I would gladly present my self before his face alredie judged of my self, and
not to be judged the^ of him. Therefore I will make a reckoning whiles I am here
both of my good deeds and of my badde. My evil shall be corrected with better
works; they shall be watered with tears; they shall be punished by fasting; they
shall be amended by sharp discipline. I will rip up the very bottom of my ways
and works, to the end he may find nothing untried at that day, or not fully
discussed to his hands. And then I hope in his mercy, that he will not judge
the same faults again, as he has promised. Hitherto are the words of S.
Bernard. Naum. 1.


The like great fear uttered holy S. Ambrose in these words: O Lord, if thou
Ambros. Praecat. prae parat 2. Ad Missam.
reserve any thing in me to be revenged in the next life: yet I humbly beseech
the, that thou give me not up to the power of wicked spirits, whiles thou
wipest away my sins, by the pains of Purgatory. And again, in an other
place: I shall be Sermon. 1. in Psalm. 118.
searched and examined as lead (in this fire) and I must burn until all the
lead be melted away. And if then there be found no silver metal in me: woe be
unto me, for I Cor. 3.
must be thrust down to the profoundest parts of hell, or else wholly waste
away as straw in the fire. But if any gold or silver be found in me, not
through my works, but by grace and Christ's mercy, and through the ministry
of my prestoode; I shall also once say: surely they that Psalm. 30.
trust in the, shall never be confounded. And thus much of this temporal
punishment reserved even for the purging of Gods servants in the life to come.

BUT NOW TOUCHING the reprobate, and such as for their wickedness. are
dessigned to eternal death: we must Imagine that with them the case stands
much more hardly: for thereunto may be applied, that saying of our Savior to
the good women of Jerusalem, who lamented his case, when he was going to his
passion: If they do these things in grene Luc. 23.
word: what shall become of the dry? which words S. Peter seems in some
part to expound, when he says: If the Judgment 1. Pet. 4.
of God begin with us which are his servants: what shall the end of
vvickedmen be? As who would say, that in all reason, their end must be
intolerable. For more particular conceyuing whereof, because the matter is of
great importance for all Christians to know: it shall not be perhaps amiss, to
consider briefly, what the holy scriptures and ancient fathers of the
Catholic Church, (directed no doubt by the holy Ghost) have reueiled unto
us, touching this punishment.

And first of al, concerning the place it self of punishment appointed for the
damned, Of the names of hell ix diverse tongues.
commonly called hell; the scripture in diverse languages, used diverse names,
but al tending to express the grieuousnesse of torments therein to be endured.
As for example, in the latin tongue, it is Esa. 5. and 38. INFERNVS.
called, INFERNVS, that is, a place beneath or under ground, as most of the
old fathers do interpret. But whether it be under ground or no, most
certain it is, that it is a place most opposite to heaven which is said to be
above, and from which lucifer was throune down. And this Job. 11. Esa. 14.
name is used to signify the miserable deiection and hurling down of the
damned, to be trodden under the feet, not only of almighty God, but also of al
good men for ever. For so says the scripture. Behold Mala. 4.
the day of the Lord comes burning like a furnace, and al proud and wicked
men shall be straw to that furnace, and you that fear my name shall tread them
down, and they shall be as burnt ashes under the soles of your feet in that
day. And this shall be one of the greatest miseries that can happen to the proud
and stout potentates of the world, to be thrown down with such contempt, and
to be trodden under the feet of the^, whom they so much despised in this world.

The Hebrew word which the scripture uses for hell, is SEOL, which signifies
SEOL. Esa. 14. Mat. 14.
properly a great ditche or dungeon. In which sense the same place is also
called in the Apocalips, lacusirae Dei, the lake of Gods wrath. And again,
Stagnum ardens Apo. 14. Apo. 21. Mat. 11. In co^. supra verba, vide latenter.
HADES. ZOPHOS. 2. Pet. 4.
igne and sulphur, a poole burning with fire and brimstone. In greek the
scripture uses three words for the same place. The first is, HADES, used in
the ghospel, which (as Plutarch noted) signifies a place where no light is.
The second is ZOPHOS, in S. Peter, which signifies darkness it self. In which
sense it is called also of Job. terra (...) and operta mortis caligine, a dark
Job. 10. Mat. 22.
land and over whelmed with deadly obscurity. Also in the ghospel, revebra
exteriores, utter darkness. The third greeks 2. Pet. 4.
word is TARTAROS, used also by S. Peter: TARTAROS.
which word being derived of the yerbe tarasso, (which signifies to terrify,
trouble, and vex) imports an horrible confusion of tormentors in that place:
even as Job says, there is no order, but everlasting horror, which the holy
Ghost in an other place describes more at large in these words; There are
spirits created to revenge, and in their fury they have sortified their Job.
10.
torments. When the final day shall come, they shall power forth the force
and rage of him that created them; fire, hail, famine, death, teeth of
beasts, scorpions, and serpents.

The Chaldie word (which is also used in Hebrew, and translated into greek) is
GEHENNA. First of al used by Christ our Saueour, Eccle. 39. GEHENNA. Math. 5.
for the place of them which are damned, as S. Ierom notes upon the tenth
chapter of S. Mathewes ghospel. And this Marc. 9.
word being compounded of gee and binnom, signified a valley nigh to Jerusalem,
The valley hinnom.
called the valley of hinnom; in which the old Idolatrous Jews, were wont to
burn alive their own children in the honor of the devil, and to sound with
trumpets, tvmprils, and other loud instruments, whiles they were making of this
abominable sacrifice, to the end, the pitiful shrikes and cries of their
children might not be heard. And this place was afterward used for the receipt
of al filthiness, dung, dead carions, and the like. And most probable it is,
that our Savior used this word GEHENNA above al other, for hell; thereby to
signify the miserable burning of souls in that place, the pitiful The
lothsomnes of hell.
clamours and cries of the tormented, the confuse and barbarous noise of the
tormentors, together with the most lothsom filthiness of the place; which
otherwise is described in the scriptures, by the names of adders, snakes,
cocatrices, scorpions, and other venemouse creatures, as has been and shall be
afterward declared. And with this word GEHENNA, concurreth also in
signification an other used by the Prophet Esaie, to denote the same place;
that is to say, TOPHET. Which properly TOPHET.
signifies the forsaid valley of the children of Hinnom; but is applied
expressly to declare and represent the most horrible dungeon of damned souls.
Which Esaie, (talking of God as of a great king,) describes in these words.
From eternity is Esa. 30.
TOPHET prepared by this king, a profound and spacious room. His food is fire
and store of vvood: The breath of our lords mouth does kendle the same, like a
maine river of brimstone.

AND NOW HAVING thus declared OF the pains OF hell.
the names of this place and thereby also in some part, the nature: it
remains that we examine, what manner of pains men suffer in the same. For
declaration whereof, we must consider, that as heaven and hell are contrary,
assigned to contrary persons, for contrary causes: so have they in all
respects contrary properties, conditions, and effects; in such sort, as
whatsoever is spoken of the felicity of the one, may serve to infer the
calamity of the other. As for example; when S. Paul 1. Cor. (...).
says, that no eye has seen, nor ear has beard, nor heart conceived the
joys that God has prepared for them that shall be saved: we may interre, that
the pains of the damned must be of like proportion. So again, when the
scripture says, that the felicity of the^ in heaven is a perfect felicity,
containing al goodness, so that no one kind of pleasure ca^ be imagined which
they possess Exo. 33.
not: we must think on the contrary part, that the misery of the damned, must
be also an absolute misery, containing al afflictions that may be, without
want of any. So that, as the happiness of the good is insiaite and universal; so
also is the calamity of the wicked infinite and universal. Now in this life,
all the miseries and pains which fall upon man, are but particular and not
universal. As for example, we see one man pained in his eyes, an other in his
teeth, an other in his stomak, an other in his back: which particular pains not
witstanding, are some times so extreme, as life is not able to resist them,
and a man would not suffer them long for the gaining of a million of worlds.

But suppose that some one man were tormented The pains of hell infinite and
vni uersal.
in all the parts of his body at once, as in his head, his eyes, his tongue,
his teeth, his stomak, and in all other ioints and members of his body besides:
suppose (I say) he were most cruelly tormented with extreme pains in all these
parts together, without ease or intermissio^. What thing could be more
miserable then this? what fight more lamentable? what calamitre more
unspeakable? If thou should see but a brute beast lie in the street thus
afflicted; I know thou could not but take compassion of him. Well then,
consider what difference there is between abiding these pains for a week, or
for all eternity: in suffering them upon a sost bed, or upon a burning
gridiron and boiling furnace: among a man's friends comforting him, or among
the suries of hell whipping and tormenting him. Consider this (I say gentle
reader,) and if thou would take agreate deal of labor, rather then in this
life temporallie to abide the one; be content to sustain a little pair, rather
then to incur the other in the life to come eternally.

But yet to penetrate these things a little further; not only al these parts
of the How every part bathe his particular torment in hell.
body which have been instruments to sin, shall be tormented together in this
place of punishment; but also every sense both external and internal for the
same cause, shall be afflicted with his particular torment, contrary to the
object wherein it delited most, and took pleasure in this world. As for
example; the lascivious eyes shall be afflicted with the ugly and fearful sight
of devils: the delicate ears with the horrible noise of damned spirits: the
dainty nostrels, with poisoned stench of brimstone and other unsupportable
filth: the delicate taste, with most rauinous hungar and vnque^ chable thirst:
and all the sensible parts of the bodi, with burning fire. As also inwardly,
the imagination of the damned, shall be tormented, with the apprehension of
pains both present and to come: the memory, with the remembrance of pleasures
past: the understanding, with consideration of the felicity lost, and the
misery now come upon them. O poor Christian, what will thou do amiddest the
multitude of so intolerable calamites?

It is a wounderful matter, and able (as one father says) to make a
reasonable The pains of hell exercised for (...), and not for chestisment.
man go out of his wits, to consider what God has reueiled unto us in the
scriptures, touching the dreadful circumstances of this punishment, and yet to
see, how little the rechelesse me^ of this world do fear it. For first,
touching the universality, variety, and greatness of the pains; not only
the reasons before alleged, but also diverse other considerations in the
scriptures, do declare the same. As where it is said of the damned,
cruciabuntur die and nocte, they shall be tortured day and night. Apo. 20. and
14. Apo. 18. Luc. 16.
And again, Date illi tormentum; give her torment, speaking of Babylon in hell.
By which words of torture and torment may well appear, that the pains in hell
are exercised, not for chastisment, but for affliction only and torment of the
patients. And we see commonly in this world, that tortures and torments are so
great, violent, and extreme, as the wit of man can reach to devise. Imagine
then (good brother) when God almighty shall bend his endeavor and infinite
endless wisdom to create torments, (as he has done in hell) what manner of
torments they are like to be?

If creating an eleme^t here for our comfort (I mean the fire) he made the
same so The fearse nature of hell fire, with the differences from ours.
insufferable as it is, in such sort, as a man would not hold his only hand
therein one day, for to gain a kingdom: what a fire think you, has he
provided for hell, which is not created for comfort, but only for torment, of
the parties? Our fire has a thousand differences from that, and therefore is
truly said of the holy fathers, to be but as a painted or fained fire in
respect of that. For first our fire was made to comfort (as I have said; and
that Esa. 30.
breath of Gods own mouth does blow, feed, and nourish the same. Our fire
gives the natural and proper place wherein it was created, and therefore has al
his full strength, and abides perpetually. Ours consumes the food that is
cast into it, There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. For that weeping,
seems properly to be referred to the Mat. 8. 13 22. 24. Luc. 13.
effect of extreme burning in that fire, seeing the pains of scalding and
burning do enforce tears sooner then any other pains; as appears in them,
who upon the sudden do put any burning thing in their mouths, or do
vehemently scald any tender and sensible part of their body. And gnashing or
chattering of teeth (as every man knows) proceeds principally of great and
extreme cold. Imagine then (my brother) what a fire this may be, which has so
contrary extreme effects both of heat and cold. O mighty Lord, what a
strange God art thou? how wonderful and terrible in all thy works and
inventions? how bountiful art thou to those that love and serve the? and how
severe and terrible to them which contemn thy commandments? Have thou
devised away how they which lie burning in a Apoc. 21.
like of fire and brimstone, shall also be tormented with extreme cold? what
understanding of man can conceive how this may be? but thy Judgments (o Lord)
are a depth without bottom, and therefore Psalm. 35.
I leave this to thy only providence, praising thee eternally for the same.

But now besides these general pains 5. Several pains for several offenders.
common to all that be in that place; the scripture signifies also, that there
shall be particular and several torments, peculiar both in quality and quantity
to the sins and offenses of each offendour. For to that end says the
prophet Esaias to God, thou Esa. 27. Esa. 28. Iere. 2. Apo. 20. Psa. 27. 98 Eze.
24. Osee. 12. Zach. 1.
will judge in measure against measure. And God says of him self; I vvil
exercise Judgment in weight, and Justice in measure. And that is the meaning
of al those threats of God to sinners, where he says that he will pay them
home according to their particular works, and according to the inue^tions of
their own hearts. In this sense it is said in the Apocalipse of Babylon, now
thrown down iuto the lake: Look how Apo. 18.
much she has glorified herself, and has lived in dolites: so much torment
and affliction give her. Whereof the holy fathers have gathered the variety of
torments that shall be in that Li. de very. poen. c. 2.
place. As there be differences of sins; so shall there be variety of
torments, (says old Ephraem) for the adulterour shall have one kind of
torment, the murderer an other, the thief an other, the drunkarde an other,
the liar an other. And so he follows on, showing how the proud marshal be
trodden under feet to recompense his pride; the glutton shall suffer inestimable
hungar; the drunkarde extreme thirst; the delitiouse mouth shall be filled up
with gaul; and the delicate body seared with hot burning yrons.This is the
contemplation of this holy ancient father.

And truly the holy Ghost signifies Job. 20. A maruailous description used
by the scripture.
such a thing when he says in the scriptures, of the wicked worldling: His
bread in his belly shall be turned into the gaul of serpe^ts: he shall be
constrained to vomet out again the riches which he has devoured; God shall pull
them forth of his belly: he shall be constrained to suck the gauls of
cocatrices, and the tongues of adders shall slay him; he shall bear the smart of
all that ever he has done: and yet shall he not be consumed, but shall suffer
according to the multitude of al his devises. By which words is plainly
showed, that wicked men shall receive particular torments for their gluttony,
for their delicate fare, for extorsion, and the like. Which torments shall be
greater then any mortal tongue can express: as may appear by these vehement
and dreadful words which are here used to insinuate the same.

And yet further, besides all this universality, particularitie, rigor,
greuousnes, 6. The straitnes of pains in hell.
and horror which hitherto has been declared to be in these pains and
torments; the holy spirit of God reueileth unto us an other condition or
quality no less terrible then the former which is, the most severe straitnes
thereof, without al possibility of any one jot of help, aid, ease,
intermission, relaxation, respiration, or comfort. This is signified by those
severe words of our Saueour so often times repeated, that the daned shall be
cast into hell bounden hand and foot, that is, without al ability Math. 12.
of resistance or struggling against their torments: Also, by that most
dreadful shutting up of the gate, whereof our Saueour spoke in such dolful manner
when he said; clausa est ianua, the gate is shut up, and made fast for ever;
that is to say; in hell the gate of al mercy, of al pardon, of al ease; of al
intermission, of al comfort, is shut up Math. 25.
forever; and that both from heaven, from earth, from the creator, and from al
creatures; in so much, that no consolation is evermore to be hoped for, (as in
the miseries of this life there is always some,) but extreme desolation for all
eternity.

This straitnes is likewise most lively expressed in that dreadful parable of
the rich glutton in hell; who was driven to Luc. 16. The wonderful example of
the rich glutton.
that necessity; as he desired most pitifully that Lazarus might dippe the
top only of his fingar in water, therewith to cool his tongue, in the midst
of that fire wherein he was tormented, and yet could not he obtain it. A small
refreshing it seems that it would have been unto him, if he had obtained his
request; but yet to show the straitness of the place, it was denied unto him.
O ye that live in sinful wealth of the world, consider but this one example of
Gods severity, and be a fearde. This man was in that russe and iolitie a little
before, as he would not give the very crommes of his table, to buy heaven; and
now would he give a thousand worlds (if he had them) for one drop of water to
cool his tongue. Good God, what demand could be less then this? what request
more humble? He durst not ask to be delivered thence, or to have his torments
diminished, or to have a great vessel of water wherewith to refresh his whole
body; but only so much as would stick on the top of Lazarus fingar, to cool
his tongue. To what extreme need was this poor man now driven? what a strong
imagination had he of the force of one drop of water? to what pitiful change
was his tongue now come, that was accustomed to be so daintelie bathed, and
diligently tended with all kinds of pleasant liquors? O that one man can not
take example by an other: o that Ooliba will not learn to be wise by seeing the
punishments of her elder The example of one moves not an other.
sister Oolla. God reueiled the calamity of the former, inflicted for her
wickedness, thereby to terrify the latter, from the like sin; but for that she
profited nothing by Ezec. 23.
that example, he says; for so much as thou Ooliba have walked in the ways,
of thie sister Oolla: this says God unto the; I will lay the cup of thie sister
upon the; thou shall drink it as she did, both in depthe and largenes; thou
shall drink it up even unto the very dregs.

Thus said the prophet of God then to Jerusalem, that would not be warned by
the punisheme^tes of Samaria; and thus says the son of God now to al men,
that will not be terrified by these torments of the damned Glutton; and if all this be true (as it must be except the words of our Saueour could be false:)
then what wonderful people are we, that seeing our selves in danger of this
intolerable misery; do not seek with more diligence to prevent the same?

In respect of these extremities and strait dealings of God in denying al
comfort and consolation at this day: holy scripture Apo. 16. Eccle. 23.
says, that men shall fall into rage, fury, and utter impatience, blasphening
God, and cursing the day of their nativity, with Apo. 23. Luc. 23.
eating their own tongues for grief, and desiring the rocks and mountains to
come and fall on them, thereby to end and finish their pains.

But now, if we add to all this, the eternity and everlasting continuance of
these 7. The eternity of the pains.
torments; we shall see, that it increases the matter beyond al hu nane
cogitation. For in this world, there is no torment so great, or affliction so
violent; but that time either takes away or diminishes the same. For either
the tormentor, or the tormented dies, or some other occasion happens, whereby
the extremity of the tribulation is mitigated. But here no such hope or
comfort may be expected; for that, Apo. 21.
as holy writ affirms, Cruciabuntur in saecula saeculoru^, in stagne ardente
igne and sulphur: They shall be tormented for ever and ever, in a poole that
burns with fire and brimstone. As long as God is God, so long must they burn
therein. Neither shall the tormentour or the tormented die, but both must live
eternally, for the eternal misery of him that suffers.

O (says one holy father in a godly meditation) if a sinner damned in hell,
did A vvo^derful saying, and cogitation of eternity.
know that he had to suffer those torments no more thousand years, then there
be sands in the sea, and grass leaves on the ground; or no more thousand
millio^s of ages, then there be creatures in heaven, hell, and in earth: he would
greatly rejoice; for that he would comfort him self at the least wise, with
this cogitation; that once yet the matter would have an end. But now (says
this good man) this word Never, breaks his heart, considering that after a
hundred thousand millions of worlds; (if there might be so many,) he has as
far to his iournies end, as he had at the first day of his entrance into those
torments. Consider (good Christian) what a length one hour would seem unto the,
if thou had but to hold thy hand in fire and brimstone only during the
space thereof, or to be stretched on a rack, or other torture. We find by
experience, that if a man be grieuouslie sick, though he be laid upon a very
soft bed; yet one night seems a long time unto him. He turns and tosseth
him self from side to side telling the clock, and counting every hour as it
passes, which seems to him a whole day. And if a man should say unto him,
that he were to abide that pain but seven years together: he would go nigh to
dispare for grief. Now if one night seem so long and tediouse to him that
lies on a good soft bed, afflicted only with a little ague: what will the
lying in fire and brimstone do, when he shall know evidently, that he shall
never have end thereof? O dear brother, the satietie of continuance is
loathsome, even in things that are not evil of them selves. If thou should be
bound always to eat one only meat, albeit otherwise of it self it were not
ingrate: yet would it be displeasant unto the in the end. If thou should be
bound to sit still al thy life in one place, without moving: it would seem
grievous and intolerable, albeit no man did torment thee in that place. What
then will it be, to lie eternally, that is to say, world without end, in most
extreme torments and inexplicable desolatio^s? is it any way to be
comprehended, how they may be suffered? o blind judgment of man, that makes
no more accounte of preventing these calamities.

And yet might I here adioine an other circumstance of these punishme^tes, which
holy scripture it self omitteth not, when it says, that al these torments
shall be suffered 8. Darckenes in hell.
in darkness; a thing dreadful of it self unto man's nature, as you know. For
that there is not the stoutest heart made of flesh, but if he found him self
alone, destitute, Mat. 8. 22
and naked in some desolate place of darkness, and should hear the voices and
cries of infernal spirits drawing toward him; he would be stricken with fear
in respect of the place it self, albeit as yet he felt no hurt upon his body.
For that nothing is more terrible to man's imagination, then to conceive perils
at hand; which the eye can not discover, nor any thing more full of extreme
desolation, the^ having our sight, to want for ever the use and object thereof.
This then is the most pitiful and desolate state of such as are 9. The derisio^
that shall e used toward the damned.
damned, that their insupportable and everlasting pains are sustained in
darkness. whereunto also may be added an other circumstance recorded by the
prophet to knit up all the rest, which is, that God shall laugh at them in these
their miseries; an affliction Psalm. 36.
perhaps to be numbered amongst the greatest of al others. For as in this
life, to be moned by a man's friends in time of adversity, is exceeding great
comfort: so to be derided and laughed at, especially by them, who only may
help and redress our miseries; is a great and intolerable increase of
calamity.

AND NOW ALL THIS that I have OF the pains. OF damage
hitherto treated, is but one only part of a damned man's punishment, called by
divines, paena sensus, the pain of sense or feeling; that is, the pain or
punishment sensibly inflicted upon the soul and body. But yet beside this,
there is an other part of his punishment called, poena damni, the pain of loss
or damage; which by all learned men's opinion, is either greater, or no less
then the former. And this is, the infinite loss which a damned man indureth,
in being excluded for ever and ever, from the sight of his Creator, and from
his glory. Which sight only, being sufficient to make happy and blessed al
those that are admitted thereunto; must needs be an infinite misery to the
damned man, to lack the same eternally. And therefore, this is put as one of
the first and chiefest plagues to be laid upon him; Tollatur impius ne videat
Esa. 26.
gloriam Dei, Let the wicked man be taken away to hell, to the end he may not
see the glory of God. And this loss contains al other losses and dommages
in it: as are the losses of eternal bliss and joy; of eternal glory; of
eternal society with the Angels; and the like: which losses when a damned man
considers, (as he can not but consider them perpetually;) he takes more
grief thereof (as divines do prove) then of al other sensible torments that he
abides besides.

And hereof proceeds that great and general torment, which is so often
repeated The worm of conscience. Mar. 9.
in holy write, by the name of the worm of our conscience, so called; for
that, as a worm lies eating and gnawing the wood wherein she abides: so shall
the remorse Esa. 66. Eccle. 7. Iudit. 6.
of our own conscience, lie within us griping and torme^ting us for ever. And
this worm or remorse shall principally consiste, in bringing to our minds,
the The cogitationis of the damned.
means and causes of our present extreme calamities. To wit, our folly and
negligence, whereby we lost the felicity which other men have gotten. And at
every one of these considerations, this worm shall give us a deadly pinche and
gripe, which shall reach even to the very bottom and intrals of our heart. As
when it shall lay before us, all the occasions that we had offered to avoid the
misery, wherein now we are fallen, and to gain the glory which we have lost:
how easy it had been to have done it: how nigh oftentimes we were to resolve
our selves to do it: and yet how vnfortunatlie we left of that cogitation
again. How many times we were foretold of this danger, and yet how little
care and fear we took of the same. How vain those wordlie trifles were,
wherein we spent our time, and for which we lost heaven, and fell into these most
intolerable miseries. How they are now exalted, whom we thought fools in the
world: and how we are now proved fools and derided, who thought our selves
wise. These things (I say) and a thousand more, being laid before us by our
own conscience; shall yield us infinite grief and desolation, for that it is
now to late to amend them. And this grief is called the worm or remorse of
our own conscience: which worm, shall more enforce me^ to weep and houle at
that day, then any torment else, considering how negligentlie, foolishlie, and
vainlie, they are come into those so insupportable torments, and that now there
is no more time place, or leave to redress their errors.

Now only is the time of weeping, wailing, and of everlasting lamentation The
time of eternal weeping.
for these me^; and yet al in vain. Now shall they begin to freat and rage,
and marvel at them selves, saying: where was our wit? where was our
understanding? where was our Judgment, when we followed vanities, and contemned
these affairs of our salvation? This is the talk of sinners in hell (says the
scripture) what Sap. 5.
has our pride, or what has the glory of our riches profited us? They are
al now vanished like a shadovv: we have vvearied out our selves in the way
of iniquity and perdition, but the way of our Lord we have not known. This
(I say) must be the everlasting song of the damned and tormented conscience in
hell; eternal repentance without avail. By which extremity, he shall be brought
to such desperatio^ (as the scripture also notes;) that he shall turn into
fury against him self, tear his own flesh, rent his own soul (if it were
possible,) and inuit the fiendes and furies to torment him more, for that he
has so beastly behaved him self in this world, as not to provide in time, for
this principal matter, only (in deed) to have been thought upon. O if he
could now have but an other short life to lead in the world, how would he pass
it over? with what diligence? with what severity? But this will not be
granted; neither is there any price of value to purchase it. Only we (dear
brethren) that are yet alive, do inioye this inestimable grace and treasure of
time for our amendment, if we were so happy as to resolve in deed, to make
our gain and commodity thereof. One of these days, we shall be past it also,
and shall not recover the same again, no not one hour, if we would buy it with
a thousand worlds; as no doubt but that the damned would do, if it lay in
their powers. Let us now then so use this benefit, as when we are past hence,
we have no need to wish our selves here again.

This is the only time wherein we may avoid al; now is the season when we may
The passing commodity of the preset time.
put our selves out of danger of al these terrible matters: now (I say) if we
resolve our selves out of hand. For we know not what shall become of us to
morrow. It may be that to morrow our hearts will be as hard and careless of these
affairs, as they have been heretofore, and as Pharao his heart was, after
Moses departure from him. O that he had resolved him self thoroughly whiles
Moses was with him; how fortunate a creature had he been? if the rich Glutton
had taken the time while Lazarus lay at his door; how blessed a man had he made
him self? he was for told his misery (as we are now) by Moses and other
prophets, according Luc. 16.
as our sauy our does signify; but he would not hear. After ward he fell into
such admiration of his own folly, that he would needs have Lazarus sent from
Abraham's bolome unto his brethren in the world, to warn the^ of his error.
But Abraham told him, it was booteles; for that they would not have believed
Lazarus in this case, but rather (perhaps) have persecuted him as a liar and
difamer of their honorable brother disceased, if he should have revealed unto
them his torments. And so in very deed would the wicked men of this world do
now, if one should come and tell them that their parents or friends are damned
in hell, for such and such offenses as them selves are inta^gled withal. What
then can God devise to do for the saving of these men? what way, what means,
what order may he take, when neither warning, nor example of others, nor
threats, nor exhortations will do any good? we know, or may know, that leading
the life we do, we can not be saved. We know and ought to know, that many
before us have been damned for less matters. We know and can not choose but
know, that we must shortly die, and Great negligence and over sight.
receive our selves, as they received; living as they did, or worse. We see by
this laid down before, that the pains are intolerable and yet eternal, which
do attend and expect the wicked. We confess them most unfortunate and
miserable that for any pleasure or commodity of this world, are now fallen
into the^. What then should let us, to dispatche our selves quickly of al
impediments? to break violently from al bands and chains of this wicked
world, that let us from this true and zealouse resolution? why should we sleep
one night in sin; seeing that night may chance to be oar last, and so the
everlasting cutting of, al hope to come?

Resolve thy self therefore (my dear brother) if thou be wise; and clear thy
The conclusion.
soul from these dangers while God is willing to receive thy amendment, and
moves the thereunto by these means, as he did the rich man by Moses and his
other prophets while he was yet in his prosperity. Let his example, be
oftentimes before thine eyes, and consider it thoroughly, and it shall do the
good. God is a wounderful God; and to show his patience and infinite goodness,
he woeth us in this lise; seeks unto us, and lays him self (as it were) at
our feet, to move us thereby to our own good; to win us, to draw us, and to
save us from perdition. But after this life, he alters his course of dealing:
he turns over the leaf, and changes his style. Of a lamb he hecometh a
lion to the wicked: and of a Saniour, a just and severe punisher. What can be
said or done more by his divine Majesty to move us. He that is forewarned, and
sceth his own danger before his face, and yet is not stirred up nor made the
more wary or fearful thereby; may well be pitied, but surely by no means can he
be helped, making himself incapable of al remedies, that may be used.

OF THE MOST HONORABLE, EXCELLENT, AND MVNIFICENT rewards and paimentes.
Ordained for such as truly serve God, and do employ their time in
perfourmance of his most holy commandments. CHAPT. XII.
THE motives, reasons, and co^sideratio^s laid down before, in the precendent
chapters, might well suffice, to stir up the heart of any one reasonable
Christian, to take in hand this resolution whereof we presently treat, and
whereunto I do so much covet to persuade thee (for thy only good and gain)
gentle reader. But for that al hearts are not of one constitution in this
respect, nor al drawn and moved with the same means: I purpose to adioine
here a consideration of commodity, whereunto co^monlie each man is prone by
nature; and consequently, may be perhaps of greater force to work that effect
which we desire, then any thing else that hitherto has been spoken. I intend
therefore in this place, to treat of the benefits which are reaped by the
service of almighty God; of the gain procured thereby; and of the good pay and
most liberal reward which God performs to his servants, above al other
masters that may be served. And though God the best Paimaister.
the just fear of punishment, (if we serve him not) might be sufficient to
drive us to this resolution: and the infinite benefits alredie received, might
induce us to the same, in respect of gratitude, (of both which some what has
been said before:) yet am I content so far to enlarge this liberty to thee
(good reader,) that except I show this resolution, which I crave, to be more
gainful and profitable then any thing else in the world that can be thought of;
thou shall not be bound unto it for any thing that hitherto has been said in
that behalf. For as God in all other things is a maiestical God, full of bounty,
liberality, and princely magnificence; so is he in this point above al other;
in such sort, as albeit what soever we do or can do in his service, be indeed
but debt and tribute due unto him, and for that cause of it self deserves
nothing; yet of his munificent Majesty, he Mat. 10. Matc. 9.
lets pass no one jot of our service unrewarded; no, not so much as a
cup of cold water, bestovved for his love.

God commanded Abraham to sacrifice Genesis 22.
unto him his only son Isaac, whom he so dearly loved. But when he was
ready to do the same; God said unto him, do it not: it is enough for me that
I see thine obedience. And for that thou have not refused to obey me, I swear
to thee (says Liberal pai me^t for little pains.
he) by my self, that I will multiply thy seed as the stars of heaven, and as
the sands of the sea: and among them also one shall be the Messiah and Savior of
mankind. Was not this (trow you) a most liberal 2. Reg. 7.
pay for so little pains? king David discoursing with him self on a certain
time, how his own palace being richly builded of Cedar timber, the arc of his
Lord and maken was lodged only under a poor te^t; resolved with him self, to
erect a house and temple for the same. Which only cogitation God took in so
good part, as he sent Nathan the prophet unto him presently, to refuse the
thing; but yet to tell him, that for so much as he had determined such a matter,
God would build a house, or rather a kingdom to him and his posterity, which
should last for ever, and from which he would never take away his mercy, what
sins or offenses so cue: Psalm. 88.
they committed. Which liberal promise we see now fulfilled in the Church of
Christ descended originally from that noble family. What should I labor to
heap together more examples to this effect? Christ him self gives a general
note hereof, when he calls the workmen and pays to each man his wages so
duly; as also when he says of him self; behold I come quickly, and my
revvard is with Mat. 20. Apoc. 22.
me. By which places it is evident, that God suffers no labor in his service
to be lost or unpaid. And albeit (as hereafter In the second part and 2. chap.
of this book.
in place convenient more amply shall be showed,) he pays also, (and that
abundantly) in this life present: yet (as by these two texts appears) he
deferreth his chief pay, unto his coming in the end of the day; that is,
after this life, in the resurrection of the just, as him self says in an Luc.
14.
other place.

OF THIS PAYMENT then reserved for gods servants in the life to come, THE. 1.
part. OF the revvard in general. Mat. 25. 2. Tim. 4. 2. Pet. 1. Luc. 14.
we are now to consider, what manner a thing it is, and whether it be worth so
much labor and trauail, as the service of God requires. And first of al, if
we believe the holy scripture, calling it a kingdom, a heavenly kingdom, an
eternal kingdom, a most blessed kingdom: we must needs confess it to be a
maruailous great reward: seeing that in this world, hardly can there be found
so bountiful a Monarch, as will bestow a kingdom upon his servant in
recompe^se of his service; and if he would and were able to perform the same;
yet would it be nether heavenly nor eternal nor blessed kingdom, such as this
is which God has promised unto his servants. Secondly, if we credit that
which S. Paul says of this reward, that nether eye has seen, nor ear 1.
Cor. 2. Esa. 64.
beard, nor heart of man conceived, how great a matter it is: the^ must we yet
admit a greater opinion thereof. For that we have seen many wounderful things
in our days; we have heard more wounderful; we may conceive most wounderful,
and almost infinite. How then shall we come to understand the greatness and
value of this reward? surely no tongue created either of man or Angel can
express the same, no imagination conceive, no understanding comprehend it.
Christ him self has said, nemo scit nisi qui accipit: No man knows it Apoc.
2.
but he that enjoys it. And therefore he calls it hidden manna in the same
place. Notwithstanding, as it is reported of a How the greatness of heaue^lie
joy is found out.
learned Geometrician, who finding the length of Hercules foot upon the hill
Olimpus, drew out his whole body by the proportion of that one part: so we by
some things set down in holy scripture, and by some other circumstances
agreing thereunto, may frame a conjecture of the matter, though it be far
unequal and inferior to the thing it self.

I have before declared, how this reward in holy writ is called a heavenly,
everlasting, and most blessed kingdom. By which words is signified, that al
shall be kings. and most happy kings, that shall be found worthy of this
reward. To like, effect is it called in other places, a crown of glory; Apoc.
2. and 3. Mat. 16. Lue. 10.
a throne of May. c; a paradise, or place of pleasure; a life everlasting.
S. John the Evangelist, being in his banishment by special privilege made
privy to some knowledge and feeling thereof, as well for his own comfort as for
ours, takes in hand to describe Apo: 21. and 22. The description of paradise
used by S. John.
it, by comparison of a city: affirming, that the whole body thereof was of
pure gold, environed with a great and high wall of the pretiouse stone, called
Iaspis. This wall had also twelve foundations, made of twelve distinct precious
stones which he there names: also twelve gates made of twelve rich stones
called Margarits, and every gate was an entire Margarit. The streets of the
city were paued with gold, interlayed also with pearls and precious stones.
The light of the city was the clearenesse and sple^dour of Christ him self,
sitting in the midst thereof: from whose seat proceeded a river of water, as
clear as cristal, to refresh the city: and on both sides of the banks, there
grew the tree of life, giving out continual and perpetual fruit. There was no
night in that city, nor any defiled thing entered thereinto: but they which
are within, shall reign (says he) for ever and ever.

By this description of the mostriche and precious things that this world has,
S. John would give us to understand, the infinite finite value, glory, and
Majesty, of this felicity, prepared for us in heaven: though (as I have noted
before) it being the Heb. 1. Math. 13.
princely inheritance of our Save our Christ, the kingdom of his father, the
eternal habitation of the holy Trinity, prepared before al worlds to set out
the glory, and to express the power of him that has no end or measure, either
in power or glory: we may very well think with S. Paul, that nether tongue
can declare it, nor heart imagine it.

When God shall take upon him to do The magnificencie of God expressed
diversely.
a thing for the uttermost declaration (in a certain sort) of his power,
wisdom, and eternal Majesty: imagine you what a thing it will be? It pleased
him some time, to make certain creatures to serve him in his presence, and to
be witnesses of his glory: and thereupon with a word, he 1. By the creation of
Angels.
created the Angels, both for number and perfection of nature so strange and
wonderful, as the cogitation thereof astonieth our understanding. For as for
their number they were almost infinite, passing the number of all the creatures
of this inferior world, as diverse See S. Thom. part. 1. q. 50. art. 3. and
Dionis. de caelesti Hier. c. (...). Dan. 7.
learned men and some ancient fathers are of opinion: albeit Daniel (according
to the custom of holy writ) do put a certain number for an uncertain, when
he says of Angels, a thousand thousands did minister unto him, (that is unto
God) and ten thousand times a hundreed thousand, did stand about him to assist.
And for their perfection of nature, it is Psalm. 102.
such, (being, as the scripture says, celostial spirits and like burning
fire;) as they far surpass al inferior creatures, in natural knowledge,
power, beauty and al other excelle^cies; which i one Angel are more, for
perfection of nature (not respectig grace,) then in all other creatures of the
world put together. What an infinite Majesty the^ does this argue in the
Creator?

After this, when many of these Angels were now fallen: it pleased almighty 2.
By the creation of the world for man.
God to frame an other creature, far in nature inferior unto this, to fill up
the places of such as were fallen; and thereupon created man of a piece of
claye, appointing him to live in this world, as a place of entertainme^t and
trial for a time: which place God notwithstanding determined, afterward to
destroy again. But yet in creating this transitory world, (which is but a
base cotage in regard of his own eternal habitation,) consider (god reader)
what power, what magnificence, what Majesty he has showed? what heavens and
how wonderful has he created? what infinite stars and other lights has he
devised? what elements has he framed? and how marvelously has he compacted
the^ together? The seas tossing and tumbling without rest, and replenished with
infinite sorts of fish: the rivers running incessantly through the earth like
veins in man's body, and yet never empty nor ouerflowing the same: the earth
it self so furnished with all variety of creatures, as the hundredth part
thereof, is not used nor employed by man, but only remains to show the full
hand, and strong arm of the Creator. And all this (as I said) was done in an
instant, with one word only, and that for the use of a small time in respect
of the other future life, which is to endure for all eternity. What then may we
imagine that the habitation prepared for that eternity shall be? If the cotage
of his meanest servant, and that made only for Mark this collection.
a time, to bear of (as it were) a shower of rain, be so princely, so
gorgeous, so magnifice^t, so Maiestical, as we see this world is: what must we
think that the kings palace it self is, appointed for all eternity, for him
self and his friends to reign together? We must needs think it to be as
great, as the power and wisdom of the maker could reach to perform; and that
is, incomparably, and above al measure infinite.

The great king Assuerus, which reigned Hest. 1. 3. By the promise of a
banquet.
in Asia over a hundred twenty and seven provinces, to discover his power and
riches unto his subjects, made a feast (as the scripture says) in his great
city of Susa, to all the princes, states, and potentates, of his dominions, for
a hundred and fourscore days together. Esaias the prophet Esa. 25.
says, that our God and Lord of hosts, will at the last day make a solemn
banquet to al his people upon the hill and mount of heaven; and that a harvest
banquet, of fat meats and pure wines. And this banquet shall be so solemn, as
the very son of God him self, chief Lord and Patron of the feast, shall be
content to gird him self, and to serve in the same, as by his own words he
promises. What manner of banquet then shall this be? how magnificent Luc. 12.
and maiestical? especially seeing it has not only to endure a hundred and
four score days, (as that of Assuerus did,) but more then a hundred and
fourscore millions of ages: not served by men (as Assuerus feast was) but by
Angels, and by the very son of God him self: not to open the power and
riches of a hundred tuentie and seven provinces, but even of Almighty God, the
king of kings, and Lord of Lords, whose power and riches are without end, and
greater then al his creatures put together can conceive. How glorious a banquet
shall this be then? how triumphant the joy of this festiual day? how in
comprehensible a bliss, to be partaker thereof? O most miserable and foolish
children of Adam, that are borne to so rare and singular a dignity, and yet
can not be brought to consider, love, or esteem of the same.

Other many things there be, whereby to conjecture the exceeding greatness of 4.
By the plea sures and commodities of this life.
this reward and felicity; as for example, to consider, that if God have given
so many pleasures and comfortable gifts in this life, (as we sec innumerable
in the world,) being a place notwithstanding of banishment, an habitation of
sinners, a vale of misery, and appointed only for a time of repenting,
weeping, mourning, and bewailing: what will he do in the life to come, to the
just, to his friends, in the time of joy and marriage of his son? Apoc. 19.
This was a most forcible consideration with good S. Augustine, who in the
secret speech of his soul with God, said thus. O August. soliloq. c. 2.
my Lord, if thou for this vile body of ours, have given us so great and
innumerable benefits, from the firmament, from the air, from the earth, from
the sea: by light, by darkness, by heat, by shadow: by dewes, by showers, by
winds, by raines: by birds, by fishes, by beasts, by trees: by multitude of
herbs, and variety of plants, and by the ministry of al thy creatures: O
swet Lord what manner of things, how great, how good, and how innumerable, are
those which thou have prepared for us in our heauelie Country, where we shall
see thee face to face? If thou do so great things for us in our prison: what
will thou give us in our palace? If thou geuest so many things in this world,
to good and evil men together: what have thou laid up for only good men in
the world to come? if thine enemies and friends together are so well provided
for in this life: what shall thy only friends receive in the life to come? if
there be so great solaces in these days of tears: what joy shall there be in
that day of marriage? if our iaile and prison contain Apcc. 19.
so great matters: what shall our Country and kingdom do? O my Lord and God,
thou art a great God, and great is the multitude of thy magnificence and
svvetnes: and as Psalm. 30.
there is no end of thy greatness, nor number of thy mercies, nor depth of thie
wisdom, nor measure of thy benignity: so is there neither end, number, depth,
length, greatness, or measure of thy rewards, to them that love thee and do
fight for thee. Hitherto S. Augustine.

An other mean whereby to conceive some part of this reward in the life to By
the honor that God has used to his servants in this life. 1. Reg. 2. Psalm.
138.
come, is, to remember and weigh the manifold promises of almighty God, to
honor and glorify al those that shall love and serve him. Whosoever shall honor
me (says he) I vvil make him glorious: and the prophet David, as it were
complains ioifullie, that Gods friends were to much honored by him. Which he
might with much more cause have said, if he had lived in the new testament, and
had heard that promise of Christ whereof I spoke before, Luc. 12.
that his servants should sit down and banquet, and that him self would serve
and minister unto them, in the kingdom of his father. What understanding can
conceive, how great this honor shall be? But yet in some part it may be gessed,
by that he says, Mat. 19. Luc. 22. 1. Cor. 6.
that they shall sit in judgment with him; and (as S. Paul adds,) shall be
Judges not only of men, but also of Angels. It may also be coniectured by the
exceeding great honor which he at certain times has done to his servants,
even in Mat. 10.
this life; wherein notwithstanding, they are placed to be despised and not to
be honored.

How great honor was that (trow Genesis 12. 14. 20. Abraham. Exo. 5. 6. 7. 8.
you,) which he did to Abraham in the sight of so many kings and princes of the
earth, as of Pharao, Abimelech, Melchiseedech, and others? How great honor was
that he did to Moses in the face of Pharao and of al his court, by the Moses.
wonderful signs that he wrought by him? What excessive honor was that he did
to holy Iosue, when in the sight of al Iosue.
his army he stayed the sun and Moon in the midst of the firmament at
Iosues Iosu. 10.
appointement, obeying therein (as the scripture says) to the voice of a man?
what honor was that he did to Esaias in Esa. 38.
the preface and sight of king Ezechias, when he made the sun to go back
ten degrees in the heavens? what honor was that he did to helias in the
sight of wicked Helias. 3. Reg. 17
Achab, when he yielded the heavens into his hands, and willed him to say, that
neither rain nor dew should fall upon the ground (for certain years) but by the
words of his mouth only? what honor was that he did to Elizeus in the
Elizeus. 4. Re. 5. 4. Re. 13.
sight of Naaman the noble Syrian, whom he cured only by his word from the
leprosy, whose bones also after his death, raised up (by only touching) the
dead to life? inallie, not to allege more examples herein; what singular
honor was that he The Apostles.
gave to all the Apostles of his son, that as many as ever they laid hands
on, were healed from al infirmities, as S. Luke affirms? Act. 5.
Nay (which is yet more) the very girdles and napkins of S. Paul did the Act.
19.
same effect; and yet more then that also, so many as came within the only
shadow of S. Peter, were healed from their Act. 5.
diseases. Is not this maruailous honor even in this life? was there ever
Monarch, prince, or potentate of the world, that could vaunt of such points of
honor? And if Christ did this to his servants, even in this world, whereof
notwithstanding he Ioh. 18. 2. Tim. 4. Apo. 4.
says his kingdom was not: what honor shall we think he has resesued for the
life to come; where his kingdom shall be in all fulness, and where al his
servants shall be crouned as eternal kings with him?

Lastly, for some further declaration of 6. By the 3. places whereto a man is
appointed.
this matter, and for expressing the incomparable excellency of heavenly
bliss; some divines do use a consideration of the three different places,
whereunto man by his creation is ordained, albeit in all points it be not
necessary to hold the same just proportion. The first of which places is, our
mothers womb; the second, this present world; the third is, coelum Empireum,
which is the place of bliss in the life to come. Now in these three places,
(say the learned,) we must hold some like proportion, (by all reason) between
the third and second place, as we see sensibly to be observed between the
second and first. So that, in what proportion the second does differ from the
first: in like measure must the third be different from the second, on rather
much more, for that eternal and heavenly things do exceed al comparison of
tra^sitorie things among themselves. By this proportion then, we must say,
(for example sake,) that as far as Mark the collection.
the whole world does pass the womb of one private woman: so much in all
beauty, delites, and Majesty, does the place of singular prerogatives of the
Saints in heaven. So that by all these reasons laid together, there may a general
conjecture be framed of the most infinite and incomprehensible excellency of
this reward whereof we treat.

BUT NOW TO CONSIDER the same thing somewhat more in particular; THE. 2. part.
OF THE two parts of felicity in heaven.
it is to be noted, that this reward or glory of heaven, shall comprehend in it
self two parts or members; the one called essential, belonging to the soul:
the other termed accidental, belonging to the body. First of the soul.
The essential part consists in the vision or sight of God, as afterward
shall be showed. The accidental consists in the Second of the body.
change and glorification of our flesh after the general resurrection, whereby
this corruptible body of ours, shall put on incorruption, (as S. Paul says)
and of mortal 1. Cor. 15. Sap. 9. Ephe. 4.
become immortal. All this flesh (I say) of ours, that now is so combersom and
aggreeueth the mind; that now is infested with so many inconveniences; subject
to so many mutations; vexed with so many diseases; defiled with so many
corruptions; replenished with so infinite miseries and calamities: shall then be
made glorious and most perfect, to endure for ever without change or mutation,
and to reign with our soul everlastingly. And for this purpose (as See S.
Tho. 3. par. q. 82. in supple.
divines do prove) the same shall be endued with certain excelles qualities and
gifts from God, which S. Anselm (whom in this matter I will follow) In l. de
simi. c. 48. 49.
does reckon to be seven; to wit, beauty, agilitie, fortitude, penetrabilitie,
health, Seven privileges of the glorified bodies.
pleasure, and perpetuity. Al which excellencies, either do want in the
damned bodies; or else their contraries are found therein.

And first of al, concerning the privilege and high excellency of beauty, 1.
Beauty.
how singular it shall be in the bodies glorified, our Saueour him self in some
part declares, when he says. At that day shall the Just shine as the sun
in the Mat. 13.
kingdom of their father. A maruailouse speech, and in humane sense almost
incredible, that our putrefied bodies should shine and become as clear as the
sun. Whereas in the contrary part, the bodies of the damned shall be as black
and ugly, as filth it self. The second prerogative assigned to the bodies of
the just, is 2. Agilitie.
agilitie or velocitie, whereby their flesh is delivered from al lumpish
heuinesse, wherewith it was pestered in this life, and made as light as the
Angels them selves which are spirits, and do pass from place to place with
infinite swiftness, as also do ascend and descend of them selves, against the
nature of corruptible bodies: whereas in the mean space, the damned bodies
shall be bound both hand and foot, Mat. 22.
not able once to move, as the scripture expressie notes.

The third gift and quality is supernatural strength, wherewith the glorified
3. Strength. Cap. 52.
body shall so abound (as Anselmus says,) that he shall be able to move the
whole earth if he would: and contrariwise, the damned body shall be so weak and
impotent, as he shall not be able to remove the very worms from: his own
face and eyes. The fourth quality is penetrabilitie, or free power of passage,
whereby the glorified body shall be enabled, to pearse 4. Penetrabilitie.
and penetrate any other bodies what soever; as walls, doors, the earth or
firmament without any resistance, quite contrary to the nature of a
corruptible body. So we see that. Christ's body glorified, Ioh. 20.
after his resurrection, entered the house where his disciples were, the doors
being shut, and pearsed also the heavens at his Ascensio^. The fifth rare
quality, is most absolute health; whereby the glorified 5. Health.
body shall be delivered from al diseases and pains of this life, and from al
troubles and encombrances belonging to the same; as are, eating, drinking,
sleeping, and other like; and shall be set in a most perfect and flourishing state
of health and freedom, never decayable again: whereas the damned body in
contrary manner, shall be filled and stuffed with innumerable diseases, pains,
and torments, which no tongue of man is able to express.

The sixth perfection is delight and pleasure, 6. Pleasure.
wherewith the glorified body above al measure shall be replenished; al his
senses together finding now their peculier and proper objects in much more
excellency, then ever they could in this world. Now (I say) every part,
sense, member, and joint, shall be filled with exceeding delectation and
pleasure; according as in the damned, each part and sense shall contrariwise be
afflicted and tormented. I will allege S. Anselmus his words, for that they
express unto us this matter most lively. All the whole glorified body Ansel.
c. 5v. vbi sup.
(lays he) shall be filled with abundance of al kind of comfort; the eyes, the
ears, the nose, the mouth; the hands the throat, the lungs, the heart; the
stomach, the back, the bones, the marowe; and the very-entrales them selves,
and every part thereof, shall be replenished with such unspeakable sweetness and
pleasure; that truly, it may be said, that the whole man is made t, drink
of the river of Gods divine Psalm. 35.
delites, and made-dronke with the abundance of Gods house. In contrary wise
the damned body, shall be tormented in all his parts and members; eue^ as if you
saw a man that had a burning iron thrust into his eyes, an other into his
mouth, an other into his breast, an other into his ribs, and so through all the
ioints, parts, and members of his body. Would you not think him miserable,
and the other man happy?

The seventh and last excellency of a glorified body, is called perpetuity or
security 7. Perpetuity
of life, whereby it is made assured never to die or alter more from his
felicity; according to the saying of holy scripture, the just shall live for
ever. And this Sap. 5.
is one of the chiefest prerogatives and most excellent dignities of a
glorified body, whereby al care, doubt, and fear is taken away, al danger of
hurt and noyance. For if all the world should fall together upon such a body; it
could not hurt or harm it any thing at al: where as the damned body lies
always in dying, and is subject to the grief of every blow and torment laid
upon it, and so must remain for all eternitie^.

These Al these things Bun. either reiectath, or ma^gleth: perhap pes, as not
appertaini^g to the bodies of Protesta^tes.
seven most excellent qualities, prerogatives, dignities, and preemine^cies,
shall adorn and beautify, or rather deifie (in a certain sort) the bodies of
the just in the life to come. And albeit this universal happiness be but
accidental (as I have said,) and nothing in deed to the essential felicity of
the Queen and mistres her self, that is our soul: yet is it a matter of no
small importance as you see, but such, as if any body in this life had but any
one jot of the least part thereof, we should esteem it most happy. And to
obtain so much in this world, many men would adventure far; whereas to get
the^ al together in the life to come, no man almost will move his fingar.

But now to leave this, and to come to the The 2. part of felicity, called
essen tial, pertaining to the faule.
most excellent and essential point of this felicity, that is, to the part
which pertains to the soul: it is to be understood, that albeit there be
many things that do co^curre in this felicity, for the acco^plishment and
perfection of full happiness; Yet the fontaine of al is but one only thing,
called by divines, Visio dei beatifica, the sight or vision of god that makes
us happy. Haec sola est summu^ bonu^ nostru^, says S. Augustine; Aug. lib. de
trin. c. 13.
this only sight of god, is our entire happiness. Which Christ also
affirms, when he says to his father, this is life everlasting, that men
know the true god, and Jesus Christ Ioh. 17.
whom thou have seut. S. Paul also puts our felicity, in seeing god, face
to face. And S. John, in seeing god, as he is. And the reason of all this 1. Cor.
13.
is, for that all the pleasures delites and co^tentations How the vision of God
shall make men happy.
of this world, wherein mortal me^ do solace them selves, being nothing else but
little pieces and crummes of Gods incomprehensible felicity: the same are
contained much more perfectly and excellently in god him self, (from whom
they are derived,) then they are in their own natures imparted unto man; as
also all the perfections of Gods creatures, are more fully in him, the^ in them
selves. Whereof it follows, that who soever is admitted to the vision and
presence of almighty God, the Creator and fontaine of al delites; he shall
there find all the goodness and perfections of worldly things compact and
united together, and presented unto him at once. So that whatsoever may delight
either body or soul; there he shall enjoy it wholly, knit up together (as it
were) in one bundle, and with the presence thereof, shall be ravished in all
parts both of mind and body; in such sort, as he shall not be able to imagine,
think, or wish for any one joy whatsoever, but there he shall find the same
in his full perfection. There he shall find al knowledge, al wisdom, al
beauty, al riches; al nobility, al goodness, al pleasure, and whatsoever
besides may deserve either love or admiration, or woorkethanie pleasure or
contentation unto man.

All the powers of our mind shall be filled with this sight, presence, and
fruition of God: all the senses of our body shall be God to the saved shall be al
in all.
satisfied and passinglie contented with the same. God shall be the universal
felicity of al his saints; containing in him self alone al particular
felicities, without end, number, or measure. He shall be a glass to our eyes,
music to our ears, honey to our mouths, most sweet and pleasant balm to our
smell. He shall be light to our understanding, contentation to our will,
continuation of eternity to our memory. In him shall we enjoy all the variety
of times that delight us here: all the beauty of creatures Mug. lib. 4. de
anima. ca. 15.
that allure us here: all the pleasures and joys that content us here. In this
vision of God (says one doctor) we shall know, we shall love, we shall rejoice,
we shall praise. We shall know the very secrets and judgments of God, which are
a depth Psalm. 13. Knoledge.
without bottom: As also, the causes, natures, beginnings, ofsprings, and
ends of al creatures. We shall love incomparably, both God, (for the infinite
causes of love Love.
that we see in him;) and our brethren and companions as much as our selves,
for that we shall see them as much loved of God as our selves, and for the same
cause for which we are loved: whereof ensues, that our joy shall be without
measure; both, for that we shall have a particular joy for every thing we love
i^ God, which are infinite: and also, for that, we shall rejoice at The greatness
of joy in heaven.
the felicity of every one of our brethren as much as at our own; and by
that means, we shall have so many distinct felicities, as we shall have distinct
companions in our felicity; which being without number; it is no marvel
though Christ said go into the joy of thy Lord, and not, let Mat. 25.
thy Lords joy enter into thee: for that no one heart created, ca^ receive the
fulness and greatness of this joy. And hereof finally it does ensue, that we
shall praise God without end or wearines, with all our heart, with all our
strength, with all our powers, with all our parts; according as the scripture
says; Happy are they that Psalm. 83.
live in they house (o Lord) for they shall praise thee eternally without end.
Hitherto this learned doctor.

Of this most blessed vision, sight, possession, The speech of S. Augustine
touching the vision of God. Tract. 4. in ep. Ioau and cap. 36. foliloq.
and fruitio^ of almighty God, whereunto in heaven the elect are admitted, the
learned father S. Augustine writes thus. Our Saueour in the Gospel said unto
his Disciples, Happy are the clean of heart, for they shall see God. By which
words we are let to understand, that there is a sight and vision of God, which
is sufficient of it self to beatifie men, and make them happy. A Mat. 5.
vision which nether eye has seen in this world, nor ear has heard, nor
heart conceived. A vision (dear brethren) that passes 1. Cor. 3.
all the beauty of earthly things; of gold, of silver, of woods, of feeldes;
of sea, of air, of sun, of moon; of stars and of Angels: for that al these
things have their beauty from thence. We shall see him face to face (says
his Apostle) and we shall 1. Cor. 13.
know him, as we are known. That is, we shall know the power of the father,
we shall know the wisdom of the son, we shall know the goodness of the Holy
Ghost, we shall know the indivisible nature of the most blessed Trinity. And
this very seeing of the face of God, is the joy of Angels, and of al other
saints and celestial spirits in heaven. This is the reward of life
everlasting; this is the glory of al blessed Cherubins; their everlasting
pleasure; their croune of honor; their game and goal of felicity; their rich
rest; their beautiful quietness; their inward and outward consolation; their
divine paradise; their heavenly Jerusalem; their happiness of life; their
fulness of bliss; their eternal triumph; their precious peace of God, which
passes al understanding. This sight Psalm. 4.
of God, is the full beatitude, the total glorification of man and Angels; to
see and behold him (I say) that made both heaven and earth; to see and behold
him (dear brother) that made thee, that redeemed thee, that glorified thee. For
in seeing him, thou shall know him; in knowing him, thou shall love him; in
loving him, thou shall possess him; in possessing him, thou shall praise him;
and in praising him thou shall spend thie whole eternity. For he is the
inheritance of his people; he is the possession of their felicity; he is the
reward of their expectation. I will be thy Genesis 15.
great revvard says he to Abraham. O Lord, thou art great, and therefore no
marmile if thou be a great reward. The sight of thee therefore is al our hiar,
al our reward, al our joy and felicity that we expect: seeing thou have said,
that this is life Ioh. 17.
everlasting, to see and know thee our true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou
have sent. Thus uttered S. Augustine his feeling in these affairs.

AND NOW HAVING thus declared THE. 3. part. OF circumstances increasing the
joys of heaven.
the two general parts of heaue^lie felicity, the one appertaini^g to our
soul, the other to our body: it is not hard to esteem, what excess of joy
both of the^ joined together, shall work unto us and i us at the most happy
day of our glorificatio^. Which the forsaid holy S. Augustine conceived and
expressed in these most zealous S. Augustines apprehensio^ of the joys of
heaven. Phil. 4.
and affectuous words. O joy above al joys, passing al joys, and without
which there is no joy; when shall I enter into thee, when shall I enjoy thee,
to see my God that dwells in thee? O everlasting kingdom, o kingdom of al
eternity, o light without end, o peace of God that passes al understanding,
wherein the souls of Saints do rest with thee (o Lord,) and Esa. 51. Esa. 35.
everlasting joy is upon their heads, and they do possess joy and
exultation, and al pain and sorrow is fled from them. O how glorious a
kingdom is thine (o Lord) wherein al Saints do reign with the, adorned with
Psalm. 103. Psalm. 20.
light as with precious apparel, and have crowns of precious stones upon
their heads? O kingdom of everlasting bliss, where thou art present (o Lord)
the hope of al Saints, and the diadem of their everlasting glory,
replenishing the^ with joy on every side by thy blessed sight. O Lord, in this
kingdom of thine, there is infinite Joy and mirth without sadness; health
without sorrow; life without labor; light without darkness; felicity without
abatement; al goodness without evil. Here youth florisheth that never waxes
old; life that knows no end; beauty that never fades; love that never
cools; health that never diminishes; joy that never coaseth. Here sorrow is
never felt; complaint is never heard; matter of sadness is never seen; nor
evil success is ever feared. For that they possess thee (o Lord) which art
the perfection and culme of their felicity.Hitherto blessed Augustine.

And now dear Christian brother, if we that live in these days and do read 1.
Of the ioiful mutatio^ as a just ma^s death.
these things, would enter in deed into these considerations, as this holy man
and other his like did; no doubt, but we should be more inflamed with the love
of this heavenly felicity prepared for us, then we are; and consequently,
should strive more to gain it, then (alas) we do. And to the end thou may
conceive some more feeling in the matter, consider but a little withme, what a
ioiful day shall that be at thy. house, when having lived in the fear of God,
and atchiued in his service the end of thy peregrination; thou shall come (by
the means of death) to pass from misery and labor, co life of immortality;
and in that passage (when other men begin to fear) thou snalt lift up thy
head in hope, Luc. 21.
according to thie Saueours words, for that the time of thy salvation comes
on: tell me (I say) what a day of joy shall that be unto thee, when thy soul
stepping forth of prison, and conducted by the Angels to the tabernacle of
heaven, shall be received there, with the honorable companies and troops of
that place? with all Ephe. 1. Colos. 1. 1. The. 1. Esa. 6.
those hierarchies of blessed spirits that are mentioned in scripture: as
Principalities, Powers, Virtues, Dominatio^s, Thrones, Angels, Archangels,
Cherubines, and Seraphines? with the holy Apostles and Disciples of Christ;
with Patriarchs, Prophets. Martyrs, Virgins, Innocents, Luc. 15.
Confessors, holy Bishopes, Priests, and other Saints of God? Al which, as
they did rejoice at thy conversion from sin: so shall they triumph now at thy
coronation and glorification. What joy and jubilee will thy soul receive at
that day (dear brother,) when she shall be presented by her good Angel, in the
presence of al these princely states, before the seat and Majesty of the
blessed Trinity, with recital and declaration of al thy good works done,
and travails sustained for the love and service of almighty God; when (I say)
those blessed spirits shall lay down in that honorable consistory, al thy
virtuous acts, with their particularities; al thy alms deeds; al thy
prayers; al thy fastinges; al thy innocence of life; al thy patience in
bearing injuries, al thy constancy in adversities, al thy tempera^ce in
meats, and drinks; all the virtues of thy whole life; when al (I say) shall be
recounted there, al commended, al rewarded; shall thou not see now the value
and profit of virtuous living? shall thou not confess now from the bottom of
thy heart, that gaineful and honorable is the service of God? shall thou not now
be most ioiful, and bless the hour ten thousand times, wherein first thou
resoluedst thy self to leave the slavery of this miserable world, to serve
only so bountiful a Lord? shall thou not think thy self now beholden most
deeply to him or her, that persuaded thee first to make this resolution? yes
verily.

But yet more then this; when thou shall look about thee and consider into what
a 2. The joy of security.
port and haven of security thou art arrived, and shall cast back thin eyes
upon the dangers which thou have passed, and wherein other men are yet in
hazard: thy cause of joy shall greatly be increased. For thou shall see
evidently now, how infinite times thou were in peril to perish in that
journey, if God had not held his special hand over thee. Thou shall now see the
dangers wherein other men are; the death and damnation wherinto many of thy
friends and acquaintance have fallen; the eternal pains of hell incurred by
sundry, that used to laugh and be merry with thee in the world. Al which shall
augment the unspeakable felicity of this thy so fortunate a lot. And now for
thy self, thou may be secure, thou art out of al danger for ever and ever.
There is no more need now of fear, of watch, of labor, or of care. Thou
may now lay down al armoure, as the children of Israel Iosu. 21. 22. Genesis
3. Sap. 17.
did when they came into the land of promise; for there is no more enemy to
assail thee; there is no more wielie serpent to beguile thee: al is peace, al
is rest, al is joy, al is security. Good S. Paul has no 1. Cor. 9.
more need now to fast, to watch, or to punish his body: Good old Jerome, may
Iero. cp. 22. ad Eusto. Apo. 19.
now cease to afflict him self both night and day for the conquering of his
spiritual enemy. Thy only exercise must be now to rejoice and triumph, and
to sing alleluya to the La^be, which has brought the to this felicity, and
will continue the therein for everlasting eternity.

O dear Christian and most loving brother, what excessive joy and comfort will
3. The seeing of Christ in glorified flesh. Mat. 2.
it be at that day, to see that holy LAMB sitting in Majesty upon his seat
of state? If the tree wise men of the East, came so far of, and so reioiced
to see him lying in a Ma^ger: what will it be to see him now triumphing in his
glory? If S. John Baptist Inc. 1.
did leap at his approaching toward him in his mothers womb: what shall his
presence do in this his royal and eternal kingdom? It passes al other joy
and glory that Saints have in heaven (says blessed S. Augustine) to be
admitted to the Sermon. 37. de sanctis.
inestimable sight of Christ his face, and to receive the beams of glory from
the splendor of his Majesty. And if we were to suffer torments every day,
yea, to tolerate the very pains of hell for a time, thereby to gain the sight
of Christ in heaven, and to be joined in glory to the number of his saints:
it were nothing in respect of the worthiness of the reward. O that we made such
account of this matter, as this holy and learned man did: we would not live
as we do, nor loose the same for such vain trifles, as most men in the world
do loose it daily.

But to go forward yet some what further in this consideration. Imagine (dear
4. Meetinge with our frindes in heaven.
brother) besides all this that hitherto has been said, what a joy it shall be
unto thy soul at that day, to meet with all her godly friends in the
kingdom of heaven; with father, with mother, with brethern, with sisters; with
wife, with husband with master, with scholars; with neigboures, with
familiers, with kindred, with acquaintance: the welcomes, the mirth, the sweet
embracementes that shall be there; the inestimable joy whereof, the holy
ancient Martyr and most blessed father and doctor S. Cyprian expresses in these
words. Who is there in peregrination The saving of S. Cypria^ l. de mortalit.
iu sine.
abrod (says he) that reioiceth not exceedingly at the very thought of his
return to his friends and Contrie? O dear brethren, heaven is our Contrie;
and the inhabitants of that place, are our friends and kinsfolk: why make we
no more haste to salute and embrace them? In heaven an infinite multitude of
Bun. rejects here this belief of S. Cypria^ touching Knowledge in heaven,
of fathers and mothers etc. But every man of reason, can put a difference
between a Cyprian and a Buney.
our parents, brethren, children and acquaintance do expect us. What a joy will
it be, both to them and us, to meet and embrace and solace our selves together?
how inestimable will the delight of those heaven lie kingdoms be, and how extreme
the felicity, where eternity of life shall be void of al fear of death? Thus
far S. Cyprian; adding further a most vehement exhortation that we should
make have to the attaining of this meeting.

This then shall be a most high and incomprehensible joy: but yet further, add
to this, the most triumphant exultation that 5. The daily arriual of new
brethren to heaven.
daily shall be in that place at the fresh arriual of new brethren and sisters,
coming thither from time to time with the spoils of their enemies, conquered
and vanquished in this world. O what a comfortable sight will it be, to see those
seats of Angels fallen, filled up again with men and women of flesh, from day
to day? to see the crowns of glory set upon their heads; and that in all
variety, according to the infinite variety of their combats and conquestes.
One, for martyrdom or confession against 2. Tit. 4. Apo. 2. 3. 4.
the persecutor; an other, for virginity or chastity against the flesh; an
other, for poverty or humility against the world; an other, for many
conquestes together against the devil? There the glorious quiar of Apostles,
(says the forsaid holy Cyprian Lib. de mortal.
there the number of reioising prophets, there the innumerable multitude of
holy Martirs, shall receive the crounes of their deaths and sufferinges.
There, triumphing virgins which have overcome concupiscence with the strength
of continency: there, the good aulmners which have liberally fedd the poor,
and according to our Lords commandment, have made over their earthly riches
to the storehouse of heaven, shall receive their due and peculiar reward. O how
shall virtue show her self at this day? how shall good deeds content their
doers? And among al other joys and contentations, this shall not be the least,
to see the poor souls that come thither at a iumpe, either from the pains
and miseries of this life, or from the torments of the purging fire, how they
shall be raushed, remain astonished, and as it were, besides them selves, at
the sudden mutation, and excessive honor done unto them.

If a poor afflicted man, that were out of his way, wandering alone in a
deep, miric, and durtie lane, in the midst of a dark and tempestuous night,
far from company, destitute of money, beaten with rain, terrified with
thunder, stiff with A similitude expres sing the sud den joy of the just after
their de parture.
cold, wearied out with labor, almost famished with hungre and thirst, and
near brought to despare with multitude of miseries; should upon the sudden,
in the twinkling of an eye, be taken out of that affliction, and be placed in a
goodly large and tiche palace, furnished with all kind of clear lights,
comfortable fire, sweet savors, dainty meats, soft beds, pleasant music,
delicate apparel, and honorable company: al prepared for him alone, and al
attending his coming, to receive and embrace him, to serve and honor him, and
to anoint and croune him a king for ever: what would this poor man do trow
you? how would he look? what could he say? Surely I think he would be able to
say little, but rather, breaking forth into tears, would for joy remain mute
and dumme, his heart being not able to contain the sudden and exceeding
greatness of so inestimable comfort.

Well then (dear brother) so shall it be, and much more with these twice happy
souls, that come to heaven from the troubles of this life. For never was there
cold shadow so pleasant in a hoate burning sunnie day; nor the welsprig to the
poor trauailer in his greatest thirst of the summer; nor the repose of an easy
bed to the wearied servant after his labor at night: as shall be this rest of
heaven, to an afflicted soul which comes thither. O that we could conceive
this; that we could imprint this in our hearts; that we had a feeling The value
of heaven, and the account that old Saints made there of.
of this that I say: would we follow vanities as we do? would we neglect this
matter as we do? No doubt, but that our coldenes in purchasing these joys,
does proceed of the small opinion we do conceive of the^. For if we made such
account and estimate of this Jewel of heavenly bliss, as other merchants
before us (more skilful and wiser then our selves) have done: we would bid for
it as they did, or at leastwise would not let it pass so negligentlie, which
they sought after so carefully. S. Paul says of our Save our, proposito Heb.
12.
sibi gaudio sustinuit crucem; He layinge before his eyes, the joys of heaven,
sustained the Cross. A great estimation of the matter, which he would buy at
so dear a rate. But what counsel gives he to other men about the same?
surely none other, but to go and sell al they have, to purchase Mat. 13.
this treasure. S. Paul of him self, what says he? verily, that he esteemed
all the world as Philip. 3.
dung, in respect of the purchasing of this Jewel. S. Paul's scholar Ignatius,
what Icrom. in catalogo.
bids he? hear his own words. Fire, galowes, beasts, breaking of my
bones, quartering of my members, crushing of my body, all the torments of the
denil together; let them come upon me, so I may enjoy this treasure of heaven.
S. Augustine Ser. 31. de sanctis.
that learned father, what offers he? you have now heard, that he would be
content to suffer torments every day, yea the very torments of hell it self, to
gain this joy. Good Lord, how far did these holy Saints differ from us? how
contrary were their judgments to ours in these affairs? who will now
marvel of the wisdom of the world, judged folly by God, and of the wisdom
of god judged 1. Cor. 1. 2. and 3. Psalm: 4.
folly by the world? Oh children of men (says the prophet) why do ye love
vanity and seek after a lie? why do you embrace straw and contemn gold?
straw (I say) and most vile chafe, and such as finally will set your own houses
on fire, and be your ruin and eternal perdition?

BUT NOW TO draw toward an end in this matter (though there be no Whereunto a
Christian is borne by Baptism.
end in the thing it self:) let the careful Christian consider whereunto he is
borne, and where of he stands in possibility, if he will. He is borne heir
apparent to the kingdom of heaven: a kingdom without end, a kingdom void of
limitatio^, a kingdom of eternal bliss, the kingdom of Gal. 3. and 4. Ephe.
1. and 5. Colos. 3. Tit. 3. Romans 8. Jacob 2. Heb. 1. 9. 1. Pet. 1. 3 2. Pet. 3.
Apoc. 1. Mat. 19. Luc. 22. 1. Cor. 6.
almighty God him self: he is borne, to be ioint-heyre with Jesus Christ the
son of God; to reign with him; to triumph with him; to sit in Judgment of
Majesty with him; to judge the very Angels of heaven with him. What more
glory can be imagined, except it were to be God him self? All the joys, all the
riches, all the glory that heaven contains, shall be poured forth to make him
happy. And to make this honor and triumph yet more; the glorious Lamb that
sits: upon the throne of Majesty, with his eyes like fire, his feet like
burning copper, and his face Apo. 1. and 4. Luc. 12.
more shining then the precious diamant; from whose seat there proceeds thunder
and lightening without end; and at whose feet the four and twenty elders lay
down their crounes: this lamb (I say) this glorious God and man, shall rise
and honor him with his own service. Who then would not esteem of this royal
inheritance? who would not make greater account thereof then we do, especially
seeing the gaining and winning of the same is now (by the benefit of our
redemption and grace purchased unto us therein,) brought to be in our own
hands? according to the express words of our Save our, Math. 11.
saying. Note that Bun. thrusts out, as well these words of Christ, as those
that insuc of S. Au gustin: and thereby shows, that he spares the Evangelist
no more then ancient fathers, when he mistiketh their writings. Sermon. 37. de
sanctis.
The kingdom of heaven does suffer violence, and men do lay hand-fast upon
it, by force. That is to say, by the force of gods covenant made with
Christias, that they living virtuously, shall obtain the same; whatsoever
Christian does perform this virtuous life, takes heaven (as it were) by
force and by violence. The matter is put in the power of the doer (says S.
Augustine) for that the kingdom of heaven suffers violence. This thing (o
man) that is, the kingdom of heaven, requires no other price but thy self it
is so much vvoorth as thou art vvoorth: give thy self, and thou shall have it.
By which he signifies, that every man, how poor or needy soever he be in
this world, may gain this inheritance to him self; may make himself a prince,
a king, a Monarch, if he will: even the meanest and miserabl est man I say upon
earth. O most wonderful bounty and liberality of our Saueour; o princely
heart and unspeakable mercy: o incredible prodigality (in a certain manner so
to say,) of treasures so inestimable, as are the most infinite and endless
riches of heaven.

Tell me now, gentle reader and most loving and dear brother, why will thou The
buying of heaven.
not accept of this offer of thie Saueour? why will thou not account of this
his kingdom? why will thou not buy this endless glory of him, for so little a
labor as he requires for it? Hear how earnestly he persuadeth thee to
bargain with him: Apoc. 3.
Suadco tibi emere a me (says Christ) auru^ ignitum, probatum, vt locuples
sias. I do give thee counsel, to buy of me pure and tried gold, to the end
thou may be rich. Why will thou not follow this counsel (dear brother?)
especially of a merchant that means not to deceive thee? Nothing can grieve
this thie Save our more, Exo. 5.
then that men will seek with such pains, to buy straw and chafe in Egypt,
whereas he would sell unto the^ fine gold at a lower price: and that they will
needs purchase pudle water, with more labor and cost, Icre. 2. Apo. 21.
the^ he would require for ten times so much pure liquour, out of the very
fontaine of life it self. There is not the wickedst man that lives in the
world, but takes more travail in gaining hell, (as after more largely shall be
declared) then does the most painful servant of God in purchasing of heaven and
eternal bliss. O folly, o madness.

Follow not then (o thou careful Christian) The folly of seeking worldly
vanities.
this fanatical frenzy of earthelie wisdom; make not thie self partaker of
their error. For the day will come, when thou shall see them do heavy penance
for their sollie, at what time thie heart shall be right ioiful that thou had
never any part or portion among them. Let them go now and bestow their time,
in transitory vanities, in finful pleasures and delites of this world; let
them build now their pleasant palaces; let them purchase dignities, scrape
pieces and paches of earth and ground together: let them hunt after honors and
frame castles in the aier: the time will come ere long (if thou believe Christ
him self) wherein thou shall have Luc. 6. Luc. 12. Math. 26.
sinal cause to envy their felicity. If they do imagine and talk baselie now
of the glory and riches of God and of his Saints in heaven; not esteeming
them in deed, in respect of their own, or contemning them rather, for that
carnal pleasures are not reconed therein: do thou make little account of their
words; for that the sensual 1. Cor. 2. Ep. lad. A similitude.
man understands not the things which are of God. If horses were promised by
their masters a good feast and banquet, most evident it is that they could
imagine nothing else, but prouander and water to be their best cheer, for that
they have no knowledge of daintier dishes: so fares it with these men who being
accustomed only to the pudle of fleshly pleasures; can mount with their minds
to no higher thig the^ brutish sensuality. But I have showed to thee before
(gentle reader) some ways and considerations, to conceive greater matters;
albeit as I have advertised the often, we must confess still, with S. Paul,
that no humane heart can conceive 1. Cor. 2.
the least part thereof. For which cause alse, it is not unlike that S. Paul
him self 2. Co. 12.
was forbidden to utter the things which he had seen and heard, in his most
wonderful miraculous assumption unto the third heaven.

Wherefore to conclude at length this whole chapter; thou have to consider my
The conclusion with the application of all that has been said.
dear and loving brother, that this great Game and Goal of heaue^lie bliss,
which hitherto I have endeavored to describe unto thee, is set up only for
them that will run unto it, as S. Paul well notes: and no man is crouned in
this glory, but such only as will fight for it, according as the same.
Apostle does teach and forwarne 1. Cor. 6. Phil. 3. 2. Tim. 2. 1. Ti. 6. Heb.
12. Mat. 7. 19 25.
us. It is not every one that says to Christ, Lord Lord, shall enter into the
kingdom of heaven: but they only which shall do the will of Christ's eternal
father that is in heaven. Albeit this kingdom of Christ be set out to al men,
yet every man shall not arrive to reign with Christ, but such only as shall
be content Romans 8. Mat. 11.
to suffer with Christ. Though the kingdom of heaven be subject to violence:
Apo. 14. and 20.
(as has been said,) yet no man can enter there by force, but he only whose
good deeds shall follow him to make open the gates: that is; except he enter
(as the prophet Psalm. 14.
says) without spot, and have vvroght justice. My meaning the^ is, that as I
have showed, the exceeding greatness and worthiness of this treasure (gentle
reader:) so thou being a Christian should also conceive the right way of
gaining the same; which is no other by the testimony of Christ him self, but
only by holy and virtuous life, in keeping his commandeme^tes. Thou art
therefore to sit down and consider, (according Math. 7. and 19. Ioh. 14. Luc.
14.
to thy Saueours counsel,) what thou will do and determine herin; whether
thou have so much spiritual money, as is sufficient to build this tower, and to
make this heavenly war, or no: that is; whether thou have so much good will
and holy manhood in thee, as to bestow the pains of a virtuous life, (if it
be rather to be called pains then pleasure,) required for the gaining of this
eternal kingdom. This is the question, this is the principal The final end of
all that has been said.
point, this is the very whole issue of all the matter; and hitherto has
appertained whatsoever has been spoken in this book before, either of thy
Creator and creation, of thie particular end; or of the Majesty, bounty, and
justice of thie God and Saueour: as also of the account he will demand of thee;
and of the punishment or rewards laid up for the life to come. All this (I say)
has been meant by me to this only end and purpose, that thou (measuring the
one part and the other,) should finally resolve thie self what thou
would do, and not to pass over thy time in careless negligence, as many
are accustomed to do, never espiing their own errors until it be to late to
amend them.

For the love of God then (dear Christian An exhortation.
brother) and for the love thou bear to thy own soul and eternal welfare,
shake of this most dangerous security, wherein flesh and blood is wont to lulle
the careless people of this world; make some earnest resolution, for looking to
thy state in the life to come. Recalle to mind oftentimes that worthy
sentence; Hoc momentum, vnde pendet aeternitas: This life A saying to be
remembered.
is the moment, whereof depends al eternity of weal or woe hereafter. If it
be but a moment (dear brother) and yet a moment of so great consequence and
importance: how is it passed over by earthelie men with so little care, and
cogitation? what reason may be alleged of this so dangerous a negligence? what
cause may be assigned, of so extreme a folly? All the creatures of earth,
heaven, and hell, even from the very first to the last, if thou examine them al,
may be arguments and motives unto thee, to leave this perilous course wherein
thou art: al are or may be books lessons and sermons unto thee, preaching and
protesting, (some by their punishment, some by their glory, some by their
beauty, and al by their creation,) that thou ought without delay, to make
resolution of an other kind of life; and that al is vanity, al is folly, al
is iniquity, al is misery, besides the only service of thie Lord and maker.
And so with this, will I make here an end of this first part, reserving some
other things to be spoken in the second; for removing of such impedime^ts, as
our spiritual adversary is wont to cast against this good work of Resolution,
as against the first step and degree of our salvation.

Our Lord God and Savior Jesus Christ, who was content to pay his own
precious blood for the purchasing of this noble inheritance of his kingdom
unto us; give us his holy grace, to esteem of it, as the great weight of the
matter requires, and not by negligence to loose our title and portion therein.

The end of the first part, containing motives to resolution.
THE SECOND PART, WHICH TREATS OF THE LETTES and impedimentes that hinder
resolution.
THE PREFACE.
IN the former part of this book (gentle reader) there have been laid down
sundry reasons, and The effect of the first part.
considerations, whereby to stir up men to the firm resolution of serving
God; which might be sufficient (no doubt) to that effect, (the nature of virtue
being also considered, which of her self draws reasonable men to love and
admiration of her:) were not the subtlety of our spiritual enemy very great
and dangerous in this behalf, and his endeavors most diligent against our
purpose. For so it fares, that when he sees by the former reasons and
demonstrations alleged, that the judgment of man is convinced in the points
which are treated, and that it can no longer resist or deny, but that the only
true wisdom were in deed, to break of from the vanities and sinful life of
this world, and to be-take our selves to the gainful (...) mighty God: then
this infernal foe, (...) able further to delude our judgment (...) blind our
understandings; imployeth him self The subtilitie of the devil.
by all means possible, (for retaining of his pray) to stay our will from
yelding consent unto our judgment; all eaging for his dissuation, either the
difficulty of obtaining pardon, or the pains and hardness of virtuous life, or
the loss of worldly honor and earthly commodities, or some other such like
fraud or trifle, whereby to let and hinder our resolution, or at least wise to
prolonge it so far forth, as he may be in hope, that we shall never make it
afterward to our gain or comfort.

For preventing of which malicious and most perilous endeavor of our ghostelie
adversary, this second part is adioined, containing the The effect of this
second part.
chief and principal impedimentes, that usually do rise against resolution;
the remooual and confutation of which lettes and impedimentes, shall bring no
small light unto the studious reader, for the true understanding both of his
own estate, and of the deceptes and illusions used toward him by his enemy.
Read then this part also (dear Christian brother) with no less diligence
then the former; for that the profit thereof shall be equal, and thy contentement
perhapes far greater; in respect of the variety of matters handled therein,
and of the manifold comfortes which thy soul in perufing shall receive thereby.

OF THE FIRST IMPEDIMENT THAT IS WONT TO LET SINNERS from resolution. Which
is, the mistrust and diffidence in Gods mercy, through the multitude and
grieuousnes of their offenses. CHAPT. I.
AMONG al other gricuous and most perilous cogitatio^s, which in this world are
accustomed to offer them selves to a mind entangled and lode with great sins;
this usually is the first, (thorough the nature of sin it self Despair an
ordinary temptations to the greatest sinners.
and crafty suggestion of our ghostly enemy;) to fall into distrust and
despair of Gods mercy. Such was the cogitation of most unhappy Cain, one of
the first inhabitants of mankind upon earth; who after the murder of his own
only brother, and other sins by him committed; brust forth into that horrible
and desperate Caini.
speech, so greatly offensive to his Lord and Maker, mine iniquity is greater,
then Genesis 4.
that I may hope for pardon. Such was in like manner, the desperate conceit of
wicked Judas, one of the first of them that were Judas.
chosen to the peculiar service of our Redeemer; who feeling his conscience
oppressed with manifold enormous iniquities, and most of al with the prodition
of his own Lord and master: took no other ware of amendment or redress, but
to destroy him self both in body and soul; adioining only those words full of
miserable distrust and desperation; I have sinned in Mat. 27.
betraying the innocent and just blood. By which words and most wreched end,
he more grieuouslie offended and iniuried his most loving and merciful Saueour,
then by all his former iniquities committed against him.

This then (most loving brother,) is the first and greatest rock, whereat a
sinful The ship vvrak of souls ouerloded with sins.
soul ouerburdened with the charge of her own iniquities, and tossed in the
waves of dredful cogitations by the blastes and storms of Gods threats against
sinners, does commonly make her shipwrake. This is that most horrible depth
and dungeon, where of the holy Scripture says, The impious man, when he is
come into Prou. 18.
the botome and prosonditie of his sins, contemns al. This is that
remediles sore and incurable wound wherewith God him self charged Jerusalem when
he said; Insanabilis fractura tua; Thy rupture is irremediable. Iere. 3.
And the Prophet Michaeas considering the same people, thorough the multitude
of their wickedness to eneline now to despair of Gods goodness toward them;
brake forth into this most pitiful complaint; for this vvil I weep and lament
extremely; I vvil strippe of my clothes, and wander Mich. (...).
naked; I vvil rore like unto Dragons, and sound out my sorrow as Strutbious
in the desert, for that the vvound and malady of my people is desperate.

This is that great and maine impediment that stops the conduits of Gods The
misery of desperation.
holy grace, from flowing into the soul of a sinful man. This is the knif
that cutteth in sunder al those heauely blessed cords, wherewith our sweet Lord
and Saneour endeavors to draw unto repentance the hearts of sinners, saing by
his prophet, I vvil pull them unto me with the chains of love and charity.
For by this means Osee 11.
every sinful conscience comes to answer almighty God, as did Jerusalem,
when being admonished of her sins, and exhorted by his prophet to amendment
of life; she said: Desperaui, nequaquam faciam; I am become desperate; I will
never Iere. 2.
think of any such thing. To which lamentable estate, when a sinful man is
once arrived; the next step he makes, is, (for avoiding al remorse and
trouble of conscience;) to engulfe him self into the depth of al detestable
enormities, and to abandone his soul to the very sincke of al filth and
abominations; according as S. Paul said of the Gentiles in like case; that by
despair they delivered them selves over to dis Ephe. 4.
solute life, thereby to commit al manner of uncleanness.

Which wicked resolution of the impious, is the thing (as I have noted before)
that most of al other offenses upon earth, does exasperate the ire of Almighty
God, depriving his divine Majesty of The thing vvherin God most deliteth, is
mercy.
that most excellent property, wherein he chiefly deliteth and glories, which
is, his infinite and vnspeacable mercy. This might be declared by diverse and
sondrie examples of holy writ; how be it, two only shall suffice for this
present. The first is of the people of Israel not long before their banishment
to Babylon; who being threatened from God by the Prophet Jeremy, that manifold
punishments were imminent over their heads, for their grievous sins committed
against his Majesty: began (in stead of repentance) to fall to desperation,
and consequently, resolved to take that impious course of al dissolute life,
alleged before out of S. Paul; for thus they answered God exhorting them by
his threats to reform their wicked lives. We are now grown desperate; and
therefore we vvil hereafter follow our own A desperate resolution.
cogitations, and every one sulfil the wickedness of his own conceit.
Whereat God stormed infinitely, and brake forth into this vehement Pere. 18.
interrogation: Interrogate Gentes; quit audiuit talia horribilia? Ask and
enquire of the very Gentiles, whether ever among them were heard any such
horrible blasphemies. And after this, for more declaration of this intolerable
injury herin offerred to his Majesty: he commanded the Prophet Jeremy to
go forth of his own house; and to get him to a potters shope, which in the
village was framing his vessels upon the wheel. Which Jeremy having done; he
saw before his face a pot crushed and broken by the potter al in pieces upon
the wheel; and thincking thereby that the vessel had been utterly unprofitable
and to be cast away: he saw the same clay ptesently framed again by A
marvelous example of Gods cleinencie.
the potter, into a new vessel more excellent then before. Whereat he
maruailing; God said unto him: Do not thou thinck (Jeremy) that I can do
with the house of Israel, as this potter has done with his vessel? Or is not
the house of Israel in my hands, as the clay is in the hands of this
craftesman? I will denounce upon the sudden against a Nation and kingdom, that
I will root it up and destroy it; and if that nation or kingdom do repent
from their wickedness, I also will repent me of the punishment which I intended
to lay upon them. And then he proceeds foreward, declaring unto Jeremy the
exceeding grief and indignation which he conceaueth, that any sinner what
soever, should despair of mercy and pardon at his hands.

The second example is of the same people of Israel during the time of their
banishment in Babylon, at what time being afflicted with many miseries for
their sins, An other example of Gods vvo^derful mercy.
and threatened with many more to come, for that they changed not the course of
their former wicked conversation: they began to despair of Gods mercy, and
to say to the Prophet Ezechiel that lived banished among them, and exhorted
them to amendment upon assured hope of Gods favor toward them; Our iniquities
and sins do lie greeuouslie upon us, and we languish in them, and what
hope of Eze. 33.
life then may we have? At which cogitation and speech God being greatly
moved; appeared presently to Ezechiel and said unto him; Tell this people; I do
live says the Lord God of hosts, I vvishe not the death of the impious, but
rather that he should turn from his wicked ways and live. Why vvil the
house of Israel die in their sins, rather then turn unto me? And then he
makes a large and vehement protestation, that how grievously soever any person
shall offend him, and how great punishments soever he shall denounce against him;
yea, if he had given express sentence of death and damnation upon him: yet, Si
egerit paenitentiam a peccato suo, seceritque iudicium and iustitiam; that is;
if he repent him self of his sin, and exercise Judgment and justice to be
used in true repentance; that is, judgment upon our selves, and justice
toward others.
judgment and justice for the time to come; al his sins that he has
committed shall be forgiven him (says almighty God) for that he has done
judgment and Justice.

And this now might be sufficient, (albeit nothing else were spoken) for
removing this first obstacle and impediment of true resolution, which is the
despair of Gods infinite goodness and mercy. Nevertheless, for more evident
clearing and demonstration of this matter; and for the greater comfort of such
as feel them selves burdened with the heavy weight of their iniquities
committed against his divine Majesty: I have thought expedient in this place
to declare more at large, this abundant subject of Gods endless mercy, toward
al such as will truly turn unto him; in what time, state, condition or age
Four parts of this chapter.
soever in this life: which shall be showed and set down by these four points
and parts that do ensue.

FIRST OF AL, by the infinite and THE. 1. part. TOUCHING. the love that God:
bears toward man.
incomprehe^sible love that almighty God bears unto man; which love is
always the mother of favor, grace, and mercy. If you demand of me in what
sort I do prove that the love of God is so exceeding great toward man: I
answer as the Cosmographer is wont to do, who by the greatness and multitude
of the streams and rivers, does frame a conjecture of the fountain from which
they flow. The proper rivers which are derived and do run forth of love,
are good turns and benefits; which seeing they are infinite endless and
inestimable, bestowed by God upon man, (as in place before has been declared,
and the whole universal frame of this world does abundantly bear witness;)
it follows most evidently, that the origin, fountain, and welspring of al
these favors, graces, and good turns; must needs be infinite, immeasurable,
and far surpassing al compass of man's understanding.

If you require of me the cause and reason, why almighty God should so
wonderfully be affected toward man; I can directly yield you none at al, but
rather marvel thereat with holy Job, why so sovereign a Majesty should set
his heart Job. 7.
upon so base a subject. Notwithstanding, the holy Scripture seems to allege
one principal reason of this love, when it says; Nihil odistieorum quae
secisti, and parcis omnibus, Sap. 11.
quia tua sunt, Domine, quidiligis animas. That is; Thou (O Lord) which love
souls, can not hate those things which thou have made, but do use mercy
toward al, for that they are thine. And the like manner of reasoning uses God
1. The first cause why God loves us, for that he is our Creator and we are
his own works. Ezec. 18.
him self when he says by his Prophet Ezechiel; behold, al souls are mine:
and hereupon he infers a little after; Numquid voluntatis meae est mors
impij: Can I have the will to damn a wicked man, seeing that his soul is mine,
created and redeemed by me? as who would say, this were a case against al
order and equity. And the reason of this manner of speech and argument is, for
that every man naturally is inclined to love the things that be of his own
making. So we see that if a man have an orchard wherein be great variety of
trees and plants, yet if there be but one of his own peculier grafting that
florisheth and prospers well; he takes more delight therein, then in any of the
rest, for that it is his own workmanship. So in Every man given to love his
own.
like manner if a man have a vineyard of his own planting and trimming. For
which respect, the holy prophet David, finding him self and the whole kingdom
of Jury in great affliction and calamity: thought no other means so forcible
to draw God to compassion and commiseratio^ of their case, as to cry out to
him in this manner; Thou which gouernest Israel, look toward us Psalm. (...)
and be atte^t: Thou have brought forth a vineyard out of Egypt, thou have
purged the same from Gentiles, and have planted it. Thou o God of al power,
turn toward us, look upon us from heaven, and visit this thy vineyard
which thy own right hand has planted. The like manner of persuasion used the
holy prophet Esaie to move God when he said; look upon Esa.
us I beseech the (o Lord) which are the work of thine own hands.

But above al other, the blessed man Job stands, as it were, in argument and
disputation Job. 1.
with God about this matter, saying; have not thy hands made me? have they The
confidence of Job in that God had made him.
not framed me of clay and earth? have not thou compacted me as cheese is made
of milk? have not thou knit my bones and sinowes together, and covered my
flesh with skin? have not thou given me life, and conserved my spirit with
thy continual protection? how soever thou seem to dissemble these matters and
hide them in thy heart; yet I know that thou reme^brest them al, and are not
unmindful of them. By which words this holy man signified, that albeit God
suffered him greatly to be tempted and afflicted in this life, so far forth,
as he might seem to have forgotten him: yet was he well assured that his divine
Majesty could not of his goodness forsake or despise him, for that he was his
creature and the proper workmanship of his own hands. In which very name of
vvorkemanship, holy David took such great comfort, considering that the
workman can not choose but be loving and favorable toward his own work,
(especially so excellent and bountiful a workman as is almighty God, toward
a work made as man is, to his own shape and likeness:) that in all his
necessities, yea even in his greatest infirmities of flesh, and most grievous
offenses committed against his Majesty, he conceaueth most assured The assured
hope David had in that he was Gods work manship.
hope of mercy and pardon, upon this consideration, that he was his
workmanship; and consequently, well known to his divine wisdom, of how
bricle and infirm a metal he was made. For thus at one time among other, he
reasons of this matter. Look how far distant the east is from Psalm. 102.
the west; so far of has God removed our iniquities from us. Even as a
father does take compassion of his own children; so does our Lord take mercy
upon us: for that he well knows the mould whereof we are made, and does
remember that we are nothing else but dust.

In which discourse the holy Prophet makes mention of two things, that did
assure him of Gods mercy; the one, that God was his Creator and maker, and
thereby privy to the frailty of his constitution and nature: the other that he
was his father, whose property is to have compassion on his children; and this
is a second reason, more strong and forcible perhaps then the former, why
every man The second reason of assurance of Gods love, for that he is our
Father.
may be most assured of pardon that heartily turns unto almighty God;
considering that it has pleased his divine Majesty, not only to be unto man a
creator (as he is to al other things;) but also a father, which is the title
of the greatest love and conjunction, that nature has left to things in this
world. Whereof a certain philosopher said well; that no man could conceive the
love of a parents heart, but he only that had a child of his own. For which
respect, our Savior JESUS to put us in mind of this most fervent love; and
thereby as it were, by one fire to enkendle an other within our hearts; did use
often times and ordinarily, to repeat this Mat. 5. 6. 8. etc.
sweet name of Father in his speeches to his folowers, and thereupon founded
diverse most excellent and comfortable dissourses; as at one time, when he
dehorted them from over much care and worldly solicitude: he adds this
reason; Your father Math. 6.
in heaven knovveth that you have need of these things: as who would say, he
knowi^g your wantes and being your father; you shall not need to trouble
yourselues with too great anxietie in these matters, for that a fathers heart can
not but be prouide^t and careful for his children. The like deduction makes he
in the same place, to the same effect, by comparison of the birds of the air
and other- irreasonable creatures; for which, if God do make (says he) so
abundant provision, as all the whole world may witness that he does: much more
careful will he be to provide for men that are his own children, which are more
dear unto him then any other terrestrial thing created.

Al which speeches and reasons of our Savior, are derived from the nature and
property of a parent, which can not but affect and love his children;
especially such a father whom Christ calls celestial, who in this perfection
of true father ly What a father God is.
love, so far exceeds al earthly parents put together; as in power,
clemency and goodness, almighty God surpasses the infirmity of his feeble
creatures. Such a father, as has not only given life and being unto his
children; but also (as S. Paul Gal. 4.
says) has powered into their hearts the divine spirit of his only eternal
son, stirring them up to most assured confidence and invincible hope, in his
fatherly goodness and protection. And upon assurance of this hope have as well
sinners as Saints from the beginning, fled unto him confidently under this
title of paternitie, and never were deceived. So the prophet Esaie as well in his
own name, as in the name of the sinful people of Israel, doubted not to cry.
Thou art our father; Abraham Esa. 63.
has not known us, and Israel is ignorant of us: Thou, o Lord, art our
father, thou art our redeemer. And to confirm this assurance unto us, Christ
sent that most sweet and comfortable Christ's comfortable em bassage. Joan. 20.
embassage unto his disciples, presently upon his resurrection; Go and tell my
brethren, that I do ascend unto my father and unto your father; unto my God,
and unto your God. By which two words of Father and God, the one of love, and
the other of power; the one of will, the other of ability: he took away al
doubt of not speeding, from each man that should make recourse to this merciful
Lord and Father.

God him self also after many threats used by the prophet Jeremy against the
people of Israel for their sins, in the end, lest they should despair,
turns about his talk, and changes his style, assuring them of many graces
and favors, How greatly the respect of a father moves God. Iere. 31.
if they would return unto him; telling the house of Israel, that he had loved
her from the beginning, and had sought to draw her unto him by threats, to the
end he might take mercy upon her: and that now he intended to build her up
again, to adorn her with joy and exultation, to gather her children from al
corners of the earth; to refresh them with the waters and rivers of life, and
all this (says he,) quia factus sum Israeli pater; for that I am become now a
Father to Israel. And in the same place to wicked Ephraim (the head city of
the rebellious kingdom of Samaria) he says; Ephraim is become my honorable
son, my delicate and dearly beloved child; Iere. 31.
therefore my bowels are moved with compassion upon him, and in abundance of
mercy vvil I take pity of him. So much attributed God to this respect of being
a father unto Israel and Ephraim, and of their being his children; that for
this cause only (notwithstanding their infinite enormous sins) his bowelles of
endless mercy were moved with love and compassion toward them.

And these are those tender merciful bowelles, which holy Zachary father to
Luc. 1.
S. John Baptist, protests to be in almighty God toward mankind that had
offended him. These are those which were vo. 16.
in that good old father mentioned in the Gospel, who being not only offended
but (...) (...) (...) the preal son.
also abandoned by his younger son, yet after he saw him return home again,
notwithstanding he had wasted al his thrist and substance, and had weried out
his body with wicked life: he was so far of from disdaining to receive him; as
he came forth to meet with him, sell upon his neck, and kissed him for joy;
adorned him with new apparel and rich iewelles; provided a solemn banquet for
him; invited his frie^des to be merry with him; and showed more exultation and
triumph for his return, then if he had never departed from him.

By which parable our Saueour JESUS endeavored to set forth unto us, the
incomprehensible mercy of his heavenly Father toward sinners: in which
respect he is truly called by his Apostle pater misericordiarum, the father of
mercies. For 2. Cor. 1.
that (as S. Bernard well notes) this sea and Ocea^ of mercies, does flow
peculiarly from the heart of a father, which can not be said Ber. ser. 5. de
natal.
so properly of the gulf and depth of his judgments. For which cause he is
called Psalm. 35.
in Scripture the God of justice and revenge, and not the Father. And finally
this blessed What the name of Fa there does import.
name of father in God, does import unto us by Gods own testimony, al
sweetenes, al love, al friendship, al comfort; al satherly providence, care, and
protection; al certainty of favor, al assurance of grace, al security of
mercy, pardon, and remission of our sins, whenever unfeignedly we turn
unto him. And in this point his divine Majesty is so foreward and vehement, to
give us assurance; that being not content to set forth his love unto us by the
love of a fathers heart; he goes further, and protests unto us that his heart
is more tender toward us in this behalf, then the heart of any mother can be
to the only child and infant of her own womb. For thus he says to Sion, which
for her sins, began to doubt least he had forsaken her: Can the mother Esa.
49.
forget her ovvainfant, or can she not be merciful to the child of her own
womb? if she could, yet can I not forget or reject thee: behold, I have
written thee in the flesh of my own hands. And this, for so much as God is
called our Father.

There remains yet a third consideration, which more sets forth Gods
inestimable The. 3. argument of Gods love, the geeuing in's son for us.
love, then any of the other demonstrations before handled. And this is, that
he gave the life and blood of his only begotten and eternal son for
purchasing and redeeming us when we were lost; a price so infinite and
inexplicable, as (no doubt) his divine wisdom would never have given, but for
a thing which he had loved above al measure. Which our Savior him self that
was to make the payment, does plainly signify; and therefore also seems, as
it were, to wonder at such a bargain, when he says in the Ghosple; So dearly
has God (my father) loved the Ioh. 3.
world, that he has given for it his only begotten son. In which words he
ascribes this most wonderful dealing of his father; unto the vehemency and
exceeding abounda^ce of love; as does also his dearest disciple and Apostle S.
Sohn, saing; In this appears 1. Ioa. 4.
the great love and charity of God toward us, that he has sent his only
begotten son into the world to purchase life for us. In this (I say) is made
evident his exceeding charity, that we not loving him, he loved us first; and
gave his own son to be a ransom for our sins. Christ was given for love.
Whereunto also the holy Apostle S. Paul agrees, admiring in like manner the
excessive love of God in these words; God Romans 5.
does marvelously commend and set forth, his great love unto us, in that we
being yet sinners, he gave his son to the death for our redemption. And in an
other place framing out, as at were, a measure of Gods mercy by this
abundance of his love; Ephe. 2.
faieth thus. God who is rich in mercy, thorough the exceeding love which he
bore unto us, we being dead in sin, he revived us in Christ, and raised us up
even unto heaven, making us to sit down there with him, to the end he might
declare to al ages and worlds ensuing, the most abundant riches of his grace
and goodness toward us.

This was the opinion of that noble Apostle S. Paul, and of al his coequals,
Apostles Evangelists Disciples and Saints; that this work of our redemption
proceeded only from the inflamed furnace of Gods immeasurable love. And
therefore to The conclusion of this point made by S. Paul. Tit. 3.
make no other conclusion her of then that which S. Paul him self does make: If
God have not spared his own proper and only begotten soon, but has given him
up to death for gaining us unto him: how can it be, that with him he has not
given unto us al other things? If when we were his enemies and thought not
upon him, he Romans 5.
sent to seek us so diligently; by such a messinger as he loved so dearly;
allowing him to lay down a price for us which he so infinitely esteemed: what
shall we think that he will do unto us now; (we being made his own by our
redemption,) if we return willingly unto him; when onr receiving shall cost him
nothing else, but only a merciful look upon us; which is not so much from the
infinite bowels of his botomeles mercy, as is one drop of water from the
most huge gulf of the maine Ocean sea. And this shall suffice for this first
point of Gods love, declared vnro us, by the three most sweet and comfortable
names and respects, of Creator, Father, and Redeemer.

NEXT AFTER WHICH we are to consider in what manner God is accustomed THE. 2.
part.
to express and declare this love of How God expresses his love toward
sinners.
his, in his dealings and proceedi^gs toward sinners. And first of all the wise
man (having had long experience of this matter,) begins to describe and set
it forth in this sort, saing unto God himself: Thou (O Cap. 11.
Lord) do dissemble the sins of men to give unto the^ time of repentance.
And the^ when they will not use this benefit of his forbearing, but will needs
enforce him to punish and correct them; he says further of this correction:
Such as vvilfully do run astraie Cap. 12.
(O Lord) and vvil not turn unto the; thou do correct the^ sweetly by
little and little, admonishing and exhorting them to leave their sins and to
believe in thee. These two points then of exceeding clemency, by the
testimony of the wise man, are found in almighty God: Two rare points of
(...) in God.
first, to wink at the wicked life of men, and to expect their conversion with
inspeakable patience and longanimitie, according as also the Prophet Esaias
bears witness, adioining the cause thereof in these words, Your Lord does
atte^d your conversion, to the end he may take mercy on you, and thereby be
Esa. 30.
exalted. And secondly, for the same respect when he is enforced by reason of
his Justice, to chastise them; yet does he the same with such moderation and
mildnes, as always in this life he reserueth place of pardon.

And to these two we may adioine yet a third property of his mercy, more
admirable (perhaps) then the former; which Tertul. in Apol. ca. 2.
is, (as Tertulian excellently notes,) that he being the party offended, yet
first and principally desires reconsiliation; he having received the wrong and
injury, yet does he most busely entreat for amity and attonment. And whereas
in all right and God that is offended, seeks attonment with us.
equity he might deny us pardon, and for his power take revenge of us at his
pleasure: yet does he not only offer us peace of his own accord; but also
sueth unto us by all means possible to accept thereof, humbling (in a certain
manner) his divine Majesty to our baseness and vilitie; and behauing him self in
this respect, as a prince that were inamoured of his bondslaue and abject
servant.

This might be declared by many of his own speeches and doings in holy
Scripture; but one place out of the Prophet Esaie shall serve for all: where
almighty God so earnestly wooeth the conversion of Jerusalem, as no lover in
the world could utter more signs and testimonies of a heart inflamed and set on
fire with love, then he does toward that city which so highly had offended
him. For first after Gods vvooing of Jerusalem.
many threats poured out against her, if she did not return; lest she might
perhapps fall into despair; he makes this protestation in the beginning of his
speech: Indignatio non est mihi etc. Angry I am not (o Jerusalem,) but what
soever I have (...). 27.
spoken, I have spoken of good will and love. Secondly, he enters into this
dispute His protestation.
and doubt with him self about punishing her for her sins; what shall I do?
Shall I tread her under my feet and put her to the fiar? or else vvil she stay
my puissant hand and His cunctation.
make peace with me, vvil she (I say) make attonment with me? After which
doubt and cunctation; he resolves him self to change his manner of style, and
to fall a little to chide with her, and then says: harken O ye deaf
inhabitants of Jerusalem; look about you, ye blind His chiding
folk that vvil not see: who is blind and deaf but my servant, that vvil not
regard or listen to the messingers which I send? O thou which have open
ears, vvilt thou not hear? And then a little after, he begins to smooth and
speak fair again, saing: Ever since thou have been His fair speech.
gracious and glorious in mine eyes, I have loved the; and for thy soul vvil I
give whole nations. Fear not, for that I am with the. Wherewith she being
little or nothing moved, he returns to a sweet manner of complaint, saing:
Thou have enthralled me by thy sins, and with His complaint.
thine iniquities thou have greatly afflicted me. Which being said, and she
somewhat won thereby to love him, as it seems: he turns unto her with this
most comfortable and kind speech; I am he, I am he, which cancelleth thine
iniquities for mine own His kind speech.
sake, and vvil never think any more upon thy sins.

Al which being done, and they now reconciled, and made fast friends together:
his divine Majesty begins a very loving conference (as it were) and sweet
expostulation with her, saing in these words: Cai thou to memory the things
that are His conference.
past, and let us judge our selves here together. Tell me if thou have any thing
vvherby thou may be iustefied. Thy first parent was a sinner etc. Whereat
she being ashamed, and having nothing in the world to answer for her self:
almighty God comfort her, and knitteth up the whole matter in this most His
svveet conclusion.
kind and amiable sort. Fear not, for I will power out my spirit upon the and
upon thy seed, and my benediction shall be upon thine offspring; thy children
shall budde up and flourish as willoes planted by the water side; Thus says the
Lord and king of Israel, the Lord of hosts that is thy redeemer; I am the
first and the last, and besides me there is no other God. Be mindful of this
thou house of Jacob, I have dissolved and dissipated thy sins, as a cloud is
dissolved in the air; be mindful of this and have an assured confidence. Thus
far continues the treaty between God and his city of Jerusalem.

And now tell me (dear Christian brother) whether it be possible for any heart A
consideration upon the former treaty of God with Jerusalem.
or tongue in the world, to conceive or express more ways or significations
of most vehement good will and burning affection, then of Gods part in this
treaty has been declared? What lover or enamoured person upon earth, what
passionate heart could woo more earnestly, sue more diligently, solicit more
artificially, complain more pitifully, expostulate more amiablie, confer
more intrinsically, remit offenses more redely, offer benefits more
abundantly, conclude more sweetly, and give more pregnant testimonies of
unfeigned love, or more assured certainty of eternal league and amity, the^
does almighty God unto this nation that so grieuouslie had offended him? who
will not confess now with the prophet David, that svveet and merciful is our
Lord, and his miserations above all the rest of his mast wonderful Psalm. 144.
works. Who will maruail, if the same prophet made a vow, that his
everlasting Psalm. 16.
song should be of the mercies of this his Lord and maker?

But yet this thing is made much more Gods tender love to Hicrusale^ when he
was to destroy it.
apparent, by that which his divine Majesty did afterward to the same people
in the days of Jeremy the prophet (above an hundredth years after this
treaty in the time of Esaie;) at what time God being resolved to destroy them
and their city, for their obduration in their sins; when the hour of
execution drew near, his bowels of mercy were so touched with commiseratio^
toward them, as he called to Jeremy, and commanded him once again to go
up to the temple gate where all the people did pass in and out, and there with a
loud voice to cry as follows. Hear ye the word of God, o Iere. 7.
al you of Judah, that do pass in and out by these gates; thus says the Lord
of hosts, the God of Israel: yet do you amend your ways, and I will dwell in
this place with you. etc. And when this exhortation, and blessed endeavor of
almighty God could not move or profit them any thing at al: then his
unspeakable goodness began with sharp threats in this manner; My fury and
indignation is gathered Iere. 7.
together upon this city; and upon the inhabitants, and upon the very beasts
and cattle thereof, as also upon the fruit and trees of this region. The
carcases of this people, shall be food to the birds of the air, and to the
beasts of the filde; their enemies shall come and cast forth Iere. 8.
of their sepulchers, the bones of the kings and princes of Judah; the bones of
their priests prophets and inhabitants; and shall dry them at the sun, and
cast them out unto the dunghill. After al which long and dreadful co^mination,
he alters his speech presentelie again, and says with a very lamentable and
pitiful voice. And A pitiful complaint.
vvil not he that is fallen (notvvithstanding all this) rise up again? VVil not
be that is departed from me, return unto me again? O, why does my people
run from me so obstinately?

By which loving complaint, and infinite other means of mercy that God The
wonderful proceeding of God with Jerusalem.
used to that people, when no amendment at al could be procured: his divine
Majesty was enforced to call Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon before the walls
of Jerusalem, to destroy it. But even now also consider the bowels of his
unspeakable mercy. For hoping that by this terror they might perchance be
stirred up to conversion; he sent Jeremy the prophet to them again, with this
embassage: tell the inhabitants of Jerusalem; vvil ye not yet receive
discipline and obey my words? Iere. 35.
Whereat those graceles people were so little moved, as they took Jeremy and
cast him into prison for his message, and thereby exasperated most grieuoulie
Gods further indignation against them. Notwithstanding al which, his
incomprehensible clemency would not thus abandon them; but commanded holy
Jeremy to Iere. 36.
write out al his threats and promises in a book together, and to send the
same unto them, forth of the prison where he lay, by his servant Baruch, to be
read in their hearing; and so he did. Whereof when Ioacim the king had
understanding; he commanded Baruch to be brought into his presence, and there to
read the book by the fire side, as the Scripture notes. And when he had heard
but three or four pages thereof, he cut them out with a pen knif, The
obstinacy of the Iuish nation.
and threw the whole book into the fire, and so consumed it. At which
obstinat and impious dealing, albeit almighty God were extremely offended; yet
commanded he this same book to be indicted and written again, in much more
ample manner then before, thereby (if it had been possible) to have stirred up
and gained that people unto him. But when this by no means in the world could
be brought to pass; then permitted his divine Majesty, the whole city to be
destroyed, according to his former threate, and that rebellious people to be
lead away captive in bondage to Babylon. In which place and misery
(notwithstanding their demerites) his infinite mercy could not for sake them,
but sent his prophet Ezechiel, as also Baruch unto them, with extreme complaint
of Eze. 23.
their obduration; and yet offering unto the^ mercy and pardon even the^, if
they would repent.

And what more wonderful clemency then this, can possibly be imagined dear
Christian brother? May in reason any man ever now enter into doubt or despair
of Gods mercy, how great and grievous soever the burden of his sins Ezec. 2.
Epithetons given by God to the people of Israel.
be, when he considers this proceeding of his eternal Majesty with the
people of Israel, for so many years and ages together; whom him self calls
notwithstanding, Gentem Apostatricem dura facie and indomabili cord; an
apostatical nation of a shameless countenance and incorrigible disposition? Can
God devise any more effectual and forcible means, to erect and animate a sinner
confidently to return unto him, then are these? And yet (gentle reader) for thy
further confort and encouragement in this behalf, I will adioine one thing more,
which does exceed and pass al reason and reach of humane imagination; and
this is, that God promises to a A vvo^derful point.
sinner that faithfully will return unto him, not only to forget and utterly
extinguishe al memory of his former iniquities; but also to make more joy and
triumph at his conversion, and to love and cherishe him more tenderly at his
return; then if he had never fallen or departed from his service.

This God him self signifies by the Prophet Esaias when he says: call unto
Jerusalem; Esa. 40.
speak unto her heart; (that is, comfortably:) for that her iniquity is for
given; she has What joy theris made at a sumers conversion. Esa. 30.
received dubble at Gods hands for all her sins committed. And more plainly
in an other place by the same Prophet; the light of the moon shall be as the
light of the sun; and the light of the son shall be as the light of seven
days, seven times put together, when God shall bind up the wounds of his
people and heal their fores. And to this purpose do appertain directelie
those most wonderful parables of our Saueour in the Ghospel, concerning the
extraordinary joy and feasting that Luc. 15.
the careful woman made when she had found again her grote that was lost; and
the good Shepherd, when he brought back the sheep that was astray; and the
merciful father when he received home his son that before had aba^doned him.
And to the same purpose does it also appertain, that in the Prophet David God
Psalm. 57.
glories especially in the service of those people, that before had not known
him. And this shall suffice for this second point, to show, what wonderful
means almighty God does use, in setting forth his mercy for allurement of
sinners unto repentance.

AND SO HAVING declared what THE. 3. part. WHAT assurance God gives to them
that repent.
exceeding great love and mercy God bears toward man, and how effectually
he expresses the same by his sueing unto sinners for their conversion: it
follows that we should in this third place examine some what more in
particular, what certain assurance his divine Majesty gives, of undoubted
pardon and full remission of their sins, to al such as unfeignedly shall
resolve them selves to make their refuge unto him. Which thing, albeit every
man by that which before has been treated, may sufficiently conceive: yet for
the importance of the matter, it shall not be amiss in this place also to add
a word or two, for more plain and evident demonstration thereof. And this shall
be done by setting down both the words and deeds, that is, both the
promises and perfourma^ce which almighty God has used and excercised in this
behalf, to al such as have offended him whatsoever.

And for the first, which are his promises; most apparent it is, as well by the
things which before have been discussed, The promises of God to sinners that
repent.
as also by the whole course, body, and drift of holy scripture; that the
promises of mercy and pardon which his divine Majesty has made to sinners,
and whereunto by his sacred word, he has (in a certain manner) obliged him
self; are both manifold, vehement, absolute, resolute and universal. Who so
ever shall depart from his Ezec. 18. 33. 34. 37.
wicked vvayes, and turn unto me, (says almighty God) I vvil receive him.
Behold the universality of al people and persons, without excluding any. And
then further; At what day soever an impious man shall return unto me from his
impiety; his wickedness shall not hurt him; says the same L. God, of hosts:
see the universality of al times and seasons without exception. But yet harken
what God adds besides. Leave of to do peruerselie, (says he to the Jews
etc.) and then do you come and find fault with me, if you Esa. 1.
can. For if your sins vvher as red as skarlet, they shall be made as white
as snow. etc. Consider the universality of al kind of sins, be they never
so grievous, so horrible or heinous. And finally, God talking to a soul that
has oftentimes fallen and most infinitely offended him; he says thus: it is
Iere. 3.
a common received speech that if a woman depart from her husband, and do join
her self to an other man; she may not return to her first husband again, for
that she is defiled, and made contaminate. And yet whereas thou have departed
from me, and have committed fornication with many other lovers; do thou
return unto me again, and I will receive the, says almighty God.

By which words is expressed the fowerth universality, containing al states,
qualities, and conditions of men; how many ways, or how oftentimes, or how
contemptuously soever, they have committed sins against his divine Majesty.
And what may be added now more unto this? was there ever prince that made so
large an offer unto his subjects? or was there ever father that gave so ample
and universal promise of pardon unto his children? Who can now mistrust him
self to Four universalities in Gods promises to sinners.
be excluded from this assurance of mercy, wherein al sorts of people, al
kinds of sins, al times and seasons, al states and qualities of sinners are
comprehended? O most miserable and unfortunate man that excludes him self,
whom God excludes not. What is there in this general and universal promises,
whereof any man in the world should have pretense, to make any least doubt or
question? Of the meaning (perhapes) and intent of him that promises? O dear
brother, it is only love and tharitie; and consequently, can not deceive us.
Of the truth and suertie of his promises? It is infallible; and more certain
then heaven and earth put together. Of the power that he has to perform
Three points of great comfort.
his promise? It is infinite, and not restrained by any bounds or limitation:
whereof the^ may we doubt? or in which of these three points may we not conceive
most singular consolation? hear the comfortable meditation, that blessed S.
Bernard made upon these three particulers which we have now mentioned. Tria
considero (says he) in quibus tota spes mea consistit; charitatem Bern. ser.
in verb. Psalm. misericordia Domini in aeter. cantab.
vocationis, veritatem promissionis, potestatem redditionis. etc. That is, I
do consider three things (says this holy man) wherein al my hope consists,
and whereby it is made invincible. First, the exceeding love and charity of
him, that calls me to him by repentance; secondly, the infallible truth and
certainty of his promise which he makes to me of pardon and mercy; thirdly,
the endless power and ability he has to perform whatsoever he promises.
This is that triple or threefold rope and chain, which holy scripture says
is Eccle. 4.
hardly broken: for that by this rope, let done unto us from heaven which is
our contrie, into this world, that is our prison; we may ascend and mount up
(if we will) even unto the sight and possession of Gods eternal kingdom and
heaue^lie glory. Thus far that blessed father.

But now to the second point; if we consider how faithfully almighty God
How God has persourmed his promises, to sinners that have repented.
has put in execution those promises of his from time to time, and how no one
man upon earth, (so many ages as the world has continued) was ever yet
frustrate of his hope, in making his conversion unto his Majesty, if he made
it from his heart: we shall find further cause for us to confide. For so much as
it is not probable, or i^ reason to be imagined; that he which never failed in
times past, will break his promise for the time to come; especially seeing now
in Christianity, when we have this advantage above other former times (as S.
John does also note,) that he who was 1. Ioa. 2.
and is our judge, is become also our aduouocat to plead our cause.

Cast back thine eyes then my loving dear brother, and take a view of al ages
times and seasons past and gone. Begin from the first creation of the world,
and come donneward even unto this day; and examine indifferently whether in all this wide compass of times, persons, places and Never sinner repented that
was not pardoned.
most grievous offenses committed against his divine Majesty, there were ever
yet any one sinner upon earth, that returned unsay nedlie and was not received.
The sin of our first parents, was presentelie forgeuen Genesis 3.
unto them, upon their first signification of grief and sorrow for the same.
And not only this, but our Saueour also Adam and Eve.
Jesus Christ was promissed to be sent, for restoring them and their posterity
to the glory and felicity, which by their fall they had lost. After this,
until the time of Abraham and of the people of Israel, as some works of Gods
justice are recorded in holy writ, that were excercised upon irrepentant
offenders: so are there many more celebrated of his mercy; and only two
persons in particular are mentioned, who notwithstanding some sorrow which they
seemed to have of their offenses, were yet rejected; the first The reicetion of
Cain and Esau.
whereof was the murderer Cain, who at the beginning denied his wickedness unto
God; and then being convicted, despaired of remission. The second was Esau,
whom S. Paul calls a profane fornicator; who found no place of repe^ta^ce,
albeit Heb. 12.
with tears he sought the same. Whereof S. Chrysostom gives the reason in
Chris. hom. 80. de paenit. ad pop. Antio.
these words: For this cause Esau obtained not pardon, for that he did not
repent as he should have done; his tears proceeding rather of anger and
temptation, then of true sorrow.

When the people of Israel came to be a distinct nation, and to be governed at
Gods appointement: how greeuouslie (trow you) did they offend day lie, and
almost howerlie his divine Majesty? And how graciously did his unspeakable
clemency remitt and pardon their manifold and innumerable sins and
trespasses done against him? The whole scripture (in truth) The infinite sins
of the Iuishe people and their infinite pardons received from God.
seems nothing else, but a perpetual narration of Gods incredible patience and
infinite mercies toward them. And if I would speak of particular persons
among them, which he received to his favor after great and manifold offenses
committed; there would be no end of that recital. Let Manasses that most impious
and wicked king, be an example for all; of whose The example of Manasses
enormous life and most detestable acts, whole pages are replenished, both in
the 4. Reg. 21 2. Par. 33.
books of kings and Chronicles; and yet afterward notwithstanding, the same
man falling into misery and calamity among the Babylonians, (a fortunate
school oftentimes for Princes, who in their prosperity are wont to contemn
God,) he began to be sorrowful for his former life and actions; and to do great
penance (as the scripture says) in the sight of God, for the same. Whereat his
divine and incomprehe^sible mercy was so much moved presently, as he received
him to favor, and brought him back from his prison and fetters, to his
kingdom and imperial throne of Majesty.

The example also of the Ninevites is very notable and singular in this behalf:
against The example of the Ninevites.
whom almighty God having decreed a sentence of death, to be executed within a
certain time; he commanded Jonas the Ion. 1. 2. 3. 4.
prophet to go and denounce that sentence unto them. But Jonas well knowing the
nature and disposition of God toward mercy; forsaw (as afterward he
signifies) that if he should go and bear that embassage unto them, and they
thereupon make change of there lives; his Majesty would presently pardon them,
and so he should be taken for a false and lying prophet. For avoiding which
inconvenience, he chose rather to flee away by sea to the city of Tharsis, and
there to hide himself. But almighty God raised a tempest in that journey, and
disposed in such sort, as Jonas was cast into the sea, and there received and
devoured by a whale; from whose belly he was commanded afterward to repair to
Niniue, and to do his former message; which he performed. And the tenor of
his message was, that within forty days that huge city of Niniuie should be
destroyed. Which he having denounced unto them: the sequel fell out, as Jonas
before had suspected. For the Ninevites believing the message, and betaking
them selves to repentance, God forgave them presently; whereat Jonas was
exceedingly grieved and offended, and complained sweetly to God of his
strange dealing herin, demanding why he had enforced him to come and preach
destruction unto them, knowing well before hand, that he would pardon them. But
his merciful Lord answered him fully to this point, by a certain accident
that fell out, whereto Jonas was not able to reply one word.

For so it chanced, that Jonas sitting without the walls of Niniuie, under an
Iuie bush, that in one night by Gods appointment was spro^g up to cover him
from the sun: the same Iuie by Gods ordinance perished upon the sudden, and
was consumed by a worm, leaving the poor prophet destitute of that
consolation of shadoe which he received by it. Wherewith he being not a little
disquieted and afflicted; Consider this speech of almighty God. Ion 23. 4.
God said unto him; thou (Jonas) art sorrowful, and much grieved for loss of
thine Iuie tree, which not withstanding thou did not plant nor make to
grow, nor tookest any labor at al about it. But the same grew up in one night,
and in one night it perished again. And shall not I then, be careful to pardon
my great city of Niniuie, wherein there be above an hundred and twenty
thousand innocent people, which can not distinguish between their right hand
and their left? This was the answer of almighty God to Jonas, for defense of
his singular inclination to mercy, in respect that the Ninevites were his own
creatures, his own workmanship, and the labors of his own hands, as al other
people also are. Of which kind of reason, and consideration, there have been
diverse things said and declared In the first part of this chapter.
before, for manifestation of Gods infinite mercy. And all this that hitherto
has been spoken, is of things only done in time of the old testament,
before the appearance of Christ our Saueour in flesh.

But now if we look into the time of grace, when God incarnate came him self
Examples of mercy in the new testament.
in person, to show the riches of his endless mercy unto mortal men upon earth:
we shall see more examples without comparison, of this exceeding clemency. For
that now, our Creator and shepherd overcome (as it were) with extreme
compassion came down into the vale of our misery, with resolution not only to
offer pardon and forgeuenes to al his sheep that were a stray and would
return; but Luc. 15.
also to follow and seek them out; and being found, to lay them on his own
shoulders, and so to bear them back unto the fold again, and there to give
his life and blood for their defense against the wolf. O sweet Lord, what
greater love ca^ be imagined Joan. 10. and 11.
then this? what more pregnant signification of inflamed charity, can man's
cogitation conceive or apprehend? is it marvel now if he which descended unto
us with this heart, and with these bowels of burning affection, did set open the
gates of al his treasures, favors, and graces unto us? Is it marvel if the
holy apostle S. Paul do say of this time, Superabundauit gratia, that grace
did over abound: and yet Romans 5.
further in an other place; that Christ being very God, did in a certain sort
impouerish and empty him self, with the Phil. 2.
most wonderful effusion of mercies and hauoke of heaven, which at this time
and ever since he has made?

Herehence it proceeded that al his delight and pleasure upon earth, was to
converse The wonderful cleme^cie of Jesus our Savior.
with sinners, and to geeue them comfort, courage, and confidence in him. Which
he did so manifestly, in the sight of all the world; as he was very scandalous
and offensive thereby to the Scribes and Pharisees, and other principal rulers
among the Math. 9. and 11. Marc. 2. Luc. 5.
Iuish nation. Herehence also did proceed those his most maruailous speeches and
strange inuitations of wicked men unto him; as for example at one time among
other, when he cried out in public; Come unto me al ye that do labor and be
heavy laden, and I well refresh you. And at an other Math. 11.
time, going into the temple of Jerusalem upon a high festiual day, when all the
people were gathered together: he stood up in the midst of them al, and brake
forth into this vehement inuitation, with a loud voice, as S. John Evangelist
records; if any man among you, be thirsty; let him Joan. 7.
come unto me, and he shall drink. Hereby it came to pass, that his divine
Majesty was termed commonly, Publicanorum and peccatorum Mat. 11.
am cus; The friend and familiar of wicked Publicans and sinners. And hereof
finally it did proceed, that he received al, embraced al, and forgave all that
repaired unto him; were they Scribes, Pharisees, Souldiars, Publicans, Vserers,
Harlotes, Thieves, Persecutours, or whatsoever most grievous offenders
besides; (whereof particular examples in each kind might be alleged:) assuring
us furthermore, that after his resurrection and blessed ascensio^ to the right
hand of his father, he would be more bountiful yet in this manner of proceeding,
and dravv al unto him self: being Joan. 12.
at one time both our Judge and Aduocat, our king and Mediator, our God and
Redeemer, our Father and brother, our Priest and Sacrifice, and he that both
pleads and determines our cause together.

What then should not we hope at this time (dear Christian brother) at the
hands Great and many causes of assured hope in JESUS.
of this our Lord and Master, which has left unto us such words, such
deeds, such assured euidencies of his infallible love and abundant mercies
toward us? why should not his dealinges with other men before us, geeue us
heart and courage to confide assuredlio in him, for the time present and to come?
why should not his former most infinite mercies, be unto us oderiferous alluring
savors and oyntmentes, to make us as the spouse did in the Canticles, follow
and run after Cant. 1.
him? Hear what devout S. Bernard does meditate upon this passage of Christ's
Bern. ser. 5. in Cant.
fragrant ointmentes. O sweet Jesus (says he) the fresh and oderiferous smell
of thie wonderful clemency does allure us to run after the, when we hear
say, that thou despisest not beggars, nor abhorrest sinners. We know right
well (o Lord) that thou did not reject the thief that confessed thee, nor
the sinful woman that wept upon thee, nor the Chananaean that humbled her self
before thee, not the wicked adulteress brought unto thee, nor the toullar or
tribut gatherer that followed thee, nor the publican that repaired unto thee,
nor the disciple that denied thee, nor Saul that did persecute thee, nor thie
tormentours that did nail thie sacred body upon the cross. O Lord, al these
are fragrant smells and savors of thie most sweet mercy; and at the sent of
these thie ointmentes, we do follow and run after thee. Thus far S. Bernard.

AND SO WITH THIS to come THE. 4. part. The application of all that has been
said.
to the fourth and last part of this chapter, and to apply all that has been
said of Gods mercy, to our present purpose; What man is there living in the
world, that reading and believing these things, can doubt or mistrust to
receive pardon for his sins? If God be he that justifies; who is able to
condemn us, says the holy Apostle Romans 8.
S. Paul? If God be minded to deliver us, who can take us out of his hands? If
God protest that he will pardon us, why should Ioa. 10.
we make any doubt or question thereof at al? Why should not we join rather
with that confident and faithful servant of his S. Paul, who says unto us and
to al other sinners living, in his masters name; let us repair unto him with
a true heart in fulness of faith, having Heb. 10.
purged our hearts from an evil conscience; let S. Paul's exhortation to
confidence.
us hold fast an immouable confession of our hope, seeing he is faithful which
has given unto us his promis, and let us consider how one of us may provoke
an other to charity and good works. By which words the holy Apostle
signifies, that what sinner soever shall resolve with him self to purge his
conscience from wickedness for the time to come, and to employ the rest of life
in charetie and good works: he may confidently and boldly repair unto
almighty God, with most certain assurance to receive pardon and remission.
And alas (dear brother) why then should any man despair? wherefore should any
man cast away his own soul, that God so much desires to save? what a pitiful
and lamentable case is it, to behold so many Christians in the world to go
languishing in there sins, and to give the^ selves over to al kind of careless
and dissolute sensuality (which by God him self is called desperation,) upon
this conceit and wicked cogitation, that now they are gone so far, and so
deeply rooted and habituated in this kind of life, as either it is impossible
or in vain for them now, to think of change or amendements O dear Brother,
let these men harken to this excellent discourse of holy Chrysostom, which
ensues.

If thou be a wicked man (says he,) think upon the Publicane. If thou be
unclean of life, consider the harlot. If An excellent discourse and
exhortation of S. Chrysostom. liom. 2. in Psalm. 50.
thou be a murderer, remember the thief. If thou be a swearer, call to mind the
Blasphemer. Cast thine eyes upon Saul and Paul, first a persecutour, and then a
preacher; first a violent robber, afterward a good steward and Dispenser: First
chafe, afterward corn: first a wolf, afterward a sheppard; first lead, after
gould: first a pirate, afterward a good pilot: first a dispersour, afterward a
gatherer; first a breaker down of Gods vineyard, afterward a pla^ter: first a
destroier, afterward a builder. Thou have seen manifold wickedness; but now
behold unspeakable mercy. Thou have heard the pride of the servant; consider
now the love and clemency of the Master. I will not thou say to me, I am a
blasphemer, I have been a persecutour, I have lead an unclean and abominable
life, and therefore I doubt lest I shall not have pardon; Say not so unto me,
for here thou have examples to the contrary, in every of these and many other
sins. Thou may safely fly to what port thou list, and that either in the
old or new Testament. For in the old thou have David, in the new thou have
Paul. I will not have the therefore allege excuses unto me, for covering thine
own cowardnes. Have thou sinned, do penance: have thou sinned a thousand
times, repent a thousand times unfeignedly. This is the only ointment that may
be poured in to an afflicted conscience, the torment whereof I do well know.
For the Devil stands by, whetting his The speech of the devil. to a sonle
laden with sum.
sword of desperation and saing unto the; Thou have lived wickedly al thy
youth, and thy former years thou have misspent; thou have hanted plays and
spectacles with thy companions, and have followed after louse and lascivious
women; thou have taken other men's goods from them wrongfully; thou have been
covetous, dissolute, and effeminate: thou have foresworne thy self; thou have
blasphemed and committed many other heinous and enormous crimes, and therefore
what hope can thou have of salvation? Truly none at al. Thou art a mere
castawie, and can not now go back; and therefore my counsel is, that now
thou use the pleasures and commodities of this world, and pass over thy time
in mirth of heart, without cogitation of other affairs.

These are the words of the Devil (loving brother:) These are the counsels and
persuasions of our enemy. But mine are contrary. If thou have fallen, thou
may S. Chrysostoms counsel against the devils temptation.
rise again: If thou have been a lost companion, yet thou may be saved. If
thou have committed fornication and adultery in time past; thou may be
continent for the time to come. If thou have hanted plays and games; thou
may draw back thy foot from hence forth. If thou have delighted in lewd
and evil company; thou may herafter acquaint thy self with good. Thou have
free will to choose either part. This only is necessary; that thou begin thy
conversion out of hand, and that thou repent and take in hand to reform thy
self, though it be at the first but a little. Let thine eyes begin but to shed
forth one tear; enter into thy conscience; consider thy self but
indifferently; examine thine actions and what they deserve; lay before thy face
the day of Judgment with the torments of hell on the one side, and the joys of
heaven on the other. Repent, confess, amend thy life, seek a medicine for thy
wound, out of hand while thou art in this life, in what state or condition
soever thou be. Yea if thou be upon thy deathbed, and ready to breath out thy
soul No time to late to repent.
and spirit; fear not to repent, for that Gods mercy is not restrained by the
shortness of time. Which I speak unto you (my dear brethren) not to make you
hereby the more negligent, but only to stir you up to the confidence of Gods
mercy, and thereby to avoid the most dangerous gulf of desperation. Hitherto
are the words of this holy and learned Father.

In which long and large discourse of his, we are to note, that (together with
most excellent encoragement which he gives to al sinners of what state and
condition soever they be, in all times and seasons to confide in Gods mercy,
and never to despair;) he gives also an wholesome admonishment, that we should
not by this confidence become more necligent in reforming our lives, but rather
do it out of hand, without al delay or procrastinatio^. Whereunto in like manner
the holy father S. Augustine in a like exhortation against despair, does
endeavor most vehemently An exhoritation and ad monition of S. Augustine. Ser.
58. de temp.
to stir us up in these words: Let no man after a hundred sins, nor after
a thousand, despair of Gods mercy; but yet so let him not despair, as he
seek presently without al stay, to reco^cile him self to God by amendment of
life; least perhaps after that by custom he has gotten a habit of sin, he
be not able to deliver him self from the snares of the Devil, albeit he would.

And in the very same sermon he discourses yet further of the same matter, in
manner following. Not every man that has sinned, but he that perseuereth in
sin, is hateful and abominable in the sight of God. For that no man must
distrust of Gods mercy toward him that will amend and leave his sins. For
that God him self as a most sweet comforter has said by his Prophet, that the
impiety of a Eze. 11. 33
wicked man shall not hurt him, at what day soever he shall turn from the
same. But yet this great mercy of our Lord, is the^ only profitable unto us;
if we delay not our conversion, nor do multiply sins upon sins. Which I
will declare unto you by the example of wounds and ruptures of our body, by
which the infirmities also of our mind and soul may be conceived.

Thus then we see, if a ma^s foot, leg, or arm be broken; with how great
pain A similitud of the body, to express the miscrie of the soul, by
multiplying sin.
the same is restored to his accustomed strength. But if any member of our body
should be broken twice, or three times, or more often in one and the self same
place: your charity ca^ imagine, how hard a thing it were for that part to
recover her perfect health again. So fares it (dear brethren) in the wounds
and ruptures of our soul. If a man do commit sin once or twice, and do
vnsainedly without dissimulatio^ make his refuge to the medicine of pera^ce; he
does out of hand obtain health again, and that sometimes without any skar or
blemish of the disease past. But if he begin to add sins upon sins in such
sort, that the wounds of his soul do rather putrify within him by covering
and defending them, then heal by repentance and confession: it is to be
feared, least that heavy speech of the Apostle be fulfilled in him, to whom he
says; do thou Romans 2.
not know, that the benignity of God is used to bring thee to repentance? but
thou by the obdurate and irrepe^tant heart, do heap to thy self wrath, in
the day of vengeance and of the revelation of Gods just judgment. Thus far S.
Augustine.

But now (dear Christian brother) what can be spoken more effectually, either
to (...) us to hope and confidence in Gods mercy, (...) (...) (...)
presumption in delaying our amendment, the^ here has been uttered by these
noble pillars, and fathers of Christ's Church, and most excellent instruments
and temples of his holy Spirit? The divine wisdom Codlie man words ought to
move us greatly. Eccle. 12.
of almighty God i a certain place says, that the words of wise men, ought
to be spurs unto us, and as it were nails, driven into the depth of our
hearts: meaning thereby, that we should be stirred up and most vehemently
moved, when we hear such wise men as the holy Ghost there means (which in
deed are only they that have the knowledge and true fear of God,) make such
exhortations unto us, and ue us such holsom admonishmentes, as these godly
fathers in this great affair have done. And how is it then (dear brother)
that we are nothing stirred up thereby, nothing quickened, nothing awaked? Well;
I will conclude this whole chapter and treatise with an other exhortation and
admonition of S. Augustine; for that besides the grave authority of the man
(which ought to move us much) I think nothing can be spoken more excellently,
or more agreeing to our peculiar purpose. Thus then he says.

Almighty God does never despise the repentance of any man, if it be offered
unto him sincerely and simply: nay, he accepts A notable discourse of S.
Augustine touching our conversion. Ser. 181. de temp.
the same most willingly, embraces the penitent, and endeuoreth to reduce him
to his former state wherein he was before he fell. And that which is yet more;
if a man be not able to fulfill the whole order of his satisfaction; yet does
not. God refuse the least penance that is, though it be do^ne in never so short
a space. Neither does he suffer the reward to perish of any little conversion.
And this does the prophet Esaie seem to me to signify, when Esa. 54.
he faith in Gods person to the people of Israel: I have contristed thee a
little for thy sin; I have stricken thee and have turned my face from thee:
thou have been sad and have walked in sorrow, and I have comforted thee again.
These examples then of penance (dear brethren) we having before our eyes; let
us not persevere in our wickedness, nor despair of reconciliatio^, but rather
let us say with a confide^t heart: we will turn home to our father, and present
our selves unto our God; for truly (my brethren) he will never turn away from
the man, that turns unto him. Himself has said that he is a God that draws
Esa. 19.
nere unto us, were it not that our sins do make a separation betwixt him
and us. Let us take away then the separation and obstacle, and so nothing shall
let our conjunction with him, which he greatly desires. For to this end did he
create us, that he might bestow upon us eternal bliss in his kingdom of
heaven. He did not make us for hell, but he made Hell not made for man. Mat. 25.
his kingdom for us, and hell for the devil. So he says in the Gospel; Come ye
blessed of my father, enjoy the kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of
the world. And to the damned; Depart from me ye accursed into everlasting fire
which is prepared for the devil and his angels. If then hell fire was prepared
for the Devil and the kingdom of heaven for man, from the beginning of the
world; it remains only that we provide; not to loose our inheritance by
persisting in sin. So long as we are in this life, how In this life al
penance is auailable but not after.
many or great soever our sins may be, it is possible to wash them away by
penance: but when we shall be once departed from this world, albeit then we do
repent, (as no doubt but we shall from the bottom of our hearts,) yet shall it
avail us nothing. And albeit our teeth do gnash, our mouth, cry out, our eyes
gush forth in tears, and our hearts lament with innumerable complaints and
supplications: yet shall no man hear us, no man assist us, nor so much as with
the tip of his fingar, give unto us a drop of water to cool our tongue amiddest
her torments; but we shall receive that lamentable answer which the rich
glotton received at the mouth of Abraham: There is between us and you a great
distance, so that none may pass from us to you, nor from you to us. Hitherto
lasts S. Augustins exhortation.

THE SECOND LET OF RESOLVTION, WHICH IS, THE SVPPOSED hardness and asperitie of
virtuous life. The fallacy vvherof is discovered, and the manisoid helps
declared, that do make the same most easy, svveet, and pleasaent. CHAPT. II.
The everlasting and irreconciliable enemy of our heaue^lie bliss and
salvation, having received by the former reasons and considerations of Gods
i^finit goodness, a very strong encounter and contradiction against his first
and greatest assault of desperation; (him self also being enforced to confess,
though with endless greef and envy, that Two assaults of our ghostly enemy.
the mercy of almighty God is without measure toward man:) he retireth him
self back many times from the pursuit thereof, (i such especially as have yet
some time to live in this world, and seem not to be near unto their ending
days,) and takes in hand a more calm and easy enterprice, (as it may
appear,) persuading such sinners as he can not bring to despair, that at
least wise they stand aloose and hold themselves of from al resolution, to put
in ure and exercise the precepts of Christian life, for that they are hard,
unsavory, painful, and troblesom; full of melancholy and sadness; void of
comfort, good felooship, and dilection; opposite to al mirth contentation and
joy; subject to continual affliction and vexatio^ of mind; and finally not
supportable to such bodies, such minds, such education, such custom, such
course of life as theirs are.

This is an ordinary slight and practice of our adversary; which he makes
to seem so sweet and plaucible, by certain ointmentes that he adioineth of
flattery, to our sensuality: that most men of the world do receive this
persuation for sound council and perfect wisdom, esteeming al other either
simple or sottish, or at least wise far inferior in judgment and discretion to
them selves, that do embrace or persuade the contrary. By which means it
comes to pass, that this second point of hardness and difficulty in virtuous
life, is a very great, strong, ordinary, and universal impediment, that
lets infinite souls, from embracing the means of their salvation; and
consequently, not to be passed over in this place without full examination and
perfect answer.

First then albeit we should suppose, that the way of virtue were so hard in
1. If virtuous life were hard, yet vvorthie the labor.
deed, as the enemy would make it seem; yet might I well say with S. John
Chrisostom, that seeing the reward is so great and infinite as before we have
declared: no labor should seem great for gaining of the same. Again, I might
say with holy S. Augustine; Lib. de co^punct. cordis. Hom. 16. ex 50.
That seeing we take daily so great pain in this world, for avoiding of lesser
inconveniences, as of sickness, imprisonementes, loss of goods and life, and
other the like: what pains should we refuse for avoiding the eternity of hell
fire, the torment whereof is insupportable? The first of these considerations S.
Paul used when he said; the sufferinges of this Romans 8. 2. Pet. 2.
life are not vvoorthie of the glory which shall be revealed in the next. The
second, S. Peter used, when he wrote; that seeing the heavens must be
dissolved, and Christ come in Judgment to restore to every man according to
his works: what manner of men ought we to be in all holy conversation? As who
would say; No labor, no pains, no travail, no penance, ought to seem hard or
great unto us, to the end we might avoid the terror of that dreadful day. S.
Augustine demands this question; what we think the rich glutton Lue. 16.
in hell would do now for avoiding his torments, if he were in this life again;
would he take pains or no? would he bestirre him self, rather then turn into
that place of calamity again? I might adioine to this, the infinite pains
that Christ took for us; the infinite benefits he has bestowed upon us; the
infinite sins we have committed against him; the infinite examples of Saints,
that have trodden this path before us, being notwithstanding of more delicate
co^stitution of body the^ we are: in respect of al which, we ought to make no
bones at a little pains and labor, if it were true that Gods service were so
troublesome as many do esteem it.

But now in very truth the matter is nothing so; and this is but a subtle
deceate 2. The vvays of virtue is not hard in deed. Mat. 12.
of the enemy for our discouragement. The testimome of Christ him self is
clear in this point, saing: Iugu^ meu^ suaue est, and enus meum leave: My yoke
is sweet, and my burden light. And his dearly beloved disciple S. John, who
had best cause to know his masters secret herein, says plainly; Mandata
eius grauia non sunt; his commandments 1. Ioh. 5.
are not grievous. What is the cause then why so many men do conceive such an
insuperable difficulty in this affair? Surely, one cause is, (besides the
fallacy of the devil which is the The cause of prete^dea^ difficulties.
cheifest,) for that men feel the disease of concupiscence in their bodies,
but do not consider the strength of the medicine given unto us against the
same; they cry with S. Paul, that they find a law in their members repugning
to the law of their mind, (which is, the rebellion of concupiscence left in
our flesh by original sin;) but they confess not, or consider not with the
same apostle; that the grace of God, by Jesus Christ, shall deliver Ibidem.
them from the same. They remember not the comfortable saying of our Saueour
unto S. Paul, in the midst of his greatest temptations; Sufficie tibi gratia
mea; My grace is 2. Co. 12.
sufficient to strengthen thee against them al. These men (I say) do as
Helizeus his disciple did, who casting his eyes only upon 4. Re. 6.
the number of his enemies; that is, upon the huge army of Syrians ready to
assault him; thought himself lost and utterly unable to stand in their sight,
until by the prayers of his master the holy Prophet, he was permitted by God
to see the Angels, that stood there present to fight on his side; and then he
well perceived that his part was the stronger.

So fares it with the weak and distrustful people, who feeling and
considering only the miseries and infirmities of their own nature, whereby day
lie strong The singular assistance of God, for over cumming difficulties.
tentations do rise against them; do account the batail painful, and the
victory impossible; having not tasted in deed, nor ever proved (through their
own default and negligence) the manifold helps of heavenly and spiritual
succors, which almighty God never fails to send unto such, as are content
for his sake to take this conflict in hand. S. Paul had well tasted that aid,
who having reckned up all the hardest incounters and impedimentes that might be;
he adioineth notwithstanding; Sed in his omnibus superamus propter cum qui
dilexit Romans 8.
nos: But we overcome in all these combats, by his assistance, that loves us.
And then falls he to that most wonderful protestation, whereof both heaven
earth and hell may stand in admiration; that nether death, nor life, nor Angels,
nor other thing, should be able to seperat him from Christ, or to make him
abandon his service; and all this upon the confidence of spiritual aid from his
said Saueour, whereby Philip. 4.
he sticked not to avouch, that he could do al things. The Prophet David also
had proved the force of this assistance, when he said; I did run the way of
thy commandments (o Psalm. 118.
Lord,) when thoudiddest enlarge my heart. This enlargement of heart, was by
spiritual consolation of internal unction, whereby a man's heart drawn together
by anguishe and sorrow, is opened and enlarged (at what time Gods holy grace is
powered ito it) no otherwise then a dry purse is softened and enlarged by
anointing it with oil. Of which divine oil, and heavenly comfort, when this
blessed servant of God had received his part; he confessed presently, that he
did not only walk the ways of Gods commandementes with ease; but also did
run them over with exceeding pleasure. Eue^ as a carte wheel A similitude.
which creketh and complains, under a small burden when it is dry; does run
on merrily and without al noise, when a little oil is put unto it. Which thing
aptly expresses our state and condition; who without Gods assistance are able
to do nothing; but with the aid thereof, are able to conquer and overcome al
things.

And surely, I would gladly ask these men that imagine the way of Gods holy
A question to be demanded of pretenders of difficulties. Psalm. 118.
law to be so hard and full of difficulty; how the prophet could say (who was a
man as we are) I have taken pleasure (o Lord) in the way of thy
commandments, even as in all the riches of the world? And in an other place;
That the same commandementes were more pleasant and more to be desired, then
any gold or precious stone; and more svveter the^ honey Psalm. 18.
or the honey comb; By which words he yields to virtuous life, not only due
estimation of honor and value above al treasures in the world; but also of
pleasure, delight, and sweetness; thereby to confound al those that abandone and
forsake the same, upon idle pretensed and feined difficulties. And if king
David could say thus much in the old testament, and of the old law, (which
notwithstanding was infinitlie more hard the^ is the new:) with how much more
reason may we speak it now, in the time of grace, when not only the service
of God in it self, is Joan. 5. Romans 5. Heb. 6.
without al comparison more sweet and easy: but also the peculier helps and
assistances of almighty God, much more effectual and abundant.

For further declaration whereof, I would demand of thee, thou poor infortunat
Christian, that deceauest thie self with The end of Christ's coming to make the
way easy.
these bugges and fancies of imagined difficulties, why Christ our Saueour came
into this world? why took he our flesh upon him? why labored he and took
so much pains among us? why shed he his blood? why prayed he to his father
so often for us? why appointed he the Sacraments as conduites to derive his
most holy grace unto us? why sent he the Holy Ghost into the world? what
signifies Ghospel or good tidings? what means the words, Grace and Mercy
brought with him? what imports the comfortable name of JESUS? Is not all this
to deliver us from sin? from sin past, (I say) by Mat. 1.
his only death; from sin present and to come, by the same death and by the
assistance of his holy grace, bestowed on us more abundantly then before? Was
not this one of the pri^cipal effects of Christ his coming as the prophet
noted; that craggie paths should be made straight, and hard Esa. 40. Esa. 11.
Et vide Ier. ibid. Amb. lib. 1. de sp. 5 c. 20. S. Aug ser. 209. de temp.
vvayes plain? was not this the cause why he endued his church with the seven
blessed gifts of the Holy Ghost, and with the virtues infused; to make the
yoke of his service sweet, the exercise of good life easy, the walking in his
commandeme^tes pleasant: in such sort, as men might now sing in tribulations,
have confidence in Mat. 5. Luc. 6. Act. 4. 2. Cor. 4.
perils, security in afflictions, and assurance of victory in all temptations?
is not this the beginning, middle, and end of the Ghospel? were not these the
promises of the Prophets, the tydinges of the Evangelists, the preachinges of
the Apostles, the doctrine, belief, and practice of al saints? and finally is
not this, verbum abbreuiatum, The word of God abbreuiated Esa. 10.
and made short, wherein do consist all the riches and treasures of our
Christian profession?

But for that this matter is of exceeding great weight, to the stre^gthening of
Christians in their vocation, against the The sum of this chapter with the
two ge neral parts thereof.
temptations of pusilanimitie and deiectio^, which are very ordinary and
dangerous to most me^ in the world; it shall not be amiss (perhaps) to treat
and discuss the same more at large in this place, laying down the particular
means and helps which every man has or may have in this business, if he want
not will to use and apply the same to his assistance and commodity. And for
that the feeld is large, and the matters are many, which do appertain unto
this point: I have thought convenient for more plainness and perspicuitie of
the reader, to reduce the whole sum, unto two general heads and parts; In
the first whereof, shall be showed the manifold

The first part. Of the helps that are given to Christians for making virtuous
life easy.
IT were a very hard and difficil matter for any man to take upon him, to set
forth al and every the particular ways ^
and means, whereby our most merciful Lord and Saueour, does comfort,
strengthen, and cherish the soul, that resolves to live faithfully in his
service. There are infinite secrets that do pass between them, infinite privy
tokens and significations of love, that none else can express or conceive:
whereof the Prophet Esaias having had a taste, cried out; Secretum meum mibi,
Secretum meum mihi: My secret is to my Esa. 24.
self, my secret is to my self. But yet of those public and ordinary ways,
whereby it is evident in holy write, that almighty God is accustomed to work
this effect of making sweet and easy his commandementes; I shall here recount
the chief and principal for our common consolation and encoragement.

AND FIRST OF AL other, we must recon in this number, the infusion of THE.
help. GODS grace and the force thereof.
Gods most holy and precious grace into our minds and souls, whereby they are
beautified and strengthened against al difficulties and temptations, as S.*
Paul was in particular against the tribulations and temptations of the flesh.
And this grace 2. Cor. 12.
is of such efficacy and force in the soul where it once enters; that it
alters This grace given to S. Paul, Bun. strikes out; for fear, least by S.
Paul's example, any man should think himself aid (with the help of Gods
grace) to resist such temptations.
the whole state thereof, making those things clear, which were obscure
before; those things pleasant, which were bitter before; those things easy,
which were hard and difficult before. And for this cause also it is said in
scripture, that it makes a new spirit and a new heart where it is bestowed by
almighty God; which his divine Majesty signifies by the Prophet Ezechiel in
these words, when he treats of the graces that should be given at the coming
of Christ in flesh; I vvil give unto them a new heart, and vvil put a new Exo.
ca. 31. and 36.
spirit in their bovvelles; to the end they may walk in my precepts, and
keep my commandementes. What can be spoken more effectually of the power of
Gods holy grace, to the perfourmance of good works.

In like manner of the force and efficacy of the same grace to resist,
mortify, and The force of grace in resisting temptations.
conquer the passions of our flesh and sensuality, which by their rebellion
against virtue do make the way of Gods commandementes unpleasant, S. Paul
testifies clearlie, when he writes thus to the Romans: This we know, that
our old man is crucified, Romans 6.
to the end that the body of sin may be destroyed, and we be in bondage no
more theru^to. In which words, by the old man, and the body of sin, S. Paul
understands our rebellious appetite and concupiscence, which is so crucified
and destroyed by the most noble sacrifice of Christ our Saueour: as we may by
the grace purchased unto us in that holy sacrifice, So proves S. Aug. l. 2.
de pecca. mer. cap. 6.
resist and conquer this appetite, and so keep our selves from the servitude
of sin: that is; from any consent and guilt of mortal sin, if we will our
selves. And this is that noble and entire victory, which God promised so long
ago to every Christian soul by the means of Christ, when he Esa. 41.
said. Be not a feared for I am with thee: step not aside, for I thy God have
strengthened thee, and have assisted thee; and the right hand of my just (MAN,)
has taken thy defense. Behold, all that fight against thee, shall be confonded
and put to shame; thou shall seek thy rebels, and shall not find the^: they
shall be as though they were not, for that I am thy Lord and God.

Lo here a full victory promised upon our rebels, by the help of the right
hand of Gods just man; that is, a full coquest upon our disordinate passions and
temptations, by the aid of grace from JESUS Christ. And albeit these rebels
are not here promised to be taken clean away; but only to be conquered and
confonded: yet is it said, that they shall be as though they were not. Whereby
is signified, that they shall not hinder us in the way of our salvation, A
similitude shevving, how passions when theyare mo derated may be prositable.
but rather advance and further the same, if we will. For as wild beasts which
of their own nature are fearse, and would rather hurt then profit mankind;
being mastred and made tame, become very commodious and necessary for our
uses: so these rebellious passions of ours, which of the^ selves would utterly
overthrow us, being once subdued and mortified by Gods grace and our own
diligence, do stand us in singular stead to the practice and exercise of al
kind of virtues. As for example: ^.
choler or anger, to the inkendling of zeal; hatred, to the pursuing of sin;
a hautie mind, to the reiectig of the world; love, to the embracing of algreat
and heroical attemptes, in consideration of the benefits received from God.
Besides this the very conflict and combat it self in subduing these passions,
is left unto us for our great good; that is, for our patience, humility,
merit, and victory in this life: and for our glory and croune in the life to
come: as S. Paul affirmed of him self, and coufirmed to al others, by his
example.

Now then let the slothful Christian go put this hands under his girdlie,
and say: There is a lion in the way, and a lioness in the parthredie to
devour hin, for which he dare not (...) forth of doors. Let him cry; It is
cold, and therefore he dares not go to plovve. Let him excuse him self that
it is uneasy Prou. 26. Excuses of slothful Christians. Pro. 20. Pro. 24.
to labor, and therefore he can not purge his vineyarde of nettles and
thistles, nor build any wal about the same; That is; let him say, that his
passions are strong, and therefore he can not conquer them: his body is
delicate, and therefore he dare not put it to travail: the way of virtuous life
is hard and uneasy, and therefore he can not apply him self thereunto. Let him
say all this and much more, which idle and slothful Christians are accustomed
to bring for their excuse: let him allege the same as much and as often times
as he will; it is but an excuse, and a false excuse, and an excuse most
dishonorable and detractorie to the force of Christ holy grace, purchased unto
us by his bitter passion: that now his yoke should be unpleasant, seeing Mat. 11.
he has made it sweet; that now his burden should be heavy, seeing he has
made 1. Ioh. 5. Ioh. 8. Romans 7.
it light; that now his commandments should be grievous, seeing his most
divine Maiestre affirms the contrary: that now we should be in servitude of
our passions, seeing he has by his grace delivered Romans 8. Psalm. 26. 27.
us, and made us truly free. If God be with us, who will be against us,
says the Apostle? God is my helper and defender (says holy David,) for
whom shall I quake, or tremble? If whole armies should rise against me: yet will
I always hope to have the victoric. Psalm. 22.
And what is the reason? for that thou art with me (o Lords) thou fightest on
my side; thou assistest me with thy grace; by help and assistance whereof, I
shall have the victory, though all the squadrons of my enemies, that is, of the
flesh, the world, and the devil, should at once rise against me. Nay, I shall
not only have the victory, but I shall have it also most easily, and 1 Ioh.
5.
with all pleasure comfort and delight. For thus much signifies S. John; in
that, (having said that the commandments of Christ are not grievous;) he
infers presently, as the cause there of; Quoniam omne quod natum est ex Deo,
vincit mundum. For that al which is borne of God, overcomes and conquereth
the world: that is; the grace and heavenly assistance which is derived and
sent us from God above, does both conquer the world, with all the difficulties
and temptations thereof; as also make the commandments of almighty God, most
easy unto us, and al virtuous life veric sweet and pleasant.

But here perhaps you will say unto How Christ's for nice is a yoke and
burden and yet not heavy nor troblesome.
me: Christ him self confesses it to be a yoke and burden; and how then can it
be so pleasant and easy as you make it? whereto I answer; that Christ adds
also, that it is a sweet yoke and a light burden; whereby your objection is
taken away. Again it is further signified, that there is a burden which
greeueth not the bearer, but rather helps and refreshes the same; like as
the burden of feathers upon a birds back, bears up the bird, and is nothing
at al grievous unto her. So in like manner though it be a yoke, yet is it a
sweet yoke, a comfortable yoke, a yoke more pleasant than honey or honey comb,
as says the Prophet. Psalm. 118.
And why so? because we draw therein, with a sweet yokefelow; we draw with
Christ him self; that is to say, Christ's holy grace draws at the one end of
the yoke, and our endeavor at the other. And because when a great ox and a
little do draw together in one yoke, the weight lies al upon the greater ox
his neeke, for that he bears up the yoke from the other: thereof it comes,
that we drawing in this yoke together with Christ, which is infinitely stronger
and greater then we are; he lighteneth unto us the whole burden, and only
requires, that we should go on comfortablie with him, and not refuse to join
and persevere under this sweet yoke in his company; for that the pains shall be
his, and the pleasure and profit ours. And this him self. Mat. 11.
signifies very expreslie in the Ghospel, when he inuiteth al men that are
heuelie The yoke of Christ delivers us from many yokes.
laden, to come unto his yoke and he will refreshe the^. Whereby he declares
plainly that his calling us to the bearing of his sweet yoke, is only thereby
to disburden and ease us, and not any way to laden or agreeue us: to disburden
us (I say) of the heavy loadinges packes and yokes of this world; as from the
burden (for example) of a guilty conscience, the burden of melancholy, the
burden of envy, hatred, and malice; the burden of pride, the burden of
ambition, the burden of covetousness, the burden of wrath, the burden of fear,
the burden of al wickedness, and of hell fire it self. From al these burdens,
lodinges, and miserable yokes, our most loving Saucour desires to deliver us,
by covering our necks only with his yoke and burden, so lightened and
sweetened by his holy grace; as the bearing thereof is not trauailsome, but most
easy, pleasant, iocunde, and comfortable. And thus much of the first and
principal help that makes the path of virtuous life easy; I mean of Gods
holy grace, inhere^t in man's soul, which is the offspring and fountain of al
other helps that do ensue.

THE SECOND thing that makes this yoke so sweet, this burden so light, and
THE. 2. help. Vehemency of love.
this way of Gods commandments so pleasant to resolved men, is vehemency
of love; love (I mean) toward God, whose commandments they are which we
take in hand. For that every man can easelie tell, and has experienced in him
self, what an irresistible force the passion of love contains, and how it
makes most facil the very greatest pains that are in this world. What makes
(for examples sake,) the mother to take such incessant pain in the bringing up
of her child, and to endure with comfort so many travails as she does, but
only love? what causes the wife to fit so attentive at the beds side of her
husband when he is sick, but only love? what moves the beasts and birds
of the air, to spare from their own food, and to endaunger their own lives,
for the feeding and defending of their little ones, but only the great force
and puissance of love? See S. Aug. of this matter, ser. 9. de verb. dom.
S. Austen does prosecute this point at large by many other examples, as of
Marchantes that refuse no adventure of sea, for love of gain; of huntars, that
refuse no season of evil weather, for love of game; of soldiers, that refuse
no danger of spoil. And he adds in the end: that if the love of man can be
so great toward creatures here, as to make great labors easy, and in deed
to seem no labors but rather pleasures: how much more shall the love of good
men toward God make al their pains and travails comfortable, which they
take in his service.

This extreme love was the cause and reason, why all the intolerable pains
and The great force of love between Christ and his servants.
afflictions which our Save our Christ suffered for our sake, did seem nothing
unto him. And this love also was the reciprocal cause why so infinite travails
and tribulations as zealous Christians from the beginning have suffered for
their Lord and Master, seemed nothing unto them. Imprisonmentes, torments,
loss of honor, goods, and life; have seemed very trifles to innumerable
servants of God, in respect of this fervent and burning love. This love drove
infinite virgins, and tender children to offer them selves in time of
persecution, for zealous affection toward him, which in the cause was
persecuted. This love caused holy Apollonia of Alexandria, being brought to the
fire, to slip Eusebius. li. 6. c. 34.
out of the hands of such as led her, and joyfully to run into the same,
of her self. This love enforced blessed Ignatius, Ierom. in catalogo.
the ancient Martyr to say (being condemned to beasts, and fearing least
they would refuse his body, as they had done the bodies of diverse Martirs
before him;) that he would not permit that; but would rather provoke them to
pulle and tear his body in pieces.

These are the effects (dear brother) of fervent love; which do make even the
The love of Gods comma^deme^tes.
things that in this world are most difficult and dreadful of the^ selves, to
appear very facile sweet and pleasant; and much more the laws and
commandments of almighty God; which in them selves are most just,
reasonable, holy and easy. Da amantem (says S. Austen speaking of this
Psalm. 6. and 18. Mat. 11. 1. Ioh. 5. Tra. 26. in Johan.
matter,) and sentit quod dico: Si autem frigido loquor, nescit quid loquar:
Give me a man that is in love with God: and he feels this to be true, which I
say: but if I talk to a cold Christian; he understands not what I say. And
this is the reason why our blessed Saueour talking of the keeping of his
commandementes; repeateth many times this word, LOVE; as the only sure
ground whereon their whole regard, reverence, and observation depends; for
want of which love among men in this life; the most part of the world neither
respects nor keeps them. And herehence it is, that in the same our Saueour
uses these and other like speeches; If you do love me; then keep my Ioh. 14.
commandementes: And again, he that has my commandementes, and keeps them,
he is he that loves me. And yet further: He which loves me, vvil keep my
commandment; and he that loves me not; keeps not my commandementes. In
which last words, some do note, that to him that loves he says his
commandment An observation.
in the singular number; for that to such a one, al his commandmentes are but
one commandment, according to the saying of S. Paul; That love alone is the
fulfilling Romans 13.
of all the law, for that it comprehends al in all. But to him that loves
not, Christ says his commandmentes, in the plural number; signifying thereby,
that they are both many and heavy to him; for that he wants love, which
should make them few and easy. The effect of which point, S. John also
expresses, when he says; this is the love of God, when we keep his
comma^dementes, 1. Io. 5.
and his commandementes are not heavy. That is to say, they are notthing
heavy to him, which has love; otherwise no marvel though they be most
heavy; for that every thing appears burdenous and intolerable, which we
do against our liking: and so by this also (dear Christian brother) thou
may make a conjecture, whether the true love of thie Lord and Saueour be in
thee, or not.

AND THESE ARE two means, THE. 3. help. PECVLIER light of understanding.
whereby the life of virtuous men is made easy in this world. There follow
diverse other, to the end that these negligent excusers may see, how unjust and
untrue their excuse is, concerning the pretended hardness of living in Gods
service. Which in very deed is endued with infinite privileges of comfort,
above the life of most prosperous sinners; eue^ in this world. Whereof the next
that I will name, for example sake, is a certain special and peculiar light of
understanding, pertaining to the just; and called in scripture prudentia
sanctorum, the Prou. 9.
wisdom of Saints; which is nothing else, but a certain sparkle of heavenly
wisdom, bestowed by singular privilege upon the virtuous, for their direction
in this life; whereby they receive most comfortable light and understanding in
spiritual affairs, touching their own and other men's salvation, and in things
necessary thereunto. Of which knowledge the prophet David meant, when he said;
not as mihi Psalm. 16.
fecisti vias vitae; thou have made the ways of life known unto me: as also
when he said of him self; Super senes intellexi; I have understood Psalm. 118.
more then old men. And again in an other place: Incerta and occulta
sapientiae tuae Psalm. 50.
manisestasti mihi; thou have opened to me the unknown and hidden secrets of
thy wisdom. This is that most excellent light wherewith S. John says that
Christ our Ioh. 1.
Save our lighteneth his true servants; as also that unction of the Holy
Ghost, which the same Apostle teaches to be 1. Io. 2.
given to the godly, thereby to instruct the^ in all things behoofful for
their salvation. This is in like manner that writing of Gods law in men's hearts,
which he promised Iero. 31. Esa. 54.
by the prophet Jeremy, so long ago, to be performed in the time of grace; as
also the instruction of men immediately from God him self, fortold by the
prophet Esaye. And finally, this is that sovereign understanding in the law,
commandementes, and iustifications of almighty God, which holy David so much
desired, and so often dema^nded in that most divine Psalm, which begins
with this vehement protestation; Blessed are the vnsputted in the way; (that
is, in this life;) and Psalm. 118.
blessed are al sucb as do walk in Gods law.

By this heavenly light of understanding, and by this supernal illumination
imparted The great comfort of internal light.
to the good, for their direction; the way of virtue is made very easy and
passing comfortable. For as in bodily sight and in viages of this world, it
falls out, that he which has good eyes and sees perfectelie, goes on his
way with far greater alacrity, joy, and security, then does an other that
either lacks that sense, or has it very dim: So in the course of our soul
in this life, it is of no less importance and comfort but rather of much more,
for a man to have this celestial vndersta^nding for governing him self to his
salvation; that is, to know what he does, see where he walks, discern wither
he goes, conceive what he expects; and to be in that happy state whereof S.
Paul says, that a spiritual ma is able 1. Cor. 2.
to judge of al things. Whereas in the mean space the carnal and sensual man
(as the same Apostle testifies) is so blind, as he ca^ neither see nor
conceive tbe things that are of Gods spirit. Of which sort of men, the Prophet
Esaias says in their own person, expressing their misery; we have groped like
as Esa. 65.
blind men do for the vvalle, and we have stumbled at middaye, even as if it
bad been in darkness. By which words is set forth unto us the exceeding
great calamity of wicked men, who see not where they go) what state they are
in; how far of, or how near they are to perdition; but do live in continual
darkness, and most uncomfortable blindness; which they confess also in an other
place of holy scripture saing; the light of justice has not shined unto us;
and the son of understanding has not appeared Sap. 5.
to our eyes; we are vveried in the way of iniquities. The lack then of this
heavenly light is wearisome and miserable unto the wicked, and consequently
the inioying thereof, most comfortable to the virtuous.

NOW THEN to proceed; an other principal matter which makes the way THE. 4.
help. INTERNAL consolation.
of virtue easy and pleasant to them that walk therein, is a certain hidden
and secret consolation, which God-poureth into the hearts of them that trulle
serve him. I call it secret and hidden; for that it is known to none but to
such only as have felt and received part thereof. For which cause, Christ him
self calls it, Apoc. 2.
hidden manna, known to them alone that do inioye it. To which effect also
the Prophet David said to almighty God; Great is the multitude of thy
sweetness (o Lord) which thou Psalm. 30.
haste laid up and hidden for them that fear thce. And again in an other
place, thou vvilt Psalm. 67.
lay aside (o Lord) a special chosen rain or dew for thine inheritance. And
almighty God him self promises to a denout soul by the Prophet Osee; I vvil
lead her a side into a Osee 2.
wilderness, and there vvil I talk unto her heart; that is, I will comfort
her. By all which words, of wilderness, separating, choice. and hidden, is
signified unto us, that this consolation is a secret privilege bestowed only
upon the virtuous; and that the carnal hearts of wicked men, have no part or
portion therein.

But now, how exceeding great and inestimable The force and sweetness of this
consolation. Psalm. 35. and 64.
the sweetness of this heavenly wine is to them that taste it; no tongue of man
or angels can express. A certain conjecture only may be made, by the words
of holy David, who attributes unto it sufficient force, to make al men
drunk, that taste thereof: that is to say, to take from them, al sense and
delectation in terrestrial pleasures, according as Peter when he received but a
drop or two thereof upon the mount Thabor at his Masters Mat. 17. Marc. 9. Luc.
9. Psalm. 35.
transfiguratio^, forgate him self presently, and talked as a man distracted
touching the building of tabernacles there, and resti^g in that place for ever.
This is, torre^s voluptatis, that sweet stream of pleasure, according Esa. 29.
as the Prophet calls it, which coming from the mountains of heaven,
waters (by secret ways and passages) the hearts and spirits of the godly,
and makes them drunken with the unspeakable joy which it deriueth unto them.
This is a kind of taste of the very joys of heaven in this life, bestowed
upon good men, to comfort and encourage the^ in their way, and to keep them
from fainting. For as Merchants desirous to sell their wares, are content often
times to let you see and handle, and some times also to taste A similitud
expressing the cause why God gives this consolation. Apoc 3.
the same if the nature thereof so require, thereby the sooner to induce you to
buy: even so almighty God being very careful and willing to sell unto us the
joys of heaven, is content to imparte a certain taste before hand to such as
he sees are willing to buy, thereby to make them come of more roundly with
the price, and not to stick to pay so much, yea more labor then he requires.
This is that exceeding joy and jubilee in the hearts of just men, which the
Prophet means, when he says: The voice of exultation and salvation Psalm.
117.
is in the tabernacles of the just. And again, Blessed is that poople that
knovveth iubilation. That is; that people which has experienced this extreme
joy and pleasure of internal consolation. S. Paul had tasted it 2. Cor. 7.
when he wrote these words, amiddest al his labors for Jesus Christ: I am
filled with consolation, I ouerflovve and super abound in all joy amiddest our
tribulations. What can be spoken (dear brother) more effectually then this,
to show the divine force of this spiritual consolation.

But thou will here ask me perhaps: if this be so, why thou being a
Christian The way to come to spiritual consolation.
as well as other, have never vet tasted of this sweet consolation? whereunto I
answer, that (as has been showed before) this is not meat for every mouth;
but a chosen moisture provided for Gods inheritance Psa. 67.
only. This is wine of Gods own seller, laid up for his spouse alone:
That is, for the devout Can. 1.
soul dedicated unto Gods service. This is a teate of comfort, only for the
child to suck, as the prophet Esaye testifies. The Esa. 66.
soul that is drouned in sinful pleasures and delites of this world, can not
be partaker of this rare benefit, neither the heart that is replenished with
carnal cares and cogitations. For as Gods Arcke and 1. Reg. 5. Io. 8. 14. 15.
16. 1. Io. 2. Exo. 16.
the idol Dagon could not stand together upon one Altar: so can not Christ
and the world stand together in one heart. God sent not the pleasant Manna unto
the people of Israel so long as their flower and chibols of Egypt lasted:
nether will he send this heavenly consolation unto thee, (dear brother) until
thou have rid thy self of the cogitations of vanity. He is a wise merchant,
though a liberal. He will not give a taste of his treasure, Worldly
consolations and heaue^lie stand not well together.
where he knows there is no will to buy. Resolve thy self once in deed to
serve him, and thou shall then feel thy heavenly joy whereof I talk, as many
thousands before thee have done, and never yet any man was herein deceived.
Moses first ran out of Egypt, to the Exodus 2.
hills of Madian, before God appeared unto him: and so must thy soul do out
of worldly vanity, before she can look for these consolations.

But if thou would resolve thie self effectually, and once offer thie self
througly to his divine service: then (no doubt) but thou should find most
sweet and merciful intertainement above al expectation, notwithstanding thy
former evil life and Beginners chiefly cherished by God.
sins whatsoever. For that such is the abu^da^t goodness of his divine
Majesty, for encoraging of al me^ to repair unto him; that he always shows
more particular and tender love toward them that come newly unto his
service, then unto others Luc. 15.
which have served him of longer time. Which is most evidently signified, by
the parable of the prodigal son, whom the good father cherished with much
more tenderness and solicitude, then he did the elder brother, which had served
him continually. And the causes hereof are two; the one, for the joy of the
new gotten servant, as is expressed by S. Luc in the Ghospel; the other, least
he finding no consolation at the beginning, should turn back to Egypt again;
as God by a figure in the children of Israel declares most manifestly in
these words: When Pharao Exo. 13.
had permitted the people of Israel to depart out of Egypt: God brought them
not by the country of the Philistines, (which was the nearest way,)
thinking with him self, lest perhaps it might repent them, if they should
see vvarres straight way rise against them, and so should return into Egypt
again. Behold here the cause why almighty God would not presently permit
war and desolation to fall upon his people, after they were departed out of
Egypt, least they should repent them, and so turn back again. What fatherly
heart Mat. 11.
can express more tender and inflamed love then this?

YET TO GO foreward; after this THE. 5. help. THE peace of co^lcie^ce. 2.
Cor. 1.
privilege of internal consolation, ensues another, making the service of God
also pleasant, and this is the testimony of a good conscience; whereof blessed
S. Paul made so great account, as he called it his glory. And the Holy Ghost
says of it further, by the mouth of the wise man; Secura men's quasi judge
conuiuium; a secure mind Pro. 15.
and good conscience is as a perpetual feast. Of which we may infer, that the
virtuous man having always this secure mind and peace of conscience, lives
always in festiual joy and ioiful feasting. And how then is this life hard or
unpleasant, as you imagine? On the contrary side, the wicked man, having his
conscience vexed with the priuitie and guilt of many sins, the same Genesis 4.
1. Mac. 6. Mat. 27. Act. 1. Marc. (...).
is always tormented with in it self; as we read that the conscience of
wicked Cain was, after he had slain his own brother; and of Antiochus for his
wickedness done to Jerusalem; and of Ludas for his treason against his
master; as our Saueour also does signify generally of al naughty men, when
he says that they have a worm that gnaweth their consciences both day and
night. The reason whereof, the holy scripture opens in an other place, when
it says, al wickedness is sul of Sap. 7.
fear, giving testimony of damnation against it self; and therefore a troubled
conscience alvvaies presumes cruel matters: That is to say; it presumes cruel
things to be imminent over itself, as it makes account to have deser- ued.
But yet further, above al other, holy Job most lively sets forth this
miserable state of wicked men's consciences in these words: A wicked man is
proved all the days of his life, though the time be uncertain how long he
shall play the tyrant. The sound of Job. 15. The trouble of an evil conscience.
terror is alvvaies in his ears; and although it be in time of peace, yet he
alvvay suspecteth some treason against him. He believes not that he can rise
again from darkness to light, expecting on every side the svvord to come upon
him. When he sits down to eat, he remembers that the day of darkness is
ready at hand for him: tribulation terrefieth him, and anguish of mind
enuironeth him, even as a king is environed with soldiars, when he goes to
war.

Can any thing be expressed more effectually (loving brother) then this matter
is here let down by holy writ it self? what creature may be imagined more
miserable The saying of S. Chrisostom of a wicked conscience. Hom. 8. ad pop.
ant.
and pitiful than this man, which has such a boucherie and slaughter house
within his own breast and heart? what fears, what anguishes, what desperatio^s
are here declared? S. Chrysostom discourses most excellently upon this
point. Such is the custom of sinners, (says he) that they suspect al
things, in so much as they doubt their own shadows; they are afeard at every
little noise, and they think every man that comes toward them, to come
against them. If men talk together, they think they speak of their sins.
Such a thing is sin, as it bewrays it self, though no man accuse it: It
holds always the sinner in extreme fear, albeit there be no appearance of
any danger to wards hi. Hear how notably holy writ describes this fear of
sianers and the just ma^s liberty. The wicked man flies Pro. 28.
though no man pursue him. And why does he fly if no man pursue him? for
that he has within his own conscience an accuser that does pursue him, the
which accuser he always carries about with him. And as he can not fly from
him self: so ca^ he not fly from this accuser that rests within his
conscience; but where soever he goes, he is pursued beaten and whipped by the
same, and his wound is incurable. But the just man is nothing so: The just man
(saves Solomon) is as consident as a Pro. 28.
lion.Hitherto are the words of S. Chrysostom.

VVHERBY, AS also by the scriptures THE. 6. help. CONFIdent hope.
before alleged, we take notice yet of an other prerogative of virtuous life,
which is a most lively hope or confidence of eternal salvation, this being one
of the greatest treasures and richest Jewels that Christian men have left them
in this life. For by this we pass through al afflictions, al tribulations and
adversities, most joyfully. By this we say with S. Paul; We do Iac. 5. Romans
5.
glory in our tribulations, knovving that tribulation works patience, and
patience proof, and proof hope which consoundeth us not. This is our most
strong and mighty comfort; this is our sure ankor in all our most te^pestuous
times and storms, according as the same holy Apostle avouches, when he
says; Heb. 6.
that it is a most strong solace and comfort unto us, when we make our refuge
to the hope that is proposed by God that can not lie, which hope we hold as the
sure and infallible anchor of our soul. This is that Ephe. 6. 1. The. 5.
noble helmet of salvation, as the same Apostle calls it, which bears of all the blows that this world can lay upon us. And finally, this is the only
rest set up in the heart of a virtuous man; that, come life, or come death;
come health, or come sickness; come wealth, or come poverty; come
prosperity, or come adversity; come never so violent seas and waves of
persecution; he fitteth down quietly, and says calmelie with the Prophet;
my trust Psalm. 55.
is in God, and therefore I fear not what flesh can do unto me. Nay further
with holy Job, amiddest al his miseries, he sings this most confident dittie;
si occiderit me, in ipso sperabo; if God should kill me, yet would I Job. 13.
put my trust in him. And this is (as the scripture said before) to be as
confident as a Lion; whose property is, to show most courage, when he is in
greatest peril, and near unto most troubles.

But now, as the holy Ghost says, non sic impij, non sic. The wicked can not
say Psalm. 1.
thus, they have no part in this confidence, no interest in this consolation:
Quia spes Pro. 10.
impiorum peribit, says the scripture: the hope of wicked men is vain, and
shall perish. And again, praestolatio impiorum furor, Pro. 11.
the expectation of wicked men is fury. And yet further, spes impiorum
abhominatio animae: The hope of wicked men is abomination, Job 11.
and not a comfort unto their soul. And the reason hereof is double. First,
for that in very deed (though they The vain hope of wicked men,
say the contrary in words) wicked me^ do not put their hope and confidence
in God, but in the world, in their riches, in their strength, friends, and
authority; and finally in the deceauing arm of man: even as the prophet
expresses in their person, Iere. 17.
when he says: We have put a lie for our hope: That is, we have put our hope
in Esa. 28.
things transitory, which have deceived us. And this is yet more expressed by
the scripture, saying: the hope of wicked men is as Sap. 5.
chasse, which the vvinde blovveth away: and as a buble of water which a
storm disperseth: and as the smoke which the vvinde blovveth abroad: and as
the remembrance of a guest that stays but one day in his inn. By all which
metaphores, the Holy Ghost expresses unto us, both the vanity of the things
wherein in deed the wicked do put their trust; and how the same fails them,
after a little time, upon every small occasion of adversity that falls out.

This is that also which God means, when he so stormeth and thundreth against
those which go into Egypt for help, and Esa. 30. and 36.
do put their confidence in the strength of Pharao, accurfing them for the
same, and promising, that it shall turn to their own confusion: which is
properly to be understood Iere. 17. 48.
of all those, which put their cheef confidence in worldly helps; as al
wicked men do, whatsoever they say or dissemble to the contrary. For which
cause also of dissimulation, they are called hypocrites by Job: for where as
the wiseman says, the hope of wicked men shall perish: Job says, the hope
of hypocrites Pro. 10. Job. 8.
shall perish, calling wicked men hypocrites: for that they say, they put their
hope in God, where as in deed they put it in the world. Which thing, not only
Scripture, but also experience teaches. The wicked man's hope is not in God.
For with whom does the wicked man consult in his affairs and doubts? with
God principally, or with the world? to whom does he seek in his afflictions?
whom does he call upon in his sickness? from whom hops he to receive comfort
in his adversities? to whom yields he thanks in his prosperities? When a
worldly man takes in hand any work of importance, does he first consult
with God, about the event thereof? does he fall down on his knees, and ask
his aid? does he refer it wholly or principally unto his honor? if he do
not; how can he hope for aid therein at his hands? how can he repair to him
for assistance in the dangers and lettes that fall out about the same? how can
he have any confidence in him, which has no part at al in that work? It is
hypocrisy then (as Job truly says) for this man to affirm that his
confidence is in God: whereas in deed it is in the world, it is in Pharao, it
is in Egypt, it is in the arm of man, it is in a lie. He builds not his
house with the wise man, upon a rock: but with the fool, upon the sands: and
therefore (as Christ well assures him) when the rain Mat. 7.
shall come and studdes descend, and vvindes blovv, and al together shall rush
upon that house (which shall be at the hour of his death:) the^ shall this house
sal, and the sal of it shall be great. Great, The sal of a wicked man's house.
for the great change which he shall see: great, for the great horror which he
shall conceive: great, for the great misery which he shall suffer: great, for
the unspeakable joys of heaven lost: great, for the eternal pains of hell
incurred: great every way assure thy self (dear brother) or else the mouth of
God would never have used this word, Great. And this is sufficient for the
first reason, why the hope of wicked men is vain; for that in deed they put
it not in God, but in the world.

The second reason is; for that, albeit they should put their hope in God, yet
Wicked men can not kept in God.
(living wickedlie) it is vain and rather to be called presumption, than hope.
For understanding whereof, it is to be noted, that as there are two kinds of
faithes recounted in holy scripture, the one a Jacob. 2. Mat. 7. 1. Co. 13. and
15.
dead faieth without good works; that is, which believes al you say of
Christ, but yet observes not his commandments: the other a lively, and
justifying faieth, which believes not only, but Romans 1. Gal 3. Ephe. 2.
also woorketh by charity, as S. Paul's words are: So are there two hopes
following these two faithes: the one of the good, proceeding of a good
conscience, where of I have spoken before: the other of the wicked, resting in
a guilty conscience, which is in deed no true hope, but rather presumption.
This S. John proves (...). 3.
plainly, when he says: Brethren if our heart reprehend us not, then have we
confidence with God: That is, if our heart be not guilty of wicked life. And
the words immediately following do more plainly express the same, which are
these: What so ever we ask, we shall receive of him, for that we keep his
commandments, and do those things which are pleasing in his sight. The
same 1. Ti. 1.
confirms S. Paul, when he says, that the end of Gods commandments is
charity, from a pure heart and a good conscience. Which words S. Austen
expounding in diverse places of his works, proves at large, that without a
good conscience, there can no true hope be conceived. S. Paul (says he)
adds (from a good conscience) because of 2. Austens saing of hope. lib. 1. de
doct. chri. cap. 37.
hope: for he which has the scruple of an evil conscience, dispareth to
attain that which he believes. And again. Every man's hope is in his own
conscience, according as he feels him self to love God. And again in an
other book, the Aposlle puts a good conscience for hope: for he only
hops which has a good conscience: In prafat. Psalm. 31.
and he whom the guilt of aneuil conscience does prick, retireth back from
hope, and hops nothing but his own damnation. I might here repeat a great
many more privileges, and prerogatives of a virtuous life, which make the same
easy, pleasant, and comfortable, but that this chapter grows to be long:
and therefore I will only touch (as it were in passing bie) two or three other
points of the most principal: which notwithstanding would require large
discourses to declare the same, according to their dignities.

THE FIRST where of is, the inestimable privilege of liberty and freedom,
which THE. 7. help. FREEDOM; of mind. Ioh. 8.
the virtuous do enjoy above the wicked, accordig as Christ, pmiseth i these
words: If you abide i my co^mademe^ts, you shall be my scholars in deed, and you
shall know the truth, and the truth shall set you free: Which words S. Paul as
it were expounding, says; where the 2. Co. 3.
spirit of our Lord is, there is freedom. And this freedom is meant, from the
tyranny and thraldom of our corrupt sensuality and concupise^ce, called by
divines the inferior part of our mind: whereunto the wicked are so in
thraldom, as never was any bondslaue more to a most merciless cruel and
bloody tyrant. This in part may be conceived by this one example.

If a man had married a rich, beautiful, and noble gentlevvoman, adorned with
An example expressing the bondage of wicked men given to sensuality.
al induments which might be devised or desired in that sex: and yet
notwithstanding should be so sotted and entangled with the love of some foul
and dishonest beggar, or servile maid of his house, as for her sake to
abandone the company and friendship of his said wife, to spend his time in
daliance and service of this base houswife: to ru^ne, to go, to stand still at
her appointment: to put al his living and revenues into her hands, for her to
consume and spoil at her pleasure: to deny her nothing, but to wait and serve
her at a beck: yea and to compel his said wife to do the same: would you not
think this man's life miserable and most servile? And yet surely the manner of
servitude whereof we talk, is far greater and more intolerable than this.
For no woman or other creature in this world, is, or can be of that beauty or
nobility that lady Reason is, to whom man by his creation was espoused: which
notwithstanding we see abandoned, contemned and rejected by him, for the love
of Sensuality, her handmaid, and a most deformed creature in respect of
reason: in whose love notwithstanding or rather servitude, we see wicked men so
drouned, as they serve her day and night with all pains, perils, and expenses;
and do constrain also reason her self, to be subject to all the beckes and
commandments of this new tirannical and vile mistress. For, wherefore do
they labor? wherefore do they watch? wherefore do they heap riches together,
but only to serve their sensuality, and her desirs? wherefore do they beat
their brains, but only to satisfy this cruel tyrant and her passions?

And if you will see in deed how cruel and pitiful this servitude is: consider
only some particular examples of the same. Take a man whom she ouerruleth in
any The misery of a man ruled by sensuality.
passion: as for example, in the lust of the flesh: what pains takes he for
her? how does he labor, how does he drudge in this servitude? how potent and
strong does he feel her tyra^nie? Remember the strength of Samson, the
wisdom of Solomon, 2. Re. 11. Iud. 14.
the sanctity of David overthrown by this tyranny. Jupiter, Mars, and
Hercules, 3. Re. 11.
who for their valiant acts otherwise, were accounted gods of the Panimes:
were they not overcome, and made slaves by the enchantement of this tyrant? And
if you will yet further see of what strength she is, and how cruelly she
executes the same upon those, that Christ has not delivered from her bondage:
consider (for examples sake in this kind) the pitiful case of some disloyal
wife, who though she know that by committing adultery, she runs into a
thousand dangers and inconveniences; as the loss of Gods favor, the hatred of
her husband, the danger of punishment, the offense of her friends, the utter
dishonor of her person (if it be known;) and finally, the ruin and peril
of body and soul: yet to satisfy this tyrant, she will venture to commit the
sin, notwithstanding any dangers or perilles whatsoever.

Nether is it only in this one point of carnal lust, wherein sensuality has
such An ambitious man.
tira^nical dominatio^ over the^ that enthral themselves unto her, but also in
every other passion. Look upon an ambitious or vainglorious man: see how he
serves this mistress, with what care and diligence he attends her
commandments; which is no other, but to follow after a little wind of men's
mouths, to pursue a little fether flying before him in the air. You shall see
that he omitteth no one thing, no one time, no one circumstance for gayning
thereof. He rises early, goes late to bed, trotteth by day, studieth by
night; here he flattereth, there he dissembleth, here he stoupeth there he
looks big; here he makes friends, there he preuenteth enemies; and to this
only end he refers al his actions, and applies al his other matters, al
his order of life, his company keeping, his suits of apparel, his house, his
table, his horses, his servants, his talk, his behavior, his iestes, his
looks, and his very going in the street.

In like wise he that serves this Beldame in the passion of covetousness;
what A covetous man.
a miserable slavery does he abide: his heart being so mured in prison with
money, as he must only think thereof, talk thereof, dream thereof, and
imagine only new ways to get the same, and nothing else. If you should see a
Christian man in slavery under the great Turk, tied in a galley by the leg
with chains, there to serve by rowing for ever: you could not but take
compassion of his case. And what then shall we do of the misery of this man,
who stands in captivity to a more base creature, than is a Turk, or any
other reasonable creature; that is, to a piece of metal, in whose prison he
lies bound, not only by the feet, in such sort, as he may not go any
where, against the commodity and commandment of the same; but also by the
hands, by the mouth, by the eyes, by the ears, and by the heart: so as he
may nether do, speak, see, hear, or think any thing, but in service of the
same? Was there ever servitude so great as this? does not Christ say Ioh. 8.
Romans 6. 2. Pet. 2.
truly now, qui facit peecatu^ seruus est peccati; He that commits sin is
a slave unto sin? does not S. Peter say well, A quo quis superatus est, huius
and seruus est; A man is a flaue to that, whereby he is conquered?

From this slavery then are the virtuous delivered, by the power of Christ,
and by The liberty a man has by serning God.
his assistance; in so much, as they rule over their passions and sensualite,
and are not ruled thereby. This God promised by the prophet Ezechiel, saing.
And they sbal know, that I am their Lord, when I shall break Eze. 34.
the chains of their yoke, and shall deliver them from the power of those,
that ouerruled them before. And this benefit holy David ackowleged in himself,
when he used these most affectuous words to almighty God. O Lord I am thy
servant, I am thy servant; Psalm. 90.
and the child of thy hand-mayde; thou have broken my bands, and I vvil
sacrifice to the, a sacrifice of praise. This benefit also acknowledged S.
Paul, when he said, that our old man was crucified, to the end the body of
sin Romans 6.
might be destroyed, and we be no more in servitude to sin; understanding by
the old man, and the body of sin, our concupiscence, mortified by the grace
of Christ in the virtuous.

THE. 8. help. PEACH of mind.
AFTER THIS privilege of freedom, follows an other, of no less importance
then this; and that is, a certain heavenly peace, serenitie and tranquillity
of mind, according to the saying of the Psa. 75. Psa. 118.
prophet: Factus est in pace locus eius, his place is made in peace. And in an
other place: Pax multa diligentibus legem tuam, there is great peace to them
that love thy law. And on the contrary side, the prophet Esaias repeateth this
sentence oftetimes from the mouth of almighty God him self, Non est Esa. 48.
57.
pax impijs dicit dominus; Our Lord God avouches, that there is no peace unto
the wicked. And an other prophet says of the Psalm. 13.
same men, Contrition and infelicitie is in their ways, and they have not
known the way of peace. The reason of this difference has been declared
heretofore; whereas I set down the diversity of good and evil men, touching
their passions. For the virtuous having now (by the aid of Christ's holy grace)
subdued their said passions, do pass on their life most sweetly and calmely
under the guide of reason, without any perturbatios that endanger them in the
greatest occurrents of this miserable life. But the wicked not having mortified
Romans 11.
any part of the said passions, are tossed and tombled with the same, as with
vehement and contrary winds. And therefore their state is compared by Esaias to a
Esa. 57.
tempestuous sea, that never is quiet; and by S. James, to a city or country,
where the Iac. 3. Two causes of disquietnes in wicked men.
inhabitants are at war and sedition among them selves. And the causes here
of are two: first, for that these passions of concupiscence being many and
almost infinite in number, do lust after infinite things, and are never
satisfied, but are like those bloodsuckers which the wise man speaks Pro. 30.
of, that cry always Geeue Geeue, and never say, Hoe. As for example, tell me,
when is the ambitious man satisfied with honor? or the incontinent man with
carnalitie? or the covetous man with money? never truly; and therefore as that
mother can not but be greatly afflicted which should have many children crying
to her at once for meat, she having no bread at A similitude.
al or not sufficient to break unto them; so the wicked man being greedily
called upon without ceasing, by almost infinite passions, to yield unto their
desires; must needs be vexed and pitifully tormented, especially being not
able to satisfy any one of the least of their petitions.

An other cause of vexation in these me^ The. 2. cause.
is, for that these passions of disordinate concupiscence, be oftentimes
contrary the one to the other, and do dema^de most opposite and contrary
things, representing unto us most lively the confusion of Babel; where one
tongue spoke against an Genesis 11.
other, and that in diverse and contrary languages. So we see oftentimes that
the desire of honor says to his master, spend here: but the passion of
avarice says, hold thy hands: Lechery says, venture here: But pride
says; No, it may turn thee to dishonor. Anger says, revenge thy self
here: but ambition says, it is better to dissemble. And finally, here is
fulfilled that which the Psalm. 54.
prophet says; vidi iniquitatem and contradictionem in ciuitate; I have seen
iniquity and contradictio^ in the self same city; Iniquity, for that all the
demandes of these passions are most unjust, for so much as they are against
reason her self: Contradictio^; for that one contradicts the other in their
demandes. From al which miseries God has delivered the just by giving Phil. 4.
them his peace, which passes al understanding, Ioh. 14. (...).
as the Apostle says; and which the world can nether give nor taste of, as
Mat. 10.
Christ him self affirms.

And thus many causes may be alleged now (besides many other which I pass
over) to justify the verity of our Save ours words, affirming that his yoke
is svveet and easy; to wit, the assistance of grace, the love of God, the
light of understanding, the internal consolation, the quiet of conscience, the
confidence thereof proceeding, the liberty of soul and body, with the sweet
rest and peace of our spirits, both toward God, our neighbors, and our
selves. By all which means, helps, privileges and singular benefits, the
virtuous are assisted above the wicked, as has been showed; and their way made
easy, light and pleasant.

TO AL WHICH yet we may adioine THE. 9. Reason. EXPEctation of revvard.
one other great privilege as the last but not the least comfort to them that
walk under the yoke of Christ's service; and this is, the promise and most
assured expectation of reward; to wit, of eternal glory and felicity to the
good; and of everlasting damnation and torments unto the wicked. O good God,
what a matter is this, to comfort the one, if their life were paineful; and to
afflict the other, amiddest their greatest. pleasures and swetest delectations?
The labourer when he thinks of his good pay at night, is encouraged to go
thorough with the heat of the day though it be painful unto him. Two that An
example.
should pass together toward their country, the one to receive honor for
good service done abrod, the other as prisoner to be arraigned of treasons,
committed in foreign dominions, against his Sovereign; could not be alike
merry in their inn upon the way. For albeit he that stood in danger should
sing, or make show of courage and comfort, and set a good face upon the matter,
yet the other might well think that his heart had many a cold pull within him; as
no doubt but al wicked men have, when they think with themselves, of the life
to come. If Joseph and Pharaos baker had known both their distinct lottes in
prison; to wit, that on such a day, one should be called forth to Genesis 40. 41.
43.
be made Lord of Egypt, and the other to be hanged upon a pair of new
gallows: they could hardly have been alike merry whiles they lived together in
the time of their imprisonment. The like may be said, and much more truly, of
virtuous and wicked men in this world. For when the one sort do but think
upon the day of death, which to the^ is to be the day of their deliverance from
this prison; their hearts can not but leap for very joy, considering what is
her after to ensew unto the^. But the other are afflicted and do fall into
melancholy and extreme desolation, as often as mention or remembrance of death
is offered; for that they are sure, that it brings with it their eternal
bane, according as holy scripture says; The wicked man being dead, there
remains no more hope unto him. Pro. 11.


Well then (dear Christian brother) if al these things be so; what should stay
thee now at length to make this resolution, whereunto I exhort thee? will thou
yet say (notwithstanding all this) that the matter is hard, and the way
unpleasant? or will thou believe others that tell the so, albeit they know less
of the matter then thy self? Believe rather the word and promise of thy
Savior Christ, which assures Mat. 11.
thee the contrary. Believe the reasons before alleged, which do prove it
most evidently. Believe the testimonies of them which have experienced the
matter in them selves, as king David, S. Paul, S. John Evangelist, and others
whose testimonies I have alleged before, concerning their own proof. Believe
many hundredes, which by the holy grace of God, are converted day lie in
Christendom from vicious life, to the perfect service of their Lord; al which
do protest that them selves have found much more facility and comfort, the^
either I have said in this place, or can say in the matter.

And for that perhaps thou may reply, The testimony of such as have had
experience in them selves.
that such men as have experie^ced this in them selves, are not now living in
the place where thou art, to give this testimony of their own experience: I
can and do assure thee upon my conscience before almighty God, that I have
had consere^ce with no small number of such persons my self, and that to my
singular comfort, in beholding the strong hand and exceeding bountifulness of
Gods sweetness toward them in this case. Oh dear brother; no tongue can
express what I have seen herin; and yet saw I not the least part of that
which they inwardly felt. But yet this may I say, that they that attend in the
Catholic Church Here Bun, is enforced to mangle extremly.
to deal with souls in the holy sacrament of Confession, are in deed those, of
whom the prophet says, that they work in multitudes of waters, and do see
the maruailes of God in the Psa. 106.
depth; In the depth (I say) of men's conscieuces uttered with infinite
multitudes of tears, when God touches the same with his holy grace. Believe
me (good reader,) for I speak in truth before our Lord JESUS, I have seen so
great and exceeding consolations in diverse great sinners after their
conversion, as no heart can almost conceive; and the hearts which received the^,
were hardly able to-containe the same: so abunda^tlie distilled down that
heaue^lie dew from the most liberal and bounteful hand of God. And that this
may not seem strange unto thee; thou must know, that it is recorded of one holy
man called Effrem, that he had so maruailous great Vide pratam spirituale SS.
Patrum.
consolations after his conversion, as he was often constrained to cry out to
God: O Lord retire thy hand from me a little, for that my heart is not able to
receive so extreme joy. And the like is written of S. Bernard; who for a Gosr.
invita Bern.
certain time after his conversion from the world, remained as is it were
deprived of his senses, by the excessive consolations he had from God.

Houbeit, if all this can not move thee, but that thou will still remain in thy
distrust: hear the testimony of one, whom I am sure thou will not for shame
discredit, especially speaking of his own experience; And this is the holy
martyr and doctor S. Cyprian, who writing of the Li. cp. 1.
very same matter to a secret friend of his called Donatus, confesses that he
was before his conversion, of the same opinion that thou art now; to wit, that
it was impossible for him, to change his manners, and to sinde such comfort in
a virtuous life, as after he did, being accustomed before to al kind of loose
behavior. Therefore he begins his narration to his friend in this sort;
Accipe quod sentitur antequant discitur, etc. Take that which is first felt
before it be learned; and so he follows on with a large discourse; showing,
that he proved now by experience, which he could never believe before his
conversion, albert almighty God had promised the same. The like writes S.
Augustine of him self in his books of confession, showing Li. 6. confess. c.
12.
that his own passions and the devil would needs persuade him, before his
conversion, that he should never be able to abide the austeritie of a virtuous
life: especially touching continency in the sins of the flesh (wherein he
had lived wantonlie, until that time;) it seemed to him impossible that he
could ever abandon the said sin, and live chaste; which notwithstanding he
afterward found both easy, pleasant, and without al difficulty. For which he
breaks into these words, Li. 8. confess. ca. 1. Psa. 34.
directed unto almighty God him self; O my Lord let me remember and confess
thy mercies toward me; let my very bones rejoice and say unto thee, O lord
who is like unto thee? thou have broken my chains, and Psa. 115.
I vvil sacrifice to thee a sacrifice of thanks giving. These chains which the
blessed man mentions; were the chains of concupiscence, whereby he stood
bounden in captivity before his conversion, as he there confesses; but
presently thereupon, he was delivered of the same, by the blessed help of Gods
most holy grace.

My counsel should be therefore unto thee (gentle reader) that seeing thou have
The conclusion of this first part.
so many testimonies, examples, reasons, and promises of this matter; thou
should at least, prove once, by thine own experience, whether this thing be
true or no; especially seeing it is a matter of so great importance, and so
worthy thy trial: that is to say, a matter concerning so near thy eternal
salvation as it does. If a mean fellow should come unto thee, and offer for
hazarding of one crown of gold, to make thee a thousand by Alchimie; albeit A
similitude.
thou should suspect him for a cousiner, yet the hope of gain being so
great, and the adventure of loss so small: thou would go nigh for once, to
venture and see the trial. And how much more should thou do it then in this
case, where by proof thou can leese nothing; and if thou speed well, thou
art sure to gain as much as Gods kingdom and the everlasting joy of heaven
is worth. And thus much for this first part.

The. 2. part. of this chapter. Containing certain instructions and examples
for ouercomming of difficulties.
ANd now, albeit this great affair be such as I have declared before, and
nothing so as the world and Satan do bear men in hand: yet may not I let
pass in this place (dear Christian brother) to admonish thee of one thing,
which the ancient Fathers and saints of God that have passed over this river
before Resistance at the beginning.
thee (I mean the river dividing between Gods service and the world) do
affirm of their own experience; and that is, that as soon as thou take
this work or resolution in hand, thou must expect many great encounters,
strong impedimentes, sharp contradictions, and fearce temptations: thou must
expect assaults, combats, and open war within thy self. This S. Cyprian, S.
Augustine, S. Gregory, Cyp. li. 1. cp. 1. Aug. li. 1. doct. c. 23. Greg. li.
Mor. ^. c. 24. li. 32. cap. 1^. ^. Bern. in psa. 90. Cyr. li. dc orat. Orig.
^^. 32. in Exo. and 9. in leuit. ^. and 11 in Iosue. (...) in psa. 118. Eccle.
2.
and S. Bernard do affirm upon their own proves. This do Cyril and Origin
show in diverse places at large. This does Saint Hillarie prove both by reasons
and examples. This does the scripture it self forewarne thee when it says, My
son, when thou art to come to the service of God, stand fast in justice and
in fear, and prepare thy mind unto temptation. And the reason of this is; for
that the devil possessing quietly thy soul before, lay still, and sought
only means to content the same, by daily suggesting new delites of carnal
and worldly pleasures. But when he sees that thou offerest to go from him; he
begins straight ways to rage, and to move sedition within thee, and to
toss up and down both heaven and earth, before he will leese his kingdom in
thy soul. This is evident by the example of him whom our Savior Christ,
coming down from the hill after his transfiguration, delivered from a deaf
and Marc. ^^.
dumme spirit. For albeit this devil would seem nether to hear nor speak,
while he possessed that body quietly: yet when Christ commanded him to go
out; he both heard and cried out, and did so tear and rent that poor body,
before he departed, as all the standers by thought in deed that he had been
dead. This also in figure was showed, by the story of Laban, who never
persecuted his son in law Jacob, until he would needs depart Genesis 31.
from him. And yet was this more plainly expressed in the doings of Pharao,
who after once he perceived that the people of Israel meant to depart his
kingdom, never ceased greeuouslie to afflict them (as Moses testifies)
until God had utterly delivered them out of his hands, with Exodus 5.
the ruin and destruction of al their enemies. Which event al holy doctors
and saints in Gods church, have expounded to be a plain figure of the
delivery of souls from the tirannie of the devil.

And now if thou would have a lively example of all this that I have said
before, I could allege thee many; but for The conversion of S. August.
breuities sake, one only of S. Augustines conversion shall suffice, testified
by him self in his books of confession. It is a maruailous example, and
contains many most notable and Here Bun. makes an impious note upon this
conversion.
comfortable points. And surely whosoever shall but read the whole at large,
especialie in his sixth, seventh and eigth books of his confessions, shall
greatly be moved and instructed thereby. And I beseech the reader that
understands the latin tongue, to vewe over at least but certain chapiters
of the eigth book, where this Saints final conversion (after infinite combats)
is recounted. It were to long to repeat al here, though in deed it be such
matter, as no man could ever be weary to hear it. There he shows, how he
was tossed and tombled in this conflict between the flesh and the spirit;
betwne God drawing on one side; and the world, the flesh, and the devil holding
back on the other part. He went to Simplicianus a learned old man Li. 8.
co^fess. c. 1. and 2.
and a devout Christian: he went to S. Ambrose bishop of Milan; and after his
conference with the^, he was more troubled than before. He consulted with his
companions Nebridius and Alipius; but al would not ease him. One day after
dinner there came into his house, 2 Christian Cap. 6.
courtier and captain named Potinian, All this story Bun. cutteth out, saving
certain rags of his own making.
and finding by chance S. Paul's epistles upon the board, where Augustine and
his fellows were at play; by occasion thereof fell into talk of spiritual
matters: and among other things, to recite unto them the life of Saint
Anthony, the monk of Egypt, and the infinite virtues and miracles of the
same, which he had sound in a book among Christians a little before, and thereby
was him self converted to Christianity. Which story after Augustine had heard;
as also, that there was a monastery A Monastery of monks as Millan before S.
August. time.
of those monks, without the walls of Milla^, (in which City this happened)
and that they were nourished by S. Ambrose Cap. 7.
the bishope (whereof Augustine before this, knew nothing;) he was much more
afflicted then before: and after Potinian was departed, withdrawing him self a
side, had a most terrible combat with him self, whereof he writes thus. What
did I not say against my self in this conflict? how did I beat and whyppe my
own soul, to make her follow thee (o lord?) But she held back, she refused,
and excused her self; and when al her arguments were convicted, she remained
in horror and fear as of death, to be restrained from her loose custom of
sin, whereby she had now consumed her self even unto death. After this he went
into a garden with Alipius, his companion, Cap. 8.
and there cried out unto him. Quid hoc est? quid patimur? surgunt indocti and
caelum rapiunt; and nos cum doctrinis nostris, sine cord, ecce vbi volutamur
in carne and saaguine. What is this? (Alipius) what suffer we under the
tyra^nie of sin? unlearned men (such as Anthony and others) do take heaven
by violence; and we with all our learning, without hearts, behold, how we lie
groueling in flesh and blood? And he goes forward in that place, showing the
wonderful and almost incredible tribulations that he had in this fight, that
day. After this, he went further into an orcharde, and there he had Mark this
gentle reader.
yet a greater conflict. For there, al his pleasures past represented the^
selves together before his eyes, saying unto him? Demittes ne nos, and a
mome^to isto nonerimus tecum vltra in (...)? etc. What, will thou abandone us?
and shall not we be with thee any more for ever, after this moment? shall it not
be lawful for the to do this and that, any more hereafter? And then (says S.
Augustine) O Lord, turn from the mind of thy servant, to think of that filth
which they objected to my soul. What filth, what shameful pleasures did they
lay before mine eyes? At length he says that after long and tedious combats a
maruailous tempest Cap. 12.
of weeping came upon him; and being not able to resist any longer, he ran
away from Alipius, and cast him self upon the ground under a fig tree, and
gave full scope unto his eyes, which brought forth presently whole fluddes of
tears. Which after they were a little past over; he began to speak to God in
this sort: Et tu domine, Li. 8. c. 12.
vsquequo? quam diu? quam diu, cras, and cras? quare non modo? quare non hac
hora finis est turpitudinis meae? O Lord, how long will thou suffer me thus?
how long, how long shall I say to morrow, to morrow? why should I not do it now?
why should there not be an end of my filthy life, even at this instant? And
after this follows his final and miraculous conversion, together with the
conversion of Alipius, his companion; which because it is set down breeflie by
him self, I will recite his own words, which are, as follows immediately upon
those that went before.

I did talk (says he) in this sort to almighty God, and did weep most
bitterly, S. August. final conversion by a voice from heaven.
with a deep contrition of my heart; and behold, I heard a voice, as if it had
been of some child singing from some house nere unto me, and oftentimes it
repeated these words, take up and read; take up and read. And straight ways, I
cha^ging my countenance, began to think most earnestly with my self, whether
children were wont to sing any such thing, in any kind of game that they used;
but I could never remember, that I had heard any such thing before. Wherefore
repressing the force of my tears; I rose up, interpreting no other thing, but
that this voice came from heaven, to bid me open the book that I had with
me, (which was S. Paul's epistles) and to read the first chapter that I should
find. For I had heard before of S. Anthony, how he was admonished to S.
Anthonies conversion. Athanasius in vita Antonij.
his conversion, by hearing a sentence of the Gospel, which was read, when he
by chance came into the Church: and the sentence was; Go and sell al thou have,
and give to the poor, and thou shall have a treasure in heaven, Mat. 19.
and come and follow me. Which saying S. Anthony taking as spoken to him in
particular; was presently converted to thee (o Lord.) Wherefore I went in have
to the place where Alipius sat, for that I lad left my book there when I
departed. I snatched it up, and opened it, and read in silence the first
chapter that offered it self unto mine eyes;and therein were these words; Not
in banquettinges, or in dronkennes; Romans 13.
not in vvantonnes, and chamber works; not in contention and emulation; but
do you put on our Lord Jesus Christ, and do you not perform the providence
of flesh, in concupiscences.

Further then this sentence I would not read, nether was it needful. For
presently with the end of this sentence, as if the light of security had been
poured into my heart, all the darkness of my doutfulnes fled away. Wherepon
putting in my finger, or some other sign, (which now I remember not,) upon the
place; I closed the book, and with a quiet countenance opened the whole matter
to Alipius. And he by this means, uttered also that vocation which now wroght
in him, (which I before knew not. He desired that he might see what I had
read, and I showed the place unto him. He considered the whole, and went
further also then I had read. For it followed in Saint Paul, Romans 14.
which I knew not,) take unto you him that is yet vveake in faith. Which
saying, Alipius applied unto him self, and opened his whole state of doutfulnes
unto me. But by this admonition of S. Paul, he was established, and was joined
to me in my good purpose; but yet calmelie, and without any troublesome
cunctation, according to his nature and manners, whereby he differed always
greatly from me, in the better part.

After this we went in together, to my Her name was Monica, a verj.
mother; we tell her the whole matter; she reioyseth: we recite unto her the
whole order of the thing; she exulteth and holy vvom. i^ as he shevvth.
triumphs, and blesses thee (o Lord,) which art more strong and liberal
than Li 9. c. 9. 10 11. 12. 13.
we can ask or understand; for that she saw now, much more granted to her
from thee, touching me, than she was wont to ask with her pitiful and
lamentable sighs. For thou had so converted me now to thee, that I nether
sought for wife, nor any other hope at al of this world, living and abiding in
that This was the religions rule of Asonostical life which S. Auste^ after
professed Possid. in vita Augu.
rule of fayeth, in which thou did reveal me unto her, so many years
before. And thus thou did turn her sorrow now, into more abunda^t solace,
than she could wish; and into much more dear and chaste joy, then she could
require, by my children, her nephues, if I had taken wife. O Lord, I am thy
servant, I am now thy servant, and child of thy handmay de; thou have broken
my chains, and I will sacrifice to thee therefore, a sacrifice of praise. Let my
heart and tongue praise the: and let my bones say to thee. O Lord, who is
like unto thee? Let them say it (o Lord;) and do thou answer, (I beseech
thee,) and say to my soul; I am thy salvation. Hitherto are S. Augustines own
words.

Now then (dear Christian brother) in the miraculous example of this famous
Annotatio^s upon this conversion.
man's conversion, there be diverse things to be noted, both for our comfort,
and also for our instruction. First is to be out of his possession and
dominion; which was so much the more (no dowt) for that he was to be so great
a pillar afterward in Gods Church. And we see that his fellow Alipius found not
so great resistance, for that the enemy saw there was much less in him, to
hurt his kingdom, than in S. Augustine: which ought greatly to animate and
comfort them, that feel great resistance, and strong temptations against their
vocation; assuring The best men, have greatest conflict in their conversion.
them selves, that this is a sign of more grace and favor, if they manfully
go through. So was S. Paul called (as we read) most violently, being stricken
down to the ground, and made blind by Christ, before his conversion, for that
he was a Act. 9.
chosen vessel, to bear Christ's name unto the Gentiles.

Secondly is to be noted in the same example, that although this man had most
Li. 6. c. 6. and 15.
him so strongly in deed, as he thought it impossible (before his
conversion,) ever to subdue and conquer the same: yet afterward, he proved the
contrary, by the help of Gods omnipotent grace. Thirdly in the way of
virtuous life. For a little after his conversion, he writes thus: I LL 9. c. 6.
could not be satisfied (o Lord) in those days, with the maruailous sweetness
which thougauest me. O, how much did I weep in thy himnes and canticles, being
vehemently stirred up with the voices of thy Church, singing most sweetly!
Those voices did run into my ears, and thy truth did melt into my heart, and
thence did boil out an affection of piety, and made tears to run from me,
and I was in most happy state with them.

Fourthlie is to be remembered for our 4. The diligence of S. Aug. in arying and
follovving Gods vocation.
instruction and imitation, the behavior of this holy man about his vocation.
First in searching and trying out the same, by his repair to S. Ambrose, to
Simplicianus, and others; by reading of good books, frequenting of good
company, and the like; which thou ought also (good reader) to do when thou
feel thy self inwardly moved; and not to lie dead, as many are wont,
resisting openly the holy Ghost with all his good motions, and not so much as
once to give ear to the knocking of Christ at the door of their consciences.
Apoc. 3.
Moreover, S. Austen (as we see) refused not the means to know his vocation,
but prayed, wept, and often retired him self alone from company to talk with
God, in that matter. Which many of us will never do, but rather do detest and
fly al means that may bring us into those cogitations of our conversion.
Finally, S. Austen, after he had once seen clearlie the will and pleasure of
God, made no more stay of the matter, but bracke of strongly from all the
world and vanities thereof; gave over his rhetorike lecture at Millan; left al
hope of promotion in the Li. 9. c. 2.
court, and betook him self to serve almighty God through lie; and therefore,
no marvel if he received so great consolation and advancement from God
afterward, as to be so worthy a member in his holy Church. Which example is to
be followed of al them that desire perfection, so farforth as each man's condition
and state of life permits.

And here by this occasion I may not let pass to advertise thee (good reader)
Violence to be used at the beginning of our conversion.
and also by S. Austens example to forewarne thee, that who soever means to
make this resolution thoroughly, must use some violence to him self at the
beginning. For as a fire, if you rushe in upon it with force, is easily
put-out, but if you deal softly, putting in one hand after an other, you may
rather hurt your self then extinguish the same: so is it with our passions, who
require manhood and courage for a time, at the beginning. Which who soever shall
use (together with the other means set down in the second book of this
treatise:) he shall most certainly find that thing to be easy, which now he
thinks heavy; and that most sweet, which now he esteems so unsavory. For
proof whereof, as also for conclusion of this chapter, I will allege a short
discourse out of S. Barnard; who after his fashion, proves the same most
fitly by an authority alleged out of the holy scriptures. His words are
these.

Christ says unto us; take my yoke upon you, and you shall find rest. This is
a marvelous Bernard. in verba Eua^gelij: Ecce nos relicuimus omnia.
novelty, but that it comes from him which makes al things new. He that
takes up a yoke, finds rest; he that leaves al, finds a hundred times so
much. He knew well this (I mean that man according to the heart of God) which
said in his psalm; Does the seat of iniquity cleave to thee (o Psalm. 93.
Lord) which feignest a labor in thy commandment? is not this a feigned
labor (dear brothren) in a commandment; I mean a light burden, a sweet
yoke, an anointed cross? So in old time he said to Abraham, Genesis 22.
take thy son Isaac, whom thou love, and offer him to me in sacrifice.
This was a feigned labor in a commandment. For Isaac being offered, he was
not killed, but sanctified thereby. Thou therefore, if thou hear the Christsyoke
a feigned labor.
voice of God within thy heart, willing thee to offer up Isaac (which signifies
joy or laughter;) fear not to obey it faith fuilie and constantly. What
soever thy corrupt affection judges of the matter, be thousecure. Not Isaac,
but the Ram shall die for it; thy joy shall not perish, but thy stubburnes
only, whose horns are entangled with thorns, and can not be in thee,
without the prickinges of anxietie. Thy Lord does but tempt the, as he did
Abraham, to see what thou will do. Isaac (that is, thy joy in this life) shall
not die, as thou imaginest, but shall live; only he must be lifted up upon the
wood, to the end, thy joy may be on high, and that thou may glory, not in
thine own flesh, but only in the cross of thy Lord, by whom thy self also
art crucified: crucified, (I say) but crucified to the world: for unto Gall. 3.
God thou live still, and that much more, then thou did before.

THE THIRD IMPEDIMENT THAT STAYS DIVERSE MEN FROM REsolution in Gods service.
Which is, the fear they conceive of persecutution, affliction, loss, danger
or tribulation. CHAPT. III.
THERE want not many persons in the world, who, (either moved by the reasons and
considerations before recited, or convicted by their own experience, for that
they behold daily no small numbers of godly persons to live as contentedly as
them selves) do yield thus much unto virtuous life, that in very deed they
esteem the same to be easy and pleasant enough, to such as are once entered
in thereunto. And that in good sooth, for their own parts, they could be
content to embrace and follow the same, if they might do it with quiet and
peace of al hands. But yet to request them unto it in such time or place, or
with such order and circumstances, as tribulation, affliction, or New snifies
to avoid resolution.
persecution may fall upon them for the same: they think it a matter
unreasonable to be demanded, and them selves very excusable, both before God
and man, for refusing it. But this excuse (dear brother) is no better then the
other going before of the pretended difficulty; for that it stands upon a
false ground, as also upon an unjust illation or consequent enforced upon that
ground. The ground is this; that a man may live virtuously, and serve God
truly, with all worldly ease; and without any affliction, tribulation, or
persecution; which is false. For that, albeit external contradictions and
persecutions, be more in one time then in an other; more in this place, then in
that: yet can there not be any time or place without some, both external and
internal. Which although (as I have showed before) in respect of the manifold
helps and consolations sent from God in co^terpoise of the same, they seem
not heavy nor unpleasant unto the godly: yet are they in them selves both
great and weighty, as would appear if they fell upon the wicked and impatient.
Secondly, the illation and consequence made upon this ground, is unjust; for
that it alleges tribulation, as a sufficient reason to abandone Gods service,
which God him self has ordained for a mean to the contrary effect; that is,
to draw men thereby Four points to be handled in this chapter.
unto his service and from the service of the world. For better declaration
whereof (the matter being of very great importance) I will handle in this
chapter, these four points ensuing.

First, whether it be ordinary for all

Seco^dlie, what are the causes why God

Thirdly, what principal reasons of comfort a man may have in his tribulations

Fourthlie, what is required at his hands in hat state. which four points
being

The first part.
AND TOUCHING the first, there needs little proof, for that Christ him self
has affirmed to his Disciples, and 1. Whether al good men must suffer
tribulation or no.
by them to al other his servants; In mundo pressuram sustinebitis; In the
world you shall sustain affliction. And in an other place; In your patience
shall you possess your souls: that is to say, by suffering patiently the
adversities, that shall be laid upon you: Ioh. 26. Loc. 11. 2. Ti. 3.
which S. Paul yet utters more plainly when he says; Al they that vvil
live godly in Jesus Christ, shall suffer persecution. If al, then none can be
excepted. And to signify yet further the necessity of this matter, both S.
Paul and Barnabas also did teach (as S. Luke reports) that we of necessity
must enter into the kingdom of God, by many Act. 14.
tribulations: using the word oportet, which signifies a certain necessity.
And Christ him self yet more plainly reuealeth this secret, when he says to
S. John the Evangelist, Apo. 3.
that he chastises al those vvho^ he loves. Which words S. Paul as it were
expounding to the hebrews says, flagellat Heb. 12.
omnem filium que^ recipit; he whippeth every child whom he receaueth. And S.
Paul urges this matter so far in that place, as he affirms plainly al
those to be bastardes, and no children of God, who Ver. 8.
are not afflicted by him in this life. The same position he holds to
Timothy: Si sustinemus and conregnabimus; if we suffer 2. Ti. 2.
with Christ, we shall reign with Christ, and not otherwise. Wherein also
co^curreth holy David, when he says, Multe tribulationes Psa. 33.
iustorum; The just are appointed to many tribulations.

The same might be proved by many 1. Testimony of scripture.
other means, as by that our Savior says. He came not to bring peace, but
the svvord into the world. Also by that S. Paul Mat. 10.
says. That no man can be crowned except he 2. Tim. 2.
fight laufullie. But how can we fight, if we have no enemy to oppugn us? The
same signifies Christ in the Apocalips, when C. 2. and 3.
he repeateth so often that heaven is only for him that conquereth. The very
same is signified by the ship, wherinto Christ Matt. 8.
entered with his disciples, which was tossed and tumbled, as if it would have
been drouned; this (I say) by all the ancient Fathers exposition, was a figure
of the troubles and afflictions, that al they should suffer, which do sail in
the same ship with Christ our savior. The same also is proved, in that the
life of man is Job. 7.
called a warfare upon earth; and by that, he is appointed to labor and
travail, Job. 5.
while he is here; also in that, his life is replenished with many miseries,
even by Job. 13.
the appointement of almighty God after man's fall. The same also is showed, in
that that God has appointed every man to pass through the pains of death,
before he come to joy. In like manner, by the infinite contradictions and
tribulations, both within and without, left unto man in this life. As for
example, within, are the rebellions of his concupiscence and other miseries of
his mind, wherewith he has continualie to make war, if he will save his
soul. Without, are the world, and the devil, which do never cease to assault
him, now by fair means, and now by foul; now by flattery, and now by
threats; now alluring by pleasure and promotion, now terrefying by affliction
and persecution; Against al which the good Christian has to resist manfully,
or else he leeseth the crown of his eternal salvation.

The very same thing also may be showed by the examples of all the most
renowned 2. The example of saints in the old testament.
saints, from the beginning; who were not only assaulted internallie with the
rebellion of their own flesh; but also persecuted and afflicted outwardly, by
diverse adversities, thereby to confirm more manifestly this purpose of
almighty God unto us. This we see in Abel, persecuted and slain by his own
brother, as soon as Gene. 4.
ever he began to serve God sincerly. The same we see in Abraham, afflicted
diversely after he was once chosen by almighty God. Of the same cup drank
al his Genesis 22.
children and posterity that succeeded him, in Gods favor; as Isaac, Jacob,
Joseph, Iudit. 8.
Moses, and all the prophets; of whom Christ him self gives testimony, how
their blood was shed most cruelly by the Ma. 5. 23.
world. The affliction also of Job is Luc. 13.
wonderful, seeing the scripture affirms it to have come upon him by Gods
special Job. 1.
appointement, he being a most just man. But yet more wonderful was the
affliction of holy Tobias, who among other calamities, was stricken blind by
the falling Job. 2.
down of swallows dung into his eyes; of which the Angel Raphael told him
afterward: Because thou were a man grateful Tob. 12.
to God, therefore it was of necessity that this tentation should prove thee.
Behold the necessity of afflictions to good men. I might add to this, the
example of David and others; but that S. Paul gives a general testimony of all the saints of the old testament, saying: That some were racked; Heb. 11.
some reproched, some whiped, some chained, some imprisoned: other were stoned,
cut in pieces, tempted, and slain with the sword: some went about in hear
clothe, in skins of goats, in great need, pressed and afflicted, wandering
and hyding them selves in wildernesses, in hills, in caves, and holes under
ground, the world not being worthy of them. Of al which he prononceth this
comfortable sentence, to be noted of al men: Non suscipientes redemptionem, vt
meliorem inuenirent resurrectionem: That is, God would not deliver them from
these afflictions in this life, to the end their resurrection and reward in
the life to come might be more glorious. And this of the saints of the old
testament.

But now in the new testament, founded 3. Saints of the new testament. Luc.
24.
expresselie upon the cross, the matter stands much more plain, and that
with great reason. For, if Christ could not go into his glory but by
suffering, as holy scripture affirms: then by the most reasonable rule of
Christ, affirming, that the servant has not privilege above his master, it
Mat. 10. Luc. 6. Mat. 10.
must needs in reason follow, that al have to drink of Christ's cup, which
are appointed to be partakers of his glory. And for proof hereof, look upon
the dearest friends that ever our Savior had in this life, and see whether
they had part thereof or no? Of his mother, old Simeon prophesied Luc. 2.
and told her at the beginning, that the svvorde of tribulatio^s should pearce
her heart; signifying thereby, the extreme afflictions that she felt afterward
in the death of her son, and other miseries heaped upon her. Of the Apostles
it is evident, that besides al their labors, travails, needs, sufferinges,
persecutions and calamities, which were infinite, and in man's sight
intolerable, (if we believe S. Paul recou^ting the same:) besides all this 1.
Cor. 4. 2. Cor. 4. 6. 11. 12. Act. 20. Romans 8. Ioh. 21.
(I say) God would not be satisfied, except he had their blood also, spent in
his service: and so we see that he suffered none of them al to die naturally
or in his bed, but only S. John by a special privilege particulerlie granted
to him from Christ; albeit if we consider what S. John also suffered in so long
a life as he lived, being banished by Domitian to Pathmos; and at Ter. lib. de
prescrip. hereti. Ierom. lib. cont. Iouin.
an other time, thrust into a tonne of hoate boiling oil at Rome (as Tertulian
and S. Jerome do report;) we shall see that his part also was no less then
others in this cup of his master. I might recko^ up here infinite other
examples, but it needs not; for it may suffice, that Christ has given this
general rule in the new testament; He that takes not up his cross and Math.
10.
follows me, is not vvoorthie of me. By which, is resolved plainly, that
there is no salvation now to be had, but only for them that take up (that is,
do bear willingly) their proper crosses, and therewith do follow their
captain, walking on with his cross upon his shoulders before them.

But here perhaps some man may say; if this be so, that no man can be saved
An objection ansvvered.
without a cross: that is, without affliction and tribulation; how do al those
that live in peacible times and places, where no persecution is, no trouble, no
affliction or tribulation? To which I answer; first, that if there were any
such time or place, the man living therein should be in very great danger,
according to the saying of the prophet, they are not in the labors of other
Psalm. 72.
men, nor yet vvhipped and punished as others are, and therefore pride possessed
the^, and they were covered with iniquity and impiety: and their iniquity
proceeded of their fatness, or abundance. Besides this, albeit men suffered
nothing in this life, yet (as S. Austen largely proves:) In psa. 73. and de
vera and falsa penite^tia. c. 18 1. Cor 3.
if they died out of the state of mortal sin; they might be saved by
suffering the purging fire in the next, according to the saying of S. Paul;
that such as build not gold or silver upon the true foundation, but wood,
straw, or stuble: shall receive damage thereof at the day of our Lord, to be
reueiled in fire; but yet by that fire they shall be saved.

Seco^dlie I answer, that there is no time and place so void of tribulation,
but that there is always a cross to be found, for them that will take it up.
For ever is there either poverty, sickness, slander, enemitie, injury,
contradiction, or some like affliction offered continually. For that, those me^
never want in the world, whereof the prophet said; They that do render evil
for Psalm. 37.
good, did detract me, for that I followed goodness. At the least wise, there
never want those domestical enemies, of which our Savior Christ for warns us;
I mean either Mat. 7.
our kindred and carnal friends, who commonly resist us, if we begin once
thoroughly to serve almighty God; or else our own disordinate affections, which
are the most perilous enemies of al other, for that they make us war upon our
own ground. Again, there never want the temptations of the world and devil, the
resisting whereof is much more difficult in Time of peace more dangerous then of
persecution.
time of peace and wealth, then in time of external affliction and persecution;
for that these enemies are stronger in flattery, then in force; which a godly
father expresses by this parable. The sun and wind (says he) agreed one
day to prove their several strengthes in taking a cloak from a waiefaring man.
And in the forenoone, A parable.
the wind used al violence that he could to blow of the said clok. But the more
he blew, the more fast held the trauailer his clock, and gathered it more
closely about him. At after noone the sun sent forth her pleasant beams, and
by little and little so entered into this man, as he caused him to yield and to
put of, not only his cloak, but also his cote. Whereby is proved (says this
father) that the allurementes of pleasure are more strong and harder to be
resisted, then the violence of persecution.

The like is showed by the example of 2. Re. 11.
king David, who resisted easily many assaults of adversity; but yet fell
dangerously in time of prosperity. Whereby appears that virtuous men have no
less war in time of peace, then in time of persecution. Nor ever wants
there occasion of bearing the cross, and suffering affliction, to him that will
accept of the same. And this may susfice for this first point, to prove that
every man must enter into heaven by tribulation as S. Paul says.

The second part.
TOUCHING THE second, why God would have this matter so; it were sufficient 2.
THE cause why God sends affliction to the godly.
to answer, that it pleased him best so, without seeking any further reason of
his meaning herein: even as it pleased his divine Majesty, without al reason
in our sight, to abase his son so much, as to send him hither into this world
to suffer and die for us. Or if we will needs have a reason hereof, this one
might be sufficient for all; that seeing we look for so great a glory as we do;
we should labor a little first for the same, and so show our selves worthy of
Gods favor and exaltation. But yet, for that it has pleased his divine
Majesty, not only to open unto us his will and determination for our suffering
in this life; but also diverse reasons of his most holy purpose and pleasure
therein, for our further encouragement and consolation that do suffer: I will in
this place repeat some of the same, for declaration of his exceeding great
love and fatherly care toward us.

THE FIRST cause then, and the most 1. Increase of glory.
principal, is, to increase thereby our merit and glory in the life to come.
For having appointed by his eternal wisdom and justice, that none shall be
crouned there, but according to the measure of his fight in 2. Tim. 2. Apoc. 2.
this world; the more and greater co^bates that he gives (together with
sufficient grace to overcome them:) the greater crown of glory prepares he
for us at our resurrection. This cause touches S. Paul in the words before
alleged of Heb. 11.
the saints of the old testament; to wit, that they received no redemption
from their miseries in this world, to the end they might find a better
resurrection in the world to come. This also meant Christ expresselie when he
said: Happy are they Mat. 5.
which suffe: persecution, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven: happy are you
when men speak evil, and persecute you, etc. rejoice and be glad (I say,)
for that your revvard is great in heaven. Hereunto also appertain al those
promises, of gaining life by leesing life; of, receiving a hundred for one, and
the like. Herehence do proceed Mat. 10. Mat. 19. Esa. 56. Mat. 19. 1. Cor. 7.
Psalm 67. Mat. 19. Luc. 12. Pro. 21. Luc. 9. 2. Cor. 4.
al those large promises to virginity, and chastity: and to such as geld them
selves for the kingdom of heaven: to voluntary poverty, and to the renouncing
of our own will by obedience. Al which are great conflictes against the
flesh, world, and our own sensuality, and can not be performed but by
sufferings and affliction. Finally S. Paul declares this matter fully, when
he says: that a little and short tribulation in this life, works a beape of
glory above al measure in the hight of heaven.

THE SECOND cause why God appointed this, is to draw us thereby from 2. HATRED
of the world.
the love of the world, his professed enemy; as in the next chapter shall be
showed at large. This cause S. Paul utters in these words; We are punished
of God (in this 1. Co. 11.
life) to the end we should not be damned with this world. In like manner as
a Nurse, that to weane her child from the love and liking of her milk, does
anointe her teat with Aloes, or some other such bitter thing: so our merciful
Father, that would retire us. A similitude.
from the love of wordlie delites (whereby infinite men do perish daily) uses
to send tribulation, which of al other things has most force to work that
effect; as we see in the example of the prodigal son, who could by no means
be stayed from his pleasures and retired home to his old Father, but only by
Luc. 15.
affliction.

THIRDLY, God uses tribulation as a most present and sovereign medicine 3. A
Medecin to cure our deseases.
to heal us of many diseases, otherwise almost incurable. As first, of a
certain blindenes and careless negligence in our estate, contracted by wealth
and prosperity. In which sense, holy scripture says, that affliction gives
understanding. And the wise man affirms, that the rod brings Eccl. 28.
Pro. 29.
wisdom. This was showed in figure, when the sight of Tobie was restored by
the Tob. 12.
bitter gaul of a fish. And we have clear examples in Nabuchodonasor, Saul,
Antiochus, and Manasses; al which came to Dan. 4. 2. Mac. 9. 2. Para. 33
see their own faults by tribulation, which they would never have done in
time of prosperity. The like we read of the brethren of Joseph, who falling
into some affliction in Egypt, presently entered into their own conscience,
and said; We suffer those things vvorthely, for that we Genesis 42.
sinned against our brother. And as tribulation brings this light, whereby we
see our own defectes: so helps it greatly to remove and cure the same;
wherein it may be well likened unto the rod of Moses. For as that rod
striking the hard rocks, brought forth water, as the scripture Ero. 17. Deuteronomy.
8. Psalm. 77.
says: so, this rod of affliction falling upon stony hearted sinners,
mollifieth them to contrition, and often times brings forth the fluddes of
tears to repentance. Tob. 3.
In respect whereof, holy Tobie says to almighty God; In time of tribulation
thou forgeuest sins. And for like (...) it is compared also to a file of iron
which Job. 23. Prou. 17. Eccle. 2. Esa. 1. Ier. 9.
takes away the rust of the soul. In like manner, to a purgation that drives
out corrupt humors. And finally to a goldsmithes forge which co^sumeth away
the refuse metals, and fineth the gold to his perfection, I vvil try thee by
fire to the quick, (says God to a sinner by Esaias the prophet) and I vvil take
away al thy tin, and refuse metal. And again by Jeremy, I vvil melt them
and try them by fire. This he meant of the fire of tribulation, whose
property is (according as the scripture says) to purge and fine the soul, as
fire purges and Sap. 3. Zach. 13.
fineth gold in the furnace. For besides the purging and removing of greater
sins, by consideration and contrition, (which tribulation woorketh, as has
been showed;) it purges also the ruste of infinite evil passions, appetites,
and humors in man; as the humor of pride, of vain glory, of sloth, of
choler, of delicate nisenes, and a thousand more, which prosperity ingendreth
in us.

This God declares by the prophet Ezec. 24.
Ezechiel, saying, of a rustie soul; put her naked upon the hot coals, and
let her heat there, until her brass be melted from her, and until her
corruption be burned out, and her ruste consumed. There has been much labor
and sweat taken about her, and yet her over much ruste is not gone out of
her.This also signifies holy Job, when having said, that God Job. 33.
instructs a man by discipline (or correction) to the end he may turn him
from the things that he has done, and deliver him from pride: (which is
understood of his sinful acts,) he adds a little after, the manner of this
purgation, saying; his flesh being consumed by punismentes, let him return
again to the days of Ver. 25.
his youth; That is, al his fleshly humors and palsions being now consumed by
punishments and tribulations, let him begin to live again in such purity
of soul, as he did at the beginning of his youth, before he had contracted
these evil humors and diseases by prosperity.

NETHER ONLY is tribulation a strong medicine to heal sin: and to 4. A
Preservative.
purge away the refuse metalles in us, of brass, tin, iron, lead, and
dross, as almighty God by Ezechiel says: but also a most excellent
preservative against sin for the time to come. According as good king David
said, thy discipline (o Lord) has Psalm. 17.
corrected me for evermore; That is to say, it it has made me wary, and
watchful, not to commit sin again, according as the scripture says in an
other place; Agrenous infirmity or affliction makes the soul sober. Eccl. 31.
For which cause the prophet Jeremy calls tribulation, virgam vigilantem? A
watcheful rod; that is, (as S. Jerome expounds Iere. 1.
it,) a rod that makes a man watchful. The same signified God, when he said
by Ose the prophet; I vvil hedge Ose. 2.
in thy way with thorns; That is, I will so close thy life on every side
with the remembrance and fear of affliction, that thou shall not dare to
tread awrie, lest thou tread upon a thorn. Al which, good David expresses
of him self in these Psalm. 18.
words: before I was humbled and brought low by affliction, I did sin and
offend the (o Lord:) but after that time, I have kept thy commandementes.

OF THIS ALSO appears yet an 5. A PREuentio^ of the punishment in purgatory.
other cause, why God afflicts his elect in this life; and that is, to
prevent his justice upon them, in the world to come: I mean that Justice, which
otherwise remains to be executed upon every one after their departure hence
in that most grievous purging fire, whereof I spoke before. Touching which S.
Barnard says thus; Oh would to God some man would now Ser. 55. in cantic.
before hand, provide for my head abundance of waters, and to mine eyes a
fountain of tears; for so happily the burning fire should take no hold,
where running tears had cleansed before. And the reason of this is, (as that
holy man him self notes after) for that God has said by Naum the prophet, I
have afflicted the once, and I vvil not afflict thee again: Naum. 1.
there shall not come from me a double tribulation.

SIXTHLIE, God sends tribulation 6. TO Prove us.
upon his servants, to examine and prove them thereby, whether they be fatheful
and constant or no: that is, to make the^ selves and other men see and
confess, how faithful or unfaithful they are. This in figure was signified,
when Isaac would Genesis 27.
grope and touch his son Jacob, before he would bless him. And this the
scripture expresses plainly, when talking of the tribulations laid upon
Abraham, it adds, tentauit Deus Abraham, God tempted (...). 22.
Abraham, by these means to prove him. And Moses said to the people of
Israel; Thou shall remember how thy God led thee Deuteronomy. 8.
forty years about the desert to afflict thee, and tempt thee; to the end it
might appear wiat was in thy heart, whether thou vvoldest keept bis
commandeme^tes or na. And again, a few chapters after: Your God and Lord does
tempt Deu. 13.
you, to the end it may be manifest whether you love him or no, with al your
heart and with al your soul. In which sense also, the scripture says of
Ezechras, after many praises given unto him, that God left him sor a time to be
tempted, that the thoughts of his heart might thereby be made manifest. 2. Par.
32.


And that this is Gods fashion toward al good men, king David shows in the
person of al, when he says, Thou have proved us (o Lord) thou have examined
us by fire; thou have laid tribulation upon our backs, and Psalm. 63.
have brought men upon our heads. And yet how well he liked of this matter, he
signifies, when he calls for more thereof in an other place: saying, Try me
(o Lord) and tempt me; burn my reins and heart within me. Psa. 25.
That is, try me by the way of tribulation and persecution; search out the
secrets of my heart and reins; let the world see whether I will stick to the
in adversity or no. Thus said that holy prophet, well knowing Tribulation
tries.
that which in an other place the holy Ghost utters; that as the furnace
tries the potters vessels, so tribulation tries men. For as the sound
vessels onelic, do Eccl. 27.
hold when they come to the furnace, and those which are crased do break in
pieces: so in time of tribulation and persecution, the virtuous only stand to
it, and the counterfeit bewraye them selves: according to the saying of Christ:
In tempore tentationis recedunt: They depart from me Luc. 8.
in time of temptation.

THE SEVENTH reason, why God lays tribulation upon the virtuous, is, 7. TO
MAKE men run to God.
thereby to make them run unto him for aid and help: even as the mother, to
make her child to love her more, and to run unto her, procures the same to
be made afearde and terrified by others. This, God expresses plainly by the
prophet Ole, saying of them that he loved; I vvil dravv Ose. 11.
the^ unto me, in the ropes of Adam, in the chains of love, and vvil seem
unto them as though I raised a yoke upon their iavv bones. By the ropes of
Adam, he means affliction, whereby he drew Adam to know him self; as also
appears by that he adds of the heavy yoke of tribulation, which he will lay
upon the heads and faces of his servants, as chains of love, thereby to draw
them unto him. This chain had drawn David unto him when he said, O Psalm. 31.
Lord thou art my refuge from the tribulation of sinners. As also those whereof
Elay says, Esa. 26.
they saught the out (o Lord) in their affliction. Also those of whom David
said, Infirmities Psalm. 19.
were multiplied upon them, and after that, they made have to come. And God
says generally of al good men; They vvil rise betimes Ose. 6.
in the morning, and come to me in their tribulation. Wherefore holy king David
desiring Psalm. 82.
the weal of certain men, and to win them to God, says in one of his
psalms; Fill their faces (o Lord) with shame and confusion, and then vvil they
seek unto thy name. And this is true (as I said) in the elect and chosen
servants of God. But in the Tribulation. helps not the reprobate.
reprobate, this rope draws not, this yoke holds not, nor does this chain
of love win them unto God; whereof God him self complains, saying: In vain
have Iere. 2.
I stricken your children, for they have not received my discipline. And again
the prophet Jeremy says of them to God; thou have crushed them, and they
have refused to receive Iere. 5.
thy discipline; they have hardened their faces even as a rock, and vvil not
return to thee. Behold, they have rent the yoke, and broken the chains.

OF THIS NOW ensues an eight reason, why God brings his servants 8. To
MAnifest Gods power and love in delivering.
into affliction: to wit, thereby to show his power and love in delivering them.
For as in this world a princely mind desires nothing more, the^ to have
occasion whereby to show his ability and good will unto his dear friend: so God
almighty which has al occasions in his own hands, and passes al his
creatures together in greatness of love and nobility of mind; works
purposely diverse occasions and opportunities, whereby to show and exercise she
same. So he brought the three children into the burning furnace, thereby to show
his power and love in delivering them. So he brought Daniel, into the lio^s
de^ne; Dan. 3. 6. 13.
Susanna, unto the point of death; Job, into extreme misery; Joseph, into
prison; Tobie Job. 1. 2. Genesis 31. Tob. 2. 12.
unto blindness: thereby to show his power and love in their deliverance. For
this cause also did Christ suffer the ship to be almost drouned, before he
would Mat. 8.
awake; and S. Peter to be almost under water; Mar. 14.
before he would take him by the hand.

AND OF THIS one reason, many other reasons and most comfortable causes 9. THE
JOY of deliverance.
do appear of Gods dealing herin. As first, that we being delivered from our
afflictions, might take more joy and delight thereof, then if we had never
suffered the same. For as water is more grateful to the waiefaring man, after a
long drouth; and a A sunilitude.
calm more pleasant unto passingers after a troublesome tempest: so is our
delivery more sweet after persecution or tribulation, according as the
scripture says; Speciosa misericordia Dei in tempore tribulationis; Eccl. 35.
the mercy of God is beautiful and pleasant in time of tribulation. This
signified also our Savior, when he said, your sorrow shall be turned into joy;
that is, you shall rejoice Ioh. 16.
that ever you were sorrowful. This had David proved when he said, thy ready (o
Psalm. 22.
Lord) and thy staff have comforted me that is, I take great comfort that ever
I was chastised with them. And again, according to the multitude of my
sorrows, thy consolations Psalm. 53.
have made ioiful my mind: That is, for every sorrow that I received in time of
affliction, I receive now a consolation after my deliverance. And again in an
other place, I vvil exult and rejoice in thy mercy o Lord. And wherefore (good
king) will thou so rejoice? Psalm. 30.
it follows immediately: For that thou have respected my abasement, and have
delivered my soul from the necessity vvherin she was, and have not left me
in the hands of mine enemy.

This then, is one most gracious meaning of our loving and merciful father in
afflicting us for a time; to the end our joy may be the greater after our
deliverance; as no doubt but it was, in all those whom I have named before,
delivered by Gods mercy: I mean, Abraham, Joseph, Daniel, Sidrach, Misach,
and Abdenago, Susanna, Job, Thobias, Peter and the rest; who took much more
joy after their deliverance, then if they had never been in affliction at al.
When Judith had delivered Bethulia, and returned thither with Holofernes head;
Judith. 6. 14. 15.
there was more hearty joy in that city, then ever there would have been, if
it had not been in distress. When S. Peter was Act. 12.
delivered out of prison by the Angel; there was more joy for his deliverance
in the Church, then could have been, if he had never been in prison at al.

OVT of this great joy resulteth an other 10. THANKS giving for our
deliverance.
effect of our tribulation, much pleasant to God, and comfortable to our
selves; and that is, a most hearty and earnest thankesgeuing to our Lord for
our deliverance; such as the prophet used when he said, after his deliverance:
I for my part vvil sing Psalm. 58.
of thy strength, and vvil exalt thy mercy betimes in the morning, for that
thou have been my aider and refuge, in the daey of my tribulation. Such hearty
thanks and praise did the children of Israel yield to God for their
deliverance, when they were passed over the read sea, in that notable song of
theirs, which begins, Cantemus domino; and is Exo. 15. 1. Re. 2. Iudie. 5.
Iudi. 12.
registered by Moses in Exodus. From like hearty affect came also those songs
of Anna, Debora, and Judith, moved thereunto by the remembrance of their
afilictions past. And finally, this is one of the cheifest things that God
esteems and desires at our hands; as he testefieth by the prophet, saying,
call upon me in the day of tribulation; and Psalm 49.
I vvil deliver thee, and thou shall honor me.

BESIDES AL these effects, God has yet further reasons of laying persecution
11. EMROLDning us (...) Gods service.
upon us; as for example, to the end that by suffering, and perceiving in deed
Gods certain assistance and consolation therein, we may come to be so hardy,
bold, and constant in his service, as nothing afterward can dismay us. Eue^ as
Moses, albeit he were first afeard of the serpent that Exo. 4.
was made of his rodd, and so fled away from it: yet afterward, when he by
Gods commandment had once taken it up by the tail, he feared it no more. This
the Psalm. 45.
prophet David expresses notably, when he says: God has been our refuge,
and strength, and helper in our great tribulations, and therefore we vvil not
fear if the whole earth should be troubled, and the mountains cast into the
midst of the sea. What greater considence can be imagined then this?

AGAIN, by persecution and affliction 12. THE exercise of all the virtues.
God brings his children to the exercise and perfect possession of all the
holy virtues belonging to a Christian man. As for example, faith is exercised
in time of tribulation, by considering the causes of Faith.
Gods permission, and believing most assuredly the promises he has made for
our deliverance. Hope is exercised in conceauing Hope.
and assuring our selves of the rewards promised to the^ that suffer patiently.
Charity Charity.
is exercised, in considering the love of Christ suffering for us, and thereby
proueketh the afflicted to suffer again for him. Obedience is exercised, in
co^forming Obedience. Patience. (...).
our wills to the will of Christ. Patience, in bearing quietly. Humility, in
abasing our selves in the sight of God. And so likewise al other virtues,
belonging to a good Christian, are stirred up, exercised, confirmed,
strengthened, and established in man by tribulation, according to the saying of
S. Peter: God shall make perfect, confirm, and 1. Pet. 5.
establish them, which have suffered a little for his name.

FINALLY, Gods meaning is by laying 13. To MAKE us like unto Christ.
persecution and affliction upon us, to make us perfect Christians, that is to
say, like unto Christ our captain, whom the prophet calls Virum dolorum, and
scientem infirmitatem; a man of sorrows, and one Esa. 53.
that had tasted of al manner of infirmities, thereby to receive the more glory
at his return to heaven, and to make more glorious al those, that will take his
part therein. To speak in one word; God would make us by tribulation to become
crucified Crucified Christians.
Christians, which is the most honorable title that can be given unto a
creature in heaven or earth. Crucified (I say) and mortified to the vanities
of this world; to the flesh and to our own concupiscence and carnal desires;
but quick and full of al live lie spirit, to virtue, godliness, and devotion.
This is the heavenly meaning of our Sovereign Lord and God, in sending us
persecution, tribulation, and affliction; in respect whereof holy Job douteth
not to say: Blessed is the man that is afflicted by God. Job. 5. Mat. 5.
And Christ him self yet more expresselie; Happy are they which suffer
persecution. If they be happy and blessed thereby, then is the world (no doubt)
greatly a vvrie, which so much abhors the sufficiance thereof; the^ is
almighty God but unthankfully dealt with all by many of his children, who
repine at this happiness bestowed upon them, where as indeed they should accept
it with joy and thankes-geuing. For proof and better declaration whereof, I
will enter now into the third point of this chapter, to examine what reasons and
causes there be, to induce us to this joyfulness and contentation in tribulation.

The third part.
AND FIRST of al for proof and declaration of this third part, the reasons
WHY tribulations should be perceived ioifullie.
and causes before alleged of almighty Gods merciful and fatherly meaning in
sending us affliction, might be sufficient to comfort and content any Christian
man or woman, who takes delight in Gods holy providence toward them. For if
God do send affliction unto us, for the increase of our glory in the life to
come, for drawing us from infectio^ of the world, for opening our eyes, and
curing our diseases; and for preserving our souls from sin hereafter, as
has been showed in the former part: who can be justly displeased therewith, but
such as are enemies unto their own eternal welfare? We see, that for the
obtaining of bodily health, we are content, not only to admit many bitter and
unpleasant medicines, but also (if need require) to yield willingly some part
of our blood to be taken from us. And how much more should we do this, for the
eternal health and salvation of our souls? But now further; if this medicine
have so many more commodities besides, as have been declared: if it serve here
for the punishment of our sins, due otherwise in an other place, in far
greater quantity and rigor of justice: if it make The benefits of suffering.
a trial of our estate, and do draw us to God: if it procure Gods love
toward us; yield matter of joy by our deliverance; provoke us to thankfulness;
embolden and strengthen us in his service; and finally, if it furnish us with all virtues, and do make us like to Christ him self crucified: then is there
singular great cause, why we should take comfort and consolation therein: for
that to come near and to be like unto our master and Savior, is the greatest
dignity and preemine^ce that can be imagined. Lastly, if Gods eternal wisdom
have so ordained and appointed, that this shall be the meares of his servants
salvation; the badge and liuerie of his son; the high way to heaven under the
standard of his Cross: then ought we not to abhor these means, not to refuse
this liuerie, not to fly this way, but rather with good S. Peter Act. 5.
and John, to esteem it a great dignity to be made worthy of the most
blessed participation thereof. We see that to wear A comparison.
the colors of the prince, is thought aprerogatiue among courtiers in this
world; but to wear the robe or crown it self, were to great a dignity for
any inferior subject to receive. Yet Christ our Lord and king is content to
imparte both the one and the other of his, unto us. And how then ought we (I
pray you) to accept thereof?

And now (as I have said) these reasons might be sufficient to comfort and
Special considerations, of comfort in affliction.
make joyful al those that are so happy as to be called to suffer affliction
and tribulation for Christ's cause. But yet there want not some more particular
considerations besides. Whereof the first and most principal is, that this
matter of persecution and affliction comes not by chance or 1. Gods
providence and his love.
casualtie, or by any certain general direction of stars and planetes unto
Christians, but by the special providence and peculiar disposition of God, as
our Savior Christ shows at large in S. Matthews Mat. 10.
gospel; that is to say, this heavenly medecin or potio^, is made for us by
the very hand of almighty God. Which Christ signifies expressly when he said
to his disciples, at it were in anger, shall I not drink the cup which my
Father has given to Ioh. 18.
me? That is, for as much as mine ownfather has tempered a potion for me, shall
I not drink it? as who would say, it were too much ingratitude. Seco^dlie is
to be noted, that the very same hand of God, which tempered the cup for
Christ, who was his own natural son, has done the same also for us,
according to Christ's saying; You shall drink of my cup; to wit, of the same
cup which my Father has Mat. 10.
tempered for me. Hereof it follows, that, with what heart and love, almighty
God tempered this cup unto his own most dearly beloved son; with the same
he has tempered it also to us: that is, altogether for our good and for his
glory. Thirdly is to be considered, that this cup is te^pered with such
special care (as Christ says) that, what trouble or danger soever it may
seem to work: (as al purgations for a time do) yet shall not one hear of
our head perish by the same. Nay Luc. 21. Mat. 10. Psalm. 79.
further, is to be noted, that which the prophet says, O Lord thou shall give
us to drink in tears, in measure. That is, the cup of tears and
tribulation shall be so tempered in measure by our heavenly physician, as no
man shall have above his strength. The dose of Aloes and other bitter
ingredients shall be qualified with manna and sufficient sweetness of heaue^lie
consolation. God is faithful (says S. Paul) 1. Co. 10.
and vvil not suffer you to be tempted above your ability. This is a singular
point of comfort, and ought always to be in our remembrance.

Besides this, we must consider, that the appointing and tempering of this
cup, 2. Al tribulatio^s measured unto us by Christ Mat. 28. Heb. 5.
being now in the hands of Christ our Savior, by the full commission granted
him from his Father, and he having learned by his own sufferinges (as S. Paul
notifieth) what it is to suffer in flesh and blood; we may be sure that he will
not lay upon us more, then we can bear. For, as A comfortable comparison.
if a man had a Father or brother that were a most skilful physician, and
should receive a purgation from them, tempered with their own hands; he might
be sure it would never hurt him, what ro^bling soever it made in his belly for
the time: so and much more may we be assured of this potion of tribulation
ministered unto us by the hand of Christ, howsoever (as S. Paul says) it seem
unto us unpleasant Heb. 12.
in the operation.

BUT ABOVE al other comfortable 3. GODS measure of tribulation goes according
to the measure of his Ieue. Apoc. 3. Heb. 12.
cogitations, this is the greatest and most full of consolation, to consider,
that he divides this cup only of love, as him self protests, and as S.
Paul proves; that is, he geneth out portions of his cross (the richest Jewel
that he makes account of) as worldly princes do their treasine: unto none,
but unto his chosen and picked friends; and among them also, not equally to
(...), but to every one a measure, according to the measure of good will and
special affection wherewith he loves them. This is evident by the examples
before set down of his dearest friends most of al afflicted in this life; that
is to say, they received greatest portio^s of this treasure, for that his good
will was greatest toward them. This also may be seen manisestly in the example
of S. Paul, of whom after that Christ had said to Ananias, vas electionis est
mihi, he is a chosen vessel unto me: he gives immediately Act. 9.
the reason thereof: For I vvil show unto him, what great things he must
suffer for my name. Lo here, for that he was a chosen vessel, therefore he must
suffer great matters for Christ. Does not the measure of suffering go then
according to the measure of Gods love unto us? Surely S. Peter knew well how the
matter went, and therefore he writes thus: If you living well, do suffer with
patience; this 1. Pet. 2.
is a grace (or privilege) before God. And again alitle after: If you suffer
reproach in the name of Christ, you are happy; for that the honor and 1. Pet.
4.
glerie, and power of God, and of his holy spirit, final rest upon you.

Can there possibly be any greater reward promised to man or any more The
great dignity of suffering.
excellent dignity, the^ to be made partaker of the honor, glory, and power
of Jesus Christ? Is it marvel now if Christ said, Happy are you when men
revile and persecute Mat. 5.
you? Is it marvel though he said, gaudete in illa die, and exultate,
rejoice and triumph Luc. 6.
ye in that day? Is it marvel, though S. Paul said, I take great pleasure,
and do glory in my infirmities or afflictions, in 2. Co. 12.
my reproaches, in my necessities, in my persecutions, in my distresses for
Christ? Is it marvel if S. Peter and S. John being Act. 5.
reproched and beaten at the Judgment seat of the Jews, went away rejoicing
that they were esteemed worthy to suffer contumely for the name of JESUS? Is
it marvel though S. Paul accounted this such a high privilege given to the
Philippiens when he said, It is given unto you, Philip. 1.
not only to believe in JESUS Christ, but also to suffer for him, and to have
the same co^bat which you have seen in me, and now hear of me? All this is
no marvel (I save,) seeing that suffering with Christ, and bearing the cross
with Christ, is as great a preferme^t in the court of heaven, as it should be
in an earthly court for the prince to take of his own garment, and to lay
it on the back of one of his servants.

Of this now follows an other consequent 4. TRIBVlation a sign of
predestination.
of singular consolation in time of affliction; and that is, that tribulation
(especially when grace is also given to bear it patiently) is a great
conjecture of our predestination to eternal life. For, so much do al those
arguments before touched, insinuate. As also on the contrary part, to live in
continual prosperity, is a dreadful sign of everlasting reprobatio^. This
point is marvelously proved by S. Paul unto the hebrews, and greatly Heb.
12.
urged. And Christ gives a plain signification in S. Luke, when he says;
Happy Luc. 6.
are you that weep now, for you shall laugh. And on the other side; VVoe be
unto you that laugh now, for you shall weep: vvoe be unto you rich men,
which have your consolation here in this life. And yet more vehemently then
all this, does the saying of Abraham to the rich man in hell, (or rather Christ's
words parabolicallie attributed unto Abraham) confirm this matter. For he
says to the rich man complaining of his torment: Remember child, that thou
receauedst Luc. 16.
good things in thy life time. He does not say (as S. Barnard well notes)
rapuisti, thou tokest them by violence, but recepisti, thou receauedst them.
And yet, this now is objected against him for a sufficient cause of his
damnation as we see. Holy David handles this matter in diverse places, but
purposelie in two of his psalms, Psalm. 27. and 143.
and that at large. And after long search, and much admiration, his conclusion
of wicked me^ prospering above other in the world, is this: Veruntamen propter
dolos posuisti Psalm. 37. Ver. 18.
eis, deiecisti eos dum alleuarentur. Thou have given them prosperity (o Lord)
to deceive them withal; and thou have indeed thrown them down, by exalting
them: That is; thou have thrown them down to the sentence of damnation in thy
secret and inscrutable determination.

Here then the comparison of S. Gregory Com. in Job.
takes place; that as the oxen appointed to the slaughter, are let run to
feed at their pleasure, and the other A comparison of S. Gregory.
kept under daily labor of the yoke: so fares it with evil and good men. In
like manner, the tree that bears no fruit, is never beaten (as we see) but
only the fruitful; and yet the other (as Christ says) is reserved for the
fire. The sick man that Ma. 3. 7. Ep. Iud.
is past al hope of life, is suffered by the physician to have whatsoever he
lusts after; but he whose health is not dispaired, can not have that liberty
granted. To conclude, the stones that must serve for 3. Re. 6.
the glorious temple of Solomon, were hewed, beaten, and polished without the
Church, at the quarrie side, for that no stroke of hammer might be heard within
the temple. S. Peter says, that the virtuous 1. Pet. 2.
are chosen stones, to be placed in the spiritual building of God in heaven,
where there is no beating, no sorrow, no tribulation. Here then in this life
must we Apo. 21.
be polished, hewed, and made fit for that glorious temple; here (I say) in the
quarrie of this world; here must we be fined, here must we feel the blow of
the hammer, and be most glad when we hear or feel the same; for that it is
a sign of our election, to that most glorious house of Gods eternal mansion.

BESIDES THIS matter of predestination 5. TRIRVlatio^ brings the company of
God him self. Psalm. 90.
and election, there is yet an other thing of no small comfort to the godly
afflicted, founded on these words of almighty God, cum ipso sum in
tribulatione; I am with him in tribulation. Whereby is promised the company of
God him self in affliction and persecution. This is a singular motive (says S.
Barnard) to stir men up to embrace tribulation, seeing that even in this world
for good company, men adventure to do many hard and difficult things. Joseph
was carried captive into Egypt, and God went down with Genesis 37 Sap. 10
him (as the scripture says:) yea more then that, he went into the dongeon,
and was in chains with him. Sidrach Misach and Abdenago were cast into a
burning furnace, and presently there was a fourth seen, that did bear them
company; of whom Nabuchodonasor says thus: did Dan. 3
we not put three men only bound into the fire? And his servants answered,
yea verily Sir. But behold (says he) I see four men unbound walking in the
midst of the fire; and the shape of the fourth is like the son of God.
Christ restored, as he passed by, a certain beggar unto his sight, which had
been blind from his nativity. For which thing, the man being soon after
called in question, and speaking somewhat in the praise of Ioh. 9
Christ, for the benefit received; he was cast out of the sinagoge by the
pharasies. Note this example.
Whereof Christ hearing, sought him out presently, and conforting his heart,
bestowed upon him the light of mind, much more of importance then that of the
body given unto him before. By this and like examples it appears, that a man
is no sooner in affliction and tribulation for justice sake, but straight way
Christ is at hand to bear him company: and if his eyes might be opened, as
the eyes of Elizeus his disciple was, to see his companions, the troops of
Angels (I mean) 4. Re. 16
which attend upon their Lord in this his visitation: no doubt but his heart
would greatly be comforted therewith.

BUT THAT which the eye can not see, the soul feels; that is, she feels 6.
THE assistance of Gods grace in tribulation.
the assistance of Gods grace amiddest the depth of al tribulations. This he
has promised again and again; this he has sworn; and this he performs
most faithfully to al those that suffer meeklie for his name. This S. Paul
most certainly assured him self of, when he said, that he did glory in all
his infirmities and tribulations, to the end that Christ his virtue might dwell
in him; that is to say, to the end that Christ should assist him more
abundantly with his grace. Cu^enim infirmor, tunc potens sum; for when I am in
most infirmity, then am I most strong, says he. That is, the more
tribulations and afflictions are laid upon me, the more potent is the aid of
Jesus Christ his grace unto me. And therefore the same Apostle writes thus of
him self and of al the other Apostles together; We suffer tribulation in all
things, but yet we are not distressed; we are 2. Co. 4
brought into perplexities, but yet we are not forsaken; we suffer
persecution, but yet we are not abandoned; we are throvve^ down to the
ground, but yet we perish not. This the^ ought to be a most sure and secure
staff in the hand of al Christians afflicted, that whatsoever befall unto them,
death or life, yet the grace of almighty God will never fail to hold them up,
and bear the^ out therein. for most true and certain is that saying of S.
Austen, so often repeated by him in Ser. 88 de temp. and de not. and gr. ca. 26.
his works; that God never forsakes any man, except he be rejected and
forsaken by man first.

FOR THE LAST reason of comfort in affliction, I will join two things 7. 8.
SHORT time of suffering, and great revvard. 2. Co. 4
together, of great sorce and efficacy in this matter. The first whereof, is
the expectation of reward: the other is the shortness of time wherein we have
to suffer: both are touched by S. Paul in one sentence, when he says, that a
little, and momentanie tribulation in this world, works an eternal poise of
glory in the hight of neauen. By momentanie, he shows the^ little time we have
to suffer: and by eternal poise of glory, he expresses the incomprenensible
greatness of the reward prepared in heaven for recompense of that suffering.
Christ also ioineth both these comfortes together, when he says: Behold I come
quickly, Apo. 22.
and my revvard is with me. In that he promises to come quickly, he
signifies that our tribulation shall not enduie long; and by that he brings
his reward with him, he assures us that he will not come empty ha^ded, but
ready furnished, to recompense our labor thoroughly. And what greater means of
encouragement, dear brother, could he use then this? If a man did bear a
very heavy burden, yet if he were sure to be well paid for his labor, and
that he had but a little way to (...) (...) comparison.
the same, he would strain him self greatly, to go through to his ways end,
rather then for sparing so short a labor, to leese so large and so present a
reward. This is our Lords most mercirul dealing with us, to comfort us in our
affliction, and to animate us to hold out ma^fully for a time, though for the
present the poise seem heavy on our shoulders. The coming of Iac. 5. Mat.
11. Apoc. 7. 21. Gal. 6.
our Lord is even at hand, and the judge is before the gates, who shall refresh
us, and wipe away al our tears, and place us in his kingdom to reap joy
without fainting. And then shall we prove the saying of holy S. Paul to be
true; That the sufferinges of this world are not vvoorthie of that glory Romans
8
which shall be revealed in us. And this may be sufficient for the reasons left
us of comfort in tribulation and affliction.

The fourth part.
AND THVS now having performed How WE (...) behave our selves in tune of
tribulation.
the first three parts before promised; there remains only to say a word
or two of the fourth; which is, what we have to do for our parts in time of
persecution tribulation and affliction. And this might be dispatched in saying
only that we have to conform ourselves to the will and meaning of almighty
God, uttered before in the causes of tribulation. But yet for more ease and
better remembrance of the same, I will breeflie run over the principal
points, that are to be borne in memory.

AND FIRST of al, we should endeavor 1. To Rejoice.
to aspire unto that perfection, whereof our Savior speaks, and whereunto he
exhorts us when he says, gaudete and exultate. rejoice and triumph in your
adversities. Or else if our corrupt and lumpish nature Luc. 6.
will not permit us to arrive unto this so singular a perfection; yet ought we
at least wise to perform that which the Apostle so expressly commands when he
says, Jacob. 1
omne gaudium existimate cum in varias tentatianes incideritis, esteem it a
matter worthy of al joy, when ye fall into diverse temptations; that is, if we
can not rejoice at it in deed, yet ought we to think it a matter in it self
worthy of rejoicing; reprehending our selves, for that we can not reach unto
it. And if we ca^ not mount thus high nether, (as in deed we ought to do) yet
in any case to remember, what in an other place he says: patientia vobis
Heb. 10
necessaria est, vt reportetis promissionem: You must of necessity have
patience, if you will receive Gods promise of everlasting life.

SECONDLY, we ought to do as 2. To COME to God by seruent prayer. Mat. 8.
the Apostles did, when they were in the most terrible tempest of the sea
(Christ being with them, but a sleep;) that is, we must go and awake him; we
must cry unto him with the prophet: Exurge, quare obdormis domine? O Lord
arise, why do Psalm. 43
thou sleep in our misery? This wakening of Christ does please him
wonderfully, as before has been showed; but especialie if it be done, with
that assured confidence of true affectioned children, wherewith S. Mark
describes the Apostles to have awakened Christ. For their words were Marc. 4
these; Master, does it not appertain unto the, that we perish here? As who
would say, are not we thy Disciples and servants? art not thou our Lord and
Master? is not the cause thine? is not al our trust and hope in the? how
chances it then, that thou sleep and suffer us to be thus tossed and
tombled, as if we appertained nothing unto the? With this zele and affection
prayed holy Esaye, when he said; attend Esa. 63.
(o Lord) from heaven; look hither from the holy habitation of thy glory;
where is thy zeal? where is thy fortitude? where is the multitude of thy
merciful bowels? Have they shut the^ selves up now toward us? thou art our
father, Abraham has not known us, and Israel has been ignorant of us; thou
art our Father (o Lord) turn thy self about for thy serua^res sake, for love
of the tribe of thine inheritance. Thus I say we must call upon God; thus we
must awake him, when he seems to sleep in our miseries; with earnest, with
devout, with continual prayer; always having in our mind that most
comfortable parable of Christ, wherein he says, Luc. 11
that if we should come to our neighbors door, and knock at midnight to
borowe some bread, when he were in bed with his children, and most loath to
rise: yet if we persevere in asking and beating at his door still, though he
were not our friend, yet would he rise at length, and give us our demand,
thereby at least to be rid of our crying. And how much more will God do this
(says Christ) who both loves us, and tendreth our case most mercifully?

But yet here is one thing to be noted in this matter: and that is, that Christ
suffered An important note. Mat. 8.
the ship almost to be covered with waves (as the Evangelist says) before
he would awake; thereby to signify, that the measure of temptations is to be
left only unto him self. It is sufficient for us to rest upon the Apostles
wordess He is faithful, and therefore he vvil not suffer us 1. Co. 10
to be tempted above our strength. We may not examine or mistrust his doings;
we may not inquire why he does this; or why he suffers that; or how long will
he permit the evils to reign. God is a great God in all his doings; and when he
sends tribulation, he sends a great deal together, to the end he may
show his God permits temptations to grow great before he remedy.
great power in delivering us, and recompense it after, with great measure of
comfort. His temptations often times do go very deep, thereby to try the
very hearts and reins of men. He went far with Elias, when he caused him to
fly into a mountain, and there most desirous of death, to say; They have
killed al thy prophets (o Lord) and I am left alone, and now they seek 3. Re.
19
to kill me also. He went far with David, when he made him cry out: why do
thou forget my poverty and tribulation? And Psalm. 30.
in an other place again: I said with my self in the excess of my mind; I am
cast out from the face of thy eyes, o Lord. God went far with the Aposties,
when he 2. Cor. 1.
enforced one of them to writ, we will not have you ignorant (brethren) of our
tribulation in Asia, wherein we were oppressed above al measure, and above al
strength; in so much as it lothed us to live any longer. But yet above al
others, he went furthest with his own dear son, when he constrained him to
utter those pitiful and most lamentable words upon the cross; My God, my God,
why have thou for Mat. 27 Psalm. 21
saken me? Who can now complain of any proof or temptation what soever laid
upon him, seeing God would go so far with his own dear and only son?

HEREOF then enseweth the third 3. Magnanimity with a strong faith.
thing necessary unto us in tribulation: which is magnanimity; grounded upon
a strong and invincible faith of Gods assistance, and of our final deliverance,
how long soever he delay the matter, and how terrible soever the storm do
seem for the time. This God require that our hands, as may be seen by the
example of the disciples, who cried not, we perish; before Mat. 8. Luc. 8.
the waves had covered the ship, as Saint Matthew writes: and yet Christ said
unto them, abi est sides vestra, where is your faith? S. Peter also was not a
feared until he was almost under water, as the same Evangelist records; and
yet Christ reprehended Mat. 14
him saying, thou man of little says, why did thou doubt? What then must
we do in this case, dear brother? surely we must put on that magnanimous
faith of valiant king David, who upon the most assured trust he had of Gods
assistance, said, In deo meo transgrediar murum; In the help of my God I will
go through a wall. Psalm. 17
Of which invincible says S. Paul was also, when he said: Omnia possumineo
qui me Phil. 4.
consortat; I can do al things in him that comfort and strengthens me.
Nothing is impossible, nothing is to hard for me, by his assistance. We must
be (as Prou. 28
the scripture says) quasi leo considens absque terrore. Like a bold and
confident lion, which is without terror; that is, we must not be astonished at
any tempest, atanie tribulation, at any adversity; we must say with the
prophet Dauic, experienced Psalm. 3.
in these matters; I vvil not fear many thousands of people that should
enuironne or Psalm. 21 Psalm. 26
beseege me together. If I should walk amiddest the shadovv of death, I vvil
not fear. If whole armies should stand against me, yet my heart should not
tremble. My hope is in God, and therefore I vvil not fear what man can do
unto me. God is my helper, and I vvil not fear what stesh can do unto me.
God is my he per, and protector, and Psalm. 55
therefore I vvil despise and contemn mine enemies. And an other prophet in
like sense: Psa. 117 Esaie (...).
Behold, God is my Savior, and therefore vvil I deal considentlie, and vvil
not fear. These were the speeches of holy prophets; of men that knew well what
they said, and had often tasted of affliction, them selves; and therefore could
say of their own experience, how infallible Gods assistance is therein.

To this supreme courage, magnanimity, and Christian fortitude, the scripture
4. Christian fortitude. Eccl. 10 Eccl. 4.
exhorts us, when it says; If the spirit of one that is an authority, do
rise against thee; see thou yield not from thy place unto him. And again, an
other scripture says: strive for justice, even to the loss of thy life; and
stand for equity unto death it self, and God shall overthrow thine enemies for
thee. And Christ him self yet more effectually Luc. 12.
recom ne^deth this matter in these words; I say unto you my friends, be not a
fearde of them which kill the body, and afterward have nothing else to do
against you. And S. Peter adds 1. Pet. 3.
further, (...) co^turbemini; That is, do not only not fear them, but (which
is less) do not so much as be troubled for all that flesh and blood ca^ do
against you.

Christ goes further in the Apocalips, Christ's exhortation to magnammitte.
Apoc. 2.
and vieth maruailous speeches to entise us to this forticude. For these are his
words; he that has an ear to hear, let him hear what the spirit says unto
the churches. To him that shall conquer, I will give to eat of the tree of
life, which is in the paradise of my God. This says the first and the last,
he that was dead, and now is a live: I know thy tribulation, and thy poverty:
but thou art rich in deed, and art blasphemed by those that say they are true
Israelites, and are not, but are rather the Sinagogue of Satan. Fear nothing
of that which you are to suffer; behold, the devil will cause some of you to be
thrust into prison, to the end you may be tempted: and you shall have
tribulation for Those ten days some think to have been the ten general
persecutions, within the first 300. years, after Christ. Cap. 3.
te^ne days. But be faithful unto death, and I will give the a croune of life.
He that has an ear to hear, let him hear what the spirit says unto the
churches. He that shall overcome, shall not be hurt by the second death. And he
that shall overcome, and shall keep my works unto the end, I will give unto him
authority over nations, even as I have received it from my father; and I will
give him besides, the morning star. He that shall overcome, shall be appareled
in white garments; and I will not blot his name out of the book of life, but
will confess his name before my father, and before his Angels. Behold, I come
quickly; hold fast that thou have, lest an other man receive thy croune. He
that shall conquer, I will make him a pillar in the temple of my God, and he
shall never go forth more; and I will write upon him the name of my God, and
the name of the city of my God, which is new Jerusalem. He that shall conquer,
I will give unto him to sit with me in my throne; even as I have conquered, and
do sit with my father in his throne.

Hitherto are the words of Christ to S. John. And in the end of the same
book, after he had described the joys and glory of heaven at large, he
concludes thus; And he that fate on the throne said to me. Write these words,
for that they are most faithful and true, Qui vicerit possidebit haec, and ero
illi Deus, and ille erit mihi (...): timidis autem Cap. 21
and incredulis etc. pars illorum erit in stagna ardenti, igne and sulphur,
quod est mors secunda. He that shall conquer, shall possess all the joys that I
have here spoken of; and I will be his God, and he shall be my son. But A
terrible (...) (...) (...) fear (...).
they which shall be fearful to sight, or incredulous of these things that I have
said; their portion shall be in the lake burning with fire and brimstone, which
is the second death.

Here now we see both allurements and threats; both good and evil: life and
death: Eccl. 18.
the joys of heaven, and the burning lake of hell proposed unto us. We may
streach out our hands unto which we will. If we fight and conquer (as by Gods
grace we may) then are we to enjoy the promises laid down before. If we show
our selves either unbelieving in these promises, or fearful to take the sight in
hand, being offered unto us, then fall we into the danger of the contrary
threats; even as S. John affirms in an other place, that certain noble men
did, among the Jews; who believed Ioh. 12.
in Christ, but yet durst not confess him, for fear of persecution.

HERE THEN must ensew an other 5. A FIRM resolution.
virtue in us, most necessary to al tribulation and affliction; and that is, a
strong and firm resolution, to stand and go through, what opposition or
contradiction soever we find in the world, either of fauning flattery, or of
persecuting cruelty. This the scripture teaches crying unto us, esto Excl. 9.
firmus in via domini; Be firm and immouable in the way of our Lord. And
again, State 1. Co. 16
in side, (...) agite: Stand to your faith, and play the men. And yet further,
conside in Eccl. 11.
Deo, and mane in loco (...) Trust in God, and abide firm in thy place. And
finally, (...) 2. Par. 15
and no^ dissoluantur (...) vestrae. Take courage unto you, and let not your
hands be dissolved from the work you have begone.

This resolution had the three children The consta^cie and firm resolutia^ of
(...).
Sydrach, Misach, and Abdenago, when having heard the flattering speech, and
infinite threats of cruel Nabuchodonasor, they answered with a quiet spirit; O
king Dan. 3.
we may not answer you, to this long speech of yours. For behold our God is
able (if he will) to deliver us from this furnace of fire which you threaten,
and from all that you ca^ do otherwise against us. But yet if it should not
please him so to do; you must know (Sir king) that we do not worship your
gods, nor yet adore your, golden: Idol, which you have set up.

This resolution had Peter and John, who being so often brought before the
council, and both commanded, threatened, and beaten, to the end they should
talk no more of Christ, they answered still; Obedire Act. 4. 5.
oportet Deo magis quam hominibus, we must obey God, rather then men. The same
had S. Paul also, when being requested with S. Paul.
tears of the Christians in Cesarea, that he would forbear to go to
Jerusalem, for Act. 21.
that the holy Ghost had revealed to many, the troubles which expected him
there: he answered; what mean you to weep thus, and to afflict my heart? I am
not only ready to be in bonds for Christ's name in Jerusalem, but also to
suffer death for the same. And in his epistle to the Romans, Romans (...).
he yet further expresses this resolution of his, when he says: what the^
shall we say to these things? if God be with us, who will be against us? who
shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall tribulation? shall distress?
shall hungar? shall nakedness? shall peril? shall persecution? shall the sword? I am
certain that nether death, nor life, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor
powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor strength, nor height, nor
depth, nor any creature else, shall be able to separate us from the love of God,
which is in Jesus Christ, our Lord.

Finally, this was the resolution of all the holy Martyrs and Confessors, and
Of Martyrs.
other servants of God: whereby they have withstood the temptations of the
devil, the allurementes of flesh and blood, and all the persecutions of
tirants, exacting things unlawful at their hands. I will allege one example
more out of holy scripture, and that before the coming of Christ, but yet nigh
unto the same; and therefore no manuaile (as the holy fathers do note) though
it took some heat of Christian fervor and constancy toward martyrdom.
The example is wounderful, for that in man's sight it was but for a small matter
required at their hands, by the tirantes commandment; that is, only to eat
a piece of swines flesh: for thus it is recorded in the scripture.

It hapened seven brethren to be apprehended together in those days, and to be
brought (with their mother) to the tyrannous 2. Mac. 7 A maruailous consta^cie
of the seven Machabees and their mother.
king, Antiochus; and there to be compelled with torments of whipping, and
other instruments, to the eating of swines flesh against the law. At what time
one of the^, (which was the eldest) said; what do thou seek? or what will thou learn out of us, o king? we are ready here rather to die, then to break
the ancient laws of our God. Whereat the king being greatly offended,
commanded the frying pa^nes and pottes of brass to be made burning hot; which
being ready, he caused this first man's tongue to be cut of, together with the
tops of his fingers and toes, as also with the skin of his head, the mother
and other brethern loking on; and after this he caused him to be fried until he
was dead. Which being done, the second brother was brought to torment, and
after his hear plucked of from his head together with the skin, they asked
him whether he would yet eat swinnes flesh or no, before he was put to the rest
of his torments? whereto he answered, noe: and thereupon was (after many
torments) slain with the other. Who being dead the third was taken in hand,
and being willed to put forth his tongue, he held it forth quickly together
with both his hands, to be cut of, saying confidentlie: A vvorthie saying.
I received both tongue and hands from heaven, and now I despise them both
for the law of God, for that I hope to receive them al of him again.

And after they had in this forte tormented and put to death six of the
brethren, every one most constantly protesting his faith, and the joy he had
to die for Gods cause; there remained only the youngest, whom Antiochus
(being ashamed that he could pervert never a one of the former) endeavored by all means possible to draw from his purpose, by promising and swearing, that he
should be a rich and happy man, and one of his checi fre^des, if he would yield.
But when the youth was nothing moved there with, Antiochus called to him the
mother, and exhorted her to save her sons life, by persuading him to yield;
which she feigning to do, thereby to have liberty to speak to her son; she
made a most vehement exhortation to him in the hebrew tongue, to sla^d A noble
example of a mother.
to it, and to die for his conscience; which speech being ended, the youth
cried out with a loud voice, and uttered this noble sentence worthy to be
remembered. Qucon suslinetis? non obtempero praecepto regis, sed praecepto
legis: Whom do you stay for? I do not obey the commandment of the king, but
the commandment of the law of God. Where upon both he and his mother were
presently (after many and sundry torments) put to death.

This then is the constant and immouable resolution which a Christian man
should have in all adversity of this life. Where of S. Ambrose says thus.
Gratia praeparandus est animus, exercenda men's, and stabilienda (...). 1. ossi.
c. 38.
ad constantiam: vt nullis perturbari (...) possit terroribus, vullis frangi
mole sliis, nullis suppliciis cedere. Our mind is to be prepared with grace,
to be exercised, and to be so established in constancy, as it may, not be
troubled with any terrors, broken with any adversities, yield to any
punishments or torments whatsoever.

IF YOU ask me here how a man 6. How a man may come to an invincible
resolution.
may come to this former resolution; I answer, that S. Ambrose in the same
place, puts two ways how to attain the same: the one is, to remember the
endless and intolerable pains of hell, if we have it not, or do yield against
our own conscience for fear: the other is, to think of the unspeakable glory
of heaven, if we persevere constant. Whereto I will add the third, which with a
noble heart, may perhaps prevail as much as either of the^ both: and that is,
to consider what others have suffered before us, especially Christ him self,
and that only of mere Jove and affection toward us. We see that in this
world, loving subiectos do glory of nothing more, then of their dangers or
hurtes taken in bataille for their prince, though he never took blow for them
again. What the^ would they do, if their prince had been afflicted
voluntarily for them, as Christ has been for us? But if this great example of
Christ seem unto the to high to imitate: look upon some of thy brethren
before thee, made of flesh and blood as thou art; see what they have suffered
before they could enter into heaven; and think not thy self hardly dealt
withal, if thou be called to suffer a little also.

Saint Paul writes of all the Apostles 2. Cor. 4 The sufferings of the Apostles.
together; Even unto this hour we suffer hungar and thirst, and lack of
apparel; we are beaten with men's fistes; we are'vagabondes, not having where
to stay: we labor and work with our own hands: we are cursed, and we do
bless: we are persecuted, and we take it patiently: we are blasphemed, and we
pray for them that blaspheme us: we are made as it were the very out-castes
and purgings of this world even unto this day: That is, though we be Apostles,
though we have wrought so many miracles, and converted so many millions of
people: yet even unto this day are we thus used. And a little after, describing
2. Cor. 6
yet further their lives, he says: we show our selves as the ministers of
God, in much patience, in tribulations, in necessities, in distresses, in
beatinges, in imprisonmentes, 1. Co. II The particular sufferinges of S. Paul.
in seditions, in labors, in watches, in fastinges, in chastity, in
longanimitie, in sweetness of behavior. And of him self in particular he
says, In laboribus plurimis, etc. I am the minister of God in many labors,
in imprisonments more then the rest in beatinges above measure, and oftentimes
in death it self. Five times have I been beaten of the Jews, and at every time
had forty lashes lacking one: three times have I been whipped with rods: once
I was stoned: three times have I suffered ship wrake: A day and a night was I
in the bottom of the sea: oftentimes in iourneys, in dangers of fluddes: in
dangers of thieves: in dangers of Jews: in dangers of Gentiles: in dangers of
the city: in dangers of wilderness: in dangers of sea: in dangers of false
brethren: in labor and travail: in much watching: in hungar and thirst: in
much fasting: in cold and lack of clothes and besides al these external things,
the matters that daily do depend upon me, for my universal care of al
Churches.

By this we may see now, whether Christ's holy Apostles taught us more by How
Christ suffered the Apostles to want.
words, then they showed by their own examples, about the necessity of
suffering in this life. Christ might have provided for them if he would, at
leastwise things necessary to their bodies, and not have suffered them to
come into these great extremities of lacking clothes to their backs, meat to
their mouths, and houses to pat their heads in. He that gave the^ authority
to do so many other miracles, might have suffered them also to have procured
sufficient maintenance for their bodies, which should be the first miracle that
worldly men would work, if they had such authority. Christ might have said
to Peter when he sent him to take his tribut from out of the fishes mouth; take
so much more, as will suffice for your Mat. 17.
necessary expe^ces, when you travail over foraine countries. But he would
not, nor yet diminish the great afflictions which I have showed before, though
he loved them as dearly, as ever he loved his own soul. Al which was done,
(as S. Peter interprets) to give us example, 1. Pet. 2.
what to follow, what to look for, what to desire, what to comsort our selves
in, amiddest the greatest of al our tribulatio^s.

Saint Paul uses this, as a principal consideration, Heb. 12.
when he writes thus to the Hebrews, upon the recital of the sufferinges A
notable exhortation of S. Paul.
of other saints before the^. Wherefore we also (brethren says he) having so
great a multitude of witnesses (that have suffered before us,) let us lay of al
burdens of sin hanging upon us; and let us run by patience unto the
battle offered us, fixing our eyes upon the author of our says, and
fulfiller of the same, JESUS; who putting the joys of heaven before his eyes,
sustained patie^tly the Cross, contemning the shame and confusion thereof, and
therefore now sits at the right hand of the seat of God. Think upon him (I
say) which sustained such a contradictio^ against him self, at the hands of
sinners: and be not weary, nether faint ye in courage. For you have not yet
resisted against sin unto blood; and you have for gotten (perhaps) that
comfortable saying, which speaks unto you as unto children: My son; do not
contemn the discipline of our Lord, and be not vvearie vvhee thou art
chastised of him. For whom God Prou. 3. Job. 5. Apoc. 3.
loves he chastises, and he whippeth every son whom he receaueth. Persevere
therefore in the correction laid upon you. God offers him self to you as to
his children. For what child is there whom the father corrects not? if you be
out of correction, whereof al his children are made partakers; then are you
bastardes, and not children. Al correction, for the present time when it is
suffered, seems unpleasant and sorrowful; but yet after, it brings forth
most quiet fruit of justice, unto them that are exercised by it. Wherefore,
strengthen up your weary hands, and loosed knees; make way to your feet.
etc. That is, take courage unto you, and go forward valiantly under the Cross
laid upon you. This was the exhortation of this holy captain unto his
country man (soldiers of JESUS Christ) the Jews.

Saint James the brother of our Lord uses an other exhortation in his
Catholic Iac. 5. The exhartation of S. James.
epistle to al Catholics, not much different from this. Be you therefore
patient my brethren (says he) until the coming of our Lord. Behold, the
husbandman expects for a time, the fruit of the earth, so precious unto him,
bearing patiently until he may receive the same in his season; be you therefore
patient, and comfort your hearts, for that the coming of our Lord will shortly
draw near. Be not sad, and complain not one of an other. Behold the Judge
is even at the gate. Take the prophets for an example of labor and patience,
who spoke unto us in the name of God. Behold, we account them blessed which
have suffered. You have heard of the sufferance of Job, and you have seen
(Isa, e) that our Lord is merciful and full of compassion.

I might here allege many things more out of the scripture to this purpose,
for The conclusion.
that the scripture is most copious herein: and in very deed, if it should al
be melted and poured out, it would yield us nothing else almost, but touching the
cross, and patient bearing of tribulation in this life. But I must end, for
that this chapter grows to long, as the other did before. And therefore I will
only, for my conclusion, set down the confession and most excellent
exhortation of old Mathathias, in the time of the cruel persecution of
Antiochus against the Jews. The story is thus reported in the scripture.

At that time the officers of Antiochus said unto Mathathias; thou art a
prince, 1. Mac. 2 The confession and exhortation of Mathathias.
and of greatest estate in this city, adorned with children and brethern; come
thou therefore first, and do the kings commandment, as other men have done in
Judah and Jerusalem, and thou and thy children shall be the kings friends, and
enriched with gold and silver, and many gifts from him. Whereto Mathathias
answered with a loud voice: if al nations should obey Antiochus, to depart
from the obedience of the laws of their ancestors; yet I, and my children
and brethern will follow the laws of our fathers; Let God be merciful unto us at
his pleasure, etc. And the days came of Mathathias his death, and then he
said unto his children. Now is the time that pride is in her strength. Now is
the time of chastiseme^t toward us, the time Note.
of euersion and indignation is come. Now therefore (o Children) be you zealous
in the law of God: yield up your lives for the testament of your fathers;
remember the works of your ancestors, what they have done in their
generations, and so shall you receive great glory, and eternal name. Was not
Abraham found faithful Genesis 12. Genesis 41. Number. 25
in time of temptation, and it was reputed unto him for justice? Joseph in time
of his distress kept Gods commandementes, and was made Lord over al Egypt.
Phinees our Father, for his zeal toward the law of God, received the
testament Iosue. 1. Iud. 14. 2. Re. 2. 4. Re. 2.
of an everlasting presthode. Iosue for that he fulfilled Gods word, was made a
captain over al Israel. Caleb for that he testified in the Church, received an
inheritance. David for his mercy, obtained Dan. 3.
the seat of an eternal kingdom. Elias for that he was zealous in zeal of the
law, was taken up to heaven. Ananias Azarias Dan. 9.
and Misael through their belief, were delivered from the flame of the fire.
Daniel for his simplicity, was delivered from the mouth of lions. And so do
you run over, by cogitation, al generations, and you shall see that al those
that hope in God shall not be vanquished. And do you not sear the words of a
sinful man; for his glory is nothing A vvorthie saying.
else but dung and worms; to day he is great and exalted, and to morovv he
shall not be found; for he shall return unto his earth again, and al his fond
cogitations shall perish. Wherefore take courage unto you (my children) and
play the men in the law of God. For there in shall be your honor and glory.
Hitherto are the words of scripture, which shall suffice for the end of this
chapter.

THE FOVRTH AND GREATEST IMPEDIMENT THAT Hinders resolution, to wit: The
love and respect which men bear to the pleasures and vanities of this world.
CHAPT. IIII.
AS the former impedimentes which now by Gods grace we have removed, be in
very deed great stays to many me^, from the resolution we talk of: so this
that presently we take in hand, is not only of it self a strong impediment and
let; but also a general cause and (as it were) a common ground to al other
impedimentes that be or may be. For if a man could touch the hidden pulse of al
such as refuse, or neglect, or do differ to make this resolution: he should
find the The world the ground of al other impedimentes.
true cause and origin thereof, to be the love and respect which they bear
unto this world, what soever other excuses they pretend besides. The noble men
of Iewrie, pretended fear to be the cause, why they could not resolve to
coniesse Christ openly: but S. John that felt their-pulses, and knew their
disease, utters the true cause to have been, for that they loved the glory
Ioh. 12.
of men, more then the glory of God. Demas that for sooke S. Paul in his
bands, even a little before his death, pretended an other cause of his
departure to Thellalonica, but S. Paul says it was, quia diligebat hoc
seculu^; 2. Ti. 4.
for that he loved this world. So that this world is a general and universal
impediment, and more largely dispersed in men's hearts the^ outwardly appears;
for that it brings forth diverse other excuses, thereby to cover it self in the
people where it abides.

This may be confirmed by that most excellent Mat. 13. Marc. 4. Luc. 8.
parable of our Savior Christ, recorded by three Evangelists, concerning the
three sorts of men which are to be damned, and the three causes of their
damnation; where of the third, and last, and most general (including as it were
both the two former) is, the love of this world. For the first sort of men
there mentioned, are the air; which is, (as Christ expounds The exposuion of
the parable of she seed.
it) by the devils, in such careless men, as contemn what-soeuer is said unto
the^; such are insidels, heretics, and other like obstinate and contemptuous
people. The second sort of damnable people are compared and brings soorth no
fruit. By which last words lie signifies, that whersoeuer the doctrine of
Christ grows up, and yet brings not forth due fruit: that is to say,
whersoeuer his faith is planted received and professed, (as among Christians it
is,) and yet brings not forth virtuous life, holy conversation, good works,
and due service of God corespo^dent to this seed; there the principal cause is,
for that it is choked with the love and care of this present world.

This is a parable of maruailous great The importance of this varable.
importance, as may appear; both for that Christ after the recital thereof,
cried out with a loud voice: He that has ears to Mat. 13.
hear, let him hear: As also, for that he expounded it him self in secret
only to his Disciples: And principally, for that before the exposition
thereof, he used such a solemn preface; saying; to you it is given to know the
mysteries if the kingdom of heaven, but to others not: for that they seeing do
not see, and hearing do not hear nor under stand. Whereby Christ signifies,
that the understanding of this parable, among others, is of singular
importance, for conceauing the true mysteries of the kingdom of heaven; and
that many are blind, which seem to see; and many deaf and ignorant, that
seem to hear and know: for that they understand not well the mysteries of this
parable. For which cause also his divine wisdom makes this conclusion, before
he begin to expound the parable: Happy are your eyes that see, and biessed
are your ears that hear. After which words, he begins his exposition,
with this admonition; Vos ergo audite parabolam, Do you therefore hear and
understand this parable.

And for that this parable does contain and touch so much in deed, as may or
is needful to be said, for removing of this great and dangerous impediment of
worldly love: I mean to stay my self only upon the explication the ros in
this place, and will declare the force and truth of certain words here uttered
by Christ of the world and worldly pleasures. And forsome order and methodes
sake, I will drawal to these six points following. Six parts of this chap.


First; how and in what sense all this whole world and commodities thereof are

Secondly; how they are not only vanities Deceptions, as the words of
Christ are; that is to say, deceyte, and fallaces, not performing to us in
deed, those little trifles which they do promise.

Thirdly; how they are spinae, that is,

Fourthlie; how they are arumnae, that

Fiftlie; quomodo suffocant, how they

Sixthlie; how we may use them notwithstanding,

The first point of the parable.
AND NOW for the first, albeit I 1. THE first part: how all the world is
vanity,
might stand upon many reasons and demonstrations; yet do I not see how
breefly and pithelie it may be better declared, that all the pleasures and
goodly shows of this world are mere vanities, as Christ here signifies, then
to allege the testimony and proof of some, which has tasted and proved them
al; that is to say, of such an one, as speaks not only by speculation, but
also of his own experience and practice. And this is the wise and mighty king
Solomon; of whom the 2. Par. 9.
scripture reports wounderful matters, touching his peace, prosperity,
riches, and The world lie prosperity of king Solomon.
glory in this world; as for example, that all the kings of the earth desired
to see his face, for his wisdom and renowned felicity; that all the princes
living besides, were not like him in wealth; that he had six hundred sixty and
six talents of gold (which is an infinite sum) brought him in yerelie,
besides al other that he had from the kings of Arabia, and other princes; that
silver was as plentiful with him as heaps of stones, and not esteemed, for the
great store and abundance he had thereof; that his plate and Iewelles had no
end; that his seat of majesty, with stools, lio^s to bear it up, and other
furniture, were of gold, passing al other kingely seats in the world; that his
precious apparel and armor was infinite; that he had all the kings, from the
river of the Philistians unto Egypt, as his servants; that he had forty
thousand horses in his stables to ride, and twelve thousand chariottes, with
horses and other furniture ready to them for his use; that he had two hundred
spears of gold borne before him, and six hundred crowns of gold bestowed upon
every spear; as also three hundred bucklers, and three hundred crowns of
gold, bestowed in the guilding of every buckler; that he spent every day in
his house, a thousand nine hundred thirty and seven quarters of meal and
flower; thirty oxen, with an hundred wethers, beside al other 3. Re. 4. 30.
cori similae. and 60. cori farinae, and every corus is 21. quarters and (...).
3. Re. 11.
flesh; that he had seven hundred wives as Queens, and three hundred other as
concubines. All this, and much more does holy scripture report of Salomons
worldly wealth, wisdom, riches, prosperity: which he having tasted, and used
to his fill; pronounced yet at the last this sentence of it al: Vanitas
vanitatum, and omnia vanitas; Vanity Eccl. 1.
of vanities, and al is vanity: by vanity of vanities meaning, (as S. Jerome
interprets) the greatness of this vanity, In cap. 1. ecclesia.
above al other vanities that may be devised.

Nether only does K. Solomon affirm Salomons saying of him self. Eccl. 1.
this thing in word, but does prove it also by examples of himself. I have been
king of Israel in Jerusalem (says he,) and I purposed with my self, to seek
out by wisdom al things. And I have seen, that al under the sun, are mere
vanities and affliction of spirit. I said in my heart, I will go and abound in all delites, and in every pleasure that may be had: and I saw that Cap. 2.
this was also vanity. I took great works in hand, builded houses to my self,
planted vineyardes, made orchardes and gardens, and beset them with all kind of
trees: I made my fish-pondes to water my trees: I possessed servants and
hand-maides, and had a great family, great heardes of cattle, above any that
ever were before me in Jerusalem: I gathered together gold and silver, the
riches of kings and provinces: I appointed to my self musicians and singers,
both men and women, which are the delites of the children of men: fine cups
also to drink wine, and what soever my eyes did desire, I denied it not unto
them: nether did I let my heart from using any pleasure, to delight it self in
these things which I had prepared. And when I turned my self to all that my
hands had made, and to all the labors wherein I had taken such pains and
sweat; I saw in them al, vanity and affliction of the mind.

This is the testimony of Solomon, The testimony of S. John.
upon his own proof, in these affairs; and if he had spoken it upon his
wisdom only (being such as it was;) we ought to believe him; but much more,
seeing he affirms it of his own experience. But yet, if any man be not moved
with this: let us bring yet an other witness out of the new testament, and
such a one, as was privy to the opinion of our Savior Christ herin; and this
is, the holy Evangelist and apostle 1. Joan. 2.
S. John, who makes an earnest exhortation to al wise men, never to entangle
them selves with the love of worldly affairs, using this reason for the same;
mundus transit and concupiscentia eius, the world is tra^sitorie and all that is
to be desired therein; that is to say, it is vain, fleeting, uncertain, and
not permanent; and then coming to show the substance of this
transitorie-vanitie, he reduces them al to three general heads or branches,
saying; what so ever is in this world, is either concupiscence of The general
branches of vvorldly vanities.
the flesh, or concupisceuse of the eyes, or pride of life; By the first he
comprehends al sensual pleasures used in cherishing and pampering the flesh;
by the second al beauty and bravery of riches; by the third, he signified the
vanity of ambition in worldly honor and estimation.

These then are the three general and Three principal vanities.
most principal vanities of this life, wherein wordlie men do weary out their
brains; to wit, ambition, covetousness, and carnal pleasures; whereunto al other
lesser vanities are addressed, as to their superiors. And thersore it shall not
be amiss to consider of these three in this place together with their
dependents; for that eueric one of these three have diverse branches depending of
them; especially the first, which here I will handle, called by S. John,
Ambition and pride of life, whereunto belong these six members that ensue.

FIRST vainglorie, which is a certain disordinate desire to be well thought of,
1. VAINglorie.
well spoken of, praised and glorified of men: and this is as great a vanity,
(though it be common to many) as if a man should run up and down the
streets, after a fether flying in the air, tossed hither and thither with the
blastes of infinite men's mouths. For, as this man might weary out him self
before he gate the thing which he followed, and yet when he had it, he had
gotten but a fether: so a vainglorious man may labor a good while, before he
attain to the praise which he desires: and when he has it, it is not worthy
three chippes; being but the breath of a few men's mouths, that does alter
upon every light occ sion, and now makes him great, now little, now nothing at
al. Christ him self may be an example of this; who was tossed to and from in
the speech of men: some said he was a Samaritan and had a devil; other said he
was a prophet; other said he could Mat. 27. Ioh. 8.
not be a prophet, or of God, for that he kept not the Sabbath day: others
asked, if he were not of God, how he could do so many miracles? So that there
was a scisme or division among them about this matter, Ioh. 9.
as S. John affirms. Finally, upon Palm sunday, they received him into
Jerusalem, with triumph of Hosanna, casting Mat. 21. Mar. 11. Mat. 27.
their apparel under his feet. But the thurseday and friday next ensuing, they
cried, Crucifige against him; and preferred the life of Barrabas, a wicked
murderer before Luc. 23.
his.

Now my friend, if they dealt thus with The miseroy of depe^ding on other men's
mouths.
the Saueour of the world which was a better man, then ever thou will be; and
did more glorious miracles, the^ ever thou will do, to purchase name and
honor with the people: why do thou so labor and beat thy self about this
vanity of vainglorie? why do thou cast thy travails into the wind of men's
mouths? why do thou put thy riches in the lips of mutable men, where
every flatterer may rob the of them? have thou no better a chest to lock
them up in? S. Paul was of an other mind, when he said: I esteem 1. Cor. 4.
little to be judged of you, er of the day of man. And he had reason surely. For
what cares he that runs at the tilt, if the ignorant people that stand by
do give sentence against him, so the Judges give it with him? If the blind
man, in the way to Jericho, had depended of the liking and approbation Luc. 18.
of the goers bie, he had never received the benefit of his sight: for that,
they disuaded him from running and crying so vehemently after Christ. It is a
miserable thing for a man to be a windemil, which grindeth not nor makes
meal, but according as the blast endures. If the gale be strong, he sourgeth
about lustely; but if the wind slake, he relenteth presently. So, do you
praise the vainglorious man, and ye make him run; if he feel not the gale
blow, he is out of heart. He is like the Babilonians, who with a little sweet
music, were made to adore any Dan. 3.
thing what soever.

The scripture says most truly, as silver is tried in the fire by blowing to
it: so is a man Pro. 27.
tried in the mouth of him that praises. For as silver, if it be good, takes
no hurt thereby, but if it be evil, it goes al into sum: so A fit similitude.
does a vain man, by praise and commendation. How many have we seen puffed up
with men's praises, and almost put besides them selves for joy thereof and yet
afterward brought down, with a contrary wind, and driven full near to
desperation by contempt? How many do we see daily (as the prophet did in his
days) Psalm. 9.
commended in their sins, and blessed in their wickedness? How many palpable
and intolerable flateries do we hear both used, and accepted daily, and no
man cries with good king David, away with this oil, and ointment of
sinners, let it not come upon Psa. 140.
my head? Is not all this vanity? Is it not Psalm. 39.
madness, as the scripture calls it? The glorious Angels in heaven seek no
honor unto themselves, but al unto God: and thou poor worm of the earth
desire to be glorified? The four and twenty elders in the Apocalips took
of their crounes, and cast them at the seet of the Apoc. (...).
lamb: and thou would pluck forty from the lamb to thy self, is thou
could. O fond creature: how truly says the prophet, Psa. 143.
homo vanitati similis factus est: a man is made like unto vanity: that is,
like unto his own vanity: as light as the very vanities them selves, which
he follows. And yet the wise man more expressly, In vanitate sua appenditur
peccator, the sinner is Eccl. 23.
weighed in his vanity: that is, by the vanity which he follows, is seen
how light and vain a sinful man is.

THE SECOND vanity that belongs 2. VVORLDly honor and promotion.
to Ambition, is desire of worldly honor, dignity and promotion. And this is
a great matter in the sight of a worldly man: this is a Jewel of rare price,
and worthy to be bought, with any labor, travail, or peril what-soeuer. The
love of Ioh. 11.
(...) let the great me^, that were Christians Ioh. 19.
in Iewrie, from confessing Christ openly. The love of this, let Pilat from
delivering JESUS, according as in conscience he saw he was bound. The love of
this, let Agrippa and Festus, from making Act. 26.
themselves Christians, albeit they esteemed Paul's doctrine to be true. The
love of this, lets infinite men daily from embrasing the means of their
salvation. But (alas) these men do not see the vanity hereof. S. Paul says
not without just 1. Co. 14.
cause, Nolite esse pueri sensibus, be you not Children in understanding. It is
the fashion of Children, to esteem more of a painted babble, then of a rich
Jewel. And such is the painted dignity of this world; gotten with much labor,
maintained with great expenses, and lost with intolerable greef and sorrow. For
better conceauing whereof, ponder a little with thy self (gentle reader) any
state of dignity that thou would desire; and think how many have had that
before the. Remember how many mounted up, and how they descended down again:
and imagine with thy self, which was greater, either the joy in getting, or the
sorrow in leesing it. Where are now al those emperors, those kings, those princes
and prelates, which reioised so much once, at their own advancement? where are
they now, I say? who talks, or thinks of them? are they not forgotten, and
cast into their graves long ago? And do not men boldly walk over their
heads now, whose faces might not be looked on, without fear, in their life?
what then have their dignities done them good?

It is a wonderful thing to consider the vanity of this worldly honor. It is
like The vanity of vvorldly honor.
a man's own shadow, which the more a man runs after, the more it flies:
and when he flies from it, it follows him again: and the only way to catch
it, is to fall down to the ground upon it. So we see, that those men which
desired honor in this world, are now forgotten; and those which most fled from
it, and cast them selves lowest of al me^ by humility; are now most of al
honored: honored (I say) most, even by the world itself whose enemies they
were, while they lived. For who is honored more now, who is more commended and
remembered, then S. Paul Philip. 3.
and his like, which so much despised worldly honor in this life, as he made
less account thereof then of common du^ge. Most vain then is the pursuit of
this worldly honor, which nether contenteth the mind, nor eases the pained
body, nor continues with the possessour, nor leaves behind it any benefit or
co^tentation.

THE THIRD vanity that belongs 3. THE vanity of vvorldly nobility.
to ambition or pride of life, is nobility of flesh and blood; a great pearl
in the eye of the world, but in deed in it self, and in the sight of God, a
mere trifle and vanity. Which holy Job well understood, whe^n he wrote these
words; I said unto Job. 17.
rottenness, thou art my father; and unto worms, you are my mother and
sisters. He that will behold the gentry of his ancestors, let him look into
their graves, and see whether Job says truly or no. True nobility was never
begone but by virtue; and therefore, as it is a testimony of virtues in the
predecessors, so ought it to be a spur to the same in the successors. And
he which holds the name thereof by desce^t only without virtue, is a mere
monster, in respect of his ancestors; for that he breaks the limits and
nature of nobility. Of which sort of men, God says by one prophet: They are
made abominable, even Cic. 9.
as the things which they love; their glory is from their nativity, from the
belly, and from their co^ception.

It is a miserable vanity, to beg credit of dead men, where as we deserve
none our selves; to seek up old titles of honor from our ancestors, we being
utterly incapable thereof, by our own base manners and behavior. Christ
clearlie confounded this vanity, when being descended him self of the greatest
nobility and raze of kings that ever was in this world; and besides that,
being also the son of God; yet called he him self ordinarily, the Math. 8.
20. 24. 26.
son of man; That is to say, the son of the pore virgin MARIE (for
otherwise he was no son of man;) and further then this also, called hi self a
shepherd, which Ioh. 10.
in the world is a name of contempt. He sought not up this and that old title
of honor, to furnish his style withal, as our me^ do: Nether, when he was to
make a king first in Israel, did he seek out the auncientest blood, but took
Saul, of the 1. Re. 9.
basest tribe of Jews: and after him, David the poorest shepherd of al his
brethren. 1. Re. 16.
And when he came into the world, Mat. 4. Psalm. 44. 1. Cor. 1.
he soght not out the noblest men to make princes of the earth: that is, to
make Apostles: but took of the poorest, and simplest, thereby to confound (as
one of them says) the folish vanity of this world, in making so great
account of the preeminence of a little flesh and blood in this life.

THE FOVRTH vanity that belongs to ambition or pride of life, is 4. THE vani
tie of vvorldly vvisdome. 1. Cor. 3.
worldly wisdom; whereof the Apostle says: The wisdom of this world is
folly with God. If it be folly, then great vanity (no dowbt) to delight and
bost so much in it, as men do. It is a strange thing to see, how contrary the
Judgments of God are to the judgments of men. The people of Israel would
needs have a king (as before I have said) and they thought, God would have
given them presently some great mighty prince to rule over them, but he chose
out a poor man, that followed 1. Re. 9.
asses up and down the country. After that, when God would displace this man
again for his sins; he sent Samuel to anoint one of Isay his sons; and
being come to 2. Re. 16.
the house, I say brought forth his eldest son, Eliab, a lusty taule fellow,
thinking him in deed most fit to govern; but God answered, Respect not his
countenance, nor his taulnes of personage, for I have rejected him: nor do I
judge according to the countenance of man. After that, I say brought in his
second son, Abinadab, and after him, Samma, and so the rest, until he had
showed him seven of his sons; Al which being refused by Samuel; they
maruailed much and said, there was no more left but only a little read headed
boy, that kept the sheep, called David; which Samuel caused to be sent for.
And as soon as he came in sight, God said to Samuel, this is the man that I
have chosen.

When the Messiah was promised unto the Jews to be a king, they imagined
presently according to their worldly wisdom, that he should be some great
prince: and therefore they refused Christ, that came in poverty. James and John
being yet but carnal, seeing the Samaritanes contemptuously Joan. 12.
to refuse Christ's disciples sent to them, and knowing what Christ was;
thought straight way, that he must in revenge, have called down fire from
heaven to consume them: But Christ rebuked them, saying; you know not of what
spirit you Luc. 9.
are. The Apostles preaching the cross and necessity of suffering, to the
wise Gentiles and Philosophers, were thought presently 1. Cor. 1.
fools for their labors. Festus, the Emperors lieutenant, hearing Paul to
speak so much of abandoning the world, Act. 26.
and following Christ, said he was mad. Finally, this is the fashion of al
worldly wise men: to condemn the wisdom of Christ, and of his Saints. For so
the holy scripture reports, of their own confession, being now in place of
torment; nos insensati vitam illorum aestimabanins insaniam; Sap. 5.
we fond men, esteemed the lives of Saints as madness. Wherefore, this is also
great vanity (as I have said) to make such accoumpt of worldly wisdom; which
is not only called folly, but also madness, by holy scripture itself.

Who would not think, but that the wise men of this world, were the fittest to
be chosen to do Christ service in his Church? Yet S. Paul says, non multi
sapientes, 1. Cor. 1.
secundum carnem, God has not chosen many wise men according to the flesh. Who
would not think, but that a worldly wise man might easily also make a wise
Christian? yet S. Paul says no; except first he become a fool, stultus fiat,
vt sit sapiens: 1. Cor. 3.
If any man seem wise amongst you, let him become a fool, to the end he may
be made wise. Vain then and of no account, is the wisdom of this world,
except it be subject to the wisdom of God.

THE FIFTH vanity belonginge to pride of life, is corporal beauty; whereof 5.
THE vanity of beauty. Pro. 31. Psa. 118.
the wise man says, vain is beauty, and deceauable is the grace of a fair
countenance. Whereof also, king David understood properly, when he said, Turn
away my eyes (o^ Lord,) that they behold not vanity. This is a singular
great vanity, dangerous and deceatful; but yet greatly esteemed of the Psalm.
4.
children of men, whose property is, to love vanity, as the prophet affirms
and experience teaches. Beauty is compared by holiemen, to a painted snake,
which is fair without, and full of deadly poison within. If a man did consider
what infinite ruins and destructio^s have come by over light giving credit
thereunto, he would beware of it. And if he remembered what foul dross lies
under a fair skin; he would little be in love therewith, says one holy
father. God has imparted certain sparcles of beauty unto his creatures,
thereby to draw us to the consideration and love of his own beauty, whereof
the other is but a shadow; even as a man finding a little issue of water, may
seek out the fountane thereby; or happening upon a small vain of gold, may
thereby come to the whole mine it self. But we like babes, delight our selves
only with the fair A lesson to be read in the beauty of al creatures.
cover of the book, and never do consider what is written therein. In all fair
creatures that man does behold, he ought to read this lesson, says one
father; that if God could make a piece of earth so fair and lovely, with
imparting unto it some little spark of his beauty: how infinite fair is he
himself, and how worthy of al love and admiration? And how happy shall we be,
when we shall come to enjoy his beautiful presence, whereof now al creatures do
take their beauty?

If we would exercise our selves in these manner of cogitations, we might
easily keep our hearts pure and unspotted before God, in beholding the
beauty of his creatures. But for that we use not this passage from the
creature to the creator, but do rest only in the external appearance of a
deceatful face, letting go the bridle to our foul cogitations, and setting
wilfully on fire our own concupiscences: hence it is, that infinite men do
perish day lie by occasion of this fond vanity. I call it fond, for that every
child may discrie the deceate and vanity thereof. For take the fairest face in
the world, wherewith infinite folish men fall in love upon the sight thereof, and
raze it over but with a little scrach, and all the matter of How quickly beauty
is destroyed.
love is gone; let there come but an Ague for four days and all this goodly
beauty is distroyed; let the soul depart but one half hour from the body,
and this loving face is ugly to look on; let it lie but two days in the
grave, and those who were so hot in love with it before, will skarse abide to
behold it, or come near it. And if none of those things happen unto it: yet
quickly comes on old age, which riueleth the skin, draws in the eyes,
setteth-owt the teeth, and so disfigureth the whole visage, as it becomes more
contemptible and horrible now, then ever it was beautiful and alluring before.
And what then can be more vanity then this? What more madness, then either to
take a pride thereof, if we have it our selves, or to endanger our souls for
the same, if we behold it in others?

THE SIXTH vanity belonging 6. THE vanity of apparel. Eccl. 11.
to pride of life, is the glory of fine apparel; against which the scripture
says, In vestitu ne gloriaris vnquam; See thou never take glory in apparel.
Of al vanities this is the greatest, which yet we see so common among men of
this world. If Adam had never sallen we had never used apparel. For that,
apparel was devised to cover our shame of nakedness, and other infirmites
contracted by that fall. Wherefore, we that take pride and glory in apparel, do
as much as if beggar should glory and take pride of the old cloutes that do
cover his sores. S. Paul said unto a bishop, If we have vvhervvithal to cover
our selves, let 1. Ti. 6.
us be content. And Christ touched deeply the danger of nice apparel, when he
commended so much S. John Baptist for his austere attire, adding for the
contradictorie, Qui moliibus vestiuntur in domibus regum sunt; They which are
clothed in soft and Ma. 3. 11. Luc. 7.
delicate apparel, are in kings courts; that is, in kings courts of this
world, but not in the kings court of heaven. For which cause in the
description of the rich man damned, this is not omitted by our Savior: That
he was apparelled in purple and Luc. 16.
silk.

It is a wounderful thing to consider the different proceeding of God and the
Genesis 3.
world herin. God him self was the first tailer that euermade apparel i this
world, and he made it for the most noble of al our auncestous, in paradise: and
yet he made it but of beasts skins. And S. Paul testifies Heb. 12.
of the noblest saints of the old testament, that they were covered only
with goats skins, and with the hears of Cameles. What vanity is it then
for us, to be so curious in apparel, and to take such pride therein, as we do?
we rob and spoil al creatures in the world, to cover our backs, and adorn
our bodies. From one, we take his wolle; from an other his The extreme vanity
and poverty of man.
skin; from an other his furre: and from some other their very excrementes;
as the silk, which is nothing else, but the excrementes of worms. Nor yet
content with this, we come to fishes, and do beg of them certain pearls to
hang about us. We go down into the ground for gold and silver; and turn up
the sands of the sea, for precious stones; and having borrowed all this of other
creatnres, we iette up and down, provoking men to look upon us, as if all this
now were our own. When the stone shines upon our fingar, we will seem
(forsooth) thereby to shine. When the silver and silks do glister on our
backs; we look big, as if all that beautic came from us. And so (as the
prophet says,) we pass over our days in Psalm. 77.
vanity, and do not perceive our own extreme folly.

AND THVS much now may suffice, THE 2. head of vvorldiy vanities. Concupiscence
of the eyes.
for declaration of the first general head of worldly vanities, termed by S.
Iohu, Pride of life. There follows the second which he calls, Concupiscence
of the eyes; whereunto the ancient fathers have referred al vanities of riches,
and wealth of this world. Of this S. Paul writes to Timothy; Give
commandment to rich men of 1. Ti. 6.
this world, not to be high minded, nor to put confidence in the uncertainty
of their riches. The reason of which speech is uttered by the scripture, in an
other place when it says; Riches shall not profit a man in the day of
revenge; Prou. 11.
That is; at the day of death and judgment. Which thing the rich men of this
world do confess them selves, though to late, now being in torments;
diuitiarum iactantia quid nobis contulit? what has the Sap. 5.
bravery of our riches profited us? Al which does evidently declare the great
vanity of worldly riches, which can do the possessour no good at al, when he
has most need of their help. Rich men have slept, their sleep (says the
prophet) and have found Psalm. 75.
nothing in their hands; that is, rich me^ have passed over this life, as me^
do pass over a sleep, imagining them selves to have golden mountains and
treasures where with to help them selves in all needs that shall occur, and
when they a wake (at the day of their death) they find themselves to have
nothing in their hands that can do the^ good. In respect whereof, the prophet
Baruch asks this question; Where are they now, which heaped together gold
and silver, Cap. 3.
and which made no end of their scraping together? And he answers him self
immediately: Exterminati sunt, and ad inferos descenderunt; They are now rooted
out, and are gone down unto hell. To like effect says S. James. Novvye rich
mco do ye weep and vvaile and houle in your miseries that come upon you;
Iac. 5.
your riches are rotten and your gold and silver is rustie; and the rust thereof
shall be in testimony against you: it shall seed upon your one flash as if it
were fire, you have hoarded up wrath to your own selves in the last day.

If wealth of this world be not only so vain, but also so perilous as here
is affirmed: Wealth not only rain but also perilous. Phil. 3.
what vanity then is it formen to set their minds so upon it, as they do? S.
Paul says of him self, that he esteemed al but as dung of the earth. And he
had great reason surely to say so, seeing in deed riches are no better then the
very excrements of the earth, and fownde only in the Job. 28.
most barraine places thereof, as they can tell which have seen their mines.
What a base matter is this then for a man to tie his love unto? God commanded
in the old Leui. 11.
law, that what soever did go with his breast upon the ground, should be unto
us in abomination. How much more then, a reasonable man, that has glewed his
heart and soul unto a piece of earth? We came naked into this world, and
naked we Cap. 1.
must go soorth again, says Job. The mill whele stirs much about, and
beats it self from day to day, and yet at the years end, it is in the same
place that it was i^ the beginning: so rich men, let them toil and labor
what they can, yet at their death must they be as poor, as at the first day
wherein they were borne. When the rich man dies (says Job) he shall take
nothing Job. 27.
with him; but shall close up his eyes, and find nothing. Poverty shall lay
hands upon him, and a tempest shall oppress him in the night; a burning wind
shall take him away, and an hurl wind shall rushe upon him, and shall not spare
him; it shall bind his hands upon him, and shall hiss over him, for that it
sees his place wether he must go.

The prophet David in like wise forewarneth us of the same, in these words: Be
not afraid when then see a man made rich, and the glory of his house
multiplied. For when he dies, he shall take nothing with him, nor shall his
glory desiend to the place whether he goes; he shall pass into the progenies
of his aunceslours, (that is, he shall go to the place where they are, who have
lived as he has done) and world without end he shall see no more light.

All this and much more is spoken by the Holy ghost, to signify the dangerous
vanity of worldly wealth, and the folly of those men, who labor so much to
procure the same, with the eternal peril of their souls. If so many
physicians, as I have here alleged scriptures, should agree together, A
comparison.
that such or such meats were poisonned and perilous: I think few men would
give the adventure to eat thereof, though otherwise in taste they appeared
sweet and pleasant. How the^ comes it to pass, that so many earnest
admonitions of God himself, can not stay us from the love of this dangerous
vanity? Nolite cor apponere, Psalm. 61.
says God by the prophet; that is, set not your hearts upon the love of
riches. Qui Eccl. 31.
diligit aurum non iustificabitur, says the wise man: he that loves gold shall
never be justified. I am angry greatly upon rich nations. Cap. 1. Mat. 19.
says God by Zachary. Christ says; Amen dico vobis, quia dives difficile
intrabit in regnum caloru^: Truly I say unto you, that a rich man shall
hardly get into the kingdom of heaven. And again, vvoe be to you rich Luc.
6.
men, for that you have received your consolation in this life. Finally, S.
Paul says generally 1. Ti. 6.
of al, and to al: They which will be rich, do fall into temptations, and into
the snares of Satan, and into many unprofitable and hurtful desires, which do
drown them in everlasting destruction and perdition.

Can any thing in the world be spoken more effectualie, to dissuade from the
love of riches than this? must not here now al covetous men of the world either
deny God, or condemn them selves in their The pretense of wife and children
refuted.
own consciences? Let them go now and excuse them selves, by the pretense of
wife and children and kinsfolk as they are wo^t: saying; they mean nothing
else, but to provide for their sufficiency. Does Christ, or S. Paul admit this
excuse, where Gods service and their own salvation comes in question? ought we
so much to love wife, or children, or other kindred as to endanger our souls
for the same? Tell me (dear Christian brother) what comfort may it be to an
afflicted father in hell, to remember that by his means, his wife and children
do live wealthelie in earth, and that for his eternal woe, they enjoy some few
years pleasurs? No, no, dear brother, this is vanity, and a mere deceate of
our spiritual enemy. For within one moment after we are dead, we shall care no
more for wife, children, father, mother, or brother in this matter, the^ we
shall for a mere stranger; and one penie given in alms while we lived, for
Gods sake, shall comfort us more at that day, the^ thousands of pounds
bestowed upon our kindred, for the natural love we bear unto our own flesh and
blood. The which one poi^t would Christ al worldly men could consider, and then
(no doubt) they would never take such care for kindred, as they do: especially
upon their death beds, whence presently they are to depart to that place,
where flesh and blood holds no more privilege, nor riches have any power to
deliver; but only such, as were well bestowed in the service of God, or given
to the poor for his names sake. And this shall be sufficient for this point of
riches.

THE THIRD branche of worldly vanities is called by S. John concupiscence THE
3. head of vvorldly vanities.
of the flesh; which contains al pleasures and carnal recreations of this
life, as are banqueting, laughing, playing, and such other delites, wherewith
our flesh is much comforted in this world. And albeit in this kind, there is a
certain measure to be allowed unto the godly, for the convenient maintenance
of their health, (as also in riches it is not to be reprehe^ded;) yet, that al
these worldly solaces, are not only vain, but also dangerous, in that excess
and abundance, as worldly wealthy men seek and use them, appears plainly
by these words of Christ. VVoe be Ioh. 16.
unto you who now do laugh, for you shall vvepe. VVo be unto you that now
live in fill and satietie, for the time shall come, when you shall suffer bungar.
And again, in S. John's gospel Ioh. 16.
speaking to his Apostles, and by them to al other, he says; you shal' vvepe
and morn, but the world shall reioise; making it a sign distinctiue between
the good and the badde, that the one shall mourn in this life, and the other
reioise and make them selves merry.

The very same does Job confirm both Job. 21.
of the one and the other sort: for of worldlinges he says; that they solace
them selves with all kind of music, and do pass over their days in
pleasure, and in a very moment do go down into hell. But of the godly he
says in his own person; Job. 3.
that they sigh before they eat their bread. And in an other place, that they
Job. 9.
fear al their works, knowing that God spares not him which offends. The
reason whereof the wise man yet further Eccl. 9.
expresses, saying: That the works of good men are in the hands of God, and
no ma knovveth whether he be vvorthie of love or hatred, at Gods hands: but
al is kept uncertain for the time to come. And old Tobias insinuates yet an
Tob. 5.
other cause, when he says: What joy can I have or receive, seeing I sit here
in darkness, speaking litterallie of his corporal blindness, but yet leaving it
also to be understood of spiritual and internal darkness.

These are then the causes (beside external affliction which God often sends)
Why good me are sad in this life. 1. Co. 2. 2. Co. 7. Philip. 2. Job. 3. Ioh.
16.
why the godly do live more grave sad and fearful in this life, then wicked
men do, according to the counsel of S. Paul; and why also they sigh often
and weep, as Job and Christ do affirm; to wit, for that they remember
oftentimes the severe Justice of almighty God; their own frailty in sinning;
the secret judgment of his predestination uncertain to us; the vale of misery
and desolation, wherein they live here; which made even the very Apostles them
selves to groan, as S. Paul affirms; albeit they had much less cause Romans 8.
then we have. In respect whereof we are willed to pass over this life in
carefulnes, Ephe. 4. Mac. 24. 2. Cor. 5. and 7. Eccl. 7.
watchfulnes, fear, and trembling. In regard whereof also, the wiseman says;
It is better to go to the house of sorrow, then to the house of feasting. And
again. Where sadness is, there is the heart of vvisome^; but where mirth is,
there is the heart of fools. Finally, inconsideration of these things the
scripture saiths Beatus homo qui semper est pauidus, Happy Tro. 28.
is the man which always is fearful. Which is nothing else, but that which the
holy Ghost commands every man, by Micheas the Prophet, solicitum ambulare
cu^ Deo; To walk carefully and diligently Mich. 6.
with God, thinking upon his commandments; how we keep and observe the
same; how we resist and mortify our members upon earth; how we bestow our
time, talents, and riches lent unto us; how we labor in good works for the
gaining of heaven; what account we could yield if presently we were to die.
etc. which cogitations, if they might have place with us; would cut of a great
many of those worldly pastimes, wherewith the careless sort of sinners are
overwhelmed: I mean, of those good feloushippes, in eating, drinking, laughing,
singing, disputing, and other such vanities that distract us most.

Hereof Christ gave us a most notable aduertiseme^t, in that he wept often
times; as for example, at his nativity, at the resuscitation of Lazarus, upon
Jerusalem, and Ioh. 10. Luc. 19.
upon the Cross. But he is never read to have laughed in all his life. Her of
also is cch man's own nativity and death a signification and figure; which two
extremities, (I mean our beginning and ending) being reserved by God in his
own hands to dispose; are appointed unto us in sorrow greef and weeping as we
see and feel. But the middle part thereof, (which is our life) being left by
God in our own hands, we pass it over with vain delites, never thinking
whence we came, nor whether we go.

A wise trauailer passing by his Inn, albeit he see pleasant meats set before
him A similitude.
to banquet at his pleasure; yet he for bears and restrains his appetite
upon consideration of the price, and of the journey he has to make; and takes
nothing, but so much, as he knows well how to discharge the next mornig at his
departure. But a fool lays hands on every delicate bayt that is presented
to his sight: and plays the prince for a night or two. But the next morning
when it comes to the reckning, he wishes that he had lived only with bread
and drink, rather then to be so troubled as he is, for the payment. The
custom of Gods Church is, to fast the even of every feast, and then to make
merry the next day following, which is the festiual it self. And this
represents the abstinent life of goodmen in this world, thereby to be merry in
the world to come. But the fashion of the world is contrary, that is, to eat
and drink merrily first at the tavern, and after to let the host bring in
his reckning. They eat, drink, and laugh: and the host, he skoreth up al in
the mean space; And when the time comes that they must pay; many a heart is
sad, that was pleasant before.

This very self thing holy scripture affirms also, of the pleasures of this
world: Risus dolor miscebitur and extrema Pro. 14.
gaudij luctus occupat; Laughter shall be mingled with sorrow, and mourning shall
ensue at the hinder end of mirthe. The devil, that plaieth the host in this
world, and will serve you at an inche with what delight or pleasure you desire,
writes up al in his book; and at the day of your departure, (which is, at
your death) he will bring in the whole reckoning, and charge you with it al; and
then shall follow that, which God promises to worldlinges by the prophet Amos,
Your mirth shall be turned Amos. 2. Tob. 2.
into morning and lamentation. Yea, and more then this, if you be not able to
discharge the rekoning, you may chance to hear that other dreadful sentence
of Christ in the Apocalips, quantum in delitiis fuit, tantum Apo. 18.
date illi tormentum; Look how much he has taken of his delites, so much
torment do you lay upon him.

Wherefore, to conclude this point and therwithal this first part of the
parable The conclusion of the 1. point.
touching vanities: truly may we say with the prophet David, of a worldly
minded man; Vniuersa vanitas omnis homo Psalm. 38.
viuens, The life of such men contains al kind of vanity. That is to say,
both vanity in ambition, vanity in riches, vanity in pleasures, vanity in all things which they most esteem. And therefore, I may well end with the words
of almighty God by the prophet Esaias; vaevobis, qui trahitis iniquitatem in
funiculis vanitatis; Woe be unto you, which do draw wickedness in Esa. 59.
the ropes of vanity. These ropes are those vanities of vainglorie, promotion,
dignity, nobility, beauty, riches, delites, and The ropes of vanity.
other such like before touched, which always draw with them some iniquity
and sin. For which cause holy David says unto his Lord, Thovvhatest (o
Lord) obseruers of super fluous vanities. And the scripture Psalm. 3.
reporting the cause why God destroyed 4. Re. 17.
utterly the family and lineage of Baasa king of Israel, says, it was, For
that they had provoked God in their vanities. And lastly, for this cause the
holy Ghostpronounceth generally of al men: Beatus vir qui non respexit in
vanitates, and insanias falsas; Blessed is Psalm. 39.
that man which has not respected vanities, and the false madness of this world.

The second point of the parable.
NOW COME I to the second part proposed in this chapter, (which was also How
vvorldly vanities are also deceites. Mat. 13.
the second point contained in Christ's parable,) to show how this world with
the commodities thereof, are not only vanities, but also deceites; for that in
deed, they perform not unto their folowers, those idle vanities and trifles
which they do promise. Wherein, the world may be compared to that wretched and
ungrateful deceiuer Laba^, who made poor Genesis 29.
Jacob to serve him seven years for fair Rachel, and in the end deceived him
with False promises of the world.
foul Lia. What false promises does the world make daily? To one it pmiseth
long life and health, and cutteth him of in the midst of his days. To an
other it promises great wealth and promotion, and after long service,
performs no part thereof. To an other it promises great honor by large
expenses, but underhand it casts him into contempt by beggarie. To an other
it assures great aduanceme^t by marriage; but yet never geneth him ability to
come to his desire. Go you over the whole world, behold countries, view
provinces, look into cities, hearken at the doors and windows of private
houses, of princes palaces, of secret cha^bers, and you shall see and hear
nothing else. but lamentable complaints; one, for that he has lost; an other,
for that he has not won; a third, for that he is not satisfied; ten
thousand, for that they are deceived.

Can there be a greater decrit (for examples fake) then to promis renoume and
The salse promises of renoune.
memory, as the world does to her folowers, and yet to forget them as soon as
they are dead? Who does remember now one, of forty thousand ioly fellows in
this world, captains, souldiars, counsaillers. Dukes, Earls, Princes,
Prelates, and Emperors, Kings and Queen's, Lords and ladies? who reme^breth
them, I say? who once thinks or speaks of them now? has not their memory
perished with their sound, as the prophet fortold? Did not Job promise truly,
that their remembrance Psalm. 9. Job. 13. Psalm. 1.
should be as ashes trodden under soote? And David: That they should be as dust
blovvn abrod with the vvind? The first holy eremite named This example Bunnie
thrusts out in despit of heremites.
S. Paul, did hide him self (as S. Hierome in his life reports) fowers kore
and ten years in a wilderness, without knowing or speaking with any man, or
once showing or revealing him self to the world. And yet now, the world both
remembers and honoreth his memory. But many a king and Emperor, have striued
and labored al their life to be known in the world, and yet are now
forgotten. So that the world is A comparison.
like in this point, (as one says) unto a covetous and forgetful host; who,
if he see his old ghest come by his inn in beggarlie estate, al his money
being spent, he makes semblance not to know him. And if the ghest marvel
thereat, and say, that he has come often that way, and spent much money in the
house: the other answers, it may be so my frind, for there pass this way so
many, as we use not to keep account of al men. But what is the way to make
this host to remebre you, says this author? the way is (says he) to use him
evil as you pass by: beat him well, or do some other notable injury unto him
(as Paul, and his like did unto the world;) and he will remember you as long as
he lives, and many times will talk of you, when you are far of from him.

Infinite are the deceites, and dissimulations of the world. It seems goodly,
What the deceites of the world are.
fair and gorgeous in utter show; but when it comes to handling, it is
nothing but a fether; when it comes to sight, it is nothing but a shadow; when
it comes to weight, it is nothing but smoke; when it comes to opening, it
is nothing but an image of plaster woork, ful-of old rags and patches
within. O miserable and most deceitful world, says S. Augustine; whose Aug. in
medit.
grief is true, and delight false; whose sorrows are certain, and pleasures
uncertain; whose pains are permanent, and repose transitory; whose toiles are
intolerable, and rewards most contemptible; whose promises are princely, and
paime^ts begarly; whose miseries are void of al consolation, and whose happiness
is mingled with all kind of misery.

To know the miseries of the world, A fimilitude.
you must go a little out from it, says one. For, as they which walk in a
mist, do not see it so well, as they which stand upon a hill from it: so fares
it in discerning the world; whose property is, to blind them that come to it,
to the end they may not see their own estate; even as a Raven, first of al,
strikes out the poor shepes eyes, to the end she may not see the way, to
escape from his tyranny.

So the^ after the world has once bereft The practice of the world.
the worldling of his spiritual sight, in such sort as he can judge no longer
between good and evil, vanity and verity: then it rocketh him also a sleep,
at his ease and pleasure. It binds him sweetly, it deceives him pleasantly,
it tormenteth him in great peace and rest: it has ready presently a proud
spirit which shall place Math. 4.
him in the pinnacle of greedy ambition, and ther-hence show him all the
dignities and prefermentes of the world; it has twenty false marchantes,
which in the dark shall show unto him, the first and former ends of fair and
precious clothes, but in no case may he look into the whole pieces, nor carry
them to the light thereby to discern them. It has four hundred false
prophets to flatter him, as Achab had, which must keep him from 3. Re. 22.
the hearing of Micheas counsel; that is, from the remorse of his own
conscience, which tells him the truth. It has a thousand cunning fishers,
to lay before him pleasant baits, but al furnished with most sharp and
dangerous hooks within. It has infinite strumpetes of Babylon, to offer him
drink in golden cups; but al Apo. 17.
mingled with most deadly poison. It has in every door an alluring Iahel, to
entise Iudic. 4.
him unto the milk of pleasures and delites; but al have their hammers and
nails in their hands, to murder him in the brain, when he falls a sleep.
It has in every corner, a flattering Ioab, to embrace (...). 20.
with one arm, and kill with the other; a false Judas, to give a kiss, and
therewith to betraye. Luc. 22.


Finally, it has all the deceites, all the dissimulations, all the flatteries, all the treasons, that possibly may be devised. It hates them, that love it:
deceives them, The true figure of the world.
that trust it: it afflicts them, that serve it: it reprocheth them, that
honor it: it damneth them, that follow it: and most of al forgets them, that
labor and travail most of al for it. And to be brief in this matter, do you
what you can for this world, and love it and adore it as much as you will; yet
in the end, you shall find it a right Nabal: who after many benefits received
from David, yet when David came to have need of him, he answered, who is 1.
Re. 25.
David, or who is the son of Isay, that I should know him? Upon (...) (...)
then said the prophet David, (...) (...) (...) of men, how Psalm. 4.
long vvil you be so (...) (...) Why do you love vanity, and seek after a
(...)? He (...) the world, not a liar, but a lie it (...), for the exceeding
great fraud and deceit which it uses.

The third point of the parable.
HAVING DECLARED how the How pleasures of the world are thorns.
commodities of this world that let men from resolution, are vanities and
fallaces; it comes next to be examined, in what sense our Saueour calls
them in like manner, thorns: of which S. Gregory writes Mat. 13.
thus; who ever would have believed me (says he) if I had called riches
thorns Hom 15 in Euang.
(as Christ here does;) seeing thorns do prick, and riches are so pleasant?
And yet truly are they called thorns, for that, with the pricks of their
careful cogitations, they tear and make bloody the minds of worldly me^. By
which words this holy father signifies, that even as a man's naked body, tossed
and tumbled among many thorns, can not be but much rent and torn, and made
bloody with the pricks thereof: so a worldly man's soul beaten with the cares
and cogitations of this life, can not but be vexed with restles pricking of the
same, and wounded also with many temptations of sin which do occur. This
does Solomon (in the places before alleged) signify, when he does not only
call the riches and pleasures of this world, vanity of vanities, that is, the
greatest vanity of al other vanities; Eccle. 1. 2. 3. 4.
but also affliction of spirit; giving us thereby to understand, that where these
vanities are, and the love of them once entered; there is no more the peace of
God which passes al understanding; there is no longer rest or quiet of mind;
but war of desires, Phil. 4.
vexation of thoughts, tribulation of fears, pricking of cares, unquietness of
soul, which is in deed a most miserable and pitiful affliction of spirit.

And the reason here of is, that as a clock can never stand still from running,
so long A comparison.
as the peazes do ha^g thereat: so a worldly man, having infinite cares,
cogitatio^s, and anxieties hanging upon his mind, as peazes upon the clock,
can never have rest or repose day or night, but is enforced to beat his brains
when other men sleep, for the compassing of those trifles, wherewith he is
incombred. O how many rich me^ in the world do feel to be true, that I now
say? how many ambitious men do prove it daily, and yet will not deliver the^
selves out of so miserable imbroilments?

Of all the plagues sent unto Egypt, that Exodus 8.
of the flies was one of the most troublesome and fastidious. For, they never
suffered men to rest, but the more they were beaten of, the more they came upon
them. So, of all the miseries and vexations, that God lays upon worldlinges,
this is not The terme^t of rich me^ in their riches.
the least, to be tormented with the cares of that thing, which they esteem
their greatest felicity, and can not beat them of, by any means they can
devise. They rush upon them in the morning as soon as they awake; they
accompany them in the day; they forsake them not at night; they follow them to
bed; they let them from their sleeps they afflict the^ in their dreams; and
finally, they are those importune and unmerciful tyra^ts, which God threatens
Iere. 16.
to wicked men by Jeremy the prophet, qui nocte ac die non dabi^et requiem,
which shall give no rest either by day or by night. And the cause hereof, which
God alleges in the same chapter, is, quia abstuli pacem meam a populo isto
(...) dominus,) misericordiam, and miserationes. For that I have taken away my
peace from this kind of people; (says God) I have taken away my mercy, and my
commiserations. A very heavy sentence to al them, that lie under the yoke and
bondage of those miserable vanities.

But yet the prophet Esaias, has a much more terrible description of these men's
Esa. 59.
estate: They put their trust in things of nothing (says he) and do talk
vanities; They conceive labor and bring forth iniquity; They break the
eggs of serpents, and vveaue the vvebbes of spiders. He that shall eat of
their eggs, shall die; and that which is hatched thence shall be a Cocatrice.
Their vvebbes shall not make cloth to cover them; for that their works are
unprofitable; and the work of iniquity is in their bands. These are the
words of the prophet Esaias, declaring The explication of the words of Esaias.
unto us by most significa^nt similitudes, how dangerous thorns the riches
and pleasures of this world are. And first he says, they put their hope in
things of nothing, and do talk vanities: to signify, that he means of the
vanities and vain men of this world, who commonly do talk of the things
which they love best, and wherein they place their greatest affiance. Secondly
he says, they conceive labor, and bring forth iniquity; alluding herin to
the childbirth of women; who first, do conceive in their wombes, and then
after a great deal of travail, do bring forth their infant: even so worldly
men, after a great time of travail and labor in vanities, do bring forth no
other fruit, then sin and iniquity. For that is the effect of these
vanities, as he speaks in the same chapter, crying out to such kind of men:
VVoe be unto you, which do dravv iniquity in the ropes of vanity.

But yet to express this matter more forciblie, he uses two other
similitudes; Two significant similitudes.
saying, they break the eggs of serpents, and do vveake the vvebbes of
spiders: Signifying by the one, they vanity of these worldly cares, and by th
other, the danger thereof. The spider we see, takes great pains and labor
many days together, to weaue unto her self a web; and in the end, when al is
done, comes a puff of wind or some other little chance, and breaks al in
pieces: Eue^ as he in the gospel which had taken great travail and care, in
heaping Luc. 12.
riches together, in plucking down his old barnes, and building up of new; and
when he was come to say to his soul, Now be merry; that night his soul was
taken from him, and al his labor lost. Therefore Esaie says in this place,
that the vvebbes of these vvcauers shall not make them clothe to cover them
selves with al, for that their works are unprofitable.

The other comparison contains matter of great danger and fear. For, as the
bird that fitteth upon the eggs of serpe^tes, by breaking and hatching them,
brings forth aperilous brood to her own destruction: so those that sit (as it
were) on brood upon these vanities of the world, do hatch at last their own
destruction. The reason whereof is, (as Esaias says,) for that the work of
iniquity is in their hands: still harping upon this string, that a man can not
love and follow these vanities, or entangle him self with their ropes (as his
former phrase is) but that he must in deed draw on much iniquity therewith;
that is, he must mingle much sin and offense of God with the same. Which
effect of sin, because it kills the soul that co^senteth unto it, therefore
Esaias compares it unto the brood of serpents, that kills the bird which
brings them forth into the world. And finally, Moses uses the like
similitudes, when he says of vain and wicked men. Their vineyard is the
vineyard of Deuteronomy. 32.
Sodomites, their grape is the grape of gaul, and their clusters of grapes are
most bitter; their wine is the gaul of dragons, and the poison of cocatrices
incurable. By which dreadful and lothesome comparisons, he would give us to
understand, that the sweet pleasures of this world, are i^ deed deceitful
thorns; and will prove in the end most bitter and dangerous.

The 4. point of the parable.
THE FOVRTH point that we have to How the world is misery.
consider, is, how this word, aerumna, that is, misery and calamity, may be
verified of the world and of the felicity thereof: Which thing, albeit it may
appear sufficiently, by that which has been said before: yet will I (for
promise sake) discuss it a little further in this place, by some particulars.
And among many miseries 1. Brevity.
which I might here recount, the first and one of the greatest, is, the
brevity and uncertainty of al worldly prosperity. O how great a misery is
this unto a worldly man, that would have his pleasures constant and perpetual?
O death how bitter is thy remembrance (says the scripture) unto a ma Eccl.
41.
that has peace in his riches? we have seen many men advanced, and not
endured two months in their prosperity; we have heard of diverse married in
great joy, and not to have lived six days in their selicitie; we have read of
strange matters happened out in these kinds, and we see with our eyes no few
examples daily. What a grief was it (think you) to Alexander 1. Mac. 2.
the great, that having subdewed, in twelve years, the most part of all the
world, should be then enforced to die, when he was most desirous to live, and
when he was to take most joy and comsort of his victories? What a sorrow was it
to the rich man in the gospel, to hear upon the sudden, hac nocte: even
this night thou must die? What a misery will this be to many wordlings Luc. 12.
when it comes, who now build palaces, purchasse lands, heap riches, procure
dignities, make marriages, join kinredes, as though there were never any end of
al these matters? What a dolful day will this be to them (I say) when they must
be turned of, no otherwise then princes mules are wont to be at the end of a
journey; that is, their treasure taken from them, and their gauld backs only
left unto them selves? For, as we see these mules of princes go all the day
long, laden with A comparison.
treasure, and covered with fair clothes, but at night shaken of into some
sorry stable, much bruised and gauled, with the carriage of those treasures: so
rich men that pass through this world, lodened with gold and silver, and do
gaul greatly their soulesi carriage thereof; are despoiled of their burden at
the day of death, and are turned of with their wounded co^scie^ces, to the
lothesome stable of hell and damuation.

An other misery joined to the prosperity 2. Discontentement.
of this world, is the grievous counterpeare of discontenteme^tes, that every
worldly pleasure has with it. Run over every delight and solace in this
life, and see what sauce it has adioined. Ask them that have had most proof
thereof, whether they remain contented or no? The possession of riches, is
accompanied with so many fears and cares, as has been showed. The adua^ceme^t
of honors, is subject to al miserable scruitude that may be devised. The
pleasure of the flesh, though it be lauful and honest; yet is it accompanied
(as S. Paul says) with tribulation of the flesh: But, if it be with sin; 1.
Cor. 7.
te^ne thou and times more is it environed with all kind of miseries.

Who can reckon up the calamities of 3. Miseries of body.
our body? so many diseases, so many infirmities, so many mischances, so many
dangers? who can tell the passions of our mind that do afflict us, now with
sorrow, Of mind.
now with envy, now with fury? who can recount the adversities, and
misfortunes that come by our goods? who Of goods.
can number the hurtes and discontentations, that daily ensewe upon us from
our neighbors? one calls us into law for Of neighbors.
our goods; an other pursues us for our life; a third, by slander impugneth
our good name. One afflicts us by hatred, an other by envy, an other by
flattery, an other by deceit, an other by revenge, an other by false witness,
an other by open arms. There are not so many days, nor hours in our lives,
as there are miseries and contrarieties in the same. And further the^ this, the
evil has this prerogative above the good, in our life; that one defect only,
ouerwhelmeth and drowneth a great number of pleasures together. As if a man had
all the felicities heaped together, which this world could yield, and yet had but
one toothe out of tune: al the other pleasures would not make him merry. Hereof
you have a clear example in Ama^, chief counsailer of king Assuerus: who,
Hest. 5.
for that Mardochaeus the Jew did not rise to him when he went by, nor did
honor him, as other men did: he said to his wife and free^des, that al his
other felicities were nothing, in respect of this one affliction.

Add now to this, the misery of darkness and blindness, wherein wordlie men
live, 4. The misery of blindness.
(as in part I have touched before;) most fitly prefigured by the palpable
darkness of Egypt, wherein no man could see his Exo. 10.
neighbor, no man could see his work, no man could see his way: such is the
darkness wherein woridlie men walk. They have eyes, but they see not, says
Christ: Mat. 13.
that is, though they have eyes to see the matters of this world, yet they are
blind, for that they see not the thigs they should see in deed. The children
of this world are wiser in their generation, then the children Luc. 16.
of light. But that is only, in matters of this world, in matters of darkness,
not in matters of light, whereof they are no children, for that the carnal man
understands not the things which are of God. Walk over the world, and you
shall 1. Cor. 2.
find men as sharp eyed as Egles in things of earth, but the same men as blind
as beetles in matters of heaven. Her of ensue those lamentable effects that we
see daily, of man's laws so carefully respected, and Gods commaundemetes so
co^temptuously rejected: of earthly goods sought for, and heavenly goods not
thought upon: of so much travail taken for the body, and so little care used
for the soul. Finally, if you will see in what great blindness the world does
live; remember, that S. Paul coming from a worldling to be a good Christian,
Act. 9.
had skales taken from his eyes by Ananias, which covered his sight before,
when he was in his pride and ruff of the world.

Besides al these miseries, there is yet an 5. Temptations and dangers.
other misery, greater in some respect, the^ the former: and that is, the
infinite number of temptations, of snares, of intisementes in the world, whereby
men are drawn to perdition daily. Athanasius writes of S. Anthony the
heremite, that God revealed Athan. in vita Antonii.
unto him one day the state of the world; and he saw it al hanged full of
nets in every corner, and deuilles fitting by to watch the same. The prophet
David, to signify the very same thing, that is, the infinite multitude of
snares in this world, says, God shall rain snares upon sinful Psalm. 10.
men; that is, God shall permit wicked me^ to fall into snares, which are as
plentiful in the world, as are the drops of rain which fall down from
heaven. Every thing almost, is a deadly snare unto a carnal and loose hearted
man. Every fight that he sees, every word that he hears, every thought that
he conceaueth, his youth, his age, his friends, his enemies, his honor, his
disgrace, his riches, his poverty, his compagnie keeping, his prosperity, his
adversity, his meat that he eats, his apparel that he wears, al are
snares to draw him to destruction that is not watchful.

Of this then, and of the blindness declared before, does follow the last and
greatest 6. Facility of sinners.
misery of al other which can be in this life. And that is, the facility
whereby worldly men do run into sin. For truly says the scripture,
miseros facit populos peccatum, Sin is the thing that makes Pro. 14.
people miserable. And yet, how easily men of the world do commit sin, and
how little scruple they make of the matter, Job signifies, when talking of such
a man, he says, bibit quasi aquam iniquitatem: Job. 15.
He suppeth up sin, as it were water; that is, with as great facility,
custom and ease, adue^tureth he upon any kind of sin that is offered him, as
a man drinks water, when he is a thirst. He that will not believe the saying
of Job, let him prove a little by his own experience, whether the matter be so
or no. Let him walk out into the streets, behold the doings of men, view
their behavior, consider what is done in shoppes, in halles, in consistories,
in judgment seats, in palaces, and in common meeting places abroad: what
lying, what slandering, what deceiving there is. He shall find, that of al
things whereof men do make any account in the world, nothing is so little
accounted of, as to commit a sin. He shall see The sinful state of the world.
justice sold, verity wrested, shame lost, and equity despised. He shall see
the innocent condemned, the guilty delivered, the wicked advanced, the
virtuous oppressed. He shall see many thieves flourish, many usurers bear great
sway, many murderers and extorsioners reverenced and honored, many fools put
in authority: and diverse which have nothing in them but the form of men, by
reason of money, to be placed in great dignities for the government of others.
He shall hear at every man's mouth almost; vanity, pride, detraction, envy,
deceit, dissimulation, wanto^nesse, dissolution, lying, swearing, perjury, and
blaspheming. Finally, he shall see the most part of men, to govern them selves
absolutely, even as beasts do, by the motion of there passions, not by law of
justice, reason, celigion, or virtue.

The. 5. point of the parable.
OF THIS DOES ensue the fifte How the world stra^gleth.
point that Christ touches in his parable, and which I promised here to
handle; to wit, that the love of this world choketh up and strangleth every
man whom it possesses, fromal celestial and spiritual life; for that it
fills him with a plain contrary spirit, to the spirit of God. The Apostle
says, Si quis spiritum Chrsti Rem. 8.
non habet, hic non est cius; If any man have not the spirit of Christ, this
fellow belongs not unto him. Now, how contrary the spirit of Christ, and the
spirit of the world is, may appear by the twelve Gal. 5. The effects of the
spirit of Christ.
fruits of Christ's spirit reckned up by S. Paul unto the Galathians: to wit,
Charity, which is the root and mother of al good works; Joy, in serving
God; peace, or tra^quilitie of mind, in the storms of this world; Patience,
in adversity; Longanimitie, in expecting our reward: Bogitic, in hurtig no
man; Benignity, in sweet behavior; Gentleness, in occasion given of anger;
Faithfulness, in performig our promises; Modesty, without arrogancy;
Continency, from alkind of wickedness; Chastity, in conseruing a pure mind in
a clean and unspotted body. Against these men (says S. Paul) there is no
law. And in the very same chapter Gal. 5.
he expresses the spirit of the world by the contrary effects; saying, the
worcks The effects of the spirit of this world.
of flesh are manifest, which are, fornication, uncleanness, wantonness,
lechery, idolatry, poysonninges, enemities, contentious, emulations, wrath,
strife, dissension, sects, envy, murder, dro^kennes, glutonie, and the like:
of which I fortel you, as I have told you before, that those men which do
such things shall never obtain the kingdom of heaven.

Here now may every man judge of the spirit of the world, and of the spirit of
Christ; and (applying it to him self) may conjecture, whether he holds of the
one or of the other. S. Paul geeueth two pretty short rules in the very same
place Two rules of S. Paul to knovvour spirit. Gal. 5.
to try the same. The first is, They which are of Christ, have crucify
ltheir flesh, with the vices, and concupisconces thereof. That is, they have so
mortified their own bodies, as they commit none of the vices and sins
repeated before, nor yield not willingly unto the concupiscences or temptations
thereof. The second rule is, if we live in spirit, then let us walk in
spirit: That is, our walking and behavior is a sign whether we be alive or
dead. For if our walking be spiritual, (such as I have declared before by the
twelve fruits thereof:) then do we live and have life in spirit: but if our
works be carnal, (such as S. Paul now has described:) then are we carnal and
dead in spirit, nor have we any thing to do with Christ, or portion in the
kingdom of heaven. And for that all the world is full of those carnal works,
and brings forth no fruits in deed of Christ's spirit, nor permits them
to grow or Christ and the world enemies.
prosper within her: thence is it, that the scripture always puts Christ
and the world for opposite and open enemies.

Christ him self says, that the world can Ioh. 14. Ioh. 15. 17.
not receive the spirit of truth. And again in the same Evangelist he says,
that nether he, nor any of his, are of the world, though they live in the
world. And yet further, in his most vehement prayer unto his father, Pater
just, mundus te non cognouit: just father, the world has not known Ioh. 17.
thee. For which cause S. John writes, If any man love the world, the love of
the Father Ioh. 2.
is not in him. And yet further, S. James; that vvbs soever desires only to be
a sreend of this Iac. 4.
world, is thereby made an enemy to God. What will worldly me^ say to this? S.
Paul affirms 1. Co. 11.
plainly, that this world is to be damned: And Christ insinuates the same in
S. John's gospel: but most of al, in that wonderful Ioh. 12.
fact of his, when praying to his Father for other matters, he excepteth the
world by name. Non promun lo, says he; I Ioh. 17.
do not ask mercy and perdone for the world, but for those which thou have
given me out of the world. Oh what a dreadful exception is this; made by the
Ioh. 1. Luc. 13.
Savior of the world; by the lamb that takes away al sins, by him that
asked perdone, even for his tourmentours and crucifiers, to except (I say) now
the world by name from his mercy? Oh that worldly men would consider but this
one point only, they would not (I think) live so void of fear as they do.

Can any man marvel now, why S. Paul cries so carefully unto us, nolite
conformari huic saeculo, conform not your selves to this Romans 12.
world? and again, that we should renounce utterly al secular desires? Can any
man Tit. 2.
marvel why S. John, which was most privy above al others to Christ's holy
meaning herein, says to us in such earnest sort, Nolite diligere mundum
neque ea quae in mundo sunt, do not love the world, nor 1. Ioh. 2.
any thing that is in the world. If we may nether love it, nor so much as
conform our selves unto it, under so great pains as are before rehearsed (of
the enimitie of God and of our eternal damnation:) what shall become of those
me^, that do not only conform them selves unto it and to the vanities
thereof, but also do follow it, seek after it, rest in it, and do bestow al
their labors, and travails upon it.

If you ask me the cause why Christ Why Christ hates the world. 1. Io. 5.
so hates and abhors this world; Saint John tells you, Quia mundus totus
in maligno positus est, for that all the whole world is set on noughtines: for
that it has a spirit contrary to the spirit of Christ, as has been showed:
for that it teaches pride, vainglorie, ambition, envy, revenge, malice, with
pleasures of the flesh, and al kind of vanities. And Christ on the contrary
side, preaches al humility, meekenes, perdoning of enemies, abstinence,
chastity, sufferance, mortification, bearing the Cross, with contempt of al
earthly pleasures for the kingdom of heaven. Christ hates it, for that it
persecuteth the good, and aduanceth the evil; for that it rooteth out virtue,
and planteth al vice; And finalie, for that it shuts the doors against
Christ when he knocks, and Apoc. 3.
strangleth the heart that once it possesses.

Wherefore to conclude this part, seeing A description of the world.
this world is such a thing as it is: so vain, so deceitful, so troublesome,
so dangerous: seeing it is a professed enemy to Christ, excommmunicated and
damned to the pit of hell: seeing it is (as one father says) an arcke of
travail, a schole of vanities, a marcket of deceit, a laberinthe of error;
seeing it is nothing else but a barraine wilderness, a stony field, a dirtie
stie, a tempestuous sea: seeing it is a grove full of thorns, a medowe full of
scorpions, a flourishing garden without fruit, a cave full of poisoned and
deadly basiliskes: seeing it is finally (as I have showed) a fountain of
miseries, a river of tears, a feigned fable, a delectable frenzy: seeing (as
Saint Au. ep. 39.
Austen says) the joy of this world has nothing else but false delight, true
asperitie, certain sorrow, uncertain pleasure, trauailsome labor, fearful
rest, grievous misery, vain hope of felicity: seeing it has nothing in it
(as S. Chrysostom says) but tears, shame, repentance, reproach, sadness, Hom.
22. ad pop. Antiochenum.
negligences, labors, terrors, sickness, sin, and death it self: seeing the
worlds repose is full of anguish, his security without foundation; his fear
without cause, his travails without fruit, his sorrow without profit, his
desires without success, his hope without reward, his mirthe without
continuance, his miseries without remedies: seeing these and a thousand evils
more are in it, and no one good thing can be had from it, who will be deceived
with this visard, or allured with this vanity hereafter? who will be stayed
from the noble service of God by the love of so fond a trifle as is this world?
And this to a reasonable man may be sufficient, to declare the insufficiency
of this third impediment.

The. 6. point of this chapter.
BUT YET NOW for satisfying my promise in the beginuing of this chapter: How
we may avoid the evil of the world.
I have to add a word or two in this place, how we may avoid the foresaid
dangers of this world, as also use it unto our gain and commodity. And for
the first, to avoid the dangers, seeing there are so many snares and trappes,
as has been declared: there is no other way, but only to use the refuge of
birds in avoiding the dangerous snares of fowlers: that is, to mount up into
the air, and so to fly over them al. Frustra tacitur rete ante oculos
pennatorum, says the wise man: that Pro. 1.
is, the net is laid in vain before the eyes of such as have wings and can
fly. The spies of Hierico, though many snares were laid for them by their
enemies; yet they escaped al, for that they walked by hills, says the
scripture. Which place Origin expounding, says, that there is no way He. 1.
in Iosue.
to avoid the dangers of this world, but to walk upon hills, and to imitate
David, that said, Leuaui oculos meos ad montes, vnde ve (...) auxiliu^ mihi, I
lifted up mine eyes Psa. 120.
unto the hills, from whence al mine aid and assistance came, for avoiding
the snares of this world. And then shall we say with the same David, Anima
nostra sieut passer erepta est de laqueo venantium: Our soul is delivered Psa.
123.
as a sparo we from the snare of the fowlers. We must say with S. Paul, Our
conversation is in heaven; and then shall we Phil. 3.
little fear al these deceites, and dangers upon earth. For as the fouler has
no hope to catch the bird, except he can allure her to pitch, and to come
down, by some means: so has the devil no way to entangle us, but to say as
he did to Christ, mitte te deorsum, throw thy self down; that Mat. 4.
is, pitch down upon the baits which I have laid, eat and devour them,
enamour thy self with them, tie thine appetite unto them and the like.

Which gross and open temptation he that will avoid, by contemning the
allureme^t of these baits, by flying over them, by placing his love and
cogitations in the mountains of heavenly joys and eternity: he shall easily
escape al dangers and perils. King, David was past them al when he said to
God: What is there for me in heaven, or what do I desire besides thee upon
earth? Psalm. 72.
my flesh and my heart have fainted for desire of thee. Thou art the God of my
heart, and my portion (o Lord) for ever.

Saint Paul also was past over these dangers, when he said, that now he was
crucified Gal. 6.
to the world, and the world unto him: and that he esteemed all the wealth of
Phil. 3.
this world as mere dung; and that albeit he lived in flesh, yet lived he not
according 2. Co. 10.
to the flesh. Which glorious example if we would follow, in contemning and
despising the vanities of this world, and fixing our minds on the noble riches
of Gods eternal kingdom to come: the snares of the devil would prevail
nothing at al against us in this life.

Touching the second point; how to use the riches and commodities of this world
How to use vvorldly wealth to our advantage. Luc. 16.
to our advantage; Christ has laid down plainly the means, Facite vobis
amicos de Ma^monainiquitatis: Make unto you friends of the riches of
iniquity. The rich gloutton might have escaped his torments, and have made
him self a happy man by help of worldly wealth, if he had listed. And so
might many a thousand that now live Luc. 16.
in Christianity, and will go to hell for the same cause that the glutton did.
Oh that men would take warning one by an other, and be wise whiles they have
time. S. Paul says, Deceive not your selves; Look Gal. 4. 2. Cor. 9.
what a man sows, and that shall he reap. What a plentiful harvest then
might rich men provide to the^ selves if they would, having such store of
seed by them, and so much ground offered them daily to sow it in? Why do they
not remember that sweet haruest-song, Come ye blessed of my father; enter into
the kingdom prepared for you; for Mat. 25.
I was hungry, and you fed me; I was thirsty, and you gave me to drink; I
was naked and you appareled me? Or if they do not care for this; why do they
not fear at least the black Sanctus that must be chaunted to them for the
contrary? Agite anne diuites, plorate, vlulantes in miserijs vistris quae
aduenie^t Iac. 5.
vobis: go now you rich men; weep and houle in your miseries that shall come
upon you?

The holy father John Damaseen reports a goodly parable of Barlaam the
heremite, Dam. in hist. Barlaa^ and Iosaphat cap. 14. A parable.
to our purpose. There was (says he) a certain city, or common wealth,
which used to choose to them selves a king from among the poorest sort of
people, and to advance him to great honor, wealth, and pleasures for a time.
But after a while, when they were weary of him, there fashion was to rise
against him, and to dispoile him of al his felicity, yea of the very clothes
of his back, and so to banish him naked into an Island of a far country;
where, bringing nothing with him, he should live in great misery, and be put
to exceeding slavery for ever. Which practice one king at a certain time
considering, by good advise (for all the other, though they knew that fashion,
yet through negligence and pleasures of their present felicity, cared not for
it;) took resolute order with him self, how to prevent this misery: which was
by this means. He saved every day great sommes of money from his superfluities
and idle expenses; and so, secretly made over before hand a great treasure unto
that island, whereunto he was in danger daily to be sent. And when the time
came, that in deed they deposed him from his kingdom, and turned him away
naked, as they had done the other before: he went to the ila^d with joy and
confidence, where his treasure lay; and was received there, with exceeding
great triumph; and placed presently in greater glory, then ever he was before.

This parable teaches as much as possibly may be said in this point. For this
city The application of this parable.
or common wealth, is this present world, which aduaunceth to authority, poor
men: that is, such as come naked into this life; and upon the soudaine when
they look least for it, does pull them down again, and turns them of naked
into their graves, and so into an other world; where bringing no treasure of
good works with them, they are like to find little favor, but rather eternal
misery. The wise king that prevented this calamity, is he, which in time of
wealth in this life (according to the counsel of our Saueour Christ) does
seek to lay up treasure Luc. 12.
in heaven by alms deeds and other good works, against the day of his death,
when he must be banished hence naked, as all the prices of that city were. At
which time, if their good deeds do follow them, then (as God pmiseth,) they shall
be happy Apo. 14. Mat. 25.
men, and placed in much more glory, then ever this world was able to give
them. But if they come without oil in their lamps; then is there nothing for
them to expect, but nescio vos; I know you not. And when they are known; Ite
Mat. 25.
maledicti in ignem aeternum, go you accursed into fire everlasting.

EXAMPLES OF TRVE RESOLVTION IN THE TWO FORMER POINTS; of suffering for
Christ, and contemning the world. Adioined for the better declaration and
confirmation of the two chapters next going before. CHAPT. V.
FOR so much as the two precedent chapters of contemning the world and
suffering for Christ, are by their own natures, and in man's natural sight and
reason, very dreadful and loathsome to flesh and blood, and to whatsoever
depends thereof; in such sort, as diverse persons, (who otherwise esteem the^
selves The reason of this chapter.
no evil Christians,) do take horror and auersion even at the very name and
mention of such things; persuading them selves that the necessity of Christian
profession, requires not any resolution to so high a perfection: I am moved in
this place, to adioine to the former treatises, a brief declaration of the
practice and exercise of ancient Christians in these two points, whereby their
opinions and censures may better be seire the^ by their words; and wherein each
other Christian that lives at this day, may behold as in a table or glass,
what behooves him to do (when occasion is offered) if he profess to serve
under the same banner, and do expect his pay at the hands of the same king
and master, that they did.

Many things have been said before, concerning these two mysteries of worldly
What has been handled before.
contempt, and sufferance in tribulation. And among other matters it has been
declared, that the very foundation of Christian Religion (which is the holy
cross and Crucifix) stands builded principaly upon these two pillars. It has
been showed, how Christ our Savior when he sent forth his Apostles and
disciples, as the first spiritual fathers and masters of the world; instructed
the^ especially in these two doctrines, as most behooful and necessary to the
end which he prete^deth. And for that his divine wisdom did easily foresee,
that deeds have much more force to persuade then words: he did set forth this
doctrine most exactly in the example of his own life, making the same a pattern
of al worldly contempt and suffering for justice; as also did his said Apostles
and disciples after him, to the true and perfect imitation of their master.

Thus much then has been treated before; and many particulers have been
declared The firm resolution of the apostles.
as well of the holy Apostles extreme suffering in all kinds and manners of
affliction, as also of their utter dispising whatsoever was precious or
pleasant in this world, for the perfect serving of their Lord and master. No
allurements of this world could intise them, no dignities delight them, no
flattery deceive them, no pleasure pervert them, no labors weary them, no
difficulty stay them, no terror or tyranny of mortal man could fear them
from their course begone, as long as their souls remained within their
bodies. Some of them ended their lives by the sword, some upon the cross,
others were stoned and thrown down from high pinacles, others were scorched
and skinned alive: and all this for the perfect serving of their master, and to
stir us up to follow their examples. Which thing the learned and devout Father
S. John Chrysostom considering, when he treated of the deeds of S. Peter and
S. Paul in particular, breaks forth into this speech following.

O holy and blessed Apostles of my Savior, what thanks shall we yield unto The
speech of S. Chrysostom. ser. 32. in mor. exhort.
you for all the labors and toiles that you have taken for us? When I think of
thee, O Peter, I fall into admiration; and when I remember thee O Paul, I fall
besides my self, and am oppressed with tears. For what shall I say, or what
shall I think, when I behold the afflictions that you have suffered? How many
prisons have you two sanctified? how many chains have you adorned? how many
torments have you ^usteined? how many reproaches have you received? O blessed
be those tongues of yours, that have been such instruments of the holy Ghost,
and blessed be your members inbrued with blood, for the love of Christ's
Church. You have truly followed your master in all things, etc. Rejoice
therefore thou Peter, to whom it was given to die upon the cross, thereby to
imitate thy Savior: and triumph thou Paul, whose head was cut of with the
sword for the same cause. O this sword shall be to me in stead of a crown, and
the nails wherewith S. Peter was crucified, shall be most precious stones in my
Diadem. Thus much and many things more utters this holy father with great
fervor, in admiration of the sufferings of these blessed Apostles: whose
labors how much he endeavored to put in execution in his own life, and how far
he was made partaker of like afflictions, it may appear to him that will read
the Vide hist. Secrat. li. 6.
Ecclesiastical history, which declares how he both lived and died in
continual tribulation.

O dear christian brother, if we had so tender hearts in contemplation of these
affairs, as had this holy man of God, we would be of other judgment in many
things then we are. We see that S. Chrysostom was thus moved, with the
consideration only of these two Apostles trauails. But how much might be said
of all the rest in like manner? Of S. James that Of S. James.
was called the brother of JESUS, and was left by him as the first bishope of
Jerusalem, it is written by Egesippus that lived Egesip. lib. 5. hist. apud
Eusebius. li. 2. cap. 22.
immediately after his time, that he being in singular authority and credit for
his holiness and wisdom, not only among al Christians, but also among the whole
nation of Jews (for which he was called by the name of James the Just as
Josephus the Jew reports;) yet chose he a most austere and sharp life, never
testing either wine or flesh, or anointig his body with oil, according to the
fashion of the country. He was so diligent and painful in continual praying
upon his knees, that the skin thereof was as hard as the brain of a camels
knee. And being brought forth one day and placed upon a pinnacle of the temple
of Jerusalem, in the presence of in inic people, (for it was on the high
feast of Easter) and there entreated by all the nobles and Magistrates of Jury
to speak some word in derogation of Christian religion, with promise of
infinite honor for the same, if he would yield the runto: he made choice not
only to lack that honor, but also to be reviled by the people, to be thrown
down from the pinnacle where he stood, and to have his head cleft in sunder
with a staff or instrument that diars of cloth do use, rather then to relent
one jot in professing that thing which he knew to be true.

This was the small account that those men made of worldly dignities and
promotions, when they brought with them any let or hinderance to Gods perfect
service. And this was the ready desire they have to suffer, in every least
occasion offered for their. Masters honor. O gentle reader, how worthily said
our Samour Jesus of these me^; you are they who baue stood with me in my
temptations, and therefore I prepare Luc. 22.
for you a kingdom; and how justly may it be verified of us, that which the
same our Savior in another place says, in tempore tentationis accedunt, they
abandone me in Luc. 8.
time of tentation.

BUT LET US see now further, how these which insued and lived after the
Apostles, behaved themselves in this behalf. For better conceauing whereof,
thou THE manifold tentations of the primative church.
have to remember (loving brother) that for the space of three hundred years
together after Christ's departure out of this world; he sent almost continual
temptations, that is to say, continual tribulatio^s, afflictions and
persecutions unto his Church upon earth, (except only certain short times or
breathing,) wherein he meant to make evident proof of his servants patience,
and of his own power against his enemies. And whereas a little before his
departure, he forwarned his disciples of these things to come, assuring them
that they Mat. 10.
should have pressures, and that he sent the^ forth as lambs among wolves; he
performed the same in such sort not long after, as it may seem that he brake
open all the gates and bars of hell at once, (as else where I have noted) and
turned forth all the legions of suries therein contained, as most ravenous bears
and lions upon these his lambs. For in ten general and most deadful
persecutions, which in this time, by public authority and co^ma^deme^t were
excercised; it is impossible for man to recounte, either the tyranny and
iniquity of the laws, or the barbarous cruelty of the executors, or the
infinite multitude of the sufferers, or the strange inventions of the
tormentours. And albeit in these times of trial (as always it falls out,)
there wanted not diverse Christians (as Eusebius Eusebius. li. 8. hist. cap. 2.
well notes that writes the story) who for love of their own ease made
shipwrak of their salvation: yet without number were those also that by contempt
of the world, did bear out the storm, and perseuered faithful. Of whom for
our instruction and comfort in like occurre^tes, some sew shall be noted in this
discourse following.

After the death of S. James before mentioned, and the destruction of
Jerusalem, The example of Simeon.
which was especially hastened by God for punishment of that murder (as
Josephus the Jew was of opinion,) Ege sippus Joseph. apud Euse. lib. 1. c. 22.
and Eusebius do report, that so many of the Apostles and disciples of Christ
as were then alive, gathered them selves together, Apud Euse. l. 3. c. 10. and
26.
and ordained bishop of Hieruiale^ in place of S. James, one Simeon the soune
of Cleophas; which Cleophas, S. Luke names for one of the two disciples that
Luc. 24.
went to Emaus together, and talked with Christ upon the way, after his
resurrection. S. Matthew also and S. John do Mat. 27. Ioh. 19.
make mention of MARY the wife of Cleophas, which was continually in the
company of the blessed Virgin Mother of our Save our, at his Passion: which
MARY being mother to this Simeon; and her husband Cleophas, being brother to
Joseph (as Egesippus holds:) Simeo^ was accounted as cosine german to our
Savior JESUS, and by all probabilite, had both seen him and heard him in his
life.

This man then having lived very long in this his charge of bishoprike, and
being now a hundred and twenty years old, was in the time of Traian the
Emperor (S. John the Evangelist being dead a little before.) accused by certain
heretics: who then first (as Egisippus says, who lived in the same time)
began to show Egesip. apud Euse. li. 3. cap. 26.
them selves openly in the world, (having lived secretly in corners before,)
for that all the holy Apostles and others which had heard our Savior speak,
were now dead, and therefore these heretics devised now, what new expositions
upon The public beginning of heretics.
scriptures liked them best. And for that this man was the only or chief
pillar that stood against them for defense of the Catholic faith and
apostolical tradition at that day, they caused him coningly to be apprehended
and presented before Atticus then govern our of Jury for the Emperor. Who
after many allurementes and threats used unto him, when by no me a^s he could
move him to relent from his constancy in Christ's service: he caused him to be
beaten with whippes and to be tormented many days together: which the old man
endured with most wonderful courage, in so much that Atticus being The death of
Simeon.
astonished (says our author) that one of six skore years of age, could bear so
many torments, commanded him finally to be nailed on a cross as his master
Christ was, and so he died.

At the very same time lived therein Asia a man of singular name for his
holiness, The story of S. Ignatius.
called Ignatius, disciple to the apostles, and by them or deined bishop of
Antioche after that S. Peter had lest the same. This man being accused for his
faith to the governor of Syria, and standing constant in the confession
thereof, was condemned by him to be torn in pieces of wild beasts. But for
that he was a person of great mark; he was sent prisoner to Rome under the
custody of ten soldiars, to suffer there. And albeit these soldiars upon the way
used him very discurteously and kept him strait; yet found he means either
by speech or letters to comfort al Christians as he passed by them. But
especially (as Eusebius notes) he inculcated two Fusch li 3. cap 30.
points to be remembered of them, Primum, vt haereses, quae tum primo emergere
caeperunt, maxim praecaue: e^t; deinde, vt apostoloru^ traditioni (...)
adhaerescere^t; first, that they should above al other things take heed of new
opinions and heresies which then first began to creep abroad: and secondly,
that they should stick and clean most firmly to the tradition of the
Apostles, for the true understanding and interpretation of scriptures; that is
to say, they should admit no other interpretation but that which al Ignatius
his rule to discern truth.
churches by general and uniform consent had received from the apostles;
insinuating hereby, that this should be an infallible rule to guide men by,
unto the worlds end.

Besides this the good man got time also and opportunity in his journey, to
write diverse epistles to sandry churches, which Eusebius in his story sets
down. And among other things either he being informed, or fearing of him self,
that the Christians in Rome hearing of his coming, would make means to the
Emperor to get pardon for his life, and so deprive him of martyrdom: he write
a most earnest letter unto them, beseeching them not to do so. Out of which
letter, both Eusebius and S. Hieron do cite these Easeb. li. 3. cap. 20.
Hieron. in catal.
most excellent words following. In this my iourny (says he) from Syria to
Rome, I am enforced to fight day and night with ten leopards, that is, with ten
soldiars sent to keep me. Who the more benifites I do bestow upon them, the
worse The Zealous words of S. Ignatius at his death.
and the more cruel they are toward me. But their iniquity is my instruction,
and yet hereby I am not justified. Would God I were once come to enjoy those
beasts that are appointed to devour me. I desire greatly that it may be
hortly, and that they may be stirred up to eat me quickly, least perhapes they
abstain to touch me, as they have done from the bodies of other martyrs. But
if they should refuse to set upon me, I will intise them on my self. Pardon me
(my children) for I know what is good for me. Now I begine to be Christ's true
disciple, desiring nothing that is seen in this world with man's eyes, but only
JESUS Christ my Savior. Fire, cross, beasts, breaking of my bones,
quartering of my members, tearing and renting of my body, and al the other
torments that the devil can invent, let them al come upon me, only that I may
enjoy my JESUS.

Thus far does Eusebius cite the words of his own epistle, which yet is
exstant. (...) (...). 5. (...) (...) Hieron. in catal.
And S. Irenaeus and S. Ierom do (...) yet further, that when he came to
suffer, and heard the roringes of the lions ready to come forth upon him, he
used these words; I am Gods corn, and the teeth of these wild beasts must
grind me, to the end I may be pure and good bread for Christ's table. He
suffered (says S. Jerome) in the eleventh year of Traians reign; and his
relics were carried back again, by Christians from Rome to Antioche, and S.
Ignatius relics.
there are kept without the gate called Daphnitica.

Here we see the fervor of this servant of God; we see his constancy, his
courage, his comfort in suffering. And how came he (dear brother) to this most
happy and blessed estate? We hear him say of him How old Christians came to
their constancy.
self, that now he began to be Christ's true disciple, when he desired
nothing that man's eye can behold, but only his Lord and Savior JESUS Christ.
This burning love then of JESUS, did consume in him al other love and affection
that stays worldly men from like resolution. He was no friend or lover of
this world. Hear the saying of an other light and lantern of Gods church,
which lived at the very same time, and suffered so one after him, for the same
cause, and spoke with him in his journey toward Rome; I mean S. Policarpus,
who wrote S. Policarp. his speech of S. Ignatius.
thus of Ignatius, presently after his martyrdom, unto the Philippenses. I
beseech you brethren to yield al obedience where it is due, and to use al
patience in your afflictions, Eusebius. li. 3. cap. 30.
according to the example which you have seen in Ignatius, and other martyrs;
as also in S. Paul and the rest of the Apostles, assuring your selves, that
those men ran not in vain, but in faith and justice; and therefore are gone to
the place which was due unto them, being now with their Lord, of whose
afflictions they were made partakers in this life. They were no lovers of this
world, but they loved their master, who suffered death for our love, and rose
again for our glorification. Thus far Policarpus.

And for that we are fallen into the mention of this rare and worthy man
Policarp, The story of S. Polycarp.
who albeit he saw not Christ hi^ self in flesh, yet did he live most
familiarly with diverse of the Apostles, and especially with S. John Evangelist;
whose domestical disciple he was many years, and by him made bishope of the
Church of Smyrna: and for that his fight and martyrdom for Christian religion,
ensued not long after the death of Ignatius; it shall not be amiss to speak
of him also in this place. The story is set down at large by Eusebius, Eusebius.
l. 4. c. 13. and 14.
and others out of an Epistle written by the Christians of the Church of Smyrna,
which were al present at the whole tragedy of his death; the sum whereof is
this: that whereas at a certain day by the commandment of the Emperor
Antonius, incredible and innumerable torments were used against Christians, in
the city of Smyrna: diverse did bear the same out with invincible courage, to
the singular comfort of their brethren, and to the great admiration of their
enemies; albeit one Quintus that was newly come out of Dangerous for any man to
offer him self to persecutours.
Phrygia, and had rashly offered him self to the tortours before he was sought
for; fell shamefully the same day, and denied his profession.

Polycarpus then while these things were in doing remained secretly in a house
thereby, with other christians; whether every thing was brought to him by the
brethren as soon as they were done: and at length news came, that Polycarpus
himself was sought for. Whereat he nothing moved, answered with a quiet mind and
countenance, that he was ready; meaning in deed to expect the officers there
until they came for him. But the christians that were present with him,
enforced him whether he would or no, to retire him self unto a little village
not far of, where he made his abode for certain days, whiles he was sought
for in the city. During which time, he did nothing else (says the story) but
pray day and night, and that especially for the peace and unity of the Church,
for that heresies now pubblicly Policarpus greatest care for the Churches
unity.
begone to swarm. He had a vision also, (which he told unto those that were
there present with him) signifying that he must go to Christ by fire. At length
the purseuants that had sought him al about the city, came by Gods permission,
unto the village where he was, and thereupon he sted by night unto another,
whether they followed him also. And there finding two children in the street,
enforced the one of them by beating, to discover the house wherein he lay.

Coming therefore into the house, and understanding that he was in a chamber
Policarpe apprehended.
above, sent for him to come down; and albeit the messenger favoring
Polycarpus, showed him a way how to escape by an other house, yet he refused
the same, saing; we have fled enough, let Gods will be done. And so coming
down with a merry countenance, bid them heartily welcome, and commanded the
meat left in the house to be set before them, beseeching them only to give him
one hours space wherein to pray unto his Lord, before he departed: Which they
willingly granted, being much moved with his gray hairs and fatherly
countenance, as allo cast into admiration with the fervor of his prayers that
he made there by him self, whiles they were eating. Which being ended, they
took him forth, placing him upon an Ass, and so led him toward the city
of Smyrna, very early in the morning upon the great saboth day, having
advertised the Magistrates before of their coming, who for that cause were
gathered together with all the people in the market place.

And to make the matter more solemn, they sent forth one Herod, that was
provost Policarpus his carriage to Smirna.
of the peace, to mete him and fetch him in. He therefore coming forth with
great pomp in his coche, met with Polycarpus, and first saluted him with great
honor and reverence, causing him to come down from the ass, and to sit with
him in his coche, and there began to flatter him, saing; You are a grave and
wise man, have The manner of persecutours speeches.
respect unto your self. what great matter (man) is it to say, Lord Caesar; or
to make a sacrifice. But Polycarpus held his peace; and when the other went
forward to use many words to that purpose, Polycarpus answered: Sir, in fine I
am not to follow your counsel. At which words he taking great disdain; thrust
him headlong out of his coche, and that with such violence, as he wounded
pitifully his leg in going forth. But the old man making no account thereof,
followed merrily the soldiars that lead him.

And when he came to the place where the judges were; he entered in with a merry
Policarpus confession before the multitude.
countenance, and much the more, for that at the very instant when he entered,
there was a clear and loud voice heard from heaven, saying; beos good courage
Polycarpe, and bebaue thy self valiantly. When he came before the high
magistrate, named Proco^sul; first, there was an insinite cry given out by the
people against him. Which being appeased; the Proconsul asked him, whether he
were Polycarpus; to which he answered, yea. Then said the Proconsul, have
regard unto thy oldage, (Father) repent and desire that wicked me^ may be
destroyed. Whereat Polycarpe turned him self unto the multitude, and lifting up
his hands to heaven with a deep sigh, said; o Lord destroy or take away the
wicked. Then said the Proconsul; swear also by Caesar's fortune, and defy
Christ. Whereto Polycarp answered; I have served Christ now fourscore years and
more, and he never yet did me any hurt but much good, and how the^ can I defy
my Lord and king, that hitherto has so mercifully dealt with me? Then urged
the Proco^sul again, that he should swear by Caesar's fortune. Whereto the
other replied, if thou name Caesar's good fortune so often, for oftentations
sake; know thou, that I am a Christian, which has (...) to do with fortune;
and if thou (...) (...) what Christian (...), appoint a day and I will teach
the. (...) this people (quoth the Proconsul) to be content with that. No said
Policarpe, I (...) them not worthy to be dealt withal in such a matter; but to
the, as to a Magistrate, our profession teaches us to have respect and
reverence.

After this there passed diverse other speeches between them, the one
threatening torments, beasts, fire and sword; and the other showing al desire
and readiness to sustain the same. The people cried out continually that he
might be Unruly behaueour of a multitude.
torn with wild beasts. But that was denied, for that the beasts were
wearied out upon other martyrs before. The^ cried they that he might be burned
aline, which Policarp hearing, and remembering the vision which he had seen in
the village before his apprehension, fell down of his knees and prayed; and
soon after rising again, turned him to the people and said; be ve content,
for you shall have your desire, for it is determined that I shall be burned
alive; and a little after, the Proconsul gave sentence for his burning.

When he was brought unto the fire, he put of his own apparel, says the
story; The martyrdom of S. Policarp.
but when he came to his shows he had some difficulty therein, for lake of
use, being never permitted by Christians to do that office to him self before,
every one thinking it a felicity to be the first in doing of that service,
whersoeuer he came, thereby to touch his holy body. He prayed vehemently in the
fire, and gave immortal thanks vuto almighty God that had made him worthy of
that days combat; during which time, the fire divided it self in two parts,
and would not touch him; in so much, that the magistrate was constreined to
send one to run his body through with a sword, wherewith he died. Thus far
repeteth Eusebius out of the epistle of these men that were present at his
martyrdom, and they do add further these words in the same epistle; that
Eusebius. li. 4. ca. 14. and Niceph. li. 3. ca. 35.
the Jews and Gentiles there present, did suggest to the Magistrate, to take
heed least we did steal away his body, and so begin to honor him in stead of
our God crucified. Upon which suggestion, his body by commandment was burned
there in our presence after it was dead, but yet we afterward gathered up his
bones out of the ashes, and laid them up as things more precious then gold or
precious stones, in S. Policarpus his relics.
a place convenient for such a treasure; hoping that one day God will permit us
to come together in peace, and to celebrate the festiual day of this his holy
martyrdom.

I have been the longer in setting down the co^bat and end of this glorious
Saint, for that he was a most rare and singular man, and his example may serve
us for our instruction to diverse purposes; but especially, To be noted in S.
Policarp.
how we ought to be firm and constant, in holding the general uniform
doctrine, and interpretation of scripturs, delivered by tradition from the
apostles in the Catholic church, with detestation of al new opinions, as also
S. Ignatius warned us before. The holy bishop and martyr Iren. lib. 3. cap. 3.
apud Eusebius. lib. 4. c. 13.
of God Irenaeus, that lived in his time, and went from Lio^s in France, unto
Asia to see and hear him, reports certain things of this blessed man, which
I can not in this place omit (notwithstanding I make haste) for that they may
greatly profit such men in these our days, as have grace to be moved or helped
with any thing.

Policarpe (says he) was not only instructed by the apostles them selves, but
also made bishop, by them of Smirna. He Irenaeus his testimony of Policarpus
doctrine.
lived familiarly with many that had seen and spoken with our Saueour in flesh,
and we in our youth saw him in Asia, for he lived long, and ended his life by a
most famous martyrdom. He taught always those things, which he had learned of
the apostles, and which the Church delivers, and which are only true. Which
may be proved, by the consent of all the churches of Asia, and by the bishopes
which have succeeded after him. He was a more faithful witness of the truth, then
Valentinus, or Marcion, or all the body of other heretics together, which have
brought pestilent new sects into the Church. He went to Rome, Anacetus being
the^ bishop, and reduced to the church and true religion, diverse that were
perverted by the for said heretics: and protested openly, that he had
received of the apostles them selves, that only and sole truth which is
delivered by the Catholic church. There are yet a live that have heard him
tell, how that S. John the apostle of our Save our, being once at Ephesus going
into a common bath, and seeing Cerinthus the heretic to be within; ran out
again in have, saying S. John's hatred against heretics.
to them that were with him; let us flee from hence, least the bath fall down
and destroy us, in which the enemy of God Cerinthus remains. The same
Policarpe, at the same time when he was at Rome, meeting by chance with Marcion
the heretic there, and being demanded of him whether he knew him or not;
answered; vea, I know the for the chief child of Satan. So wary were the holy
apostles and their scholars, not so much as to talk with such fellows, as
endeavored by their new comme^taries and expositio^s of scriptures, to change
the truth before received. And so S. Paul warns us al to do, when he says;
Avoid an heretical man after one or two admonitions, assaring Tit. 3.
thy self, that such a one is peruers and sins, being condemned by his own
proper judgment. Hitherto are the words of holy Irenaeus.

The same Irenaeus, writing to one Florinus his old acquaintance in schole of
Polycarpus (and now beginning to be an heretic in Rome) as follows. These
opinions of thine (O Florinus) to speak Iren. ep. ad' stor. and Eusebius. lib 5.
cap. 19.
friendly, are not true nor wholesome. These opinions are repugnant to the Church.
These opinions thou receauedst not by tradition from the Priests, that before
us were scholars to the Apostles. I did see thee when I was but a child with
Polycarpus in Asia, at what time thou living very gorgiously in the Emperors
court, did endeavor to hold a good opinion with Polycarp. I remember those
times well, and they stike in my mind more firmly, The doings and sayings of S.
Polycarp.
then other things that passed since. In so much, that I can tell at this time,
the very place wherein this blessed man did sit when he spoke unto us. I can tell
the order and manner of his coming in; the form and fashion of his life; the
shape of his body, the manner of his disputing and of his preaching to the
multitude. I remember how he was wont to recompt unto us, the familier
conversation that he had with S. John the Evangelist, and with diverse others
who had seen our Savior. I remember how he would tell unto us their speeches,
and what he had heard them say of Christ; of his miracles, virtues and
doctrine, which they had seen with their own eyes, and heard with their
ears, which were al agreing with the scriptures that now we have.

These things through the great mercy of God toward me, I heard at that time,
both diligently and attentively; not so much committing them to ink and
papire, as to the inward cogitation of my mind. And while I live, I do and
shall by Gods holy grace most carfully renew the memory thereof. And now here
before almighty Mark this protestation.
God, I may truly protest, that if this holy and Apostolical priest Polycarp,
should have heard of such new opinions, as you defend; he would have stopped
his ears, and cried out (according as his fashion was,) O good God, unto what
miserable times, have thou reserved me, to hear these things! And presently
would have risen and run away from the place, where he had been standing or
sitting, when such doctrine should have been vttred. Hitherto Irenaeus.

AND NOW (dear Christian brother) who would not be moved, with ANNOtatio^s
upon the premises touchig the danger of new opinions.
the grave and zealous speeches of these reverend men, that lived so nighe to the
times of the holy Apostles, and of our Saueour him self? How exceeding great
was their care amiddest al their other tribulations, and at the very last time
when they were to depart out of this world, (for Irenaeus also soon after
suffered martyrdom,) to forwarne Christian people to beware of heresy and
schisine, and to detest al manner of new commentaries and expositio^s upon holy
scriptures, other then the universal tradition of the Church did leave unto
them from the Apostles time. They saw well and were so told by the Apostles
them selves, that there was no other certain way to understand and hold the
truth first planted, but to stick to this tradition (for understanding of
scriptures) which should pass from hand to hand, from bishope to bishope, from
doctor The nature and (...) of tradition.
to doctor, from Council to Council, from Church to Church, from age to age
until the worlds end; and without this, they saw by experience of those first
heresies, that every heretic would make his part as good as the catholic
Church from time to time, by interpreting the scriptures after his own devise.
To the end the^, that Christ's Catholic people might stand together firmly in
unity of faith, and arm them selves jointly to the contempt of this world and
suffering for their master; these holy men did so carefully cry upon them,
having heard at the Apostles own mouths (as it may be supposed; how detestable
a thing heresy was i^ the sight of God: and whersoeuer it entered, that there
was no more hope of any virtue or other good thing to salvation. For which
cause it is recorded in like manner, that diverse of these first martyrs, being
brought forth Apollinar. hiera. apud Niceph. li. 4. c. 23.
to die in the company of certain heretics, that offered to die also for
defense of Christian religion; they refused to go forth or die in their
company, affirming the^ in truth to be enemies to JESUS Christ, howsoever
otherwise they made profession to die for him.

This be spoken by the way, concerning these notable men's zeal in detestation
of schism and heresy, and of new expositio^s of holy scripture against the
tradition of antiquity: which no man can think to be from our purpose, if he
consider the times wherein we live, and how little this tradition is now regarded
by many, in respect of their own new devises and fresh inventions. But now it
follows in the forsaid story of Eusebius, that S. Irenaeus in process of
small time, came also to make his combat for the confession of his master, in
the city of Lio^s in France; where, after infinite torments and afflictions that
he suffered, he ended his life the xxviij. day of The martyrdom of Irenaeus.
June under the Emperor Seuerus. But before this, he was sent into Asia to the
Christians there, from the Christians in France that lived in persecution, and
in the way he had letters also to the bishop of Rome Eleutherius, in his own
comme^dation. Which letters do well declare, what a reverend opinion the
martyrs of God had of him. And the other letters that he carried into Asia, do
set forth the maruailous trial that our Savior used at that time upon his
servants. whereof for our instruction, as also for our comfort in adversities
that fall unto us, I have thought good to recite some part also in this place.

The letters begin thus. The servants of JESUS Christ, that dwell at Lions
and The letters of Christians suffering persecution in France. Apud Evse. lib.
5. c. 1.
Vienna in France, send peace in our Lord JESUS, unto their brethern in Asia
and Phrigia, who have the same faith and hope of redemption etc. The greatness
of our afflictions which grow upon us, in this place, and the multitude of
torments that we suffer, neither can we, nor any man else by writing express.
And then they show first, how they were forbid by public edict to enter into
any common house, boothe, or market place, or to come abrod out of their own
doors. Secondly, from their own houses they were fetched out by officers, led
to the market place, and in the way reviled and spit on by the people, beaten
with stones and other weapons which each man had in his hand; their apparel
pulled from their backs, and this before judgment was given against the^,
while yet they expected the coming of the President to determine their cause.
Who when he came, demanding no other question of them, but only whether they
were christians or no; commanded al manner of torments to be exercised upon
the^. And for that a noble young gentilman named Vetius, began to speak a word
or two in their behalf; he was also condemned among the rest, as advocate of
the christians. Thirdly they show, that al their frindes, acquaintance, and
kindred among the Gentiles at that time, forsook them. Their own servants for
fear of torments, came in and accused them most falsely of eating of This was
a commi accusation of Christians in those days, in respect of the B. Sacrament,
which then was holden to be Christ's flesh.
man's flesh; and that which grieved them most of al, ten of their company upon
the first sight of torments, abiured Christ openly.

And yet all this notwithstanding they declare, that Christ their Savior
forsook the^ not in those extremities, but comforted the^ above al measure, by
the noble co^fessio^s and co^bates of diverse others, whereof they recite very
strange examples; namely of one Sanctus a deacon, who for all the Wonderful
constantie of diverse martyrs.
torments the enemies could use upon him from morning unto night, could not be
enforced to answer the President to no one question that he demanded, but
only by those two latin words ( Christianus sum) I am a Christian. These two
words (says the story) served for answer to whatsoever he was asked, either
touching him self or others. The like they write of one Blandina a noble woman,
which wearied out al her tormentours, and therefore in a rage toward the end
of the day, they tied her to a great beam, and hanged her up in the air.
Which beam for that it represented the form of a Cross as she hanged upon
it: did comfort both her and al other Christians infinitely. They declare
besides, that their holy old bishope named Pothenus (in whose place Irenaeus
Pothenus.
succeeded after) being four score and ten years old, and not able so much as
to stand on his feet, was carried to the place by the hands of soldiers, and
there ended his life with incredible fortitude. And of the foresaid Blandina,
they write, that Blandina.
being put down from the beam again, she was beaten with whippes, rent with
iron hooks, set upon a burning frying pan, and after that, wrapped in a net and
cast among wild bulls. In all which torments she kept a merry countenance,
thanking God most hartelie for this benefit, and for that she had seen her
own children die constantly in the same place for the same cause before her.

They report also of one Attalus a man of great name and authority in that
city, The courage of Attalus the martyr.
who being drawn forth of his house, was first lead about the place of
spectacle with a table borne before him, wherein was written in great latin
letters, This is Attalus the Christian: and afterward he was abused by the
people in all kind of most extreme villainous manner; but yet because of his
calling, the president durst proceed no further against him, until he had
written to Rome to the Emperor, and received answer, which soon after was had,
(he in the mean space being kept in prison where he did singular much good,)
and then upon the solemn day of the public faires that were in Lions, he was
brought forth again, and first put to fight with diverse wild beasts, by which
he was greatly torn and tormented, but not slain. And then after all this, he
was placed naked in a chair of burning iron, and there examined Great cruelty.
of his faith. And when the smoke and loathsome stinch of his flesh that
broiled, offended them that stood about him; he said unto the people; o
brethren, this is in deed to denoure man's flesh, whereof falsely you accuse us.
And finally, the story adds, that after these tormentours had ended their
fury i^ the slaughter of so many Christians, as it was a very horror unto
them selves to behold their bodies and bones; yet were they not so satisfied.
But first caused the said bodies to be watched in that place for the space of
six days together (until they were putrified) to the end that Christians
should not steal them away: and then also doubting least some of their
relics might be reserved, if Spite of Infidels against relics.
they should so abandone them; they burnt al to ashes, and cast the same into
the great river of Rhodanus that ronneth through the city.

These were the combats (gentle reader) whereby almighty God in those days
would prove and try his trusty servants. Hear now an other brief
description set down by Dionisius bishope of Alexandria of the things that he
and other Christians suffered there in his city, not long after under Decius
the Emperor. He writes the history to the Bishop of Antioche, and the same
is recorded by Eusebius. Eusebius. li. 6. c. 32. and 33. and lib. 7. c. 10.
I speak before God (says he;) and his divine Majesty knows that I speak
the truth, etc. The persecution began here against us before the Emperors edict
came forth, as it were by a certain prophecy that shortly it would ensue.
First they A most cruel persecution on Alexandria.
began with a certain godly woman named Quinta, who^ they drew by the heels
about the city upon the paueme^t, and whipped her naked, and finally murdered
her with stones. After that, they came in fury unto al our houses, and drew us
forth, that is, every man his neighbor according as either hatred moved him or
covetousness to have his goods. For what so ever was precious in our houses,
they took with them, and the rest they flung out into the streets. This
endured for diverse months, and many noble Martyrs died in this time; as
Appollonia, Serapion, and others; albeit some that were not worthy of this
conflict, made shipwrake of their salvation.

At length was published the most horrible edict of Decius against us, and then
might you see that dreadful sentence of our Savior fulfilled, that the very
elect if it were possible, should be driven to fall. For first Mat. 24.
of al, those that were rich among us, or of any great calling (whereof there were
many,) some of them prevented the Magistrates The danger of riches in
persecution.
and offered them selves voluntarily (as good subjects) to fulfill the
Emperors commandment. Others permitted them selves as unwilling, to be drawn
by the Magistrates to adore their Gods; others went as allured, and constrained
Diverse sorts of filling.
(as it were) by persuasio^s of their neighbors, friends and kinsfolks:
others did it secretly in their own houses at home: others went with so evil a
will and with so ilfauored a countenance to sacrifice, as they were laughed at
by the enemies them selves, for that they had neither courage to deny it, nor
yet heart to do it. Others went openly and impudently unto it, affirming that
they had never been Christians in their lives; al which to behold, made us
remember that saing of our Savior, how Mat. 19.
hard it is for a rich man to be saved.

Many of the poor sort followed the example of rich men: some fled, some were
taken and carried to prison, and after Poor men follovv easily the example of
the rich.
diverse days were induced to forswere Christ. Others came out and began to
suffer torments, but presently fainted and denied their faith. But afterward
ensued the glorious spectacle of the chosen martyrs: whereof the first was, old
Julian that could not move by reason of the gout; yet being set upon a camel,
and whipped Constant martyrs.
naked through out all the streets of Alexandria (which you know is very
large,) was afterward burned alive. After him followed Cronion, Macar,
Alexander, Heron, Dioscorus, Ammon, Zeno, Ptolomaeus, Ingenes, Mercuria,
Dionysia and others. And the said Dioscorus for that he was but yet a child,
after a certain time was let go by the president, hoping that he might be
corrupted. But he is here with me very constant, and most ready to sustain a
greater conflict when God shall call him to it.

Thus wrote this blessed man of God; adioining many things of his own
examinations and sufferings, which for brevity sake I omit; only I may not
let pass, that The Zele of Dionys. against Schism and Heresy.
rare zeal which he showed amiddest al these his afflictions, against
Schismatiques and Heretics; as may appear by those words of his, which he
writes in an epistle to Nouatus, when he by new inventions began to trouble
the Church of Eusebius. li. 6. cap. 37.
Rome. The words are recorded by Eusebius and are these which ensue. It should
have been thy deuty O N ouatus (says he,) to have suffered al inconveniences
in the world, rather then to have broken the concord of Gods Church. And truly
that martyrdom which is suffered for the defense of the consent and unity of
Christ's Martyrdom at heretics hands more commendable then at Insidels.
Church, is no less, but rather much more commendable, in mine opinion, then
that which is suffered for not sacrifising to Idols. For that in the later, a
man suffers martyrdom for saving his own soul; but in the former, he
suffers for saving the whole Church. And thus far of Dyonisius.

At the very same time, with this holy man (though somewhat younger) lived the
famous Prelate and martyr of God, S. Cyprian; Of S. Cyprian.
who, (as by his own writings appears and is recorded by Pontius his Deacon,
that lived with him; and by S. Hierom, Po^t. in vit. Cyp. Hier. in catal. Aug.
ser. de S. Cyp.
S. Augustine and others that ensued him) not only made many martyrs in his
time by his exhortations, and by his example in suffering: but also concluded
his own life with a most famous martyrdom, sustained with all ala critie for
his masters sake. He wrote a whole work in exhortation to martyrdom, and an
other of the good that comes to Christians by suffering, and many epistles to
the same effect and purpose, especially to such as were in prisons, mines,
banishment, and persecution; in which writings of his, he does most deuinely
set out the dignity of this thing. And in the end, when his own time drew nere
to suffer in like manner, for that the Emperors edict was determined against
Christians; S. Cyprian being in banishment, and having received news thereof by
some that he had sent for that purpose to Rome, advertised one Successus a
Bishop, of the whole matter, and by him the rest of the brethren in Africa in
these words.

Brother Successus, know you, that the men whom I sent to Rome, are returned,
and do bring for certain, that Valerian S. Cyprians epistle vvri ten a little
before his death.
the Emperor has written to the Senate, that al bishops priests and deacons
be executed presently, etc. The copy of which letters we hope will come hither
Lib. 5. cp. 9.
quickly, and so we stand resolved by Gods grace to al sufferance; expecting at
the mercy of our Lord, a croune of life everlasting. Know you also that Sixtus
died three days before S. Laurence.
Sixtus the Bishope of Rome, was put to death the eight day before the Ides of
August last. I beseech you that these things may be signified by your means to
al our fellow bishopes in those Provinces, to the end that by their good
exhortatio^s, the whole brotherhood of Christians, may be strengthened and
prepared to this spiritual combat that is imminent; and that no man in these
times think so much upon death, as of the immortality which has to follow
death. Let every man (I say) with full faith and al virtue dedicated to our
Lord, rejoice rather the^ fear, in this confession which we must make;
assuring our selves, that the true soldiers of Christ our God, shall not be
slain but crouned therein.

After this not many days, he living in certain orchardes or gardins in the
country; was advertised by his friends, that two Pursiuantes were sent to take
him, and bring him to the city of Vtica; whereupon he fled. And least any man
should think perhaps that it was of fear; he wrote an epistle (which was the
last that is extant The last letter that ever S. Cyprian vvrote.
of his writing) unto the Priests, deaco^s, and people of his Church of
Carthage where he was bishope; showing them the reason why he had retired him
self from the hands of the Purseuantes, in these words. When it was brought
unto us (dear brethren) that officers were sent to lead Li 5. ep. 1.
me unto Vtica; by the counsel of our dear friends I was content, upon just
cause, to retire my self from our orchardes: for that it seemed to me,
convenient for a Bishope, to make his last confession in that city, where he
has gouuerned Gods Church; to the end that by his confession, he may honor
his flock and people. And it seemed to me that the honor of our glorious
Church of Carthage, should be much deminished S. Cyprian would die in Carthage
and not in Vtica.
at this time, if I, the bishope thereof, should receive my sentence and death
in Vtica. For which cause, I have always desired and prayed almighty God,
that I might make my confession and suffer in Carthage, and from thence depart
unto my Lord. So then here we abide presently in a very secret place, expecting
the return of the Proconsul from Rome to Carthage, who will bring with him (I
doubt not) the determination of the Emperor, touching both bishopes and
Iaimen, that are Christians; and will decree that which our Lord, for the
present, will have to be done. And as concerning you (my dearest brethen)
according to the discipline which always you have received from me out of our
Lords comma^dementes; do you observe al tranquillity among your selves; let
no man raise tumultes touchi^g the doings of his brethren; This also does S.
Augustine repeat out of the place.
let no man offer him self to the persecutions, but when he is apprehended,
then let him speak; for in that instant, God will speak in us, who rather will
have us CONRESSOVRS the^ PROFESSOVRS in his cause. Touching Lib. 1. cont. ep.
Gaude^t.
other things that I would have you observe; I hope before my sentence be
given, by our Lords instruction to dispose in general. Christ's JEWS keep and
preserve you al long in his Church.

Soon after this was written, that is, upon the 13. of September as Pontius and
Pont. in vita Cyp. de quo Hiero. in catal. vit. illust.
other do write, came suddenly upon him, two purseuantes; and apprehending
him, brought him to the new Proconsul called Galerius Maximus, at Carthage;
where after a glorious confession made of his faith, (the particularities whereof
were here to long to be set down,) his sentence was read, that he must be
behedded. Whereunto S. Cyprian answered, Deo gratias; and so the next day
after, received his Martyrdom, at a place called Sexti not far of from
Carthage; shutting up his The martyrdom of S. Cyprian.
own eyes with all peace and confort of mind, and commanding twenty crounes
of gold to be given to him that cut of his head. And Pontius that was there
present, adds these words. The brethren stood rownd about him weeping, and
did cast their napkins and prayer books before him, that none of his blood
might be dru^k up of the ground. His body by reason of the curiosity of the
Gentiles that pressed S. Cyprians solemn burial with tapers etc.
about him, was buried for the present in a place nigh bv, but the night
following, it was taken thence again by the Christians, and carried solemly
with torches and wax tapers to the possession of one Macrobius Candidus, in the
way called Apellensis, nigh to the fish pondes, etc.

And the reverend opinion of this man's sanctity was so great among Christians
even presently upon his death, that they builded Churches in his honor and
memory, as may appear by the story of S. Victor bishop of Vtica, who lived
the next age after, and records in his first book de persecutione Vandalica,
how that the heretical Vandals that were Arians, overthrew two goodly Churches
in Africa, dedicated to S. Cyprian, the one in Churches erected to S. Cyprian,
with solemn festival days.
the place where he was martired called Sexti, the other in the place where his
body was buried called Mappalia. S. Augustine also in his confessions lib. 5.
cap. 8. makes mention of a Church in Africa dedicated to S. Cyprian, where
Monaca his mother prayed for him at his departure toward Italy. And in Vide
cp. 120. ad Honor. cap. 5. and sermon. 12. tem. 10.
diverse places he mentions the solemnity which yearly was celebrated in the
day of his martyrdom; which day (according to the Churches phrase,) he calls
his nativity. And in his tenth tome he has a whole sermon made in the feast
of S. Cyprians nativity, of which sermon not only venerable Bede makes
mention in his commentary upon the second epistle to the Ephesians, but also
Possidius S. Austens scholar, in Indiculo. And finally S. Augustine every where
not only makes most honorable mention of this blessed martyr; but also against
the Lib. 5. de bapt. cont. Domt. c. 7.
Donatistes desires to be helped by his prayers now in heaven. Wherefore his
example ought greatly to move us.

I might here recompt many other persecutions, and the singular combats of
infinite particular men, which could never (I dare say) weary the Christian
reader. But yet would they be to long for this place. The last general
persecutions under Diocletian and others.
Eusebius affirms, that to set down only the fight sustained in his time,
under Diocletian, Maximianus, Maximinus, and other tyrants, (which was the last
general affliction, before the general peace restored by Constantine:) were a
matter of infinite volume. For (says he) the persaecution See Eusebius. toto lib.
8. and 9.
began in the month of March, when Christians were ready to celebrate the
feast of Christ's holy passion. At what time Diocletians first edict was, that
al Christian Churches through out the world, should presently be overthrown,
al Pastors thereof taken, and by all manner of torments that man's wit could
devise, be enforced to sacrifice together with their people. The^ (says
Eusebius) was it a time, when each man might easily see who loved the world, or
loved God; who was a good A time of trial.
Christian, and who was a counterfete; who was true corn, and who was chafe.
Many lost their souls (says he) in this combat, and many got them eternal
crounes. The edict was executed with all rigor and fury throughout al Provinces
at once: and diverse were the issues of such as came into trial. But the infinite
glory of such as conquered, surpassed far the infamy of such as fell.

And the ennemy in the end, being utterly confounded, would gladly have seemed
to have brought that to pass, which The practice of Gods enemies, for to seem
to have vvone.
he neither did, nor could. For when by force he had drawn Christians unto the
temples of the Idols, he would have had it seem, that they came voluntarily;
and when men would not sacrifice, he was desirous at leastwise, that they
should permit him to say and publish, that they had sacrificed; others being
beaten down with clubbes upon their knees, were reported to have kneeled of
their own wills for adoring the Gods; whereof some cried openly
notwithstanding, that they neither had nor ever would do so, for any torment
that could be laid upon the^. But the more resolute sort, they were dealt with
in all most cruel and barbarous manner without measure, reason, or order. Whereof
you may read both many and strange examples in the eight and ninth books of
Eusebius, who wrote the things as he saw them pass; and when our Savior
permitted al A comfortable consideration.
these extremities to fall upon his Church, then was the time nearest that he had
determined to beautify her in earth, with greatest peace, rest, riches and
glory: even as he did immediately after, by converting Constantine to be so
zealous a Christian.

AND HERE NOW does end the story of Eusebius, which conteine^th the
conflictes of the first three hundred years THE end of Eusebius story.
after Christ's departure. But the ecclesiastical writers that do ensue after
him, each man in his age, do declare, that after the times of Constantine, the
Catholic Church inioyed not long her temporal peace, but had her exercise
from time to time, albeit in an other sort then before: that is to say, not
by Pagans, but by such as some times had been her own children; a far more
lothesome, odious, cruel, and The persecution of heretics more cruel then of
Pagans.
dangerous affliction then the former. For as soon as Constantine was dead,
and had left the Roman Empire divided unto his sons; one of them which
governed all the east Constans.
being corrupted by his wife, became an Arrian. By whom and other Princes
infected afterward with the same heresies, the Church of God sustained
incredible distresses for many years together.

And then again after all the children of Costantine were dead, one Julian that
The (...) (...) of (...) (...) (...) (...)
had been brought up in Christian religion, came to have the whole Empire to
him self; and falling from Christ became an Apostata; of whom Ruffinus that
lived at the same time, writes thus. He was a ^
more conning persecutour then the (...) and consequently cruel; proceeding not
so much by force and torments, a by rewards, honors, flatteries, (...) and
deceit. By which means, he overthrew more souls, the^ if he had proceeded
altogether by violence.

The worthy father S. Gregory Nazianzenus, writes two large (...) this man's
doings, and shows that in his The relation of S. Gregory touching Julian.
youth, both he and S. Basile were acquainted with Julian in the grammar
schole. At what time he says, they well fore saw great signs of wickedness in
him; notwithstanding at that time, he seemed very devout, and for devotions
sake (though he were a great Prince) he would needs take upon him the office
of lectorship in the Catholic Church, and besides that (says S. Gregory)
began to build Churches also to christian Martyrs. But when he came to be
Emperor, he washed of his Julian denout in his youth.
baptism with blood, and profaned his hands of purpose (says S. Gregory)
where with before he had touched the most pure Orat. prima in Iulia. page 556.
and unbloody sacrifice of the altar, by which we are made partakers of the
passion and divinity of our Saueour.

After this, he made an edict for the spoiling and profaning (says this
Saint) of al Church-stuffe, money, sacred ornaments The wicked edictes of
Julian.
and holy vestements, that were to be had: for defiling of aulters, for
deshonoring priests, deacons, and Virgins; but principally, for breaking down
of Martyrs sepulchers, and for the distroying their Churches. In respect
whereof, this holy father writes unto him thus. Thou persecutour after Herod;
thou traitor after Judas; thou murderer of Christ after Pilat; thou ennemy of
God after the Jews: Orat. 2. in Iudic. page 559.
do thou not reverence those holy sacricrifices slain for Christ? Do
thou not fear those noble champions, John, Peter, Paul, and others that past
thorough fire, sword, beasts, tyrants, and what other cruelties so ever might
be denounced against them, with a merry heart? Do thou not fear the^, to whom
now are assigned so great honors, and to whom festiual days are ordained upon
earth? by whom devils ar driven away, and disseafes are The great honors done
to martyrs in old time.
cured? and whose only bodies ar able to do the same miracles now, which
their holy souls did when they were upon earth. Their bodies (I say) when they
are handled by us, and honored; yea the only apparitions and predictions, the
only dropes of blood of these bodies, do as great miracles as the bodies them
selves. These bodies therefore do thou not worship, etc? Thus far S. Gregory
Nazia^zene.

But now after the death of wicked Julian, albeit some times, good Emperors The
Arria^ persecution.
were sent by God; yet endured they not long, but the Arria^ heretics came in
government again, and so did bear the swaie for diverse ages after; afflicting
and persecuting most extremely the Catholics, as may appear by all the
ecclesiastical writers that are exta^t of that time. And for a better
conjecture what was done and suffered in the whole world abrod, I would wish
thee (gentle reader) but to view that which remains write of one part only,
and that for the space of few years; I mean of the persecution of the Arrian
Vandals in Africa, which began not long before S. Augustins death, and endured
diverse years after, and is recorded in three several books by the holy man,
Victor bishope of Vtica, that was one of the sufferers. The story is strange,
and most worthy the reading, for that it has very many things, which set
forth the perfect form of times, that have insued since, and yet do endure.

Possidius that lived with S. Augustine, and after writ the story of his life,
reports S. Augustines grief and sorrovv for the Va^dal persecution.
in the same, that when the holy man saw but the beginninges of this
persecution, he was wonderfully afflicted with compassion in his mind. For
(says he,) he saw now already Catholic Churches destitute of their priests;
sacred Virgins and others that lived continent, to be dissipated and cast out;
the Hymns and praises of God, to have ceased in most Churches; the buildings
of Churches burned; the solemn service due unto almighty God, to be no more
used in their proper places; the divine sacrifices and sacraments, either not
to be sought for any longer, or else that there were not easily found priests to
minister the same unto such as sought them. Hitherto are the words of
Possidius.

But S. Victor, coming to declare the said persecution more in particular;
shows, that albeit they were cruel against al Catholics in general: yet
says he, Vict. l. 1. de pers. Vand.
praecipue in ecclesijs, basilicisque and caemiterijs, and monasterijs,
sceleratijss saeuiebant. They principally did exercise their wicked cruelty,
upon Churches, oratories, churchyards, and Monasteries. And then he goes
forward, showing their further cruelties and outrages in abusing priests and
monks, and in spoiling alters: of which he says in particular, de pallis
altaris, (proh nesas) Note that things and confer the^ with our times.
camisias sibi and femoralia faciebant. Of the corporesses, and other clothes
of the altar, (sie on the villainy) they made them selves shirtes and briches.
Further he adds, that they gathering diverse sacred Virgins together, against
al shame, would behold and handle the privy parts of their bodies; whom
afterward (for that they would not be lewd with them,) they tormented with
fire, and threw into rivers with stones tied to their feet, saying unto them,
tell us how do your bishops and clergy men use to lie with you? besides all this, he says, that they prohibited Catholics, Missas agere vel tractare; to
have Mass or to talk thereof; they forbide them also to bury Christians
solemly, with lights tapers and torches; and finally, they forbid them al
exercise of their Catholic Christian religion. And for that in these things
they were not obeyed as they desired, but were resisted openly and manfully, by
them that had spirit and courage from God, to do it: therefore did they rage and
foam above al measure, and did exercise more extremity in all despiteful and
villainous kind of cruelties, then did the Pagan persecutours, either before or
after.

NOW THEN to make here our stay, and to pass no further in this discourse:
THE conclusion of this chapter.
thou see (dear brother) in this descent of Gods Church for five hundred
years together after Christ's departure; how ordinary a thing it was to our
Save our to send persecution unto his dearest servants for their trial and
merit. In which matter notwithstanding is diligently to be considered; first,
the greatenes and sharpness Four things to be considered.
when the like, more or less, do fall unto our lot. Secondly, how pitiful and
miserable the fall of diverse were in this trial,

Besides this, it shall not be amiss for thee to consider and that for thy
particular A comfortable consideration for a Catholic that suffers.
comfort, if thou be a Catholic; how careful these holy Martyrs were that
suffered in the primative Church, to keep them selves within the unity of
Catholic faith and doctrine, delivered universally by tradition, in all
Churches from age to age; to the end their sufferinges and labor; might
reccaue their merit. How dilligent also they were in aduertising others of this
important point, assuring them that without this, their travails could be of
no profit or avail. And as it is most evident and certain, that al these
blessed martyrs and Saints which before I have named, together with their
brethren, did continue by succession for five hundred years together, in the
common known faith of Christendom, called at that time, Catholic; and did
defend the same both by words writing and suffering against al apostaces,
heretics, schismatiques, or other newfangled enemies whatsoever: So is it as
evident and appare^t to the world, that the same universal and general church,
faith, and doctrine, which these men left, have continued ever since until this
day, (and shall do to the worlds end) fighting and striving against al new
vpstart enemies of the same tradition of Christian religion, which these me^ so
carefully commended unto us.

By all which, as also by the manner of persecution that was then, and by the An
illatio^ upon the premises.
things them selves that were suffered at heretics hands in these old times,
every Catl. olique man that by Gods special grace, is made worthy to suffer
the like in these our days, may take singular comfort and great instruction
therein; considering, nubem illam testium propositam, as S. Paul calls Heb. 12.
it; that is, the great multitude and cloud of examples and witnesses that
have gone before us, to instruct and animate us in this battle. And the holy
Apostle uses the word, cloud, to allude by a metaphore unto that cloud which
out Savior sent to the people of Israel, to Exodus 13.
direct their journey in the deserte; insinuating hereby, that these excellent
examples of holy Martyrs and Confessors which I have named before to have
suffered so valiantely in the primative church, ought to be unto us, a most
certain direction both for courage, constancy, wisdom, alacretie, and
resolution in this spiritual fight: assuring our selves that we following their
steps, in fighting for the like cause, against the like enemies, with like
fortitude and humility, and in like patience and longanimantie as they did: we
shall not want the like grace, like comfort, like assistance, like merit and
reward at our merciful Saviors hand, as they received.

THE FIFTH IMPEDIMENT OF RESOLVTION, IN THE SERVICE OF Almighty God. Proceeding
of over much presumption in the mercy of our Savior, without remembrance of
his justice. CHAPT. VI.
AS many men, for their excuse against the resolution which we persuade, do
serve them selves with the reasons that before we have confuted: So is there an
other forte of people that takes a more short way to dispatch their hands of
all that can be said to move the^ by sear, (quite contrary to them whom in the
first chapter of this second part I answered:) and this way is, to lay the
whole matter of their stay upon the back and shoulders of our Savior Christ
himself; and to answer what soever you can say against them, with this only
sentence; God is merciful. Of these men our Save our seems to complain
grievously by the prophet, when he says, Supra dor sum meu^ Psa. 128.
fabricauerunt peceatores, prolongauerunt iniquitatem; Sinners have built upon
my back, they have prolonged their iniquity. By Building on Gods back.
which words he signifies, that prolonging of our iniquities in hope of Gods
mercy, is to build our sins on his back and shoulders. But what follows?
will God bear this injury? no verelie; for the next words ensuing are;
Dominus iustus co^cidet ceruices peccatorum; God is just, and he will cut in
sunder the necks of sinners. Here (lo) are two cooling cards, for the two
warm imaginations before recited. For mean you (Sir) to prolong your
iniquity, for that God is merciful? remember then also, that he is just,
says the prophet. Are ye gotten up, upon the back of almighty God, to make
your nest of sin there? take heed; for he will fetch you down again, and
break your neck douneward, except ye repent; for that in deed there is no one
thing which may be more injurious to Gods divine majesty, then to make him the
foundation of our sinful life, who lost his own life for the extinguishing of
sin.

But you will say perhaps; And is not God then merciful? yes truly (dear
brother,) How God is both mer ciful and just.
he is most merciful; and there is neither end nor measure of his mercy; he is
even mercy it self; it is his nature and essence; and he can no more leave to
be merciful, then he can leave to be God. But yet (as the prophet here says)
he is just also. We must not so remember his mercy, as we forget his justice.
Duleis and rectus dominus, our Lord is sweet, but yet upright and just also,
says holy David. And in the same place, all the ways of our Lord are mercy
and Psalm. 24. Ser. 52. paruorum. The two feet of God.
truth. Which words S. Barnard expounding in a certain sermon of his, says
thus. There be two feet of our Lord, whereby he walks his ways: That is,
Mercy and Truth: and God fastneth both these feet upon the hearts of them
which turn unto him. And every sinner that will truly convert him self, must
lay hand-fast on both these feet. For if he should lay hand on mercy only,
letting pass truth and justice: he would perish by presumption. And on the
other side, if he should apprehend justice only, without mercy; he would
perish by desperation. To the end therefore that he may be saved, he must
humbly fall down and kiss both these feet: that in respect of Gods justice,
he may retain fear; and in respect of his mercy, he may conceive hope. And
in an Ser. 6. in cant.
other place; Happy is that soul, upon which our Lord JESUS Christ has
placed both his feet. I will not sing unto thee, Judgment alone, nor yet
mercy alone (my God,) but I will sing unto thee, with the prophet David, mercy
and judgment Psa 110.
joined together. And I will never forget Psa. 148.
those two iustifications of thine.

S. Austen handles this point most August.
excellently in diverse places of his works. Let them mark (says he) which
love so much mercy and gentleness in our Lord; Tract. 33. in Ioh.
let them mark (I say) and fear also his truth. For (as the prophet says)
God is both sweet and just. Do thou love that Psalm. 24.
he is sweet? fear also that he is just. As a sweet Lord he said, I have
held my peace at your sins. But as a just. Lord he adds, And think you
that I vvil hold my peace still Psa. 102.
God is merciful, and full of mercies, say you: it is most certain; yea add
unto this, that he bears long. But yet fear that which comes in the verses
end; and verax; That is, he is also true and just. There be two things whereby
sinners do stand in danger; Two daun gers of sinners.
the one, in hoping to much, (which is presumption;) the other, in hoping to
little, which is desperation. Who is deceived by hoping to much? He which says
to himself, God is a good God, a merciful God, and therefore I will do what
pleases me: and why so? because God is a merciful God, a good God, a gentle
God. These men run into danger by hoping to much. Who are in danger by
despair? they, which seeing their sins grievous, and thinki^ng it now
impossible to be pardoned, say within themselves; well, we are once to be
damned: why do we not then whatsoever pleases us best in this life? These me^
are murdered by desperation, the other by hope. What therefore does God for
gaining of both these men? To him which is in danger by hope, he says; Do
not say Eccl. 5.
with thy self, the mercy of God is great, he vvil be merciful to the
multitude of my sins; for the face of his wrath is upon sinners. To him that
is in danger by desperation, he says: At what time soever a sinner shall
turn him self to Ezec. 11.
me, I vvil forget his iniquities. Thus far S. Auste^; besides much more
which he adds in the same place, touching the great peril and folly of those
men, who upon vain hope of Gods mercy, do persevere in their evil life.

It is truly (dear brother) a very evil consequent, and a most unjust kind
of reasoning, An (...) manner of reasoning.
to say; that for so much as almighty God is merciful and long suffering,
therefore will I abuse his mercy, and continue in my wickedness. The scripture
teaches us not to reason so, but rather quite contrary. God is merciful, and
expects my conversion, and the longer he expects, the more grievous will be
his punishment when it comes, if I neglect his patience: and therefore I ought
presently to accept of his mercy. So reasons S. Paul, who says, do thou
contemn the riches Romans 2.
of his long suffering and gentleness? Do thou not know that the patience of
God toward thee, is used to bring the to repentance? But thou through the
hardness of thy heart, and irrepentant mind, do hoard and heap up to thy self
wrath, in the day of vengeance, at the revelation of Gods just judgment. In
which words S. Paul signifies, that the longer God suffers us with patience
in our wickedness, the greater heap of vengeance does he gather against us, if
we persist obstinate in the same. Whereunto S. Augustine adds an other
consideration of great Tract. 33. in loan.
dread and fear; and that is, if he offer thee grace (says he) to day, thou
know not whether he will do the same tomorow. If he give thee life and
memory this week; thou know little whether thou shall enjoy that benefit
the next.

The holy prophet beginning his seventy and second Psalm, of the dangerous
Gods goodness nothing helps those that persevere in sin.
prosperity of worldly men; uses these words of admiration; How good a God
is the God of Israel, unto the^ that be of a right heart? And yet in all that
Psalm, he does nothig else but show the heavy justice of God toward Psa. 72.
the wicked, even when he gives the^ most prosperities, and worldly wealth;
and his conclusion is; Behold (o Lord) they shall perish which depart from
thee; thou have destroyed al those that have broken their faith of (...) with
the. By which is signified, that how good soever God be unto the just; yet that
pertains nothing to the relief of the wicked, who are to receive just
vengeance at his hands, amiddest the greatest mercies bestowed upon the
godly. The eyes of our Lord are upon the just, Psa. 33.
(says the same prophet,) and his ears are bent to hear their prayers; but
the face of our Lord is upon them that do evil, to destroy their memory,
from out of the earth.

It was an old practice of deceiving prophets, resisted strongly by the
prophets of God, to cry, peace peace, unto wicked men; when in deed their was
nothing toward them but danger, sword and Ier. 6. 8.
destruction; according as the true prophets fortolde, and as the event
proved. Wherefore, the prophet David gives us a notable and sure rule to
govern our hope Ezec. 13.
and confidence withal, when he says, sacrificate sacrificiu^ iustitiae, and
sperate in domino; do you sacrifice unto God the sacrifice of righteousness,
and then trust in him. Wherewith S. John agrees when he says, If our heart or
conscience do not reprehend us [for 1. Io. 3.
wicked life:] then have we confidence with God; As who would say; if our
conscience be guilty of lewd and wicked life, and we resolved to dwell and
continue therein; then in vain have we confidence in the mercies of God, unto
whose just judgment we stand subject for our wickedness.

It is most wonderful, and dreadful to consider, how almighty God has used
The seuertie of God punishment upon same.
him self toward his best beloved in this world, upon offense given by
occasion of finne; how easelie he has changed countenance; how soon he has
broken of frendshippe; how straightly he has taken account; and how severely
he has punished. The Angels that he created with 1. The Angels.
so great care and love, and to whom he imparted to singular privileges, of al
kind of perfections, as he made them almost very Gods, (in a certain
manner,) committed but only one sin of pride against Esa. 14.
his majesty, and that only in thought, as divines do hold; and yet
presently, all that good will and favor was changed into justice; and that
also so severe, as they were thrown down to eternal torments, without
redemption; designed for ever, to abide the rigor of hell fire and intolerable
2. Pet. 2. Ep. Iud.
darkness.

After this, almighty God made to him self an other new friend of flesh and
blood, Adam and Eve.
which was our first father Adam in paradises where God conuersed with him so
friendly and familiarlie, as is most wounderful to consider. He called him, he
talked with him, he made al creatures in the world subject unto him; he brought
them al before him, to the end that he, and not God, should give to them their
names. He made a mate and companion for him; he blessed them both; and
finally, showed al possible tokens of love, that might be. But what ensewed?
Adam committed but one sin; and that, at the entisement of an other; and that
also a sin of small importance, (as it may seem to man's reason,) being but
the eating of an aple forbidden: and yet the matter was no sooner done, but al
friendship was broken between God and him; he was thrust out of paradise,
condemned to perpetual misery, and al his prosperity to eternal damnation,
together with him self, if he had not repented. And how severely this grievous
sentence was executed afterward, may appear Great severity.
by the infinite millio^s that went to hell for this sin, for the space of
four thousand years, that passed before it was ranso^med; which finally could
not be done, but by the coming down of Gods own son, the second person in
Trinity, into this flesh; and by his intolerable sufferinges, and death in the
same.

The two miracles of the world, Moses 3. Moses and Aaron.
and Aaron, were of singular authority and favor with God; in so much as they
could obtain any thing at his hands for other men. And yet, when they
offended God once them selves at the waters Number. 20. 27. 33.
of contradiction in the desert of sin, for that they dowted somewhat of the
miracle Den. 10. 33. 34.
promised to them by God, and thereby did dishonor his majesty before the
people, as he says: they were presently rebuked most sharply for the same.
And albeit they repented hartelie that offense; and so, obtained remission of
the fault or guilt: yet was there laid upon them a grievous punishment for the
same; and that was, that they should not enter them selves into the land of
promise, but should die when they came within the sight thereof. And albeit they
entreated God most earnestly for the release of this penance: yet could they
never obtain the same at his hands, but always he answered the^; seeing you
have dishonored me before the people, you shall die for it, and shall not enter
into the land of promise.

In what special great favor was (...) 4. Saul.
with God, when he chose him to be the first king of his people? caused Samuel
the prophet so much to honor him, and to 1. Re. 10. and 11. Act. 13.
anoint him prince upon Gods own inheritance, as he calls it? when he
commended him so much, and took such tender care over him? And yet afterward,
for that he brake Gods commandment in reserving 1. Re. 13. 15. 16.
certain spoils of war, which he should have destroyed, yea, though he
reserved them to honor God withal, as he pretended: yet was he presently cast
of by God, degraded of his dignity, given over to the hands of an evil
spirit, brought to infinite miseries, (though he shifted out 1. Re. 16.
for a time,) and finally so forsaken and abandoned by God, as he slew him
self, 1. Re. 31.
his sons were crucified on a cross by his enemies, and al his family and
lineage 1. Par. 10.
extinguished for ever.

K. David was the chosen and dear friend of God, and honored with the title 5.
David.
of one that was according to Gods own heart. But yet, as so one as he had
sinned, the prophet Nathan was sent to denounce Gods 2. Re. 12.
heavy displeasure and punishment upon him. And so it ensued, not with
standing his great and voluntary penance that Psalm. 34. 68. 108. 101.
him self added for the pacifying of Gods wrath, by fasting, prayer, weeping,
wearing Psalm. 29.
of sacke-cloth, eating of ashes, and the like. By which is evident, that how
great Gods mercy is to them that fear him, so great is his justice to the^
that offend him.

The holy scripture has infinite examples of this matter; as the reiectio^ of
Cain Genesis 4.
and his posterity straight upon his murder. The pitiful drowning of the whole
Gene. 8.
world in the time of Noe. The dreadful Genesis 19.
consuming of Sodom and Gomorra with the cities about it, by fire and brimston.
The sending down quick unto hell, of Chore Number. 16.
Dathan and Abiron, with the slaughter of two hundred and fifty their
adhere^ts, for rebellion against Moses and Aaron. The sudden killing of Nadab
and Abiu, 1. Le. 10.
sons of Aaron, and chosen priests, for once offering on the Altar other
fire then was appointed them. The most terrible striking dead of Ananias and
Saphira, Act. 5.
for retaining some part of their own goods, by deceit, from the Apostles:
with many more such examples, which holy writ does recount.

And as for the grecuousnes of Gods justice, and heaviness of his hand when it
The heaviness of gods hand.
lights upon us, though it may appear sufficiently by all these examples
before alleged, (wherein the particular punishments, as you see, are most
rigorous:) yet will I repeat one act of almighty God more, out of the
scripture, which expresses the same in wounderful sort and manner. It is well
known that Benjamin among Genesis 42. 43.
all the twelve sons of Jacob, was the dearest unto his father, as appears
in the book of Genesis; (and therefore also greatly respected by God; and his
tribe placed in the best part of all the land of promise, upon the division
thereof, having Iosu. 18.
Jerusalem, Jericho, and other the best cities within it:) Yet notwithstanding
for one only sin committed by certain private men in the city of Gabaa,
upon the wife of a Leuit; God punished the whole tribe, in this order, as holy
scripture recounteth. He caused all the other eleven Iudi. 19. 20.
tribes to rise against them; and first, to come to the house of God in Silo,
to ask his advise, and to follow his direction in this war against their
brethren. And thence having by Gods appointement joined battle twice with
the tribe of Benjamin, the third day God gave them so great a victory, as
they slew all the living creatures, within the compass of that tribe, except
only six hundred men that escaped away into the desert: the rest were slain
both man, woman, children, and infantes, together with all the beasts, and
cattle; and all the cities, villages, and howses burnt with fire. And all this,
for one sin committed only at one time, with one woman.

And who then (dear Christian brother) will not confess with Moses, that A
consideration upon the premises.
God is a just God, a great God, and a terrible God? Who will not confess with
S. Paul, that it is horrible to fall into the hands of the living God? Who will
not say with holy David: Deu. 10. Heb. 10. Psa. 118.
A Iudicijs tuis timui; I have feared at the remembrance of thy judgments. If
God would not spare the destroying of a whole tribe, for one sin only: if he
would not perdon Chore, Dathan, and Abiron for once: the sons of Aaron for
once: Ananias, and Saphira, for once: if he would not forgive Esau, though he
demanded it with tears, as S. Paul says: if he would Heb. 12.
not remit the punishment of one fault to Moses and Aaron, albeit they asked
it with great instance: if he would not forgive one proud cogitation, unto the
Angels: nor the eating of one apple unto Ada^, without infinite punishment; nor
would pass over the cup of affliction from his own dear son, though he
required the same thrice, upon his very knees, with the sweat of blood and
water in his presence: what reason have thou (my brother) Mat. 26.
to thike, that he will let pass so many sins of thine unpunished? what cause
have thou to induce thy imagination, that he will deal extraordinarily with
thee, and break the course of his justice for thy sake? Art thou better then
those whom I have named? or have thou any privilege from his Majesty above them?

If thou would consider the great and strange effects of his justice, which
we Great and strange effects of gods justice.
see daily executed in the world: thou should have little cause to persuade
thy self so favorably, or rather to flatter thy self so daungerously, as thou
do. We see that, notwithstanding Gods mercy, yea after the death and
passion of Christ our Savior, for saving of the whole world: yet so many
infinite millions be damned daily, by the justice of almighty God; so many
insideles, heathens, Jews and Turks, that remain in the darkness of their
own ignorance; and among Christi^ans, so many heretics and misbeleuers; and
among Catholics, so many euel livers, as Christ truly said, that few were
they Ma. 7. 20.
which should be saved; albeit his death was paid for all, if by their own
wickedness they made them selves not unworthy thereof. And before the coming of
our Savior much more we see, that all the world went awrie to damnatio, for
many thousand years together, excepting a few Jews, which were the people of
God. And yet among them also, the greater part perhaps were not saved, as may
be co^iectured by the speeches of the prophets from time to time: and
specially by the sayings of Christ to the harisees and other rulers thereof. Now
then, if God for the satisfying of his justice, could let so many millions
perish, through their own sins, as he does also now daily permit, without any
prejudice or impechement to his infinite mercy; why may not he also damn thee
forthy sins, notwithstanding his mercy, seeing thou do not only commit
them without fear, but also do confidently persist in the same?

The 2. part of the chapter.
BUT HERE now perhaps some man may say, if this be so, that God is so severe
in punishment of every sin; and Whether Gods mercy be greater the^ his
justice.
that he damneth so many thousands for one that he saves: how is it true,
that the mercies of God are above al his other works, (as holy scripture
affirms,) and that it Psalm. 14. lac. 2.
passes and exalts it self above his judgment? For if the number of the
damned do exceed so much the number of those which are saved; it seems that
the work of justice does pass the work of mercy. To which I answer, that
touching the small number of them that are saved, as also of the infinite
quantity of such as are damned, we may in no wise doubt; for that besides al
other prophets, Christ our Savior has made the matter certain, and out of
Mat. 7. and 20.
question. We have to see therefore, how, notwithstanding all this, the mercy of
God does exceed his other works.

And first, his mercy may be said to exceed, for that, al our salvation is of
his mercy, and our damnation from our selves The first way how Gods mercy
is above his justice. Ose. 13.
only, as from the first and principal causes thereof, according to the saying
of God, by the prophet, Perditio tua Israel, tantummodo in me auxilium tuum.
Thy perdition is only from thy self (o Israel) and thy assistance to do good,
is only from me. So that, as we must acknowledge Gods grace and mercy for the
author of every good thought and act that we do, and consequently, ascribe
al our salvation unto him: so none of our evil acts (for which we are damned)
do proceed from him, but only from our selves, and so he is no cause at al
of our damnation; and in this does his mercy exceed his justice.

Secondly, his mercy does exceed, in The 2. way.
that he desires al men to be saved, as S. Paul teaches, and him self
protests, 1. Ti^. 2. Exe. 18.
when he says, I vvil not the death of a sinner, but rather that he turn
from his vvikednes and live. And again by the prophet Jeremy, he complains
greeuouslie that men will not accept of his mercy offered. Turn from your
wicked ways (says he,) why vvil ye die, a you house of Israel? By which
Iere. 3.
appears, that he offers his mercy most willingly and freely to al, but
uses his justice only upon necessity (as it were;) constrained thereunto by
our obstinate behavior. This, our Savior Christ signifies more plainly,
when he says to Jerusalem; O Jerusalem, which killest the prophets, and
stonest them to death that Math. 23.
are sent unto thee; how often would I have gathered thy children together, as
the hen clocketh her chickins underneath her wings, but thou would not?
behold thy house (for this cause) shall be made desert, and left without
children. Here you see thee mercy of God often offered unto the Jews: but,
for that they refused it, he was enforced (in a certain manner) to pronounce
this heavy sentence of destruction and desolatio^ upon them; which he
fulfilled within forty or fifty years after, by the hands of Titus and
Vespasian, Joseph de bello Iud. L1. c. 1. 2. 3.
Emperors of Rome; who utterly ouerthrewe the city of Jerusalem, and the
whole nation of Jews, whom we see dispersed over all the world at this day, in
bondage both of body and soul. Which work of Gods Justice, though it be most
terrible; yet was his mercy greater to the^, as appears by Christ's words,
if they had not rejected the same.

Thirdly, his mercy exceeds his justice, The 3. way.
even toward the damned them selves; in that he used many means to save them
in this life, by giving them freewil and assisting the same with his grace to
do good: by moving the^ inwardly with infinite good inspirations: by alluring
the^ outwardly with exhortatio^s, promises, examples of others; as also by
sickness, adversities, and other gentle corrections. By giving them space to
repent, with occasions, opportunities, and excitations unto the same. By
threatening the^ eternal death, if they repented not. Al which things being
effects of mercy, and goodness toward them; they must needs confess
amiddest their greatest fury and torments, that his judgments are true, and
justified in them selves, and no ways to be compared with the greatness of his
mercies.

By this then we see that to be true, which the prophet says, Misericordiam
and Psa. 53.
veritatem diligit dominus; God loves mercy and truth. And again; Mercy
and truth have met together; Justice and peace have kissed Psa. 84.
on an other. We see the reason why the same Psa. 100.
prophet protests of him self; I vvil sing unto thee mercy and judgment, (o
Lord,) not mercy alone, nor judgment alone, but mercy and judgment
together: that is, I will not so presume of thy mercy, as I will not fear thy
judgment: nor yet will I so fear thy judgment, as I will ever Fear to be
joined with hope.
despair of thy mercy. The fear of Gods judgment, is always to be joined
with our confidence in Gods mercy; yea in very Saints them selves, as David
says. But what fear? that fear truly, which the Psa. 33.
scripture describes, when it says: the fear of our Lord expels sin:
the fear of Eccle. 1. Prou. 1. Eccl. 7. Eccl. 15. Eccl. 7. Eccl. 2.
God hates al evil. He that fears God, neglects nothing; he that fears
God, will turn and look into his own heart: he that fears God, will do good
works. They which fear God, will not be incredulous to that which he says;
but will keep his ways, and seek out the things that are pleasant unto him.
They will prepare their hearts, and sanctify their souls in his sight.

This is the description of the true fear of God, set down by holy
scripture. This The praise of true fear.
is the description of that fear, which is so much commended and commanded in
every part and parcel of Gods word. Of that fear (I say) which is called,
Fons vitae, radix prudentiae, corona and plenitudo sapientiae, Pro. 14.
gloria and gloriatio, beatum donum: That is, the fountain of life, the root
of prudence, the crown and fulness of wisdom, the Eccle. 1. 5.
glory and gloriation of a Christian man; a happy gift. Of him that has this
fear the scripture says, happy is the man which fears our Lord, for he
vvil place his mind upon Psa. 111.
his comman lementes. And again, the man that fears God shall be happy at the
last end, and Eccle. 1.
shall be blessed at the day of his death. Finally, of such as have this fear,
the scripture says, that God is their foundation; God has Psalm. 24. Psalm 30.
Psalm. 60. Psalm. 62. Psa. 144.
prepared great multitude of sweetness for them; God has purchased them an
inheritance; God is as merciful to them, as the father is merciful unto his
children. And (to conclude) Voluntatem timentium se faciet; God will do the will
of those that fear him with this fear.

This holy fear had good Job, when he said to God; I feared al my works.
And he yealdeth the reason thereof; For that I Job. 9.
knevve that tbovv sparest not him that offends thee. This fear lacked the
other, of who^ the prophet says: The sinner has exasperated God, by saying,
that God will not Psalm. 9.
take account of his doings, in the multitude of wrath. Thy judgments (o
Lord) are removed from his sight. And again; wherefore has the wicked man
stirred up God against him self, by saying God vvil not take account of my
doings?It is a great exasperation of God against us, to take the one half of
Gods nature from him, which is, so make him merciful without justice; and to
live so, as though God would take no account of our life; whereas he has
protested most earnestly the contrary; saying, that he is like a hard and
covetous man, which will not be content to receive his own again, Mat. 25.
but also will have usury for the lone: that he will have a strait reckoning of
al his. Luc. 16.
goods lent us: that he will have fruit for all his labors bestowed upon us:
and finally; Mat. 7.
that he will have account for every Luc. 13.
word that we have spoken. Mat. 12.


Our Savior Christ, in the three score and eight psalm, which in sundry
places Mat. 27. Marc. 15. Ioh. 2.
of the gospel he interprets to be written of himself, among other dreadful
curses, which he sets down against the reprobate, he has these; let their
eyes be daseled in such sort as they may not see: power out thy wrath (my
Father) upon the^, let the fury of thy vengeance take hand fast on the^. Add
iniquity upon their miquitie, and let him not enter into thy justice. Let them
be blotted out of the book of life; and let them not be enrolled together
with the just. Here (lo) we see, that the greatest curse which God can lay
upon us, next before our blotting out of the book of life, is to suffer us to
be so blinded, as to add iniquity upon iniquity, and not to enter into
consideration of his justice. For which cause also, this confident kind of
sinning D. Tho, secunda. secundae. q. 14. art. 1. 2. 3.
upon hope of Gods mercy, is accounted by divines for the first of the six
grievous sins against the holy Ghost, which our Savior in the gospel,
signifies to be so hardly pardoned unto men by his Father. Why presumption
is a sin against the holy Ghost.
And the reason why they call this a sin against the holy Ghost, is, for that
it rejects wilfully one of the principal means left by the holy Ghost, to
retire us from sin; which is, the fear and respect of Gods justice upon
sinners.

Wherefore, to conclude this matter of presumption: me thinks, we may use the
The danger of not fearing.
same kind of argument touching the fear of Gods justice, as S. Paul uses to
the Romans Romans 13.
of the fear of Gods ministers; which are temporal princes. Would thou not
fear the power of a temporal prince, says he? do well then; and thou shall
not only not fear, but also receive laud and praise therefore. But if thou
do evil, then fear; for he bears not the sword without a cause. In like
sort may we say to those good fellows, which make God so merciful, as no man
ought to fear his justice. Would ye not fear (my brethren) the justice of God
in punishment? live virtuously then, and you shall be as void of fear, as
lions are, says the wiseman: For that, perfect charity expels fear. Pro.
28.
But if you live wickedlie, then have you 1. Ioh. 4.
cause to fear, for God called not him self a just judge for nothing. 2. Ti. 4.


If the matter had been so secure, as many men by flattery do persuade
themselves it is, S. Peter would never have said unto Christians now baptized;
Walk you in scare, during the time of this your earthely 1. Pet. 1.
babitation: Nor S. Paul to the same men, Phil. 2.
Work your own salvation in fear and trembling. But here perhaps, some
men will ask me, how then docth the same Apostle An objection ansuered.
in an other place say: That God has not given us the spirit of fear, but of
virtue, love, 2. Ti. 1.
and sobriety? to which I answer: that our spirit is not a spirit of servile
fear: that is to live in fear only for dread of punishment, Servile fear,
and the fear of children.
without love; but it is a spirit of love, joined with the fear of children,
whereby they fear to offend their father, not only in respect of his
punishment, but principally for his goodness toward them, and benefits
bestowed upon them. This S. Paul declares plainly to the Romans, Romans 8.
putting the difference between servile fear, and the fear of children; you
have not received again the spirit of servitude (says he) in fear, but the
spirit of adoption of children, vvherby we cry to God, Abba father. He says
here to the Romans; you have not received again the spirit of servitude in
fear; because their former spirit, (being How the fear of gentiles was
servile.
gentiles,) was only in servile fear: for that they honored and adored their
Idols, not for any love they bore unto them, being so infinite as they were,
and such not able leudnes reported of them (I mean of Jupiter, Mars, Venus,
and the like;) but only for fear of hurt from them, if they did not serve
adore and honor them.

S. Peter also in one sentence expoandeth 1. Pet. 3.
all this matter. For having said, timorem little ne timueritis, fear not their
fear (meaning of the servile fear of wicked men:) he adds presently,
Dominum autem Christum sanctificate in cordibus vestris, etc. cum modestia, and
timore, conscientiam habentes bona; That is, do you sanctify our Lord JESUS
Christ in your hearts; having a good conscience, with modesty and fear. So
that the spirit of servile fear, which is grounded only upon respect of
punishment, is forbidden us: but the loving fear of children, is commanded.
And yet also about this, are there two things to be noted.

The first, that albeit the spirit of servile. 1. Servile fear necessary to
beginners.
fear be forbiden us, (especially when we are now entered into the service of
God;) yet is it most profitable for sinners, and for such as yet do but
begin to serve God; for that it moves them to repentance, and to look about
them: for which cause it is called by the wiseman, the beginning of vvisdome.
And therefore, both Jonas Pro. 1. IOH. 13. Mat. 3.
to the Ninevites, and S. John Baptist to the Jews, and all the prophets to
sinners have used to stir up this fear, by threatening the dangers and
punishments which were imminent to them, if they repented not. But yet
afterward, when men are converted to God, and do go forward in his service;
they change every day this servile fear into love, until they arrive at last,
unto that state where of S. John says, that perfecti love or charity expels
fear. Whereupon S. Austen says, that fear is 1. Ioh. 4. Tract. 9. in cp. 1.
Ioh.
the servant, sent before to prepare place in our hearts; for his mistres,
which is charity. Who being once entered in, and perfectly placed: fear goes
out again, and gives place unto the same. But where this fear never enters
at al, there is it impossible for charity ever to come and dwell, says this
holy father. 2. Servile fear may well remain also afterward.


The second thing to be noted, is, that albeit this fear of punishment, be not
in very perfect men; or at leastwise, is less in them, then in others, as S.
John in the place before alleged teaches: yet being joined with love and
reverence, (as it ought to be,) it is most profitable and necessary for all
common Christians, whose life is not so perfect, nor charity so great, as that
they have that perfection, whereof S. John speaks. This appears by that,
that our Savior Christ persuaded also this fear, even unto his Apostles,
saying; Fear you him, which after he has slain the body, has power also
to send both body and soul Luc. 12. Mat. 10.
unto hell fire: this I say unto you, fear him. The same does S. Paul to the
Corinthians, who were good Christians, laying down first the justice of God,
and thereupon persuading the^ to fear. Al we (says he) must be presented
before the tribunal seat of Christ, 2. Cor. 5.
to receive, each man his proper deserts, according as he has done, good or
evil in this life. And for that we know this; we do persuade: he fear of
our Lord unto men. Nay (that which is more) S. Paul testifies, that
notwithstanding al his favors received from God; he retained yet him self this
fear of Gods justice, as appears by those words of his; I do chastise my
body, and do bring it into 1. Co. 9.
servitude, least perchance, when I have preached to others, I become a
reprobate myself.

Now then (my friend) if S. Paul stood The conclusion.
in awe of the justice of God, notwithstanding his Apostleshipp; and that he
was 1. Cor. 4.
guilty to him self of no one sin or offense, as he protests: what
ought thou to be, whose conscience remains guilty of so many misdeedes
and wickedness? This know you (says S. Paul) that no Ephe. 5.
fornicatour, unclean person, covetous man, or the like can have inheritance
in the kingdom of Christ. And immediately after, as though this had not been
sufficient, he adds, for preventing the folly of-sinners, which flatter the^
selves; Let no man deceive you with vain words; for the wrath of God
comes for these things, upon the children of unbelief. Be not you therefore
partakers of them. As if he should say; They that flatter you and say, Tush,
God is merciful, and will pardon easily al these and like sins: these me^
deceive you (says S. Paul,) for that the wrath and vengeance of God lights
upon the children of unbelief, for these matters: that is, it lights upon those
which will not believe Gods justice, nor his threats against sin; but
presuming of his mercy do persevere in the same, until upon the sudden, Gods
wrath do rush upon them, and then is it to late to amend. Wherefore (says
he) if you be wise; be not partakers of their folly; but amend your lives
presently, while you have time. And this admonition of S. Paul shall be
sufficient to end this chapter, against al those that refuse, or defer their
resolution of amendment, upon vain hope of Gods pardon or tolleration.

THE SIXTH THING THAT USES TO STAY AND HINDER MEN FROM MAture resolution.
Which is the deceitful hope and persuation to do it better or with more ease
afterward. CHAPT. VII.
THE reasons and authorities which hitherto have been alleged, might seem (I
doubt not) sufficient in the judgment and censure of any reasonable man, to
prove the necessity of the resolution whereof we treat, and to remove al
impedimentes that offer them selves against the same. But yet, for that (as the
wiseman says) he which is (...). 18.
once minded to break with his frind, seeks occasions how to do it with
some color and show: there be many in the world, who having no other excuse of
A vvaine excuse.
their breaking and houlding of from God; do seek to cover it with this
pretense, that they mean, by his grace, to amend al in time. And this time is
driven of from day to day, until almighty God (in whose hands only the
momentes of time are) do shut them out of al time, and do send them to pains
eternal without time, for that they abused the singular benefit of time in
this world.

This is one of the greatest and most dangerous deceites, and yet the most
ordinary and universal, that the enemy of mankind does use toward the
children of Adam. And I dare say boldly, that more do perish by this deceit
among Christians, the^ by all his other guiles and subtilities that he uses
besides. He well knows the The causes why the devil persuadeth us to delay.
force of this snare above al others, and therefore urges it so much unto
every man. He considers, better then we do, the importance of delay, in a
matter so weighty, as is our conversion and salvation. He is not ignorant how
one sin draws on an other; how he that is not fit to day, will be less fit
to morrow; how custom grows into nature; how old diseases are hardly cured;
how God withdraws his grace; how his justice is ready to punish every sin;
and how by delay we exasperate the same, and heap vengeance on our own
heads, as S. Paul Romans 2.
says. He is privy to the uncertainty and perils of our life; to the
dangerous chances we pass through; to the impedimentes that will come daily
more and more, to let our conversion. All this he knows and well considers,
and for that cause persuadeth so many to delay as he does. For being not able
any longer to blind the understanding of many Christians, but that they must
needs see clearlie, the necessity and utility of this resolution; and that
al impedimentes in the world, are but trifles, and mere deceites, which divert
them from the same: he runs to this only refuge, that is, to persuade men,
that they defer a little, and that in time to come they shall have better
occasion and opportunity to do it, then presentely they have.

This, S. Augustine proved in his conversion, as him self writes. For that
after Li. 8. confess. ca. 7. 12.
he was persuaded, that no salvation could be unto him, but by change and
amendment of his life: yet the enemy held him, for a time in delaie, saying
unto him; stay yet a little; yet deserre for a time. Thereby (as he says) to
bind him more fast in the custom of sin; until by the omnipotent power of
Gods grace and his own most earnest endeavor, he brake violently from him,
crying to God; why shall I longer say to morovv, to morovv? why shall I not
do it even at this instant? And so he did, even in his very youth, living
afterward, a most holy and severe Christian life.

But if we will discover yet further, the The causes which make our conversion
harder by delay.
greatness and peril of this deceit: let us consider the causes that may let our
resolution and conversion at this present; and we shall see them al increased,
and strengthened by delaie; and consequently, the matter made more hard and
difficult, for the time to come, then now it is. For first

Well then, (dear Christian brother) put all this together, and consider
indifferently Note.
with thy self, whether it be more likely, that thou shall rather make this
resolution hereafter, the^ now. Hereafter, (I say) when, by longer custom of
sin, the habit shall be more deeply rooted in thee; the devil in more firm
possession of the; Gods help further of from thee; thy mind more infected;
thy judgment more weakened; thy good desires extinguished; thy passions
confirmed; thy body corrupted; thy strength diminished; and al thy whole
common wealth more perverted?

We see by experience, that a ship which The sam. shevved by comparisons.
leaketh, is more easily emptied at the beginning, then afterward. We see, that
a ruinous palace, the longer it is let run, the more charge and labor it will
require in the repairing. We see, that if a man drive in a nail with a hammer,
the more blows he gives upon it, the more hard it is to pluck out again.
How then think thou to commit sin upon sin, and by perseverance therein,
to find the redress more easy hereafter, then now? It is written among the
lives of old heremites; An example. In prato spirituali sanctorum Patrum.
how that on a time, an Angel showed to one of them in the wilderness, a
certain good fellow that hewed down wood; who having made to him self a great
burden to carry thence, laid it on his back; and for that it was uneasy, and
pressed him much, he cast it down again, and put a great deal more unto it,
and the^ began to lift at it a new. But when he felt it more heavy then
before; he fell into a great rage, and added twice as much more unto it, thereby
to make it lighter. Whereat when this holy man mused much; the Angel told him,
that this was a figure of them in the world; who finding it somewhat
unpleasant to resist one or two vices at the beginning, do defer their
conversion, and do add twenty or forty more unto them, thinking to find
the matter more easy afterward.

Saint Austen expounding the miracle of our Savior, in raising Lazarus from
Tract. 49. in Ioh.
death to life, which had been dead now four days, as the Evangelist says:
examineth Ioh. 11. Mat. 9. Luc. 7.
the cause why Christ wept, cried out, and troubled him self in spirit, before
the doing of this act, where as he raised others with greater facility. And
he concludes the mystery to have been, for that Lazarus was now dead four
days, and also buried: which signifies, the four degrees of a sinner; the
first, in voluntary delectation of sin; the second, in consent; the third,
in fulfilling it by work; the fowerth, in continuance or custom thereof;
wherein whosoever is once buried (says this holy father) he is hardly raised
to life again, without a great miracle of God, and many tears of his own
part.

The reason hereof is, that which the wiseman says, Languor prolixior grauat
medicum; The reason of more difficulty by delay.
an old sickness does trouble the physician; Breuem autem languorem, praecidit
medicus. But the physician cutteth of quickly Eccl. 10.
a new or fresh disease, which has endured but a little time, The very bones
of an old wicked man shall be replenished with the Job. 20.
vices of his youth (says Job) and they shall sleep with him in the dust,
when he goes to his grauc. We read that Moses, in part of Exo. 32.
punishment to the people, that had sinned in adoring the golden calfe, broke
the same in pieces, and made them drink it. So, the vices wherein we delited
during our youth, are so dispersed by custom in our bodies and bones; that
when old age does come on, we can not rid them at our pleasure, without
great difficulty and pain. What folly then is it, to defer our amendment
unto our old age, when we shall have more impedimentes and difficulties by a
great deal, then we have now?

If it seem hard to thee to do penance now; to fast, to pray, and to take
upon thee other afslictions, which the Church prescribed to sinners at their
conversion: how will thou do it in thy old age, when thy body shall have more
need of cherishing, then of punishment? If thou find it unpleasant to resist
thy sins now, and to root them out, after the continuance of two, three, or
four years: what will it be after twenty years more adioined unto them? How
mad a man would thou A comparison.
esteem him, that travailing on the way, and having great choice of lusty
strong horses, should let them al go empty and lay al his carriage upon some
one poor and lean beast, that could skarse uphold him self, and much less
sustain so great a burden cast upon him? And surely no less unreasonable is
that man, who passing over idly the lusty days and times of his lise,
reserueth all the labor and travail unto impotent and feeble age.

But to let pass the folly of this deceit; tell me, (good Christian) what
ingratitude Ingratitude toward God.
and injustice is this, toward almighty God, having received so many
benefits from him alredie, and expecting so great a pay as the kingdom of
heaven is, for thy service: to appoint out, notwithstanding, the least, and
last, and worst part of thy life unto his service; and that, whereof thou art
most uncertain, whether it shall ever be, or never; or whether God will accept
it when it comes or no? He is accursed by the prophet, which having whole and
sound cattle, does offer unto God the lame, or halting part thereof. How much
Malac. 1.
more shall thou be accursed, who having Comparisons.
so many days of youth, strength, and vigor; do appoint unto Gods service,
only thy limping old age? In the law it Deu. 25.
was forbidden, under a most severe threate, for any man to have two measures
in his house for his neighbor: one greater to his friend, and an other less
for other men. And yet thou art not ashamed, to use two measures of thy life,
most unequal, in prejudice of thy Lord and God; whereby thou allotest to him, a
little, short, maimed, and uncertain time of old age; and unto his enemy, the
world, thou assignest the greatest, the fairest, the surest part thereof.

O dear brother, what reason is there, why God should thus be used at thy
hands? what law, justice, or equity is this, Unjust dealing with God.
that after thou have served the world, flesh, and devil al thy youth and best
days: in the end to come and thrust thine old bones, defiled and worn out
with sin, into the dish of thy Creator: his enemies to have the best, and he
the leauinges: his enemies the wine, and he the lies and dregs? Do thou
not remember, that Leui. 3. Number. 18. Mala. 1.
he will have the fat and best part offered to him? Do thou not think of the
punishment of those, who offered the worst part of their substance to God? Follow
the counsel then of the holy Ghost, if thou be wise, which warns thee, in
these words: Be mindeful of thy Creator in the days of thy youth, before the
time of affliction come on, Eccl. 5.
and before those years dravv near, of which thou shall say, they please me
not.

How many have thou seen cut of before thine eyes, in the midst of their
days, whiles they purposed in time to change their life? How many have come to
old age it self, and yet then have felt less will of amendment then before?
How many have driven of, even unto the very hour of death, and then least of
al have remembered their own estate; but have died, as dum ne and sensles
beasts, according to the saying of holy S. Gregory, The sinner has also
this affliction laid upon him, that when he comes to die, he forgotteth
Sermon. 10. de sanctis.
him self, which in his life time did forget God? O, how many examples are
there seen hereof daily? how many worldly men, that have lived in sensuality;
how many great sinners, that have passed their life in wickedness; do end and
die, as if they went into some place insensible, where no account, no reckening
should be demanded? They take such care in their testamentes for flesh and
blood, and the commodities of this world, as if they should live still, or
should have their part of these vanities when they are gone. In truth, to
speak as the matter is, they die as is there were no immortality of the
soul; and that, in very deed, is their inward persuasion.

But suppose now, that all this were not so, and that a man might as easily,
commodiouslie, The loss of merit.
yea and as surely also, convert him self in old age as in youth, and that the
matter were also acceptable enough to God: yet tell me, what great time is their
lost in this delaie? what great treasure of merit is there omitted, which might
have been gotten, by labor in Gods service? If whiles the captain and other
soldiers A comparison.
did enter into a rich city, to take the spoil, one soldier should say, I
will stay and come in the next day after, when all the spoil is gone; would
you not think him both a coward, and also most unwise? So it is, that Christ
our Savior and al his good soldiers, took the spoil of this life; enriched
them selves with the merits of their labors; carried the same with them as
bills of exchange, to the bancke of heaven, and there receive pay of eternal
glory for them. And is it not great folly and perverseness in us, to pass over
this life without the gayning of any meritat al? Now is the time of fight, for
gaining of our crown: now is the day of spoil, to seize on our booty; now
is the market, to buie the kingdom of heaven; now is the time of running, to
get the game and price; now is the day of sowing, to provide us corn for the
harvest that comes on. If we omit this time, there is no more crown, no more
booty, no more kingdom, no more price, no more harvest to be looked for. For
as the scripture assures us; He that for sloth vvil not Pro. 20.
fovv in the vvinter; shall beg in the summer, and no man shall give unto him.

But if this consideration of gain can not move thee (gentle reader) as indeed
it ought to do, being of such importance as it is, and irreuocable when it is
once past: yet weigh with thy self, what obligation The obligation and charge
by delay.
and charge thou drawest on thee, by every day that thou deferrest thy
conversion, and live in sin. Thou make each day knottes, which thou must
once undo again: thou heapest that together, which thou must once disperse
again: thou eatest and drinkest that hourly, which thou must once vomit up
again: I mean, if the best fall out unto thee: that is, if thou do repent in
time, and God do accept thereof: for otherwise, woe be unto thee, for that thou
hoardest (as S. Paul says) wrath, and vengeance on thine own Romans 2.
head. But supposing that thou receive grace hereafter to repent, which
refusest it now; yet (I say) thou must weep, for that thou laughest now; thou
must be heartily sorry for that wherein thou delitest now; thou have to curse
the day wherein thou ever gave consent to sin, or else thy repentance will
do thee no good. This thou know now, and this thou beleeuest now, or else
thou art no Christian. How then art thou so mad, as to offend God now, both
willingly, and deliberatelie; of whom thou know that thou must once ask
pardon with tears? If thou think he will pardone the; what ingratitude is it to
offend so good a Lord? If thou think he will not pardone thee; what folly can
be more, then to offend a prince without hope of pardon?

Make thine account now as thou will: if thou never do repent and change thy
life, then every sin thou committest, and every day that thou live therein,
is increase of wrath and vengeance upon thee in hell, as S. Paul proves. If
thou do, by Romans 2.
Gods mercy, hereafter repent and turn (for this is not in thy hands:) then
must Satisfaction for delay.
thou one day lament, and be wail, and do penance for this delay, which now
thou make. Then must thou make satisfaction to Gods justice, either in this
life, or in the life to come, for that which now thou passest over so
pleasantly. And this satisfaction must be so sharp and rigorous (if we believe
the ancient All the authorities of S. Cyprian, Aug. and Hierom. follovving Bun.
leaves out and ma^gleth most impudently. Cyprian. li. de la. and li. 5. ep. 5.
ad cor.
Fathers, and Councels of Christ his Church) as it must be answerable to the
weight and continuance of thy sins; as I shall have occasion to show in the
second book, talking of satisfaction. So that, by how much the more thou
prolongest, and encreasest thy sin; so much greater must be thy pain and
sorrow in satisfaction. Alto vulneri diligens and longa adhibenda est medicina:
paenitentia crimine minor non sit (says S. Cyprian.) A diligent and long
medicine is to be used to a deep sore; and the penance may not be less the^
the fault. And the^ he shows in what order it must be: with prayer, with
tears, with watching, with lying on the ground, with wearing of hear cloth,
and the like. It is not enough (says S. Austen) to Hom. vlt. and 50. ho.
change our manners, and to leave to sin, except we make satisfaction also to
God for our sins past, by sorrowful penance, humble sighs, contrition of
heart, and giving of Alms. Our body that has lived in many delites must be
afflicted: (says Ep. 27. ad Eustoch.
S. Ierom:) our long laughing must be recompensed with long weeping: our soft
linen, and fine silk apparel, must be changed into sharp hear cloth.
Finally, S. Ambrose agreeing with the rest, says, Grandi Ad virg. Iapsam. c.
5.
plagae alta and prolixa opus est medicina. Grande scelus grandem necessariam
habet satisfactionem. Unto a great wound, a deep and long medicine is
needful. A great offense requires of necessity a great satisfaction.

Mark here (dear brother) that this satisfaction must be both great and long,
and also of necessity. What madness is it then for the, now to enlarge the
wound, knowing that the medicine must afterward be so painful? What cruelty
can be more against thy self, then to drive in thorns into thine own flesh,
which thou must afterward pull out again with so many tears? would thou
drink that cup of poisoned liquour for a little pleasure in the taste, which
would cast thee soon after into a burning fever, torment thy bowels within
thee, and other dispatche thy life, or put the in great ieoperdie?

The 2. part of the chapter.
BUT HERE I know thy refuge will be, as it is to al the^, of whom the prophet
says, mentita est iniquitas sibi, iniquity has Psalm. 26.
flattered and lied unto her self; thy refuge (I say) will be, to allege the
example of THE example of the thief saved on the cross, discussed.
the good thief, saved eue^ at the last hour, upon the Cross, and carried to
paradise that same day with Christ, without any further penance or
satisfaction. This example is greatly noted, and urged by all those who defer
their conversion; as no doubt it is, and ought to be of very great comfort to
every man, which finds him self now at the last cast, and therefore commo^lie
tempted by the enemy to despair of Gods mercy, which in no case he ought to
do. For the same God which saved that great sinner at that last hour, can
also (and will) save al them that hartelie turn unto him, eue^ in that last
hour. But (alas) many men do flatter and deceive them selves with
mis-vnderstandings, or rather mis-vsing of this example.

For we must understand (as S. Austen well notes) that this was but one
particular act of Christ, which makes no general rule; even as we see, that a
temporal Circumstances of the fact.
Prince pardons sometime a malefactor, when he is come to the very place of
execution; yet wore it not for every malefactor to trust thereupon. For that,
this is but an extraordinary act of the prince his favor, and nether showed
nor promised to al men. Besides this, this act was a special miracle reserved
for the manifestation of Christ his power and glory, at that hour upon the
Cross. Again, this act was upon a most rare confession made by the thief,
in that instant, when all the world forsook Christ, and even the Here Butt.
vvil needs tring in our lady also: affirming ber to have broken three
commandementes at once, for that she defended not here son. God help the fond
man.
Apostles them selves, either douted, or lost their faith of his godhead.
Besides all this, the confession of this thief was at such a time, as he could
nether be baptized, nor have further time of penance. And we hold also, that
at a man's first conversion, there is required no other penance, or satisfaction
at al, but only to believe and to be baptized, for the gaining of heaven. But
it shall not be amiss perhaps, to allege S. Austens very words upon this
matter. For thus he writes.

It is a remediles peril, when a man gives him self over so much to vices, as
he The discourse of S. Augustine upon the theeses conversion. Sermon. 110. de
temp.
forgeteth that he must give account thereof to God. And the reason why I am of
this opinion, is; for that it is a great punishment of sin, to have lost the
fear and memory of the judgment to come, etc. But (dearly beloved) least
perhaps, the new felicity of the believing thief on the Cross, do make
any of you too secure and remiss: least peradventure some of you say in his
heart, my guilty conscience shall not trouble nor torment me: my naughty life
shall not make me very sad, for that I see even in a moment al sins
forgeuen unto the thief: we must consider first in that thief, not only the
shortness of his belief and confession, but his devotion; and the occasion of
that time, even when the perfection of the sust did staggar. Secondly, show me
the faith of that thief in thy self, and then promise to thy self his
felicity. The devil does put into thy head this security, to the end he may
bring thee to perdition. And it is impossible to number al them, which have
perished by the shadow of this deceitful hope. He deceives him self, and
makes but a ieste of his own damnation, which thinks that Gods mercy at
the last day shall help or relieve him. It is hateful before God, when a man,
upon confidence of penance in his old age, does sin the more freely. The
happy thief whereof we have spoken (happy (I say) not for that he laid
snares in the way, but for that he took hold of the way it self in Christ,)
laying hands on the pray of life; and after a strange manner, making Note this.
a booty of his own death; he (I say) nether did defer the time of his
salvation wittinglie, nether did he deceitfullte put the remedy of his estate,
in the last moment of his life; nether did he desperately reserve the hope of
his redemotion unto the hour of his death; nether had he any knowledge either of
religion or of Christ before that time. For if he had had; perhaps he would
not have been the last in number among the Apostles, which was first in the
king some of heaven.

By these words of S. Augustine we are admonished, (as you see) that this
particular fact of Christ, makes no general rule of remission to al men: not,
for that Christ is not always ready to receive the penitent, as he promises,
and was to receive this thief; but, for that every man has not the time or
grace to repent, as he should, at the last hour, according as has been
declared before. The general way The general way. 2. Co. 11.
that God proposes to al, is that which S. Paul says; Finis secundum opera
ipsorum: The end of evil men is according to their works. Look how they live,
and so they die. To that effect says the prophet, Once God speak, and I heard
these two things from his Psalm. 61.
mouth. Power belongs to God, and mercy vnta thee, (o. Lord) for that thou
vvilt render to every man, according to his works. The wise man makes this
plain, saying, the way of simers is paued with stones, and their end is
Eccl. 1.
hell, darkness, and punishments. Finally, S. Paul makes this general and
peremptory conclusion: Be not deceived, God is not mocked; look Gal. 6.
what a man sows, and that shall be reap. He that sows in flesh, shall
reap corruption; he that sows in spirit, shall reap life everlasting. In
which words, he does not only lay down unto us the general rule whereto we
must trust; but also says further, that to persuade our selves the contrary
thereof, were to mock and abuse God, which has laid down this general law
unto us.

Notwith standing (as I have said) this general law barreth not the mercy of
almighty That the conversion made at the last day is insufficient.
God, from using a privilege to some particular man even at the very last
cast. But yet miserable is that soul, which places the ancker of his eternal
wealth or woe, upon so tyclesome a point as this is. I call it ticlesome, for
that al divines who have written of this matter, do speak very dowtfullie of
the penance or conversion of a man, at the last end. And albeit they do not
absolutely condemn it, in all; but do leave it as uncertain unto Gods secret
judgment: yet do they incline to the negative part; and do allege four
reasons, for which that conversion is to be doubted, as insufficient for a man's
salvation.

The first reason is, for that the extreme The first reason.
fear and pains of death, being (as the philosopher says) the most terrible,
of al terrible things, do not permit a man co^monlie so to gather his
spirits and senses at that time, as is required, for the treating of so
weighty a matter with almighty God, as is our conversion and salvation. And
if we see often times, that a vetie good man can not fix his mind earnestly
upon heavenly cogitations, at such time as he is troubled with the passions of
cholicue, or other sharp diseases: how much less in the anguishes of death
can a worldly man do the same, being unacquainted with that exercise, and
lodened with the guilt of many and great sins, and cloyed with the love, both
of his body, and things belonging thereunto?

The second reason is; for that the conversion, which a man makes at the last
The second reason.
day, is not (for the most part) voluntary, but upon necessity, and for
fear: such as was the repentance of Semei; who having grievously offended king
David, in time of his affliction; afterward, when he saw 2. Re. 16.
him in prosperity again, and him self in danger of punishment; he came, and
fell down before him, and asked him forgiveness with tears. But yet, David well
2. Re. 19.
perceived the matter, how it stood; and therefore, albeit he spared, him for
that day, wherein he would not trouble the mirth with execution of justice: yet
afterward he gave order, that he should be used 3. Reg. 2.
according to his deserts.

The third reason is; for that the custom of sin, which has continued all The third reason.
the life long, can not easily be removed upon the instant, being grown now
(as it were) into nature it self. For which cause, God says to evil men, by
the prophet Jeremy; If an Ethiopian can change his Iere. 13.
black shinne, or a leoparde his spots, that are on his back: then can you
also do well, having learned al days of your Life, to do evil.

The fowerth cause is; for that the acts of virtue them selves, can not be of
so The fourth reason.
great value with God, in that instant, as if they had been done in time of
health before. For, what great matter is it (for example sake) to pardon thy
enemies at that time, when thou can hurt the^ no more? to give thy goods
away, when thou can use them no more? to abandon thy concubine when thou
can keep her no longer? to leave of sin, when sin must leave thee? Al
these things are good and holy, and to be done by him, which is in that last
state: but yet, they are of no such value, as other wise they would be, by
reason of this circumsta^ce of time, which I have showed.

These are the reasons why the holy Fathers and doctors of Christ his Churh,
S. Augustines speech of the doubtful event of final conversion.
do speak so dowtfullie of this last conversion: not, for any want on Gods
part, but on theirs who are to do that great act. I might here allege great
store of authorities for this purpose: But one place of S. Austen shall serve
for all. Thus then he writes of this matter in a certain homily of his. If a
man have done penance Hom. 47. est lio. 50.
truly, and do die, (being absolved from the bonds wherewith he was tied and
separated from the body of Christ,) he goes to rest. But if a man in the
extreme necessity of his sickness, do desire to receive Al tins discourse
of S Augustine Bun. strikes out.
penance, and do receive it, and do pass hence reconciled: I confess unto
you, that we do not deny him that, which he demands: but yet we presume
not, that he goes hence in good case. I do not presume (I tell you plainly,)
I do not presume. A faithful man that has lived well, goes away securely.
He that dies the same hour he was baptized, goes hence securely. He that is
reconciled in his health, and does penance, and afterward lineth well: goes
hence securely. But he that is reconciled, and does penance at the last end:
I am not secure, that he goes hence securely. Where I am secure, I do tell
you, and do give security. And where I am not secure, I may give penance, but
I can give no security. But here perhaps some man will say to me; good
priest, if you know not in what state a man goes heace, nor can give security
that he is saved to whom penance was assigned at his death: teach us (I beseech
you) how we must live after our conversion and penance? I say unto you;
abstain from dronkennes, from coucupiscence of the flesh, from theft, from
much babbling, from immoderate laughter, from idle words, for which men are to
give account in the day of judgment. Lo how small things I have named in your
sight. But yet, al these are Mat. 11.
great matters, and pestilent to those which commit them. Nay yet, I tell you
further: a man must not only abstain from these vices, and the like, after
penance: but also before, when he is in health. For if he drive it of to the
last end of his life: he can not tell, whether he shall be able to receive
penance, and to confess his sins to God, and to the priest, or no. Behold
the cause why I said unto you, that a man should live well before penance, and
after penance better.

Mark well what I say: and perhaps it shall be needful to expound my meani^g
Note this.
more plainly, least any man mistake me. What say I then? that this man which
repents at the end shall be damned? I do Here Bun. puts in a piece of S.
Aug. again, but suppresseth his name.
not say so. What then? Do I say he shall be saved? no. What then do I say? I
say, I know not: I say, I presume not; I promise not; I know not. Will thou
deliver thy self forth of this doubt? will thou escape this dangerous and
uncertain point? do penance the^ whiles thou art whole. For if thou do
penance while thou art in health, and the last day chance to come upon thee:
run presently to be reconciled; and so doing, thou art safe. And why art
thou safe: for that thou did penance in that time, wherein thou might
have sinned. But if thou will do penance then, A notable saying.
when thou can sin no longer; thou leauest not sin, but sin leaves
thee. But you will say to me; how know thou whether God will forgive a man's
sins at the last hour, or no? You say well; I know it not. For, if I knew
that penance would not profit a man at the last hour, I would not give it him.
Again, if I knew that it would deliver him: I would not warn you, I would not
terrify you, as I do. Two things there are in this matter: either God
pardons a man, doing penance, at the hour of death; or he does not pardon
him. Which of these two shall be, I know not. Wherefore, if thou be wise, take that
which is certain, and let go the uncertain. Hitherto are S. Auste^s words
of the dowtful case of those, which do penance at the last day.

And here now would I have the careful Christian to consider with me, but this
one comparison that I will make. If they A comparison.
that repent, and do such penance as they may at the last day, do pass
hence notwithstanding, in such dangerous doutfulnes as S. Augustine shows:
what shall we think of al such who lack either time or ability, or will, or
place, or means, or grace to do any penance at al, at that hour? what shall
we say of al those, who are cut of before? which die suddenly? which are
stricken dumme, or deaf, or senseles, or frantike, as we see many are? what
shall we say of those, which are aba^doned by God, and left unto vice, even unto
the last breath in their body? I have showed before out of S. Paul, that
ordinarily, 2. Co. 11.
sinners die, according as they live. So that, it is a privilege for a wicked
man, to do penance at his death. And then, if his penance (when it is done) be
so doutful, as S. Austen has declared: what a pitiful case are al other in? I
mean the more part, which repent not at al, but die as they lived, and are
forsaken of almighty God in that extremity, according as he promises, when
he says; For that I have called Pro. 1. Iere. 35.
you, and you have refused to come; for that I have held out my hand, and none
of you would vouchsafe to look toward me: I will laugh also at your
destruction, when anguish and calamity comes on you. You shall call upon me,
and I will not hear; you shall rise betimes in the morning to see me, but you
shall not find me.

It is both dreadful and lamentable which the prophet says, of such as defer
A dreadful saying. Psalm. 58.
their conversion, from time to time: Conuertentur ad vesperam; and famem
patientur vt canes, and circuibuat ciuitatem; They will convert them selves to
God at the evening, and then shall they suffer hungar, as dogs; and shall run
about the city.The words that go immediately before, and do immediately ensue
after, do express more plainly the greatness of this threate. For before, the
verse is: Attend (o Lord) to visit al nations; take no mercy upon al those that
work iniquity. That is, which work iniquity unto the end without change,
for otherwise the wish were hard. And immediately after enseweth; These men shall
speak with their mouth, and a svvord shall be in their lips; for who has
heard them? and thou (o Lord) shall skoffe at them. That is to say, these men in
their last extremety shall cry for help; and their cry shall be as sharp to
pearse men's ears, as a sword is; and yet notwithstanding, no man shall hear
the^. And thou (o Lord) which only can help them, shall be so far of from
hearing or pitying their case, as thou shall also laugh at their misery and
destruction. By all which is signified, the great calamity of such as defer
their conversion unto the last day, expressed by three circumstances, in the
former sentence alleged.

For first he says, they vvil turn at the evening; that is, at the hour of
death. For as Turning to God at the evening.
the evening is the end of the day, and the beginning of night: even so is this
time, the end of light, and the beginning of al darkness unto the wicked. In
which sense Christ said; I must work the works of him Ioh. 9.
that sent me, vvhiles the day lasts; for night vvil come on, when no man
can work more. At this time then; that is, at this evening, in this twy
light, between day and darkness, when the pleasant brightness, and heat of al
sun beams is past: the brightness (I mean) of honor, of vainglorie, and of
worldly pomp is consumed: when the heat of concupiscence, of carnal love, of
delicate pleasures is quenshed; when the beautiful summer day of this life is
ended, and the boisterous winter night of death draws on: (the^ says the
prophet) will the wicked man begin of force to turn unto God; then will he
(forsooth) repent; then will he resolve him self, and make his conversion.

But what? shall this be accepted? You have heard the prophets request to God,
Final turning to God not accepted.
Non miserearis; do not take mercy on them. Not, for that the prophet wishes
God to be unmerciful; but for that he well knew Gods immutable justice toward
such kind of men. Whose misery, in this extremity, he expresses further, by
saying, they shall suffer hungar as dogs; which is, as if he should have
said: even as dogs, when they are hungry, are ravenous, and do seek by all
means for meat, be it never so homely: and will refuse nothing that is
offered, but will devour al those things most gredilie, which they contemned
whiles their bellies were full: so these men that would not hear of penance,
while they were in health, will now admit any thing, and make strange of
nothing. Now (I say) when they can live no longer, will they promise any pains:
what prayers you will; what fasting you please; what alms deeds you can
desire; what austeritie soever you can imagine. They will promise it, (I say)
upon condition they might now have life again; upon condition that the day
might be prolonged unto them; albeit, if almighty God should grant them their
request, in this also, (as many times he does,) they would perform no one
point thereof; but would be as careless, as ever they were before: yet for the
present, you shall see the^ as hungry as dogs, says the prophet, most ready
to devour any thing, that may be devised, for their salvation.

And not contented with this, the same prophet adds yet a further clause of
misery. A marvelous circumstance of misery for the^ that deserre their
conversion to the evil.
And that is, that they shall circuit or run about the cilic; even as dogs
do, when they are hungry, putting in their heads at eucry door for releef,
though it be with great danger to be beaten out again. This expresses an
unspeakable distress and calamity of wicked men, at the last day; when they
shall circuit, and run about the whole city of God, both in heaven, and
earth, to seek help, and shall find none. When they shall cry, with sighs and
groans, as pearsing as a sword, and yet shall not be heard. For, whether will
they turn them selves in this distress? unto their worldly wealth, power, or
riches? alas, they are gone; and the scripture says, riches shall not profit
in the day of revenge. Will they turn unto their carnal Pro. 11.
friends? But what comfort can they give, besides only weeping, and comfortles
mourning? Will they ask help of the Saints in heaven to pray for them in this
instant? It is good, surely, so to do: but yet, they can not choose but
remember what is written, The sainies shall reioise in glory; exultation Psa.
145.
shall be in their throtes; and two edged swords in their hands, to take
revenge upon nations, and increpations upon people; to bind kings in fetters,
and noble men in manacles of iron; to execute upon them the prescript judgment
of God; and this is the glory of al bis saints. Their only refuge the^ must
be unto God, who in deed is the only sure refuge of al; but yet in this case,
the prophet says here, that he shall not hear them: but rather contemn, and
laugh at their misery. Not, that he is contrary to his promise of Pro. 1. Psa.
58.
reccauing a finner, at what time soever he repe^teth, and turns from his
sin: but, for that this turning at the last day, is not commonly true
repentance and conversion, for the causes before rehearsed.

To conclude then this matter of delay; what wise man is there in the world, who
The conclusion, what danger is in delay.
reading this, will not fear the deferring of his conversion, though it were
but for one day? Who does know whether this shall be the last day, or no, that
ever God will call him? God says; I called, and you refused to come; I held out
my hand, and you Pro. 1.
would not look toward me; and therefore vvil I forsake you, in your
extremity. He does not say, how many times, or how long he did call and hold
out his hand. God says, I stand at the door, and knock; but he says not, how
often he does that, or how many knockes he gives. Again, he said of wicked
Iezabel, the feigned prophetess Apoc. 2.
in the Apocalips; I have given her time to due penance, and she would not, and
therefore shall she perish: but he says not, how long this time of repentance
endured. We read of wonderful examples herin. HEROD the father, had a call given
him, and 1. HEROD the first.
that a loud one, when John baptist was sent unto him, and when his heart was so
far touched, as he willingly heard him, and followed his counsel in many
things, Marc. 6.
as one Evangelist notes. But yet, because he deferred the matter, and took
2. HEROD the second. Luc. 11. Luc. 23. Mat. 14.
not time, when it was offered: he was cast of again, and his last doings made
worse then his former. HEROD tetrarche the son, had a call also, when he felt
that desire to see Christ, and some miracle done by him: but, for that he
answered not unto the call, it did him no good, but rather much hurt. What a
great knock, had PILATE given him at his heart, if he had 3. PILATE.
been so fortunate, as to have opened the door presently, when he was made to
understand the innocence of Christ; as appears Plat. 27.
by washing his hands in testimony thereof, and his wife also sent unto him an
admonition about the same? No 4. AGRIPPA. Act. 26.
less knock had king AGRIPPA at his door, when he cried out, upon the hearing
of S. Paul: O Paul, thou persuadest me a little, to be a Christian. But, because
he deferred the matter, this motion passed away again.

Twice happy had PHARAO been, if he 5. PHARAO.
had resolved him self presently, upon that motion that he felt, when he cried
to Exodus 9. Act. 24 6. FELIX.
Moses, I have sinned, and God is just. But by delay, he became worse then
ever he was before. S. Luke reports how FELIX, the governor of Ieurie for
the Romans, conferred secretly oftentimes with Saint Paul, that was his
prisonner; and heard of him the faith in Christ, wherewith he was greatly moved;
especially at one time, when Paul disputed of Gods justice, and of the day of
judgment, whereat FELIX trembled. But yet, he deferred this resolution,
willing Paul to depart, and to come again an other time: and so the matter by
dilation came to no effect. How many men do perish daily, some cut of by
death, some left by God, and given over to a reprobate sense; which might have
saved them selves, if they had not deserred their conversion from day to day;
but had made their resolution presently, when they felt God to call within
their hearts.

Almighty God is ready and bountiful to knock and call; but yet, he binds
him The danger of passing the day of our vocation.
self to no time or space, but comes and goes at his pleasure. And they who
take not their times when they are offered, are excuseles before his justice,
and do not know whether ever it shall be offered to them again, or no; for
that, this thing is ouelie in the will and knowledge of Exo. 33.
God alone; who takes mercy where it pleases him best, and is bound to none.
Romans 9.
And when the prefixed time of calling is once past, woe be unto that party.
For a thousand worlds will not purchase it again. Christ shows wonderfully
the importance of this matter; when, entering into Jerusalem upon Palme-sonday,
amidest all the mirth and glory of his receiving, he could not choose but weep
upon that city, considering (as most men think) that this was the last day of
mercy and vocation, that ever should be used to the same. And therefore he said
with tears; O Jerusalem, if thou knevvest also, those things which appertain
Luc. 21.
to thy peace, even in this thy day! but now these things are hidden from
thee. As if he had said; if thou knew (Jerusalem) as well as I do, what
mercy is offered unto thee, even this day, which is the last day, that ever
such offer shall be made; thou would presently accept thereof. But now this
secret judgment of my father is hidden from thee; and therefore thou make
little account thereof, until thy destruction shall come suddenly upon thee; as
soon after it did.

By this now may be considered, the great reason of the wise man's exhortation:
Forslovv not to turn to God; nor do thou deserre it from day to day; for his
wrath vvil Eccl. 5.
come upon the, on the sudden, and in time of revenge it vvil destroy thee. It
may be seen also upon what great cause, S. Paul exhorted the Hebrews so
vehemently, Dum cognominatur Heb. 3.
hodie; to accept of grace, eue^ whiles that very day endured; and not to let
pass the occasion offered. Which every man applying to him self, should follow,
in The honre of our calling not to be omitted.
obeing the motions of Gods spirit within him, and accepting of Gods vocation
without delay; considering what a grievous sin it is, to resist the Holy
Ghost. Every man ought (I say) when he feels Act. 7.
a good motion in his heart, to think with him self; now God knocks at my
door; if I open presently, he will enter, and Apoc. 3.
dwell within me. But if I defer it until to morrow, I know not whether he will
knock again, or no. Every man ought to remember still that saying of the
prophet, touching Gods spirit: Hodie si vocem eins auaieritis, Psalm. 94.
nolite obdurare corda vestra; if you chance to hear his voice calling you to
day, do not harden your hearts, but presently yield unto him.

Alas (dear brother) what hope of gain have thou by this perilous dilation,
The srutles endeavors of sinners at the last day.
which thou make? Thy account is increased thereby, as before. I have
declared; thy debt of satisfaction is made more grievous; thy enemy more
strong; thy self more feeble; thy difficulties of conversion multiplied. What
have thou then to with hold thee one day from resolution? The gaining perhaps
of a little time in vanity? But I have proved to thee before, how this time is
not gained but lost, being spent without merit, which is in deed the only true
gain of time. If it seem pleasant to thee for the present: yet remember what
the prophet says, Iuxta ast dies perditionis, and Deu. 32.
adcsse fistina a temporal; The day of perdition is at hand, and the times of
destruction make haste to come on. Which day being once come; I marvel what
hope thou will conceive. Do thou think (perchance) to cry, Peccaui? It
shall be well truly, if thou can do it: but yet, thou know, that Pharao did
so, and auailed nothing. Exodus 9.
Do thou intend to make a good testament, and to be liberal in alms deeds,
at that time? This (no doubt) is very commendable; but yet thou must remember
also, that the virgins which filled their lamps, only at the very instant of
their entrance to the marriage, were shut out, and utterly rejected by Christ.
Do thou Mat. 25.
think to weep and mourn, and to move thy judge with tears, at that
instant? first, this is not in thy hands to do at thy pleasure; and yet thou
must consider also, that Esau found no place of penance, though he sought it
with tears, as S. Paul well notes. Do thou mean to have many Heb. 12.
good purposes, to make great promises and vows in that distress? Call to
mind the case of Antiochus in his extremities; what promises of good deeds,
what vows 2. Mac. 9.
of virtuous life made he to God, upon condition he might escape, and yet
prevailed he nothing thereby. All this is spoken, not to put them in despair
which are now in those last calamities, but to dissuade others from falling into
the same; assuring thee (gentle reader) that the prophet said not without a
cause; Seek unto God while he may be sound, call upon him while Esa. 55.
he is near at hand. Now is the time acceptable, now is the day of salvation,
says 2. Co. 6.
S. Paul. Now is God to be found, and near at hand to embrace al them that
truly turn unto him, and make firm resolution of virtuous life hereafter.
If we defer this time; we have no warrant that he will either call us, or
receive us hereafter; but rather many threats to the contrary, as has been
showed. Wherefore I will end with this one sentence of S. Augustine; Tract. 33.
in Ioh.
that he is both a careless and most graceles man, which, knowing all this, will
venture notwithstanding the eternity of his salvation and damnation, upon the
doubtful event of his final repentance.

OF THREE OTHER LETTES AND IMPEDIMENTES THAT HINDER men from resolution, to
wit. Slothfulnes; careless negligence; and hardness of heart, utterly co^temning
al things: with the conclusion of this first book. CHAPT. VIII.
BESIDES al other impedime^tes lettes and hindrances which hitherto have been
named and recounted, there remain yet diverse other to be found, if a man could
examine the particular consciences of al such as do not resolve. But these
three here mentioned, and to be handeled in this chapter, are so public and
known: as I may not pass them over, without discovering the same; for that,
many times men are sick and evil affected within, and yet know not their own
diseases; the only declaration whereof (to such as are desirous of their oune
health) is sufficient to divert the danger of the sickness.

Of Sloth.
FIRST THEN, the impediment of sloth, is a great and ordinary let of
resolution OF Sloth. the first part.
to many men; but especially in idle and delicate people, whose life has been
in all case and rest; and therefore do persuade themselves, that they can take
no pains, nor abide any hardness, though never so feign they would. Of which
kind of persons, S. Paul says, that nise 1. Co. 6.
people shall not inherit the kingdom of heaven: These folks do proceed in
this order. They will confess to be true, so much and a great deal more then
is said before: and that they would also gladly for their parts put the same
in execution, but that they can not. Their bodies may not bear it; they can
not fast; they can not watch; they can not pray. They can not leave their
disportes, recreations, and Excuses of nise people.
merry companions: they should die presently (as they say) with melanchely, if
they did it; yet in their hearts they desire (forsooth,) that they could do
the same; which seeing they can not, no doubt (say they) but God will accept our
good desires, and pardon us in the rest. But let them hearken a little, what the
scripture says hereof; Desires do kill the slothful man (says Pro. 21.
Solomon:) his hands vvil not fall to any work: all the day long he coucteth
and desires: but he that is just, vvil do, and vvil not cease. Take the
slothful and unprofitable servant (says Christ) and fling him into utter
darkness, where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. Mat. 25.
And when he passed by the way and found a fig tree with leaves, without
fruit (which signified desires without Mat. 21.
works:) he gave it presently an everlasting curse. Finally, the prophet
David detesteth those men, and says also, they are detested of God, qui in
labor hominu^ non sunt, Psa. 72.
which are not in the labors of men.

Of this fountain of sloth, do proceed many effects, that hinder the slothful
from Four effects of sloth.
al good resolution. And the first is, a certain heaviness, and sleepie
drowsines DROVSINES. Pro. 19. Ephe. 5. Marc. 13. Mat. 24. and 25.
scripture says; pigredo immittit soporem, sloth does bring drousines. For
which cause S. Paul says, surge qui dormis, arise thou which art a sleep:
and Christ cries out so often, videte, vigilate, look about you, and watch.
You shall see many men in the world, with whom if you talk of a cow or a
calfe, of a fat ox, of a piece of ground, or the like, they can both hear and
talk willingly and freshly. But if you reason with them of their salvation,
and of their inheritance in the kingdom of heaven: they answer not at al, but
will hear, as Prou. 6. and 24.
if they were in a dream. Of these persons then says the wise man; how long
will thou sleep, o slouthful fellow? when will thou arise out of thy dream? A
little yet will thou sleep; a little longer will thou slumber; a little will thou
close thy hands together, and take rest: and so, poverty shall hasten upon
thee as a run ning post, and beggarie as an armed man shall take and possess
thee.

The second effect of sloth, is a certain FEAR.
of casting dowtes where none be, according as the scripture says, pigrum
deiicit timor, fear discourageth the slothful man. Pro. 19.
And the prophet says of the like, they shake for fear where there is no
fear. These Psa. 52.
men do frame unto them selves strange imaginations of the service of
almighty God, and of very dangerous euentes, if they should embrace and follow
the same. One says; if I should Bun. here strikes out the first two members
of fusting and praying.
fast much, it would without dowte corrupt my blood. An other says, if I
should pray, and stand bareheaded long; I should die most certainly with
rheum. A third says, if I should keep account of al my sins, to confess
them; it would quickly kill me with sadness. And yet all this is nothing else but
sloth, as the scripture testifies in these words; Dicit piger, leo est foris;
in Pro. 21.
medio platearum occidendus sum. The slouthful man says (sitting still in his
house) there is a Lion without; if I should go out of doors to labor, I should
certainly be slain in the midst of the streets.

A third effect of sloth is, pusillanimitie and faintnes of heart; whereby the
slouthful by every little contrariety or difficulty Pusillanimitie.
which he finds in virtue, or which he imagines to find therein. Which the
scripture signifies, when it says, inlapide luteo lapidatus est piger, the
slouthful man, is stoned Eccl. 22.
to death with a stone of dirt; that is, he is overthrown with a difficulty
of no importance. Again: De stercore boum lapidatus est piger, the slouthful
man is stoned dead with the dung of oxen: which commonly is such a substance,
as hardly can do any hurt.

A fowerth effect of sloth is, idle lazines: which we see in many men that 4.
Lasines.
will take and consult of this and that, about their amendment, but will execute
nothing. Which is most fitly expressed by the Holy Ghost in these words;
Sieut ostium vertitur in cardine suo, it a piger in lectulo suo. Pro. 26.
As a door is tossed in and out upon his hingels, so is a slothful man, lying
lazelie upon his bed. And again; vult and non Pro. 13.
vult piger; A slothful man will and will not; that is, he turns him self to
and from in his bed, and between willing and nilling he does nothing. And yet
further, in an other place the scripture describes this laziness, saying, the
slothful man puts his hands under his girdle, and vvil not vouchsase to
lift them up to his mouth, for that it is painful. Pro. 19.


Al these and many more are the effects of slothe; but these four especially,
have I thought good to touch in this place; for that, they let and hinder
greatly this resolution which we talk of. For he that lives in a slumber,
and will not hear, or attend to any thing that is said of the life to come; and
besides this, imagines fearful matters in the same; and thirdly, is thrown
down by every little block, that he finds in the way; and lastly, is so
lazy, as he can bear no labor at al: this man (I say) is past hope, to be
gained to any such purpose as we speak of.

TO REMOVE therefore this impediment; this forte of men ought to lay before
MEANS to remove Sloth.
their eyes, the labors of our Savior Christ, and of his Saints; the
exhortatio^s they used to other men, to take like pains; the threats made in
scripture against them which labor not; the condition of our present warfare,
that requires travail; the crown prepared for it; and the misery ensewing
upon idle and lazy people. And finally, if they can not bear the Sea before.
Chap 2.
labor of virtuous life, which in deed is accompanied with so many
consolations, as it may not rightfullie be called a labor: how will they abide
the labor and torments of the damned life to come, which must be both
intolerable and everlasting unto them?

Saint Paul says of him self and others, These. 3. The labors of Sainctas
to the Thessalonians; we did not eat our bread of free cost when we were with
you: but did work in labor and weariness, both day and night, thereby to give
you an example of imitation; denouncing further unto you, that if any man would
not work, he should not eat. Christ in his parable, went forth into the
streets twice in one day, and til reprehended greeuouslie those that stood
idle, saing; (...) Mat. 20.
hic statis tota die otio i^? Why do ye stand here all the day idle, and doing
nothing? I am a vine, (says Christ) and my father is a husband Ioh. 15.
man; every branche that bears not fruit in me, my father will cut of, and
cast into the fire. And in an other place: Cut down the unprofitable tree;
why does it stand Lac. 13.
here, and occupy the ground for nothing? And again: the king dome of heaven
is subject to force; Mat. 11.
and men do gain it by violence and labor. For which cause, the wise man
also says: Eccl. 9.
what soever thy hand can do in this life, do it instantly: for after this,
there is neither time, nor reason, nor wisdom, nor knowledge, that we can
employe to any profit. And again the same wise man Prou. 10.
says: The lazy hand works beggarie to it self, but the industrious and
ualiant hand heapeth up great riches. And yet further to the Prou. 20.
same effect; The slouthful man vvil not sovv in the vvinter, for that it is
cold; and therefore he shall beggein the summer, and no man shall take pity of
him.

All this pertains to show, how that this life is a time of labor, and not of
The conclusion.
idleness; and is appointed unto us for the gaining of heaven. It is the Market,
wherein we must buy; the batail, wherein we must fight and gain our crown; the
winter, wherein we must sow; the day of labor, wherein we must sweat and gain
our penny. And he that passes over lazilie this day (as the most part of me^
do) must suffer eternal poverty and need, in the long night to come; as in
the first part C. 2. 3. pa. 11. (...).
of this book more at large has been declared. Wherefore, the wise man (or
rather the Holy Ghost by his mouth) gives Prou. 6.
each one of us, a most vehement admonition and exhortation, in these words.
Run about; make haste; stir up thy frind; give no sleep unto thy eyes; let
not thine eye liddes slumber; skippe out as a do from the hands of him that
holds her, and as a bird out of the hand of the fouler. Go unto the Emmet
(thou slothful man,) and consider ber doings, and learn to be wise. She
having no guide, teacher, or captain, provides meat for her self in the
summer, and gathers together in the harvest, that which may serve her to
feed upon in the vvinter. By which words we are admonished, in what order we
ought to behave our selves in this life, and how dilligent and careful we should
be in doing of al good works, (as S. Paul also teatheth): considering, that
Coloss. 1. Romans 12. Gala. 6.
as the Emmet labors most carnestlie in harvest time, to lay up for the
winter to come: so should we do for the next world: and that, sloth falnes to
this effect, is the greatest and most dangerous-let that' may be. For, as the
Emmet should die in the winter most certainly for hunger, if she should live
idlelie in the summer: so without al doubt they are to suffer extreme need and
misery in the world to come, who now for sloth do omit to labor.

Of Negligence.
THE SECOND impediment is called by me, in the title of this chapter,
Negligence. But I do understand thereby, a OF NEGligence, the second part.
further matter then commonly this word imports. For I do comprehend under
the name of negligent, al careless and dissolute people, which take to heart
nothing that pertains unto God or godliness, but only attend to worldly
affairs, making their salvation the least part of their cogitations. And
under this kind of negligence is contained, both Epicurisme, (as Epicurisme,
or life of Epicures. Phil. 3. Romans 16.
S. Paul noted in some Christians of his days, who began only to attend to
eat and drink, and to make their bellies their God, as our Christians now
do:) and also a secret kind of Atheism, or denying God; which is, to deny
him, not in words, but in life and behavior, as S. Paul expounds it. For
albeit these men Tit. 1.
of whom I speak, do in words confess God, and profess them selves to be
as good Christians as the rest: yet secretly in deed they do not believe God,
as their life and doings do declare. Which thing holy scripture discovers
plainly, when it says, vae dissolutis cord, qui non credunt Deo; Eccl. 2.
woe be unto the dissolute and careless in heart, who do not believe God. That
is, albeit they profess that they believe and trust in him; yet by their
dissolute and careless doings, they testify, that in their hearts they believe
him not; for that, they have nether care nor cogitation of matters pertaining
to him.

This kind of men, are those which the Of careless Atheistes. Deu. 22.
scripture notes, and detesteth for plowing with an ox and an Ass together;
for sowing their ground with mingled seed; for wearing apparel of linsie
wolsie; that is, made of flax and wool together. These are they of whom Christ
says in the revelations, I would thou were either cold or hoate. But for
that thou art luke vvarme, and Apoc. 3.
netber cold nor hoate, therefore vvil I begin to vomit thee out of my mouth.
These are they who can accord al religions together, and take up al
controversies, by only saying; that, either they are differences of small
importance, or else that they appertain only to learned men to think upon,
and not unto them. These are they who can apply them selves to any company,
to any time, to any princes pleasure, for matters of life to come. These men
forbid al talk of spirit, religion, or devotion in their presence; only
they will have men eat, drink, and be merry with them; tell news of the court
and affairs abroad; sing, dance, laugh, and play at cards; and so pass
over this life in less consideration of God, then do the very heathens. And
has not holy writ great reason then (dear brother) in saying, that these men
in their hearts and works are in deed very Atheistes? yes surely. And it
may be proved by many rules of our Savior him self. As for example; this is
one rule set down by him self; By their fruits ye shall know them. For Luc.
6.
such as the tree is within, such is the fruit which that tree sends forth.
Again, the mouth speaks from the abundance of the heart; Math. 12.
and consequently, seeing these men's talk is nothing but of worldly vanities:
it is an evident sign, there is nothing in their heart, but that. And then it
follows also by a third rule, where the treasure is, there is Math. 6.
the heart; and so consequently, seeing their hearts are only set upon the
world, the world is their only treasure, and not God; and there upon are very
Atheistes.

This impediment (dear Christian Two causes of Atheism at this day.
brother) reaches both far and wide at this day; and infinite are the
people who are entangled therewith; and the causes thereof are two especially.
The This Bun. lesueth out.
first is, division schism and heresy, in matters of our faith; which by
raising many doubts and questions, and by contentious quarreling which it
maintains, wearieth out a man's wit, and in the end brings him to care for
no part, but rather to contemn al. The second is, inordinate love of the
world; which brings men to hate God, and to conceive enemitie against him, as
the Apostle says; and therefore, no marvel 1. Ioh. 2.
though indeed they nether believe, nor delight in him. And of al other men these
are the hardest to be reclaymed, and brought to any resolution of amendeme^t,
for that they are insensible; and besides that, do also fly al means, whereby
they may be cured. For, as there were final A comparison.
hope to be conceived of that patie^t, which being greuouslie sick, should
nether feel his disease, nor believe that he were diste^pered, nor abide to
hear of physic, or physician, nor accept of any counsel that should be
offered, nor admit any talk or consultation about his curing: so these men are
in more dangerous estate then any other, for that, they know not their own
danger; but persuading them selves to be more wise then their neighbors, do
remove from their cogitations al things, whereby their health might be procured.

THE ONLY way to do these men THE way to cure careless men.
good, (if there be any way at al) is, to make them know that they are sick,
and in great danger; which in our case may be done best (as it seems to me)
by giving them to understand, how far they are of, from any one piece of true
Christianity; and consequently, from al hope of salvation that may be had
thereby. God requires at our hands, that we should Deuteronomy. 6. Mat. 22. Luc. 10.
love him and serve him, with al our heart, with al our soul, and with al
our strength. These are the prescript words of almighty God, set down both in
the old and new law. And how far (I pray the) are these careless men short of
this, who emploie not the half of their heart, nor the half of their soul,
nor the half of their strength in Gods service; nay, not the least part
thereof? God requires at our hands, that we should make his laws Deuteronomy. 6. and
11. John. I.
and precepts our study and cogitation; that we should think of the^
continually, and meditate upon them both day and night, at home and abroad,
early and late, when we go to bed, and when we rise in the morning: this is
his commandment, and there is no dispensation therein. But how far are these
men from this, which bestow not the third part of their thoughts upon this
matter, no not the hundredth part, nor scarce once in a year do talk thereof?
Can these me^ say, they are Christians, or that they believe in JESUS, our
Saueour?

Christ making the estimate of things in this life, pronounced this sentence;
Vnum est necessarium, one only thing is Luc. 10. Antitheses betvve^ true
Christians and careless vvorldlinges. 1. John. 2.
necessary, or of necessity in this world; meaning thereby, the diligent and
careful service of God. These me^ find many things necessary besides this one
thing, and this nothing necessary at al. How far do they differ then in
judgment from their Savior Christ? Christ's Apostle says; that a Christian,
must nether love the world, nor any thing in the world. These men love nothing
else, but that which is of the world. He says, That who soever is a friend to
the world, is an enemy to Christ. These men are enemies to who soever is not a
friend to the world. How then can these men hold of Christ? Christ says, we
should pray still. Luc. 18. Ephe. 5.
These men pray never. Christ's Apostle says, that covetousness, uncleanness, or
scurrilitie, should not be so much as once named Luc. 21. Mat. 24. Mich. 6.
Romans 11. Romans 12. Mat. 10.
among Christians: these men have no other but such talk. Finally, the whole
course and canon of scripture runs, that Christians should be, attenti,
vigilantes, soliciti, instantes, feruentes, perseuerantes, sine intermissione:
That is, attent, vigilant, careful, instant, fervent, and perseuerant without
intermission, in the service of their God. But these men have no one of these
points, nor any one degree thereof, but in every one the clean contrary. For
they are nether attent to those things which appertain unto God, nor vigilant,
nor solicitous, nor careful; and much less, instant and fervent; and least of
al, perseuerant without intermission; for that they never begin. But on the
contrary side, they are careless, negligent, lumpish, remisle, key cold,
perverse, contemning and despising, yea lothing and abhorring al matters that
appertain to the mortifiing of them selves, and to the true service of God.
What part have these men then in the lot and portion of Christians, besides
only the bare name, which profits nothing?

And this is sufficient to show, how great and dangerous an impediment this
careless, The dager of a careless man.
senseles, and supine negligence is, against the resolution whereof we entreat.
For if Christ require to the perfection of this resolution, that whosoever once
espieth Mat. 13.
out the treasure hidden in the field, (which is the kingdom of heaven, and
the right way to gain it) he should presently go and sell all that he has, and
buie that field: that is to say, that he should prefer the pursuit of this
kingdom of heaven, before all the commodities of this life whatsoever; and
rather venture them al, then to omit this treasure. If Christ (I say) require
this, as he does; when will these men ever be brought to this point, who will not
give the least part of their goods to purchase that field; nor go forth of
the doors to treat the bying thereof, nor will so much as think or talk of the
same, nor allow of him which shall offer the means and ways to compass it?

Wherefore, whosoever finds him self in this perilous disease, I would
counsel The conclusion.
him to read some chapters of the first part of this book; especially the
third and fifth, entreating of the causes for which we were sent into this
world; as also of the account, which we must yield to God, of our time here
spent; and he shall there understand (I dout not) the error and danger he
stands in, by this damnable negligence wherein he sleeps, atte^ding only
to those things which are mere vanities, and for which he came not into this
world; and passing over other matters, without care or cogitation, which
notwithstanding are only of importance, and most necessary for all men to employ
their whole care and study in.

Of hardness of heart.
THE THIRD and last impediment, that I purpose to handle in this book, is a
certain HARDNESS of heart, the 3. part.
affection, or evil disposition in some men, called by the scriptures, Hardness
of heart, or in other words, obstination and obstinacy of mind. Whereby a man
is settled in resolution, never to yield from the state of sin wherein he
lives, whatsoever shall or may be said against the same. And I have reserved
this impediment, for the last place in this book; for that, it is the last,
and worst of al other impedimentes discovered before, containing all the evil in
it self that any of the other before rehearsed have; and adding to the same
besides, a most wilful and malicious resolution of sin, quite contrary to
that resolution, which we so much endeavor to induce men unto.

This hardness of heart has diverse degrees in diverse men, and in some much Two
degrees of hardness of heart.
more grievous and perilous then in other. For some are arrived to that high
and and chief obduration, which I named before; in such sort, as albeit they
well know that they are amiss, yet for some worldly respect or other, they will
not yield, nor change their course, do, say, or prove what you will or can.
Such was the obduration of Pilate; who albeit he Mat. 27.
well knew that the condemned our Savior Christ wrongfullie: yet, not to leese
the favor of the Jews, or incur displeasure with his prince; he proceeded,
and gave that most wicked sentence against him. This also was the obduration of
Pharao; who, though he saw the miracles Exodus 6. 7. 8.
of Moses and Aaron, and felt the strong hand of God upon his kingdom: yet,
not to seem to be overcome by such simple people as they were; nor that men
should think he would be enforced by any means to relent: he perseuered still
in his wilful wickedness, until his last and utter destruction came upon him.
This hardness of heart was also in king Agrippa, and in Act. 26. 27.
Foelix, governor of Ieurie; who, though in their own consciences they
thought that S. Paul spoke truth unto them; yet, not to hazard their credit in
the world, they continued still, and perished in their own vanities. And
commonly this obduration is in all persecutors of virtue, and Persecutors.
of virtuous men: whom, albeit they see evidently to be innocent, and to have
equity on their side; yet, to maintain their estate, credit, and favor in
the world; they persist, without either mercy or release, until God cut them
of, in the midst of their malice and furious cogitations.

Others there are, who have not this A second degree of abduratio^.
obduration in so high a degree, as to persist in wickedness directly against
their own knowledge; but yet they have it in an other sort: for that, they are
settled in firm purpose to follow the trade, which alredie they have begone;
and will not understand the dangers thereof; but do seek rather means to
persuade the^ selves and quiet their consciences therein: and nothing is so
offensive unto them, as to hear any thing against the same. Of the; men holy
Job faith: Dixerunt Dco, recede a nobis, and scientiam viarum tuarum nolumus:
Job. 21.
They say to almighty God, depart from us, we will not have the knowledge of
thy Psalm. 57.
ways. And the prophet David yet more expressly; Their fury is like the
fury of serpents, like unto cocatrices that stope their cares, and vvil not
hear the voice of the inchaunter. By this inchaunter, he means the Holy
Ghost, which secketh by all means possible, to charm them from the bewitching
wherein they stand, called by the wise man, fascinatio megacitatis; the
bewitching of vanity. But (as the prophet faith) Sap. 4.
they vvil not hear, they turn their backs, they Zach 7.
stop their ears, to the end they may not understand; they put their hearts
as an Adamant stone, left perhaps they should hear Gods law, and be
converted.

The nation of Jews is peculiarly noted to have been always given to this
The hard hearted. Jews.
great finne, as S. Stephen witnesses, when he said unto their own faces; You
stiff necked Jews, you have alvvayes resisted the Holy Ghost: meaning thereby
(as Christ declares Act. 7.
more at large) that they resisted the prophets and Saints of God, in whom
Mat. 5. Luc. 11. 13.
the Holy Ghost spoke unto them from time to time, for amendment of their
life. And for that, through the light of knowledge which they had by hearing of
Gods law, they could not in truth, or with show of reason, condemn the things
which were said, or avoid the just reprehensions used toward them; and yet
resolved with the^ selves not to obey, or change the custom of their
proceedings: therefore fell they in fine to persecute sharply their
reprehendors; whereof the only cause was, hardness of heart. Indurauerunt facies
suas supra petram, and noluerunt reuerti, says God by the Iere. 5.
mouth of Jeremy; they have hardened their faces above the hardness of a rock;
and they will not turn to me. And in an other place of the same prophet he
complains greeuouslie of this peruersenes: Quare ergo auersus est populus
isle in Jerusalem, Iere. 8.
auersione contentiosa? And why then is this people in Jerusalem revolted from
me, by so contentious and perverse an alienation; as they will not hear me any
more etc? And yet again in an other place: Quare moriemini domus - Israel? why
will you die, (...). 18.
you house of Israel? why will you damn your selves? why are you so obstinate,
as not to hear? so perverse, as not to learn? so cruel to your selves, as you
will not know the dangers wherein you live? nor understand the misery that
hangs over you?

Do thou not imagine (dear brother) that God uses this kind of speech, not
only to the Jews, but also to many thousand Christians, and perhaps also
unto thy self many times every day, for that thou refusest his good motions,
and Gods cry unto us daily.
other means sent from him, to draw thee to his service; thou being resolved
not to yield thereunto, but to follow thy pursuit, whatsoever persuasions shall
come to the contrary? Alas, how many Christians be there, who say to God
daily, (as they did whom I have named before) depart from Job. 21.
us, we vvil not have the knowledge of thy ways? How many be there, which
abhor to hear good counsel, fear and tremble to read good books, fly
and detest the frequentation of godly company, lest perhaps by such occasions
they might be touched in conscience, and so converted and saved? How many be
there, which say with those most unfortunate hard hearted men, whereof the prophet
speaks; Percussinius foedus cum morte, and cum inferno fecimus pactum: We
have stricken a league Esa. 28.
with death, and have made a bargain with hell it self; which is in effect as
much, as if they had said; trouble us not, moleste us not with thy persuations;
spend not thy words and labor in vain, talk unto others who are not yet
settled; let them take heaven that take it will; we for our parts are resolved;
we are at a point; we have made a league that must be kept; we have made a
bargain that must be performed, yea though it be with hell, and death
everlasting.

It is a wonderful fury, the obduration of a hard heart: and not without cause
compared by the prophet (as I have showed The description of (...) hard (...).
Eza. 48.
before) to the wilful fury and rage of serpents. And an other place of
scripture describes it thus: Durus es, and neruus ferreus ceruix tua, and
frons tua aerea; Thou art hard hearted, and thy neck is a sinowe of iron, and
thy forehead is of brass. What can be more vehemently spoken to express Li.
1. de co^sid. ad Erg. cap. 2.
the hardness of this metal.But yet S. Barnard expresses it more at large,
in these words; Quid ergo cor durum? and what is then a hard heart, says he?
and he answers immediately. A hard heart is that, which is neither cut by
compunction, nor softened by godliness, nor moved with prayers, nor yields to
threatening, nor is any thing helped, but rather hardened by chastising. A hard
heart is that, which is ingratful to Gods benefits, disobedient to his
counsails, made cruel by his judgments, dissolute by his allureme^tes,
unshamefast to filthiness, feareles to perils, discourteous in humane affairs,
recheles in matters pertaining to God, forgetful of things past, negligent in
things present, improuident for things to come.

By this description of S. Barnard it appears, that a hard heart is almost a
desperate The explication of S. Barnards words.
and remediles disease, where it falls. For what will you do (says this good
father) to amend it? If you lay the greeuousnes of his sins before him: he
is not touched with compunction. If you allege him all the reasons in the
world, why we ought to serve God, and why we ought not to offend and dishonor
him: he is not mollified by this consideration of piety. If you would request
him and beseech him with tears, even on your knees: he is not moved. If you
threaten Gods wrath against him: he yields nothing thereunto. If God scourge
him in deed: he waxes furious, and becomes much more hard then before. If
God bestow benefits on him: he is ungrateful. If he counsel him for his
salvation: he obeieth not. If you tell him of Gods secret and severe
judgments: it drives him to desperation, and to more cruelty. If you allure
him with Gods mercy: it makes him dissolute. If you tell him of his own
filthiness: he blusheth not. If you admonish him of his perils: he fears not.
If he deal in matters toward men: he is proud, and discourteous. If he deal
in matters toward God: he is rash, light, and contemptuous. Finally, he
forgets what soever has passed before hi^, toward other men, either in
reward of godliness, or in punishment of sinners. For, the time present, he
neglects it, and makes no account of using it to his benefit. And of things
to come, either of bliss or misery, he is utterly improvident; nor will
esteem thereof, lay them never so often, or vehemently before his face. And
what way is there then, to do this man good?

Not without great cause surely, did the wise man pray so hartelie to God;
Animae irreuerenti and insrumitae ne tradas me; deliver The danger of a hard
heart. Eccl. 23.
me not over (o Lord) unto a shameless and unruly soul: that is, unto a hard
and obstinate heart. Whereof he gives the reason in an other place, of the same
book: Cor enim durum babebit male in nouissimo; for Eccl. 3.
that a hard heart shall be in an evil case at the last day. Oh that al hard
hearted people would note this reason of the scripture. Note.
But S. Barnard goes on, and opens the terror hereof more fully, when he
says. Nemo duri cordis salutem vnquam adepi^us Li. 1. de co^sid. c. 2. Ezec.
36.
est, nisi quem forte miserans Deus abstulit ab to (iuxta prophetam) cor
lapideum, and dedit cor carneum. There was never yet hard hearted man saved,
except perchance God by his mercy did take away his stony heart, and give him
a heart of flesh, according to the prophet. By which words S. Barnard
signifies, and proves out of the prophet, Two kinds of hearts in men, with
their properties.
that there are two kinds of hearts in me^; the one a fleshie heart, which
bleedeth if you but prick it; that is, it falls to co^trition, repentance,
and tears upon never so small a check for sin. The other is a stony heart,
which if you beat and buffet never so much with hammers, you may as soon
break it in pieces, as either bend it, or make it bleed. And of these two hearts
in this life, depends al our misery, or felicity for the life to come. For
as God, when he would take vengeance of Pharao, had no more grievous way to do
it, then to say, Indurabo cor Pharaonis; I will harden the heart of Pharao; that
is, (as S. Austen expounds) I will take away my Exo. 4. 7. 14. Au. q. 18.
super exodus and ser. 88. de temp. Ezec. 36.
grace, and so permit him to harden his own heart: so when he would show mercy
to Israel, he had no more forcible mean to express the same, then to say, I
vvil take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and give you a fles hie heart
in stead thereof. Which is to say, I will take away your hard heart and give
you a soft heart, that will be moved when it is spoken unto. And of al other
blessings and benefits which God does bestow upon mortal men in this life,
this soft and tender heart is one of the greatest; I mean such a heart as is
soon moved to repentance, soon checked and controlled, soon pearsed, soon
made to bleed, soon stirred to amendment. And on the contrary part, there
can be no greater curse or malediction laid upon a Christian, then to have a
hard and obstinate heart, which heapeth every day vengeance unto it self and his
master also, as S. Paul says: and is compared Heb. 6.
by the same Apostle unto the ground which no store of rain can make fruteful,
albeit it fall never so often upon the same; and therefore he pronounces thereof,
Reproba est and maledicto proxima, cuius consuinmatis in combustimem; That is;
it is reprobate, and the next door unto malediction; whose end or consum nation
must be, fire and burning.

Which thing being so, no marvel though the holy scripture do dehort us The
conclusion.
so carefully from this obduration and hardness of heart, as from the most
dangerous and desperate disease, that possibly may fall upon a Christian, being
in deed (as S. Paul signifies) the next door to Heb. 6.
reprobatio^ it self. The same Apostle therefore cries, Nolite contristare,
nolite extinguere Ephe. 4. 1. The. 5.
spiritum Dei; do you not contristate or make sad; do you not extinguish
the spirit of God, by obduration, by resisting and impugning the same. Again;
non obauretur quis ex vobis sallacia peccati; Let no man Heb. 3.
be hard hearted among you, through the deceit of sin. The prophet David also
cries, hodie si vocem eius audicritis, nolite obdurare Psalm. 94.
corda vesira; Eue^ this day, if you hear the voice of God, calling you to
repentance: see you harden not your hearts against him. Al which earnest
speeches, used by Gods holy spirit, do give us to understand, how carefully
we have to fly this most pestilent infection of a hard heart; which almighty
God of his mercy give us grace to do, and indue us with a tender heart
toward the full obedience of his divine Majesty; such a soft heart (I say) as
the wise man desired, when he said to God; Da serun tuo cor docile; Give unto
me thy servant (o Lord) a heart that is docible, 3. Re. 3.
and tractable to be instructed: such a heart as God him self describes to be
in all Esa. 66.
them whom he leueth, saying, ad quem respiciam, nisi ad pauperculum and
contritum sorde, and timentem sermones meos? To whom will I have regard or show
my favor, but unto the poor and humble of heart, unto the contrite spirit, and
to such as tremble at my speeches?

Behold (dear brother) what a heart What heart God requires in us.
God requires at thy hands? A little poor and humble heart: (for so much
imports the diminitiue, Pauperculus.) Also a contrite heart, for thy offenses
past; and a heart that trembles at every word that comes to thee from God,
by his ministers. How then will thou not fear at so many words, and whole
discourses as have been used before, for awaking the, for denouncing thy peril,
for stirring the to amendment? How will thou not fear the threats and
judgments of this great Lord for thy sins? How will thou dare to proceed
any further in his displeasure? how will thou defer this resolution any
longer? Surely the least part of that which has been said, might suffice to
move a tender heart, an humble and contrite spirit, to make a present
resolution for the amendment of life. But if al together, can not move thee to
do the same: I can say no more, but that thou have a very hard heart in deed;
which I beseech our heavenly father to soften for thy salvation, with the
precious hoate blood of his only son, our Savior, who was content to
shed it for that effect upon the Cross.

The Conclusion of the whole book.
AND THVS NOW having said so much as time permitted me, concerning the first
general point required at our hands for our salvation: that is, concerning
resolution, appointed by my division in the beginning, to be the subject or
matter of this first book: I will here make an end; Page 9.
deferring for a time the performance of my purpose for the other two books,
upon the causes and reasons set down in The other two books promised.
the beginning; nothing dowting, but if almighty God shall vouchsafe to work
in any man's heart by means of this book or otherwise, this first point of
resolution (the most hard of al other,) then that he will also give means to
perfect the save work begone of him self, and will supply Phil. 2.
by other ways the two points following: that is to say, both a right
beginning, and a constant perseverance, whereunto my other two books promised,
are appointed. Neither would it be hard for any man that were once in deed
resolved, to find helpers and instructours enough, (besides the Holy Ghost,
which in this case will always be at hand,) to assist him in this holy
enterprise, albeit these two other books of mine should never come forth. There
want not at this day (our merciful Lord be glorified for it,) neither store of
godly books, nor yet of skilful men, in our own country, that are well able
to guide a zealous spirit, in the right way to virtue. And yet (as I have
promised before,) so mean I (by Gods most holy help and assistance) to send
thee (gentle reader) as my time and ability will permit, the other two books
also; especially, if it shall please his divine Majesty to comfort me
thereunto, with the gain or good of any one soul by this which is already
done: that is to say, if I shall understand, conceive, or hope, that any one
soul so dearly purchased by the precious blood of the son of God, shall be
moved to resolution by any thing that is here said; or shall be reclamed from the
bondage of sin, and restored to the service of our maker and redemer; which
is the only end of my writing, as his divine Majesty best knows.

And truly (dear Christian brother) albeit I must confess, that much more
might be said for this point of resolution, then is here touched by me, or then
any man can well utter in any competent kind of book or volume: yet am I of
opinion, that either these reasons here alleged are sufficient, or else nothing
will suffice, for the conquering of our obstinacy, and beating The effect of
that which has been said in this book.
down of our rebellious disobedience in this point. Here thou may see and
read the principal arguments inducing thee to the service of God, and
detestation of vice. Here thou may behold (especially in this second edition
which is much larger then the former) first, that of necessity thou must
confess there is a In the first part.
God that made thee and all the rest; the end and cause why he created thee,
which was to serve him; the only true way of which service, to be by fulfulling
Christ's holy commandeme^tes; then, what things are required at thy hands in
particular; the account that will be demanded of thee; the justice and severity
of God therein; his goodness toward thee; his watchfulnes over thee; his desire
to win thee; his reward, if thou do well; his infinite punishment, if thou do
evil; his calls; his baits; his allurementes to save thee. And on the
contrary part, here are In the second part.
discovered unto thee, the vanities, and deceites of those impedimentes,
hindera^ces, or excuses, which any way might let, stay, or discourage thy
resolution: the feigned difficulties of virtuous life are removed; the
conceived fears of Gods service are taken away; the alluring flatteries of
worldly vanities are opened; the foolish presumption upon Gods mercy; the
danger of delay; the dissimulation of Sloth; the desperate peril of careless and
stony hearts are declared. What then will thou desire more to move thee? What
other arguments will thou expect, to draw the from vice and wickedness, more
then these?

If all this stir the not, what will move thee (gentle reader)? If when thou
have The necessuie of resolution.
read this, thou lay down the book again, and walk on in thy careless life
as quietly as before; what hope (I beseech thee) may there be conceived of thy
salvation? Will thou go to heaven living as thou do? it is impossible: As
soon thou may drive God out of heaven, as get thither thy self, by this
kind of life. What then? will thou forgo heaven, and yet escape hell also? this
is less possible, whatsoever the Atheistes of this world do persuade thee.
Will thou perhaps defer the matter, and think of it herafter? I have told
thee my opinion hereof before. Thou shall never have more ability to do it
then now, and perhaps never half so much. If thou refuse it now, I may
greatly fear, that thou will be refused hereafter thy self. There is no waic
then so good (dear brother) as to do it presently whiles it is offered.
Break from that tyrant, which detaineth thee in servitude; shake of his
chains; cut in sunder his bands; run violently to Christ, which stands
ready to embrace thee, with his arms open on the Cross. Make joyful all the
Angels, and court of Luc. 15.
heaven with thy conucrsion; strike once the stroke with God again; make a
manly resolution; say with that old courageous soldier of JESUS Christ,
Saint Jerome; If my father stood weeping on his A notable saying of S.
Jerome.
knees before me, and my mother hanging on my neck behind me; and al my
brethren, sisters, cvilaren, and kinssolkes hovviing on every side to retain
me in sinful life with them: I would sting of my mother to the ground,
despise al my kindred, run over my father, and tread him vndermy seete, thereby
tarunne to Christ when he calls me.

Oh that we had such hearts (dcare: Christian brother) as this servant of God
An exhortation.
had; such courage, such manhood, such seruent love to our Master. Who would
lie one day drowned in sin? who would live one day in such slavery as we
do? who would eat swaddes with the prodigal son among swine, seeing he may
return home, and be so honorably received, and entertained by his own
father; have so good cheer, and banqueting, and hear so great melody, joy,
and triumph for his return? I say no more Luc. 15.
herein, (dear brother) then thou art assured of, by the word, and promise of
Gods own mouth, from which can proceed nether falsehood nor deceit. Return
then I beseech thee; lay handfast on his promise, who will not fail thee:
run to him now he calls, whiles thou have time; and esteem not all this
world worth a straw, in respect of this one act. For so shall thou be a most
happy, and thrice happy man; and shall bless hereafter the hour and moment,
that cuer thou made this fortunate resolution. And I for my part (I trust)
shall not be void of some portion of thy good hap and felicity. At least
wise I doubt not, but thy holy conversion shall treat for me with our common
father, who is the God of mercies, for remission of my manifold sins, and
that I may serve and honor him together with thee, all the days of my life;
which ought to be both our petitions; and therefore, in both our names, I
beseech his divine Majesty to grant it unto us; for his dear son, our
Lords sake, JESUS Christ.

Amen.
The end of this first book treating of resolution.
A BRIEF METHOD HOW TO USE THE FORMER treatises, chapters, and
considerations to diverse purposes, according to the diverse quality of the
person, time, state, place, or need when they are to be used.
An Annotation.
IT is to be remembered that al these points and parcels of the book which are
here assigned for every one, to-applie to him self: the same may be
accommodated and practiced: by each man toward his frind, or by the pare^t
toward his child, or by the master toward his servant or scholar, and
especially by the Confessor toward his penitent; persuading, assigning, or
commanding him to read such parcels of this book, as he thinks may do him
most profit for his soul, in the state wherein he stands.

Of diverse states, conditions and qualities of men.
IF a man either in him self or others, do feel his soul lumpish and heavy
and 1. Hermie, lim pish, and slouthful.
unwilling to hear or think of spiritual affairs: let him read the first
chapt. part. 1. of inconsideration. As also the last of all the book, touching
Sloth and Negligence page 852.

Let him examine also the cause of this unwillingness in him self, according to
2. Abhorring spiritual books.
the three causes there set down. page 9. etc. especially if he find in him
self any horror against reading of spiritual books, as many do.

He that should any way be tempted in faith, has many things in this book for
3. For them that doubt whether there be a God.
his confirmation; and first if he be troubled with plain Atheism, and do
doubt whether there be a God or no, let him read the whole 2. chapter. page 25.

If he confess God, but yet do doubt of Gods particular and infallible
providence 4. Doubters of Gods providence.
in desposing al matters of this world: let him read the fowerth argument of
the Metaphisique. page 44.

If he doubt about the immortality of the 5. Doubters of the souies
i^mortality.
soul; let him consider the fifth argument of the Metaphisique. page 46.

He that has any suggestion against the infallible truth of the holy
scriptures or 6. Doubters of the scriptures.
any part thereof; let him read the whole third section of the 2. chapter. page
61.

He that should have any doubt or scruple about any thing in Christian
religion, 7. Doubters is Christian religion.
let him read the whole 4. chapter. page 132. As for example, if he should
doubt whether Christ were fore promissed to be God and man, whereof. page 132.
or whether he should have authority to change Moses law whereof, page 162. or
the like.

He that should be resolved of the truth 8. How to judge what opinion is true
in Christian Religion.
of Christian religion in general; but yet among so many sects and diverse
opinions which are holden therein, should doubt which to take, or how to judge
of the certainty thereof; let him read the first part of the 5. chapter,
treating of right faith, page 298. also the whole fifth chapter part. 2. of the
examples of true resolution. page 747.

If a man find him self or other careless 9. For careless and over confident men.
confident, and nothing fearing the severity of Gods justice; let him read the
7. chapter, page 349. of the accompting day. Also the 11. chapter. page 444. of
punishments prepared after death. Also the 6. chapter. page 793. of
presumption.

He that feels him self inclined to follow 10. For world by (...) ambitious
men.
worldly designs and courses of ambition, and thinks that he may so do and
yet come to heaven also; let him read the 3. chapter page 110. of ma^s final
end. Also the third fourth and fifth points of the 4. chapter, concerning the
world. page 683.

If a man feel him self desirous of the 11. For me^ delighted with
commodities of this life.
pleasures prefermentes and commodities of this world, or else afflicted for
that he has them not; let him read the whole fourth chapt. page 683. of the
world. And in particular, if he love honor, see, 700. If estimation of
wisdom; see 703. if beauty; see 706. if brave apparel; see 708. if riches;
see 711. etc.

He that finds him self or others easy 12. For them that sear not sin.
to fall into sin, and not greatly abhorring or fearful thereof; let him read
the 8. chapter par. 1. page 378. of the nature of sin and sinners. Also the first
part of the 6. chapter page 326. of resisting sin. Also the 9. chapter. page
400. of Gods Majesty and benefits.

When a mar. should feel him self to make small account of the joys of the
life 12. Co^temners of the world to come.
to come, so he might enjoy these of this life still, or should find him self
little moved with cogitation of heaven; let him read the 12. chap. par. 1. page
479. of the rewards after this life.

If a man were desirous to know what 14. For them that are desirous to know
their own estate.
state he were in with God; let him read the 5. chapter page 298. which
shows who is a true Christian. Also the third chapter page 110. which
teaches a man to take a scantling of that matter.

A man that should be tempted with cogitations of desperation, in respect of
the 15. Against desperatio^.
multitude or wickedness of his sins, or of his continuance therein; let him
read, the 1. chap. par. 2. page 523. of Gods endless mercy.

If any person should find him self troubled or tempted by consideration of the
16. For them that are pusillanimous.
contrarieties and vexations, that fall out daily in Gods Church against the
Catholic faith and good me^; let him read the 5. chapter page 747. of
examples of true resolution. As also the 3. chapter, of Tribulation, page 631.

The same let them do that find them 17. For them that are in affliction.
selves or their frindes in tribulation, or do stand in fear thereof for that
they love well their own ease.

He that finds him self tender and delicate, 18. For tender and delicate
persons.
and fearful of the pains which a virtuous life requires, or weary of
weldoing; let him read the 2. chapter of difficulties page 570.

He that thinks him se^lf young or 19. For young persons and others that do
delay.
otherwise so occupied, as he has not time need or leisure as yet to make his
couersio^; let him read the 10. chapter page 419. treating of death; as also
the 7. chapter page 818. that handles the manifold dangers of delay.

Finally, both by this that here has 20. For all sorts, states, and
conditions of people.
been noted, as also by consideration of the several chapters set down in the
beginning before the preface; each man either young or old, poor or rich, in
affliction or prosperity, in sickness or health, of high or low degree, or of
what quality, state, mind, constitution, temperature, condition, calling,
habit, desire or inclination soever he be; may take some what from this book
to be considered used and applied to his peculier commodity, or to his frind
in like case.

How the former treatises may be used to meditation and prayer.
FOR so much as me^tal prayer is nothing else but an elevation of our spirit
unto Mental prayer.
almighty God, and an exercise of our soul wherein she debateth i^ the
presence of her Creator the affairs which appertain to her own, salvation,
(whereunto also the treatises of this book do al tend;) I have sorted the
same out into two kinds of meditations, to be used at several times Two
sorts of meditations.
twice every day for the space of one month or there about. Which being ended,
the reader may begin again, and so continue the perpetual memory thereof,
taking now of one kind, and then of an other, according as he shall find his
mind Rules to be observed in meditation.
most desirous or inclined. And in his meditation he may observe these few
rules following.

First, that when he goes about to meditate, 1. Preparation.
he think with him self before he begin; what and where, and with whom he
has to deal, and how he would stand in the presence of a far less king of
this world, if he were to go before him, as now he is to present him self
before the Majesty of almighty God.

Secondly, that he do not only humble 2. External humiliatio^.
him self in heart, even unto the ground before so great a Majesty; but also
that he show the same (if he can) by some external action, as S. Paul and
Christ did when they put them selves upon their knces at the beginning of their
prayers.

Thirdly, having made the sign of the holy Cross upon his breast and for head
in the 3. Petition before meditation.
name and confession of the blessed Trinity; let him frame some short petition
and prayer (such as after follows, or the like) thereby to demand grace to
profit his soul by that meditation.

Fourthly, this being done, let him 4. Lection.
read with great attention, and distinction, the piece or parcel assigned in
the meditations following, and let him read it with such quiet of mind, as he
may say with the prophet, Audiam quid in me loquatur Dominus. I will give ear
and be attentive to Psalm. 84.
that which it shall please our Lord to speak unto me.

Fifthly, when he has read out all the Ruminatio^.
matter assigned, or before, (if any special thing move him as he reads;) let
him stay, and laying a side the book, or making some note where he breaks
of; let him quietly reuolue and meditate in his mind that which he has read,
and this either kneeling, fitting, walking, or lying, as he finds most
convenient for the repose of his mind. And what so ever he feels to affect
or move him most, let him stand most upon that, and apply it earnestly to the
stirring up of him self and of his soul to do her deutie.

Sixthly, when he has done what he can to the enkendling of his affections in
6. Prayer.
such good motions as the matter of that meditation does minister, be it of
love, reverence, fear, zele, courage, confidence, hatred and detestation of
sin, or the like, then let him turn to almighty God with all the vehemency
that possibly he is able, dema^ding with great fervor what soever his spirit
in that instant most desires, and so he may end with the prayer that after is
assigned, or some such like, which commonly is to be said with devotion upon
our knees.

A prayer to be used at the very instant when we begin to read any thing
whereon to meditate.
OEuerlasting, omnipotent, and most merciful Lord and father, I present my self
here before the face of thy divine Majesty, most humbly craving the assistance
of thy holy spirit, for my direction and instruction in this meditation that
now I take in hand; to the end that my soul may receive consolation and
benefit thereby, in learning to know both thee and her self, thy sacred will and
her bounden dewtie, thy judgments and her accomptes, thy endless mercies and
her infinite offenses. Give unto me, o Father of al mercy and Creator of al
good spirits, such a docible and tender heart, as may be pearsed with the holy
inspirations, which it shall please thy heavenly benignity to bestov upon me.
Grant that the holy fire of godly affections may be inkendled within my bowels
by this meditation, as it was in the heart of thy servant David by like holy
Psalm. 38.
exercise. Make my spirit attent to those blessed and fatherly admonitions,
which thou shall please to send unto me in this time of treaty between thee
and me. Illuminate my understanding, incline my will, stir up my affections,
inflame my desires, confirm my memory and continual remembrance in all such
things, as it shall please thy goodness to reveal unto me at this instant or
otherwise for my salvation. Grant all this (o my most merciful God) for thy
dear son our Saueour JESUS sake, who has assured us, that thou will never
deny a good spirit, to him that in sincerity demands the same.

A prayer to be used in the end of our meditation.
BEhold, o my God, behold, o my most merciful and patient Lord, how I have
passed over this time of meditation and contemplatio^ with thee. With how much
negligence, sloth, coldness, and distraction, and with how little feeling of thy
good motions within me. But thou (o Lord) art well witting and privy to mine
infirmities and manifold miseries, and therefore of thee I crave pardon for the
same. I thank thee also most heartily and humbly for all the good thoughts,
cogitatio^s, and suggestio^s, which have presented them selves unto my mind,
in the time of this meditation, as most holy Ambassadors sent from thie
heavenly throne, to deal with me for the gaining of thy kingdom. Whose blessed
voices and most profitable speeches, I beseech thy divine goodness to give me
grace that I may imprint in my heart, and seek to put in execution in the
course of my life to come; to the end that my judgment and damnation be not
the more grievous in respect of these thy benefits, but rather that my life
being amended thereby, and my soul stirred up to more zele in thy service, I
may finally be made partaker with thy true children of that eternal bliss
which thou have prepared for such as do love, fear, and serve thee, and do
yield obedience to such holy inspirations as thou do send unto them for
their everlasting weal.

FINIS. AFter this he may say Pater, Aue, Credo, and other such his devotions
as he likes best. And as he shall feel his mind affected at that instant,
either with fear of his sins, or with joy and comfort upon hope of
amendment, or else endued with other motions: so may he recite either the
Psalms; Miserere, or, Domine ne in furore tuo. Or one of the Canticles,
Benedicice Psalm. 50. and 6. Dan. 3. Luc. 1.
omnia opera Domini Domino, or, Benedictus Dominus Deus Israel. Or finally one
of the hymns. Te Deum laudamus; or Veni Creator Spiritus, or any the like.

Arguments to meditate upon.
THe first sort of meditations (being The first sort of arguments for
meditation.
20. in number) which appertain more peculierly, to speculation, discourse,
and knowledge, then to stir up affections, and therefore are sometimes to be
used for variety and recreation of the mind, when she is either weary, or not
willing to be pricked forward by the other that are more vehement in
exhortation. They are divided, for more facilities sake, into the times of
Morning and Evening, for ten days together.

The 1. day.
LEt him meditate from the beginning Morning.
page 35. Hov evident it is by all Creatures that there is a God.

From page 35. unto page 48. let him contemplate, Evening.
the arguments of the natural and supernatural philosophers vvherby they prove
God.

The 2. day.
From page 48. unto the end of the section the proofs of moral Morning.
philosophers for the same purpose.

From the beginning of the 9. section Evening.
page 61. examine the first arguments for proof of holy scriptures, ending
page 80.

The 3. day.
From page 80. unto 100. see the seventh argument ten Morning.
propheties.

From page 100. unto the end of the chapt. Evening.
consider the 8. and last argument for scriptures, concerning the approbation
of heathen vvriters, together with the conclusion of the chapter page 110.

The 4. day.
The beginning of the 4. chapt. 132. together Morning.
first section touching Christ promissed, which ends page 152.

The 2. consideration of the same sectio^, Evening.
how Christ was promissed to be both God and man. From page (...). unto 162.

The 5. day.
From page 162. unto 184. containing the how Morning.
Christ was promissed to change the law of Moses, together with the
particulers foretold of Christ's life.

The fifth consideration, how Christ was Evening.
fortold to the Gentiles both by Philosophers Prophets and Oracles. From page
169. unto 184.

The 6. day.
From the beginning of the 2. section of the time vvherin Morning.
Christ appeared, whether it were the same that was fortold or not.

From 205. unto 218. consider the second Evening.
consideration, of Christ's birth and infancy until the time of his preaching.

The 7. day.
From 218. unto 229. contemplate the 3. consideration of JESUS, touching his
life and actions. Morning.


From 229. unto the end of the section Evening.
page 245. meditate the fowerth consideration of JESUS concerning, his Passion,
Resurrection and Ascension.

The 8. day.
Begin the 3. section page 245. with the of Morning.
Christ's Church and her wonderful increase presently after his departure.

From 251. unto 258. follows the 2. consideration of Christ's Apostles, and
their wonderful Evening.
doings.

The 9. day.
From 258. unto 264. is the 3. consideration, of Christ's Evangelists and how
their vvritings Morning.
must needs be true.

From 264. unto 274. ensue the 4. and 5. co^sideratio^s Evening.
of Christ's Martyrs and of the subjection of spirits in the primative Church.

The 10. day.
From 274. unto 284. read the 6. consideration, of the punishments that sell
upon Christ's enemies both Jews and Gentiles. Morning.


From 284. unto the end of the chapter 297. read the 7. consideration, of the
fulfilling Evening.
of JESUS propheties, together with the conclusion of the whole chapter.

The second sort of meditations (being 28. in number) containing matter more
proper to stir up our affections to piety and devotion, and are divided into
14. days, that is to say, two weeks, allowing to each day two several
meditations.
THE FIRST WEEK.
MONDAY.
Morning.
COntemplate the whole chapter of Consideration page 1.

Evening.
The whole chapt. of ma^s final end pa. 110.

Tevvsday.
The first part of the 5. chapter, who is a Morning.
true Christian concerning faith 398. unto 310.

The second part of the same chapter, concerning Evening.
works 310. unto the end.

Wednesday.
The first part of the 6. chap. touching resisting Morning.
of sin 323.

The second part of the said chapt. concerning Evening.
laboring in good works 336.

Thursday.
The first part of the 7. chap. of the preparation Morning.
that shall go before the last accompting day 349.

The 2. and 3. parts of the same chap. and Evening.
of the sentence that shall ensue 364.

Friday.
The 8. chap. of the nature of sin and Morning.
sinners 378.

The 9. chap. of Gods majesty and benefits Evening.
400.

Saturday.
The 10. chap. of the day of death 419. Morning.


The 11. chap. of the punishments after Evening.
this life 444.

Sunday.
The 1. and 2. parts of the 12. chap. of the Morning.
reward of this life in general and particular 479.

The 2. part of the same chap. of the circumstances Evening.
increasing the same joy 503.

The second week.
Monday.
The 1. part of the 1. chap. part 2. Of the Morning.
exceeding love which God bears unto mankind, against the despair of Gods
mercy 523. unto 540.

The 2. and 3. parts of the same chap. how Evening.
and by how many ways God expresses his forsaid love unto us, and what
assurance he gives of pardon to such as repent, from Page 540. unto 560.

Tuesday.
The 4. part of the same chap. containing examples and instructions how to
avoid Morning.
temptations of desperation. 560.

The 1. part of the 2. chap. of the fallacy of suppused difficulties, with the
particular Evening.
helps to overcome the same Page 570. unto 618.

Wednesday.
The 2. part of the same chap. containing Morning.
means and instructions for ouercomming of difficulties, Page 618. unto the end.

The first 2. points of the 3. chap. about Evening.
Tribulation, beginning, Page 631. unto 656.

Thursday.
The second 2. points of the same chap. Morning.
begi^ning, Page 656 unto the end of the cha.

The 1. point of the 4. chap. treating of the vanities of the world, Page 688.
until. 720. Evening.


Friday.
The other parts of the same chap. 720. Morning.
until the end.

The 5. chap. of examples of Resolution. Evening.


Saturday.
The sixth chap. against Presumption. Morning.


The 7. chap. of Delay. Evening.


Sunday.
The first part of the 8. chap. of Slothe Morning.
until, Page 861.

The 2. and 3. parts of the same chap. treating Evening.
of Negligence and hardness of heart from, Page 860. until the end.

FINIS.
A TABLE OF THE PRINCIPAL MATTERS HANDLED in this book.
A
ACcompting day 349. Two accompting days or judgments; and the reasons
thereof 352. Angels appearing at the hour of death 434. Antichrist what
wonderful slaughter he shall make at his coming 358. Apostles called by Jesus
225. their miraculous doings 251. Archilaus, Herodes son how he ended 275.
Arist rus a Gentile, what testimony he gives to our scriptures 79. Ascension
of Christ proved 243. Atheists of old time 34. what Zeno said of their deaths
(...). 9. Two causes of Atheism in these our days 862. S. Augustins most
notable conversion 620.
B
S. John Baptists behavior to Christ, and the whole story proved 118. Beauty
how vain a thing 706. Beginners in Gods service chiefly by God cherished 596.
how they must behave them selves 619. The better men they are to be
afterward, the greater co^flicts they have at their conversion 617. Benefits
of God bestovved upon us 407. Bethleem appointed before for Christ's Nativity
209. Bondage and slavery of wicked men to their sensuality 607. Books of
devotion mere profitable then of controversies praef. 6. a. only written by
Catholics 9 a. why they can not be vvrite^ by Heretics. Ibid. 22. a. Buny
how he has set forth this book of mine, praef. 10. b. why he dedicateth the
same to my L. of York Ibid. 8. a His ignorance 8. b. He makes his adversaries
to speak like him self Ibid. 11. a. He inserteth pare^theses Ibi. 11. b. He
makes marginal notes Ibid. 12. a. He thrusts out Ib. 14. a. He mangleth Ib.
15. a. His foolish pacification Ibid. b.
C
Catholic, what it means and why: invented 305. who is a good Catholic
308. Charitable deeds of our forfathers 343. Christ promised diversely 141.
promised as a spiritual and not a temporal K. 144. promised to be God and man
152. that he should change Moses law 162. how he was fortold to Gentiles
169. false Christ's diverse 203. Christ's birth and infancy 207. Christ's doctrine
what it was 220 his Passion and Resurrection 229. Christian Religion proved,
pa. 131. It has been in substance from the beginning of the world and none
ever saved but by it, 134. The definition of a good Christian. 338. Christian
faith can not be obscure 300. Christian vvisdome vvherin it stands 340.
Christian vocation how perfect if it were fulfilled 344. Church of Christ
how it increased straight after he departed 246. Clemency and mercy how
wonderful in Christ. 558. Concupiscence and what misery it brings men unto
by yielding thereunto 334. Consideration. See the whole Chapter. page 1. See
inconsideration. Consolation internal of Gods servants 595. the force thereof
593. Conversion how it ought to be made 619. Item 628. Why it avails not
ordinarily, when it is made at the last instant 835. The watch of
Christians, the door vvherof is Consideration 13.
D
Death how terrible it vvil be. See the whole 10. chap. 419. the causes of
misery to worldly men in the same 413. the frequent premeditation of death
most profitable 440. Delay of our conversion from day to day how dangerous and
hurtful. See the whole (...) chapt. par. 1. the cause: why the devil
persuadeth us to delay 819. Despair of Gods mercy how grievous a sin and
how to be avoided, chap. 1. part. 2. page 523. 524. 525. etc. How to resist
al temptations of the devil thereunto page 561. 562. etc. Difficulties which
are imagined in virtuous life removed. See all the 2. chapt. 570. Doctrine of
Christ what it was 220.
E
The End for which man was created cha. 3. pa. 110. Enemies of Christ and
Christians what end they have 274. Eternity what a thing it is and how to
be esteemed 470. Evangelists of Christ's did write most truly 258.
F
Fatherhood what a thing it is by comparison of God tovvarde mankind. 533.
534. etc. Faith is easily discerned in Christian religion which is the true,
301 at large. The way to avoid al error in belief 303. Faith without
works is not sufficient. Fear of Gods judgments necessary 398. lack of
fear proceeds of infidelity 406. the force of Fear 445. the praise of true
Fear 810. two kinds of Fear 813. Felicity of man and beasts 54.
G
Gentiles, how they had Christ fortold unto them 169. unto 184. Holy Ghost
what he did at his coming 247. Glorified bodies have 7. privileges 495. God,
is proved against Atheistes 25. God proved one, by all sectos of Philosophers
51. Grace of God how strong and forcible 579. 580. etc.
H
Hardness of heart how dangerous an impediment 867. two degrees they of ibid.
Heaven and the rewards there resorued, see the whole 12. chapt. How the
greatness thereof is found out 483. Heaven how it is bought 515. Heresies how
they first rose and why and how they are avoided 306. two causes of Heresies
with their effects 311. Heretical practice in corrupting books prefat 9. b.
Heretical pride Ib. 16. Herod Ascolonita or the elder what he was, how he
rose and how he lived 189. how miserably he died 124. 8: 274. Herod Antipas
or the second, his end 124 and 175. Herod Agrippa how he died 125. and 276.
see the death of Herodias Ibid. Hell and the names and nature thereof 456. The
intolerable pains thereof 459. Honor of the world how vain 701. Hope in
the good and bade how different 599.
I
Ievvishe nation how obstinate against Christian religion according as was
foreprophetied 184. how they were chastened and destoyed 278. 279 etc.
Ignorance voluntary how grievous a thing. pa 8. 9. Immortality of the soul
proved, and thereby also God: being 47. Inconsideration, so chap 1. pa. 1. The
danger thereof 1. the cause thereof, sensuality or willful obstinacy 2. 3. 4.
etc. vvhv men do fly the same. 9. 10. the commodities and effects thereof 14.
15. Ingratitude intolerable of men toward God 4. 5. Judgment day, see the
whole 7. chap. 349. why two Iudgemantes are appointed 353. Justice of God
how terrible and severe 799.
L
Labor appointed to man by God 336. most necessary both in the old and new
testament 337. Liberty and freedom of soul how singular it is in good man
605. Life and conversation of Christ what it was 222. what it ought to be in
true Christians 320. at large. Good life has two necessity parts 324. Love
of God toward mankind how great it is and how it may be seen 529. 530.
etc. at large; so also the causes and effects thereof ibid. The force of lone
in good men toward God 586. 587. etc.
M
Magnanimity and true Christian fortitude 673. Magi there coming prophetied
and the story proved 212. how long they were in coming, ibid. Majesty of
God how wonderful 400. Man's final end, chap. 3. page 110. Martyrs of the
primative Church how vvo^derful 264. Mathematique only has no proper means to
proud God 35. Mercy of God infinite and above al sins whatsoever, see the
whole first chapt. part. 2. page 523. Miracles of Jesus 223. Monastical life
why and when it was begone 339. old Monks what austeritie they used 331.
Moral Philosophy how it proves God 48. Moses particulerly considered, what
manner of man lre was 68. Moses law vuperfect and to be changed 163.
N
Natural Philosophy how it proves God 36. Negligence how great an
impediment to our conversion 860. how it brings men to Atheism 861.
O
Oracles of Gentile Gods how false and uncertain It. what they fortold of
Christ before his nativity 181. when and how the ceased 268.
P
Passion of Christ proved 229. Peace of mind and conscience in the virtuous
how great a matter 597. Philosophy proueth-God 35. sour sects of old
Phllosophers confessing one God 51. Pilate how he died 277. Pleasures of this
world how vain 715. Porphyrie a great enemy of Christians, yet what he
confesses of Christ 223. and again 273. Presumption how dangerous and
detestable to God see the 6. chapt. part. 2. page 793. Principles to be supposed
in all sciences without proose 25. The prophesies of scripture how they prove
the scripture to be of God, page 81. what manner of men our Prophets were
68. 98. how devils may prophetie 81. Proclamation that Christ made at his
coming 250. the Proclamation or publication of the law of good life with
how great dread 350. Punishments after this life. See the 11. chapt. 444.
Purgatory proved with the greatness of the pains thereof 452. the fear that
old Saints had of the same. 454.
R
Rabbis among the Jews of two sorts, Cabalistes and Thalmudistes 157.
Redemption what a benefit 409. Religion what it means and signifies 132.
no man ever said but by Christian Religion from the beginning of the world
134. Resisting of sin how it ought to be 316. Resurrection of Christ proved
235. Revvard expected by the just how great a consolation 613. Riches how
vain and perilous 711. The Roman Monarchy fortold 188.
S
Scepter of Judah how it, pphetied, of and when it failed 191 Sciences each one
proves God 35. four principal Ib. Scriptures, their certainty proved by
many arguments 62. 63. confirmed by Ge^ntiles 100. Sensuality how dangerous
2. Sibyls what they were and of their prophesies touching Christ, at large
174. Sin how it is to be resisted 326. sin has 3. degrees 327. of the
nature of sin and sinners see the 8. cha. 378. Why every Sin is so hateful
to God and deserves infinite punishment 384. the losses that come by Sin
390. Sloth how great an impediment to the true service of God 853 four euel
effects thereof 854. The souls immortality proves God 47. how many things
the soul attends unto at one time. Spirits subdued by Christ and Christians
in the primative Church 267. Star of the Kings forprophetied and proved 213.
T
Temple of Jerusalem twice builded 192. 193. etc. The prerogatives of the 1.
temple 195. of the 2. 196. Time how precious while it indureth 476. Tradition
of learning among Jews and Gentiles from the beginning 171. The true
scriptures known only by Tradition 273. Tribulation what it works, page:
631. good men must suffer 634. the causes hereof 641. Why it should be
occeaued ioifully 656.
VV
Wickedness and wicked men how fullof misery 611. VVisdome of Christians
vvherin it consists 340. vvisdome of the world 703. VVooing which God uses
toward a sinner 542. The worlds vvrong course 118. worlds vanity and
misery, see all the 4. chap. part. 2. page 688. VVorldlinges lament when it is
to late 120. Works necessary besides faith 314. the diligence of old
Christians in vvorking while they had time. 342.
V
Vain glory what a vanity 696. Vision of God makes souls happy in heaven
499. Vocation what a benefit 411.
Y
Yoke of Christ's how svvet and easy 584.
FINIS

