THE END OF THE PERFECT MAN.

A SERMON PREACHED AT the Burial of the right Honorable Sir ROBERT SPENCER
Knight Baron SPENCER of Wormeleighton, November. 6. 1627. in Braynton Church in
Northamptonshire,

BY RICHARD PARRE Bachelour in Divinity, and late Fellow of Brasen-nose
College in Oxford, now Rector of Ladbr^^k in Warwickshire.

OXFORD, Printed by WILLIAM TVRNER Printer to the famous University. An. Dom.
1628.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, Sr WILLIAM SPENCER, Knight of the Bathe, Baron of
Wormeleighton.
Right Honorable and my very good Lord,
VOuchsafe to accept that which was both conceived, and brought forth at Your
Lordships Command; you have given it a being, it now craves your protection;
and the rather because it brings you at once a testimony both of my Obedience
and weakness.

The Piety and Worth of our late noble Lord, Your worthy Father (now with
Christ, deserved, (I confess) a far more learned Pen, though had not need
of any: it is the Privilege of Virtue and Religion, to be their own
Pannegyrists, -- habent opera suam linguam (says S. Cyprian) and suam
facundiam tacente lingua, -- they have not only tongues of their own, but
eloquence, and in a powerful silence proclaim themselves.

It Is therefore a superfluous labor to endeavor to preserve his memory in
these poor paper monuments, who still lives in those walking images of
Himself, his religious and hopeful Children; still lives in the sad hearts of
the poor and naked, whom his Charity has so often fed, and clothed: in that
neglected virtue of Hospitality, (for justly may it preserve that Name into
eternity by which it self lives; which in this cold dotage of the decrepit
World, and perpetual frost of Charity, would be benumbed or starved, were it
not entertained and cherished by that honorable Name of Spencer and some few
others:) but in this Your Honor will satisfy the world, who believes You as
truly to succeed Him in his virtues, as possessions; and in his pious and
religious Examples, which ever surviue their Authors Funerals, they have a life
of their own, or rather an immortality, by which they not only continue unto
posterity, but powerfully persuade to imitation.

But since it has pleased the dead to appoint a Sermon, and the living to make
choice of my self (the most unworthy of Gods Ministers, none being more
conscious of his own defects, none more willing to serve this Honorable
Family according to his weakness) I have studied to fit my Sermon, to his
Funerals. He did not affect Pompam funeris, as Hierome speaks ad Paulam upon
the death of Blaesilla: nor I Pompam Sermonis; here is no Rhetoric used to
move the passions and affections, which are the stoppes and fretts of the
Soul, to be fingred by the Art of a powerful Orator: I know the times we
live in to be critical and touchy, and that our Funerallists frequently
endeavor to teach sorrow to be eloquent, an age wherein an intemperate
curiosity of style is become not only a humor, but a disease; for my part I
have chosen (in a pious obserua^ce of that plainness he required) rather to
satisfye the desire of the dead, then the curiosity of the living; and
therefore I do not (as the old Romans used) laudare defunctum pro rostris
(to speak with Suetonius in his Julius Caesar, Shindleru^*
) nor have I painted his Sepulcher (like those ancient Jews;) no, I appeal
unto the world if I may not justly take up that of Bernard, testimonium
veritati praebeo, non affectioni.

If any accuse this poor Piece, as Lucilius did the writings of Fabianus
Papirius; for to plain, I must borrow that Apology which Seneca made for him,
mores ego, non verba composui, and animis scripsi illa, non auribus; Seneca ep.
100.


That divine Moralist commands his young Lucilius, that he should ever suppose
Cato or some of the stricter Stoickes, a beholder of all his actions, Sen. ep.
11.
thinking the conceit of such an awful presence, a sufficient direction: Your
Honor needs go no further then the happy memory of your blessed Father
either for direction or pattern. Suppose you him bespeaking his Children as
Valerius Corvinus did his Soldiers, Facta mea vos imitari vellem, nec
disciplinam modo, sed exemplum: take out the Lecture, and go on (great Lord)
in those virtuous and pious courses he has trod before you, and that God,
with whom he now reigns in glory, prosper and protect you in all your
actions, guide and direct you in all your ways, crown you with the blessing
of peace here, and with a Crown of glory hereafter: this shall ever be the
prayer of him who is, and professes still to continue

Your Honors in all humble duty and observance RICHARD PARRE.

The Preface.
IT was the great wisdom and care of our Honorable and religious Lord, now
translated from Earth to Heaven, Made about three years before his death.
in his last Will and Testament, to give directions in several passages unto
us, who are the Actours in this last Scene, of his decent and Christian
Burialls.

First for his blessed soul, that he voluntarily resignes and bequeathes into
the mighty hands of GOD his Creator; into the gracious arms of GOD the Son,
his Redeemer; and into the comfortable fellowship of GOD the Holy Ghost his
sanctifyer: Three persons, but one GOD, blessed for ^uer.

His blessed soul thus bequeathed to be admitted into the Congregation of the
sacred Trinity; into those celestial and everlasting habitations. Then he
commends the care and charge of his body to his surviuers with these ensuing
directions in many circumstances.

First, for the Vbi or place, where it should rest, Secondly, for the manner
(How) it should be brought to its place of rest: And then, he directs us in
this sacred business, or action, I mean, the preaching of this Sermon.

For the first circumstance, the Vbi, or place of rest, it is in the womb of
this holy ground; Braynton Church in Northamptonshire.
and more punctually, in that honorable and rich Monument with his elect Lady,
and beloved Wife; whose Christian death and dissolution divided their bodies,
not their souls: He lived a Widovver 30 years.
witness those many years he has spent as a mourner of her Funerals;
witness that individual Monument for them both, to testify to the world,
that happy union, of which, neither life, nor death could cause a disjunction.
Thus did the spark of his neuer-dying love, guided by a divine providence,
kindle and inflame his heart with a desire, not only of dying in the same bed
on earth, but also of lying in the same bed under earth: where they might dwell
together again, as in a house of safety and peace, until they rise jointly to
a joyful and glorious resurrection.

And as we are thus confined to the Vbi, or place of rest: so are we restrained
in the manner (How) he would be brought thither, not in the pompous train of
Heralds, and glorious Ensigns, nor in dumb ceremonies, and superfluous
shows, but in a decent and Christian manner, without pomp These are the
words of the Will.
or superfluity.

And as we are thus confined in one Circumstance, and restrained in another: so
are we prescribed in the third place for the preaching of this Sermon, in the
face of this Congregation, whilst he wills a Sermon, not a Panegyric clothed
in the colors of Rhetoric, nor yet a Funeral Oration, to blazen his
Honors, to hyperbolize in his praises, or to draw a glorious line of
Progenitors. No. Mallet precibus in coelum ferri, quam plausibus; as his soul
went up to Heaven in praying: so he had rather his body should be entombed in
preaching, then in unjust and ouer-praising. Therefore he wills a Sermon for
the advancing of Gods glory, a Sermon for the instruction of his Children, and
friends in the fear of God, and to stir them up to These are the words of
the Will.
live well, and dye well: which by the grace of God we shall do, out of the

37. Psalm. at the 37. Verse. Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright, for
the end of that man is peace.
FInis coronat opus: It is the end that crowns the work or action, and not
that alone, but truly distinguishes the person: pass by the house of God a
little, and walk upon the stage of the world, there mark and behold the
promiscuous actions of all persons, and we shall find little difference
betwixt Ethiopians and true Israelites, betwixt true Christians, and
counterfeit formalists, betwixt him that offers sweet incense in the Church of
God, and him that sacrifices blood in the Devils Chapel; Look upon Cain and
Abell for the outward action, both are sacrificing: Look upon Esau and
Hezechia, both are weeping: Look upon Achab and Mordecai, both are in
sackcloath mourning: Look upon Saul and David, both are confessing: in a word
look upon the righteous and the wicked, both for a time (perhaps) are like
green bay-trees, flowrishing: but mark the end, that crowns the action,
that, distinguishes the person; The end of the ungodly is, what? 2 Verse. 39.
He shall be rooted out at the last: but for the godly and upright man his
end is crowned with the blessing of Peace. Mark the perfect man, and behold
the upright, for the end of that man is peace.

The parts are 3. 1. An iniunction, Mark and behold. 2. The object or person,
the perfect man and upright man. 3. The motive, or reason, for the end of that
man is peace.


Resolve these 3. parts into these 3. Queries:

Secondly,

Thirdly and lastly,

We begin with the first Querie, what (...) the perfect man is; or how far
a man in this life is capable of perfection? For the resolving of this Querie,
part. 1.
in the first place, the Roman Doctors distinguish thus. Perfectio alia est
praecepti ac meriti, alia consilij and supererogationis. vi. Aquin: 2.2. quae
184. Art. 2. and 3.
There Is a perfection of precept and merit, and a perfection of Counsel, and
supererogation; the perfection of precept and merit, they determine to be in
omnibus iustificatis, and saluatis; but the perfection of counsel and
supererogation agrees only to some which aspire higher, not only to save
themselves, but others, as monastical votaries. Surely this is the generation
of men, of whom Saint August. complains, Sunt quidam inflati, Aug. de vcibis
Apost. s^rm. 29.
etc. there are some like vessels blown up with wind, filled with a haughty
spirit, not solidely great, but swollen with the sickness of pride, who dare
be bold to say, that some men are without sin, whereas there own Caietans
rule is most Catholic: damnatum est peccatum, non extinctum: Sin is
condemned in some, in none extinguished. And as Saint August: brands such men
with the spirit of haughtines, and pride: so does Saint Bernard bequeath unto
them a miserable woe, S. Bern. sermon. contra vitium ingrati.
Vae generationi huic miserae, woe to this miserable generation, to whom their
own insufficiency seems most sufficient. Would but the indulgent Rhemists
learn from these ancient Fathers, they would not interpret our Saviors
(vade, Mat. 19.21.
and vende) of a perfection both of merit and supererogation: both which kinds
of perfection distilled from Roman brains, we of the Church of reformation
deny and reject, distinguishing of perfection, thus. The perfection which in
sacred Scriptures, and ancient Fathers, is attributed to holy men of God for
their righteousness, and good works is either Extrinsecall, Vid. Zanch. tom.
6. comment. in cp. ad Phil. c. 3. v. 15.
or Intrinsecall.


Perfection Extrinsecall, adventitious, or by way of condonation, is, when that
which is imperfect in us, is freely pardoned by God, for Christ's sake,
according to that of S. Aug: S. Aug. lib. ^. Retr. cap. 19.
Omnia Dei mandata facta deputantur, Aug. 19. de ciu. Dei. c. 27.
quando id quoth non fit ignos^^^ur: all the commandments of God, are deputed
performed, or done, when that is freely forgiven which is undone: And again,
such is our righteousness or perfection in this life, that it consists in
remissione peccatorum potius quam in perfectione virtutum: rather in the
remission of sins, then in the perfection of virtues.

Secondly Intrinseccall perfection, or perfection by way of inhesion, is either
absolute, which is nothing else, but sincerity or simplicity of heart, opposed
to hypocrisy, or double dealing with God; in which sense Job is said ( Chap.
1.1.) to be (...), a perfect man: or else it is comparatiue in a certain
respect, or by way of comparison with others, and so Noah is said to be
perfect: ( Genesis 6.9.) but with this addition (in generationibus suis) that is,
Genesis 6.9.
he was very righteous and perfect in respect of others, that lived in those
lewd, and godless times; so Saint Paul elegantly expresses himself. We
speak wisdom amongst those that are perfect. 1. Cor. 2.7. i. amongst them
which have a greater measure of grace, 1. Cor. 2.7.
and knowledge then most of you have: for otherwise, if we speak of absolute
perfection, he is absolutely against it, Phil. 1.12.
and confesses of himself, S. Aug. in Ps. 38.
that he had not attained unto it, ( Phil. 3.12.) And Quis sibi arrogare id
audeat, quod Paulus ipse fatetur se non comprehendisse? S. Bernard in Cant.
sermon. 49.
S. Bern. super Cant. sermon. 50. And as for that seeming contradiction raised
out of the 15. verse. implying in himself, August. de tempore sermon. 49.
and exhorting others to Perfection, Saint August, wipes it away with this
short distinction. S. Paul was perfect secundum intentionem, non secundum
preuentione^: perfect, in regard of intention, and purpose, not in regard of
prouention, and obeying his purpose: And Saint Bernard is no less plain, and
peremptory in the case, Magnum illud electionis vas perfectum abnuit,
profectum fatetur. That great chosen vessel of election graunts profection,
that is, a going forward, but denies perfection. Well then does Saint Augustine
conclude the point. Perfectio hominis in hac vit a est, invenisse, se non esse
perfectum. The perfection of man in this life is, to find, and acknowledge
himself not to be perfect. How the Law is possible or impossible to be
perfectly fulfilled. See the Protesarts Appeal by Thom. Morton, D. of
Divinity, and new Lor Bishop of Couentry and Lichfield. lib. 5. ca: 12. sect 2.
And as for the cloud of witnesses which scemes to rise up against this
truth in sacred Scriptures: Genesis 17.1. Deuteronomy 18.13. Matthew. 5: 48. 2: Cor.
13.11. Ephesians. 1.4: 5: 27. 1: P^t: 1: 15:
Saint August: supplies us with several answers which he reduces to these
several heads.

1 First, he answers, that some of these places are exhortations, and
admonitions, whereby we are stirred up so to run the race which is set
before us, S. Aug: lib: de iustitia Christi contra Coelest tom: 7: S. ^ugustins
four ways of answering such Scriptures which seem to plead for an absolute
ob^dience to Gods will and Commandemen^s
that we faint not, though we cannot attain unto it; for in laws and
admonitions that is not always required. Vt tantum praestari possit quantum
suadetur: that so much should be performed by us, as is enioyn'd to us: but in
them is showed unto us Quousque conari oportet: how carnestly we ought to
strive and follow hard toward the mark for the price of the high calling of
God in Christ Jesus.

2 Secondly, he answers, that many of these places do show unto us, not what,
we (now) are, but what we shall be at the end of our pilgrimage, for then, we
shall be perfect when we arrive at that haven whither we bend our Christian
course, or race.

3 Thirdly, when the Scripture mentions men that are perfect, and immaculate,
we are to understand by them such men, who have not defiled their garments, or
polluted their consciences, with gross and damnable enormities; in this sense,
many of the Saints of God are said to be perfect, not that they are without
sin, (which is impossible) but because, it reigns not in their mortal
bodies, or because they have not wallow'd with the swine in the mire, but kept
themselves unspotted of the world.

4 Lastly, the Saints of God are said to be perfect, and without blame, and
reproof; nay, innocent and blessed, because their sins are not imputed unto
them, but freely forgiven in, and for Christ: for so it runs. Blessed is the
man whose wickedness is forgiven, and unto whom the Lord imputes no sin.
Psalm, 32.1. Psalm. 32.1: a S: Aug. in Loc:
Which sweet passage Saint Augustine makes to excel all others read unto us
in the Church militant, for the fitting, and preparing of a dying soul for the
Church triumphant: and good reason for it; for, what the Lord forgiues, who can
require? what he imputes not, who shall bring it out, against us, to
judgment? Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen? Romans 8.33.
it is God that justifies: and how? not only by taking our unrighteousness
from us, but by giving us his own righteousness, for Christ Jesus is made unto
us wisdom and righteousness. 1. Cor. 1 30. This righteousness being ours by
the free gift and imputation of God, is not now, alienased nostra iustitia. 1.
Cor. 1.30.
But not to loose the point on foot, i. how far a man in this life is capable
of perfection: There is (ye know) a perfection of parts, and a perfection of
degrees: Perfectio Parti^ and Graduum.
The former is when a man has respect to all the Commandments of God, not
allowing himself in the breach of any of them: the latter perfection, is, when
a man performs all exactly, as the Law in rigor requires; he that is perfect
the first way may be resembled to a weak and feeble child, that has all the
integrall, and perfect parts of a man, but not perfectly, or (to speak with
the Logicians) integraliter, integrally; again, he that is perfect the latter
way, may be resembled to a strong growne-man that has all his parts in
perfect vigor. To apply then, we may be perfect the first way (i.) a man may
have perfection of parts, How a man in this life may be said to be perfect
said to (...).
because he may love every good, and hate every evil in some measure: but the
second way we are not perfect, (i.) a man cannot have a perfection of degrees,
because he can neither love good, nor hate evil as be should; the first
kind of perfection then, we grant; the second, we deny: neither that, as
touching exact performance continually, but as touching constant resolution
habitually. Neither is this al we understand by perfection, or have to say for
the perfect man, by whom, in a second place, we may safely understand the
innocent man, so the Septuagint reads it. The innocent man.
Custodi innocentiam, keep innocence, or mark the innocent man, the man that
makes a covenant with his eyes, and whose hand is not imbrued in violence, the
man* that is as innocent, Job. 31.1.
as a dove, Math. 10.16.
that wrongs no man, oppresses no man, but as much as in him lies does good
unto all men.

Perfect bonus est, and vere dicitur insons,
Nec sibi, nec cujquam, quod noceat faciens.
The simple and plaine-dealing-man.
Again, by the perfect man, we may safely understand the simple and
plaine-dealing-man, the man that is simple concerning evil, for so the vulgar
reads it custodi simplicitatem; keep simplicity, Romans 15.19.
or mark the simple and plaine-dealing-man, who in simplicity, and godly
pureness, not in fleshly wisdom has had his conversation in the world: this
simple man dissembleth not betwixt God and man, 2. Cor. 1.12.
neither is he in the number of those, of whom the Poet complains.

Ore aliud, tacitoque aliud sub pectore condunt. Not he minds the same thing,
he speaks the same thing, he does the same thing, without any respect of
persons, though it be to his own prejudice, or hinderance.

Lastly, by the perfect man we may sarely understand, the man who is, Integer
vitae, scelerisque purus, a man of integrity of heart, The sincere man.
and of a pure, and upright conversation, for so Iunius and Tremelius read it,
Obserua integrum in the concrete, and the Chaldee paraphrase in the abstract,
Obserua integritatem mark the integrity of the perfect man. This grace of
integrity of the heart, and inward affections is exdiametro opposed to
hypocrisy, dissimulation or double dealing with God: God loves truth in the
inward affections: and if God love it, we must love it: and why? because, in a
conformity with God, stands man's felicity: In this integrity of heart and
truth in the inward affections are two things; holiness and sincerity,
opposite to sin, and hypocrine: we must write holiness unto the Lord, or
else we shall never see God: we must season all our actions with the grace of
Sincerity else we shall never please him: but the speculation of these two
graces, holiness and sincerity: will be more clear in the view of their
opposites, finne and hypocrisy.

Peccatum sin, in the School of God, is taught to be an exorbitancie, a
swaruing from the rule of truth, What sin is.
a transgression of the law: and sin in the Schools of men is taught to be
mendacium, a lie, and to lie is to go against the mind, or for the tongue te
give to the heart the lie; in shedding of blood, the hand only lies, or is
false to the heart, and in a common lie, the tongue only lies against the
heart: but in hypocrisy is a general lie of the whole man: not the tongue
only, lies to the heart, but the eye, the hand, the knee, and the foot also;
the hand is lifted up to heaven, the eyes look up to God, the feet go, the
knees bend and bow in the Temple of GOD, but where is the heart? does that go
along with them? no! The heart of the covetous man. is where his treasure is;
the heart of the ambitious man, is, where his honor is: and the heart of a
voluptuous man, is, where his pleasure is, -- Haec tria pro trino numine mundus
habet, this is the trynitie which these worldlings worship: for although their
feet go, and their knees bow in the Temple of God, though their eyes and
hands be lifted up to heaven, yet their hearts are groueling here on earth; it
is the policy of sin to imitate sincerity, and the guise of hypocrisy to
follow the fashions of integrity: the heirs of darkness transform
themselves into Angels of Light, and Bastard Christians can counterfeit perfect
men's behauiours, yet those heirs of darkness are not children of the light,
nor these counterfeit, true Christians: and why? because they come short in
this grace of sincetity, or integrity of heart: The painter can paint the
color of the fire, and the form of the flame thereof, but cannot paint the
heat of it: right so, the counterfeit ca^ rese^ble the perfect Christian in
outward colors, forms and fashions, but not in his integrity of heart, or
truth in the inward affections: Esau can weep bitterly, like Hezechia: Achab
can put on sackcloth, like Mordecay; and Saul can confess in word I have
sinned as well as David: yet neither Esau, nor Achab, nor Saul was (...) a
perfect man: and why? because none of their hearts were perfect in the sight of
the Lord; such hypocrites are the greatest enemies to the Church, and truth,
yet they will seek protection both from truth and Church: So Celsus and
Antiphon writing against the truth, entitle their treatise, the book of truth.
So Romes Proselites under the name of the Church, Origin contra Celsum.
overthrow the Church: Leo tells them truly Bcclesiae nomine armamini, Leo, ep.
83.
and contra eam dimicatis: Such men make conscience and justice the greatest
martyrs in the world; the great man in doing mischief, pretendes justice, the
mean man always conscience: God and a good conscience are pretended on
alsides: thus making good Luthers Proverb, Luther in 3. ad Coll.
In nomine Domini incipit omne malum, In the name of God they Christen all
their actions. But God is the God of truth, and loves truth in the inward
affections, therefore such hypocrisy must needs be an abomination unto him,
it offends him, it grieves his spirit, and at last it shall grieve the souls
of them who are the authors of it, for it shall spoil them of inward joy, and
peace of conscience here, and of eternal joy and peace in the kingdom of
heaven hereafter.

It is storied of Constantinus, surnamed Copronymus, that he was neque
Christianus, neque Iudaeus nec Paganus, sed Colluuies quaedam impietatis, that
he was neither Christian, Jew nor Pagan, but a certain mass or heap of
impieties: and so (indeed) are all hypocrites: with the Jews they salute
Christ as their king, yet buffet him: they protect him with the Christian, yet
persecute him with the Pagan: they are named Israelites, but live like
Aethiopians: they speak with the voice of Jacob, but work with the hands of
Esau, and walk with the feet of Ioab, that any man may perceive not by their
coat, but their party-colored conditions, that they are bastards and no
Christians. But leave we these Hypocrites to their bastard brood, to their
utter condemnation, to their vae, vae, vae, woe, woe, woe, in the Gospel, and
come to our selves, whilst condemnation falls on their pates, would we have
the salvation of God showed on us? then must we with our perfect man in the
text, order our conversation aright, and endeavor to serve God in the grace of
integrity, with clean hands and pure hearts, for who shall ascend into the
hill of the Lord? Psalm. 24.4.5.
even he that has clean hands and a pure heart, he shall receive the
blessing from the Lord, and righteousness from the God of his salvation.

And is there any way or means to know whether we our selves, or others, are
such men of clean hands and pure hearts? yes! Ex fructibus cognoscetis, by
their fruits ye shall know them: for good and godly men are like trees
planted by the river side, which bring forth their fruits in due season. I
demand then? what are these seasonable fruits? Psalm. 1.3.
doubtless, they are good works, and those good worksare of 3. sorts: of Piety
toward God, of equity toward our neighbor, of sobriety toward our selves:
and as the works, so the fruits are of 3. sorts: by the 1. God is glorified,
by the 2. our neighbor is edified, and by the 3. our consciences are
comforted, and co^firm'd in the assurance of salvation, For howsoever good work
sare no meriting causes, yet they are witnessing, effects or assurances of
salvation; Make your calling and election sure: ('it is S. Peter's exhortation; 2.
Pet. 1.10.
) but how? (...), by good works, ( Beza confesses he saw two greek
Manuscripts with those express words of the text:) good works have no place in
the act of justification: for by good works (causatiue) shall not man living be
justified, without good works (consequutiue) shall no man living be saved: Oh
that all disputing about good works were turned into doing, and that every
Christian would take it into his higher consideration, that, although he is not
now justified by good works, yet at that great and notable day of the Lord, he
shall be judged according to his good works. Oh that our fruitless
professors would lay this close to their hearts tell me what have they to
witness for them, that they are Christians? Their tongues and lips say they
are so: but, what say their lives and works? Look upon their unclean eyes,
full of adulteries and lust: harken to their dislolute speeches, full of oaths
and blasphemies: see their polluted hands, imbrued in blood and full of
violence: mark their feet how nimble, and swift, they are to shed innocent
blood: do not these abominations proclaim them to be Pagans, rather then
Christians? they feed not the hungry, they cloth not the naked, they visit not
the fatherless and widows, they keep not themselves unspotted of the world,
and yet these men, would have the honor to be reputed good Christians, (i.)
perfect and absolute men in all good works. But to conclude this point or
Querie, concerning the perfect man: if we tender the great honor of being
reputed such perfect and upright men, then let us be zealous of good works:
and why? because they are the fruits of our perfection, of our integrity and
truth in inward affections: nay, they are the very high ways wherein God has
ordained us to walk: we are his worke-manship created in Christ Jesus unto
good works, which God has ordained that we should walk in them. Ephesians. 2.10.
Ephesians. 2.10. Oh then let us even strive with a holy emulation, to go one before
another in good works, and to abound in them; ye know the Apostles
exhortation. hortation. As long as we have time let us do good, and why?
because when all other things in this world, our pleasures, our honors, our
lands, our livings, our parents, our friends, and whatsoever else is under the
cope of heaven, shall leave and forsake us, yet our good deeds (even so says
the spirit) our good deeds shall follow us, and solicit for a blessing upon
the souls of all perfect men, when they return to the chief shepherd and
Bishop of their souls, Christ Jesus; in whose gracious arms I leave the
perfect man, 1. Pet. 2.25.
and our first consideration of him, and in the next place crave your patience,
whilst we direct your thoughts and devotions to the contemplation of the
upright man. Behold the upright.

Mark the perfect man and behold the upright.

For the upright or just man I find it thus distinguished to my hand: A man may
be said just 4. ways. Pars. 2. (...)


1 (...). 2 (...). 3 (...). 4 (...).
The first way of being upright, or just, is (...), according to nature: and
so no man living was ever just since the fall of Adam. This the Preacher
proclaims (as it were) on the house top, with an asseueration, Certe surely
there is no man just in the earth that does good, and sins not In our last
translation the 20. verse.
Eccles. 7.22.

The second way of being just: is (...), according to the opinion and judgment
of men: such were Moses and Samuel, whose O xe have I taken etc. and they said
thou have not. 1. Sam. 12.
verse 4.

The third way of being just, is, (...), according to purpose and true
endeavor, and thus Saint Paul was just, when he tells us, that he forgets
those things which are behind, and reaches forth to the things which are
before. Phil. 3.13. And as S. Paul was thus just in practice, Phil. 3.13.
so was he in precept, charging every man to give tribute to whom tribute is
due, Romans 17.7.
custom to whom custom etc. just so the Moralists bring in their verdict,
prescribing the just man to give suum cuique, that unto every man which of
right belongs unto him: and this (suum) necessarily implies as peculiar
distinction and property of things: neither does the Politicians pen alone
domonstrate this, but it is the tenor of divine justice. Achab a King may not
take away the vineyard of Naboth his subject, 2. Kings 21.
2. Kings. 21. this is the rule or Canon of Scripture.

Where yet I find a fourth way of being upright or just, which is (...), by,
or according to imputation. Thus Abraham was a just man, he believed and it was
imputed to him for righteousness. Romans 4.3. Here is the opening of the
fountain, Romans 4.3.
or Ocean of Gods ouer-flowing goodness, who in mercy accounts us just and
righteous, in, and for the righteousness of Christ, which is made ours this
way (...) by imputation: he laid on him the iniquity of us all: Esaias 53.6. Our
God accounts our sin, his, and so he is punished as a sinner, Esaias 53.6.
and then he accounts his righteousness ours, and so we are rewarded as
righteous. This is that royal exchange made betwixt Christ Jesus, and all
believing sinners: he becomes a curse for them, that they may be the heirs of
blessing through him. Thus we see what the upright man is every way for our
instruction. It now remains, that we make him our own by way of imitation:
neither is this left to our own choice or pleasure, Note.
to do, or not to do. Noe, the text inioynes it, and by way of authority
commands us to mark the perfect man, and to behold the upright: and the
ingemination or doubling of the iniunction, mark and behold, gives way and
clear passage to this natural observation. That it is the duty of all such,
as desire to be upright and perfect men, to propose to themselves the lives and
deaths of such men, as patterns to encourage the^ on in their Christian
course and conversation.

We have here no abiding city, we are Pilgrims and strangets: if we were not
strangers Non hinc emigraremus (says S. Aug.) we should not pass hence: 2 De
verb. dom. sermon. 32.
but hence we must pass, will we, nil we: and in this our passage, there are
many obstacles which may hinder us: many allurements which may divert us: it is
therefore the goodness and wisdom of God, in this our pilgrimage, to lead
us by the light, and examples of perfect and upright men: taenquam per statuas
Mercuriales. that in the end of our pilgrimage on earth, we may safely rest,
where they do, in the kingdom of heaven: to men of ingenuitie (much more of
grace) good men's examples, and gracious carriages, are powerful and winning
means; thus Isaackes gracious carriage drew Abimelechs, and his friends
affections unto him. Genesis 26.28.
Genesis 26.28. Thus Jacobs religious conversation drew Laban, and put him upon
that earnest suite, I pray thee if I have found favor in thine eyes, tarry:
Genesis 30.27. Neither is it without good ground, that God would have perfect, and
upright men's lives exemplary: for, they are powerful, not only to persuade
imitatio^, but also to enforce approbatio^ from the convicted consciences of
the gain-saiers: No man is so badde, but would conform himself to good
courses, if they crossed not his private ends: and though he speak sometimes
against the life, yet would be glad to die the death of the righteous. Again,
the very nature of man is more inclineable to be guided by Longum iter per
praecepta, breue and efficax per exempla. Sense.
example, then precept: Though precepts, and instructions be more reasonable,
yet exampies prevail sooner, because more obuious and familiar. With what
courage and life do soldiers go on if they behold a Commander engaged in
some noble attempt? his valor makes them courageous, and his example is a
powerful argument to provoke their emulation, emulation puts them forwards to
the imitation of excellent men, as we see in Themistocles, Vale: Max: l. 8.
ca, 15. and in Plau. Apoth:
whom the trophies of Miltiades would not suffer to sleep, until, by his like
worthy acts, he had purchased to himself a like glorious name; and as it is
thus in mere natural men and Heathens: so should it be amongst Christians in
their Christian warfares. Saint Paul takes this to be a most winning course,
and therefore he cries, Be ye followers of me as I am of Christ: 1. Cor.
11.1.
1. Cor. 11.1. Besides these motives, there are two weighty causes more, why
the lives and deaths of perfect and upright men should be exemplarie unto us:
the first is, for the glory of God; the second is, for the justice of God:
first, the proposing of such men's lives as examples to our selves does advance
the glory of God, because, we seeing, or looking on their good works, do
thereby learn to glorify our Father which is in heaven:

Secondly, the proposing of such men's deaths, or ends, makes for Gods justice:
Ne Deus putetur iniquus, (it is the gloss upon the place) least God should be
thought unjust whilst we see the godly to suffer in pain, and the wicked
surfeit in pleasure. For which very cause Epicurus denies Gods providence, not
dreaming of that great day of reckoning, wherein the Lord shall come with 10000
Saints to execute judgment upon all such men, Jude. 15.
or, when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven in flaming fire, to
execute vengeance on all men, that would not know God, 2. These. 1.7.
nor obey the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ: not dreaming, that they who now
surfeit in pleasure, shall one day suffer in pain, and flames of hell fire: if
we have our heaven here, we must have our hell hereafter, Nemo potest and in
hac vita and in futura gaudere: if our way in this world be pleasant and
sweet, we shall not much care for our heavenly Jerusalem Cui peregrinatio
duleis est, non amat patriam. S. Aug. in Psalm. 93.
which is above; it is therefore the lot of the righteous, to sow in tears
here, that they may reap in joy hereafter: they must weep in this vale of
tears, that they may sing and look up with joy unto those hills from whence
comes salvation. God in sacred writ is said to wipe away all tears, and
happy are they that can shed them: he is said to gather, and blessed are
they that scatter them; oh then let all the Epicures of the world wallow
themselves in their sinful pleasures for a season: Let all inordinate persons
put off the evil day and even weary themselves in the ways of wickedness,
and make a progress in sinue, adding thirst unto drunkenness; but let all the
Saints and servants of God run in the ways of upright men, and in patience
wait until the day shall come, wherein in they shall say, verily there is a
reward for the righteous, doubtless there is a God that judges the earth: let
them (I say) in patience wait the Lords leisure, and in patience run the
race that is set before them, run the race of the Perfect and upright man,
least their lives and deaths run to rise up in judgment against them: Let
them so run, that they may obtain: 1. Cor. 9.24:
and what? Coronam gloriae, a crown of glory in one 1. Pet. 5.4.
place: let them so run, that they may obtain, and what? Coronam vitae, a
Crown of life, in another place Revel. 2.10.
: let them so run, that they may obtain, and what? Coronam iustitiae, a
Crown of righteousues, in a third place 2. Tim. 4.8.
; All these Crowns, a Crown of glory, a Crown of life, a Crown of
righteousness, shall God (for his truth and promise sake) as rewards give
unto them, if they propose, and proposing follow in all good conscience the
lives and deaths of perfect and upright men.

Yea, but such men's lives and deaths are rare examples, Ob.
non cuiuis contingit, every man cannot attain to such perfection: what then?
Est aliquid prodire tenus, Sol.
especially toward God, who accepts the will for the deed: Nay, who stands at
the door, and knockes, being more willing to come to us, then we to him.
Yea, Ob.
but such men's lives are full of difficulties, anxieties, and dangers: Sol.
true! but what is the issue? a gracious deliverance, the blessing of Peace at
the last: many are the troubles of the righteous, but the Lord delivers them
out of all. Who would have thought, that when Joseph was in the dungeon, he
should ever have been a Lord to his brethren, or a provident Father to a whole
Nation? Who would ever have thought, that, when Job was scraping his sores on
the dunghill, having lost all his children, al his cattle, all his houses and
goods, he should have bin richer then ever he was? Surely, this is the Lords
doing, and it is marvelous in our eyes: many were the troubles of good old
Abraham, but the Lord delivered him out of all: many were the troubles of good
David, but the Lord delivered him out of all. What shall I say more? many are
the troubles of every perfect and upright man, but the Lord delivers him out of
all: all these troubles shall bring him peace at the last, for the end of that
man is peace, our last querie or circumstance: Mark the perfect man, and
behold the upright, for the end of that man is Peace.

The Schools in their laborinths do wind and turn peace by many
distinctions, Pars 3. Aquinas, 22. q. 29. acric. 1.
and queries: Aquinas in four Articles, makes 4 queries of Peace. 1. Whether
it be the self same thing with concord. Secondly, whether Peace be an effect
of charity? Thirdly, whether Peace be desired of all? And lastly, whether
Peace be a virtue? For the first querie, the verdict is brought in negative;
Peace is not the same with Concord, for there may be a concord amongst the
wicked; Simeon and Leui were fratres in malo, brethren in evil: Amongst the
wicked then, Genesis 49.5.
there may be concord, but there is no peace to the wicked (says my God) Esaias
48.22. The rest of the queries concerning peace will not be so casily
resolved, Esaias 48.22.
therefore I must refer him that desires a farther information, unto Aquinas
22. quast. 29. art. 2.3.4. where also he thus distinguishes of Peace; Pax
Perfecta, Imperfecta.
There is a peace which is perfect, and a peace which is imperfect: The perfect
peace consists in the fruition of the chiefest good, and is the vltimate end of
the reasonable creature, according to that of the Psalmist, Qui posuit tuos
sines pacem, and this kind of peace is not to be had but in the world to come.
The imperfect peace is that which may be had in this world and principally
stands and rests in the contemplation of God and his goodness, yet not without
some repugnancies both within, and without, which disturb this peace.

Hugo de Sancto Victore tells us of four kinds of peace, Duas dat mundus,
Hugo de San: Vict. annotat. elucida: in Psalm. 62. and 84.
and duas dat Deus; The world gives two, and God two: The first Peace which the
world gives, is, the quiet enjoying of temporal things: The second is, the
health, or safety of our bodies: The first Peace that God gives, is, the sweet
tranquillity of the mind; and the second is, that great delight and joy which
we take in the contemplation of God; That is in man, This above man: Again,
there is Pax temporis, which is nothing else but a temporal tranquillity:
Secondly, there is Pax pectoris, Dionys. Ca^^^^ lib. de pace.
which is nothing else, but a rest, or peace of the mind, according to that of
our Savior, These things have I spoken unto you, that in me ye might have
peace: Lastly, there is Pax aeternitatis, which consists in the joys of
heaven, which God has prepared for those that love him. All these joys
howsoever multiplied in themselves, yet they aim at an end in pace: For, finis
ciuitatis huius (says Saint August:) the end of the Saints of God in the
city of God, is, either Peace in eternal life, or eternal life in Peace.

But all this while we have not determined the Querie in the text, what it is
to end, or die in peace: neither can we well conclude that, before we have
taken special notice of two material circumstances.

1 First, of the necessity of dying. 2 Secondly, of the universality of dying.
There is Statute Law for both, which no mortal can repeal, Heb. ^.
Statutum est omnibus, it is appointed that all must once die: Statutum est,
there is the necessity, omnibus, there is the universality.
For the necessity of dying, as sure as we are borne to live, so sure are we
borne to die: Nasci and denasci ordorerum est, to be borne, and to die, is the
order and course of all things: Many men have lived long, long enjoyed the
blessing of length of days, but yet those days have not outlived death: no!
The same spirit of truth which tells us that Adam lived so many hundred
years, tells us also, Gen 5.5.
that he (dyed.) Enos lived so many, and he (died:) Cainan so many, and
(died:) Methusalem so many, and (died:) These men lived many days, and months,
and years, nay, hundreds of years, yet these many days, months, years, and
hundreds of years, could not out-date death, could not free them from the
curse of a morte morieris, thou shall die the death. Hoc singulis additur, Genesis
2.17.
(The note which some interpreters, give on this place is worth the taking up:)
Vt videas efficacem fuisse sententiam mortis a Deo latam in Adamum peccatum,
Caluinus. Cornel: a Lapide, with others in 5, Geneseus.
and posteros eius: (died) is added to every one, that we may see, the power
and efficacy of that doom and sentence, which God gave on Adam sinning, and
on all the sinful brood of Adam, which still lie soaking in the same lees of
corruption, and so much the Hebrew phrase imports, (...) moriendo morieris: i.
thou shall surely die: I need not to travel far for any more examples: only
cast your eyes on this sad spectacle of mortality, and then conclude of a
necessity: for if art or learned industry of Physic could have continued
him, if strength of man could have delivered him, if wisdom could have saved
him, if wealth of man could have ransomed him; deaths arrest had never attach't
him, deaths sergeant had never imprisoned him; if greatness of estate, if gifts
of mind, if chastenesse of life, if sobernes in diet, if wishes of men, if
prayers of the Church could have prevailed for him, if any thing could have
given any advantage against death, darkness and blackenesse had not at this
time covered him.

And as nothing can repeal that statute enacted in the court of heaven for
the necessity of dying, so nothing can alter the decree for the universality
of dying: Statutum est omnibus, all must die: All flesh is grass, and all the
glory of man as the flower of the field, Esaias, 40.6. Lo the condition of all,
Esaias. 40.6.
as well great ones, as mean ones, their glory fades, these wither like
grass, but all meet in dust: The man lives not that shall not taste death:
There is a common lot to all, all must go the way of all flesh; nay! we are
now a posting in the common bark of death, and our life is nothing else, but
Iter ad mortem, a journing toward death; of all things death will not be
out-dared, Theogn.
(...), impudent death, says the Poet, because he fears no colors, spares
none, great nor good.

We therefore should be as impudent, as death to challenge that unto our
selves, which is denied unto all: where are the great Commanders of the world?
where are the rulers over thousands, and 10000: The Princes and Potentates of
the earth; Are not Death, darkness, and the Grave their lot, the portion of
them all? why then in this universal necessity of death should we sue for a
dispensation for our selves or friends? Oh then, Ferrequam sortem patiuntn^
omnes, nemore cuset.
lift up your heads ye drooping souls, who hang them down like bulrushes,
and weep, and will not be comforted, because your Lord, your Master, your
Honorable friend is not, true he is (not) in a prison, but in freedom, he is
(not) in a sea, but in the haven, he is (not) in the bondage of corruption,
but in the glorious liberty of the sons of God; he is (not) in his way, but
in his Country, he is (not) in hope of Heaven, but in possession, and look
how far Heaven excels earth, goods eternal momentary vanities, the joys of
the Saints of God, the delights of the sons of men, so much better is his case
now, he is not then where he was: Oh then, Pereat contristatie ubiest tanta
consolatie, forget your sadness in the midst of such joys, and if these
Consolations (because unseen) will not dry up the Fountain of your tears,
nor cause you to lift up your heads, then think upon the great Comfort which
you saw with your own eyes, his death, his end, which was crowned with the
blessings of Peace, and now at length after much tediousness, give me leave to
determine what it is to end or dye in Peace. What it is to end in Peace. Pax
cogitationis,


To end in Peace with Euthymius, is to end in Pace Cogitationis, in peace of
mind, as it is opposed to doubting.

To end in peace with S. Cyprian, Pax securitatis.
is to end in Pace securitatis, in peace of security as it is opposed to final
falling.

To end in peace with Origin, Pax conscienti^.
is to end in Pace conscientiae, in peace of conscience as it is opposed to
despairing.

To end in peace witholde Iraeneus, Pax mortis.
is to end in Pace mortis, in the peace of death as it is opposed to laboring.

Again to end in peace, is to end in Pace Dei, Pax Dei. Proxim^. Sui.
in the peace of God which passes all understanding (i.) far beyond men's
apprehensions. To end in peace, is to end in pace proximi, in peace with our
neighbors (i.) when no outcries or exclamations follow us: And lastly, to end
in peace, is to end in pace sui, in peace with our selves, (i.) when no
distractions or perturbations of mind molest us. Let happier wits find out, or
invent yet more ways, let them take a Peaceful end or death, which way soever
they will or can, yet a Peaceful death is still the consequence of a perfect
life: and therefore in the next place be pleased to take special notice, what
a necessary and infallible dependence there is betwixt an upright life, Note.
Qualis vita, finis us.
and a happy and Peaceful death.

The day necessarily follows the rising of the Sun, and the night is as
necessary a consequence of the falling of the same; and the same reciprocal
dependence there is betwixt. a good life, and a godly death: I have lived
perfectly (for so the Text argues) That is, I have had (in some measure) a
respect to the Commandments of God; I have lived uprightly, and kept my self
unspotted of the world, what then? why, then I shall have peace at the last,
and so S. Paul argues, I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I
have kept the faith, 2 Timothy 4.7.8
what then? why, henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of
righteousness: Oh then, let us fight a good fight with S. Paul, Let us be
followers of him, as he was of Christ Jesus, that we with him may receive a
Crown of righteousness; The different ends of good and bad lives
Let us keep the faith, and be constant unto death, and then God for his
promise sake shall give us a Crown of Life; Let us dye unto sin, and we shall
live unto righteousness; Let our bodies be the instruments of Gods glory in
this World, and they shall be vessels of honor in the world to come: But if
we live here without grace, then we must look to dye without hope: if we
sell our selves to work wickedness even with greediness, then we must expect
to dye or end comfortless, void of that great blessing in the Text, Peace: I
conclude then with S. Bernards exhortation, Si vis in pace mori, sis servus
Dei, he that will end in peace, must serve the God of peace.

And thus Right Honorable, right worshipful, and the rest heloued in our best
beloved Christ Jesus, I have indeavourd to fulfill the will of the dead, first
in preaching (according to my small measure of knowledge) for the instruction
of the living, and then in stirring them up, (after my plain manner) by
proposing unto their higher considerations, the patterns of perfect and
upright men, the fittest Champions for their imitation. For what man lives
better then the upright man, and what man dies better then the man that dies in
Peace? which was the accomplishment of Abraham's blessing, Thou shall go to thy
Fathers in Peace: Genesis 5.15.
in peace of mind free from doubting, in Peace of security free from final
falling, in Peace of conscience free from despairing, in peace of death free
from laboring, and (which is above all) in the Peace of God which passes all
understanding.

The Sermon is done for the instruction of the living, it now begins for the
honor and commemoration of the dead.
IT has been an Ancient custom in the Church of God for the Fathers to
honor the deaths of Gods Saints, by giving unto them their just and due
praises, that the Living hearing of their good lives and deaths, may learn to
glorify their Father which is in Heaven for them: Thus was Theodosius honored
by S. Ambrose; thus was Athanasius honored by Nazianzene; thus Marcella
honored by S. Hierom, and Malachy and Gerrard by S. Bernard. And yet such has
been the shameful abuse of this Ancient custom in the Church 06 by the
glozing tongues of some Parasites rather then Preachers, that for us it will be
a matter of great difficulty without the scandal and aspersion of flattery,
to speak of him, the history of whose Life and death calls for a Liuie rather
then a Florus, and for a Demosthenes rather then for a Phocion: and yet I shall
remember on what holy ground I stand, and in whose presence I stand; in the
presence of men and Angels, and which is most of all, in the presence of the
Almighty who searches the hearts and reins. If then in such a presence I
willingly call evil good, and apparel Vice in the Liverie of Virtue, then let
my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth: But If in such a presence I speak
the truth, I lie not, my conscience bearing me witness in the Holy Ghost, then
let such a presence witness with me, that our Honorable and right Christian
Lord was (...) and (...), The perfect and upright man in every sense and
interpretation we have made of him.

The perfect man in our first sense or interpretation, is the man who has
respect to all the Commandments of God, not allowing himself in the breach
of any one of them: And that he had such a respect to the Commandments of God

Appears 1 In his love to God. 2 In his love to his Neighbor.


His love to God appeared first by the exercise of his devotion and religious
duties both in public and private, morning and evening. Secondly, in the
great encouragement and countenance he gave to the Ministers of God, by hearing
them with a great deal of attention, diligence and piety, by conferring with
them with a great deal of devotion and humanity, and by his courteous usage of
them, and feeding them like good Obadiah always at his own table with his
children. And lastly, by his building, beautifying and adorning the Houses of
God where he lived: and his exemplar liberality toward the Houses of
Learning, being one of the first that gave his free will offering toward the
building of the New Schools in his Mother University. Oxon,
His love to his Neighbor appeared in reiceuing the poor. He made his House
an Hospital, giving every Monday morning, bread, drink, and money to 15 poor
folks of the neighboring Towns, besides his charitable Alms at good Times,
and his continual relief of them at his gate, he was a good Landlord to his
Tennants, insomuch that when one told him he knew not how to let his Land,
setting it at so low a rate, his answer was, that he had rather a hundred
should gain by him, then that one should cry out that he had undone him. He
was a kind Master to his servants, providing for those that served him
faithfully, that they might live plentifully in their old age, when they were
not so well able to serve. In quieting and ending of differences among the
richer, wherein he was happy, that none desired to appeal from, or went away
discontented at his sentence. Diverse of his friends trusted him with their
whole estates, and with the education of their children, and he ever performed
the trust reposed in him carefully and punctually.

In our second sense and interpretation, the perfect man was the innocent man,
that wrongs no man, oppresses no man, defraudes no man: and then whom has our
perfect man harmed, whose ass has he taken? as Samuel's justification runs
on; nay how many oxen has he given at his gates?

Consider Our perfect man in our third sense or interpretation for the simple
and plain dealing man, and then with whom has our perfect man dealt double?
His plainness and truth sought no corners, used no aequivocation, no mental
reservations, as starting holes, (that is a guise peculiar to Roman
Proselites:) his plainness feared no colors, nor hid it self under the copy
of a fained countenance: no, his rule was the old and Proverbiall rule, Qui
vadit plane, Prove. 28.18.
vadit sane, he that walks plainly, walks safely, and in the end shall dye
(as our perfect man did) Peaceably.

Lastly, take our perfect man in our last sense or interpretation, for that man
who is Integer vitae scelerisque purus, a man of integrity of heart,
uprightness of life and conversation, and then what shall we say of him who
endear oured rather to be good in deed before God, then to be taken only, or
thought to be good before men? who judged zeal by truth in's inward
affections, desiring to approve himself to God in the witness of a good
conscience. Now we may judge of the Conscience, of the truth of the trees by
the fruits, and a good tree is a good man, which brings forth good fruits;
and these good fruits are good works, and then I dare, be bold to proclaim to
the world that our perfect man was a good man because he was fruitful and rich
in good works.

And as he was thus and all these ways a perfect man, perfect in regard of
innocence, perfect in regard of harmless simplicity, perfect in regard of
integrty, and perfect in regard of the mystery of godliness, and saving points
of divinity. So likewise, was he a perfect man in regard of many arts and
sciences, the hand-maides to that Queen and mistress: And for his skill in
Antiquities, arms, alliances it was singular. And for his perfection in
Political and state affairs, that appeared to the world, as often as he was
called to the great Council of the Kingdom, wherein he labored for the
public, employing his best endeavors to advance the good of the King and
Kingdom, which he ever thought to have so strict a relation, that the good of
the one could not subsist without the good of the other: and it pleased God so
to bless him, that both the King and Kingdom had a good opinion of him. Our
late Sovereign King James of happy memory thought so well of him that he
employed him in an honorable Embassage to a foreign Prince, wherein he
served his M^ with a great deal of loyal affection, and was well accepted on
both sides.

And as he had a full measure of knowledge in these things, so did he abound
in understanding and perfection of Oeconomicall business, which first appears
unto the world in the educations of his sons, which was like themselves very
honorable in the Universities, schools of true learning, and sound religion,
whose proficiencie there, both honored themselves and fitted them for
employment in higher places.

Secondly, as his wisdom and understanding appeared in their educations, so it
likewise was conspicuous in their honorable marriages: for the son of his
right hand which succeeds him in his chair of honor. (and long may he enjoy
it to Gods glory, the honor of his house and country it was his wisdom to
plant and ingraffe him into a family which is second to none in true honor
and nobility; Earl of Southampton. Sir George Fane. Sir Richard Anderson
Salust. ep. ^.
and for the rest of his honorable children, he matched them with families
that are every way very honorable in birth, in blood, in education, in
religion: Quae omnibus semper ornatibus ornamento est, which is an ornament to
all the rest, I cannot name these religious families without some devotion, and
therefore my prayer for them all is, that they may continue long in honor,
that they may live in the service and fear of god, and dye in his favor.

But to return to their honorable Father and our right noble Lord, who as he
wisely disposed of all things concerning their esse and been esse in this life:
so likewise in the same measure of wisdom has he ordered all matters
concerning them at his death, bequeathing unto them his Saviors Legacy Peace:
my peace I give unto you, my peace I leave with you, that ye may keep the
unity of spirit in the bond of peace. Thus he lived among them a fair Above
60. years.
age of Peace. Thus he dyed and left the^ in peace. Sic illi visum est viuere,
sicque mori.

Thirdly, his understanding and perfections in Oeconomicall virtues appears in
the well managing of his great estate and menes, wherein God blessed him above
his fellows: It was his great wisdom to make a careful frugality the fuel
of his continual hospitality, which has honored Spensers family and race in
many generations successively: it was a received rule in his Economy, that a
man might better keep a constant good house, then an unconstant vain pleasure.

The last thing wherein his understanding and perfection appears in these
matters, is the well ordering and governing of his household and families: he
kept a great house, and yet an orderly, his servants were all of the same
religion he was of, neither would he keep any that in some good measure did
not live answerably to their profession: that as he was in truth, and not in
show only a perfect man: so they likewise might endeavor to attain that
perfection, recommended unto us by our Savior, Mat. 5, 48. Be you pefect as
your Father which is in heaven is perfect. And so I leave the consideration of
him as a perfect man, and entreat you to cast your thoughts awhile upon him in
the consideration of an upright man.

Behold the upright.

He was an upright or just man many ways, and yet not the first way (...),
according to nature, for so no man was ever just since the fall of Adam: but
he was an upright and just man (...), according to the judgment and opinion
of men, as was Samuel. Again, he was an upright and just man (...), 1 Samuel 12.
according to purpose and true endeavor: for with Saint Paul he forgot the
things which were behind, and reached forth to the things which are before, and
pressed hard toward the mark for the price of the high calling of God in
Christ Jesus.

Lastly, he was an upright, or just man (...) by the imputatio^ of Christ's
righteousness, which gave him an interest to that royal blood which is in the
person of Christ, and makes him both to be an heir of the earth, and to have a
title of inheritance unto heaven.

Thus ye see we have found him to be the upright man many ways, and
discovered him to be the perfect man in several constructions, according to
which perfectness and upright dealing, God for his truth sake blessed him
with a goodly inheritance and pleasant paradize, wherein in grew in abundance
the Apples of Peace, which now we are to gather in the last place.

The end of that man is peace.

And the end of this perfect and upright man was (so) crowned, even with the
blessing of peace: of peace which God gives, and of peace which the world
gives. This consisted in the quiet enjoying of temporal things together with
the health of his body for many years: That, in the sweet tranquillity of his
mind, and in the vnconceaueable joy which now he takes in the contemplation of
Gods beatificall vision.

Again, his end was in peace, in pace proximi, in peace with his neighbor, no
outcries, no accursed acclamations of cruelty and oppression follow his vrne
and ashes. Again his end was in peace, in pace sui in peace with himself,
free from distractions of mind, free from conuulsions of body, like a lamb he
passes through the gate of mortality into a house not made with hands
immortal in the heavens. Mors janu^ vitae.
The pangs of death to him were so easy, that he seemed to find death rather
then to feel it, a blessing which Augustus often wished for Sibi and suis,
Sueton: in vita ejus.
that a glorious life might be crowned with a fair and easy death. This
blessing he obtained in full measure, because he passed away in a
premeditated kind of sleeping, rather then dying, which is to dye the death of
the righteous, for so the Hebrews say of wicked men that they dye, but of the
righteous or Saints of God that they fall a sleep as Lorinus observes well on
Leniticus. And yet the honor and comfort of his death stood not only in this,
that he went away in a sleep gently, but principally in this, that as he
lived in this present world, so he died godlily, for having set aside the
trrafficke of this world which passes away, he trades for an inheritance
which fades not reserved for him in the heavens. Insomuch that his gracious
visitation toward the end seemed far more comfortable, then in the
beginning, Wormleighton.
which was clouded with some more sadness and deiection of spirit, not many
days before his end in peace, (...) macrob: in Some. Scip. lib. 10. cap. 11.
God put a resolution into his heart to visit the place which gave him the
honorable title of a Baron, that his soul might bless the poor there also
before it is loosing out of the body Ergastulum animae, the prison of the soul,
and as in fine it happily proved, this journey was a setting forward toward
the kingdom of heaven, for within the space of four days after his arrival
there, the earthly taberuacle of his body was October. 2^. 1627.
dissolved, and his soul translated from earth to heaven, where our pens
and tongues shall let him rest, only they crave leave to make a short history
of his doings and sayings, in that short respite of life, after his coming to
that place.

His very first act (his private acknowledgment of Gods great mercy for his
safe arrival there being made) was to send for a neighboring minister,
(having left his household Chaplain at his mansion house to wait on's office
with the most of his family) whom he earnestly desires to continue with him
during his abode there, morning and evening to pray with him, and to praise God
for him; that was indeed the behavior, method and guise of his devotion,
throughout the whole course of his sickness, like good Hezekiah when he was
sick, to pray unto God, and when he began to amend to praise God or give
thank unto him.

The next act of his (which does preach to the world his religious end) was a
gracious message he sent to a neighboring minister, an ancient acquaintance
of his, whom notwithstanding his profession he godlily exhorts to prepare
himself, as he did for heaven, entreating him withal to remember him in his
daily prayers, promising to do the same for him in his continual devotions.
And whilst his Catholic charity and devotion thus spread themselves on
others, was he unmindful of his own cause? No; he powers forth his complaints
and supplications for his Gods assistance against such passions as took most
advantage on him in his greatest weakness, disiring withal, his friends and
servants, to construe it not as an argument of displeasure against them, but
rather of his great weakness when he spoke passionately to them in his
sickness.

And as his zeal and faith in Christ did still increase, and the inner man
grew stronger and stronger, so his earthly tabernacle or outward man did
sensibly languish and decrease; for indeed (as it appeared by an ocular
demonstration,) the stock of Nature was quite spent, his glass was run, and
being ripe for heaven, he was gathered like a ripe apple from the tree, and
as he was in his life, Lucerna ardens and lucens, a burning and a shining
candle, so it burned to the snuff: Nec extincta est tamen sed submota, which
was not put out but set aside, In vita Malachiae.
as Saint Bernard spoke of his dead friend: his life was a candle which burned
to the snuff, a snuff which needed not a socket to conceal the stench, no,
at the very last, it was as a precious ointment leaving a sweet persume behind
it.

And whilst that our right Christian Lord was thus dying unto the world, but
living unto God, it was my great honor (being sent for before his Christian
conclusion,) to be an eyewitness to the vpshot of his happiness. D. Clayton
Reg. Profess. Med: Oxon.
It was no sooner made known unto him by his very learned and religious
Physician, that I was come (according to my bounden duty) to do the office of
a minister unto him, but he speaks affectionately, let him come in, let him
come in with all my heart; (and surely God was in his heart, when his minister
was thus the last man in his mouth;) and at my admittance into his presence, my
first posture was on the bended knees of my body, which with the bended knees
of my soul did solicit the God of mercy to bow the heavens and to look
down upon him with the eyes of mercy; and whilst we with devoted hearts and
hands sent our prayers to heaven, not a dew, but a full shower of grace and
heavenly benedictions fell down upon us, for behold the heavens, and the
heaven of heavens were opened, and the Saints and Angels ready prepared to
receive his immortal soul with all ioyfulnesse into their mansions of bliss
and happiness. Thus shall the man be blessed at's death that fears God in's
life, he shall be gathered to his fathers in the words of Piety, in the words
of Prayer, and in the words of Peace, Peace of mind, free from doubting; Peace
of security, free from final falling; Peace of conscience, free from
despayring; Peace of death, free from laboring; and (which is above all) Peace
of God which passes all understanding.

And what now remains, but that we deuote our prayers, that as he rests in
Peace, so ye may remain in Peace, even in Peace amongst your selves, in Peace
amongst your neighbors, in Peace amongst earthly Saints and heavenly Angels:
Lastly in Peace with your God, which passes all men's apprehensions: Now the
God of Peace grant this, and that for his dear sons sake Christ Jesus, to
whom be all honor and glory now and for ever.

Amen.
HOlds yet our shattered world together sound?
Does it not reele and totter, and loose ground
Crumbling toward ruin, whiles deaths fection,
Sickness and war, by troops, or one by one,
Cull's out our worthies, which like Ciment joined
'Its crazed parts together? when we find
A states or bodies principal decay,
Such symptoms presage ruin: And we may
Too justly fear it, when, in peace and war
Death on our best and brau'st preuailes so far.
Death might have seized on thousands else beside
This noble Lord, and the land gratifide.
If they had been our walking magazines;
It had been mercy to draw out their mines
In legacies, and some, perhaps, good deed.
Or had they been strait landlords, who do feed
On their poor tenants marrow, and still think
No rack enough, till the squeezed tenants shrink
To nothing, who with course and heartlesse care
Pray, and so curse them that bred all their care;
It had been mercy, though the successor,
Perhaps abate not ought so racked up; for
All change of torments ease: or had they bin
Some frothy Lords, or featner'd fry, still in
A tracke of fond and triuiall expense
Of coin and time, and of their wit and sense;
These, and ten thousand such might well be spared
Nor would the state, by their death, be impaired.
But when a Noble Lord breathes out his last,
The state sustaines an Earthquake, and is cast,
As to that limme into a Lethargy.
Lords are like stars, which guilt from heavens bright eye
Reflects i'ts splendor, and their influence
On the inferior globe, from their orbs, whence
They diversely dispense it. And when Death
Bereaues a mortal star of his last breath,
The sun wants so much demonstration
Of light, and so much influence is gone
Which cleared the world. And he that could relate
What influence both on the Church and State
Flowed from this Noble Lord, what cheerful light
He shed abroad, to do his Country right,
Whose good he tendered with more near respect
Then ought that on his private did reflect.
What warmth his beams of goodness did impart
To the distressed, sad both in face and heart,
What an unwearied, large, and open hand
He stretched out to the poor, and how his land
Was by their backs and bellies blessed, while they
Like rounds in Jacobs Ladder, sat each day
In troops about his hospitable gate,
Whence laden with his alms, early and late
They hasted to their coats, and timely fed
Their bedrid mates, and infants with his bread,
What bounteous entertainment, and how free
And hearty welcome, every guest might see
Both in his face and house, which for resort
And entertainment was a standing court
Where every honest man, though never so plain
As welcome was, as if a scarlet train
Or silken sail had vsherd him, and he
Might freely speak his mind, and never be
Thought saucy, and command a finer man
To fill him wine, who never would frown and scan
The cups or pains, but would his best afford
To the mean guest, enioyn'd so by his Lord.
How just he was in all his actions,
How free from racking or oppressions,
How far from causing any poor man's groan,
How prone to hear and right the meanest one,
What large rewards and means of liuelyhood
His servant had from him, who understood
And lou^d the service; And how firm a friend
He was, how ready Goodness to defend,
What progeny he left, how trained and bred
To ^^ue and stand the Commonwealth in stead
In any course it stear'd; And how he shone
With Piety and true Devotion,
Which opened and closed his each day. He that could
In fitting terms relate these as he should
To Truths honor and His, and take in all
Which in this large Circumference must fall,
Might write the tru'st and saddest Elegye
Tbat e're appeared unto a blubbered eye;
But the sad Countries face, and poor man's cry
Supply a living lasting Elegye,
By whom, their Patron, and their Patriot,
Though no verse were, will never be forgot.
YOu are deceived, Great Spencer is not dead;
He Is dead, who when he is gone is perished.
He Is dead of whom there is nothing does remain,
Which may remembrance of his life retain.
He Is worse then dead, whose lise had so much blame,
That after him there naught remains but shame,
But glorious great good Spencer never dies;
Who lives well here, sure lives above the skies.
Of gracious Spencer there is nothing lost,
But his sweet presence, which has ^^tely cost
So many a heavy sigh, and tear, and groan,
Whiles he in white, leaves us in sable moan.
His sweet embalmed ashes in their vrne,
Do breed a glorious Phoenix in the turn,
Of Nature into glory, when the mould
Of the new framed World shall never grow old.
Not any power created can unmake
One grain of dust: O then lett's comfort take:
Rest thou sweet Bride, and for thy Brige-groome stay,
Both shall be crowned at the great wedding Day.
Great Spencer live in thy Posterity,
Thy fame on earth, Thou in Eternity.
THe Sun did set, a shower of tears did fall,
A night of sorrow did o're-spread us all.
The cloud did darken all Northampton pale,
And thence did ouer-shaddow all the vale,
And mountains of Great Britain: tears that fell
From English eyes his worth, our sorrows tell.
But blessed be Heaven, a glorious Sun appears,
Which cleares the Air, and all the Country cheeres.
From Englands Center Spencers happy seat,
His wisdom gives light, his goodness heat.
The Church, the Muses, all the Country find
In him that good, which in his Father shined.
Shine long bright Sun, our losses to repair,
And may thy House never want so good an Heir.
An Epitaph.
HEre lies S. Mathewes blessed man, Math. 5.
if ere
Within Earths bowels he intombed were.
Humble in Mind. Verse. 3. and 4.
Mourning these evil days.
Verse. 5.
Courteous and humbly Meek in all his vvayes.
Justice, Verse. 6.
and right he made his meat and drink.
Verse. 7.
His Mercy clasp't the poor when like to sink.
A man of Peace. Verse. 9. and 8
Of heart and conscience pure.
And for his Worth by some he suffered sure.
'Twas his perfection caused our grief; Verse. 10.
His death
A heap of virtues, which did stop his breath.
His goodness robbed us of him; had Gods will
Been like to most, we had enjoyed him still.
(...),
(...).
(...),
(...),
AVlicus, Vrbanus, Musarum docta caterva;
Totaque Spencerum terra Britanna dolet.
Non dedignatur Coelum sibi sumere vestem
Atratam, and multas solvitur in lachrymas.
( Ille pius, iustusquefuit, patriaeque fidelis,
Musis patronus, pauperibusque pater.
Clare vale Spencere, vale reverende Patron,
Et longum splendens vivat imago tui.
Unthankful world, which still imput'st the crimes.
Of thine own folly to these latter times,
As if all things were worse, and Natures strength
Were waste so, that she must sink at length.
If learned Hackwell have not chaung'd this thought,
And proved it is not the time, but thou art naught.
See an Heroicke, who I dare presage,
Our sons will say, lived in a golden age;
Men were but good at Best, nor could they more
Then what was just. Those whom we most adore
Did live at large. Had Mine and Thine been known
In Saturnes days, men would have held their own.
Spencer was great, good, rich, and nobly free,
To show 'twa^ not his wealth was Lord, but he.
His wealth did cherish vvorth, for where he spied
But sparks of infant goodness, there he tried
To raise a flame, and would not let it dye,
But still revived it with a fresh supplye.
Young as I am and vveake, not vvorth the care
Of such an honored Lord, I had my share:
And humbly crave a room to moan his death
Who heartned me and gave my studies breath.
FINIS.

