MODERATVS, The most delectable and famous History of the BLACK Knight:
THe famous City of Florence besieged by the warlicke Goths, and ransacked:
PERDVRATVS the noble Governor thereof with the fair FLAMINIA his loving
spouse, and their young son MODERATVS escape the hands of the cruel
soldiers: their adventures in the wilderness of Apennines: and Duke DEVASCO
his courteous entertainment unto them in Albigena.

Chap. 1.
AFter that the blood-sucking surdes of the warlicke and victorious Goths, had
(with wreckfull revenge) finished their long siege to the mighty city of
Florence, the very flower and beauty of all Hetruria: the valiant Perduratus,
then Lord and Governor thereof, accompanied with his sorrowful wife Flaminia and
his young son Moderatus, pressed in despite of the merciless foes unto the
fields thereunto adjacent. And albeit the beautiful Phoebus had (for very
pity) hidden his bright and shining countenance, under the dark veil of Dame
Nox her clowdie mantell, yet the scortching flames of fyred buildings, like a
bright and Sunnie day, so directed their course through that ruinous and
vastefull carkas (sometimes) of a well-fortified City, that it assured them
more danger to their persons, in discovering their present escapes, then the
benefit thereof being effected, could promise them comfort.

Perduratus, his distressed and loving spouse Flaminia and innocent Moderatus,
by the time Aurora was ready to welcome her best beloved Titan, showing forth
her blushing countenance with a kind of modest shamefastness so to be
discovered, having escaped the danger of their wrathful enemies, sorrowfully
parting with their careful country: yet rather rejoicing so to be sorrowful,
(having avoided so imminent a prejudice) then to become Slaves and Uassalles to
those cruel and barbarous people. And when they had thus past the bounds of
Hetruria, they traveled with greater ease and less care, yet very pensive to
be exempt of such cares, and so to be eased, as counting them happy that had
valiantly sold their lives in defense of their country and common wealth, who
breathing their last, (having their speares-point in their enemies bosom)
lived honorably, and dyed valiantly: whose lives were as full of virtues as
their deaths were of valor. Afflicted thus with treble griefs, that he lived
after so many worthy and resolute men, he wandered certain days in the
deserts of Liguria, yet nothing dismayde with these land Alarums of cruel
Fortune, setting her at defiance with Byas, as knowing her mutable weakness
to be unable to rob him of his patience, which was a strong tower against her
bitter frowns* For even as a dwarffe standing upon the battlements of the
highest Tower, is but of a small stature: and a Giant in the depth of a
dungeon, is of a huge bigness: So a wise man, in what change soever of
Fortune, is ever the same. Thus not greatly waying his own misfortunes, being
so well experienced in worldly accidents, that he knew the highest type of
dignity (sometimes) to be the first step to a perduring misery: but
nevertheless marvelous sorrowful and heavy, for his faithful spouse and
loving infant, who unacquainted with such hard travels, and not so animated by
nature as he, to sustain the weltring waves of such desperate accidents, were
now become very weak and feeble, greatly distressed for want of relief: and
their distress procuring his unmeasurable woe, his woe their despair, their
despair his provident care to provide for their safety, supposing it a
greater policy to dissemble his own grief, thereby to mollify the
extremity of their violent passions, then by any further relation of his
myseries, to aggrauate the same. Therefore as the shellfish Echinus,
perceiving a tempest at hand, does ballist and load him self with the
sands, to avoid the danger of the storm: so he purposed not only to arm
him self with patience, to abide the brunt of this shower: but also with the
precepts of philosophy to exhort them to the same: assaying, as well with his
eloquence, to win them from desperatio^ (whereby to lighten the burden of
their miserable calamities) as earl^ with his invincible and strong arm, he
had saved them from destru^^ion, maugre the wrathful and bloody foes.

The mount Apenninus (which now they had recovered) being thus filled with the
Echoes of their dolorous complaints, metaphisically as it seemed, (moved
thereunto with a kind of pity) repeated again their sorrows in such wise,
that the sound thereof redoubling in the air, could have resolved a tirant his
stony breast to compassion, and a heart made of flint, unto tears. These
mirrours of patient and confident minds, though off-castes of Fortune, having
worn out many days wrapped in this intricate laberinth, wishing rather for
death to determine their hard destinies, then for any longer time to live to
increase their unfortunate miseries. Ianus double faced daughter now cloyed
with their calamities, began to flatter them a little, turning her late frowns
unto smiles, her storms unto calmes, clearing her clowdy countenance with a
fresh preparatiue of some better success, and covering the furrows of her
angry forhead, with a smooth promise of some present relief. For thus it fell
out: the noble Florentine, seeing no other refuge left, armed himself with the
best weapons he had, and leaving his wife and child at a point to famish for
hunger in a very pleasant grove in the wilderness of Apenninus near the Thuscan
sea, he posted up and down the Forest to seek some vittailes, to relent and
assuage the greedy desire of their perishing and hungry jaws: and in the end
wearyed with travel, and missing of his purpose, calling to memory the
multitude of his misfortunes, he began with doleful complaints to breathe
into the air, the sum of all his miseries.

Not far hence, the great City Albigena stood in the very nooke between
the Thuscan sea and this Forest, wherein the noble Duke Deuasco (who was
Prince and Governor over this country of Liguria) seated his Princely
habitation, a man very virtuous and endued with great wealth, being no less a
Cressus then a Numa, who at this time together with certain of his nobles were a
hunting in this forest, where the afflicted Perduratus lay thus wrapped in his
immoderate passions: and this noble Duke being now in hot pursuit of his game,
and singled from all his train, hearing a very pitiful noise, drew nere the
place, where this perplexed Perduratus began to renew his former compla^^es, in
this manner.

A^ wretched and unfortunate Perduratus, the very Map of all mi^rie, and a
perfect mirror of Fortunes merciless mutabilitie: (...) dying shape of life,
and the living shadow of death. Oh cruel Sisters, why do you spare him life,
who, in possessing the same, endures ten times more torment then death it
self? and in being deprived thereof, should enjoy life: if it may be called a
life, to be rid of a multitude of miserable calamities, and euer-increasing
torments? Oh wastefull and destroyed Florence (sometimes my dear country)
which, with these eyes in a small moment of time, I have seen both gallantly
flourishing, and also desperately perishing: lament the loss of thy faithful
Lord, and repeat, O ye wracked walls thereof to our posterities, the valiant
and constant resolution of thy late happy, but now most miserable Governor:
who, had he not respected with tender care, the loss of his loving spouse and
dear child, would rather with his dearest blood have kept Obiit to the happy
ghostes of his slaughtered frindes, then by avoiding the danger of death,
prolong his own Martyrdom. Ah, but while I bewail thus my hard Fortunes, my
distressed charge expecting my relief, are so pinched with penury, that there
is scant any hope left of their recovery: wherefore, it is high time I make
great haste, to lend them some succor: and therewithal hastening his
uncertain and wandering steps to seek some adventures, he was intercepted of
the renowned Duke of Albigena, who all this while (unknown unto him) gave very
attentive ear to all his dolorous complaints, whose heart being melted with
pity, for pure compassion of their miseries, drew nearer the afflicted
Florentine, and with very kind and gentle speeches, ministered a comfortable
confection to his queasie and half spent stomach, promising relief to
repair his wrack, and enquiring for his wife and child whereby to lend them
some succor also.

Perplexed Perduratus starting up with these sudden speeches, like a man
awaking from a fearful dream, perceiving his complaints to be ouer-heard,
and his misery understood, having well noted the comfortable and tender
speeches of Devalco, greatly admiring the rare courtesy of the noble Duke, his
heroical heart swelling with inflamed grief, sent up such gustes of
unquenchable heat, that it dyed his cheeks with fair vermilion, tremblin^
like the fearful Do, after long pursuit having escaped the snatchin^ jaws
of the yealping hounds: yet perceiving him self to be now free from danger,
and in good hope of relief, he plucked up his half ^^nt heart, being lately
entertained with new recovered hope: and the^ with humble and low reverence
he returned him this salutation.

O worthy and renowned Uiceroy, the very lantern of true and perfect
nobility, for that the Title of Honor is always underpropped with compassion
and bounty: is it possible that any humane creature is permitted to know and
relieve my adversity? or am I in a dream, supposing with my frivolous wishes
the shadow to be a substance? can any hope be left to a man so unfortunate? or
shall I perish, notwithstanding this comfort? O ye heavens that erst did
repine at my prosperity, and with your frowning revenge have brought me to
this low Ebb, have you at last (wearyed with my restless mishaps) pitied my
martyrdom, and vouchsafed to send some intermission to my griefs? or else
minded to aggrauate my pain, have intruded this fallible illusion to my sight,
to feed me with a little vain hope? but nevertheless howsoever I be deluded
by the injurious destinies, vouchsafe (O noble Knight) to let me know, to whom
I shall offer and attribute the honor of so rare and worthy a courtesy, whose
virtuous mind is replenished with so great a commiseration of my wretched
estate: and also least in not knowing thee, I should omit some of the duty
that belonged to thy person: and if my ignorance already has procured a
defect, I am in good hope my submission shall merit a pardon. And to satisfy
your desire of beholding that lamentable spectacle, and perfect map of all
calamity, (I mean my wife and child, I will no longer prolong your pleasure
therein, nor defer the good opportunity offered to succor those perishing
innocents, in whose health and safety does consist my welfare.

Deuasco made it not coy to tell him who he was, and to assure him of his
friendly comfort: whereupon Perduratus lifting up his hands and eyes to the
heavens, deuou^ly thanked the gods, that had so happily brought him unto this
place, to be relieved by so gentle and kind a Friend, whose virtuous and
bountiful disposition, was not obscure in any one corner of all Italy. Thus
his Orisons being ended, and ^umble thanks returned to the noble Duke, he
hastened to find hi^ wife and child again, and being followed of the noble
Deuas^^, in the end he came to the grove where he had left them, by the so^^d
of Flamineas voice, who, to comfort her child, at a point to fa^ish for want
of food, in stead of toothsome meat, she dandled him on her knee, and to lull
him a-sleepe, she warbled out this mournful ensuing dittie:

WHat Fortune so fell does foster my fall,
what heaps of grief do grow:
The hope of my stay, is causer I say,
to aggrauate my woe.
Sing lullabie, lullie, lullabie,
sing lulla, lull, lullie.
Lullabie, lullie to rest thee, sweet child,
with sleep dear child rest thee:
It doubles my pain, I still do complain,
if thou be reft from me.
Sing lullabie, lullie, lullabie,
sing lulla lull lullie.
Sith fate is so fell, we can not possess,
the soil which us did rear:
Haste Atropos, haste, my twist for to waste,
to end tormenting fear.
Sing lullabie, lullie, lullabie,
sing lulla, lull, lullie.
Thy danger, sweet Infant, makes me to moan,
and living thus, to die:
If so it be pressed from thy dying breast,
my vital breath shall fly.
Sing lullabie, lullie, lullabie,
sing lulla, lull, lullie.
Flaminea breathed out this Madrigale with such mournful melody, that the very
dead blocks and senseless trees could not choose but be moved with ruthe, the
worthy Ligurian Prince therewith feeling in his breast palpable appearance of
unaccustomed grief, rushed thorough a very thick grove, that detained them
from the sight of that distressed Lady: and having taken a curious suruay of
this Semigoddesse, he supposed her more then humane, albeit her beauty was
very much impa^red with her tormenting agony: her little child was by this
lulled a-sleepe, his Amber-curled locks partly hiding his beautiful visage so
shined (when as Phoebus delighted with his lively beauty stole a look
thereof, through the green boughs of that pleasant thicket) that it dazeled
the eyes of the beholders with reflecting beams from this glorious object.
Deuasco astonished with the sight of their superficial beauties, remained in
such a trance, as if with Perseus shield he had been turned into a stone.

And while the Duke thus confused in mind, beheld this rare spectacle, and
wonderful stratageme of Fortune, (not able for very pure compassion, to
refrain him self from shedding abundance of tears) Perduratus applied him
self to acquaint Flaminea with the bountiful promise of this royal Prince, to
repair the downfall of their slyding estate, the excellency of whose
virtuous and bountiful mind, he highly commended, and stirred her with
thanks to remunerate the same: who driven to an ecstasy for joy of this
unexpected hope, duty compelling her to obey her husbands will, and reason
instructing her to requite liberal promises with thankful words: and deeds,
with diligent endeavor to counterpease the same with the like, though ability
wanted to make any other satisfaction, wherefore she addressed her speech unto
him in this manner.

O worthy Prince, that on the afflicted and poor remain of Florence do
vouchsafe to show such tender mercy and compassion, that otherwise were left
destitute and comfortless of all relief: though no one of all our stock
(whose fames, through the malice of Fortune, is hereafter for ever like to be
committed to the book of oblivion, being now brought from wealthy and rich
Citizens, either to their graves: or living, to be poor and banished abiectes)
be ever able to make any recompense, for this your incomparable kindness
extended unto us, yet the Almighty powers (if there be any reward of pity,
and regard of Justice amongst them) will, I doubt not, gratify so noble a
deed. O my virtuous and bountiful Lord, fortunate are the parents that
brought forth such a fruitful croppe: happy is that Clymate under the which
so rare a wight has his being: and ten times more happy the soil governed
and ruled by such a merciful and loving Prince, whose lively fame shall be a
mirror to our posterities, of worthy exploytes and honorable virtues. The
Duke admiring no less at her wisdom, then erst he had done at her beauty,
was very much disquieted, when he waighed the hard Fortune of such worthy
persons, whose despair to recomfort he thus intends.

Unfortunate Florentines, (if such rare personages, being the ornaments of all
virtuous disposition, may be called unfortunate, how soever maligned by
Fortune, and brought to the highest flood of sorrow, and lowest ebb of joy)
comfort your selves, in that you have already tasted the greatest extremity
of Fortunes malice, which will be a pleasure unto you, to repeat amongst your
friends another day: wherefore, say with Aeneas, Olim haec meminisse iuuabit:
for what sweetness is in prosperity to a man that never has tasted
adversity, or what joy can be pleasing to him that never knew any sorrow?
consider this, and shake off your heaviness: you shall be heartily welcome to
the best entertainment I can affoorde: for I have tasted my self of some,
though not so great calamities, and have learned by proof of mine own pain,
to commiserate the extremities of others misfortunes. Your lack shall be
relieved, and your want supplied: banish despair, and pluck up your hearts:
for now we will make haste to meet my company, who are scattered with hunting
in this forest, that we may return to my palace, to refresh your wearyed
travels. Wherewith Deuasco concluded his speech, and sorrow being banished,
they were joyful and glad on all hands: the noble Prince, for that so good an
opportunity was offered him to intertaine such worthy (though distressed)
guestes, having the Laws of Hospitality in so great estimacion, that he held
it to be the greatest point of honorable virtues, to relieve the needy and
distressed, of what degree soever: much rather those, who were the lively
mirrors of noble minds. And on the other side, the afflicted Florentines
rejoicing in their good hap, having lighted upon so sovereign a salve to their
bleeding sores. And having deliberated upon the matter so far that they were
ready for that time to depart, the Dukes train having missed their Lord, had
sought him very narrowly, and now espying him in the company of strangers,
and drawing toward the evening, they offered their service, according unto
their duty, unto him, whereupon they all returned to Albigena, taking with
them the distressed Florentines: the Duke commanding all his subjects, to use
them with no less courtesy, then if they had been their own natural
countrymen: and commending in special unto the Duchess, the Lady Flaminia,
and her young son Moderatus: whom the virtuous Verosa, for so the Duchess
was called, cherished very lovingly, much delighting to toye with this pretty
little wanton, having also in good regard the modest and civil conversation of
the Lady Flaminia his mother, and therefore made her Tutrix to her own only
daughter, the beautiful young Florida: and the Duke also, having found the
Counsel of Perduratus to be both grave and wise, replenished as well with
politic and civil invention, as peremptory and stout resolucion, called him
to be high Steward of his Province very shortly, wherein he so well behaved
him self, that he was greatly honored for his clemency, feared for his
authority, and generally favored and loved of all.

The Lady FLAMINEA delivered of a fair daughter, whom the Duches DEVASCO
christened, and named VEROSA: FLORIDA, the beautiful daughter of the Duke,
educated by the virtuous FLAMINEA, prospers therein.

Chap. 2.
ANd to increase the good hap of these new revived Florentines, dissembling
Fortune enriched them with a goodly daughter, which the Duchess christened,
and called after her own name, who was the flower of beauty, and the very
pride of Nature, in whom she had showed the whole excellency of her skill.
The parents rejoicing in the Infant that was so lovely and amiable, brought
her up with great care and diligence, omitting no travel or charges that might
bring her to any perfection of knowledge, or instruction of virtuous living: in
so much, that as she grew in years, so she increased in virtue and knowledge,
that the excellent bounty of her mind, was nothing inferior to the rare
beauty of her body. Moderatus by this time being well grown in years,
instructed both in Philosophy, and Martial discipline, so far excelled all
of his time therein, as Phoebus entering into the Crancke, and ascending in his
fiery chariot to the highest Sphere, surpasses in brightness the least
ranging Star in the firmament: for to recreate him self from his book, he
bestowed his time in exercising feats of Arms, and wearyed therewith,
returned to his study again.

Now leave we these iollie Impes, thus flourishing under their parents conduct,
and let us see how well the fair Florida the Dukes daughter, goes forwards
under the government of the virtuous Flaminia, who being now past the years
of correction, and therefore minding somewhat to follow the humor of her high
and lofty mind, (being an insolent Natur-aliste) thinking with the ripeness
of her years to shake off a Pupils bondage, began to pick her peacockes
plumes, and to feather her thoughts with the wings of aspiring desire: for
whereas before (by the direction of her virtuous tutrix) she was continually
busied in some good exercise, now being come to years of discretion, it was
allowed unto her to be her own guide, whose chiefest care was then, to learn
to court it with the stateliest, to deck and attire her body with the
brauest, and to advance her self in behavior with the proudest: and where
Nature was halting in perfection, she furnished it with art: and where art
was defective, she braued it with a countenance full of Majesty: so that
throughout all the Dukes Court, her beck was a command to be obeyed: her
look, a Law to be fulfilled: and her words, an Oracle to be observed: yet
pollitikely using such reverence to her Parents, who so well liked and allowed
of her doings, that they construed all to the best. And so others, either not
daring the contrary, or else by reason of the good opinion they had of the
Dukes virtue, followed him in outward show of opinion touching his daughter, in
so much that she was spoken of throughout all the country, and the confines
thereof, that the meanest shepheardes in all those borders, had nothing so rife
in their mouths, as the beauty of Florida, and continually with their
Pastoral music sung Roundelayes of her praises.

PRISCVS (the son and heir apparent of LOTHVS King of Aemulia) upon the fame
and report of the surpassing beauty of the Lady FLORIDA, privily conveying
him self in disguised sort from his fathers Court, became attendant to noble
D^VASCO: The rare friendship between him and MODERATVS, and his success in
his amors with FLORIDA.

Chap. 3.
AT this time reigned in Aemulia the mighty Lothus, a King of high renown,
whose puissance was greatly feared of all his neighbor Princes, and especially
of the Prince of Liguria, the confines whereof, bordering upon his kingdom of
Aemulia, he had often sacked and spoiled: and therefore great enmity and
hatred remained between them. This Lothus had a son and heir apparent,
whose name was Priscus, a man very virtuous and wise, who greatly abhorring his
fathers tirrannies, had more mind to walk the pleasant groves in the field,
to hear the musical birds displaying their sweet notes of heavenly
harmony, then to flatter and fawn in the Court, and lend his ears to the
inchaunting sorceries of poisoned Sicophantes, the fruit of whose sweet
speeches, is in operation more bitter then gaul. And being thus devoted, one
day amongst many other times* attired in the habyte of a homely swayne, he
posted to the plains, and there frequented him self amongst the shepheardes
of his country, of purpose to delight him self with their rude manners, and
rusticall phrase of speaking, where he chanced to light on a strange shepherd,
lately come from the downs of Liguria, and now had seated him self amongst
these Country swaynes: who sitting with the rest of his companions under a
broad Beech tree, the hanging boughs whereof shadowed and shrouded them from
the great heat of the Sun, feasted them selves with such homely cates, as the
stock of their poor flocks affoorded them. Priscus espying them close at
their vittailes, thought no better time to offer him self unto their society,
then at this present: wherefore, he stepped unto them, and saluted them after the
best manner he could: and being taken for one of their fraternity, he was
willed to sit down amongst the^, which willingly he did, and to cloak his
determination, he counterfetted homely behauiours as well as he could, taking
part of their simple repast, which being ended, they all fell a singing of
catches and Roundelayes, some breathing forth Madrigals of love, to feel the
humor of their sweet hearts, who were there also handsomely tucked up in
their holi^day peticoates and gray frize rugges: for that day they used to
solemnize their feasts, in honor of the rural god Pan. And therefore with
all reverence they applied them selves for the time to their pastimes: and one
began to sing, and the rest followed him in order, till his turn came, that
was lately there arrived from the Ligurian downs, who also omitted not his
time: for, quoth he, to satisfy your expectations, I will sing you a song,
made by a Courtier of Duke Deuascos train, in the praise of the fair Florida
his daughter: whereupon he played upon a flute he had, and chaunted out this
ensuing dittie:

CAliope assist my quill,
With Sisters three lend me the skill,
Your aid I crave, I want the same,
For to describe this pearelesse Dame:
Who is the flower of beautyes train,
Which Nature made her self to stayne,
Her azure veins on forehead hie,
Do shine so bright as Crystal sky,
Her Amber hayres with wyers of gold,
Trimmed in good order to behold.
Her eyes beneath her brows do shine,
Which do entrap the gazers eyne.
Her Visage shows like Roses clear,
Where read on white seems to appear.
Her nose so comely set between,
Where excellency may well be seen.
Her cherry lips so soft and sweet,
Her teeth within so white and meet.
Her dimpled chinne so round and bright,
Might well entice a mort-fied wight,
Her neck the pillar of this Peer,
With skin so white, and veins so clear,
Vpholdes a wonder to the eye,
Excelling natures purity.
Her Arms, two branches of the vine,
Where nothing else but beauty shine.
Her shoulders been the root, I trow,
Whereof these branches fine do grow.
Two bosses shine in silver breast,
Nothing inferior to the rest.
They be the hills which do inuit,
Gaye Venus darlings to delight.
On either side is finely dight,
Like armored scales shining bright.
Two rows of Ribs so even and just,
That when one mooues, the other must.
Next unto this, the Waste so small,
Beneath her stately breast does fall,
That with a spanne might there be found,
The compass of her middle round.
Beneath the hill, fair Adons hill,
Whereof in Ida he did swill.
The pleasure sweet of loves desire,
Too rare to be a mould of mire.
Next unto this the sum of all,
Which as I ought, I dare not call.
A seal of Virgin wax at hand,
Without impression there does stand:
Then thyghes so fine, and smoothe as Iett,
Between the which a way is set,
Of either side as soft as down,
The ready path to high renown.
Her knee so knitting leg and thigh,
Like Scalap-shell of Azure sky,
Does double beauty join we see,
Which Venus mooues to jealousy.
The Kaulfe even rising just between,
The gartering place and small is seen,
As pointed Diamond Anckle bright,
Like drops of dew on Roses white.
Her press so soft with foot so fine,
That where she goes scant grass do twine.
Thus have I framed her parts in kind,
And yet the chief is left behind.
Which last I left, though it be least,
Yet for memorial to the rest.
Her hand is it, her hand in sight,
The glistering glass of beauty bright.
Her lilly hands each looker pains,
Embroydered with azure veins,
By art such works did never pass,
Unless her hand a sample was.
Her peble fingers long and small,
Tipte with yuorie beauties call,
Shined so bright as Titans rays,
My pen wants skill to paint her praise,
The beauty of this pearelesse piece,
Surpasses far the Queen of Greece,
Whose countenace and Majesty,
Does rule the stern above the sky.
Yet courteous, modest with distaine,
That every rolling eye does pain.
Her lofty thoughts and high desire,
Are never moved with fancies fire.
Who so has seen, let him repent,
Who never her viewed, may well prevent.
For hope deceiues each one that proves,
In such a soil to plant their loves.
THus the shepherd ended his song, whereat the young Prince was very much
perplexed, hearing this Saint so much commended: the report of whose beauty
had before this time made a great breach in his mind, being unable to resist
the rebellious alarums of fire-burning love: and boiling in feruencie of
desire, with such conceits, as his new thoughts presented unto him,
continually meditating with him self how to compass the sum of his desire:
which was wholly to bestow his time in the service of this Semi-goddesse, to
obtain the which, (by reason of the enmity between the King his Father and
Deuasco) seemed unto him a labor so endless, as with Dedalus to search out
the bottom of the Laberinth, or to roll the stone with Sisiphus: wherefore he
was so quatted in his former determination, that Venus had lost one champion,
had not the fiery God so boiled his senses in the furnace of fancy, that he
was perforce constrained to yield unto affection. And breathing thus he fed
him self with hope that opprtunitie would be a good plea in this suite,
soothing his own vain and foolish humor, with such frivolous circumstances,
and fond devices of his new troubled brain, that he weighed the danger
(though never so desperate) but small: and the enterprise (though never so
great) but mean, to have once a sight of this rare Saint, counting it a life
to dye in the demand of such a Jewel, and an honor to bestow the flower of
his youth in the service of such a peerless Parragon: Wherefore, resting upon
this conclusiue Periode, first, he breathed forth many sealding sighs for
sacrifice unto Venus: and many bitter tears for offeringes unto Cupid, to be
Mediators to further his new entertained fancies, and therewithal taking his
leave of all the boun companions, and gentle swaynes, leaving them to their
pastimes, he bequeathed him self to his passions: for in his return from the
plains to his Fathers Palace (making no great haste to come where he might be
known, before it should be late in the evening, least he should be descried in
those homely attires) he began to toss in his brain many odd shifts to
effect his purpose, the fe^uencie of his affection ministering unto him a
thousand devises to put this matter in practice, no one thought which fancy
presented seemied hard unto him, though all in a manner impossible. In the end
after that he had long deliberated upon this matter, he purposed in disguised
manner to give his attendance upon the Duke her Father, and so by that means
to epsy opportunity to reveal his mind unto her: which very shortly he
brought to pass, by the help of a Florentine, a very near kinsman to
Perduratus, who willing to pleasure his young Lord and Master, (requesting his
furtherance, and opening him self unto him, as assured of secrecy at his
hands, whose faith had affoorded him a thousand pledges of faithful and true
dealing) did write his letters with Priscus to his cousin Perduratus, desiring
him to place that noble Gentleman in the Dukes service, to whom and his
friends, he, in courtesy, held him self much bound. Byndon, for so the
Florentine was called, having finished his letters, delivered them to his young
Master, and wished him bone fortune in his affairs. Whereupon Priscus faining
some other occasion of absence to the King his father, departed him self with
one alone Page cowardes Albigena, (for there the Court of Deuasco Prince of
Liguria was) to put his purpose in practice, thinking every minute a Month,
and every hour a year, till he came to his iourneyes end, verifying this
only Adage, Cupienti caeleritas mora est. In this sort his thoughts building
Castles in the air, at last, he arrived at Albigena, where delivering his
letters of commendations to the Prince his high Steward, he had very good
entertainment of him, and made him the best welcome his late revived Fortune
could afford. And very shortly placed him in the Dukes service: for Priscus
was such a one, whose own person might warrant him so much favor, being a man
as rare in his qualities, as excellent in his personage, whose countenance was
adorned with the beauty of youth, and his behavior furnished with the
gravity of age, so that very thankful was this proffer to the Duke, who
always had in estimation and regard all such toward youths. This being
finished, Perduratus minding to show him self every way bountiful to young
Priscus, to remunerate some part of his kinsman his received good turns,
called unto him his son Moderatus, (who was in good credit in the Court, and
generally well-beloved, for his affability and gentleness) commanding him to
be acquainted with Priscus, and withal not to omit any occasion that might
procure his good, declaring the kindness he had showed unto his Uncle Byndon,
to induce him faithfully to do the same.

Moderatus, of duty obedient to his Fathers command, and of Nature passing
gentle, Nurture having also instructed him to be Patron unto Strangers,
especially to such as had in the highest degree merited the same, endeavored
not only to entertain Priscus with common curteste, but also to unite him
self in friendship with him (if the sequel of his life proved so virtuous,
as it seemed in outward appearance) and great reason he had so to do: for that
they were both Strangers, much of the same age, the constitution of their
bodies were alike, and the disposition of their minds without difference. So,
as nothing is to be respected in amity and friendship, more then equality:
even so could none more fitly be joined in amity and friendship (by reason
of the sympathy of their natures) then this couple, who so much resembled each
other in proportion and condition, that scant could the one be known from the
other. Thus both these fair buddes flourishing in the beautiful prime of
their years, having in some reasonable quantity of time, sufficiently
experienced each others virtuous disposition, grew so familiar in speech and
conversation, that the consent of the one was a constraint to the other: if
Priscus smiled, Moderatus rejoiced: if Moderatus lowred, Priscus laughed not:
in so much that they were never found different in opinion or action: for one
chamber was common unto them both, one bed served them both, they both ever
used one board, they had but one purse indifferent between them: and last of
all, their several and distinct bodies had but one mind: either of them with
their affable and courteous demeanor, endeavoring to gain the good will of the
people: and both of them in a very short space did in the highest degree of
good liking obtain the same.

Priscus all this while applying him self very diligently in the service of
his mistress, no where seeming pleasant, but in her presence, her looks
having fettered him in the prison o^ fancy: fortune brought him to such a
Laberinth, that his thoughts were like Ianus pictures, that presented both
peace and war: his mind not unlike to Venus Anuill, whereon is forged both
fear and hope: the sight of his beloved, something easing the intolerable
weariness of his mind: who, with her rolling looks, sometimes lending him an
amorous glance, (more of an use which she had taken, then of any favor unto
him) brought the poor Gentleman to such a fools paradise, that he measured
her manners after his own mind, and construed all to the best: thinking, that
as she was Venus ouermatch in beauty, so she might be Pallas superior in
virtue: yet the Majesty of her countenance, furnished with coye disdain,
brought him to a great doubt of the success of this enterprise: nevertheless,
he could not dissuade himself from the same: for as Ovid said, Nitimur in
vetitum semper, cupimusque negata.


Thus Priscus applying him self in his aptest habit to please his Mistress,
counting that no conquest which might be easily won, and deeming the
enterprise but base, which had not in it some danger, beholding with the fish
Mugra the bare hook, swallowed up his own bane, and with the Hearts of
Calabria, fed on Dictanum, knowing it to be deadly poison: for albeit that
he did perfectly ken the peril, yet he was so blinded with affection, that
he could not avoid the prejudice. He was sober and wise, yet all that was
too slender a defense against the pearcing beams of beauty, which had so
benumbed his spirits, that he seemed rather to be a ghost, then a living
creature: and no marvel, though his wisdom could not withstand such a
sweet encounter: for even as the fleetest fish swalloweth the delicatest
bayte, and the highest soring Hawke is soonest reclaimed to the lure: so the
sharpest wit has his wanton will, which very often is inueagled with the
poisoned sightes of alluring vanities. And albeit he endeavored all that ever
he could to cover his passions with a merry countenance (least any of the
Dukes Court espying his feruencie, might aim at his affection, and so prevent
his purpose,) yet he could not hyde a padde in straw, nor so closely cover
his flame, but that Moderatus well perceived that there was some fire, where so
great a smoke appeared: not a little marueiling, that his friend concealed his
grief from him, carrying a more ielous eye over him then before, to the end
to discover the cause of his passions, that (according to the duty of a
friend) he might minister a medicine, to cure the Melancholy malady of his
friends may contented mind.

In this sort Priscus a very long time houered between hope and despair,
fortune offering him no opportunity (nor yet daring, though she had) to make
his griefs known unto Florida, the which albeit it pierced him to the quick,
and strayned every string of his heart to the highest note of sorrow, yet he
dissembled the same, in hope that the storm could not last so long, but that
in the end it must needs present a calm: thus embracing the shadow of
pleasure, and fruit of vanity, he thought the weather very good for his
harvest, if Phoebus graced him with the light of his countenance, although the
clouds having unlocked the closset of their moisture, powered forth abundance
of rain. Wily Venus now seeing her Champion thus patient, yet almost tired,
feared least any longer delay would be such a cooling card to his queasie
stoma^ke, that he would for ever despise and abjure Love, and all his Laws,
wherefore resolved to frame a platte to procure his vain hope, which she
brought to pass in this order.

Priscus, coveting nothing so much as to be alone and in solitary places,
whereby to feed his melancholy humor with frivolous and vain thoughts, in
a fair graye morning walked forth to the common garden, adjoining to the
Palace, in the utter part whereof, there was an entrance to go unto a privy
Orchard, wherein sprung a very pleasant spring, the delectable murmr of
whose Christaline stream, falling over the pebble stones, made such musical
harmony, that it might have delighted a very sorrowful man, and the whole
platt covered with the pleasant shades of mighty Cedars* Pineapple trees,
green Bay trees, sine Cherrie trees, the sweet Briar, and the stalks of
Roses growing plentifully in the end of every Alley, and on the side of every
bank, the ground checkered all over with choice of finest flowers, as Uiolets,
and Camamell: the one, the more it is chafed, the better sent it will yield:
and the other, the more it is trodden, the thicker and finer it will grow.
There was also the Dasie, Primrose, Cowslippe, and the rest, every flower
having his secret operation to procure delight: and every tree and plant
growing in such order, that there you might behold the curious workmanship of
Nature, most lively pourtrayed and set forth: for the flowers did yield a
very pleasant and sweet sent to comfort the brain, and the tender grass a
soft pillowe to ease the wearyed body, the mighty and braunch-spreading trees
affoording shade to keep off the parching beams of fiery Phoebus, the
musical birds (not omitting their parts to set out this earthly Paradise)
accorded their notes with such dainty harmony and sweetness, that it might
have lulled a-sleepe the most wakefull and watching Argus in the world: the
fine order observed, with so artificial a proportion, in framing of this
platt, so ravished the mind of sorrowful Priscus, (having espied the same as
he ascended a step or two, to see by a horologe, that was set up upon a
pillar in a corner of the Garden, what a clock it was) with desire of solacing
him self in this place, that he stood a long while devising with him self,
how to compass an entrance thereto, (wherein to power forth his passionate
complaints, supposing it to be the Bower of pity, the sweetness thereof
inducing him to believe, that mercy lay lurking under every flower) in the
end, seeing there was no other remedy left, he skipt from the pillar where
the horrologe was, over a very high wall of brick, unto this privy orchard,
having his Lute with him which he brought of purpose to solace himself with:
where being come, he curiously surueyed over that pleasant platt, not a little
wondering at the fine order of the trees, which grew, situated diamond-wise,
keeping so good a decorum in their growth, that one leaf was not seen to
outgrow another: and being wearyed in tracing up and down amongst the
pleasant groves, he rested him self in a fine Arbor, seated in a close
thicket, near that murmuring fountain, where he began to power forth his
complaints in this manner.

Oh unfortunate Priscus, whose Prime of youth is loaded with more sorrows then
years: what peevish Planet was predominate over thy Nativity: or what
contrary oppositions the heavens seemed to power forth at the time of thy
birth? has Cupid bewitched thee? or Venus framed thee a fool in fancies
forge? or which is more, the bare report of fading beauty so besotted thy
senses, and made such a Metamorphosis of thee, that from a Prince of Aemulia,
thou art become a vassal and hireling to the Lord of Liguria, a man nothing
superior to thy self, and thy fathers mortal foe. And what has procured
this: if love fond Priscus, which, as thou know, is but a blaze like to a
Bauine* and therefore unworthy to be lodged in Priscus: if beauty, that only
is the fading show of vanity, much like the apples of Tantalus, that are
precious in the eye, and dust when they come to the handling, therefore not
fi^te to be seated in the mind of Priscus: if Florida, ah fair Florida, how
can I leave this sweet note? if (I say) Florida has procured this? thou art
not ignorant how her countenance is full of majesty, replenished with high
disdain, not contented to be woed, much less to be wiued by the statelyest
Lord of all Liguria: how then shall I hope, who am her fathers hireling, to
obtain her favor? no Priscus, no, thou striuest against the stream, and
feedest with the Dear against the wind, and thy labor is altogether
frustrate: wherefore cease this fond folly, and go not about with a dram of
pleasure to purchase an ounce of sorrow, least in seeking to gain Florida,
thou may happily loose thy life: for thou saylest between Silla and
Caribdis, where in seeking to avoid one danger, thou may easily fall into
another: because, concealing thy birth, thou art unlike to speed with Florida:
and in revealing the same, thou art in an imminent danger of thy life. Ah, but
fond Priscus where art thou carried with these vain and foolish imaginations:
do thou not venture thy life for love, whose heastes the gods them selves
were subject unto? therefore not to be resisted by thee. And what further,
do thou not hazard thy person for beauty? a thing divine, which the
stoutest champions in the world did honor with obedience, and obey with
reverence, therefore to be had in admiration of Priscus, rather then to be
disobeyed. And last, do thou not enter into this Laberinth of mishappes,
instimulated by the love and beauty of Florida, who although she be full of
Majesty and coyness, yet her countenance is tempered with modest gravity,
and virtuous behavior. And what though she will not be wooed by any Ligurian
Courtier, that does not argue that she will dye a maid: for it is not because
she will not love, but for that she sees none worthy her love. And
notwithstanding that Priscus is her Fathers hireling, yet he is a Prince, and
Florida no doubt will like and love him the better, when she understands that
he has thus embased him self for her sake. Ah, but Priscus, Florida is wise,
and will follow her Fathers counsel, and then no hope left for thee. She is
fair, and therefore thou ought to fear her the more: even as the Bees do
the tree Alpina, which deem so beautiful a thing can not be without some
hidden mischief. Tush, he that will not handle a knife to cut his meat,
because another did cut his finger with it: or dare not come near the fire to
warm him self, because it burned one, shall go to bed with cold feet, and
an empty belly: and therefore fear not to prove thy fate, seeing that thou
came so far to try thy fortune. Florida is beautiful, and therefore
pitiful: she is virtuous, and therefore will reward thy constancy: let thy
whole mind aim at Florida, only Florida, no, none but Florida.

Priscus hereupon breathing, made a long period, so that wearyed with these his
mournful complaints, having slept very little the night before, he was with
the sweet harmony of the birds, and pleasant murmr of the spring, brought
to a slumber. By this time ( Florida, who always used this place, to recreate
her self alone till dinner time) issued out of her Closset, through a Posterne
door, to this privy Orcharde, and so coming to the fountain side, began to
spread her golden hairs, that shined like Titans rays, over her shoulders, and
to dippe her Lillie-white feet in that murmuring stream, uncovering her body
unto that place, which for modesties sake is wout to be namelesse. And as she
was thus sitting in a seat, carved out of the fine marble, almost ready with
Narcissus to embrace her own shadow, so much she delighted in viewing her
self in the clear water, Priscus affright with some strange vision suddenly
awaked, and calling to memory where he was, with the vehemency of his late
passions, he took his Lute in his hand, the sound whereof, at the first touch,
Florida hard, much maruelling what it might mean, supposing no man to be so
bold to enter unto that place, without her knowledge: yet quietly remaining as
before, to understand the sequel thereof, Priscus by this having tuned his
instrument, began with musical and sweet harmony to warble forth this
ensuing Dittie.

WHen lordly Titan in his chiefest pride,
Ouer-spread Auroraes blushing countenance,
And Triton on his grayish steedes did ride,
In calmed Seas, on waves the Nayades dance.
No duskie vapor covered the welkin cleared,
Phoebus (discovering ay the heavens) appeared.
Here Jupiter presented no escape,
Then watched by Argus hundredth waking eyes,
The Sirens then transformed no man's shape,
Nor to intrappe laid forth their watching spies,
And Proteus in his wonted shape remained,
For Nature would that nothing should be stayn'd.
Princes then walked abroad for their delight,
Courtyers attend upon their princes train,
Of tempests Seamen were not then affright,
The husbandman did hardly plye his gain.
Dame Flora eke did cover the earth with green,
Procuring hope most lively to be seen.
Minerua then the Chaos did unfold,
Of these so far unordered terrene things,
That in good order you might all behold,
Trussed in a fardell under Fortunes wings.
Well may I cry alack and well away,
That Fortune frail did bear so great a sway.
It was the rusticke Gods festival day,
When shepheardes quaint do frolic with their mates,
With stones black that time well mark I may,
For then begun all my disaster fates.
Then with a smile fell fate did cover a fraud,
To perfect which, Beauty made Fame her bawd.
Fame careful then for to perform her charge,
Sounding due praise, redoubled in mine ear,
Venus ouer-match, she blazed then at large,
Which stroke my body in a quiuering fear.
This rare report being heard, I wish to see,
If earthly Wightes affoorded such a she.
I came, I saw, now Caesar's fate I want,
For to overcome: wherein I may despair,
Her stately looks my hoped hap does scant,
And day by day does still my joys impair,
For that my mind lies in her princely bower,
Whose beauty does excel Loves paramour.
A living mind in dying corpse I have,
My body here, my mind with her does stay,
A speedy death, if her I loose, I crave,
Whose sweet consent is even that blisse-full Boy,
Which only is the harbor of my rest,
In whose high thoughts I wish to build my nest.
Thou glistering Phoebus, hide thy shining face,
If ever thou view'st the beauty of this Dame,
Her brightsome hew will sure thy lights disgrace,
The rarest wight by her may blush for shame,
Whose glorious looks do still present a jar,
Twixt fire and water there lies peace and war.
O would I might (but what thereon may fall,
I know not well) once compass her goodwill:
Or that I had not (now too late I call
The thing far past) her known my joys to spill.
Then had I lived and led a quiet life,
Where now I pine with pure tormenting strife.
Sure shall desert there merit but disdain,
Where high desire does lodge in lofty thought,
Seeing Love and Fate do still conspire my pain,
Void of all hope, I count my toil for naught.
Yet naythlesse hope for to obtain thy love,
Not fearing aye the thing thou never did prove.
ANd therewithal starting up from the Arbor where he sat, to recreate him
self with walking: he presently espied Florida bathing her self in the well:
the sight of which glorious object so benumbed his senses, that he remained in
a trembling fear, having discovered so great a priuitie: least, as Acteon (for
such like offense) was of Diana turned into a Stagge, whose own whelps hunted
him to the death: so he, for so great and unadvised an oversight, should be
transformed to some new shape, his continual passions being the devouring
hounds, which should persecute him to destruction. So long remained Priscus in
this trance, that Florida had recovered her feet, and like Juno with her
pompous train, pacing so maiestically toward him, that she did put the poor
Gentleman into a great admiration of her lofty and Princely demeanor, and
being come unto him, she began thus to reprehend him for his boldness, in
presuming to enter unto that place, that was only for her recreation.

What Priscus? whether was it folly or presumption that moved thee thus
unadvisedly to intrude thy self unto this place, without my knowledge,
forbidden to all but Florida, and licenced to none but Florida. Why have thou
been so bold, to offer thy self to so great a secrecy? do thou not know
how Acteon was handled, for discovering the secrets of Diana? and why
ought thou to hope for better Fortune then he? thy descent is less, and thy
offense as great, it may be, because I favored thee, for the show of virtue
that was in thee, that wresting my meaning to another text, serving thine own
purpose, thou have thus presumed to try my patience: well, now I see that the
richest Sepulcher has but rotten bones within, and a fine scabbard sometimes a
rustie blade: and dissembling hypocrites, fair and smoothe countenances, but
rough and deceitful hearts, much like the herb Phanaces, that has a sweet
budde and a bitter fruit, or the Bathes of Calicut, that be as clear as Padus,
and as pestlient as Orme: so thou, covering thy malicious mind with
counterfetting modesty, and thy Wolfes paunch with a Lambs skin, staying
only for opportunity to put in execution some mischievous determination.
Wherefore, fond Nouice, depart hence with shame: for with great shame may
thou depart, that have committed so immodest a fact: whereupon Florida, being
in a great rage, would have departed, had not Priscus (now stirred up with this
sharp reprehension) stayed her passage with this reply.

Sweet and gentle Mistress, if either my ignorance (by reason of my late
coming to your fathers Court) might privilege my offense, having unwittingly,
though willingly, committed the same: or the acknowledging of my fault (with a
submission, ready to receive any punishment that you would censure or adiudge
me unto) pacify your late conceived displeasure toward me: the one daeth
manifestly appear to excuse my crime: for the other, I prostrate my self in
your presence, and wholly refer me to your grace, as one wishing rather to
die, then to displease you, and desiring no longer to live, then it may stand
with your gracious pleasure to grant me liberty: for be it spoken without
dissimulation, in your hands lies the sentence of my life or death, and
gladlyer would I dye by your doom, then live one minute to procure your
discontent: wherefore I humbly beseech you, that it might rest with your
liking, dear Lady, to licente me to reveal unto you, the dolorous and
secret anguish of my tormenting heart, which lies drowned in the den of
despair, without your sweet consent, to ease the same: for as water stopped,
makes the greater deluge: and sire suppressed, bursteth into a more vehement
slame: so my griefs concealed, breed such a sharp corrisiue in my heart, that
without your sweet consent give care to my passions, I am unlike ever to be
rid of my pain. Florida well perceiving by this, upon what string Priscus
harped, she did cut him off in the midst of his tale, thus:

Why how now Priscus, has the gloriousness of the place made such a
metamorphosis of you, that it bereaved you of your senses, and driven you unto
a frenzy? or some other vain humor hammered in your head so high a
determination? take heed, least with the people Hyperborei, you gaze so long
upon the sun, till you become blind, or soothing your self in the
sweetness of your folly, you resemble the Leopards that feed on Margeram,
knowing it to be their own bane. What, fond Priscus, do thou eye Florida?
can nothing content thee but the beauty of Florida? has thy presumption
grown upon my gentleness toward thee, desiring always to be noted rather
modest courteous, then ouer-curious unto Strangers? or have thou noted so much
lightness in me, that might warrant thee any hope to obtain my good will: No,
I trow, Florida is not so lavish of her honor, nor yet so base minded, as to
look upon her Fathers hireling. What you rude Princockes, deem you any thing
in your self worthy of Floridas love: or wantes any perfection in Florida, to
deserve the favor and liking of the mightyest Prince under the Sun?
wherefore content thy self Priscus, with this, that Florida allows of thee,
as her Fathers vassal, and likes of thee as a diligent servant, and favors
thee after her wonted courtesy, as thou art a Stranger: and for thy offense,
because thou pleadest both ignorance in committing the crime, and also
submission for amends: either of which might for this time satisfy Florida,
so that this may be a warning, that hereafter you enter not so unadvisedly to
any such unlawful attemptes.

Priscus moan, after Florida gave him the repulse: his Madrigale, and secret
complaint, which MODERATVS his friend ouer-heard. MODERATVS exhortation and
comfort unto him. PRISCVS discovering of him self, his Parents, and country
to MODERATVS, which before this time he concealed, and MODERATVS promise to
effect his desired amors.

Chap. 4.
PRiscus, albeit this sharp answer had driven him almost to the wall, yet
like a stout soldier, he did not mean to forsake the fort for one heavy
skirmige, being such a one, as was not to seek for answer, the readiness of
whose wit, always assured his plea to be good and sufficient in Venus Court:
and thus, as he was ready to speak further for himself, there entered in at
the Posterne door one of Floridas gentlewomen, which she perceiving, flung
away from him, and returned to the Court again with her waiting maid that
came ^or her to dinner, leaving the poor Gentleman in such a quandarie with
this repulse, at his first entering unto the game, that he lacked but little to
prove a Haggard. And now seeing the Mistress of his thoughts had thus given
him the slip, with a flea in his ear, he secretly conveyed him self unto
his chamber. And by reason it was now dinner time, he had very good
opportunity to repair there unknown to any, where when he came, breathing
forth a number of scalding sighs, he cast him self upon his bed, and after
he had there tossed him self a while, being incapable of any rest, he took
his Lute in his hand, to see, if with music he could moderate his
melancholy, and mollify some of his heavy passions: and so, like the swanne
at the point of death, he very dolefully chaunted over this Cansong.

WHen Phosphorus declining West her tracke,
Commanding Nox her charge to take in hand
And for to spread abroad her curtain black,
By Natures course to cover both sea and land:
Then at her beck a clowdie vale in stepped,
And terrene things quite from our sight has swept
By this had Phoebus clearly made escape,
And Vesperus his action did assoyne,
Of Thetis Queen then cloyed with the rape,
With Lucina in coiture does join:
From whom he clearly received away his light,
Least she should blush, being seen in such a plight*
Lucina then her budding horns did stretch,
And borrowing of her Lover light, appears,
When Morpheus presented to me poor wretch,
A sight, which still my dulled senses cheeres:
Ah cheeres: a woeful cheer: woe worth the time,
That makes me thus to spend my golden prime.
What fancy moved, folly did put in ure,
And Queen Desire did straight appoint the game,
Which once begun, no hope could help procure,
Before I loose, to give it over were shame:
Although Despair does say that I shall gain,
Naught for my toil, but heaps of cruel pain.
Cupid then smyl'd such Clyent to possess,
And thanked Morpheus that procured the same,
Venus mislikte I should rest in distress,
Least after I would ay renounce her game,
She fitted me, with opportunity
To speak: alas I spoke: all would not be.
All would not be, what then? ah doleful chance,
Have all the Fates confederated my fall?
Yes, yes: too soon I did my Bark out lance,
And eke commit my sail to winds a thrall:
Wherefore row back thy barge to native port.
In earnest end, what thou begun in sport.
That thou begun in sport: a heavy sport,
Which is the worker of thy great annoye,
Thou can not long endure in such a sort,
Exempt from hope of any earthly joy:
Unless the Saint, that wrought this deep distress,
Pityes thy panges; and do thy pains redress.
Thy pains redress, if not forthwith, too late,
For Phebe thrice her wasted horns renewed,
Since I was forc'st by spiteful frowning fate,
To come and seek the sight I lately viewed,
Which view my pains, so destiny assigned,
For at her hands no hope of grace I find.
No hope of grace I find, woe me therefore,
Without whose grace my life can not endure,
Oh that I were not as I was of yore,
Free from the scathe which does my harm assure,
Then would I keep my finger from the fire,
And quite renounce the Laws of fond desire.
Offond desire the Law, oh lawles^e Law,
Which does extreemes combine and join in wrong,
And ministers pills, which will not from the mawe,
This from the eye, not from desert is sprung,
A fickle Judge for to discern the right,
Which blinded is with force of beauties might.
The force of beauties might: a power-full might,
Which can compel the proudest to obey,
Whose mere report has brought me to this plight,
Deuoyd of hope: for sorrow bears the sway.
Wherefore as Fame me forc'st this pain to prove,
There I began, and there will end my love.
HErewithall Priscus ended his song, his music prevailing no more to moderate
his melancholy, then oil to quench the flame: and therefore in a very
frantike mood, he threw away his lute, and began a-fresh to toss himself
upon his bed, resting as weary in his body, as he was afflicted in his mind:
and thus perplexed in his disquiet passions, tormenting him self with his
ceaselesse complaints, his friend Moderatus, by chance ouer-hearing his secret
passions, pushed open the door, and entered the chamber: whereat Priscus start
up, looking so pale, as if he had been new risen from his grave, his swelling
heart, removed from her natural place, was now ascended to the straight
passage between the body and the head, and there kept the same so close, that
he (for want of breath) was unable to utter any one word: whereupon Moderatus,
his heart bleeding for very grief of his friends distress, began thus
mildely to reprehend him, both for that he had concealed his fancies from him,
and also because he did suffer him self to be so ouer-mastred with follyes.

My dear Priscus, if the faithful league of true friendship, knit up between
us, had not sufficiently authorized, nay rather commanded me (to prevent your
further harm) to be thus bold with you, I would scant have presumed to
interrupt your muses with my presence at this time: for having long sithence
perceived in you some alteration and disquietnes of mind, wrought by the effect
of some strange passion, I could not choose but be very sorry, in that I
perceived you to be unwilling to disclose the same unto me: who to discharge
the office and duty of a friend, was by the law of friendship bound, not
only to counsel you the best I could to comfort your misfortunes, but also to
be copartner of your pain, to quallifie the rigor of your extreme passions:
wheresore I can not sufficiently admire, that you would entertain any unto
friendship, whom, either you deemed not worthy of your secrets, or else (for
fear to be disclosed) durst not commit the trust thereof unto: without that
the occasion of your grief depended upon an unlawful act. And therefore
doubted, least that I would not yield my consent thereunto, because it should
be rather my part to dehorte you from the same, then any wise to further you
therein. What Priscus, if as the Swallows, nestling in houses, yet mistrust
the inhabitants thereof, so you, conuersing my society, durst not acquaint me
with your secrets: you should have done, as they do in trying of vessels,
whereinto they power water, not wine: in like manner, you might have tried my
fidelity in some frivolous matter, that if I had chanced not to be close,
there had been no danger of spilling any good licour. But I tell you Priscus,
friendship is like honey, that is sweet and pleasant in taste to the sound, but
sharp and purging in operation, to him that is infected with a canker, and
therefore finding in you this weakness, that is more pertinent to feminine
seruilitie, then to manly fortitude: I can not choose but endeavor my self to
comprehend the nature of the honey, whereby to purge you of the corrupt humors,
that have already weakened your nature: for now I find the old Adage true, that
the Minow, that is ever nibling at the bait, is at last hanged on the hook:
and the fly so long dallyes with the flame, that she is in the end consumed
therein: wherefore dear friend, leave these fond cogitations, and let not the
flilie baits of alluring vanities so entangle you in the net of folly, that in
the end you may have cause to say, that you have bought repentance at an
unreasonable rate: at leastwise, if it be so strongly rooted in you, that
reason can not easily shake it away, conceal not the same from me, least in so
doing, the cure would not prove so effectual, wanting the true knowledge of
the cause of the disease.

Priscus, now seeing that it was no time to dissemble with his friend, knowing
it impossible to cover the smoke, that was already burst into a flame, unlocked
the closset of his thoughts, and discovered him self unto him in this manner.
Sweet Moderatus, I wonder not a little, that you would thus fraudulently (by
ouer-hearing my complaints) endeavor to compass my secrets, whereas you might
have been assured (though that the revealing thereof had both impaired my
substance, and prejudiced my person) that you could no sooner have requested
the knowledge thereof, but that most willingly I would have imparted the same
unto you. And in that I have so long concealed it, it was to my most vehement
and great grief: for fire suppressed, burns more vehement, and water
stopped, bursteth out with a greater force: so ^^at the few brandes, whereat I
lately warmed my fancy, is now grown to so great a fire, that it has
almost burned up, and consumed unto cynders my poor flectible heart. And
assure your self Moderatus, I was not so suspicious as to misdeeme of your
fidelity, whose faithful dealing had assured me many ways of your loyalty:
and therefore needed no further trial, being persuaded that I had laid my
foundation upon a sure rock. Yet nevertheless, as you have very fitly
compared friendship to honey, so I find your friendly admonitions, to be so
bitter and biting, that the very name thereof, has almost ouercharged my
queasie stomach: for the counsel, howsoever wholesome, is never plausible,
when it feeds not the humor of the counseled. And for my malady, I am
unlike to be purged thereof, without that the worker of my prejudice minister a
remedy, no more then Telephus could be cured of the wound, he received of
fierce Achilles lance, before a plaster of the rust thereof was put
thereunto, to salve the same: and to leave off all ambiguities, I am so
infected with the venime of the Tarantula, that I am almost consumed in the
suddes of mine own pleasure. Wherefore, dear friend, seek not (in hope of my
recovery) to minister any thing unto me, which can work no other effect, but
only the diminishing of that little ease and rest I have: but rather suffer
thy unfortunate Priscus to dye: yea die Priscus, and why live thou to procure
thine own torment, an exile to thy country, a heart-sore to thy friends, and
a vassal to thy enemies, resting thus metamorphosed in perpetual danger of
thine own person: nay, but where wander I, pardon me, good Moderatus, in that
I have thus fantastically breathed forth my dreaming agonies: for herein shall
you rather find a senseless truth, then a sensible tale: and albeit hope
forbids me to put any confidence in her, by revealing my passions:
nevertheless, both to disburthen somewhat my thrauled mind, and also to make
amends for the fault already committed, in concealing the secrets of my
breast thus long from you: attend the whole circumstance of this my Tragical
discourse, and with the conclusion thereof, a violent expulsion of my vital
breath, from this careful and distressed carcass, if no hope be left of
releeuing my wearyed agonyes.

Had I prouidently pondered that worthy sentence of the famous and renowned
Philosopher Thales Miletius, who, being by one of his friends demanded, how
much difference there was between a Lie and Truth answered, as much as there
is between thine ear and thine eye: meaning thereby, that those things are
not ever true, which by common report are spread abroad. For as Maro says of
Fame, Mobilitate viget, viresque acquirit eundo, so passing through the mouths
of many, every one adding a little thereunto, it is in the end grown to an
intolerable error: howbeit the Philosopher admonishes us to believe those
things for trueths, which we see with our eyes, and not to be credulous of
those things which are blazed by common report. Had I advisedly weighed this
notable saying of Thales, the bare report (bare I may well call it, the croppe
being not worth the seed) of Floridas beauty, had not moved me, being
inconsiderate of my state and person, thus fondly from a Prince of Aemulia, to
become a vassal and a slave to the Governor of Liguria, no better man then my
self, and my Fathers mortal enemy: wherein, like an obstinate and untoward
youth, I laid reason in water to stiepe, being too salt for my taste, and
followed unbridled affection, which was pleasant and toothsome in the mouth,
though poisoned venom in the mawe. And my Parents, which affoorded me coin
and liberty in my youth, to work mine own prejudice, will be sorry to see
me want both wealth and wisdom in mine age. O fond Priscus, why do thou
inueigh against thy self? it is an ill bird that defiles his own nest and
it were thy part* rather to amend what is amiss, then to aggrauate thy offense
by revealing thy absurd fantasies, making thereby thy name more odious, but
nothing helping to bring thee to a better form of living. Oh, but unto what an
heresy am I fallen? wherein should I reform my self? have I not sustained
all this perplexity, being thereunto enjoined by beauty, which is a thing
divine, and which the gods them selves obeyed. What, is not this the same, that
Solomon with his wisdom could not resist: Hercules with his strength could
not withstand: and Alexander, with other mighty Monarchs of the world, with
all their forces and power could not subdue? what then, should I think my
self wiser then Solomon? stronger then Hercules? or mightier then Alexander?
No, no, Priscus, beauty commanded thee, and therefore thou must obey, and
wherefore Priscus, since thou must obey, summon thy senses to a parlie, and
arm thy self with courage, to go through with so notable a victory, and be
not dismayde, to have one repulse at a woman's hands: for women's three nayes be
but one yea: resolve thy self once more to plead for thy self, and to abide
the censure of thy dearest mistress, whether it include life or death. Now
then, sweet Moderatus, that I may lay open unto your understanding this most
strange and rare stratageme, know that thine unfortunate, but ever constant
friend, is the same Priscus, son and heir apparent to the mighty Lothus
King of Aemulia, who undertook this new shape for the love of fair Florida,
fair, but yet cruel Florida, whose sharp cutting answers, even this day,
(had I not manfully withstoode the violent attemptes of hot burning love) had
been sufficient to give me my deaths wound: for her bitter and contemptible
reprehensions, ministered rather oil then water to my flame, and fervent love,
rather then could disdain unto my fancy: lo, here behold the figure and
shape of him, that lately thursting for honor, had more confidence in a
spears point; then in a Scholars pen: the one, threatening bluntly his foe
with revenge: the other, flattering his friend with a few fine cowthed words,
shrowding his malice under the habit of friendship: then a sturdie Morglay
fitting his humor, rather then a silly wall-washing paultrie pensile: and the
managing of a good horse in the fields, more pleasing unto him, then the
courting of a fair Lady in a chamber. But now altogether vanquished and
overcome by Love, a bond-slaue of blind Cupid, and from a professed Soldier
of warlike Mars, become a vowed servant of wanton Venus, a sweet Laberinth,
wherein being entered, a man may sooner loose him self, then find reason of
him self: wherefore gentle and assured friend Moderatus, leave off all
persuasions, since they be but corrisiues to eat up old soars, and no
lenitiues to assuage new swellings, and sharp rasers to cut and lance old
festered ulcers, and ill-cured skarres, which procure treble pain, but seldom
or never bring ease to the Patient.

Here sighing sobbes stopping the passage of his speech, the fire of his true
affection enflaming his heart, and his enflamed heart dissolved into incessant
tears, he languished, burning in love, and bathed in grief, reposing all his
confidence in Moderatus his faithful and loving advice, the gates of reason
and understanding quite denying any passage unto such impossibilities, and
therefore wallowing in continual storms of fresh employed griefs, he was
altogether dead in spirit, though little moving of life appeared in his
body, until true-hearted Moderatus awaked him out of his dumpe, in this
manner.

Oh my good, though unfortunate friend, Priscus, how falls it out, that you
have this long time concealed this your secret flame from your friend, and
thus obscured the bright beams, not only of your birth and honor, but also
of your wisdom and virtue, which so shined in your life and conversation,
that it dazeled the eyes of the beholders, ravished the senses of the hearers,
and stroke into admiration all such as heard but the report thereof, now
eclipsed with such a cloud of dishonor, as to descend from a mighty Prince,
to the base office of a servant, and which is more servile, to imbase your
self thus for the love of a woman, and not only to soothe your self in these
follies, but also to exclude the counsel and comfort of a trusty friend,
which would have been partaker of all your miseries. But as it seemed, you made
still a doubt of mine undoubted fidelity, supposing that as the herb
Ambubeia, does close at the going down of the Sun, and spread abroad at the
rising thereof again: so I should be a friend in Sunshine prosperity, and
not in the dark cloud of extremity: but not so sweet friend, the operation
consistes in the matter, not in form: and surely, if I omitted any thing that
belonged to the office of a friend, it was ignorantly done, and not willingly,
or of set purpose: for I utterly detest and abhor those flattering and fained
friends, who, resembling the Amber stone, burn outwardly, and freeze
inwardly: or the bark of the Myrtle tree in Armenia, which is as hot as fire
in taste, and as cold as ice in operation. And rather, with the herb
Amaranthus, which begins to flourish in the winter, when all other herbs
do decay: so I in the winter of your extremities, purpose to show my self,
not only a friend, but a bright Sun through the thickest and darkest cloud,
being then assured that you do love me, if you repose any trust and confidence
in mine actions: wherefore, since the alarums of love have made such a breach in
your mind, your greatest policy were to study to be master again of the
forte, which you have (with so great a detriment) already lost: and to
compass the same, you ought like a good and careful Captain, endeavor to
remove the siege, then might you boldly affirm with Cicero, that Sublata
causa tollitur effectus, which although at the first it should seem difficult
and almost impossible, yet having resolutely determined the same, you should
find therein great ease, and daily would your forces increase, and your
enemies strength diminish: and albeit the taste thereof would like Aloyes seem
bitter in the mouth, yet the operation would no doubt prove medicinable and
very holesom in the maw. And if having swallowed the bayte, there be no other
remedy, but to yield your self to the mercy of the fisher, rather then so,
do as the fish Alopex marina, who, perceiving the hook to be fastened in his
belly, biteth off the line above the tackling, and so escapes. What, remember
you not the precepts of Phocas unto Lovers, who said, they should proceed in
their amors, as the Crabbe in going, whose pace is ever backwards, that though
love have force like the Adamant, to draw the tender hearts of young Nouices,
yet they should be sprinkled with Goats blood, that resists the operation,
and if you have not the virtue to be chaste, carry about you the herb
Lupinar, or the Topaze stone, which cools desire. Weigh advisedly, what great
calamities and overthrows have happened in former ages, not only to the person
infected therewith, but also to whole Provinces and Countries, by reason of
the ouer-raging flames of Love, then shall you see how Troy and Athens, the one
being the Metropolitan and most sumptuous City of all Asia, the other, the
renowned fountain, and sacred welspring of art and learning throughout al
Greece, which therefore was called the Muses habitation, were utterly
overthrown and quite consumed, for the wanton and libidinous desire borne
only to one woman. Infinite more examples I could produce, but that I think
this sufficient, to make a considerate wise man forsake the most beautiful and
entising Lays, and the coyest and most curious Florida that ever was. Now
having touched some generalities bounding upon reason, of great effect to
dissuade you from this dangerous Laberinth, yet let us go nearer to the matter
and speak particularly: is it not Florida that you aim at? whose
disdainefull and coye countenance, fenced with the hateful trench of ambition
and pride, does put to silence the brauest Lords of all Italy, fearing to
speak, where they have so little hope to speed: and will you then, while you
continue the habit of a hireling, and remain as you seem unto her, an
attendant of her Fathers, attempt to crave the same? which the flower of all
the gallaunts in the world durst not once make motion for: I persuade me in so
doing, you are void of all hope. If then you make your state known unto her,
how can she find in her heart to affect her fathers mortal enemy: and how
can you hope to remain in safety, your life lying in the mercy and power of
your deadly foe. And as Moderatus would have gone forwards in his persuasions,
Priscus, who could scarce suffer him to come to a Pertod, his ardent desire
nothing diminishing by these disswasions of Moderatus, but rather like the
small current stopped, increasing more and more in such sort, that from a male
contented man, he grew almost lunatike, and then like a desperate forlorn
burst forth in these terms.

Oh good Moderatus, if thou have no other salve for my sore, nor can affoorde
me any other comfort, suffer me by death to end this wretched life, or if thou
dislikest therewith, cease to cloye me with such prescriptions, the very name
whereof torments me more then a thousand deaths together.

And whereas you allege of the overthrow of Athens and Troy, proceeding from
the love of a woman, true it is, but Theseus and Paris justly made their
friends their foes, by the rape of Helen, who was the wife of another man,
seducing her to infringe her faith and honesty to her loyal husband, and
therefore deservedly plagued for the same: but I do endeavor by my virtuous
and chaste love, borne to Florida, to make my mortal enemies my dearest
friends: and I go about to seek nothing, but that (of right) which should be
mine own. For if he, which should bye a thing dearest, should best deserve to
have it, I am sure, you would judge me worthy of Florida, who, not only am
thus tormented in mind for her sake, but also am daily in continual danger
of my person: wherefore, sweet friend, if thou love my life, help me to the
possession of that most rare Jewel, I mean Florida, whose presence is the
preservation of my life, and without the which my carcass is but a den of
dolours, and my life hateful and loathsome unto me.

With this Priscus concluded, (very grief stopping the passage of his voice)
so that tears standing in his eyes, his words chocking in his throat, he
sent forth great gustes of scalding and heavy sighs, and withal distilled
from his eyes, (eyes the often messengers of his griefs) great floods of salt
and brynish tears.

Moderatus seeing him so impatiently to bear his careless calamities, was
very sorry, and comforted him all that ever he could, promising his endeavor
to effect his desires, who accepted thereof with thanks, and having by this
spent a good quantity of time in debating of these matters, they left the
chamber and went abroad, to see if good fortue would offer them any
opportunity to put in practice their determinate purpose.

Florida falls in love with Moderatus, her secret meditation upon the same.
VEROSA intercepteth her in her secret passions: both leave the desolate chamber
of FLORIDA. They fall ^n company of CORNELIUS the Dukes son, PRISCVS,
MODERATVS and PANDARINA a Gentlewoman of the ^ouse of Deualoyes. PRISCVS and
PANDARINAES dis^utation of Love: FLORIDAS censure thereof. The Gentlemen by
lotteries choose them three Ladies, which should be their mistresses for that
year. Their Music and censure of Love in Poems. FLORIDAS opinion upon the
same: their dancing* MODERATVS entreatie for his friend PRISCVS to FLORIDA,
her denial, and offering of favor to him self His further persuasion for his
friend, and her sudden departure in great anger. Their resolution to conclude
that days exercise to suppe together. PRISCVS departure thereupon. Their
repair to FLO^IDAAES chamber, where they took repast.

Chap. 5.
Now Gentlemen, here you may behold a perfect Map of Loves manifold
miseries: Priscus tormenteth him self with the racking and restless
remembrance of the fair Florida, being wounded with the golden darte of that
little and wanton wag, who, as he is blind without sight, is selfe-willed
without Reason: always endeavoring to creep into the Conceits of the ripest
and readyest minds, taking the greater glory and pride in his victories and
conquestes, by so much as they are gotten over the mightyer Potentates and
nobler Personages: thus minding that his Knights should not obtain any
pleasure without some smacke of pain, meaning thereby to try their
constancy, thinking him not worthy of a good Booty, that would give over
the pursuit for one sharp skirmidge. And albeit that Florida despised
Priscus, languishing in love, by reason of his mean estate and birth, as she
took it, yet that mighty god (though blind) Cupid, determining to revenge
the quarrel of his Champion, that had lost the victory, ceased not daily to
devise means, to make her taste of that sharp sweet, and pleasing evil,
that so often is wont, not only to torment, but also to ouerwhelme and vanquish
poor perplexed Lovers, with his inuestigable force of fervent and boiling
heat. And in the end finding her solitary, he painted before the eyes of her
remembrance, the worthiness of Moderatus, with his martial prowess, rare
virtues, and singular excellency, in so much that daily wading in the deep
floods of fancy, moved with the aspect of his comely Personage, which cited
her to yield to affection, she, which erst scorned the summons of mighty
Cupid, and disdained the crewe of wanton Venus, holding in derision their
tears, and carelessely smiling at their scalding sighs, which were enamoured
with beauty, is now forced (feeling her self wounded with the sharp pricks
of fervent desire) to offer up incense at the shrine of Venus, craving pardon
for her so long rebellion against the omnipotency of so mighty a King. And
thus continuing a certain time in these and such like cogitations, employing her
new desired friend to some service in her own presence, whereby to glut her
self with the view of so rare an object, the eyes alone doing the office of
the hands and tongue, as trusty secretaries, and faithful messengers of the
effects of the mind. Florida thus flowing in the tempestuous seas of longing
appetites, guided by a master, which delights in the shipwreck of them he
caryeth, and vanquished with an immoderate rage of love, the effects whereof
making her forgetful of her honor, wholly overcome with this new entertained
passion, being very melancholicke, and having separated her self from
company, she began thus to complain.

Ah Florida, how miserable and unfortunate art thou, that the Gods have
endewed thee with beauty, that should be prejudicial to thy honor, and
creating thee only daughter to so mighty a Prince, thou should become an
eyesore and a blemish to all thy stock and kindred, by thine own lascivious
and wanton lust. Have thou rejected the suite of the brauest Courtiers in all
Spain? and now not only contented with thy Fathers vassal, but also can
not live without that bratt, that thine own Parents have brought up of
nothing? in having of thy wish, thou loosest both thine honor, and do
obscure and blemish the house thou camst off, which once ouershadowed with the
veil of vice, will bear the skarre thereof during life. From whence comes
this new alteration, and passions unacquainted? what rebellious desires be
these, that do poyse and weigh thy thoughts, to hammer in thy brain such
thirstlesse and vain imaginations? ah Florida, what hapless misery do
thou find in this free prison? where pleasure has no place, till the friendly
foes have disquieted thy life with a million of painful travails: now is
the time for thee, to resist the hot skirmiges and fresh a^saultes of that
tyrant Love, before that he has had quiet possession within thy mind: for
being suffered to enter by little and little, he will wax so strong, that in a
short time, he will be like to dispossess thee of that little interest thou
have in thy self: and then, as the moath in the garment, and Locust in the
corn, it consumes his host, and departs away, without any reckoning for
the trespass he has committed. Then Florida consider, what may they deem of
thee, that erst had in admiration thy virtues, and reputed thee for a second
Diana? but the vilest hypocrite of the world, that would ouershadowe thy
lascivious appetites to wanton venerie, with a fained show of counterfeit
gravity: and that there wanted in them nothing but sufficient au^acitie, to
recover the ransacke of thy person, and spayle of thine honor. Wherefore leave
off this foul folly, that thus does dispoyle thee of thy desired health and
contented rest, and endeavor to forget him that is the causer thereof. At which
words she yielded forth a number of scalding sighs, and pawsed a little
thereupon, but again recovering her voice, she began thus:

Ah forget him Florida, how far do I forget my self, that seek to root
out his memory from my heart, that already has taken possession therein, in
whose consent or denial rests altogether the state of my life and honor. Ah
Moderatus, Moderatus, the flower and mirror of all mart^all prowess, and the
lively lantherne of perfect nobility, beauty, and virtue, if we estimate the
judgment of that learned Laureat, who said, Non Pater aut Matter reddunt tibi
nobilitatem:
Moribus and vita nobilitatur homo.


Oh sweet Moderatus, and therefore sweet, because, Moderatus, it is thou
alone that live in me, of whom my mind only conceiueth his hope, and the
heart his nourishment. Alas, that thy worthiness should be the overthrow of
mine honor, and thy perfection the imperfection of my life. But what, Florida,
he that fears every bush, will never be a good woodes-man: and he that will
not venture, when beauty and virtue commands, (which, though by hard
fortune they be little obscured, yet like the gold in the fire, will in the end
appear most rich and glorious,) may well come in my Aue, but shall never come
in my Creed: therefore I refer the sequel hereof unto the destinies, to be
arbiters in the cause* and rest resolved to win or loose Moderatus, betide
life or death: for his personable and valourous disposition has given my heart
the wound, and his virtue and bounty must salve the same. Ah, but fond
Florida, Moderatus is too wise to come to the fist by the lure: for he will
suppose thy call to be but counterfeit, and thy self a woman, whose property
is to be won with a nut, and lost with the shell, and therefore will reject
thy suite, and despise thy offers, setting his rest upon this old Addage,
Soon ripe, soon rotten: the hottest love is soonest forgotten: No, no
Florida, fear not, Moderatus is won already: for he that is so diligent and
willing to attend thee as a servant, will not dislike to be preferred to the
state of a husband. Wherefore burn not up daylight, and sleep not long in
doubt, for delay breeds danger, follow the counsel of Ovid, who said, Cum
mora non tuta est, subdere calcar equo. Upon this merry pin, Florida was about
to depart out of her chamber, to see if good fortune would offer her any
convenient opportunity to put in practice her determinate purpose, when
Verosa, the fair daughter of Perduratus, and sister to Moderatus, entered the
chamber, who missing her Lady Florida, and understanding that she was alone in
her chamber, marvelled the cause of her solitariness, being long before more
melancholy then she used to be. Whereupon to countenance the matter, she
dissembled the passions of her inward grief, faining her self sick,
demanding of Verosa what stir there was in Court: who, well knowing the
nature of her disease, and that mirth is a great purger of Melancholy humor,
thought it best to be pleasant with her, and thus answered: Madame* very
little: for your absence thus long, my Lady, has caused all to be hushed, not
one as much as calling for a pair of cards to play a set at Mawe, but every
one making his looking glass in his fellows face, standing like painted
Images, having nothing to do, without that with Dominianus, they would catch
flies, because they want one to instruct them in their Lessons: for our
Ligurian Gentlemen, are in a manner more nice and bashful then we women, and
want rather a spur then a bridle: and therefore, Madame, I do think, if you
would show a pleasant countenance amongst them, they would, like the Antes,
when the Sun enters into Aries, cheerfully creep out of their corners,
wherein so long they remained for dead.

Florida, smiling at this her pleasant answer, believing faithfully that
Verosa suspected her disease, and therefore to avoid suspicion, she coined
this reply.

I am glad, Verosa, that you are so iocund, and surely it seems by your
talk, that you met with a Champion, that either proved a Dastarde upon the
first encounter, whose cowardice surreth up this mirth in you, or else having
playde the part of a valiant Captain, and entered with courage the forte lately
besieged, you are glad to be won by such a worthy warrior: but howsoever,
I know you list not to make me privy, neither do I greatly covet to know,
because my little skill in that art, would happily make me give a wrong censure in
the cause: but if you come as a friend to inuit me, to see some of your
pastimes abroad, I am well contented to accept of your bidding, and to view the
end, if there be any act in playing, wherein, if you be an Actrix, I shall
rejoice to see your good grace in playing the counterfeit, and after, I will
tell you my mind, whether you be fitter for the stage in a Comedy, or a
Tragedy.

Verosa was not so gross, but that she perceived, that her Mistres
pleasantness was but to dissemble her ^^ward passions, and albeit her face was
full of smiles, yet her heart was full of sorrows, therefore smiling at her
conceited vain, she thought it not best to urge her any further upon that
text, but thus replied again: Madame, sickness and health be accidents, to
the which all living creatures be subject, yet after such sort, subject, that
both can not Dominere all at one time, therefore me thinks that it is very
strange, that contraries should concur in you upon such a sudden: for
pleasant disposition is the Calendar of a well tempered body and then, either
your sickness was but feigned, or your mirth now but dissembled. Yet
howsoever, I see it is your pleasure to make a stale of me, and to frame me
your Instrument, to argue of what you like best: and I am well pleased it
should be so, rather then you should want of your will. And therefore let us go
see, whether there be any act in preparing, if not, in playing abroad: agreed
upon this point, they left the solitary chamber of desolate Florida, and
passing through a gallerie going toward the chamber of presence, they might
see the young prince Cornelius standing in^a Bay window, which bounded upon a
very fair garden, and in his company Priscus, Moderatus, and another young
gentlewoman, which was of the house of Deualoyes, called Pandarina, a very gay
Dame she was, and noted above all the Ladies and Gentlewomen in Court, for her
ripe wit, and ready ^^swers in all pleasant discourses. Now was she in some
earnest disputation with Priscus, whereat Cornelius and Moderatus laughed a
good to see them so heated, crossing each other with pleasant and conceited
quippes. Florida perceiving them to be at it indeed, stood still, and smiling
said to Verosa, we have so long communed of comedy, til at last by good hap we
met with an act in playing: therefore let us draw nere the sport, least the
best part be past before we come: thus Florida, with more desire to make a
looking glass of the amiable countenance of her best beloved Moderatus, then
for any mind she had to hear their discourses, approached to this merry
company, whereupon Pandarina, glancing aside, happened to epsy them first, and
said, well, my lords, I see now, God has so well provided for me, knowing me
too weak for one of you, much more for three, that all in good time, he has
brought here my Lady Florida, and mistress Verosa, with whose aid I doubt
not, but to make my party good against you all. Priscus, hearing the Lady and
Mistress of his thoughts named, stood as mute, as if with Perseus shield he
had been turned into a stone: and I doubt not, if Pandarina had then followed
the chase hard, and taken the benefit of her good Fortune, but she might
easily have overcome Priscus at that instant. But she rather desirous to make
Florida acquainted with the matter, took no heed to his countenauce, which
was very pase, fear having banished all the blood from his visage, which
Moderatus well noted, and least his friend should be taken tardie, being driven
to a non plus, (if he had been enjoined to answer any demand) he interrupted
Pandarina in her speeches, and craved leave to make report of their
controversy, which being obtained, he stood so long in opening the matter,
till Priscus had taken breath, and somewhat recovered him self: for in this
sort Moderatus addressed his speech to Florida.

Madame, you came in very good season to succor a distressed Gentlewoman, who
being so hardy and valiant, as it seems by this bold enterprise, in
attempting alone to encounter with three, who think them selves to be no
cowardes at arms) it were great pity she should miscarrie, being charged with
an ouer-number. But for my Lord Cornelius and my self, Mistress Pandarina
alone shall be the Judge, if we played not fair, suffering her without
interruption (except it were a little laughing, which we could not forbear, to
see their eagerness in the cause) to combat it out with her first champion,
but she might hardly have trusted us (to you I confess) if Priscus had lost
the victory. And since you are come in such good opportunity, you have
ransomed a worthy warrior with your only presence: for I think no man here
so hardy, as to enterprise the defense of this quarrel, if you took the
contrary part. But nevertheless, since it is mistress Pandarinas pleasure,
that you should be acquainted with the question, thus it was, or so much in
effect.

As my Lord Cornelius, master Priscus, and my self stood here in this
window, viewing through these casements the fair prospect of this delightful
and pleasant garden, wondering at the excellency of Nature, the efficient of
so goodly a thing, welcomming in our thoughts the flourishing Lady of Spring,
that lately was arrriued from the boisterous storms of sturdie Hyems:
delighted thus to see her spread abroad her ensign, so trimly garnished with
littely green, we heartily wished to march under so worthy colors, which be
the tokens and badges of hope, (hope the only refuge of amorous conceited
Gentlemen) as I say, we stood thus in a Dilemma, as it were viewing these
fair flourishing flowers, which yielded forth not only a sweet and
odoriferous sent, after a pleasant April shower, but also a rare and glorious
sight, when Phoebus, having past the Equinoctial, pearceth the breast of
choleric Aries with his shining beams, beginning to dry up the silver dew
from the gentle Gilliflower, and sweet Roses, that it so ravished our minds
with contemplation thereof, that, I think, had not mistress Pandarina awaked
us of this sweet and delightful vision, we had (at leastwise wished in
desire to have) united our earthly bodies, with our minds, that be of lighter
substance and celestial, to the euer-beholding of that heavenly and divine
spectacle, and there withal have become humble peticioners to the Architector
of that great engine, that we might become attenders on the daughter of
Inachus, whom Jupiter, after that he had committed an escape with, placed a
star in the heavens, to save her from the wrath of Juno. Pandarina, seeing us
thus to stand, as stood Niobe, after the issue of Latona had revenged him
self upon her children, approaching nearer unto us, she interrupted our Muses
with this parley.

My Lords, it seems that you are either very lazy, or loosely given, if
you have neither hawke on fist abroad to procure your delight, nor Lady in
Court, under whose favor to shroud your selves, from these uncouth and
melancholy passions: for me thinks, it ill fitteth young Gentlemen to be
thus like Anchorites, still in contemplation, altogether exempt from Uenerie,
and Chivalry, which be the two principal recreations for heroical minds,
both which, do so detest the idle livers, that as the Bees hunt the Drones
from their hiue, as unfit members of their common wealth: so Mars, never
accepts for his soldier, nor Venus for her servant, any one that knows not
how to find him self occupied, either with warlike exercise, or amorous
dalliance: wherefore pluck up your spirits, for time lost can not be had
again, you may see the finest flower is but a day, and your time can not be
very long, let no base thoughts overcome your Princely minds, and if Cupid be
your Sovereign, and that the destiny have decreed, that he shall frown upon
you, yet bear valorous and resolute minds, and with Hannibal despise Fortune,
then shall you triumph over her with courage, that so ouercroweth you, being
thus given over to idleness.

My Lord Cornelius awaked with this hot skirmidge, out of his pleasant
meditation, answered her thus: Gentle Pandarina, I pray you, when you play with
your little dogs, for then you are not idle, to whom do you bequeath your
service, to Mars or Venus? whereat we all fell to such a laughter, that we made
mistres Pandarina very angry: and because my Lord proceeded no further in
this argument, which I think, was with that one word fully finished, M.
Priscus being a good tennise-player, took it at a rebound, and then went
forward with it, thus: I marvel very much, mistres Pandarina, that one of so
good a judgment as you be, should be so far ouershot in a matter so
pertinent to your sex, as the service of so honorable a Lady as Venus is, to
conclude, that because we were idle, therefore we were not in love, when as
only in being idle, we bequeath our selves wholly thereunto, being then in
contemplation of the hie mysteries of so great a Deity, imprinting in our
thoughts the Idea of our mistress lively countenance, and reuoluing in our
minds the happy success of our desired amors, where as otherwise, being as
you would have us occupied, albeit in parling with our best beloved, yet do not
we love so fervently: for that then our eyes is occupied with that office,
which being absent and solitary, our minds and hearts do execute: therefore
the fruitful effects of love, being either in the eyes or heart, I refer to
your own judgment, in which of these two parts of the body true love does
consist. If in the eyes or tongue, as it seems you would have it, I confess
I am in an error: but if otherwise, true love lies in the heart, as it does
indeed, then in being solitary, the mind is most occupied, and so the person
exempt from labors, or idle, (as you term it) is always most in love. And if
all this is not able to persuade you to believe a truth, yet reject not Ouids
principle, who being Master of that Art, censured thus of idleness: Ocia si
tollas, periere Cupidinis arcus,
Contemptaeque iacent, and sine luce faces.


Pandarina could scarce suffer him to come to a Colon, much less to a Period,
but fretting with great anger, did roundly cut him off in the midst of his
tale, replying again so effectually to the matter, that I think, if her cause
had been good, she would have ouer-matched us all: what her speeches were, I
can not remember, both for that my memory is very short, and also because the
substance of the cause grounded upon an art, whereof I am altogether ignorant:
thus Madame, you have heard the cause of contention, in such rude manner as I
could best deliver it. And I dare be bold to speak thus much in the behalf of
Priscus, that for his part, he will refer the judgment of this debate unto
your Ladyship, albeit Nature does bind you to be partial therein, in respect
his adversary and you be of the same sex.

Moderatus having thus finished his speeches, I refer to your judgments,
amorous gentlemen, who have well experienced the passions of languishing lovers,
whether Florida was not in an ecstasy for joy to hear him, that she loved as
her own soul, thus clarkly discyphering of the qualities and nature of Love.:
hoping that he could not be so perfect in the art, but that experience had
taught him his principles, and that probatum est had been his guide, directing
his compass by so good a leuel, being assured also, that if ever he had tasted
of the rind of the tree, he would reach at the fruit. And therefore hoped
that she should not need to be the plaintiff in this suit, wherein being a
defendant, she meant to suffer a recovery before he could have time to be non
suit in his action. And you must imagine gentlemen, that Priscus was not idle
all this while: for albeit his tongue walked not, yet his mind never eeased
from thinking, his heart from panting, his eyes only executing the office of
the tongue, so that I think no part of Floridas body was vnuiewed and looked
over a million of times, presenting every look with a sigh, and every sigh
ministering a thousand doubtful Dilemmas, what the sequel of his attempted
enterprise would prove, so that thus bathing him self in a sea of confused
thoughts, between hope and despair he rested speechless for the time to
attend the conclusion of their begun talk. Cornelius, Pandarina and Verosa
were not at this time altogether a sleep: for Cornelius had an eye to the
gallant beauty of young Verosa, who in respect thereof, was matchless, and
almost of an incomparable excellency, her virtuous and modest conuersations
being ornaments to deck the rest with a most gracious favor, that this young.
Saint endewed with all these qualities, wanted her peer in all the Dukes
Court. Pandarina, narrowly surueying as well the goodly personage of Priscus,
as also his gentle disposition, and ready sharp wit commixt with modest
gravity, had a great combat in her mind between Love and D^sdaine, hammering
in her brain a million of foolish fantasies, to be resolved on the sequel
thereof. Thus while Moderatus was occupied in speaking openly, the rest were
not exempt from secret and private thoughts. Verosa only excepted, who spent
the time only in giving attentive ear to their talk, being altogether either
ignorant or careless of the fantastical humors of dreaming lovers. And after
that Moderatus had concluded his begun speeches, Florida sweetly smiling,
descanted somewhat upon the matter, allowing the venterous courage of
Pandarina, not disallowing the subtle reasonings of Priscus, referring the
equity of the cause to them that had better skill in the art, then her self.
And having thus spent some part of time in reasoning pro and contra, at last
they agreed between them selves, to pass the rest of the time in some merry
exercise, to recreate their minds withal. Cornelius brake silence thus:
because we be three men, and you so many women, we will, either of us by lot,
see which of you will happen to be each of our Ladies, and as it then falls,
so shall it continue for this year: that is, the woman shall call the man
servant, and the man shall call the woman Lady and Mystresse. And when they
had all consented to this, the three Gentlemen separated them selves from the
rest of the company, and Cornelius chose to him self for a fained name, (to
take his chance in this lotterie) Troylus: and Priscus named him self Hector,
and Moderatus took to name Ulysses: and so returning again to the company,
they discovered their borrowed names: and then Verosa, because she was
youngest, was appointed to have the first choice, who having heard their names,
she said thus unto them. My Lord Cornelius, and the rest of the gentlemen, you
have chosen names worthy your selves: the first, being the flower of all
Knighthood in the world: the second, a perfect myrrour of a true and faithful
Lover: and the third, the true lantherne of all Civil policy: and for
wisdom, Mercuries own sweet sucking Babe. Wherefore, my self being young, the
youngest best agrees with my years: and so I choose for my servant, (since it is
your own pleasures so to term your selves) Troylus. Cornelius, who had taken
that name, said then, Lady and Mistress, you must kiss me for earnest, or
else the bargain is not bound: whereupon, after a little modest bashfulnesse,
that part was finished. And then Florida, who was assented to have the second
place, began thus: Ulysses by his wit and policy, did more benefit the
Grecians in their ten years siege to the City of Troy, then Achilles with
all his manhood, and help of his Myrmidones, and I had rather that my servant
should keep him self out of the danger, as Ulysses: and though using his
tongue oftener then his Target. yet doing more good therewith, then others the
stoutest warriors did with their shields and lances. And were I assured of my
chance in this my choice, I would say with the daughter of Icarus, Penelope
coniux semper Vlyssis ero: and therefore let my Servant be Ulysses. And when
herewith she had concluded, Moderatus with good grace said thus: Madame, your
hap was the worse to make so bad a choice, but since it was your lot, if it be
your pleasure to assent thereunto, let me kiss your royal hand in token of
your entertainment: to which demand she willingly assented, being glad of her
chance, and well pleased with her choice, though modesty forbade her publikly
to discover the same. Then quoth Pandarina, (allotted last to make choice,
because she was eldest) you have so pollitikely used the matter, that I could
not take my fortune, in choosing my self which should be my servant, but I am
contented, since it was my chance to light upon one, without any industry of
mine own, to give him the best entertainment I can. And I am glad I have met
with one so valiant as Hector: for when all shifts fail, he will not stick to
combat for his Mistress: and I will assure you, my Lady Florida, if you had
heard his pollitike and subtle reasonings ere-whiles, you would have judged
him to be a second Ulysses: but howsoever pollitike or valiant, or though
neither, it is ^owe no time to refuse what fell to my lot. Then quoth Priscus,
let your servant have his earnest penny, and then you may be right assured, he
will not stick either to speak for combat for his Mistress, with all the
wit and strength he has: whereupon having bound the bargain with a kind
Conge, that act was concluded. And I suppose none to be displeased with his
chance, without that Priscus remained discontented for that he had not
obtained Florida for his Lady and Mistress, in whose hands lay the sentence
of his life or death, but nevertheless he was well satisfied, his friend
having that room which he desired him self, hoping now that Moderatus upon
this new accident, should have a more convenient opportunity, to open the
matter at large unto Florida in his behalf, and by that means he might the
rather obtain some comfort in his proceedings. These gay Courtiers being at
this time all a-morte, not a word uttered by any, each one hammering in his
brain a thousand devises for their new entertained passions, in the end
Priscus very faintly, for needs must he be faintie that was fiered with such
a brand, quaking like the aspine lea^e for fear of offending, yet animated
with martial courage to attempt, thinking it too great a cowardice not to dare
to speak, at last brake silence, thus: Noble Prince, fair Lady, with all you
the rest that be of this company, the privilege of my pardon claimed and had,
for my presumption in offering (without leave) to make any motion before them,
that I ought and do obey with reverence, since that we have hitherto bestowed
all this afternone in honest recreations, which has somewhat refreshed our
minds with the exercise thereof, yet as the Hyperborei, which be of the
strongest sight, in the end are become blind in beholding the brightness of
the sun, though at the first sight they were able to endure the same: so we,
without some change of exercise, will soon weary our selves. And therefore to
change our diets from these winter nights exercise, wherewith we have already
begun, to such as shall be fit these fair summer days, and so to end this
days merriment with music might very well agree with the quality of the
company, and condition of the time: and for that my Lady Floridas chamber
wants not store of instruments, me thinks, by her leave, that to be a fit
place to solemnize the same: whereunto they all agreed, and being come to the
place, all set in order, it was agreed that every one should sing a song with
his own Instrument, and that the Punie should begin first, and so to
succeed orderly according to the prioritie of their ages, so that by this
sentence Verosa must begin, and the text must be amorous, or else the sermon
can not be current, who having brought into concord a fair pair of
Uirginals, which was hard at hand, she solemnly chaunted this ensuing
Cansong.

VER OSAES song.
ANd must the Punie that learned Gammut scant,
Muse upon Crochets trebled often and often?
Or who of Art the perfect grounds does want,
To judge thereof, shall he then clime aloft?
No, no: of truth his cunning proves but vain,
And so herein shall I such merit gain.
But seeing your doomes is a command to speak,
I will not stick, (yet blame me not therefore,
If I do err) for that my skill is weak,
So that of right the blame is yours the more,
Appointing her of colors Judge to be,
Who being so blind, can therein nothing see,
For Cupids craft, ever fronted with a smyle,
Has never pierst my panting virgins breast,
For I abhor the Caytiffes crafty wyle,
Wherewith the Lovers fond are ever oppressed.
I wish my friends never for to prove such fate,
Least unto them repentance comes too late.
For to repeat the Lovers dreaming thoughts,
If skill to me had taught the ready way,
How with loves frown they seem like dampened ghostes,
Were toyled too much, and eke would make you say,
That I a foe were to humanity,
Therefore with this, I crave excused to be,
Verosa having made an end of her song, made low obeysaunce to them all, and
so returned to her former place again. And Cornelius, because his turn was
next, called for his Lute, and before he began, thus he spoke: Mistress, how
falls it out, that so fair a Gentlewoman of your time, should be thus given,
I fear me, you will be a Nun, if you rest in this opinion a while: take heed,
your error is great, and if you repent not in time, your penance will be the
greater, or else your time in purgatory must be double: for I know well, Cupid
is too mighty to be thus skorned of you, who does not use to pardon wilful
offenses: and surely, Mistress, if you continue in this obstinacy, I am sorry
that I have met with one so blinded with heresy.

Verosa, blushing with modest shamefastness, said, pardon me my Lord, in that
I have spoken my mind, as by your commandment and the rest of the company,
I was appointed, and surely I think, what I have spoken to be rather an error
then an heresy, if it be any offense at all: but though it were neither, and
that all I spoke should be an undoubted truth, yet would I recant therein,
rather then loose so honorable a Servant: And sith you have thus like a
ghostly father given me a spiritual counsel, you have heard my confession,
and I am ready to perform any penance, that you will enjoin upon me for my
sins: By this, Cornelius Lute being come, the company requested that a good
concord of his instrument might perfect that conformity which was in his
Mistress: whereat Cornelius, being nothing displeased, having tuned his Lute,
warbled out this ensuing Dittie.

CONELIVS song.
WHo aims at honors worthy name,
And coueteith renowned fame,
In no wise can thereto aspyre,
Without the aid of Queen desire.
Oh mighty Cupid, Venus boy,
Accept of mine unfeigned joy.
She sits triumphant in her seat,
And foes with furious looks does threat,
Which do blaspheme with words vnmild;
Against her self and bonny child.
Oh mighty Cupid, Venus boy,
Accept of mine unfeigned joy.
A child, whose force and mighty hand,
The great God Mars could not withstand,
That burns like a lamp of sire,
In fleeyng thoughts winged with desire.
Oh mighty Cupid, etc.
Whose shining beams does plainly show,
The ready way for them I trow,
For to aspyre to dignity,
If loyal Lovers they will be.
Oh mighty Cupid, etc.
Lo, here behold the honors due,
To amorous hearts that will be true,
But who dislodgeth from his bower,
Shall soon perceive his rod is sour.
O mighty Cupid, etc.
And that he may with force confound,
Each living wight that goes on ground,
All you that do this God despise,
Fly from his reach if you be wise.
O mighty Cupid, etc.
But he that mean'th not to disdain,
For pleasures sake to take some pain,
Join with the rest that amorous be,
And to his Court to gain your fee.
Oh mighty Cupid, Venus boy,
Accept of mine unfeigned joy,
Cornelius having warbled out this Dittie, with a smiling countenance, bade
them all be merry: and Florida, whose course was next, called for an
Instrument, and in the mean time spoke thus to Cornelius, My Lord, you have
pleaded so cunningly for your great Master Cupid, that sure you deserve a
double fee: and no marvel, for as it is said, Animo volenti nihil est
difficile, and least we should spend so much time in reasoning, that we should
want day to finish our begun exercise, I beseech Clio to be mine aid, and
therewithal having stretched the strings of her Instrument to the highest
note, she sweetly chirped out this Ode.

FLORIDAES song,
LAtely when Aurora drew
Curtayne, which was dark of hew,
Which vnspred showed light,
That covered was by Lady night:
And blushingly discovered ay,
Her loves bed wherein she lay,
Then Titan lordly-n his seat,
Dried up moisture with his heat,
And chased has the veil dark,
Of racking clouds for his park:
Fishes swamme in silver stream,
And I unripped seame by seame.
Circumstance of natures mould,
Which rare seemed to behold.
Gazing thus with eyes of mind,
There I could nothing find,
Which pleased not curious eye,
And therewithal I began to spy:
Narcissus that was so fair,
With his golden locks of hair,
Which of late had scorned all,
That were bent to Cupids call,
Viewing there the water clear,
Where his beauty did appear,
He thought it had another been,
Whose like before he never had seen.
Thinking to embrace a shade,
(That of a substance scorn had made)
He consumed in loves desire;
Of such force is Cupids Ire,
That prepares the bed of woes,
To all such as be his foes,
And to entrap, he snares does lay,
Such as do him disobey.
When I saw his doom so dyre,
To such as despised his fire:
At his flame I thought to warm,
Least I caught the greater harm.
Then in haste I came away,
Like aspyne leaf quaking ay,
For fear of the mighty God,
That all threatened with his rod,
That ever would disloyal be,
To his Mothers progeny,
His judgment pronounced was,
With such terror, that alas,
I hear it sound in mine ear,
Moving body to pale fear,
Least I should incur his Ire,
Which might yield me chief desire.
FLorida having warbled over this Ode very demurely, sat silent, and
Moderatus, who was to follow, having his Lute ready for the purpose, first
boarded his Lady and Mistress with this preamble: Sapho was never more
poetical in her Muses, nor cunning in her musical Instruments, then you,
Madame, proved your self by this so rare demonstration of an excellent Poet,
and exquisite Musician. And albeit that it is a greater discommendation then
praise, to be commended of an ill Orator, yet pardon me, for that I do my
good will, and truth never deserves blame: and therewithal not staying for
any reply, he began with a slow and soft voice, to measure over this Cansong.

Moderatus song.
WHen golden Titan did the Ram forsake,
And warmed the Bull with force of greater heat,
Then forth I walked the pleasant air to take,
Glad when I heard the silly Lambs to bleate.
Pleased to behold the storms of winters ire,
(With quiet calm) at last for to expire.
As thus I mused under the silent shade,
The chirping birds chattering their harmony,
Pleasant slumber my senses did invade,
And then I heard a voice that loud did cry,
Woe worth the time that I did yield consent,
To lawless Love, which now I do repent.
The golden shaft that pearst my panting breast,
Came from the quiver hanged at blind Cupids side,
Which has so full bereaved me of rest,
And therewithal again he lowdly cryde,
Woe worth the time that I did yield consent,
To lawless Love, which now I do repent.
Phoebus reflecting beams from polished glass,
Yeeldes not more lively shows then does her face,
That is the cause of this my harm, alas,
Well may I say, being hopeless in her grace,
Woe worth the time that I did yield consent,
To lawless Love, which now I do repent.
Whereat I wak't, but nothing could I view,
Which made me think a vision it should be,
And straight I rose to see what would ensue,
And then a novel strange appeared to me,
A frozen man being in a fiery flame,
Another fried in frost, (woe worth the same.)
Before I could the meaning understand,
This strange Aenigma vanished quite away,
Whereat amazed much I then did stand,
Thinking that woeful wight did lately say,
Woe worth the time that I did yield consent,
To lawless Love which now I do repent.
PAndarina being ready to take her turn in this musical pastime, would not
seem to let Moderatus skill in Music and Poetry uncensured, and therefore
thus she said: Master Moderatus, you began so poetical, persisted so musical,
and ended so sophistical, that it is hard to judge, whether you be a soldier
of Mars, or a servant of Venus, but if I be a good interpreter of dreams,
Morpheus favored you highly, in giving you so gentle a warning, showing before
your face a plain demonstration of the danger, before you undertook the
charge: and it is always thought, that altogether, or for the most part, one
dreameth of that thing, which he had most in memory before he slept, whereby
it plainly appears, that the same which you spoke in the person of another,
was altogether appropriated unto your self: but if you say, it is not an
opponents part to distinguish a question proposed, pardon me good sir, your
dark description thereof made me thus much to descant, to see if I did
conceive your meaning, before we should proceed any further.

Moderatus a little moved with Pandarinas co^structio^ of his song, was about
to reply, but Florida perceiving the alteration of his color to grow of
choler, believing that this dark and obscure narration of his mind touching
love, was only to blind the rest, least they should conceive his mind toward
her, being very glad, thinking that he was only moved, when his scarre was
touched, played the moderator in disputations between them, saying, Concludat
iniuria finis, I pray you let us not stay all day in arguing, least it should
be a mean to hinder our music, and therewithal took Moderatus by the hand,
and said, Pacify your self gentle Sir, (for Mistress Pandarinas censure is
but one Doctors opinion) and reserve what you had to speak now to a further
disputation of all these matters, and so willing Pandarina to proceed in her
charge, she sat silent, and Pandarina betook her to the Uirginals, and having
tuned it to her mind, she began to sing thus:

WHen Flora flourished in her prime,
bedeckt with gallant green:
Had ouerspred the subtle soil,
most lively to be seen.
No wit could choose but wonder much,
to see such gallant Dame,
Attyred so gay with Majesty,
belonging to the same.
She traced abroad with pompous pace,
and troops of royal train,
Both male and female followed her,
the Prince and Country-swaine.
Each one so placed in his degree,
as best did fit his state,
Some pleased with his happy chance,
some cursed his frowning fate.
Before her went, but dare I speak,
what there I did behold:
A Princely youth, a mighty King,
a God both stout and bold.
His amber looks so gaily twyn'd
like crysped wyers of gold,
His beauty so ravished my wits,
I can it not unfold.
In one hand he did bear a bow,
the other carried fire:
Which would consume the stubburne sort,
that served not Queen desire.
And at his side a quiver did hang,
wherein was arrows twain:
The one with gold full finely typt,
that Lovers use to pain.
The other leaden headed was,
which makes disdain in heart:
Who so is towch'd with this, of Love
shall never feel the smart.
He wings did bear, in token that
who did his favor require:
That he should bear aspyring mind,
and winged with high desire.
But last, which does not pain me least,
the world to him was dark:
He could not see to give to each,
according to desert.
Thus marched Flora in her pomp,
chief Actrix of the game,
And ministered matter to the rest,
delighting in the same.
She is the fruit of pleasant Ver,
most lively to be seen:
Which glads the hearts of youthful wyghts,
and beautifies the green.
She matter yeeldes to Cupids mates,
for to effect their joy:
And he delights within her bower,
her company to enjoy.
This unity between these twain,
did boil the fervent mind,
And made each living thing to cleave
by Nature to his kind.
The God of Love did fancy force,
and Flora fruit did yield,
Convenient to effect the same,
twixt pleasant groves in field.
Wherefore by heaps the Amorous troops,
resorted to the place:
And followed still this Princely crew,
their pleasures to embrace.
Whose Majesty when I beheld;
and stately countenance,
Not Mars in field seemed so stout,
with warlike bloody lance.
For presently he vaunc'd him self,
unto a stately throne,
More gorgeously then ever was wrought,
in timber or in stone.
It was embossed with bordering bows,
and brancht with knots of green,
No wight by art could frame the like,
but flourishing Flora Queen.
About this seat where Cupid sat,
the chyrping birds did sing,
And his Venerian Clyents eke,
a doleful knell did ring.
Some merrily did laugh and sport,
possessing hearts desire.
And others cried for equity,
being skorched with his fire.
This Chaos of confused sport,
did make me much to muse,
If that I should this God adore,
or so to do refuse.
As thus I stood, not yet resolved
what course therein to take,
I had a summons to his Court,
my fealty to make.
Then did I seek to wrest by force,
his will for to withstand,
All that I could, I strived: yet was
to weak my faynting hand.
Lo I which erst their follyes blamed,
am now perforce constrained,
To yield obeisance at his bar,
which late the same disdained.
Wherefore I burn, and so must all
that dallieth with the flame,
Even as the Fly turning about,
is perished in the same.
Mistress Pandarina (quoth Priscus, whose turn was next) I being once almost
a sworn foe to Cupid and his Laws, your most rare and excellent discourse
has now altogether reclaymed me from mine error, and wholly recanting mine
heresy, with no less then a sorrowful and penitent heart, hoping a just
absolution to follow so open and frank a confession: and therewithal having
tuned his instrument to his mind, he solemnly desca^ted upon this ensuing
Ditty.

PRISCVS song.
WHen Titan began the Crancke for to ascend,
And touched the point ecliptike in the sky,
Each thing on earth did then him self defend:
Even from his parching beams, that did welnye
Consume all things, (with violent force of heat,)
That walked abroad in this terrestrial seat.
Princes did keep within their princely bowres,
With bows of green their chambers hanged were.
Wherein they dallied with their paramours:
The winds lay silent in their concaue sphere.
All sought that night (at pleasure) take their ease,
Of raging heat the fury to appease.
The silly swaynes (woe `s me, the silly swayues)
Under a Pine in silent shade did rest,
Ah rest, which restless still my poor heart pains,
Wherewith even now my carcass is oppressed:
Unwitting then their secrets I ouer-hard,
To what I did not taking good regard.
It was the great God Pans festival day,
When shepherds quaint do plod it with their kind,
Of rusticke pipes they made a consort gay,
To honor Pan each sport they called to mind:
Thus they did banquet with their music rude,
When to the same my self I did intrude.
Where when I did intrude, my heart I pa^n'd,
For floating fame did fill mine ears with praise,
Of Venus peer, whose beck is a command,
And then desire that is a spur always
(So fortune would) did prick my wounded mind,
(But in her sight) that no where ease I find.
A combat straight within my self arose,
Of that I should yield unto Queen desire,
Knowing that fame is partial as she goes,
So I might fall in seeking to aspire,
Then Lady Love said that I must obey,
Which sentence past, I durst not make delay,
Fortune thus framed the plot to mine annoy,
Fame blew the coals to kindle my desire,
Love did command I should no rest enjoy,
Till I were clens'd in Cupids purging fire,
Thus I do range to seek a remedy,
And though I live, yet living daily dye.
Seeing Fame of beauties pride could me enforce,
What marvel is 't if beauty it self could move?
But oh that beauty had not some remorce,
To yield me due, that fervently do love,
Or at the least to pity mine estate,
And not for love to yield me deadly hate.
The God is blind that works this mystery,
And does not work according to desert,
But yet I yield me to his Majesty,
In hope at last he will regard my smart.
In the mean time I banish quite despair,
Expecting him my wrack for to repair.
Repair if that he will, long may he reign,
Triumphing wise to govern both Gods and men,
If otherwise I can not grief refrain,
But must seek out a dark and doleful den,
In deserts wild to end my dismal days,
And Hermyte-like on roots to live always.
WHen Priscus with a deep sigh (being now come to a perfect Period) had
concluded his song, Florida, having searched all her wits, to devise means
to have some private conference with Moderatus, after a competent time of
silence each expecting other to speak, said, Be blythe, Gentlemen, and if, as
it seems, you have cloyed your selves with music that it has caused a
surfeit, having in such sundry forms used our tongues, to refresh and recreate
our selves, me thinks it could not be amiss, to digest some of our fulsome
stomachs, a little while to use our feet, least for want of exercise, they
should wax more stiff, and we forget our measures: but it is no marvel if we
do commit measures to oblivion, being thus long in conference about a thing
that is without measure: for I do think, that there is no Arithmetician so
perfect, that can number it: no Geometrician so cunning, that can measure it:
no Mathematician so excellent, that can proportion it: no Rhetorician so
eloquent, that can describe it: no Poet so conceited, that can invent a reason
thereof: no Astronomer so singular, that can judge of it: And to conclude, no
Courtier so fine, that can exquisitely countenance it. Wherefore, Gentlemen and
friends, all we have yielded our censures thereof, and the wisest Philosopher
could do no more, without a Metaphisicall mean to understand more then Nature
ever taught, or the Gods them selves had the gift to do: thus to be brief,
in my opinion you have done all well, having diuersely yielded your judgments
thereof, the thing it self being of nature so diverse. And therefore I think
it convenient, that (seeing we have for the most part spent this day in
pleasant recreations) that we should end the same with some exercise, that
would bring us to some natural heat after this cold confection, and tosome
appetites to our supper again, after our surfeit in amorous discourses. And
therewithal, the company with silence seeming to agree, Florida called for
music, which being ready, she willed her brother Cornelius, and his
Mistress to lead the rest: for as they had their turn first in other
exercise, so likewise to begin with this, and she and her servant would
censure of their good skill in Carpet trade, and afterward yield their
cunning therein, to their judgments. So presently they fell all a-dauncing,
saving Florida, and Moderatus, who withdrewe them selves to a Bay window,
where Moderatus thought it not best to slip so good an opportunity, once to
break a staff in his friends behalf, and so after a long preamble, (she
attentively giving ear thereunto, supposing it had been for him self)
imparted unto her, upon a firm and sure promise of secrecy, the whole
circumstance of his friends cause, his birth, Country, and friends, his
travail past, and the continuance of his present care, the worthiness of the
man, and the feruencie of his love: omitting nothing, which he thought might
induce her to affect and fancy him. But hereupon Florida perceiving his drift,
could scant suffer him so long a Period: for that very angerly and with bending
brows, she commanded him to proceed no further in that suit: and, quoth she,
if my friendly countenance has made you so pieuish, as to abuse my curcesie so
much, I will (albeit much unwilling) pluck away from you the favor of a
friendly affection, which peradventure might have kindled in me some fancy
toward you, if you had taken in hand that office for your self, which so
earnestly you prosecute for another. Whereupon Moderatus excusing him self
with his own unworthiness, nevertheless commending the desert of his friend,
and urging for him all that he could, was by Florida absolutely commanded to
silence, and no more to speak for Priscus, nor to presume to enter her
presence, if he seemed to disdain of her friendly courtesy so frankely offered
him. And therewithal not staying for a further reply, flung away in great
choler, without any manner of salutation to the rest of the company: whereupon
they all dissolved, not a little admiring the cause of Floridas so sudden
departure. Moderatus, to avoid suspicion, affirmed that Florida was not well
at ease, all seemed to hold them selves satisfied with this excuse, poor
Priscus only excepted, whose heart was wel-nie sundred for very grief,
misdeeming the very true occasion of that accident, yet dissembling his pain
as much as he could, with a merry countenance in outward semblance past over
the matter for that time, till he might find opportunity to confer with his
friend therein.

Gentlemen, here may you plainly behold a very actual Stratagem of a confused
Metamorphosis, wherein Cupid shows the force of his power: for first, he so
inflamed Priscus with the love of Florida, (their Parents being mortal foes,)
that he came from his Fathers kingdom, a Country far adjacent, to Liguria
to do her service, this instimulation proceeding only upon bare report of her
rare beauty, blazed by a silly shepherd in a song at a rural feast, and
pastoral sport observed by a sort of Country swaynes and shepheardes in
honor of their God Pan, and therefore might rather seem a fabulous fiction,
then any demonstration of truth, (whose credulity therein to fallible fame,
may be an wholesome admonition for you to avoid the like, being so erroneous,
as Cicero verifieth, saying, Credulitas enim error est magis quam culpa.) and
the more to wrappe this young nouice in a Laberinth of his own fond conceits,
he so favored his froward affection, that causing him to forget the danger
of being continually in the hands of his fathers mortal enemy, he brought
him from a Prince of Aemulia, to be a vassal and seruitour in her Fathers
Court, whereby to obtain the sight of her, whom he loved more dear then he
did his own life. The young Gentleman, who had never been a long wayter in
Lady Venus Court, measuring the affection of Florida after his own fervent
fancy, thought every smyle a favor, and every look the Calendar of true
love: much like the Swallows, that think every Sunshine to be a fair
Summers day, such is the desired contrariety of this blind god, that he
makes the beloved little to esteem the faithful and unfeigned zeal of the
passionate, and tormenting lover, that daily offered his humble service for the
pleasing of his Lady, which takes no effect, but rather breeds contempt and
disdain in her skornefull and proud mind, a too too unkind reward to so
loving a friend. In like manner this Cyprian boy delighting in nothing but
extremities, contrariwise so inflamed the mind of the young Lady with the
love of Moderatus, that not only her affection to him was match-able to
Priscus fancy toward her, but also did exceed her patient in love toward
him, who being not yet moved with the violent passions of seruent desire, did
little regard the same, though contrary to Decorum in feminine sex, she by
her own mouth had given him to understand thereof. So much he delights in
chaungeable nouel^yes, that he holds not that plea for current in his Court,
which is not like Proteus, that receives every shape, or to the Polip that is
apt for every impression, or to the Cameleon, that turns it self into the
likeness of every object: how dangerous is it then to warm at his fire, the
heat whereof not only wythereth the body, but also wearyeth the mind,
which, like the vemme of a Tarantula, deuoureth a man laughing: a pleasing
evil, which unawares brings us to confusion. Well, had Priscus but remembered
that a woman's eye draws like the Adamant, and preu^deth like the Basiliske,
be would not have come so far to seek his own bane: but truth it is,
Love is senseless and lawless, and therefore he that is subject thereto
obeys no reason: for needs must he trotte, whom the Devil drives, as the
old Addage is, otherwise Priscus had never so blinded him self with
self-will, who now has full experience (having with repentance bought the
same) in the miserable life of unfortunate Lovers, whose only stay is but a
rotten staff: for now feeling the bitter panges of his tormenting passions to
surcharge him with sorrow and grief, he trembled to think of the answer
he should receive of his assured friend Moderatus, and therefore as one in
despair of his own life, he feigned an excuse of some urgent and weighty
business to be done with all expedition, which called him (as he said) very
much against his will to the dispatch thereof. The rest of the company having
concluded to suppe together, whereby, with a cup of pure wine, to drive down
all their pastimes and sportes, (seeing as he feigned such necessary business
and affairs drew him from their company) they would stay his friend
Moderatus as a pledge of his return, in hope before the feast were ended, he
would repair to ransom him. Whereupon Priscus departed, and they all
together seeing the company bare without Florida, determined first to visit
her, and then if her distemperature were not overmuch, they would entreat her
to be their guest, and bear them company that night: which accordingly they
performed, and came all together to her chamber, where she being very
melancholy, and having a flea in her ear, had cast her self upon her bed, and
by this had breathed forth, not only a number of grievous groans and scalding
sighs, but also many hard and sharp inuectiues against Moderatus, that so
discourteously has refused her gentle offer: and therefore her former choler
something quallified, Florida, at their coming to the chamber, awaked out of
her dumpes, (being very high minded, and therefore would not be perceived to
mourn for any thing, stepped up upon a sudden, and said^ unto them: now gentle
friends, you have played the good woodesmen, that having wounded the Dear,
you followed his tracke so well, that you came to his den, where he was ready
to breath his last^ for surely, in good earnest be it spoken, I was so wearyed
with this days exercise, that my pillowe was my best Physician: and
therewithal spying Moderatus present, and Priscus away, she thought al was
well, and that Moderatus had recanted in his error, and Priscus become
non-sute in his action. And therefore upon their entreatie, to have her
company to suppe, she willingly assented to go with them: and being all come
to the place appointed, supper was ready, and they fell roundly to their
vittails: for their exercise that day had brought them to good appetites. And
repast being done, after a little prattle, being all desirous of rest, they
took leave each of other, and so departed.

Moderatus great sorrow, that his faithful endeavor could not take place with
FLORIDA for the preferment of his friend. His determination to leave DEVASCOS
Court, and his letter to FLORIDA to signify the same.

Chap. 6.
MOderatus, who (all this while was very sore disquieted in mind, his
thoughts wandering at it were betweeen Scilla and Charibdis) could by no
means devise how to rid him self out of the intricate Laberinth he was in:
first, the loyal league of friendship between him and Priscus, moving him to
great pity, in that his faithful endeavor could not take effect to satisfy
the desire of his dearest friend: and again, being very pensive, for that
reason and honesty commanded him to refuse the courteous and gentle offer of
the fair Florida: but to be brief, love and virtue being at great wars in
his mind, Love hammering in his head a thousand reasons to move him to fancy
Florida, and assuring him of a sufficient mean to retain his friendship still
with Priscus: Virtue on the other side, forbidding him to violate his faith
unto his friend, least in so doing he should become hateful unto the world,
and his name grow odious amongst men: in the end virtue having gotten the
superiority, (for by nature he was much inclined thereto) he bethought with
him self how he might best further his friend in his Amors, knowing very
well that to dissuade him from his purpose, was with the Assirian wolves to
bark against the stars, and when he had tossed diverse and sundry devises in
his head concerning the same, none seeming current, but all impossible, if he
remained where Florida might have knowledge of him: for now he judged that his
presence was the greatest let to hinder Priscus determinate purpose, and
therefore he determined to remove that block, and so resolved unawares to
any, presently to avoid the Dukes Court, thinking that when Florida missed him,
she would be glad to entertain Priscus: for that women, having once feathered
their thoughts with fancy, would do no less then still aim at affection:
and he knew very well, there was no fayrer mark for her in all her fathers
Court, then Priscus, and thus he concluded with him self the next morning to
depart from Albigena. On this determination he went home to his fathers
lodging, thinking it not the wisest course to go to his friend Priscus chamber
in the Court, least if he were pressed to reveal unto him the verity of the
matter, it might breed in him such a despair, that his pretended policy
would serve for small purpose: who being come to his fathers gate, it was so
far past of the night, that al were in bed: nevertheless he repaired to the
chamber window of a servant of his Fathers, whom he loved very faithfully,
and called him to open the gate for him, who incontinently so did, and showed
him a chamber to take his rest, whereupon he spoke to Baleto, (for so his
Fathers man was called, being assured of his fidelity, which very often had
yielded unto him many sure pledges of truth) how that he was to depart from
the Dukes Court upon some serious business, which required a present dispatch,
to the executing whereof, he must be furnished with a pilgrims weed, and
therefore gave him in charge, by morning to provide such furniture as belonged
thereunto: and therewithal delivered him Crowns sufficient to buy the same,
promising also to reward him well for his labor, and so Baleto hyed him about
his business, and Moderatus betook him to his ease, who all this night took
but small rest, beating his brains sometimes about the course of his travel,
other-whiles calling to memory how grievously his parents would take his
absence, with diverse other occurrents which happened to come to his mind: and
lastly resolved upon this point, that if he truly discharged the part of a
friend, he did not care how his travel prospered, how his parents should be
grieved, nor how he should be thought of by his friend. And so peremptorily
determining to depart suddenly, he took pen, ynke, and paper, and devised
these ensuing lines to be sent to Florida.

TO FAIR FLORIDA, PERFECT health and prosperous happiness.
THat which very often I have read in antiquities, I find now plainly
verified in you: which is, that Love swimmeth in a woman's eye, but never diueth
into her heart: fancy is the load-starre that rules her affection, and desert
is either never respected, or slenderly considered, it is presently in
oblivion. Well, now I perceive that the finest velvet has his bracke, the
fairest Rose his prickle, and the rarest beauty a disdainful and coye
resolution, which does more blemish an honorable mind, then the most
excellent hew of beauty does garnish and adorn the body: for as it is said,
If thou be fair, thou ought diligently to endeavor thy self, that thy
virtuous life be aequiualent to those good parts which thy Creator bestowed
upon thee: but if foul, thou ought so much the more to endeavor thy self
to excel in virtue, as thou art others inferior in beauty. Wherefore,
Madame, unnatural were it for you, being furnished with such heavenly and
divine beauty, to have your heart to hardened in the forge of cruelty, as not
to relieve the ceaselesse torments of your faithful Lover, and my distressed
friend, who counting all danger a joy, all grief a grace, all pain a
pastyme, and wayghing all torments as a treasure, so the same were sustained in
your service, or undertaken at your commandment: and to be brief, had you
any way regarded a loyal and loving heart, founded upon an unfeigned and
virtuous resolution, so long could you not have with-helde your eye of pity
from him, that so often, yea, even within your view languished with such pure
tormenting pain and grief, that his only hope of release was, to have his
dismal days ended by the pearcing and deadly darte of death. Happily you will
say, that I pronounce a sharp sentence against mine own self, and judge me
as arrogant in denying your most courteous offer, as you were unkind in not
granting my request. True it is, if either the force of lawless love, or the
ouer-liberal courtesy (far above my desert) of a royal and beautiful Lady,
had been (of a virtuous and honest mind) more to be respected and regarded,
then the sacred league and inviolable bond of true and faithful friendship,
which united Priscus mind and mine together, much more had I ouer-shot my
self to deny your request, and to refuse the thing I most of all desired: but
seeing the Imperial laws of sacred society did will and command the
contrary, I think therein that I have done but my duty: wherefore know fair
Florida, that since your doom was so dyre, as absolutely to forbid me your
presence, without I undertook so much for my self, as I did then prosecute
for my friend, rather then I would falsify my faith, I mean (though to my no
small grief) to fulfill the tenor of your sentence, by absenting my self not
only from your presence, but also from your fathers Court, and faithfully
bequeath my self to a pilgrims life, to assay if by my penance I may release
my friend from his martyrdom. Wherefore receive this my last adewe, and credit
me, the refusing of your gentle offer proceeded of a firm zeal toward my
friend, and not of a coy disdain toward you: assuring you, but to prejudice
Priscus, I am every way at your command: and so intending not to return
again, till either Florida hates Moderatus, or loves priscus. I beseech you,
if ever you affected me, you attribute the same unto him as his due, who as
Cicero said, est quasi alter idem, and therefore may justly challenge all that
were due unto me. I am so quaint in my pilgrims habit, that I forget the
reverence due to so royal a lady. Wherefore I pray for pardon, and wish you (if
the prayer of a pilgrim may take effect) to commend me to Priscus. And thus,
with tears in mine eyes, and grief in my heart, I commend you to your pleasure,
and bequeath my self to my travel.

Yours, every way, but to prejudice Priscus, DON MODERATVS.


Moderatus departure from Albigena. Priscus intercepting of MODERATVS letters
to FLORIDA and perusal of the same. His grief for the loss of his friend,
which drive him to a dangerous fever: MODERATVS letter sealed again, and
delivered to FLORIDA. Her meditation upon the same: the altering of her
resolucion, and affecting of PRISCVS. The Ladies and Gentlemen's visiting of
PRISCVS being sick. CORNELIUS censure upon Beauty and Bounty.

Chap. 7.
MOderatus having finished this letter, repaired to the chamber of Baleto, to
see how things were in a readiness, (thinking it long till he were departed
from Albigena) and to deal with him for the conueying of the letter to
Florida, where by chance he found Priscus page, who had been forth so late
the night before, that for fear to disquiet his Master, he had taken up his
lodging there, (as often he used to do) whereupon Moderatus did consider with
him self, that he would be a very fit messenger for that purpose, and
therefore he took him the letter closely sealed, and wished him with
convenient speed to deliver the same unto his sister Verosa, wishing her in
his name to deliver it over to Florida, according to the direction thereof:
Further desiring the page not to make it known to any that he had seen him,
and the rather to have him to accomplish his request, he clapped him in the fist
with a brace of angels, and told him that he was to go upon some serious
business, which he would not have any to understand thereof. And thus having
schooled the Page what he had to do, he bade him heartily farewell, and
returned to his own chamber again, where he found Baleto ready with all
things that he lacked for his journey, wherewith he presently furnished
himself, and having left order with him to excuse his absence to his Parents,
and for the doing of his business which he left imperfect, he rewarded him
well for his labor, and so departed with Auroraes first blush, that he might
not be descryed of any, passing through gardens and vineyardes (a way very
secret) till he came to the forest, where we will leave him as yet not fully
determined, which way from thence to bend the course of his travel. And now
return to Priscus, who all the night before had taken very little rest: for
that no disquietnesse may be compared to the grief of mind, wherewith he was
continually vexed, and now much more then ever before, supposing that Floridas
sudden departure was a Calendar of his ensuing calamities: for having his barge
tossed amids the weltring waves of Fortunes euer-changing surges, Floridas
looks only guided the stern, so that for every wrinckle in her browe, and
frown in her face, he was in danger of present shipwreck. The absence of his
friend Moderatus also greatly troubled him, both for that he longed to
understand his success with Florida, and also much marvelled, why he came not
to bed unto him the night before, as his manner was: and as thus he studied
upon these and such other contingents, his Page came in: whereupon he addressed
him self to be stirring, and the Page busy helping to make ready his Master,
the letter sent by him to be delivered to Florida, fell from his bosom, the
which Priscus presently espying, demanded what it was: the Page loathe (by
reason of the charge given him by Moderatus) to confess the truth, feigned
some excuse, (what upon a sudden came to his head) but nevertheless Priscus,
by the indorsement thereof, perceived it to be his friend Moderatus
handwriting, and that the direction was to Florida, which sight made him very
blancke, but better remembering him self, he straightly examined his Page how
he came by the same letter, and what he had in charge to do therewith, who
seeing his Master in some choler, thought it now no time to dally with him,
and thereupon presently confessed the truth. Priscus now maruelling what was
become of his friend, being great with child till he might view the contents
of his letter, in the end after long study, he bethought him of the print of
Moderatus signet, which he had in yuorie, and therefore might well open the
same without knowledge, whereupon presently vnripping the seal, he perused his
friends lines to Florida, wherein perceiving the fidelity of Moderatus, and
the great cruelty of Florida, he grew very melancholy and passionate for his
friend, in so much that he began to quake like the Aspine leaf, falling
therewith upon a sudden to a very dangerous fever, which forced him not only
to keep his chamber, but also to embrace his pillowe: but nevertheless sealed
the letter anew, and commanded his Page to do therewith as his friend
Moderatus had given him in charge, which the Page accordingly performed, but
the letter being come to Floridas hand, and understanding the same to come from
Moderatus, she was the gladdest woman in the world, thinking it had been a
rec^ntation of his former folly, and therefore presently opened the same, and
read over his lines, viewing and reuiewing every word in particular: the
agony of this sudden sight tormenting her so much, that she was skant able to
keep her countenance, whylest she feigned some business to send away Verosa,
which delivered the same letter unto her; who being gone, she secretly conveyed
her self to her closet, and began thus to meditate upon the matter.

Ah Florida, what means this alteration? and whereof proceeds these
unwonted passions? have thou been courted of so many brave and gallant
Gentlemen? sued unto and sought by so many worthy Personages, and service
offered unto thee by so many noble Lords: all which thou heldest in disdain,
skorning Cupides Alarums, and condemning for superstition Aphrodites Orisons:
and now like the Beetle (having nesteled in the Sun all day, is contented
with a Cowsharde for shelter at night,) art, not only forced to be the foremost
soldier to march, when Cupid sounds his trumpet, and both to deck Venus
shrine at Paphos with flowers, and to offer incense at her Altar for sacrifice:
but also overcome with base and servile thoughts, art (contrary to the
quality of thy sex) driven to offer the favor of thy affection to thy
vassal, yea, an vpstart, not known whence he came, only by thy Fathers
bounty preserved from famishing, and from a beggar advanced to dignity, and
he thus unkindly to reward thy courtesy with so slender a regard of thy
friendly offers. O unjust Fortune, that workest these strange stratagemes, and
procurest thus my prejudice: but truth it is, thou have as many frowns as
smiles, who fawning like the Tigre when he means most harm: and showing
forth a sour and frowning countenance, does prognosticate fair weather at
hand: for after a great storm, follows a pleasant caulme. But what Florida,
is it possible that Moderatus is gone? or writes thus unto thee to try thy
patience? no, Moderatus is too wise to jest in these matters, gone he is too
sure. O unkind churl, that thus repayest my love with hate, and requitest my
ardent desire with peremptory and cold disdain, resembling the Cedar, which
is most fair in sight, but yet brings no fruit: or the Nightingale, that
has a most sweet voice, but rank flesh: so thou, seeming as simple as a Dove
in outward semblance, yet in mind as cruel as a fury, or a ravening lion.
What now, Florida? wade not too far in these inuectiues, before thou
considerest the cause aright: for a rash judgment does but seldom savor of
Justice: Moderatus sued unto thee for his friend, and thou would have him
convert the same for him self: glad he would have been so to do, but that
his amity with Priscus did forbid him to falsify his faith unto his friend:
so that he had rather (though to his great grief) refuse thy offer, and
forsake his most loving and careful Parents, and all his dear friends, then
he would be found disloyal and treacherous in his friendship: oh rare and
wonderful great faith, and worthy to be had in great estimation amongst all
men, whom the force of love could not move, the displeasure of a Princess
could not fear, the loss of kind and natural Parents could not crack,
nor the hardness and danger of a Pilgrims life, (which every moment is
subject to the storm of waywarde destiny) could bend: then Florida, seeing
that Moderatus preferred his friends welfare before his own, and that he
chose rather to prejudice his own person, then any way to hinder Priscus: and
desired in his last farewell, that thou would suppose him to be present in
the habit of his friend: for that they had but one mind to their two distinct
bodies. Think th^n of the worthiness of Priscus, who loves thee as his own
life, and has sustained such hard penance for thy sake, that more thou
could not wish thine enemy, and less had been too much for one that loved
so faithfully: and now entertain him with some comfort at his entreaty, whom
thou so tenderly did love: but what, Florida, will thou so soon yield to
fond affection, as to love thy Fathers mortal foe? have thou none to fancy,
but the son of Lothus King of Aemulia, that so often has vexed thy father
and his subjects? and happily under color of professing love unto thee,
pretends some treason unto thy father, seeking rather to draw some of his
subjects from their allegiance, then to match with his daughter in marriage.
Ah, but where rouest thou fond Florida, thou do measure his inward
intencion by thy suspicious cogitation, and is it not a Maxim in the Civil
law, that suspicion is no proof, where it is said, Factum consistit in
externo and corporali actu, animus in tacito and incorporali intellectu, vnde
in animi effectus non potest cadere facti euidentia: and thou deemest Priscus
to circumuent treason, who not only assures truth in his words, but also
manifests the same in action: for if he had thought to surprise thy father
with treachery, he would not have suffered him self to be discovered unto
thee. And what though his father and mine were and are still foes, might we not
nevertheless be friends? yea, and our friendship be an occasion of amity
between our Parents? seeing their hate is not deadly, but grown of
unkindness, and some ostentation and desire of superiority. And by this match
both Provinces might be united together, that it might not only preserve the
lives of a number of their subjects, but also arm them selves with such
strength, that no stormy blast of sinister Fortune might shake the foundation
of any of them both. Love then Florida, for the worthiness of the man wills
thee so to do: his birth and Parentage are sufficient pledges of honorable
patrimony, and his personage and behavior are lively portratures and perfect
Mappes of true Nobility: his merit is far above thy desert, and his
faithful heart (tried with the touchstone of truth) excellethall: so that I
think nothing wanting in him, that might be wished for in an honorable
Gentleman, or a loyal lover. Here fetching a deep sigh, Florida made a very
long Period: Cupid now having found her as a wanton playing the trewand, had
whipped her with nettles to requite all her former coyness, and therefore she
began to forget her dearest Moderatus, and to imprint in her thoughts the
lively Idea of Priscus perfect shape, verifying the old Addage, Qui procul ab
oculis, procul est a lumine cordis.
Thus making a virtue of necessity, having none other at this time worthy
entertaining, she resolved to frame her countenance so mildly toward Priscus,
that (if heretofore she had given him a cooling card for his hot desire,
which might drive him to despair) now hope might give him comfort, that
opportunity would be a good plea to further his action: devising with her
self by what means she might best give Priscus to understand of her new
conceived affection, who being in this solemn meditation, came in some of her
gentlewomen, with whom she passed the time away, remaining in a kind of
longing desire, till good fortune should bring them once together: Priscus all
this while kept his bed, his ague being so extreme, that the report thereof
was publicly known, and the absence of Moderatus understood, which caused
great heaviness throughout all the Dukes Court in general: for that he was
very courteous and bountiful unto all, and therefore greatly beloved of all:
his Parents and friends greatly grieved therewith, especially because they
knew not the cause of his departure, nor where to send in quest of him. The
Duke and the Duchess took it also very heavily, for that they entirely loved
Moderatus for his Gentlemanly qualities, virtuous conditions, sober life, and
diligent service. Thus a good space was his departure greatly bewailed
throughout the whole City of Albigena, all comforting Priscus, supposing the
loss of his friend to be the cause of his disease, the which Moderatus Parents
noted in him presently: for being very often with him, sometimes he would
rave, and be as it were frantic, and then he never ceased to call upon his
friend Moderatus, the which being understood, they took very great care of
him, and gave in charge to Verosa tenderly to look unto him, and to cherish
him in his sickness, which the Phisicians held dangerous, though not
mortal. Verosa for her brothers sake, that was his friend, (his own courteous
and gentle behavior deserving no less) willingly assented so to do, in
perfourmance of her Parents command, and of good will unto him: and amongst
other times, Florida and Pandarina once did bear her company: for that both
of them indeed could have been contented to have comforted him in the best sort
they could, although in outward show they dissembled: who being come to the
Patients chamber, they found him very sick, yet at the latter end of his
fit, which made them offer them selves a while to keep him chat, to beguile
the tediousness of the time. Priscus faint as he was, very heartily gave them
thanks, who espying Florida, (being very near his bed, and taking him by the
wrist to feel his pulse, and asking him whether the day of his Crisis was
past) was almost in a sound to behold her, that had thus wrought all his
prejudice: the which Florida perceiving, gave him very comfortable words, and
cherished him very tenderly, and bade him take heart, for that a valiant mind
is never known but in extremity, as the pure gold in the furnace. Priscus
well noted her words, which somewhat did lighten his heart, albeit he much
marvelled, from whence this sudden kindness had proceeded, after so cruel a
sentence pronounced against him, holding it for authentical, that naturally
fire and water could not agree in one substance, nor yet love and hate so to
concur in one person, that so suddenly the one should expulse the either:
experience having taught him, that the lowest shrubbe grows not to his full
height in a moment, that flax will not burn at the sight of the fire, and
that Floridas deadly hatred could not so soon be converted to love and
affection: yet he called to mind how the tallest blade of Spattania grows
to his full height in an instant, that the hard stone Calcire, which can be
bruised with no metal, is resolved into liquor with the heat of the Sun,
and that a woman's heart is like wax, which is apt for every impression, and
therefore (forgetting that Ovid said, Spes dea sed fallax) he now builded
a-fresh upon hope, and judged all to the best. Whereupon Florida perceiving his
color something to mend, his pulses moderately to move, and he somewhat to
rouse him self in bed, told him how his Mistress Pandarina came to visit
him, who presently took Floridas tale by the end, excusing her self, in that
she had not oftener comforted him in his sickness, alleging till then, that
she was ignorant thereof: interchanged courtesy to and fro past between them.
Priscus now prettily well recovered, and very iocund, as it were, with the
gentlewomen, Cornelius the Dukes son, with other Courtiers his companions and
friends, came to visit Priscus, who said that he was glad to see him so well:
then quoth Priscus, I pray you thank the Gentlewomen, whose presence has made
me to forget my passionate ague: well, quoth Cornelius, since (Gentlewomen) you
have begun to be pleasing to Priscus, I would you would so continue, and we
would give you our assistance therein, and I do think some discourse to
beguile the time would do well, to recreate his mind a little, which is
greatly wearyed with the violent passions of his long sickness. Then quoth
Pandarina, seeing you do appoint the pastime, you will give us leave to make
choice of the matter: if you be opponent, (quoth Cornelius) on Gods name
purpose your question, and you shall see, though we be old trewandes, that we
have not forgotten all our sophistry. No, quoth Florida, we must not hold the
diseased patient with such long ambages, which will clean tire him, and so
augment his grief, but rather with some short discourse to make him sharp and
hungry, and not to cloy him with too much, to procure surfeit. Hereunto they all
agreed, and that Florida should appoint the text, and then all they to draw
cutts, who should discourse thereupon. Then (quoth Florida) let the proposition
be: Whether outward Beauty, or inward Bounty deserves most praise, or is of
greatest force to procure love. The theme being given, it fell to Cornelius
lot to be the Orator, who was of a very sharp and quick wit, and withal,
very desirous to show his cunning before Verosa, whom he had so viewed with
the eye of fancy, that the respect of his honor could not hinder him from
entering a plea in Venus court: and framing him self to the performance of his
charge, lending an amorous glaunce to Verosa, which she presently noting, died
her cheeks with such vermilion taint, that Aurora blushing at the sight of
unacquainted Phaeton, seemed not so glorious of hue: and so proceeded to his
matter thus. Well, gentle friends, you may see how unjust the fates be in
their favors, and the destinies in their dooms, always laying the greatest
burden on him that is least able, working all things by extremities, keeping a
mean in nothing but being out of measure, always spurring that horse which had
most need of a bridle: nor contented with any thing but impossibilities, taking
delight to have us seek to reach above Ela, when skant we can attain unto
Solfa: for if they had not been injurious in their constellations, they had not
amongst so many (far better skilled then my self) have allotted me (which for
the most part am ignorant in O^ids principles) to make a distinction in love
between Beauty and Bounty, a matter too high for my mean capacity: but
nevertheless, seeing Fortune has decreed it to be so, and that you do
expect the same, I will neither contrary her in her absolute commaundes, nor
deceive you in your wished expectation, condicionally you take in good part,
what upon the sudden my simple skill may affoorde: thus not doubting but the
gentlewomen will either quite fall a-sleepe, or else play with their little
dogs, when first they shall hear my rude method, I will to the matter,
least I should shape Hercules shoe for a childs foot, and so be justly
rather condemned for my folly, then indifferently thought of for my curiosity.

First therefore, because the principal matter in this case to be considered,
is love: we must know both the nature and seat thereof, before we can
proporcion our compass to level at our desire: the which, as some
Philosophers have decyphered, is but a secret inspiration of the soul,
inducing a man to affect and fancy such things, as nature has metaphysically
ingraffed in the mind to delight thereof: for otherwise we should not see some
one to fancy the beauty of the body, another the virtue of the mind,
another to fancy for riches sake, though never beautiful nor wise: thus as
love proceeds by these, and by manifold and sundry other ways and means,
so I think every one to affect most of all those qualities in another,
wherewith they are them selves furnished: for as the Raven and the Ape think
their young ones fairest, so every one naturally valueth his own gifts and
qualities most singular and of greatest estimation, so much they are blinded
with the love thereof. Semblably in my opinion, true and perfect love can not
be but between equales, at least wise in disposition and consent of mind,
according as the Proverb is, Similis gaudet simili, so that the nature of the
person entertaineth the consent to fancy, and the ratifying of affection.
Moreover, love might be well compared to the shadow upon a Horologe, or to
the grass upon the earth: for the one, you may perceive it to have moved, and
the other to have grown, but you can not see and discern the one moving, nor
the other growing: so of love, well may you feel the smart being once snared
therewith, and so secretly does he take possession in the mind, that better
you may perceive him to have entered, then take him with the manner: for first
it swimmeth in the eye, and then secretly steals into the heart, being of
nature so subtle, that perfectly to decypher the nature thereof, is a thing
metaphisicall and above nature. The reasons therefore that should induce us to
love, should be things like it self, that is, rare, singular, and perfect, and
as it is a thing heavenly and divine: so in humane creatures, we should fancy
and affect those gifts which are seated in the mind, which is immortal and
heavenly, and not in the body, which is brittle and transitory: Beauty is a
gift much to be commended, but Bounty is a virtue more to be respected:
Beauty pleases the eye for a moment, which like the days in April begin
with a Sunshine, and end with a shower: but Bounty is an ornament of the
mind, which, like the Camomell, the more it is trodden the thicker and better
it grows: or to the pomander, that yields the sweetest sent, when it is
most of all chafed. Yet nevertheless, was it not the Beauty of Helen that
moved Paris so to fancy her, that he could not live without her? was it not
likewise the comeliness of Aeneas personage, that caused Dido to love him so
much, that she killed her self by reason of his absence? and was it not also
the Beauty of Cresed, which made Troilus so to languish for her, that he was
at the point of death? Infinite more examples I could produce, where Beauty
alone without the help of Bounty, have inueagled the beholders thereof
unadvisedly to intertaine fancy: for as there is nothing more pleasing and
precious to the eye, so there is nothing more brittle and fading, being but a
pleasant bayte to intrappe the mind, which well might be compared to a bauens
blaze, the which as it is violent, can not be permanent: or to the apples in
Arabia, which begin to rot before they be half ripe. Wherefore, by how much
the mind does excel, and is of greater estimate then the body, by so much
is the virtue of the one to be preferred before the beauty of the other, which
made Diogenes to say to a beautiful youth, much beloved for his fair
complexion, O fond young man, why do thou not study to convert the lovers of
thy body, to be lovers of thy mind. Aristotle being demanded, how happened
it that we held communication longer, and more willing with a beautiful body
then another, answered, that blind persons used so to do: for that they
perceive not the brittlenesse of the beauty, but the form and grace of the
color. Aristotle in another place calls beauty, the spur of fame.
Diogenes said it to be a great gift of nature: Socrates, the violence of a
short time: Plato, the prerogative of nature, which happens but to a few:
Theophrastus terms it a silent fraud, which persuades without words:
Theocritus, a glistering misery, which is pleasant to the sight, but the cause
of many inconveniences: Carneades, a kingdom without governor, for that the
beautiful command what they will, without compulsion or force. Thus you may
see the opinion of diverse philosophers touching beauty, which nevertheless I
will assure you, is of great force to procure love, and that made Cineas the
philosopher to say, that the gods them selves in framing thereof, went beyond
their skill: for that the maker was subject to the thing made: and true it is,
for what made Jupiter to transform himself into the likeness of a Swanne to
beguile Leda, and into a Bull to ravish Europa: what transformed Neptune unto a
horse, and Mercury unto a Goat, but beauty? what meoued Apollo to be in love
with Daphne? what caused Bacchus to favor Gnosida, but beauty? well then, if
beauty was of such force to stir the minds of the Gaddes to affection, what
marvel is it, if mortal wightes and humane creatures had not the power, for
to withstand the sharp assaults of his piercing beams: for who so looks
upon the Sun, if he be not Eagle eyed, becomes stone blind, and he that
gazeth on beauty, unless his heart be as hard as Adamant, will presently be
inueagled therewith. So that as I think, beauty induces the mind to
affection, and bounty binds up the match with the consent of the heart:
Beauty wins, and Bounty conserueth, but either of them by it self, though
for a small time it might procure liking, yet in the end it would grow to
loathing: wherefore, that love that should be founded upon beauty alone
without virtue, would with that glorious hew and fading gloze vanish away: for
what love should remain, when the thing beloved were lost? again, the love
grounded upon bounty without beauty, although for a season it might be
conserved with the habit of virtue, yet in the end would it grow lothesome,
much like a feast stored with plenty of fine eats and dainty dishes, and all
these served in unclean vessels, the place of repast being also a dungeon full
of stentch and filthiness: finally, Beauty might well be compared to the wieke
of a candle, and Bounty to the tallowe: for the wieke by it self being
lighted, is but a flash, and will presently out again: and the tallowe put in
the fire, will make a flame, yet quench immediately: but the tallowe and the
wieke wrought together, will ever hold light while the substance does last.
Thus you may see that Beauty by it self is fading, Bounty by it self is
unpleasant, and so neither without other durable: wherefore I think both very
requisite to obtain and preserve love. Thus to be brief, my conclusion is
that Beauty is a rare gift, but Bounty a singular virtue: Beauty for a small
time garnisheth the body, but Bounty perpetually adorneth the mind.
Wherefore as Acops an herb not fair to the sight, nor pleasant to the smell,
yet of a singular and secret virtue, is much preferred before the glorious, yet
infectious Aconitum: so Bounty, though in never so hard a complexion, being
of such a precious operation, is to be preferred before the royal apparicion
of Beauty, which is but fading and momentarie: but this I allow, that Bounty
and virtue, by how much as it is in the more beautiful complexion, by so
much it is the more commendable. And therefore to conclude. I say, that Beauty
increases fancy, and Bounty nourishes affection, but both joined together be
both rare and singular, which may procure the most wavering Cresed and
dissembling Aeneas to be faithful and constant.

Cornelius and Verosas secret fancies: Floridas promise of favor to PRISCV'S.
VEROSAS meditation upon the sequel of her amors. CORNELIUS conference with
her, and her ratifying of affection.

Chap. 8.
HEre Cornelius finished his discourse, and all allowed of his censure,
chiefly Verosa, who having curiously surueyed in her mind the exquisite
perfection of young Cornelius, she seemed now to like of love, as the
Hyperborei do of licorice, wherewith at night they allay their thirst, having in
the morning spurned it with their feet: yet for that hitherto her breast had not
yielded to the stroke of the hammer, wherewith Cupid did use to forge fancy
upon the anduill of desire, she manfully resisted the fresh alarums of
incroching affection, her mean birth and hard fortune disabling her, nay
rather putting her out of all hope that Cornelius meant to seek her in the way
of matrimony: thus striving with her new passions, and dissembling her new
conceived love in outward appearance, she made no semblance of alteration.

The sick Gentleman ready to faint for weariness, Florida standing close by
his bed side, (all the rest of the company being in conference something
further off) she gave him very comfortable words, assuring him when he would
be able to walk abroad, she would reward him with the due hyre of all his
deserved travails: praing him to satisfy him self with those few words,
till opportunity would offer them more convenient time for the same: for,
quoth she, I have suspicious heads in my company, and therefore can not do as
I would, but in the mean time, take this for a pledge of my affection, and so
giving him a sweet kiss upon his cold lips, with interchaunged glaunces,
they bade each other adewe, and the rest of the company in like sort taking
their leave of the sickely Patient, departes, Cornelius, as they were all
stirring to go forth, had opportunity to deliver to Verosas hands a
skrowle, wherein he had painted out the feruencie of his fancy unto her, which
he carried about him for that purpose: whereupon Verosa began to feel her
heart warmed, with a secret and privy flame that lay wrapped in her bosom,
which secret mystery contained in the amorous poem delivered her by
Cornelius, the contents whereof she greatly longed to suruay: and therefore
secretly slipped away from all the company, and conveyed her self to her
chamber, where locking her self fast within, least she should be interrupted
of any, she began to peruse his lines, which were as hereafter follows, or to
like effect.

THe fluent stream that leads a swelling tide,
When Aquilon the raging waves does rear,
Bounce not more often upon their banks so wide,
That with their force the stony rocks do tear.
Then panting does my heart her prison walls,
Iumpe often against, and ^umping sudden falls.
The little current stealing through the vale,
Being stopped in course above her bank does swell:
So stealing love suppressed, does make me pale,
For why, in thought I feel a present hell.
Thou may direct the stream her course to keep,
And free my heart that lies in prison deep.
The little shrubbes in downs stir not at all,
And mean men's thoughts are seldom sauc'd with care,
When mighty Cedars shakt with winds do fall,
And noble minds on chances hard do fare.
Love looks not low on Idiots rustie rags,
Nor cares not much for Merchants welthy bags.
But Love (as Iuy claspes the tree) takes hold,
On virtue, which is seated in the mind,
And eke on Beauty pleasant to behold,
Never hoping for a better hap to find,
Then for to yield when heart on hope is paund,
And to obey when honor does command.
Your beauty sweet did claspe my tender breast,
My heart is paund your heast for to fulfill,
Love in my secret thought has built his nest,
Honor commands I must perform his will:
Wherefore within your orient beauty fair,
Does wholly rest my wrack for to repair.
AFter that she had perused this fancy, she felt her heat to increase, and
her self altogether overcome with the cunning sleightes of Aphrodites little
wanton, that secretly had now stolen into her mind, and bended the same to
stoop to affection: for being young and tender, she was apt for any form or
impression. And thus feeling her mind boiling in the furnace of feruencie, she
began to consider more advisedly of the matter, supposing Cornelius but
according to the manner of youth, to lust after her beauty, and not to mean
any truth or honesty, knowing well, that under the fairest flowers did often
lie the most deadlyest poison, and that the Panther has a noisome breath,
though a painted skin. Even so the fairest speeches many times did contain
the greatest fraud and deceit: one while she called to mind her mean estate
and his high calling, which was such a cooling card to her hot ague, that she
was void of hope to find any thing but dissimulation in him: another while,
wayghing how unlikely her hope was to take effect, though Cornelius had for his
part meant all things faithfully and truly, being right assured the Duke his
father would never assent thereunto. And finally she considered, what great
discommoditie it was to sustain the yoke of marriage: and the great ease,
quietness of mind, and due merit of a single and sole life, preferring the
quiet state of the most simple and poorest virgin, before the rich robes,
dainty dishes, sumptuous buildings, and all the ambicious ostentation of the
stateliest matrone in the world. And when she had breathed a little upon this
Period, she began again to peruse Cornelius fancy, making a full point at
every word, and at every point a sigh interlaced with some brinish tears, that
like orient pearls trilled over the ro^et of her cheeks, finding it impossible
to resist the batteries of love, she verifieth Horace sayings, Lectus genialis
in aula est, nil ait esse melius nil prius coelibe vita si non est jurat been
solis esse maritis: and therewithal issued forth through a little by gallerie
unto the common garden, whereby both to refresh her self with the air, and
also taking delight in beholding some thing abroad, where being come, the first
object that presented him self to her sight was Cornelius, who all alone
(being very melancholy) walked of purpose right under her chamber window, to
see if he might take a view of his dearest mistress. Verosa and Cornelius with
the sudden sight of each other were driven unto such an ecstasy, that for a
while, the eyes only in stead of their tongues delivered the message of the
mind: but at the last Cornelius remembering him self to be a man, and
therefore more animated by nature then she, began his proposition thus:

Sweet mistress, think it not strange to see me thus long silent, for that
with the sudden view of your presence I was so metamorphosed, that I had been
like (with Acteon) to be transformed unto some new shape: and if I fail in
delivering my mind, it is the faintness of my passion that procures the same,
being as fearful to displease, as I am fervent and desirous to attempt: it is
said, that love does make men Orators, but it seems unto me otherwise, for
that (in my opinion) the sight of the object which a man so much desires,
robs him of the sense of the mind: and this is it, that made Mars to be
mute, when he wrung Venus by the hand. Wherefore, sweet Verosa, think the
feruencie of my fancy to supply the lack I have in uttering the same. I
could with long ambages discourse of my love, but seeing in many words lies
mistrust, and that the truth is bare, and needs no glorious shows to
garnish it self: let this suffice, Cornelius loves Verosa, and his heart can
fancy none but Verosa.

Albeit that this pleased Verosa very well, yet stood she in great doubt, least
this his protestation was but a feigned gloss to cover his fraudulent intention,
and not a settled loyalty grounded upon any faithful resolucion: yet
notwithstanding thinking it no policy to drive him away with repulse: least
by her coyness she should procure her own discontent, and being in this mind
between fear and hope, she framed him this answer. Honorable servant, (if
the lawmakers do not him self break the law, I may without offense so call
you) although I am a maiden, and therefore of no great capacity, and also
Verosa, whose innocent simplicity can not search forth the intricate quidities
of sophistry, yet am I not so void of all understanding, as to swallow the
hook because it has a painted bait, and to sup poison because it is tempered
with honey: for they which do think every look to be love, every smile to be a
favor, and every word which the amorous lover speaks, to be an oracle, shall
no doubt for every dram they receive of sweet content (while thus they blind
them selves with selfeconceit) reap whole tons of sorrowful mishaps, blaming
their own credulity, and cursing the poisoned entisements of alluring vanity,
who having forgotten Ciceroes principle. Deliberandum est diu quod statuendum
est semel, run headlong to do that in haste, which afterward they may have
just cause to repent at leisure. O my L. Cornelius, are not men's tongues
resembled to Mercuries pipe, which could inchant Argus with his hundred eyes,
and be as prejudicial unto us silly maids as the sorcering cups of Circes,
whose taste though sweet, yet the operation is pestilent and monstrous.
Wherefore when such music is played, we had need to stop our ears, least
the melody thereof would animate us to folly, and so by suspecting little and
trusting much, we should wholly cast our selves away: yet pardon me, Cornelius,
in that I do suspect, for thereby I do fear, but not condemn. You would make
me believe that Cornelius is in love with Verosa, he is a Prince of great
renown, she a mean and exiled Gentlewoman, whose base fortunes makes her
ashamed to enter parlie with Cornelius: he an heir of great patrimony, and
she allotted to a poor and simple dowry. Can love be shrouded under the
habit of contrarieties? will the Eagle nestle with the Owl? or the Lion
harbor in the same den with the wolf? or can there be any simpathie of
affection between a royal Prince and a homely and simple maid? And how can
I believe, that (when fortune has allotted such difference between our
degrees) our thoughts could be united in love, since in the knitting of
affection, Aurum est causa sine qua non: for love without wealth is like the
Cedar tree without fruit, or fire without fuel: suppose then you fancy my
beauty, wherewith you will be shortly so glutted, that taking a surfeit thereon,
you will vomit it up with repentance, and so that which erst seemed most
pleasant and delectable, will become odious and loathsome, especially to such as
love with every look, who like the Pirte stone freeze inwardly, when they
seem outwardly to burn, and like the serpentine powder that will quickly
take fire, but presently be quenched, verifying the Proverb, Soon ripe soon
rotten. Cornelius, to cut her off from this inuectiue, thought it fitter to
join issue with her, then to let her proceed any further therein, began thus.

It were very absurd, Verosa, of particular instances to infer a conclusion
general: what though some did like for profit sake, and does it therefore
argue, that all should tie their affections to wealth and riches? are Venus
shrines to be furnished with coin, or her deity to be adored with a loyal and
loving heart? is Cupid to be feed with gold, or to be obeyed in his absolute
command with constancy? think you Verosa, that Cornelius the son of
renowned Deuasco, will harbor such base thoughts and servile conceits? as to
prize substance more then honor, and to measure his amors by fading pelf,
not by lasting virtue? no, no Verosa, think not so, but rather believe this
Maxim to be true, that in love there is no laeke: for it brooketh no exception
of want: and where affection is General of the field, there always either
Plenty pitcheth his pauilion, or Content so tempereth lack with reason, that
the defect of the one is furnished with the virtue of the other. Why then, what
doubt, sweet Verosa, if of my constancy, suspect not before you have cause:
for I will assure you, no straggling Aeneas shall prove me fleeting, nor any
false Jason conclude me fraudulent: what though the Pirte stone burn outwardly
and freeze inwardly, that argues not my heart to be of that operacion: and
albeit the Serpentine powder (as you say) will presently kindle, and quickly
out again, yet the Salamanders stone once set on sire will never be quenched:
and of this make bold, Verosa, that no disaster Fortune shall drive me to make
a shipwreck of my affection, nor yet the bitter frowns of hard adversity
cause me to alter fancy: wherefore, dear Mistress, yield me not chafe for
pure corn, dross for tried metal, and to conclude, repay not my ardent and
loyal love with cold and coye disdain: for believe me, and let this word
conclude all, I love Verosa, and I hate my life if I be not loved again of
Verosa: with this conclusion, Cornelius sealing his Plea with a deep sigh,
expected answer, and Verosa supposing that his passion proceeded of pure love,
and not of wanton lust, desirous to drive him out of doubt with assurance of
her fidelity, briefly returned him this answer.

Ah Cornelius, the juice of Selandine is sweet, but it fretteth deadly, and
your words be pleasant but they might pretend a prejudice: yet nevertheless,
I am neither so faint hearted as not to dare to believe, nor yet so curious to
mistrust, but that I may promise to love Cornelius, and also faithfully
perform the same, so it be without disparagement of mine honor, which is the
only Jewel I have in this my declining estate. Wherefore, sweet Cornelius,
since that now you are Master of the fortress you so lately besieged, use your
victory with such clemency, that you reap not thereby defame, nor I
repentance: wherewith he wrung her hand, and she blushed, and presently both
banishing fear, lovingly imbr^ced, and sealed up the covenant with a lease of
sweet kisses.

Priscus amendment: his conference with Florida: their amorous Poems, and
FLORIDAS kind entertainment unto him.

Chap* 9.
ANd as thus they swimmed in the seas of their sweet content, the young Lord
Deualoyes entered the garden, which brake up the conference of these new Lovers,
least there might be conceived any suspicions of their affections, and so
Verosa returned in great haste the same way she came, giving (with a glaunce)
such a kind farewell to Cornelius, that with Apollo he would have pursued
Daphne flying, had it not been to discover him self and his fancies to his
coozen Deualoyes, whose presence prevented the same. Cornelius was very glad to
have brought his purpose to so good an end, referring the sequel of further
conference till opportunity would give him leave. And so leaving them in the
simpathie of their pleasing desires, I will return to Priscus, who all this
while lay sick of his ague, the extremity whereof had brought him very low,
yet he daily mended since the comfortable preparatiue he had received at
Floridas hands, the only surgeon that could cure his malady: reason being so
blinded with fancy, that he had wholly forgotten, that his affection to
Florida had procured the l^sse of his friend, and finding her looks as
attractiue as Iet, he perceived him self too weak to withstand the force
thereof, so that yielding to the necessity of his passion, he continued
certain days not thoroughly recovered, though well amended, in which time the
Gentlewomen, and the Lords of great account came daily to comfort him, which
was a good mean to wear away that wearisome disease, which in the end being
clean shakt away, fortune offered him very convenient opportunity, to appoint
a meeting to have secret conference with Florida, which was appointed to be the
next morning in that artificial paradise, I mean that Privy garden, wherein
first he had discovered his affection unto her: and Priscus having obtained a
grant of that which was his chiefest desire, took small rest this night,
meditating upon the success of his fortunes the next day: and by that Phoebus
appeared in the East, he quickly hyed him to the place of meeting, and there
missing of Florida, because it was so timely he sat down in a fine harbor,
where with the musical harmony of the birds, the pleasant murmr of a
Christalline spring that there was, together with the weariness of his body,
(being so long exempt from any rest) lulled him a-sleepe, in which time Florida
mindful of her promise, repaired thither also, who sitting by that sweet
Helicon to drive away thoughts, melodiously warbled out this ensuing Dittie.

THe vain delights that please the curious eye,
By proof I find to turn unto their pain,
Such obiectes rare do dark the sense: for why,
The beams thereof reflecting, pierce again
With double force the faithful Lovers breast,
Until by stealth it robbes his quiet rest.
The pinching pain that does torment the mind,
Is more increased by glauncing of the eye,
Which can no where a quiet harbor find,
But in the heart, such is his urgent might.
The virtue then of a light rolling look,
Under a bait does hide a hydeous hook.
Like Iett attractiue, and like pearcing steel,
The heauiest things unto it self it draws,
Nothing so hard, but yeeldes: wherefore I feel
My heart is drawn unto his proscript Laws,
And pierced eke by force of subtle sight,
Wherefore I yield unto his lawless might.
His might has captive taken my pensive heart,
His might has made my hauty breast to bend,
His might has turned my jesting unto smart,
His might enforst me scalding sighs to send
From skorched breast, where careful thoughts enjoy
Hope of naught else, but living in annoy.
When brutish beasts do chew their cuddes in shade,
Naught do they care for barren winters food,
Who knew but shallow foords, fears not to wade:
Even so each lover in his merry mood,
(When fortune smiles and holds him in her lap)
Thinks not this calm does breed an after-clappe.
FLorida having thus finished her Dittie, Priscus awaked with the sound
thereof, would do no less then pay her her debt in the same coin, whereupon
he descanted this ensuing fancy.

IF weary sleepelesse rest
In nights do argue care,
And days with dole oppressed
To them that lovers are:
Then watchful cares that with my color grew,
To heat extreme shall prove me lover true.
Me lover true, then truth
Deserves trust I trow,
Which motive is too ruthe
In such as grace does grow.
No pity then without desert I crave:
For what I bought I merited to have.
To have what faith may reap,
And loyal love obtain,
I ought to have like cheap,
As I do sell again.
With loyalty I purchase all my love,
God grant again that others faithful prove.
If faithful others prove,
I prize my pain for naught,
If tried truth may move,
I have the thing I sought.
If neither may take place, I pine with woe,
Dye had I lever, then live and living so.
PRiiscus with this note finished his song, and presently hyed him to the place
where Florida was: where saluting her after the best manner he could, she gave
him very friendly entertainment, Priscus of a long time could not frame him
self to speak to Florida, till she did (as it were) glaciem secare, taking
occasion first to show him his friend Moderatus letter unto her: the which
albeit he had seen it before, yet perusing the contents, he took very heavily
the loss of so dear a friend, which Florida perceiving, began to shake him
out of his dumpe thus:

Why how now, Priscus, what means these sighing sobbes, which may rather
breed your harm then any hope of relief, take heed least in complaining
before you have cause, (fortune offended with your unjust accusation) a just
occasion of repentance may follow. And if these straying passions proceed of my
gentleness unto you, I am sorry to have been so ouer-liberall of mine honor,
in entertaining you with such kindness: if your grief be for your friend,
then reason doubtless may well satisfy a reasonable man to be reformed in
such an error: for ought you more to regard a little travel which your friend
endures in foreign and strange countries, (where he gayneth more honor by the
title and name of a traveler, besides knowledge and experience, which be two
so rare and special jewels, then would many thousand times counteruaile the
labor or danger of his pilgrimage) then the love of Florida, which once you
seemed to prize of greater value then your own life. Sure I must think if you
do so, that either you did then counterfeit, or now dissemble, either of which
are two too base qualities for an honorable mind. And Moderatus, no doubt,
will return hither again, when he may understand that all goes well with
you, which daily he may hear wheresoever he is commorant, being inquisitiue
(as you may assure your self he is) of the state of my fathers Court, and then
your joy will be double, his wished presence repaying with usury your late
penance for his absence.

With these comfortable speeches Priscus was very much eased, and having well
considered the whole circumstance of Florida^ speech, which to his judgment
proceeded of a hearty zeal, from the melodious harmony of her sugared voice,
the influence whereof had so ravished his mind, that for a long space he could
not utter one word, till in the end being half awaked out of his new trance,
he embraced Florida so lovingly, as though he had been ready to depart out of
this world, and ef^soones watered his cheeks with a new tide of flowing
tears, (proceeding from the unspeakable joy of his ouer-ardent desire, having
now obtained a grant to satisfy his expectation) and also yielded unto her
abundance of thanks for this her kind compassion, in relieuing his
unfortunate and miserable estate: wherefore he vowed ever to remain her true
servant at all times, ready to recompense the same: with this and such like
amorous prattle, they protracted the time till dinner, about what time, for
fear to be discovered there together, (least once being suspected, some
watching Argus, decyted by the jealousy of some new Juno, might hinder the
same) having united them selves in the simpathie of their loves, with faithful
promises and sweet embracings, they took their leave each of other with
interchaunged glaunces, and so departed, Florida to her chamber, and Priscus to
the Court, where his welcome was not slender, that being his first flight after
his so long and dangerous sickness.

Moderatus travail in the forest, sore pinched with hunger. His passing
through Vmbria: his travail in the forest of Esina: his complaint being
driven to great penury: his coming to the Hermites Cell, and their
conference. The Hermites narration of the imprisonment of King LOTHVS daughter
MODESTA, and the surmised occasion thereof. MODERATVS determination to
undertake the combat for her, and his mystical finding of Armor and horse,
for that purpose.

Chap. 10.
THus leaving Priscus to bathe him self in the pleasant stream of sweet
content, being now master of his desire, let us again return to Moderatus,
whom we left in the Forest, ready to bend the course of his pilgrimage which
way destiny did direct him, having many days trauayled in the desartes of
that country, wherein no adventure happened worthy memory, but that he was
put very often in great danger of his life with wild beasts, hunger and
thirst also troubling him very sore, having no other food, then such wild
fruits which the Forest did yield unto him.

In this sort, with very small rest he passed through the wilderness of
Liguria, and entered the plentiful and fruitful Country of Picenum, which was
a very pleasant and delectable soil, and replenished with many fair Cities
and Towns, wherein he well refreshed him self with vittayles and lodging,
understanding of the inhabitants of that place, that he was not past threescore
leagues from Spoletum a City in Vmbria, where the famous King Lothus, Prince
of that country, held his Court: wherefore he determined before all other
things to visit the same, both to suruay the manner and order thereof, and
also to visit his uncle Byndon which attended in the Kings Court, from whom he
had heard no news by word or writing, since Priscus (his faithful and assured
friend) brought salutations from him to Deuascos Court: on this determination
he set forwards toward Spoletum, and found very easy ways and plain
passages till he had past the river Esis in Vmbria, where he was to pass
through the great Forest of Esina wherein he traveled certain days very
readily, finding fair paths and plain broad ways, till being come further
into the forest, the remembrance of his old griefs made such a fresh wound in
his mind, that the pangs thereof brought him clean out of his way, howbeit he
wandered many days in those deserts, neither finding way to get out, nor place
to take any rest in, till at length being ouer-wearyed with labors, and
overcome with faintness for want of food, the heat of the day being also
very extreme, he sought out a cold shade somewhat to ease his wearyed limbs,
and having (for that purpose) stepped a little to the thickest of the woods, he
espied a fair Beech tree growing upon a fine green bank, dame Flora having
checkered the ground with curious knots of sundry flowers, bounding upon a
fair fountain, the beauty whereof seemed so glorious, that he supposed it to be
the ^owre, which Venus had prepared to dally with her loving Adon, wherein
(although he was now very pensive) he took marvelous great delight, upon the
which he stretched his weary limbs, and began to meditate with himself of
his fortunes in this manner.

Ah Moderatus, how unfortunate art thou, that the fates have loaded thee with
more cares then years, and with more misery then thy tender age could well
sustain? menacing thee daily with a dismal end, thy chief hope resting in
death to extinguish thy pinching penury: being assured of nothing, but that
the date of thy life shall be replenished with extreme wants, fortune not
contented with thy mean mishappe in that thou art an exile to the country,
and from a free libertine of Florence brought thee to be a hireling to Deuasco:
but also infusing into thy mind a rash and unadvised resolution, to undertake
a voluntary exile from thy Parents and friends, the weight of which rash
attempt, now thou feel so heavy, that thou art like to pay the charge
thereof with no less then the price of thine own life: but what then, fond
Moderatus, do thou fear death? or art thou such a coward, as to be dismayed
at every puff of adverse fortune? shall she triumph in the conquest of thy
mind? and laugh, beholding thee to take thy misery so impatient, when as
otherwise in brooking all things with content, thou do counterchecke her
pride with patience, which is the sharpest encounter that can be given to her
insolency: fear not then, Moderatus, (for thou must die but once) and
willingly yield thy life a sacrifice to perfect so rare a faith, and let the
same be a mirror to the world to express thy approved fidelity, so shall
thy name be eternized in the book of memory, and thy pure friendship be a
president of faithful hearts, and also the loadstarre to guide all virtuous
minds to that happy and honorable bower of modest and chaste loyalty. Ah,
but alas, I fear not to die, but I tremble at the manner of my death, might I
but encounter with my lance some stout warrior, and so perish in his hands,
it would never grieve me: for as the Italian proverb is, Morire nel-la guarro,
^letto del honor: but thus to famish with hunger, yea, and withal in deserts
unknown, where no sooner then my breath forsakes my panting breast, but the
vmbles of monstrous and ravening wild beasts will be my grave, and so the
son of renowned Perduratus will be thrown to the well of Oblivion: for that
no Act of his worthy memory remains extant after his decease: seeing then
to dye so desperately is the mark of a brutish faint-heart, fly sloth,
pluck up thy heart, and wander yet somewhat in these deserts to seek some
adventures, to see if good fortune will present thee with a calm after so
bitter and sharp a storm. In this mood Moderatus very faintly rose up, and
entered further into the woods, where (by good hap) upon a sudden he espied out
of a Rock hard by, a little smoke to issue out at a narrow hole, which was
the only entrance unto the same: whereat he made good semblance, supposing
that some kind of people inhabited there, and not minding to delay the time,
and burn up daylight in frivolous cogitations, he boldly entered the same, the
going in was very dark, but being come somewhat further therein, a little more
light appeared, proceeding from a hole which was in the side of the Cave
toward the East, which made it something more lightsome: by this light he
descryed a good old man, sitting in a seat dug out of the hard Rock, his
hoarie hoarie hairs (being messengers of the winter of his age) seemed to
cover a treasury of experience, being a perfect Idea of a penitent and
mortified mind: for he sat there in a surcoat of Gray, leaning his head on
his hand, and his elbow on his knee, breathing forth skalding sighs, and
shedding abundance of tears, earnestly beholding the earth under his feet, as
though he expected that the same would presently gape, and open her deuou^ing
Jaws to receive him therein. Thus like a man in a trance he rested a pretty
while, till in the end shaking off these melancholy passions, with a more
pleasant countenance, and smyling, as it were, at some secret conceit, he
chanced to cast up his eyes, and beholding a stranger to enter unto the closet
of his secrets without his license, be so fiercely bended his brows, that the
fury of his countenance discovered he had been a man of no mean thoughts.
Moderatus all this while being in a brown study, viewing the strange manner
both of the Hermites lodging, and also of his passionate behavior under so
grave a countenance, had forgotten as much as to salute this good old Father:
who seeing this rude and inhumane intrusion, shakt him out of his memento with
this sharp reprehension.

My friend, if thou may not rather be termed a private enemy, that thus by
intruding thy self unto my secrets, have increased my grief, and brought thy
self in suspicion of a guilty conscience: my friend, I say, what chance has
brought thee here unto this my poor lodging, to discover the penitent and
passionate perplexities of my withered and decaying years: if purposely have
understood of my residence in this place, thou came to rejoice at my misery,
evil may thou thrive in so wicked a determination: but if a Pilgrim and a
traveler, that by chance did discover this my secret and poor Cell,
return as thou came, thy offense (proceeding of no malice) is already
pardoned. Moderatus herewith awaking out of some secret imagination he was in
concerning the strangeness of the place, and manner of the person,
acknowledging his error, replied unto him thus.

Good Father, pardon this my rashness, and assure your se^fe it was done rather
of ignorance then of malice, and proceeding rather of extreme want, being
almost famished with penury, then of any private determination to vndermind
your secrets, or yet any special desire to be acquainted with your misery,
the which, as I do understand, does much vex you but nothing at all pleasure
me: and now to purge my self of this committed crime, you shall understand
that I am a poor travailing pilgrim, a mere stranger in this country, and
therefore unacquainted with these difficult passages, through so dangerous and
impassable a wilderness, which is the occasion that I wander in this forest,
this four or five days without any manner of food to sustain my body, and to
satisfy nature, which has brought me so low, and made me so feeble, that
except some remorce be taken of my extreme penury, I am like thus brutishly to
perish for lack of sustenance: wherefore good reverend father, I heartily desire
you, (if a strangers penitent submission may take place) to pardon my willing,
though not witting offense. And if the omnipotent Creator of all things, has
dewed down any pity or compassion amidst these wild desartes, let me obtain
some succor at your hands.

The gray headed old father, with tears in his eyes and grief in his heart, as
one that had sufficiently experienced the trial of such hard fortunes, greatly
pitying the lamentable case of so goodly a young man, being now fully
satisfied upon his protestation, that there was but good meaning in the
unexpected presence of Moderatus, he held himself contented therewith, and
assured Moderatus that for such homely sustenance, as the Cel of a poor
hermit could afford, he was heartily welcome, for, quoth he, this my poor
lodge is not replenished with any store of dainty dishes nor fine cates, yet
fully furnished both with such viands as may suffice nature, and also with
peremptory and resolute content: neither do I delight in such drugs as may
procure appetite, but rather contented with a few roots, and such other wild
fruits as this forest does yield, only to satisfy and preserve nature: thus
my friend, have thou heard how well I am stored, and lest thou should think
that I dissemble with thee, come hither, thine eyes shall be a witness of the
truth, and thy stomach shall prove how it can digest hard fare, as penitent
persons diet them selves withal. By this, he had brought Moderatus to the
storehouse where all his provision was, there he feasted him with the best
refreshing his friendly and gentle host could (for the time) provide for him,
which being done, Moderatus loaded the old Hermit with heaps of thanks, and
then, quoth he unto him, (being desirous of news) I heartily desire you,
reverend father, to let me understand how far it hence to Spoletum, and
whether Lothus prince of these countries keeps his Court there, or where else.
And further, what news in the Court, or what late accidents has there happened
worthy of remembrance: to pass away the time, vouchsafe to gratify this my
request.

Well had this good old Hermit skill of courtesy, nature* having dealt very
frankly with him, in giving him a courteous disposition: and nurture joined with
travel and experience had allied him to good manners, so that he judged all
courteous and friendly demands, to be answered with like courtesy, and
therefore he returned this answer.

My son, very glad I would be to pleasure thee any way I could: for, believe
me, when I heard of thy misfortunes, it pitied me to see thy extreme
necessities, and surely I judged fortune either blind (as the poets fame her to
be) or a very niggard in disposing of her favors, that would load one of so few
years and gentle disposition, with such a ponderous burden, and not rather
advance him to the highest note of a quiet and happy life: and surely, had I
not my self experienced part both of her favors and frowns, and that so
inconstant and mutable, that she well witnessed her footestoole to be round
and a rolling stone which is ever fleeting: I would with vehemency exclaymed
against her for this her hard sentence, and very sorry I am, that I can not
thoroughly satisfy thy demand, being altogether a stranger both to the
Country and inhabitants thereof: for that my native soil is in great
Brittane, and therein having spent the prime of my years in frivolous and
youthful fantasies, became in mine age a penitent Pilgrim, to make
satisfaction for my former follyes, and thus far I came, where viewing a
place so solitary and convenient to wear out the rest of my days in
deuotarie Orisons and Prayers, I bequeathed my self now in the winter of mine
years, (having shaken hands with all pleasure) to punish my body with hard
and austere discipline, thereby to make satisfaction for the great multitude of
my former trespasses: thus thou may perceive, how that very little I can
satisfy thy request: but for news, because thou art so desirous thereof, I
will tell thee a very doleful tale, that one passing by this way, declared
unto me, which now lately happened in King Lothus Court, and I think as yet it
is not fully finished: and thus it is.

The fair Lady Modesta, daughter to the King, was of malice by County
Delamure accused of fornication, with a Florentine named Byndon, a Gentleman
very much beloved: yet because he was a stranger, the bloody minded Delamure
could not so boldly forge such treachery, and commit such merciless massacre
against any, as toward him: this accusation proceeded not of any enmity
between him and Byndon, but of mere malice to virtuous Modesta, in whose life
and conversation (as it is credibly reported) there is lively pourtrayed out a
perfect Map of modest chastity, and virtuous humanity: wherefore the
hardest heart would be dissolved into tears, for pure compassion of such
cruelty. Then quoth Moderatus, how know you that she is innocent, and if this
proceeds but of your conjecture, you may very well be in a wrong box: for
women be wily cattle, and sometimes under the habit of counterfeit gravity,
they hyde a most unchaste and wanton desire, and so blind and deceive the
simple and plain meaning man in his conjectures, and indeed I tell you, I
much marvel that one of your years and experience, should without some
special knowledge judge so well of the Feminine gender, without that it was
your fortune never in all your life to have dealings with any, or that the
Planets were in such favorable aspects at the time of your birth, that they
assured you of truth where you committed any trust. And as Moderatus was about
to proceed further in this matter, the old Hermit did cut him off with this
reply.

My son, thou art much to blame to judge so hard of women, or to think me so
credulous: for as the one is not always bad, so in the other I would not be
lightly carried either to like or mislike, without reason should induce me
thereunto: and therefore, omitting the case in general touching all women, I
will speak in particular of this matter, assuring you that all which I speak,
grew upon a probable reason, being informed of the truth by one of the
parties privy to the conspiracy: so now mark, and you shall hear the
discourse thereof.

County Delamure, being a gallant and brave Courtier, fell in love with the
Lady Modesta, whose beauty and conversation moved him to extreme heat, that
he might truly say, Sed scio quisquis amat vritur igne graui:
And being in this extremity of passion, he prosecuted his love unto her very
earnestly, by all ways and means that possibly he could, which nevertheless
grew to small effect: for that Modesta was not yet resolved to entertain or
fancy any, and if she had, hardly could she have been contented to like of
him, because he was so peremptory, that it seemed he rather expected for it by
command, then endeavored to merit it by desert. Wherefore the chaste Modesta
suspected his fancy to be but feigned, proceeding rather of lust, then of any
pure and unspotted love, and therefore gave him an absolute answer, no further
to prosecute his suite unto her: and in the end (driven thereunto by
importunity) she gave him straight warning not to ^rie her patience any
further, nor to disquiet him self with her denials: for if he did (if none
other mean could take effect) she said, that she would acquaint the King her
father therewith, and then happily he should repeat him but too late.

County Delamure taking this repulse very grievously, with great rancor and
malice in his mind, never, ceased to invent and devise means to defame
Modesta, and thus at last he brought it to pass. First, he compacted with one
of Modestas Gentlewomen, which was near about her called Ambideza, and having
corrupted her partly with gifts, partly with promise of marriage, to keep his
counsel and to further his enterprise, interchangeable oaths for performance
of either of their promises past between them: Delamure having the plat ready
in his head, said unto her thus, then (my sweet Ambideza) must thou in thy
Mistress name repair to Byndon the Florentine, who, as I think, is somewhat
favored of her, and tell him, that thy Mistress wills him soon this
evening, to repair to her chamber when they are at supper, and that thou will
be there ready to let him in, where he shall stay til thy mistres come unto him,
to commune of some special matters, she would have none privy but them both:
that done, if he comes, (as I am sure he will) watch for him there, and bring
him to the little closet hard b^ her chamber, where leave him, and give me some
watch-worde of his being there, and then may I have opportunity, to requite an
evil turn he has done against me. Ambideza well contented to do any thing,
were it never so far from reason and conscience, to gain so honorable a
husband, promised to satisfy his will, which accordingly she did. And Byndon,
unwitting what banquet was prepared for him, faithfully giving credit to the
messenger, knowing her of some trust with her Mistress, repaired at the time
appointed, through a strange gallery he well knew, to Modestas chamber, where
Ambideza watched his coming, and brought him to that little Closset, from the
which there was an entrance both to Modestas chamber, and also to the gallerie,
through the which Byndon had thither repaired, and having shut him in, she
presently gave the watch-worde to County Delamure, who being very glad, that
his purpose was brought to so good a pass, made one or two of his vassals and
bond-flaues privy of his pretense, whom he had well advanced for such a
purpose: and when he had well schooled them, what they had to say when the
matter should come in question, he watched the time of Modestas going to
prayer, which always she used to do by her self alone, an hour or two before
bed time: and when he had espied her to forsake the presence, and all alone to
depart, he thought it his fittest time to work his mischievous intent, and so
together with those that he had dealt with therein, he secretly came to
Modestas chamber, who having made her self ready to prayer, was opening the
closset door, where Byndon was, (God knows, ignorant that any body was
within) County Delamure unseen of her was hard at her heel, and as soon as
she had opened the door of the closet, entered in with her, and presently
Bindon, who was within, seeing more then Modesta to enter the chamber,
suspected presently some treason, and sought in all haste to convey him self at
the back door which entered to the gallery, there had the County appointed one
of his men to watch, and had given him instructions, if Byndon sought that way
to escape, that he would presently thrust him in with his rapier, which
accordingly took effect, and so very villanously was Byndon murdered by his
direction: to coulor which diuilish practice, and to the full consuming of his
wicked intent, he repaired forthwith to the King, and infourmed him that he,
and some others passing through a strange gallery in his Highness Court, had
discovered a great crime committed in his royal Palace, which was no less
then the deflowring of his own natural daughter, and showed him further the
manner of the apprehension, and how Byndon being the offender would have made
escape, so that his man to save his own life, was forced to kill him: ^or that
Byndon was so earnest to get away and had so pressed upon him, that he could not
otherwise remedy the same.

The King hearing what Delamure said, so changed color, that he seemed rather
a ghost then a living creture, being at the first ouercredulous, induced so to
think, because Byndon was in such a place, the secrecy whereof was of
sufficient authority to forbid any the entrance thereunto, but to such as
Modesta specially licensed, grief and anger striving for superiority, in great
rage and without examining any further of the matter, very unnaturally did
command his daughter to be imprisoned: who finding the malice of her adversary
to have overcome her innocence, submitted her self, according to the necessity
of the time, to the stormy blastes of double faced fortune: yet not ceasing to
e^claime against such villainous and bloody murder, executed upon giltlesse
Byndon, whose innocent blood cried to the heavens for revenge of so great a
treachery: which just and pitiful complaint increased the jealousy of
suspicion against her, whose clear conscience waighed not of any unjust
disparagement, so that in answering this false accusation, she showed so
resolute a determination, that argued a valarous and noble mind in one of the
female sex, which had been sufficient arguments to repulse this scandalous and
false accution, if the credit of her accuser had not been of such great
estimation: yet nevertheless she was admitted to have her champion, so that
any, or as many as would come within three months, should be lycensed out of
what Country so ever he come, to undertake the defense of Modestas good name,
impeached by that tirannous County: and in default of accomplishment thereof,
Modesta should according to the law, suffer the pains of death. This sentence
pronounced, she was carried again to the same prison she was in before, where
she remains this forty days without any hope of enlargement: the
mightiness of Delamures countenance, and his valiant exploytes as well at home
as in foreign countries, does so terrify as well denizens as strangers, that
hitherto none durst presume to commit his person and honor to so great a
danger, as to offer him the combat, yea though never so confident of the
equity of the cause. Ambideza, seeing the matter to come to this predicament,
determined to convey her self secretly out of the way, now but too late
remembering that many love treason, but none love the Traitor: making no other
reckoning, but that Delamure made her an instrument, to bring to pass his
bloody and inhumane revenge against her mistress, and then happily he might
work some means to cut her off, for fear his treason should come to light:
feeling also some remorse in her conscience of this bloody practice, which
through her means was like to prove a doleful tragedy: here my son, quoth
the Hermit, you hear the truth of the cause, for that Ambideza bequeathing
her self to a Pilgrims life, thereby to endure some penance for her grievous
offense, happened to light on this my Cell: and because, as it seemed unto her,
I was a religious man, in the way of devotion she confessed the same unto me.

Moderatus giving attentive ear unto all this discourse, was moved with great
commiseration of Modestas unfortunate misery, taking the murdering of Byndon
his uncle very heavily: yet like a brave minded warrior, resolving rather to
revenge an injury committed, then to mourn for the loss of his friend, meant
to take opportunity by the foot, and either to free Modesta from the imminent
danger she was in, or else to offer his carcass as a sacrifice, to finish the
obsequies of his beloved kinsman, and innocent Modesta: and therefore made
great moan to the Hermit, for horse and armor to attempt this combat,
making no doubt but shortly to qualify the arrogancy of that blood-sucking
traitor. The Hermit noting the honorable resolution of his mind, judged him
to be a man of some great bounty. And thereupon calling to memory, how that
walking to take the benefit of the air, he had espied hanging upon a Pine
tree fine black armor, and therefore now he brought Moderatus where the same
was, who beholding the same, espied this poesy engraven in the bark of the
tree in Italian letters, and to this effect

None may this sharp and cutting sword uncase,
But to redeem the daughter of a King:
Nor any Knight this Armor bright unlace,
Nor of his virtue brag in any thing:
But he therewith that shall a Tigre tame,
For to defend a princely virgins name.
WHen he had well perused over the Poesy, and told the Hermit the meaning,
who had small skill in the Italian tongue, he assayed to take down the armor,
yet failed in effecting his desire, for that all his strength was too weak to
dissolve that inchauntment: who, perceiving some mystery to be therein,
proved another way to recover the same, and therefore he quickly griped the
handle of the sword, which without any great difficulty he unsheathed, and
then finding all other means insufficient to enjoy so great a Jewel, with the
fine cutting sword he squared the inchaunted bands, which fixed the Armor to
the Pine, wherewith the same fell to the ground, at the fall whereof very great
and fearful noise was heard all there-abouts: also a thick mist and darkness
so covered them, that they could scant see one another, great lights and
flashings of fire amid this darkness appeared. Thus very miraculous and fearful
with great thunder and earthquake this enchantment was dissolved, and by that
light appeared again, the Pine Tree, whereupon the enchanted armor hanged,
was missing, and in the place where it had been appeared a very fair horse well
and richly furnished, which moved them to very great admiration. Nevertheless
Moderatus was very glad thereof, having recovered such a goodly stead, and so
sure and strong armor, having now an assured confidence in the success of
this enterprise: by this the day was far spent, and it drew toward night, and
therefore the old Hermit very courteously offered Moderatus such simple
lodging as his poor Tell could afford, who willingly accepted thereof, and so
both returned again to the Hermites poor lodge, and time of repast being not
yet come, the good old father to drive away the time, began thus to parlie with
Moderatus.

The Hermits exhortation to Moderatus, and encouragement toward this
enterprise His departure from the forest of Esina His arrival to king LOTHVS
Court under the name of the black Knight. His combat with County Delamure the
false accuser of innocent MODESTA, and his victory.

Chap. 11.
MY son, now may thou see how fickle and transitory the state of mortal
men are, never satisfied in making sufficient ostentation of their glories, Dum
flaueat velis aura secunda, who giving their barks a full sail, are very often
in the midst of a very pleasant ^alme, overwhelmed with a most cruel storm,
who in sleede of a happy and quiet harbor, meet with a fearful and dangerous
shipwreck. Well also may thou see, that in danger, which is the extremest of
all extremes, some escape this great peril with plankes, boards, rafters, and
other such like engines and instruments which good fortune yields unto them
at the time of their extreme need: other being of greater fear and less
valor, do like brute beasts desperately perish, their hearts failing any way
to shift for the safeguard of their own lives: such is the disposition of
nature, that she has framed some bold and venterous, others cowards and
fearful, trembling at every wind, and ready to yield at every puff of adverse
fortune: who like the shel-fish when the Moon waxes do increase, and in the
waine thereof diminish: so they depending upon fortune, one while are mighty
and puffed up with ambition and pride: another while being cros^ in their
determinations are miserable, and stuffed up with servile care and fear, even
as Ramunsia (which is termed to be the goddess of vengeance) does alter and
change her copy: for as the river Nylus is alleged of some writers to bring
famine into Egypt, when either it ouerflowed eighteen cubits, or rise not so
high as twelve: so in like manner fortune being ouer-prosperous, or too much
malignant, does blind and detect the good motions of the mind, either with
extreme grief or inexcessiue joy, both which derogate from virtue so much as
by the same they do arrogate unto vice: weigh this with thy self advisedly,
that mortal creatures continually sail between Scilla and Charibdis, where
seeking to avoid one danger they fall into another: for if they covet to be
valiant and famous in the world, they must hazard many perils, and sustain many
great labors: be not then dismayed though fortune sometimes frown, for she does
it of purpose, whereby her favors afterward may seem more pleasant: thou
intendest to encounter with strong and mighty enemy, much feared for his
magnanimity and dexterity at arms, yet have thou a good cause to hope of
victory, for the equity of the quarrel, the defending of innocent blood, the
revenge of a cruel and tirannous murder, be (I think) sufficient motives to
animate the veriest coward to be desperate: well, I do know (gentle friend) that
this my exhortation is but to heap Athos upon Etna, or to power water into the
sea, for thy disposition carries with it self sufficient warrantise of thy
valiant and resolute determination, and therefore committing the sequel hereof
to fortune, I wish thee a happy success therein.

The hermit having thus concluded, meaning to conceal no commodities (which
his poor cabin did afford) from Moderatus, brought him to an inner room
being very beautifully furnished with pictures and tables of sundry sorts,
which greatly he delighted to behold, and amongst them, one seemed much to
excel and surpass the rest in beauty, wherein was lively purtrayed out many
histories, over the which there was written in great Roman letters this
sentence, Foelix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum. Moderatus was very
inquisitiue of the hermit to know the meaning of the histories contained in
that table: whereupon fetching a deep sigh, casting his fight upon the table,
he replied thus. It is, quoth he, a table containing true discourses acted and
euented in my country of great Brittane, which for the zeal I bare to the
parties it does represent, and for a remembrance of mine own misery I have
brought with me: rest thee contented with thus much knowledge thereof at this
time, for that to discourse thereof at large, requires longer time then at
this time we may conveniently enjoy, so great a necessity summoning you to
offer your self in the defense of innocence, which opportunity being
neglected, your travail might come too late, either to enlarge Modestas
desert, or finish your own desire. And therefore relinquish that request for
this time, and when again you happen to travel this way, (which I wish and
expect may be shortly with some good news, and happy end to these new begun
tragedies) I will cite all the whole discourse thereof unto you, fully to
satisfy your longing desire, in the mean time you want not wherewith to
employ your self in, and now for that it is requisite that you be stirring
the next morning, we will refresh our selves with such poor cates, as many
Hermitage will yield unto us.

Well, repast being ended, they walked together to take the benefit of the
air, yet they stayed little abroad, for that the waightinesse of Moderatus
charge gave him gentle summons to take his rest, and to make his helmet his
pillow for that night, which accordingly (having reverently saluted his gentle
host) he did: and all this night could Moderatus take no natural rest, so
that no sooner had Aurora put off her mourning mantle of darkness, and
discovered her blushing countenance, but that he (with a kind of longing
desire to be doing with his new implements) had forsaken the poor cowtch he
lay in all night, and busying him self very diligently to set him self in a
readiness, the Hermites assistance was not wanting, who seeing Moderatus so
well fitted and furnished with horse and armor, noting in him an honorable
and bountiful disposition, who managed his horse with such good grace, that
the old Hermit (who in his days had been as much beholding to Mars for
courage, as to Pallas for wisdom) conceived that he was one alone worthy of
so honorable an enterprise as that was, which he went about: and so commending
him to his fortunes, and him self to his Orisons, he left Moderatus making
some haste to recover Spoletum, who in short time arrived at a little village
about half a league distant from the same, there he began to be inquisitiue of
news from the Court, where he was told that the contagiousnesse of the time
affoorded none other, then the very worst news that ever Aemulia possessed,
which was the imprisonment of the Kings daughter upon Delamures accusation,
which all seemed greatly to pity, accusing the County of too too great
cruelty. Here did he also learn of one County Pallamount, which inhabited in
this village, who was Modestas uncle, unto whom he repaired, praying his
advise, and showing his whole intent unto him, Pallamount returned many kind
thanks unto him for his good will, albeit that the great prowess of Delamure
did forbid him as much as once to hope of any good speed therein: yet accepting
his frank offer, being the only comfort left for the safeguard of Modestas
credit, yea her life also depending thereupon: for that was the very last day
of respite. And therefore accompanied of Pallamount and some few of his
followers, Moderatus calling him self by the name of the black Knight,
repaired to the Kings Court, where being come, the scaffolde and all things was
prepared for the execution of the Kings daughter, and Delamure remained mounted
and armed in the field, to see if any competitour durst withstand his
auerrement. The black Knight being within view of all, thought it not best to
protract the time any longer, and therefore stepped forth, stirring his goodly
steed with good grace, till he came before the presence of the King, and then
lifting up the beuer of his helmet, and bowing him self with reverence to his
Majesty, he saluted him in this manner.

Worthy and victorious Prince, the great fame of thy high renown is so
dispersed abroad in the world, that any accident which might pertain to thy
noble Person or the state of thy Subjects, can not be obscure in strange and
foreign countries, much less amongst thy neighbor Princes, or within thine
own territories and Dominions, which has made Modesta, yea virtuous Modestas
pitiful and lamentable case better known abroad in foreign lands, then in thy
kingdom or in thy Court, yea or to thine own person: if there were no other
reason to induce thee to relinquish this jealousy, thou have conceived of thy
daughter, her virtuous life and honorable conversation so well known, yea
as well abroad as at home, and in foreign Countries more then in her own native
soil, (so that her modesty was a mirror to all Aemulia, or to speak more
truly a lantherne to all the grauest matrones in the world) might have been
sufficient shelters to excuse a slender offense, much rather a manifest and
apparent innocence: wherefore I being (as all true Knights ought to be) bound
by the oath of Knighthood, to relieve the distressed and defend the innocent,
and having (I hope) by good hap, knowledge of the false accusation of thy
daughter, (false it must be, unless my fancy deceives me, and needs must I
fancy her, in whom such royal apparition of virtue appears) by the
treacherous murderer Delamure, whose bloody grooms corrupted with avarice,
have villanously martyred and murdered giltlesse and innocent Byndon, whose
blood cries unto the Gods for revenge, and whose death I hope to quite with
the cruel traitors life that dispoyled him of his. And to that end (shrowding
my self under the habit of thy safe conduct, heretofore by thy Highness
proclamation granted to any that would attempt the Combat in defense of thy
daughter) I am hither arrived with hazard of my life, and price of my blood to
deliver Modesta from her imminent danger: wherefore I crave thy Highness royal
pardon for this mine enterprise, and then I doubt not by the power of the
Gods, but this day in all your presence to bring her wicked accusers to
confusion.

Here the black Knight ended his speech, and the King in words and countenance
allowed his pretense, much maruelling at his great boldness, that durst utter
so hard speeches against the County Delamure, whose very name was so much
feared: wherefore he judged him a man of no mean thoughts nor base birth,
that carried so honorable and valiant a resolution. County Delamure being not
far off, ouer-heard all that he spoke unto the King, which moved him to
choler and anger, that like a ravening Tiger he would presently have fallen to
blows, had he not been commanded to the contrary by the Judges of the
listes: whereupon he stayed, and so with great insolency he took up the
black Knight with such vehemency of speech, that it seemed rather to proceed
of a mad and wild frenzy, then of any valiant and resolute magnanimity. The
black Knight replied very little, smiling rather at his folly, then studying
how to make an answer to his arrogancy, and so not taking any great heed to
any further speech of Delamure, he stirred his horse before the seat of
Modesta, and demanded her allowance of him to defend her innocence, who
willingly gave her consent thereunto: yet notwithstanding that he was presently
answered his demand, beauty now made him forget him self: for so long stood
he at gaze on Modesta, till the County Delamure shakt him out of his dumpe
after this manner.

Now faint-hearted coward, do thou forecast by Astronomy, or calculate by
the course of the heavens, what shall fall of this thy foolish and rash
enterprise. No, no, I tell thee, it is too late so to do: for no submission
shall now serve thy turn, neither shall all the friends thou have be able to
redeem thee from my hands: wherefore make thee ready and defend thy self,
for longer shall thou not pause upon the matter. The black Knight not a little
moved with his so great insolency, first with a glaunce discovered his new
entertained affection to his Mistress, and then casting down the beuer of his
helm, he turned his horse about with great dexterity, the agilitie of his
body very well agreeing with the readiness of his horse: and Delamure in like
sort was ready to the combat, whereupon their pages brought them spears,
Perio served the black knight, for so he was called, that County Pallamount
commanded to give attendance upon him. And now both the combatants being
ready, the trumpetters sounded, and then having taken their full compass,
they so spurred their light and strong horses, that they ran together like
the wind, and presently they met in the midst of the race with such a strong
encounter, that the splinters of their mighty spears whistling and making a
noise in the air, did drive the beholders to wonderful great admiration: more
spears were brought unto them, among which they made choice of the best and
strongest they could find. County Delamure, having by this tried the great
strength of his adversary, thought it not best to dally with him, least in
trifling away the time, he might purchase dishonor, and blemish his credit,
in that a strange and an unknown Knight should hold battle there so long
with him: and on the other side, the black Knight remembering that he had in
hand the murderer of his dear kinsman, and the false accuser of Priscus
sister (his dearest friend living) redoubling his force in such sort, that he
thought it no conquest if his adversary held out any long time. Thus on either
side being stirred with great indignation and choler, they pricked their
furious steades to run with great swiftness, and the black Knight so well
behaved him self in this meeting, that he burst his spear in small shiuers,
and gave Delamure so strong an encounter, that both horse and man fell to the
ground, him self also feeling the great force of his mighty adversary: for
that he had received such a counter-buffe of Delamure upon his visor, that he
was quite out of all remembrance, and fell down upon the saddle bow, his
horse carrying him all about the field as dead: Delamure received small damage
by this encounter, but only the disgrace of his fall wherein his horse
shoulder was broken, which was very good hap to the black Knight: for if
Delamure had had his horse to follow him when he was in this trance, he had
quickly ended the battle, and albeit he was a-foote, and his body corpulent,
he made so great haste to follow him, that he came within reach of him, and as
he was ready to handfast a blow upon to finish that labor, the black Knight
recovered him self, and perceiving that he was so disgraced before the Prince
of Aemulia, where he well hoped to gain honor, not knowing of the fall of his
adversary, he turned his horse with great fury, where espying Delamure, and
on foot so nigh him, with a trice he lighted from his horse, and drew out his
sword, which was one of the best that ever had been forged of steel: for that
it had been wrought by wisdom and art) and so the County did the like: then
began the battle very bloody and stout, either endeavoring with all his force
to endammage his foe. The good Lady Modesta now somewhat recovered of a
trance, (although she was yet doubtful of the success of the battle)
wherein she had fallen in this great danger of her champion, whose death had
been a small judgment of her life. In this sort they continued the space of a
good hour, without any advantage perceived of any side, to the great wonder of
all the beholders, who judged it impossible for any humane strength to sustain
so long and hard a travel: all greatly admiring at the great bounty of the
black Knight, for that as it grew further in the day, the heat of his choler
being kindled, his force and strength also increased, and his adversary was
perceived to become more slow and fainty, yet for his credit sake he
encouraged him self, and redoubled his blows with such force, that he had
greatly endaungered the black Knight, had it not been for the goodness of his
armor, which no weapon could pearce: yet the blows lighting upon his armor
as thick as upon an anduill in a Smythes forge, greatly bruised his body, the
blood issuing out at his Beuer, and in many other places through the joints of
his armor, the which the black Knight perceiving, and seeing that it grew
late, thought it not his best course so to trifle the time, and no good done,
least a new day must be taken and to end the fame, and so his labor but then
begin: and thus resolved at this time, (as it is said) to win the spurs
or loose the horse, he took his sword in both his hands, and lent Delamure
such a mighty blow upon the visor of his helmet, that he brought him quite
out of his remembrance, and doubling the same with more force, before he
recovered out of his trance, he ouerthrewe him to the ground, and then laid
his foot upon his breast, and unlaced his helmet to see if there were any hope
of life in him, and perceiving by the moving of his carcass that he was not
yet dead, in a little space he brought him to him self again, and thereupon
the black Knight began to discourse with him thus:

Now treacherous murderer, and false accuser of innocence, thou may see,
the just reward of falsehood and treason is to receive a defamed death for so
vicious a life, or rather a perpetual torment, for so villainous an intent.
Now thy life is in my hands, and in me lies either to give thee that which
thou have not deserved, that is, to depart hence with thy head: or else in
executing of Justice, to present the same to the innocent Modesta, which is too
slender a recompense for so great a villenie. And assuredly, in case thou do
not here publicly confess the truth, to avoid the jealousy which might be
conceived of Modestas honor, upon my Knighthood I will even execute the very
uttermost extremity, that honor and arms will allow to be done against thee.

County Delamures confession of his intended treason to toward MODESTA, and
the cause thereof. The Kings joy of her delivery. The black Knight his sudden
departure from the Kings Court: his letter he sent to MODESTA, being greatly in
love with her. The general sorrow in the Court, for the absence of the black
Knight. MODESTAS receipt of his letter, and her returning of answer thereof by
the same messenger, and her great affection unto him. The black knights
travel in the forest Esina: his madrigals.

Chap. 12.
COunty Delamure being now at the door of death, partly in hope to have his
life pardoned, and partly for discharge of conscience, the burden whereof was
very heavy to his mind, disclosed the whole circumstance, the manner of his
drift, and the reason which induced him so to do, particularly as before is
recited by the Hermit, to the great admiration of all them that heard it, how
such outrageous villeny could be harbored in any humane heart: who having from
point to point thoroughly discoursed thereof: great was the joy that was made in
general, for the clearing of Modesta from that false accusation, but specially
her aged and careful father the King, who was much ravished in mind with that
unexpected good hap, that for a long time he thought he had been transported
into a new world.

In this mean time Modesta with all her train of Ladies and Gentlewomen were
not meanly glad, hope having clean banished away fear, yet fear but newly
defaced with hope, in so much that the virtue of the one rooting out the
infection of the other, caused such a sudden alteration in her body, that her
wan and pale countenance was converted to a very fair and beautiful
complexion, and to be brief, so lovely and amiable she was, that the people
had been like to have run into an heresy, in derogating the dignity and
honor due unto the Queen of Love, and arrogating the same unto her as a new
Venus, more worthy then the old goddess, supposing that by her there might
be borne a young Cupid, in whom the want of the former (who was blind) might
be supplied: who being full furnished with all his senses, would (no doubt) be
more gentle and less cruel. Great reason they had to have this opinion of
her, for that in majesty she excelled Juno, in beauty Helen, in modesty
Diana, in wisdom and policy Cassandra, so that hereafter none meant to go a
pilgrimage to Citharea, nor yet to adorn Aphrodite her shrine at Paphos with
flowers, where now might be found only the dead cynders, where old sacrifices
had been, but no sign of fresh fires and new burnt offerings. Venus perceiving
the people in such an heresy, in making an earthly creature copartner of her
Deity, began to be very angry, devising with her self how she might utterly
subvert and bring in oblivion the great fame of this new Goddess, in the end
perceiving no way to compass the same, but only in extinguishing the very
cause it self: and as all desperate causes require desperate remedies, so upon
the sudden Venus be thought her of a drift to requite this injury, which was
thus. First, she solicited her dear darling Cupid to undertake the revenge of
his mothers wrong, showing him that there was no mean to effect the same, but
only to insinuate her with the love of this new Champion, wherewith she was
already something moved, and being once skortched therewith, no doubt their
purpose would take good effect: for that the black Knight meant presently to
depart to the Forest of Esina, to bring (according to his promise) tidings to
the Hermit, of his good success in his late achieved enterprise, and then
his sudden departure would be so great a grief to her heart, that in a short
space her languishing love would so alter her heavenly hew, (for the absence of
lovers breeds such a corrasiue unto the mind, that it impayreth the beauty
of the body) that the multitude would now think it but a blaze, which
vanishes away with every blast: and by this mean convert the heat and
feruencie of their desires, honoring her now as a Goddess) to a loathsome
and cold disdain, then (despising her as an abject) in the mean time while
Venus schooled her little wanton wagge, to work a revenge against the virtuous
and fair Modesta, the black knight having obtained the victory, thought it
would be more honorable if he used it with clemency: and now after that
County Delamure had confessed all the matter, and circumstance thereof, the
black Knight lifted up the beuer of his helm, (whose countenance garnished
with the excellency of beauty, his long travel having added a singular grace
to his lovely and amiable complexion) offering with great reverence to the
virtuous Modesta, the disposing of County Delamures life or death: for hers was
the wrong, and in her hand should the sword of Justice now remain, therefore
he heartily requested her to pronounce the sentence against him. Modesta
ravished as well with joy of her sudden delivery, as also with delight in
beholding the beauty of him, that now had taken fast root in her mind,
refused to accept of the black Knights offer, excusing her self with a kind
of care, least in being a Judge in her own cause, she might run into the
ignominy of the popular speeches: and so either be condemned of folly, for
saving his life that sought her death, or otherwise be accounted cruel, in not
pardoning upon the offenders submission: for that it is a great inhumanitie to
deny compassion to a man in misery. Upon these reasons she desired the black
Knight to hold her excused, giving him innumerable thanks, as well for her safe
delivery by his valor and bounty, as also for this his courteous offer, which
to satisfy his mind, she would willingly have accepted of, but fear of
disparragement to her honor commanding her to the contrary. Yet the black
Knight who was wholly resolved not to take her denial, very earnestly
entreated her again to satisfy his request herein, which he would account a
full recompense for all his travels. Then Modesta finding her self already
overcome with his strange and rare courtesy, and desirous to make a kind of
emulation thereof, in granting him any reasonable request, and therefore
having deliberated upon the matter, and considering that a life full of infamy
should be a greater torment to a valiant mind, then a death full of
martyrdom, pronounced a sentence of banishment against Delamure. Hereupon all
was finished, and the clamor of the people was so exceeding great and
wonderful, that the black Knight intending secretly to steal away from
thence, to perform his promise with the old Hermit, who was his good host
in the wild forest of Esina, with an intent nevertheless to return in some
unknown sort, to knowledge his obeisance to the fair Modesta, unto whom his
heart was prisoner: on this determination having conveyed him self out of the
press of people, and now being part in his way toward the Forest, Perio
ouertooke him, who had eyed him so narrowly, that presently perceiving him to
depart, followed him with all the speed he could. The black Knight perceiving
so convenient a messenger, and one he had also bound unto him in some sort,
with friendly rewards in recompense of his service, he allighted from his
horse, and stepped into a house in a little village hard by, willing Perio to
walk his horse till he returned again, and there calling for pen, Ink and
paper, he devised this fancy.

THe Ocean seas for every calm present
A thousand storms: so howerly does my mind,
While that I do excogitate the event
Of things, wherein great mystery I find.
With pain I prove a treble damage loss,
Since Fate my heart in waves of grief does toss.
The wonder late I saw, wherein I thought
A strange and rare effect for to contain,
Was, when I viewed your face, which in me wrought
Such deep desire ever yours for to remain.
That when I find that hope forbids to prove,
To seek redress, I languish for your love.
But froward Fate too cruel dealt with me,
To ruminate unto mine ears your fame:
Yet glad thereby that you redeemed be,
Though I do pine when thoughts present your name.
In that I can not still possess the sight
Of your sweet self, that sole may me delight.
THe black Knight having finished this Poem, he closed it up, and sent it by
Perio to Modesta, wishing him further to signify unto her, that he traveled
to the Forest of Esina to lead a hermites life, until that he might either
hope of her favor to return again, or despair thereof, to bequeath him
self perpetually to devotion: and after he had thus instructed Perio what he
should do, and had well rewarded him to make him the more willing to effect
the same, he hastened him toward the Forest, and Perio (although more
willing to follow his new Master,) returned to the Court, where he found a
great tumult, the King being very inquisitiue of the black Knight, which could
not be heard of, the which when it came to the Lady Modestas ears, she was
very much grieved and disquieted, for that she was now out of hope ever to
have any sight of him that she so entirely beloved: and as she was in this
meditation came in Perio, who having reverently saluted her, presented her with
that skrowle from the black Knight, which when she had perused, she was very
well pleased, hoping he would not be long absent, (being sick) from the
Physician which could cure his disease: yet she questioned with Perio about
him, who upon her demand, delivered her his message by word of mouth: whose
entire and faithful affection choosing rather to wander in unknown desartes
in great misery, then to stay in her fathers Court to reveal his fancy unto
her, for fear of offending her which he loved so entirely, her love toward
him began to increase, so that in the end unable to conceal the extreme heat
of her passions, she confessed unto Perio how greatly she affected him,
earnestly entreating him to take the pains to return again in quest of the
black Knight, and she would well reward him for his travel. Perio well
pleased with these news, willingly offered him self at her command
especially therein: for that he desired nothing so much, as to show him self
willing, though not able to pleasure the black Knight, so bountiful he had
been unto him. Well, Modesta perceiving the willing mind of Perio to carry
her message, presently framed a letter, and having sealed the same, she
delivered it to Perio, as being assured of his fidelity, whom she had often
tried to be faithful, requesting him with all speed to find out the black
Knight,, and to deliver the same unto him. Perio presently departed, whom we
will leave preparing him self for his journey to go in quest of the black
Knight, which we left traveling in great haste toward the Hermites Cell in
the Forest of Esina, who having at the last recovered the Forest, began to
think of his forepassed dangerous adventures, and the remembrance of his
dearest Modesta, now penetrating his mind with fresh wounds, which brought
him to a great agony tormenting him the more, because he had been but seldom
acquainted with such strange motions, being in a great rage with him self,
that his mind should be overcome with such effeminate passions, so that he
thus striving to suppress the fire, (which was yet but a spark) it rather
increased and waxed more and more, that in the end it did burst forth into a
vehement and outrageous flame, which so aggrauated his cares, that if he had
endured the torture of Perillus Bull, he could not have been more mangled in
his mind, nor by any means racked to a higher note of sorrow and grief,
remembering how impossible it was for him to enjoy that virtuous and rare
Parragon, whose favor he tendered more then his own life. And being thus
metamorphosed from a free man to a thrawled captive, from a professed soldier
of warlicke Mars, to a vowed servant of wanton Venus, taking no heed to his
way, (these busy cogitations boiling so within his brain, that almost the
sense of understanding was quite perished in him) in so much that in this
fury, his horse carried him far out of his way, before he came to him self
again. In this sort the black Knight, (for so we will call him yet) wandered
these wild deserts for ten or twelve days, till in the end wearyed with his
day labors, and his small nights rest, espying a fair fountain with fine
green banks, round about diapered with the pride of Vestas choice flowers, and
covered with the shade of a tall Beech tree, Zephirus tenderly breathing forth
soft and cool wind, which made a pleasant murmr amongst the parched leaves
of that pleasant harbor, and extinguished part of Phoebus extreme heat, here
he went and bathed himself in the fountain, and afterward reposed his
weary limbs upon the tender grass, which was very pleasing unto him, but
notwithstanding his wonted passions still disquieting him, that he could take
no rest, whereupon he warbled out this ensuing Dittie, according with the notes
of the musical birds, that sweetly chattered upon the hangings over that
clear and Christalline spring.

HOw can I sing, and have no joy in heart,
In heart no joy, a heavy doleful jest,
A jest, God wot: that still procures my smart,
A cruel smart that breeds mine unrest.
Shall I then sing, and can not jest nor joy,
Nay rather weep thus living in annoy.
Why should I weep, or heavy lot bewail?
Why should I sobbe, and sigh with sobbing care?
For herein tears, sighs, nor sobbes can prevail,
But hope may help to rid me from this snare.
The valiant mind condemns such trifling toys,
Though cruel love bereave his wished joys.
O balefull joy rejoicing in the sight
Of beauties flower, a flower like Cockeatrice.
Whose view does pearce the man of greatest might,
And does subvert the reason of the wise.
Such was the sight that did inthrawle my sight,
Such was the spite that wrought me deep despite.
Have I then pawned my credit to this end?
Have I my life in balance put therefore,
Her life to save and credit to defend,
And brought my life to thraldom for evermore.
And may not hope this courtesy to have,
Even at her hands, her champions life to save.
Despair not man, thou have not tried her truth,
Doubt not before that she an answer give,
Seek first for favor, women be full of ruth,
Though she deny, let no denial grieve.
Women will say, and will unsay again,
And often refuse the thing they would obtain.
The black Knights dream: His delivering of a young man pursued by a Dragon,
whom he found to be the messenger that he had sent to MODESTA, and received a
letter from her again His return with the messenger back to the kings court.
The report of a great triumph there, which was likewise to be performed at
Florence, and the Victor to be rewarded with the Kings daughter. Perduratus
restored to his honor and living in Florence again. The giant Bergamo his
victori in Aemulia, and his setting forward toward Florence with MODESTA in a
triumphant chariot. The black Knight his combat with him in the forest of
Mountalto, and his victory.

Chap. 13.
BY this Morpheus had befriended him with a pleasant slumber, yet the mind
working still, fed it self so long upon the bone, that he left no marowe
therein, whereby so small moisture was left within his body to work upon, that
it could not intertaine and feed the ordinary intercourse of descending
humors, which executed a friendly office within his body, to disfraught the
mind of cares, and to nus^e it up for the time in the bed of rest and ease.
Thus having but a weary sleep, as he was neither sleeping nor yet well waking,
he heard a pitiful outcrie, and a great ruffling amongst the trees, whereat
he awaked and buckled on his helmet, and by that he had recovered his feet,
and rushed a little into the thicket to learn the cause of the outcrie, he
might see a monstrous Dragon pursuing a handsome young man, and being ready to
cease upon him, the valiant black Knight unsheathed his fine cutting sword,
(being now within reach of that ouglie feend) and parted the fire-spitting
head from that monstrous and devilish carcass, and when his conquest was thus
ended, he called the young man unto him, who was yet scarce come unto him
self, being so late in so great a peril, and therefore could not speak one
word, till the black Knight having narrowly marked him, and knowing that he
was the Page by whom he had sent his letter to Modesta, spoke thus unto him.
My good Perio, (for so the Page was called) what wind brought thee hither, I
am glad it was my good fortune to be the safeguard of thy life, take heart, man:
for now thou art delivered of all thy danger. Tell me what news at the
Court, and how does my dearest Modesta? if thou have any tidings from her,
deliver thy message quickly, that I may know the charge of her doom. Perio
seeing him self in his presence that he came in quest of, and how he was
delivered of so great a danger, wept for joy, and could speak never a word,
but delivered Modestas letter unto him, the which he perceiving unripped the
seal, and read the contents, which was to this effect.

GEntle Knight, I know not whether I rejoiced so much in mine own delivery,
being in so great a danger, as I bewailed and lamented thy ab^ence, having
preserved my life and credit: the one exonerating my posterity from
perpetual infamy by thy Knightly prowess and valor: the other arguing in
thee a dislike of some thing, by reason of thy sudden departure. But
nevertheless, even as the one proceeded of thy resolute and bountiful
disposition, without any entreatie of mine: so the other followed of a
peremptory resolution, without my priuitie or consent. And if thou have
hazarded thy life in defense of mine honor, I will not stick to grant thee
any reasonable request to recompense the same. Know thou not that the
Merlion soareth after the Lark, but never ceazeth upon the wren: the Faulcon
footeth the partridge, but never flies after the puttocke: the Eagle beholds
the Sun in the top of the heavens, but never looks down toward the
bottom of the Seas: and Princes bear prince-like dispositions to reward
bountifully, and not base peasant-like minds, to recompense their champions
slenderly: wherefore do thou then despair? if my beauty has captiuated
thy sight, thy virtue has imprisoned my heart: bashful fear hinders thee
to seek, shamefast modesty forbids me to offer: and yet I had rather pass
the limits of modesty (which is so great an ornament to our sex) and confess
and acknowledge mine own infirmity, then so valiant and worthy a Knight
should miscarrie. Wherefore I charge thee upon pain of my displeasure, to
return with this messenger to my Fathers-Court again: welcome thou shall be
unto him, and princely rewarded, but more welcome to Modesta, and lovingly
entertained, who longs for thy presence. Thus resting not well pleased with
my self, till I be able to pleasure thee, I wish and expect thy short return.

Thine always unfeigned Modesta.


WHen the black Knight had perused over this letter, and had read it again
and again, he could skant withdraw his eyes from the same, so unspeakable
were the joys he conceived therein: but in the end, seeking to defer the
time in reading her skrowle, (being in good hope not only to behold, but also
to embrace her own person) was with the idle house-wife to be catching of
fleas, when her business should be in doing. Therefore he plucked up his
spirits, and rewarding well the messenger, he resolved to leave his first
determination to visit the good old hermit, (til that he had first returned
to Modesta) faithfully determining nevertheless, when opportunity would give
him leave, to repair unto him again, to hear his British discourse, and to
bring him news of Modestas enlargement according to promise. And now being
pricked forwards with the sting of a more longing desire then before, he
returned with Perio back again, and such haste they made, that within few
days they were come to a village very nere to the kings Court, where they
lodged al night. The black knight being (after his manner) very inquisitiue of
news: his host told him of a great triumph of Just and Turnament, which was
holden at the kings court, and the occasion thereof had grown in this sort.
First the King, after the delivery of his daughter, caused a proclamation to
be made, that whosoever could bring notice of him, that had by his valor
preserved her honor and life, he should be very highly rewarded for the same,
and when no news could be heard of him, he caused another proclamation to be
made, that a solemn feast should be kept in his Court for one whole month,
during which time, he granted a safe conduct to all foreign Princes, and
Knights of what country soever, to pass and repasse: and that during the time
appointed, all comers, as well within his own principality and dominions, as
strangers, should try their marciall prowess, and Knightly actiuitie at Just
and Turnament, and he which should obtain the honor of that Feast with
martial manhood, should have for his reward his only daughter Modesta in
marriage, with this condition that he would defend her beauty for one whole
month at Florence, which now flourished again, being but lately by Carolus
Magnus recovered from the possession of the Goths, and the worthy Perduratus
the valiant Governor thereof, who (at the time when the Goths sacked the
same, having narrowly escaped the fury of their blood-thirsting blades) had
ever lived in exile in the deserts of Liguria, and now was called back
again, and restored to his former possessions and livings, where he not only
erected stately and sumptuous Temples, to worship and deifie the Gods,
magnificent and gorgeous buildings to harbor his people: but also prescribed
and established Laws to keep his subjects in good order of living: these
were the reasons which moved the King to make choice of Florence, knowing that
greater company would assemble there, in respect that the fame thereof so
lately began to flourish. And the reason (as it is reported) quoth Calimacko,
(for so the host of the house was called) which moved the King to take this
course, was to find again that Knight, which victoriousty had vanquished
Modestas false accuser. These triumphs have continued these three weeks and
more, and now they draw toward an end: many worthy Knights and valiant
Champions came there out of all Countries, and amongst the rest, one came,
which is rather a devil or a monster, then a man, a Giant he is, which came
(upon report of this triumph) from the desartes of the mountain Taurus, and as
yet sithence he came none ran with him twice, for that he unhorsed every one at
the first encounter: and this is like to carry her away, much against her
fathers will, and now the King is sorry to have granted any such conditions
to the victor: but since there is no remedy, he caused to be made a triumphant
chariot to carry them to Florence, being out of all hope to be rid of this
perilous and terrible monster, without that the fresh fame of that new
erected City, together with the hope of so precious a reward, should make the
number of worthy Martialistes to be greater, and their resolution to be more
peremptory, whereby some one might (by good hap) in the end weary that
devilish feend, thereby once again to recover his Modesta from captivity.
When Calimacko had thus discoursed, the black Knight was the gladdest man in
the world, both because he heard of his Fathers happy return to Florence
again, with the great fame and renown thereof, and also to be offered so good
an opportunity, once again to combat for his Lady: and withal, that before
his Father in Florence he should advance him self to show his skill in arms.
Well; after that he had discoursed a while with Calimacko upon these news, he
caused his Page to light him to his chamber, where being come, he began to
commune with him thus. Now Perio, how likest thou these tidings of thy
Mistress, and of that handsome groom that must have her? very ill, my Lord,
quoth he, and worse will my Lady and Mistress fare, if she hear not shortly
from you. Nay Perio, quoth the black Knight, thou mistakest the matter: for
women be wily cattle, they can counterfeit sorrow when they are nothing sad,
and lowre when they have list to laugh, and smyle when they feel most smart:
dissimulation is a common practice amongst them, yea and though they should
love entirely, yet are they like the timely blossoms that are nipped with every
frost, they change their hew with the Cameleon, and alter their shapes with
Proteus, so voluble is the wheel of their unsettled resolucion. Quoth Perio,
you may assure you, my Lord, Modesta is none of those that is won with a Nut,
and lost with the shell: for as without great desert she will not affect, so
without a manifest occasion she will not dislike: and for you, my Lord, you may
be well assured, she will never be false unto you, and if you find it
otherwise, never believe Perio again. Well, quoth the black Knight, I will
try if it be so, let us take our rest this night, and in the morning you shall
know more of my mind. Little sleep satisfied the black Knight, devising
with him self in what sort he might attempt this enterprise, unknown of any:
in the end he concluded with him self, to send Perio the next morning to the
Kings Court, to learn what time, and which way Modesta should be carried
toward Florence, and gave him great charge not to show him self unto her,
before such time as he should put in practice what he had determined, for the
enlarging of her from the custody of that great Giant. Perio very readily and
closely conuayed him self to Court, and he stayed not long, but he came to the
knowledge of all: the time of the Turnament being now expired, and Bergamo (for
so the Giant was called) ready within those two days to set forwards with
Modesta toward Florence: whereby (according to the kings Proclamation) to
finish his begun enterprise. When Perio had heard this, and had learned which
way they would go, without any carrying he returned to his Master again: and
when he had declared the whole circumstance unto him, the black Knight was
very glad, that they did so quickly set forwards with Modesta, and that
Bergamo was to pass with her through the Forest of Mountalto, wherein was a
very narrow passage at the issuing out thereof, and adjoining thereunto a very
sine and plain green, furnished with two rows of Poplars, (which were
sometimes the sisters of proud Phaeton, so transformed, because they sorrowed
for their brothers fall) along the same standing in such order, as though they
had taken their places there, to behold the rare and strange sight* which
shortly was to pass that way. Then he caused to be made a Cassocke, and Basses
of read Satin to cover his black armor, least he should be descryed before
he had brought his purpose to some end: and caused also a strange attire to
be made for his Page, and when he had given order how things should be done,
he betook him to his rest. The next day, when Aurora began to clothe her self
with her gray gown, and to blush for shame that Phoebus should be seen to
dislodge him self from her bower, and that Titan had no sooner set foot in
his chariot, and his trampling steedes with foaming mouths began to ascend,
and with their lights to discover such things that were in the inferior
regions, obscured with the vale of darkness, but the black Knight armed at
all assayes, and covered with that red vesture, his Crest plumed with a great
bunch of white feathers, mounted upon his stately white courser. Thus Perio
carrying his Target, and riding upon a fine Iennet which he had bought for him,
traveled a round pace toward the Forest of Mountalto, and before Phoebus
had passed in his course the meridionall line, they had recovered the same, and
drawing nearer the plain, to the which the narrow Angle was adjoining, the
black Knight lighted off his horse, gave it unto Perio, and took Modestas
picture (that he had procured to be made for that purpose) and hanged it on a
mighty Poplar, which stood in the very nooke between the plain and the
Forest, where no body could pass but must needs see it: underneath this
picture he caused to be engraven in golden letters this sentence.

No Knight may pass this way, but must needs either confess, that she whom
this picture represents is the fairest Lady living, and yield up his Target
in honor of her name: or combat for his passage with the Knight of the
Forest, who watches here for that purpose.

And when he had placed the same to his liking, he walked aside to watch the
coming of Bergamo, who within three hours after, was come within kenne of the
black knight, who terms him self the Knight of the Forest: then presently
he called to his Page for his horse, and mounting to his saddle with a trice,
did ride a soft pace till he came to the entrance of the plain, and there he
stayed still, till the chariot came right against him, and then stepped foth,
and wished the chariot man to stay, who maruelling to see one alone man so
boldly will him to stay, thought skorne thereof and held on his course. The
knight of the Forest full of choler to see the skornfull demeanor of that
proud cartesman, spurred his horse till he came within reach of him, and then
with his armed fist he lent him such a blow upon his face, that he crushed his
skull in pieces, at the noise of whose fall those which were already past turned
back again, and those which followed, hastened forwards. Bergamo being within
glutting himself with the view of the fair Modesta, hard all this bus^ing, and
because the chariot stood, he stepped out, and seeing the knight all armed
before him, and his chariot man slain, asked the knight of the forest why he
had done so, and reviled him with great insolency, assuring him if he did not
answer him to his liking, he should taste the weight of his mighty faulchon.
The knight of the forest smiling answered, I have vowed to keep this passage,
and here thou may see the cause (pointing to the picture) and I wished thy
man to stay that I might speak with thee, who would not, and this is the
cause: now read this inscription, and answer my demand. Bergamo kindled with
wrath, was ready to run upon him with his Faulchion, but remembering him
self better, he looked toward the picture, yet took small heed thereunto,
but read over the skrowle which was underwritten, and then foaming at his
mouth like a Bore, and fretting with a deadly fury, that any should presume to
brave him in such order, he thundered out with his hollow and bellowing voice,
(his eyes burning like a flashing torch) as follows.

Proud stripling and foolish yonker, how dare thou presume to challenge me
the combat, that have terrified so many brave and resolute Knights with the
majesty of my stern countenance, and thou saucy Princkockes, art so arrogant
to set up skrowles of challenge to me, or arrogate to any woman living the
beauty incomparable of my Lady, yea and though the truth were of thy side,
yet would I not confess the same, being so peremptorily required thereunto:
for resolute men at arms are sooner won with entreaty, then overcome with
force. But I pray thee, whose picture do thou carry abroad, thus to her
defame and thy dishonor. Quoth the Knight of the Forest, care thou not,
arrogant Monster, whose it is, only know she is the Lady of my love, and
Mistress of my thoughts, in defending of whose right, I hope to disinherite
thee of thy rest, and therefore make thee ready to the combat: if I overcome
thee, I must be master of thy prize, more fitter for a man then a monster: if
thou do overcome me, I will be thy prisoner, and confess (that which I can
not deny) that she, for whom thou do undertake this enterprise, is the
very pride of beauty, and flower of all the world. Although Bergamo might
well have understood by his words, that his pretense was to win his pray,
yet he neither took any heed to what he said: only thus much he replied unto
him.

Thou unfortunate wretch, I will not stick to grant thee the honor of a
combat, because I would be thoroughly revenged on thee, and then may thou
think thy self happy, to have so honorable an end, as to perish by my
weapons: but tell who thou art, that I may know the spoil of whose honor I
shall gain by the conquest. I am the Knight of the Forest, quoth he, that
will shortly quallifie those insolent bragges of thine: but as the Beetle
nestleth her self in the Sun all day, and descending thence with a murmuring
noise, is contented with a Cowshard for shelter in the night: so thy proud and
mighty threats, which now is stretched above Ela, will ere long be contented
to decline, and to deskant upon Solfa.

Hereupon Bergamo called for his horse and armor, and while two of his squiers
made him ready, the Knight of the Forest turned his horse round, and managed
him with very good grace, and the rest of the company which gave their
attendance on the chariot did set them selves in order in two rows, the
followers of Bergamo on the one side, and those which were Modestas servants on
the other side: they all mused upon the success of this stratageme. All
Modestas followers heartily wishing the Knight of the Forest to prevail, that
their dear Lady and Mistress should not be combred with such a diuilish
Hell-hound, the sight of whom tormented her more then Hell it self. Thus all
being attentive and standing in good order, Bergamo having armed him self, and
being mounted upon a huge and mighty courser, carrying a spear in his hand as
big in a manner as a Pine tree, and stretching his unwieldy limbs in his
saddle, that one would have thought it had been a mountain that miraculously
moved toward him: but nevertheless it daunted nothing of the courage of
that good Knight, but rather increased his force and doubled his desire to be
dealing with him. And thus both parties being ready to the battle, the angry
sounding trumpets summoned them to that bloody conflict, the which no sooner
being heard, then these two champions turned about their neighing horses, and
pacing them till they were a competent distance one from another, then giving
them the liberty of the raynes, spurred them on to run like the whirlewinde,
and meeting in the midst of the race, they shiuered both their spears so
that the encounter was very dangerous, for the Knight of the Forest was so
shaken therewith, that he was glad to embrace his horse neck to save him self
from falling: and Bergamo with the force of his enemies lance was pushed upon
his horse crupper, so that he had much a do to recover his saddle again. And
both of them having well settled them selves, drew out their swords, and then
the battle began to be bloody on both sides: but to be short, long and
perilous was the fight between them, yet in the end, the Knight of the
Forest with great loss of his blood, and danger of his life, was Master of
the field: for no humane power could endure the terrible and deadly strokes of
that good Knight, so that being now in the presence of Modesta, whole legions
of monsters could not have vanquished his invincible mind. Bergamo now left
groaning his last breath, and blaspheming against Gods and men, renting the
bowels of the air with his clamorous and hollow bellowing, his own servants
flocked about him to lend him such succor as they could, all the rest ran to
the Knight of the Forest, and submitted them selves unto him, who having
dismounted from his horse, entertained them all very lovingly, and wished one
of them (which seemed unto him to be chief of all the rest) to conduct him to
their Lady and Mistress: for that now it stood him upon, to perform the
enterprise begun by Bergamo: the Gentleman very willingly did lead him
toward the chariot. Modesta all this while stood viewing of this stratageme,
and was very glad to be rid of that devilish monster, although she knew not who
it was that had ventured so far, to gain an interest in her, and to whom
she must yield a possession in her self: but whosoever he was, she liked well
the change, and therefore stood ready with a cheerful countenance to
entertain him* who having ascended to the chariot, lifted up the beuer of his
helmet, and humbly prayed her hands to kiss. Whereupon Modesta narrowly
beholding her Champion, partly gessing he should be the black Knight by the
complexion of his face, and by the valorous disposition of his mind, embraced
him with great kindness, and wished him to tell her presently, if it was not
he that had vanquished County Delamure, in defense of her life and honor.
Moderatus desiring nothing so much, as to satisfy any request that Modesta
should make, and specially to discover him self, where he above all others was
the welcommest man in the world: wherefore he made no bone of the matter, but
thus framed his salutation unto her.

The black Knights salutation to Modesta. Her courteous reply, and joining in
true league of amity. Their going forwards toward Florence* and their
embassage sent to PERDVRATAS Governor thereof. Their abode in a village called
Albauilla* The great Giant Albanus outrages there. CORNELIUS and others of Duke
DEVASCOS Court repairing to Florence to this triumph.

Chap. 14.
O Most noble Princess, the flower of all beauty, and whilome the pride of
Nature triumphing in her own excellency, having framed so noble a Creature,
in whose life and conversation both rare constancy, and the fruit of virtuous
chastity have shined more bright then the Carbuncle in the darkest dungeon, or
Phoebus ascending to his highest sphere, displaying his glorious and golden
beams, after a dark and mistie morning, I say, Modesta well deserving thy
name, and not improper to thy heroical qualities, the very Map of unfeigned
modesty, the card of singular and care courtesy, the flower of
euer-flourishing fancy, the mirror of mayden-like humility, the glass of
neuer-ending glory, and the lively lantherne of true and perfect nobility.
All hail noble Uirgine, the wonder of the world, and the matchless Parragon
amongst all humane creatures, thy twice captiuate champion, Moderatus son to
the renowned (and sometimes unfortunate) but now happy Florentine Perduratus,
Lord and Prince of that reedified and late recovered Florence, humbly
submits him self to thy person, and craves pardon, if ever he has wronged
thy sight with any rude fantasy of ouer-willing desire, to excuse my self,
whereof I can say nothing, but that in so doing, I fulfilled the commandment
of the peremptory and uncontrolled Deity of that blind Ciprian boy, whose
shafts pierced deadly, and fire burned vehemently, so that not able to resist
the alarums of his fresh batteries, I committed my passions to that tell-tale
paper, which trusly Perio delivered to mine only harts-hope Modesta. My lives
preserver Modesta vouchsafed to compound a medicine with her own hands to salve
my grief, although by distance of place it lately came to my hands: wherefore I
want not the marks of a long languishing patient, with his pale and lean
cheeks, and hanging and heavy countenance. The medicine I received by the
hands of true-hearted Perio, has something revived me again, and both the
messenger and the potion I do here present unto Modesta, as the infallible
tokens of your true-hearted knight, that vanquished both Delamure and mighty
Bergamo to advance thy honor and dignity. And if you suppose that I received
no damage in perfourming these dangerous conflictes, behold the skarres (and
therewith unlacing his Armor) of late healed wounds, and the fresh bleeding
hurtes, with bloody tears craving for pity at your hands, besides a most
dangerous wound which palpably tormenteth my soul, without that you with
tender regard of his life, (that willingly will offer the same in defense of
your honor and fame) will vouchsafe to salve his sore already like to fester,
if without delay it be not looked unto. Here Moderatus with volleyes of sighs,
and the tears trickling down his two Crystal chekes, made a full period,
resting in a Dilemma between fear and hope, and driven to such an ecstasy
with feruencie of new increasing desire, that he could not speak one word,
till his Saint, his Sun, his Joy, his Jewel, I mean his Modesta,
accompanied him with tears that trilled like drops of silver dew, over the
Carnation tincture of her milke-white face, began thus to reply unto him.

Noble Heroyes, and the flower of all Cheualrie, I hold it not necessary to
mourn when the danger is past, but rather to rejoice in that it is so happily
past: but yet to recount of our expired labors, can be no less then pleasing
unto us, for that valiant Trojan Aeneas used to comfort his distressed mates in
their greatest extremities, saying unto them, Olim haec meminisse iuuabit: so
have you repeated unto me the danger you sustained in working my delivery:
and surely thus much I must needs say, that as your valor has purchased my
freedom, so has it also eternized your fame with perpetual renown and
highest title of honor. I confess my liberty consisted in your bounty, and
since the same relyes upon my beauty, even the very same which you have freed
from perpetual infamy, shall in like sort gratify you with unfeigned loyalty,
which is the only reward it can afford for all your sustained travails. It
is an ill Gardener that toyleth in his garden all day, and can not have a few
roots for sallets at night: and a sorry husband, that labors in his vineyard
all the year, and has not a cluster of grapes instore to cole his thirst: and
so that Lover is unhappy, that in twice hazarding his life for his Mistress,
can not obtain one reasonable wish. Nay rather that garden were vnfertill,
that vineyard unfruitful, and that Mistress too too cruel, that would not
yield better fruit to such diligent servants. Wherefore sweet friend, I
protest unto thee, that as my liberty recovered by the force of thy strong
arm, has vnchayned me from the bonds of shame and dishonor: so thy skrowle
sent by Perio, (which thou do pretend to wrong my sight) has very much
cherished my late-recouered perishing body, because it was from the black
Knight presented unto me: but Moderatus presence now the second time
purchasing my liberty with the price of his dearest blood, has not only
revived me from death to life again, but also thereby purchased the Fee-simple
thereof unto him self, if Modesta has any interest in her self. Here both
burst forth again into floods of tears, and tears choking up their ripe
and mellowed speeches, left skant any vent to the breathing air to have
access unto their panting hearts, to ease the ponderous burden thereof with
volleyes of farre-fetched and skalding sighs. Thus as it were transported into
anewe world, so closely embracing, that as it may be philosophically disputed,
that lovers and friends have distinct bodies, but one mind: so it might be now
palpably proved, that these two lovers were but one entire body, with such
exceeding vehemency they clipped that which either of them so long expected
and earnestly desired: thus ravished with an extraordinary joy of this happy
meeting, they continued a long time in this sort, not much unlike to the
picture of Mars and Venus, set forth in that manner they were taken by Vulcan:
they had commanded all to stand apart upon their first salutation, and happy
it was that all discovered not so great a secrecy. In the end something
awaking out of this sweet slumber, Modesta led him in by the hand, and called
for Perio to unarm him, assuring the Page he should be well rewarded for the
pains and travel he had sustained. And Moderatus being unarmed, Modesta very
tenderly searched his wounds, cherished and bound them up with great care, and
then causing the chariot to proceed forwards, leaving Bergamo neither alive,
nor yet altogether dead. Moderatus albeit he confessed to Modesta his birth and
Parentage, would not have any other privy thereunto, till such time, as
unexpected in his Fathers presence, he might discover him self, if his
fortunes in his enterprise would prove happy, otherwise he meant not to make
himself known at all. Modesta at the first seemed very unwilling to hold on
this journey to Florence, least her champion in perfourming so many exploytes
should at last miscarrie, and so verify the old saw: So often goes the pot to
the water, that at last it comes broken home, or half crazed, but in the
end overcome with his earnest perperswasion, she yielded her self to his
will, and then they traveled on merrily, till they came within a days journey
of Florence, in all which time no adventure worth the reciting happened: and
being come so near their iourneyes end, they thought it convenient to send a
messenger before, to give notice of their coming, and to rest and repair them
selves in a fine village that was in the way called Albania, which took the
name of one Albanus a monstrous great Giant, which had built part of the Town,
and a great castle which stood in the frontier or entrance of the same, wherein
he lodged a crewe of thieuish monsters like him self, that spoiled and robbed
all the country abouts, till such time as the noble Florentine Perduratus, who
was now restored to his former place and living again, having knowledge of
the great villainies of this Albanus, came to apprehend him with a great number
of valiant men at arms, the which was not so closely determined, but this
foul beast had knowledge thereof, and fled to the wilderness of Apenninus
that joined hard upon this village, where together with the rest of his
companions, he remained robbing and spoiling all the country abouts.

This village of Albania was about twenty leagues distant from Florence, where
they continued four or five days, and there we will leave them, till other
occasions do concur to bring them forwards to the proof of this adventure.

The report of this solemn triumph already finished in the Court of Lothus
King of Aemulia, and now to be performed at Florence, was so spread abroad in
all countries, that it came to Deualco his Court, and having tickled the
minds of the lu^te gallants, (that had any confidence in their skill in
martial discipline and dexterity at arms) with emulation and desire of
honor, so that Cornelius the Duke his son accompanied with his cousen
Deualoyes, and diverse other noble and valiant Knights, prepared them selves
for Florence, both to try their manhoodes in this honorable assembly, where
triumphing with victory they were to enjoy so rich a booty. And also to
visit Perduratus, whose kindness (they were assured) would afford unto them
many thousand welcomes, with the best manner of entertainment the time and
place would yield. And amongs the rest, young Cornelius was more forward then
any other herein, because since Perduratus departure from his Fathers Court, he
had received no tidings from the virtuous Verosa, who was the only Mistress
of his thoughts, and the Saint, at whose shrine he offered the sacrifice of
his fancy: and therefore was in a very longing desire to visit her at her
fathers Court, being now in good hope, since her father was so fortunately
restored to his former dignities again, that with the consent of both their
Parents, he should now at length finish his long prolonged suite, with the
consummation of a marriage between him and his dearest Verosa.

Priscus love with Florida: her inconstancy and change: of his departure from
Albigena in quest of his friend. His travel in the wilderness of Apenninus,
and his great extremity for food: his discovering of Poems engraued in the
bark of trees, and comfort thereby. His parley with an aged Father, and the
old man's report of a fair shepherdess, which the silly swaynes courted
with those Pastoral, exercises. His discovery of the fair shepherdess
MERSA. Her song. His salutation unto her, and her reply. The Swaynes songs.
ALBANVS his interrupting of their Rural pastime. PRISCVS combat with him, and
victory. PRISCVS search for CALFVRNIO the Giants son. His ayding of the
black Knight, who fought with CALEVRNIO and all his crewe. Their victory,
knowledge one of another, and joy. The black Knight declared of his love to
his sister MODESTA, and the triumph he was to perform for her in his own
Fathers presence, though unknown of any there.

Chap. 15.
Leave we them ready in their way toward Florence, and let us not
altogether forget Priscus, whom we have not remembered all this while: who,
after his friend Moderatus departure from Albigena, vowing Pilgrimage to effect
his friends desired purpose, which (indeed) procured him the friendly
countenance of fair Florida, for whose sake he long languished in extreme
misery, so that now Moderatus being gone, love quickly increased between
Priscus and Florida to his full ripeness, and continued not long in that
estate: for women's minds will wax with the Moon, and ebb with the Sea, not
unlike to the flower in Summer, that to day is glorious in the pride of his
blossoms, and to morrow withers with the least blast of Boreas nipping
breath. These coye Minions be such libidinous libertines, that they are both
hot and cold, and all in a moment, and will both rashly choose and still
cover to change: with this blemish Florida was fowly attainted, for not long
after this firm league of ever promised friendship, had passed between her
and Priscus, it was not thoroughly warm, before Florida (as women are ever
desirous of novelties) had pitched her fancy upon the young Lord Deualoyes,
who omitted no agglets, bracelets, ouches, browches, Gems, Jewels, Feathers nor
fangles to feed her proud humor and lofty mind, and also wanted no Pandars
that for coin painted him in his colors, and that did set him forth with
their flatteries in his best habit, who derogated Priscus praise-worthie
desartes, and arrogated the same wholly to Deualoyes, as alone worthy of such a
Parragon as she was, there needed but small battery when the Captain was
ready to yield: for these pestilent and devouring Harpies, were not driven to
spend any long time in persuading of Florida, to neglect Priscus and affect
Deualoyes, the which when Priscus understood, (what think you) was he sorry
for her fickleness? no surely, but having a little exclaymed against her
inconstancy, he rejoiced rather, that he might so quickly be rid from the
infectious breath of such a painted Panther: sorrowing in nothing so much as in
the loss of his dear friend Moderatus, in quest of whom he determined to
travel. And so consequently when opportunity gave him leave, and that he had
furnished him self with all things for his purpose, he departed from the Dukes
Court, acquainting only Verosa with his determination, praying her not to
discover either his departure, or the cause thereof to any, who at parting shed
a number of kind tears, for that she loved him entirely, both for her
brothers sake, and also for his own courtesy and gentle disposition. Priscus
having now taken his leave of Albigena, being well armed and mounted, went
forwards which way fortune directed him, not regarding any course in his
travel (because uncertain in what climate Moderatus soi^urned) till in the end
he happened at unawares to range in the wilderness of Apenninus, where he
traveled many days in great danger of his life, continually pinched with
hunger, and very often put to his shifts by wild beasts, whereof there was
great plenty in this Forest, so long he continued in this penury, that he
was almost in despair of him self, and alighting from his horse led him in
his hand, and so entering to a green land that was very near the edge of the
Forest, he espied certain characters ingraued in the bark of a tall Beeche
tree, whereat he was very glad, thinking that to be a Ralender that people were
not far off, and therefore he drew near that inscription and read it over,
which was as follows, or to like effect.

Have heavens conspired my balefull destiny?
Have fates decreed my thraldom to prolong?
Will Mersa at all ^ue on my misery?
Or shall I ever continue in this wrong?
Woe worth the hour, wherein thou have been borne:
Despayring thus like to a man forlorn.
Forlorn: for that thou dare not sue for grace
Of her, who sits like Juno in her throne,
Driving the lookers on into a maze,
To whom in vain I daily make my moan.
Yet at her hands no hope of grace I find,
That still torments my poor perplexed my mind.
Live long thou tree, wherein these lines I grave,
And witness bear of this my loyalty,
And how I seek of her some favor to have,
Whose heart is framed in forge of cruelty:
Then shall I live though dead I be in grave,
With lovers true, and challenge place to have.
After he had read over this fancy, he went a little further, and found
written on a Poplar these ensuing lines.

WHat rare desert has moved my mind
to follow fond desire?
What fate to fell has framed my fall?
What fortune did conspire?
What platt was laid? what time does work
to aggrauate the same?
What danger thereof does ensue,
I attribute to fame.
For had not fame a blabbe been found,
for to extol her praise,
That is the causer of my pain,
then Mersas often delays
Had never disturbed my quiet rest,
for I my flock had fed,
When I for ease, and they for food
had better far bin sped.
PRiscus having read these two inscriptions, and two or three more to this
effect, recounting with him self the great miseries of unfortunate lovers, and
how happy they lived which were not skorched with the fiery brandes of that
pieuish god, and seeing now he aimed as well at a ragge as at a r^be, and could
as well take a nights lodging in the poor cottages of homely Swains, as a
months respite in Kings princely bowres, he greatly pittyed the hard fortunes
of the poor shepheardes, who were thus tormented with the unkindness of some
coye minion, that frequented the downs hard adjoining upon this Forest: and
therefore desirous to understand further of this matter, what manner of one
she was, that had infected these hapless Swaynes with her beau^ie, he held on
a good pace till he had recovered the plain, where upon his first entrance he
had espied a fatherly old man, with whom he questioned about this fair and
far renowmes shepherdess, who told him, how two of the quaintest* and
bountest Swaynes that frequented those downs, were in great despair for the
love of her: this old Father told him also that she used to rest her self in
the day time, in a little fine thicket adjoining thereunto. Priscus immediately
espying the same fair grove, from whence a fine little current issued out,
stealing through a pleasant vale, which made him think that there should be a
spring: wherefore being thirsty after his travail, and also desirous to take
some rest, (if happily he could not meet with the fair Mersa, to satisfy him
self in beholding so fair a creature, as report seemed to make her) made as
much haste as he could toward the foresaid grove, and now being come even
to the entrance of the same, he might hear a voice very sweetly and
melodiously singing, whereupon he stayed, and withdrewe him self to the skirt
of this thicket, and there hiding him self, (least his presence should
interrupt this music) he gave attentive ear, whereupon he might hear
warbled out with a sweet note, this Cansong following.

BY Vestaes tapers, and her holy fire,
By all her troop of sacred Virgins kind,
Which vowed are to pure and chaste desire,
By Cybll's wise and sage presaging wind,
Which turn her ordered leaves (as is decreed
By heavenly powers) to good or bad with speed.
By Siluan Nymphs, often troubled with great fear
In shunning of Siluanus raging lust,
Who still their flaring hairs with grief do tear,
Least rapes they be unto this god unjust,
Whose horned shape their damage will procure,
If he them win to cease upon his ^ure.
By the great care of Daphne, flying fast
From the pursuit of Bacchus hot desire,
Whose burning flames has made the Nymph aghast:
To turn whose shape the gods did then conspire,
To a Bay tree, which lasts to her fame,
And ever grows green in honor of her name.
By Procris rage and biting jealousy,
When by the same her death she did sustain,
By all the rites of pure virginity,
And by Dianaes chaste and holy train
I swear, (and that inviolate shall rest,
What ever mishappe or fortune me molest)
That first from Pontus waves, where Isters fall
In branches seven is to the raging sea,
Each one of these return their courses shall,
And backewardes shape the same without delay
(Against the course and force of Natures seed)
To seek the spring from whence they did proceed.
Before that Mersa moved with fancies form,
Shall make a shipwreck of her honesty,
I rather leave the sicker Swains to storm,
Then I should feel of love the tyranny.
I know not what it is, nor dare not prove,
Who tried may say: no heat to heat of love.
Although that Nictinen in raging wise,
Pearst with the shaft of the blind wanton boy,
Paid for her lust after too dear a price:
Yet mean I not so wantonly to toye.
I love no Owls, nor yet their Music hoarce:
From such fond loves, I mean to make deuorce.
I like not Venus wanton toying tricks,
With Adon sweet her loving heart and joy:
I love not them whom fond desire still pricks,
Nor yet these simpring Dames that be so coy.
I hate their lust, I banish their desire,
I will not warm by their fond fancies fire.
No shapes transformed to gold, to Swan, or Bull,
Shall pierce the fort of Mersas constant thought,
Nor ever my mind in follyes cradle lull
Such vain delights, I count them all for naught.
If ever I love, I will not love in haste,
Who seeks me so, in vain his toil does waste
If ought may move my mind to stoop to love,
Virtue thereof shall sure the conquest make:
No light desire veneriall acts to prove,
Ne any thing my settled mind shall shake.
But tract of time by due desert me lead,
For more then this it booteth not to plead.
PRiscus, all being hushed and silent, espied narrowly through those hanging
boughs, to see if he might take a view of this fine shepherdess: for now
he perceived that it was she for whom the shepherds had made all that moan,
and had printed so many Poems in the barks of trees, to be the eye witnesses
of their griefs: and presently he espied this his handsome Pastora sitting by
a fair spring in a cold shade, attired in Sable, and covered with a purple
mantle, her temples bound with a garland of Bays, her nut-browne hair hanging
about her shoulders made her beautiful v^sage (in the sight of these shepherd
Swaynes) far more amiable: for a blemish in all perfect shapes, brings
rather a liking to the eyes, then a loathing to the mind: else had not Paris
called the skarre which Helen had in her chinne, and Mars the mole which Venus
had in her cheek, Cos amoris. These jolly shepheardes had sitting about her a
great company of shepherd swaynes, all doing her obeisance and reverence, as
their Patroness, and admiring at her beauty. Hereupon Priscus showed him
self, and began to salute her and the rest of the company thus.

All hail happy Swaynes, who cannot choose but be fortunate, while they enjoy
such favor, as to possess the presence of so goodly a Nymph, not omitting my
duty to the fair Mersa, as the chief Patroness of so goodly a company. I
came not here of purpose like a straggling runne-away to rob you of your
goods, but by chance guided by good hap, and being come, willing both to
satisfy my longing desire, in viewing so fair a goddess, (Fame menacing
revenge to all that time affoorded knowledge of, and did not fill her shrine
with plenty of offerings in honor of her Deity) and also being wearyed with
long wandering of these harbourlesse plains, and desirous to take the benefit
of a cool shade, to ease my weariness, and the commodity of this murmuring
spring to quench my thirst, if fair Nymph (addressing then his speech to Mersa
alone) by your courtesy and favor, I may obtain the same. Report has filled
mine ears with your praise, and mine eyes dazeled with your beauty, does
warrant your commendation to be but deserved: and fame to be rather a niggard
then prodigal in decyphering of your good gifts. Wherefore I do hope that
you will not blemish that visage adorned with all beauty, with a mind
furnished with coy disdain: and therefore I being a stranger do desire,
(although upon a sudden I can not deserve) that measuring my actions by the
courtesy of a bountiful mind, and leuelling at my desires after the
necessity of the present time, you will afford me that favor, which the
weariness of my feeble body does require.

Mersa hearing the solemn protestation of the gentleman, though maruelling
whence he came upon such a sudden, or the cause of his speeches being a
stranger, replied thus.

Gentleman, since your fortune was so hard to light upon so barren a harbor,
you are heartily welcome to such as it is: and though the Crab-tree bears no
sweet fruit, to make Sydar for the dainty ^ooth, yet it brings forth
sour crabbes, whereof veriuyce may be made, which will yield good relyce in
the taste: and in like manner homely swaynes, though they have no sumptuous
fare that is sweet in the mouth, yet they have homely cates that is wholesome
in the mawe: no cheer to feed the eye of the curious, but the belly of the
hungry, respecting more the sauce which is a good appetite, then the meat
which is always but gross. And with that Mersa reached unto her a white
linen bag, intending to make him such a homely banquet, as the present time
and place could afford, but Priscus presently peceiuing her pretense, refused
not her offered courtesy: but after repast was ended, (which was well to his
contentation, hunger had so tempered his stomach to have appetite to meat,
were it never so gross) he desired the two loving swaynes that contended for
Mersa, that he might hear some of their Poems, which willingly they granted
unto him, and then Hymon, for so one of them was called, began thus.

HYMONS Song.
THou Hebe sweet which in the heavens do stay,
And to the gods do heavenly Manna bring,
Fly from the skies, pack hence with speed away:
In earth below there is a fairer thing,
A Nymph it is, the fairest of all fair,
Who (thou being gone) must where thou art repair.
For Jupiter being moved with her good grace,
Will thee despise, and her in stead prefer:
With envy burst to be in such disgrace,
And dye for grief. The gods sometimes do err,
Since they so fickle seem, and choose to change,
When fancy stirs their wavering minds to range.
Depatt not yet, from heaven thou shall not wend,
Use diligence the gods again to please.
Let Mersa rest: sweet Mersa on earth attend,
My troubled thoughts and pensive cares to ease.
Without whose grace nothing can pleasant be,
Nor ought remain a hearts rest unto me.
How often tuckt up like Amazonian Dame,
With bow and quiver tracing these g^oues among,
Following the Dear, or else some other game,
And killing often the fairest in the throng.
The gods themselves being moved with her love,
To win the same in vain full often did prove,
They proffer kisses sweet and gifts in vain,
They garlands make of choice and finest flowers,
They bring her fruit, but naught of her they gain,
They smyle and sing, she looks coy and lowres.
Full of disdain her tramels she does shake,
Which makes the stowtest of us all to quake.
O would she were not so hard to be pleased,
O would she showed more gentle favor to me.
Happier then I, could nothing then be praised,
But she reiect'th my loving less to be.
She does despise my prayers, and griefs disdaynes,
She flies from me, which still my poor heart pains.
O Mersa stay, fly not so fast from me,
Fair Mersa stay, no Lestrigonian bruit,
Does make pursuit to feed his lust on thee:
But one, if thou him knew, whose honest suit,
Is worthy of the same he does desire,
And burns for thee with chaste and holy fire.
And though my corpse does savage seem with hair,
And beard unkempt an ugly thing to see:
Yet am not I deformed, for beard is fair,
And hayres decent for such as valiant be.
When strong men fight nyce meacocks they do fear,
And Schools to dance, and not to fence they rear*
If ought for wealth thou likest, a shepherds stock
I have, and few does more then I possess:
For herds I keep, and eake full many a flock,
A thousand kine do feed on finest grass,
Of swine great store, and cattle fat withal,
And goats in rocks their bleating kiddes to call.
Store of throme milk in season still I have,
My chest is full of cheeses new and old,
Take what thou will, thou need'st not ought to crave,
For all I have is thine, whereof be bold.
My self also (though thou the same refuse)
Is at thy beck, thereof to take the use.
If thou would daine to walk sometimes with me,
Gather I would the Apples mellowe fine,
And clustring grapes with full ripe figs for thee,
And Filberds kernels eake if thou were mine:
With these I would thee eramme my pretty peate,
For whom great store of bloody drops I sweat.
How often would I thy tender corpse then clippe,
And eke the same in folded arms combine,
With thousand kisses would I press thy lip:
Doubt not of these: to pity eke incline,
And come with me (least that my pain increase)
To cure my care, and thraldom to release.
By pleasant springs our ease then we will take,
Embracing there sweet sleep will us deprive
Of wanton sport: when semblance we do make,
Not how with gain and lucre for to thrive,
(In silent shades) but of mean mirth and joy,
When greatest mind we have to wanton toye.
The hanging boughs and murmuring stream will strive,
Who best may please and work our sweet content,
While raging force of Summers heat does drive*
How dear to me would be thy sweet consent?
Alas thou naught do weigh my gifts, nor love,
Whose heart fair speech, nor weeping tears may move.
More cruel then the Hircan Tigre fierce,
More deaf then th'Images of Marble made,
More hard than stones that engines none can pierce,
Art thou: in fine whose beauty sure will fade.
Though nature did the same to thee ordain,
But not true Lovers suit for to disdain.
So under freshest flowers the Adder lay,
So Hyble has honey commixt with galle:
Trust not to form, which with ripe flowers decay,
Forsake thy pride, for pride will have a fall.
And while the same in prime does flourish most,
Loose not the time in vain, thou crau'st being lost.
Use thy good gifts while thou have time (each thing
By reason of his use commended is)
For withered age deformity will bring,
Too late thou wailest when thou do find the mis
Of thy fair face, to wrinkled furrows turnde,
And thy bright hew with Phoebus beams being burnde.
How often in glass will thou behold the same,
And then condemn the folly of thy youth:
That would not hunt, while time affoorded game,
Then shall thou find the proverb old a truth,
Which ever was, is, and so will be always,
That time and tide for no man's pleasure stays.
But why pour I my plaintes unto the wind?
Why do I throw my seed to barren sand?
I strive in vain, of fate some favor to find,
That cruel is my hap for to withstand
Fate, more than gold or gentry does love hail,
This scorns the Prince, when subjects do prevail.
And though more fyence then serpent thou be set,
Me to annoy that am thy careful thrall:
For with thy frowns my inward soul does fret,
Yet will I wait, and eke attend thy call,
And love thee still, which in my heart shall rest,
For Mersa alone in mind and mouth is pressed.
Hymon having thus ended his song, wrapped in a mind full of impatient
thoughts, was ready with the Swan to forsake his life, for very fear of the
future judgments, which immediately he was to receive. And Phyletas pricked
forwards with no mean desire of putting in his plea, and in some good hope of
a favorable sentence, for that he was a bonier swain, and more quaint than
all the rest, and therefore was more in countenance favored of Mersa. Having
deliberated a pretty while in tuning his instrument, he fell to his music,
thus.

PHILETAS song.
MErsa, more white than flower, or new burnt lime,
Or raging salt-sea foam, or milk reboylde:
More red than Cheries, ripe by force of time,
Or Beries yet with taint of black not soyld:
More fair than flowring trees in spring of year,
More sweet than figs, that new and ripe appear.
Such pappes had Venus none, such rolling eyes,
Such cherrie lips, both sweet and fine in tutch:
Why should I praise her soft and well made thyes,
For better were to feel than talk of such.
Both Gods and men therewith enamoured be,
For with mine eyes a Satyr I did see,
Pursuing her, whom taken, he forste to yield,
She clamor made, then aid I would have brought,
But to defend my self I had no sheeld,
Against his force, that with his horns me sought,
Of such a Rival fierce I durst not prove,
The mighty force, though pining for her love.
Oh then how often with signs she beckt at me,
And when I came me clipped in tender sort,
Even as the vine or Iuie claspes the tree,
And wanton-like did bite my lip in sport,
And flapt me on the mouth with decent grace,
Firm vowing then none other to embrace.
But what alas all this is now forgot,
And she again recovered liberty,
I ^eem'd then sine, but now a foolish sot:
For that she weighes none of my misery.
To serve her turn my service could her please,
But naught at all my bondage to release.
PHiletas had yet skant made an end of his song, when as they might hear a
great rushing amongst the bushes, and presently there appeared unto them, a
great Giant of a marvelous huge stature, carrying in his hand a mighty mace
of iron knotted, to the which was made fast two or three chains with great
Iron balls in the end thereof: this huge monster so terrified the poor
swaynes, that they made great haste to run away, and he with a roaring and
hollow voice more liker a devil then a man, called on Mer^a to stay, saying
that no defense were it ever so strong, could shrowde her from him: whereupon
the valiant Priscus (nothing dismayed at the matter) stepped unto this ugly
fiend, and having his fine Morglay ready drawn, he quickly sheathed in the
Giants belly, who was unarmed, whereupon he gave such a horrible groan, as
though heaven and earth had met together, and therewithal with his mighty
Club began to lay about him, but Priscus being light and nimble did easily
avoid his blows, and again lent him such another wound with his cutting
sword, that he severed life from his unwieldy limbs. Whereupon he called
again the shepheardes, which were not far off and saw all which happened,
whereof they were very glad, and told Priscus how he had slain the great
Albanus, who continually many years before, together with a multitude of
thieuish companions, and a son which he had much like him self, or rather
more monstrous, robbed and spoiled all the inhabitants thereabout, and
travelers that passed that way: wherefore they advised him to get away with
speed, least he should be overtaken by the cruel Calfurnio Albanus son, and
his lewd and thieuish accomplices, so happly he might be driven to stay when he
would willingly be gone. Priscus smiling at their servile fear, and aiming at
nothing but honor, armed him self with the resolution of an invincible mind,
and so taking a fine Iuorie borne that hanged about Albanus neck, he bade the
shepheardes adewe, and thanked them very often for their kindness, and then
mounted again upon his horse, and rode away very swiftly toward the Forest,
to the end to find out Calfurnio and the rest of his crewe, and the rather to
meet with them, he wynded the horn which he had taken from Albanus, thinking
that they would quickly repair to the sound thereof, which was wont very often
to be the call of their leader, thus hallowing and showting like a huntesman, in
the end he recovered the Forest again, where entering to a fair green chase,
he might epsy a great number of men, and amongst the rest one great deformed
Giant, which presently he perceived to be the son of Albanus and his
company: all which were gathered together in a flock about one alone Knight,
who dealt amongst them many deadly blows, and sent their groaning spirits to
keep holyday to the damned and infernal ghostes, yet Calfurnio was so
sturdie, that he lent the Knight many a dangerous buffet, with a big stiff
clubbe which he had. Priscus stood a long while wondering at the great courage
of the strange Knight, that so manfully behaved him self amongst so great a
company of barbarous and rude people. And then made haste to assist him, lest
upon a sudden he should receive any damage amongst those uncivil monsters.
And thus enflamed with a desire to make a quick dispatch of them all, he out
wih his sword and allighted from his horse, and then quickly made a way
through the thickest of them, till he came side by side with the strange
Knight, where he lent such a friendly assistance unto him, that they were
quickly rid of their enemies: for the most part they slew, and the rest fled
away. The strange Knight which thus was in combat with Calfurnio and his
company, was Moderatus, who (while he took his rest in Albania, staying his
messengers return from Florence with answer from prince Perduratus, concerning
the triumph which he was to perform there) hearing report of Albanus and
Calfurnios great outrage, and mischiefs committed against the inhabitants
thereabouts, was come there secretly al alone to seek out those hel-hounds,
which he dealt withal, when Priscus came to assiste him. Moderatus seeing no
more to be done, and that he had vanquished his enemies, he turned unto
Priscus, with an intent to give him thanks for his kind succor offered unto
him, in time of so great need: but looking upon him, he presently knew him by a
devise which he had in his armor, whereupon he was stricken into a great
admiration of his bounty, and joy of his presence, which brought him almost
besides himself for pure joy: And presently taking away his own helmet, he
discovered himself to Priscus, by this each of them knew another: weep and
embrace they did, and what more (Gentlemen) I leave to your imaginations, that
observe and keep sacred, a faithful and unspotted league of true and perfect
friendship: for truly better may a man conceive in his mind, than set forth
with his pen, the unspeakable kind salutations, friendly greetings, gentle
embracings, recyting of sorrowful adventures, in each others absence, and
rejoicing now at last in their so happy meeting. All which was so perfect a map
of pure and unspotted loyalty, that assuredly it was no less than admirable,
to behold the motions of their rare and fervent dispositions. And after they
had thoroughly rejoiced, in each others presence, they began to reckon up of
either side the adventures happened unto them since their parting.

And first, Moderatus showed all the course of his pilgrimage, his coming to
Aemulia, Priscus fathers court, how he had defended his sister Modesta from
death and infamy, discovering withal his affection toward her, his departure
again from Lothus court, his travel in the Forest Esina, Modestas letter sent
unto him by Perio, his return toward Aemulia again, the report of the great
triumph concerning Modesta, the which was also to be performed at Florence, in
his own fathers court, who was now restored to his ancient honor and living
again: Bergamos possessing of Modesta, his proceeding forwards with her
toward Florence, to finish the enterprise: and how himself met with him, and
entering the combat, bereaved him of his life, and thereby got the custody and
protection of his sister Modesta, and how he was now to perform that begun
enterprise: and by king Lothus proclamation, if he finished the same, he was to
have his fair sister Modesta for his wife, who now together with the rest of
his company, he had left at a village called Albania, that was hard adjoining
to that Forest. And when Moderatus had from point to point thus discoursed at
large of al matters unto his friend, Priscus was more joyful than before,
first in that his sister was delivered from the false and treacherous
accusations of Delamure, and also because he was like to have Moderatus for
his brother in law, that he loved above all men in the world, and therefore
Priscus returned him this salutation.

Happy be this day wherein such number of joys do concur together: for
believe me Moderatus, if the monarchy of the whole world had been granted unto
me, I would not have been so glad, as of these tidings you do bring me, with
your self, the which alone had been sufficient to yield me more contentment,
than I am able to utter, much sorrow have I sustained by reason of thy absence,
and more was the sorrow I conceaned, when dissembling Florida upon receipt of
thy letter, and knowledge of thy departure, giving me a friendly countenance
accepted of my service, and being thoroughly entered into acquaintance with her,
showed me the same letter sent unto her in my behalf, assuredly if all the
furies together had conferred to devise the greatest torture that could be
found, all that inflicted upon me at once, could not have plagued me more: But
yet all did not grieve me so much then, as it ioyeth my heart now that it was
so, because I am in good hope that it was a heavenly decree, to unite our loves
with more ample scope of friendship, for besides the likelihood you are into
wed Modesta, (as no doubt the Fates cannot be so injurious to prevent it) I do
greatly honor and love Verosa your sister, who was the only comfort I had,
whilst I remained in Albigena. And now since your father and my honorable good
Lord Perduratus is so happily restored to his living and honor again, and
that you are here, which I know will assist me in any honest action, I make no
doubt to obtain her love, if it be not that Cornelius Duke Deuascos son is
Lord of her heart already: some lyking was between them, but how it proved
after my departure I know not.

Priscus departure toward Florence. Answer from Perduratus to the black
Knight his message. His arrival to Florence. Likewise the arrival of
CORNELIUS and diverse others of Duke DEVASCOS Court there. PRISCVS presented
ALBANVS head to the Governor. The black Knights first days triumph.

Chap. 16.
WHen they had thus debated between them selves, of all the accidents happened
unto them, after their parting they determined that Priscus should carry the
head of great Albanus unto Florence, and present it unto Perduratus, making
himself known unto him, and no dobut he should be very welcome. And Moderatus
wished him not to make any show of acquaintance with him before this triumph
should be finished, at what time he meant to discover him self, and not
before: whereupon the day being far spent, Priscus returned to the place
where he had left Albanus dead, and there striking off his head, he took his
readiest way to Florence. And Moderatus, making no semblance of any travel,
taken in subduing those barbarous people, came again to Albania, by what time
his messenger was returned from Florence, with this answer from Perduratus,
that the daughter of mighty Lothus King of Aemulia, and her Champion was very
welcome to his Court, giving them great thanks, that they did honor him so
much, as to make choice of his Palace, for the perfourming of so honorable an
enterprise.

When Moderatus had received this answer from the noble Perduratus, he
presently set forward toward Florence, where being come, he found lodging
taken up for him by his messenger, very near adjoining to the Lords palace,
where he allighted. And his intent being adreadie published, there was
preparation made for standings, to view the sequel of this Turnament, and all
things else that were necessary and belonged thereunto: company continually
repaired thither from all places: and amongst others, Cornelius, Deualoyes,
and the rest of their company from Deuascos Court, came thither and were
exceedingly well entertained. And Priscus a little while after them came
thither also, and presented Perduratus with Albanus head, who gave him most
hearty welcome, and rejoiced much in his coming, marueiling not a little at
his great bounty, and valor, in performing so notable an exploit, al seemed
greatly to admire at the hugeness of the head, by that one part gessing at
the proportion of the rest, which they judged to be very monstrous, and
almost impossible to be subdued by any humane power. And when they had a while
busied their brains on this matter, more Lords and knights of great account
repaired there: for that the very next day this triumph of iusting and
turnament did begin. When Phoebus had bathed his angry steeds in the wide
Ocean, and that Hesperus appeared in the West, then time of rest approached, and
all ceased from their day labors, till that Titan starting from under the
clouds, discovered Thetis escape with Neptune, the^ every body prepared
themselves to be diligent in his function, and Perduratus sent for the black
Knight (for so Moderatus would have himself called) and his Lady to come to
the Lystes, who were very ready, and the Knight armed and mounted, gave
direction for the conducting of Modesta there, who being placed in a seat
appointed for her to behold (...) which should happen, her guard standing in
order about her seat, the black Knight called for a spear to his page, which
being had, he managed his horse up and down the lystes, expecting a champion,
that in regard of his mistress favor, would maintain her beauty against him.
And not long after Perduratus and his Nobles placed themselves right against
Modesta, of the other side of the lystes, and Flaminea, and all the troop of
her Ladies, her daughter Verosa, with her cosen Bysancia, who far stained all
the rest in beauty, came in and severed themselves into parts, Flaminea and
the ancient matrones of the one side of Modestas seat, And Verosa with the rest
of the young Ladies on her left side. Here you might behold love and beauty,
peace and war, yea Mars and Venus triumphing in a sympathy of decent and rare
perfections, so glorious was the sight, so singular was the modesty, so
resolute was the magnanimity, that here was to be found at this instant, that
it might be doubted whether Venus with all her wantons, Diana with all her
train, and Mars with all his Marshallists were there present: but howsoever,
they being all thus seated, there came forth the Dukes son of Panonie, in
green armor, and the picture of Hope engraven in his crest, and underneath
written in letters of gold, Solumiolamen Spes, he was mounted upon a milkwhite
horse, his saddle was green, and foreplate of beaten gold, his capparisons
correspondent to the same, very richly powdered with Oriental pearls and
precious stones that were much worth, and of great estimation, two pages
apparelled all in red, the one bore his spea^e on the one side of him, and on
the other side, the other carried his Target. And before him did ride upon a
fine Iennet, a marvelous beautiful and fine child, apparelled all in white,
and carrying in his hands the picture of fair Helena, Queen of Corinth, and
underneath the same written in fair capital letters, this posie, Negat quis
meam Helenam esse pulcherrimam? cum gladio hoc dubium resoluam. And when he had
gone in this order twice about the court, Tersimano (for so the young Lord of
Pannonie was called) took the picture in his own hands, and hanged it upon a
pillar that was set up for that purpose, right opposite against Modesta, and
having so done, he drew near to the black Knight, who seeing him coming did
salute him thus. Noble Hero^es, and worthy knight, being unknown unto me, so I
dare call thee, for more thou can not be, and thy countenance and demanour
does warrant thee so much, I had rather our salutation should be words than
blows, and friendship than contention, but since I have undertaken to maintain
Modesta, the daughter of mighty Lothus king of Emulia, to be the fairest of al
fair, and to be the only flower of beauty this day living, whose presence here
before you is an eye witness, to warrant my resolution to be lawful, I must
needs to maintain mine honor, which is my greatest patrimony, combat with all
that will say the contrary. Tersimano noting the bounty of the black Knight,
with his goodly personage and gentle disposition, returned him this short
answer. Worthy Knight, since to persuade you to leave this intolerable error
you are in, is too great a charge for me, I cannot choose but be sorry, and
to witness the right to be on my side, behold the picture of the second
Hellena, but far excelling in bounty the Queen of Greece, and ^he causer of
the Trojans wrack, unto whom if you will not yield her due, let us no longer
stay, but try the quarrel by Arms: whereupon they parted one from another,
and then the Trumpets sounded, the neighing horses mad with anger, besprinkled
^^eir riders with the foming froth of their boiling stomachs, and both these
resolute and valiant Champions coutching their spears in their rests, spurred
their angry Coursers to gallop as swift as the wind, who meeting in the midst
of their course, shiuered their mighty spears, the splinters whereof flying
in the air, into many pieces no bigger tha^ the smallest chips notwithstanding
they made no more motions in their seats, than if man, saddle, horse and all
had been one solid and entire body. And to speak the substance of the whole in
a word long and perilous was this combat, for it lasted all the morning, till
it drew toward high noone, at what time the black Knight doubled his blows
with great dexterity, his strength nothing abated, but of the other side
Tersimano had his armor crased and broken in diverse places, and therefore
received greater damage than the black Knight, whose armor was so good, that
no weapon could pearce, and in the end lent Tersimano such a blow upon his
helm, that he brought him quite out of his remembrance, whereupon he fastened
hold in the raines of his bridle, and unlaced his helmet, and plucked it off,
and seeing the good knight to avoid a great deal of blood at his mouth, he
sorowed very much, fearing least his life should be in some danger, and
therefore called for help unto him, and shortly recovered him again, who seeing
himself in his enemies hands, and overcome in that honorable assembly* had
much ado to save himself from sounding again: but yet like a wise man, seeing
it was not boot to kick against the sharp, he yielded unto Fortune, and
thanked the black Knight for his gentleness, confessing himself to be overcome
both by his bounty and valor, and also by his singular and rare courtesy:
whereupon all the company dissolved the black Knight and his Lady to their
lodging, their attendants following them. And the Lord Perduratus, and all the
rest of the company as well strange and foreign princes and knights there
assembled, as also his own Nobles and countrymen, went to his palace invited
of him there to remain continually, during the time of this Iusting and
turnament, where they were royally feasted. All this morning Cornelius, Deualoys
and Priscus kept company with Perduratus (to view this brave co^bat) who had so
effectually dealt with the^ (because his deer friends) that he won the^ not to
adventure themselves against Modestas cha^pion, before the time limited should
be near expired, and therefore they had now good opportunity to glut their eyes
with the glorious hue of most rare beauties, which was the onley object of
their delights: whereupon Cornelius glancing toward Verosa (with whom he
had but little conference after his coming to Florence) happened to epsy fair
Bysantia, who sitting next to her cosen Verosa, stained both her, and all the
rest of the company in beauty, as much as Phoebus in brightness does excel the
least star in the firmament. Herewith Cornelius having handled the pitch, was
defiled therewith, for he that is subject to change will soon find a choice,
whose amors are always like the Camelion, that is of every color, and so
they, subject to the dart of of every beauty which they behold.

Cornelius love to Bysantia, and Priscus affection to Verosa, CORNELIUS and
DEVALOYES conference with BYSANTIA and VEROSA: the complaint of VEROSA for
CORNELIUS inconstancy, and dissuading of her cosen BYSANTIA from his love:
PRISCVS conference with VEROSA, and opening of his fancy unto her, the uniting
of their loves, agreeing in sympathy of their desires.

Chap. 17
THis fickle Changling thus moved with the star-bright beauty of Bysantia,
longed very much to assay if his train would take fire, doubting least his
friendship with Verosa would be a great let unto him in this enterprise. And
therefore to keep her occupied, he wished his cosen Deualoyes to be doing
with her, who yielded unto his request, and concluded to put this in practice
of either s^de when opportunity would give them leave. Priscus was not idle all this while, for he did also cast in his mind how to compass the favor of
Verosa, greatly doubting thereof, because Cornelius was present, yet much
animated, knowing his stay in Florence to be short, after whose departure, he
was in some better hope to recover his desire. These new entertained servants
of Venus, more busied themselves with such frivolous cogitations, than in
noting this brave and resolute combat between the black Knight and Tersimano,
but being thus finished, Priscus was very glad that his friend had so happily
performed this days work, although (for fear to discover his friend) he
kept his joy secret to himself.

Repast being taken, and dinner ended, Cornelius and Deualoyes (although before
this time they never separated company with Priscus since their coming to
Florence for old acquaintance sake) singled themselves, and went about with
their cunning slatteries to entrap the silly and innocent Ladies, whom happily,
according to their expectation they met within a place convenient, to impart
their minds unto. Cornelius taking Bysantia by the arm, and Deualoyes Verosa,
they spent great part of this afternoon thus together, walking in the privy
garden, where by chance they had overtaken the two Ladies, taking the benefit
of the fresh air. Verosa seeing her lover Cornelius to court another, making
no semblance of friendship or dalliance with her, albeit at the first she was
pleasant to Deualoyes, contented to take the air of the fire to drive away
infectious humors, although she meant not to burn before she would be
reclaimed from that error, seeing Cornelius to be such a changeling, and that
she found her self wronged by him, she determined not lightly to believe any
Ligurian Courtier for his sake again. And now repenting to have built upon so
slender a foundation, very wisely and discreetly she sorrowed not so much,
because she could not better hold a sliding shadow, or to speak more truly,
fickle and unstayed substance: and therefore resolved not to wade further than
she knew how to return, nor to trust before she had good trial, in the end
cloyed with his flattery, and not well pleased with Cornelius presence, whose
light and wattering disposition she now far more abhorred, than ever she was
in love with his person, she did shake up Deualoyes with such short and
quipping answers, that now he found he had met with his match: and thereupon
Verosa with a Flea in her ear, parted company with them upon a sudden,
whereby she interrupted the contented delight of Cornelius and Bysantia, who
did well agree together: for Bysantia was ignorant of any friendship between
her cosen Verosa and Cornelius, and knowing him to be descended of so noble a
progeny, measured his secret and private intentions, by his outward
apparition, and being something credulous, she gave him friendly entertainment
who being in the depth of their conference, were forced to part with a short
vale: for Bysantia would not stay after her cosen there. But Verosa in this
choler made such haste, that she recovered her chamber, before Bysantia was
out of the garden, who mended her pace to overtake her cosen, yet came short,
but being at the entrance of her chamber, she could hear Verosa warbling with
her lute this ensuing fancy.

WHat fancies foul does silly maids entise,
To like and love the false and flattering wight,
What Viper would the self same thing despise,
Which erst he sought with all his force and might:
But fond I was, and fickle his desire,
Like bauens blaze, that soon was set on fire.
Such fire it was that wrought my deep annoy,
Such fool I was, that credulous would prove:
And trust repose, in him that did but toy,
And full of lust would counterfeit some love.
Lo to my care with grief of heart I find,
His flattering words, which were but blasts of wind.
What Cockatrice, so pleasant once could smile,
And cover fraud with such a glorious bait:
Who would have thought such beauty covered guile,
But Fowlers still their snares being laid, do wait,
And counterfeit, the silly birds to trap,
So did this wretch, the more is my ill hap.
BYsantia entered the chamber (before Verosa scant had breathed some few sighs
after this sorrowful dittie) and asked her cosen why she started away upon the
sudden, having understood somewhat by her song, which she ouerheard, she
charged her with jealousy, adding further that if she did bear any mind to
Cornelius, her self would repulse him in his suit, and give him no more hope of
obtaining her good will. Then quoth Verosa, I pray God you be not more jealous
than I am, when you shall find Cornelius but a flatterer: for surely he has
promised as much or more unto me (I am persuaded) than ever he will perform
with any: wherefore take heed, for you may well know, the Rose has his prick,
the Lawn his brack, the deadliest Adder lurketh in the finest grass, and the
greatest deceir is always covered with the fairest speeches: trust not before
you try, for fear thy repentance should come too late: and as for me I am
indifferent, for I had rather want than be cumbred with such a fickle friend,
whose fancies be more in number than his years, and his years over many to be
thus nussed in the sude of wind-wauering inconstancy: wherefore Bysantia, thou
art old enough to warm by the fire and not burn, to look upon the Adder with
her pide skin, and not to handle her sting, to make a difference between a
flattering parasit, and a faithful and indissembling mind. And having a while
debated upon this matter, Verosa perceiving by this little discourse (that had
in this behalf passed between Bysantia and her self) that she had rather
look upon the Panther, than come within his breath, gave her the scope of
aduising her self, and so leaving the chamber of Verosa, they went forth to
see what sturring there was abroad, and at their first flight, they met with
Priscus walking alone in an outer gallery, not far from Verosas chamber, who
came there of purpose to epsy opportunity to discover his affections unto
her: who at their first meeting gave him very friendly entertainment, and
desirous to confer with him singly, desired her cosen Bysantia to spare them a
little time, who presently left them together to determine of new salues for
their old sores: for Verosa knew well of the love he had borne to Florida,
and her disdainful unkindness unto him. And finding her self in like sort
agreeued with the wavering and fickle disposition of Cornelius, she disclosed
the whole event of the matter unto him, as being both assured of his fidelity,
unto whom she discovered herself, and also knowing that Priscus woulde-ioyne
with her in complaint, being in like sort deluded by Florida, as she had been
with the dissimulation of Cornelius, burst forth with great vehemence to
exclame against his wavering inconstancy. Priscus giving attentive ear
hereunto, was the gladdest man in the world* to find Veroso in this
predicament. And where before he doubted but Cornelius his presence, now he
found that let removed, and therefore was boide to open his griefs unto her,
which he discoursed with her in this sort.

My dear Verosa, and only dear unto me, because Verosa, is it possible that
the Uine should bear the fruit of a bra^ble? the pear tree a crab? and that
virtuous Deuasco should have such vicious chickens as Cornelius and Florida, nay
rather I think they be changed and none of his blood, or else they were borne
under some malignant Planet, whose aspectes predominate over their natiuities,
were contrary to all humanity, nusling them up in the bower of inconstacie.
Wherefore (my sweet Verosa) let us rather rejoice than be sorry, to be rid
of such wavering Kytes, and fickle changelings, whose voices inchaunt like
Sirens, and sighe prejudice like the Basiliske, alluring with their melody,
and inchaunting with their sorcerie, that sooner may one surfeit of their
cancred spices, than ever have any just cause to triumph with true delights.
And least we should so far wade in their inconstancy, that we might be in
danger of loosing ourselves therein, and withal should so long parlie of the
dissimulations of flattering lovers, till we should savor of their hypocrisy,
and so transnature our selves with custom, to execute a vile and base office,
let us therefore leave them to their fancies, which is as hot as wild fire in
show, and as cold as Ice in operation.

Priscus made here an imperfect period, throbbing out many sighs, to ease his
wearied and panting heart, and having perfectly taken breath, that he was able
do speak, he glaunced to Verosa some part of his affection, assuring her that
his love was in no fleshly fantasy, but a mere choice of chastity, founded
upon the rock of faith, and builded with constancy, only led thereunto by
the singular virtue, which so shined in all her actions (like the glowing worm
in the night) that it lighted him out of the bottomless dungeon of dark
despair: he shewe^ also unto her how the great and loyal amity, between him
and her brother Moderatus, was a spur which still pricked him forwards, to
compass a mean to be tied with perpetual union to him and his for ever.

Here Priscus paused again, and Verosa noting his sudden sighs, his solemn
protestations, and strange passions, well knowing the man to be of a virtuous
and rare disposition, whom she always affected for the same, and her brother
Moderatus great friend, and therefore must the rather be favored of her
(making no doubt of his constancy, whose faith already had obtained credit
sufficient to discharge the same) after some few protestations, to ground in
him a good opinion toward her (which was needless, being already so
peremptory in that point, that he judged Verosa only beautiful, only wise,
and only virtuous) she made it not coy to confess unto him, that she would
requite his love with the like, so far as with modesty and her parents
consent she might, to whom she was in duty and obedience bound.

Priscus was so well pleased with this answer, that he would suffer her to
procced no further, but ravished with joy of this happy meeting, disclosed how
that in defense of his sisters beauty, her brother Moderatus was the Champion
to perform that honorable triumph: leaving vnrecited no act or circumstance
either of his friend (and her brother) after their departure from Albigena,
coniuring her not to disclose any of these secrets, til the substance of the
whole being ripe, she meght behold the conclusion of a most excellent and rare
exigent: and so sealing his bargain with a secret kiss on her sweet lips,
he took his leave for that time, both of her and Bysantia, and so rested to
expect further adventures the next morning.

Perduratus, the Governor of Florence his proclamation, that none should enter
the combat, but just only: the black Knights famous victories and his deeds
at arms increasing to the end, PERDVRATVS his remembrance of his son
MODERATVS, in beholding the bounty of the black Knight. The black Knights
conference with his friend PRISCVS and MODESTA his sister, how to discover
himself to his father: MODE^TAS oration to PERDVRATVS, wherein she discovers
the love between PRISCVS and VEROSA, and also gives the Governor of FLORENCE
to understand, that the black Knight was MODERATVS, his son, the joy thereof,
and the celebration of both marriages.

Chap. 18.
THe noble Perduratus* forseeing (very wisely) by admitting all to the combat
of the sword, there might grow great inconuience, wherein so many worthy and
valorous Knights should be brought into such an extreme peril, and impossible
but that some of them should miscarry, did therefore make a solemn
proclamation to be made, that no man either forriners or countrymen, should
presume afterward to enter the combat with the sword, without his special
license, but to ^rie their knightly prowess by iusting only, and no otherwise,
after which commandment was published abroad, all determined to obey the same,
and the black Knight being ready in the field, expecting a Competitor, there
repaired diverse, as well princes of great renown, as worthy knights of
peremptory resolutions, trying their marshal skill with that invincible
champion, who daily got the honor of the field, and so well behaved himself
in that honorable exercise, that very few escaped unhorsed the first encounter,
so that after two or three days were expired, he had very little to do, for
that the few remaining vnfoyled by him were afraid to adventure themselves,
least they should be discredited thereby. In this mean time Cornelius and
Deualoyes had good opportunity to court their Mistresses, which they did with
great diligence, but notwithstanding all their dissembling flatteries could not
prevail: for that Verosa being once burned, would not handle the fire again,
and she had schooled her cosen Bysantia for being too credulous, so that these
sickle changelings were descryed, and their welcome was thereafter: who
perceiving their sophistry would take no effect, they grew not only melancholy,
but also (as it were) desperate, and therefore the time of the triumph being
expired, only one day remaining to make a final conclusion of all, they
prepared themselves to hazard their credits, being in such fury, that they
supposed no human power could withstand them, with this resolution having
prepared Tawny armours for themselves (the badge and token of despised lovers)
after part of the day was spent, they came both to the field, and advancing
themselves to the place of Lystes, the black Knight was ready to receive them:
and so Cornelius ran first, and broke his staff upon Modestas Champion very
gallantly, but never shakt him in his seat: And the black Knight knowing
Cornelius (for that he had some speeches with him before the Trumpets sounded)
when they came to the encounter turned away the end of his staff from him,
whereat Cornelius was very wrath thinking he had so done in disdain of him,
and fetching his course the second time charged his staff upon him with a
double force, but the good black Knight slenderly regarded his fury, passed by
him in like sort as before, not offering any manner of encounter unto him, nor
yet receiving any damage by the strong encounter of Cornelius, whereupon
Deualoyes started to his cosen, and persuaded him to leave, and that he might
try himself with the black Knight, who as it seemed favored him, by reason of
some old acquaintance, or else was afraid to deal with him, and therefore
would offer him that occasion of kindness, whereby to avoid futher trial of
his strength, with these persuasions Cornelius restested satisfied, and
Deualoyes prepared himself to take his fortune, to finish and conclude this
whole triumph: for the last hour thereof was now at hand, and therewithal
turning his horse about, spurred him to run with great swiftness, and the
black Knight perceiving his purpose, gave him the meeting, and the encounter
was so rough, that Deualoyes measured his length upon the ground: whereat he
was greatly offended and would have drawn his sword, but that he was
commanded by the Judges to stay, both for that the time appointed was now
finished, and also because it was against the kings commandment, and then
(patience perforce) Deualoys was feign to stay his hand, notwithstanding that
he had rather have lost his life outright, than be so discredited in such an
honorable assembly.

The valor of the black Knight did put Perduratus in remembrance of his son
Moderatus (whom in marshall actiuitie (as he supposed) he did much resemble)
and that rack-master Remembrance torturing with great extremity his mind in
thinking thereof, but nevertheless (like a wise man) dissembling his grief,
least thereby his guests would not think themselves w^lcom, when they should
see him melancholy, he took al things patiently* and sent a messenger to
desire the black Knight and his Lady Modesta to supper, whereby they might see
if his skill in carpet trade were equivalent with his marshall discipline, the
black Knight accepted of his bidding, and promised to satisfy his
expectation, who after the messengers departure was at great wars in his
mind, how he might discover himself to his Parents: in the end Priscus being
then present with him, they determined that Modesta should be first conducted
to the Prince, who following certain instructions they gave her, should open
all the matter unto them, which she assented unto, and then being conducted by
Priscus to Perduratus presence, after that she had demanded license to speak,
she framed her speech unto him in this manner.

W^rthy and renowned Uice-roy, the mirror of true nobility, and the lantern
of perfect virtue to all Christian Princes, I have by the direction of King
Lothus my father, arrived here to your court, where I came under the conduct of
a worthy knight, who by mine own consent, and his great merit, has won me
to be his for ever: from him, and in mine own name also do I salute you, and
your Lady Flaminea, wishing you both long life, health, and happiness, to
father these new erected buildings, and their possessors, and to eternize your
own worthiness in the Annals of perpetual honor: I bring tidings (O
victorious Prince) which I know will be no less welcome unto your Highness,
than they are profitable and pleasing to your subjects, yea such tidings as I
doubt not the child unborn shall have just cause to rejoice therein, but
before I discover so great a secrecy, I am to crave a gift of your royal
Majesty, in granting whereof you shall augment your own fame, increase your
own power, and enlarge the territories of your dominions, where of the other
side in denying my request, you should not only do injustice, but also reap
dishonor, in doing less than honor and virtue commands.

I am to make this request for one that nature binds you not to deny, and
for one that honor and policy commands you to yield unto his desire, whose
good will being obtained, Perduratus may brag of happiness with the mightiest
Prince in Europe.

Then know noble Heroyes, that here I present you and the Lady Flaminea, with
noble and victorious Lothus his son and heir, Moderatus his dearest friend
living, I say, I present your excellency with Priscus my brother, who has
vowed to be a husband to Verosa, or never to be any: who deserves Verosa, for
that he loves Verosa so well, who is not hated of Verosa, because Verosa
knows already so much, and willingly accepted thereof. Now you know him, I
leave for you to judge whether he deserves Verosa. And yet famous Prince, I
bring better news, for that I present Priscus unto you from the thrice worthy
Knight, whose valiant deeds at arms, has made his name famous in the world,
in vanquishing proud and arrogant Delamure, (whose very name was a terror to
all Aemulia) who falsely accused me of fornication, being innocent therein: in
destroying the monstrous Giant Bergamo, that got such honor in my fathers court
in performing the first part of this triu^^^ which now is happily achieved by
him, in utterly rooting out mischievous crew of deuillish Albanus: Priscus my
brother and his friend by good fortune conducted to the place where those
barbaro^s people charged him with a number of vncutteous blows: yea from him I
come to make this request, that desires rather to gain virtuous honor
secretly, than to make any ambitious ostentation thereof publicly. And
therefore, least I should hold you longer from your deserved joy, and desired
expectation than stood with reason, know (victorious Prince) that I come from
my Champion, my hearts joy, and your right renowned son Moderatus, from him
I come who in my Fathers presence (as you all will witness) has gained to
himself perpetual honor: All these things considered, I expect Verosas
acceptance, and your royal consents, and then all is perfected to make happy
two kingdoms.

I leave to your judgments (Gentlemen) whether Perduratus and Flaminea had not
just cause to rejoice in these so grateful and prosperous news, not only in
finding their lost son again, but also in so honorable and worthy a match,
both to Moderatus and Verosa: so that all these joys concurring together in
one, stirred in them such ouer-ardent delight, that the vehemency thereof
bereaved them from the use of their speech for a long time: In the end, the
tydinges being very welcome unto them, all the whole court there assembled,
rejoicing likewise at these prosperous news. Perduratus first commanded his
son to be sent for, who being come, fell upon his knees to his father,
craving pardon for his sudden departure, his so long absence, and the
concealing of himself so long from his Fathers court, who (carrying with him
sufficient reasons, to excuse himself, though no more than his own presence,
which very often (with bitter tears of his Parents) was desired) was kindly
embraced, and lovingly entertained of his noble Parents, who never
suffi^ie^tlie satisfied in beholding of him, watered their checkes with
abundance ^f salt tears, for joy thereof. And in the end recovering their
speech again, they returned unto Modesta many kind thanks, with very
friendly and gracious acceptance of (...) frank and g^^tle offer. Whereupon
order was taken, to make and things in a readiness, for the solemnizing of the
Nuptials, as well (...) Moderatus and Modesta, as of Priscus and Verosa, to the
great contentment of all Florence, and to the prosperous and happy state
thereof.

Cornelius and Deualoyes beholding all which happened, albeit at first they
could not be persuaded, but that they were in a dream, yet calling themselves
to better remembrance, they were so disquieted in mind to behold this sudden
accident, that all the entreatie that Perduratus could make, was scant able to
persuade them to stay the consummation of the marriages: which being finished,
they presently departed toward Albigena, leaving the Florentines to triumph
in the multitude of their new joys.

FINIS. R. P. Gent.
Imprinted at London by Richard Ihones, at the sign of the Rose and Crown,
near to S. Andrews Church in Holburne. 1595.


