THE FIRST BOOK OF THE CHRISTIAN EXERcise, appertayning to resolution.

Wherein are laid down the causes and reasons that should move a man to
resolve him self to the service of God: And all the impedimentes removed,
which may let the same.

Psalm. 62. Verse. 4.

Vnam petii a domino, hanc requiram: vt inhabitem in domo domini omnibus diebus
vitae meae: vt videam voluntatem domini.

One thing have I requested at gods hands, and that will I demand still:
which is, to dwell in his house all the days of my life: to the end, I may
know and do his will.

Anno. 1582.

WITH PRIVYLEGE.

THE SVMMARIE OF THE CHRIstian exercise, as it is intended.
FOR THAT three things are necessary to a man in this life, for the attayning
of salvation: that is, to resolve him self to serve God in deed: to begin a
right: and to persevere unto the end: therefore this whole treatise shall be
divided into three books.

THE FIRST book shall be of resolution, divided into two parts. And in the
first part shall be laid down all the principal reasons that ought to move a
man to this resolution. In the second shall be removed all impedime^tes that
commonly do hinder men from the same.

THE SECOND book shall treat of the way how to begin well, and shall
likewise be divided into two parts: whereof the first shall show the way how
to deliver ourselves from sin, and from the custom, bondage or delectation
thereof. The second shall open the means, how to join our selves perfectly to
God, and to make a right entrance into his service.

THE THIRD book shall handle the means of perseverance, so far forth as
it concerns our ability, for though this gift be only of god: yet are
there two things left by his grace to be performed of us: the one, to afke his
aid: the other, to join our endeavor with the same. According to which two
(...), this book shall be divided also into two parts: The first whereof shall
entreat of all kind of prayer, both me^tall and vocal. The second shall
declare the ways and means, how (by help of gods grace) we may resist and
overcome all sorts of sin, and the te^ptatio^s thereof.

AN ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER.
I Had purposed (gentle reader) at the beginning, to have printed again, the
Exercise of a Christian life, composed by D. loartes, and translated (not long
since) into our lo^gue: as may appear by the preface folovveing. And albeit I
minded to add certain matters and treatises unto the same: yet meant I not,
but to retain so much as therein was done before, esteeming it so well done
(as in deed it is) as no alteration needed therein. But yet notvvithstanding,
when I had (...) down an other order and method to my self, than that book
follows: and had begu^ne this first book of resolution: whereof no part is
handled in that treatise: I found by experience, that I could not well join
that with this: to satisfy, either the order or argument by me conceived: and
therefore was I enforced, to resolve upon a further labor, than at the first I
intended: which was, to dravve out the whole three books myself: not
omitting any thing, that is in the said Exercise, or other like books, to this
effect Which thing by gods holy assistance, I mean to do, as time, health
and liberty shall permit me.

Now I am constrained to break of, for the present, and to send (...) only
this first book of resolution: which I beseech our Lord may so work in thy
heart by his heavenly grace, as I may bei^couraged thereby the sooner to
dispache the other two. God for our better trial permits many
difficulties, disturbances, lettes, and hyndera^ces, in every thing that is
taken in hand for his service: but yet, alvvayes after, he helps us out
again: as I know he will do from time to time: the cause being his: and
much more importing him than us. The only thing that he desires at our
hands is, that we should once resolve our selves throughelie to serve him in
deed: and conseque^tlie cast our selves wholy i^to his holy arms: without
reseruatio^ of any one jot that we have, unto our selves: and then should we
see, how good and merciful a lord he is: as now also we prove daily beyond
all deserts, or expectation. Our lord bless and preserve thee (gentle reader)
and enriche thee with the guyftes of his holy grace: and when thou art
amiddest thy deepest deuotio^s, I beseech thee to have some memory of me
also, poor sinner: as I shall not be forgetful of thee, But above all others,
let us both be myndfull to pray for our persecutors: who finally will
prove to be our best free^des: being in deed the hammers which beat and
polish us, for making us fytt stones, for the buylding of gods new Jerusalem
in heaven.

THE CONTENTS OF THIS FIRST BOOK.
A preface to the reader touching two editions of this treatise wherein is
proved. page 1. THat albeit books of controversy be in this age necessary
for maintayninge of our faith: yet books of devotion are more profitable to
piety. How good life is oftentimes a mean to right faith. AN induction to
the three books of this treatise: wherein are contained. page 6. HOw there be
two parts of Christian divinity: the one called active, the other
speculatiue: with their defferences. How there be three points necessary to
a Christian life: three sorts of sinners touching the same: and this treatise
divided in three books, for helping of them.
THE CONTENTS OF THE FIRST part of this first book, touching the helps of
resolution to serve God.
The first chapter. Of the end and parts of this book: with a necessary
advertisement to the reader. page 11 HOw necessary a thing it is for a man to
resolve to leave vanities, and to serve God. What argument the devil uses to
draw men from this resolution. How wilful ignorance does increase, and not
excuse sin. What mind a man should have that would read this treatise.
The second chapter. How tecessarie it is at this day, to enter into earnest
consideration and meditation of our estate: wherein is declared. page 15. THat
inconsideration herein is a great enemy to resolution. What inco^uenie^ces
grow thereby at this day. The nature, and commodity of consideration. Of the
exact manner of meditatinge the particulars of our religion in old time: and
the fashion of beleeuinge in gross at this day.
The third chapter. Of the end (in general) why man was created and placed
in this world: vvherin is handled. page 24. HOw due co^sideratio of this end
helps a man to judge of him self. What mind a man should have to
creatures. The lamentable condition of the world at this day, by want of this
due consideration. And the mischyefe thereof at the last day.
The fowerth chapter. Of the end of man more in particular: and of two
special parts of the same, required at his hands in this life: wherein is
discussed. page 32. HOw exactlie both these parts are to be exercised. The
description of a Christian life. The lamentable condition of this time, by
negligence herein. The care and diligence of ancient fathers touching the
same. The remedies that they used for the one part and the insinite monumentes
of pyetie they left behind, touching the other. The different estates of good
and evil men: as well presently, and at the day of death, as in the life to
come.
The fyueth chapter. Of the severe account that uve must yield to God:
wherein is declared. page 45. A Principal point of wisdom in an
aecounmptant, for veweing of the state of his accoumpt before hand. The
Majesty of ceremony: and circumstances used by god, at the first publicatio^
of his law in writing: and his severe punisheme^t of offe^ders. The sharp
speeches of our savior against sinners. Why two judgments are appointed
after death. The sudden coming of them both. The demaundes in our
accoumpt, at the generaAll judgment. The circumstances of horror and dread
before, at, and after the same. What a treasure a good conscience will the^
be. The pitiful case of the damned. How easily the danger of those matters
may be prevented in due time.
The sixth chapter. A consideration of the nature of sin, and of a sinner: to
show the cause why God justly uses the rigor before mentioned: wherein
is described. page 65. GOds infinite hatred to sinners. The reasons why God
hates them. That they are enemies to God, and to the^ selves. How god punished
sinners:: as well the penitent, as the obstinate: and of the bitter speeches in
scripture against sinners. Of the seven miseries and losses which come by
sin. The obstinacye of sinners in this age. Two principal causes of sin.
Of the danger to live in sin. How necessary it is to fear.
The seventh chapter. An other consideration for the further (...) of gods
judgments, and declaration of our demerit, taken from the (...) of God and
his benefits toward us. Wherein is shevved. page 85. A Contemplation of
the majesty of God: and of his benefits. Of the several uses of sacraments.
Diverse complaints against sinners in the person of God. Our intolerable
co^te^pt and ingratitude against so great a majesty and benefactour. Of great
causes we have to love God, beside his benefits. How he requires nothing of
us but gratitude. That it rests in due resolution to serve him. An
exhortation to this gratitude, with a short prayer for a penitent sinner in
this case.
The eight chapter. Of what opinion and feeling we shall be touching these
matters, at the time of our death vvherin is expressed. page 98. THe
induration of some hearts, kept from resolution by worldly respects. Of three
matters of terror, pain, and misery that principally molest a man at his
death. A contemplation of the terrors, speech, or cogitation of a sinner at
the hour of death. Of diverse apparitions and visions, to the just and to the
wicked, lyeing a deinge. How all these miseries may be prevented.
The nyenth chapter. Of the pains appointed for sin after this life, and of
two sorts of the^: wherein is declared. page 118. HOW God uses the motive
of threats, to induce men to resolution. Of the temporal pains of
purgatory. Of the severity thereof. Of the great fear, that holy men had
thereof in old time. Of the everlasting pain in hell, reserved for the damned,
and common to all that are there. Of the two parts thereof: that is pain
sensible and pain of loss. Vehement conjectures towchinge the severity of
those pains. Of the several names of hell in diverse tongues. Of the
particular pains for particulare offe^ders, peculiar in quality and quantity
to the sins of each offonder. A certain vision of the handling of a wicked
man in hell, showed to a holy man. Of the worm of conscience.
The tenthe chapter. Of the rewards, benefits, and commodities provided for
gods servants: vvherin is declared. pa. 149. HOw God is the best payemaster.
Of his infinite magnificence. The nature, greatness, and value of his rewards.
A description of paradise. Of two parts of selicitie in heaven. A conte^platio
of the commodities of the said two felicities joined together. The honor
whereunto a Christian is borne by baptism. An admonition against security in
this life.

THE CONTENTS OF THE SECOND part of this first book: touching impedimentes
of resolution.
The first chapter. Of the first impediment: which is the difficulty, that
many think to be in virtuous life. Wherein is declared. page 195. NYene
special priuyleges and helps, wherewith the virtuous are aided above the
wicked. 1 The force of Gods grace for easinge of virtuous lyse, against all
temptations. 2 Of what force love is herein. And how a man may know, whether he
have love toward God, or no. 3 Of a peculiar light of understanding
pertaining to the just. 4 Of internal consolation of mind. 5 Of the quiet of
a good (...) I^ the just 6 Of hope in God which the virtuous have. And that
the hope of the wicked, is in deed no hope, but mere presumption. 7 Of
freedom of soul and body, which the virtuous have. 8 Of the peace, of mind
in the virtuous to wards God their neighbor, and them selves. 7 Of the
expectation of the reward, that the virtuous have. Of the comfort that holy
men have, after their conversion: And how the best men have had greatest
conflict therein. Of S. Austens conversion, and four annotations thereupon.
The second chapter. Of the (...) impediment: which is tribulation: wherein
are handled four special points. page 239. 1. FIrst that it is an ordinarye
means of salvation, to suffer some tribulation. 2. Secondly, that there be
thirtene special co^sideratio^s of gods purpose, in sending afflictions to his
servants: which are laid down, and declared in particular. 3. Thirdly, what
special considerations of comfort a man may have in tribulation. 4.
Fowerthlie, what is required at man's hands in tribulation.
The third chapter. Of the third impediment: which is love of the world:
which is drawn to six poyutes. page 292. 1. FIrst, how and in what sense.
the world and commodities thereof are vanities: and of three general points of
worldly vanities. 2. Secondlye, how worldly commodities are mere deceytes. 3.
Thirdly, how the same are prickyng thorns. 4. Fowerthlie, how the same are
misery and affliction. 5. Fyuethlie, how they strangle a man. With a
descriprion of the world. Sixtlie, how a man may avoid the danger thereof, and
use the commodities thereof to his own gain.
The fowerth chapter. Of the fovverth impediment which is to much presu ming
of gods mercy: wherein is declared. pa. 347. THat prolo^gyng of our
iniquities, in hope of gods mercy, is to buyld our sins on gods back. Of
the two feet of our Lord: that is, mercy and truth. Of two dangers of
sinners: (...) how gods goodness helps not the^ that, persevere in sin.
Whether gods mercie^ be greater than his justice. The description of true
fear. Of servile fear, and of the fear of children: and how servile fear is
profitable for sinners
The fiueth chapter. Of the fyueth impediment: which is delay of resolution
upon hope to do it better, or with more ease afterward. Wherein a
declaration is made. page 271. OF seven special reasons, why the devil
moves us to delay. And of six principal causes, which make our conversion
harder by delay. How hard it is to do penance in old age, for him that is
not accustomed to yt: and what obligation and charge a man draws to him
self, by delay. That the example of the these saved on the cross, is no
warrant to such as defer their conversion. Of diverse reasons, why
conversion made at the last hour is insufficent.
The sixth chapter. Of three other impedime^ts: that is slothe, negligence, and
hardness of heart: wherein is declared. pa. 403. THe four effects of slothe:
and the means how to remove them. Of two causes of Atheism, at this day. And
of the way, to cure careless men. Of two degrees of hardness of heart. How
hardness of heart is in all persecutors. The description of a hard heart: and the
danger thereof. The conclusion of the whole book.

TO THE CRISTIAN READER TOVVCHINGE two editions of this book.
About three years past (good reader) a certain learned and devout gentilman,
consideringe the great want of spiritual books in England, for the
direction of men to piety and deuotic^ (which ought to be the cheifest point
of our exercise in this life) took the pains to translate a godly treatise
to that effect, named, the exercise of a Christian life, written in the Italian
tongue, by a reverend man of the socretic of Jesus, named Gasper Loartes,
Doctor in divinity, and of great experience in the handlinge and managinge of
sowles to that purpose. Which book because I understand of certainty, to
have done great good, and to have wrought forcebly in the hearts of many
persons, toward the foresayed effect of piety and devotion: I was moved to
cause the same to be printed again, and that in much more ample manner than
before, having added unto it, two parts of three, which were not in the
former book.

The reason of this so large an addition shall appear in the Induction
followinge, where snalbe showed the parts of this book, with the causes and
co^tentes thereof. But the principal cause and reason was, to the end our
country men might have some one sufficient direction for matters of life and
spirit, among so many books of controversies as have been written, and are in
writing dailye. The which books, albeit in these our troublesome and
quarrelous times be necessary for defense of our faith, against so many
seditious innouations, as now are attempted: yet help they little oftentimes to
good life, but rather do fill the heads of men with a spirit of contradiction
and contention, that for the most part hinders devotion, which devotion is
nothing else, but a quiet and peaceble A description of devotion
state of the soul, endewed with a joyful promptnes to the diligent execution
of all things that appartayne to the honor of God. In respect whereof, S.
Paul geeueth this counsel to his scholar Timothy: contend not in words,
for it is profitable to nothing, but 2. Ti. 2.
to subvert the hearers. The like counsel he geuethe in diverse other places,
in respect of this quiet devotion, which is trowbled by contention.

But yet (as I have said) these books of Books of (...) ne cessarie. though
(...) to (...).
controversies are necessary for other considerations, especialie in these our
times, when every man almost is made of a fancy, and apt to esteem the same
great wisdom, except it be refuted. Such are our days, most unhappy
truly in respect of our forefathers, who receauinge the grownde of faith
peaceably, and without quarelinge from their mother the Chuche, did attend
only to build upon the same, good works and Christian life, as their
vocation required. But 1. Cor. 3.
we spendinge all the time in ianglinge abowte the foundation, have no leisure
to think upon the building, and so we wearye out our spirits without
commodity, we dye with much ado and little profit, great disquiet and small
reward. For who knows not, that what faith so ever a man has, 1 a co. 3.
yet without good life it helps him little? 1. Co. 1.


I am therefore of opinion (gentle reader) that albeit true faith be the
grownde of Christianity, without which nothing of it Heb. 12.
self can be meritorious before God: yet that one principal mean to come to
this true Good life a mean to right faith,
faith, and right knowledge, and to end all these our infinite co^tentions in
religion, were for each man to betake him self to a good and virtuous life,
for that God could not of his unspeakable mercy suffer such a man to err
long in religion. We have a clear example of Cornelius a Gentile to whom
God in respect of his religious life, prayer and alms Act. 10.
deeds, (as the scripture affirms) sent his Apostle S. Peter to instruct him
in the right faith So merciful is God to those which apply the^ selves to
virtue and piety, albeit they err as yet in points of faith.

And on the contrary side, as loose life and worldly ambition, was the first
cause of all heresye in Christian religion from the beginning: so is it the
continuance of the same. and it is very hard for him that is so affected to
be recalled from his error. For that (as the scripture says) the vvisdome of
God will not Sap. 1.
enter into a malicious mind, nor dvvell in a body subject to sin. And our
Saueoure in the gospel askethe a question of certain ambitious worldlynges,
which geeuethe great light to the thing we talk of: how (says Ihon. 5.
he) can you believe, which seek glory one of an other? as who would say,
that this worldly ambition and evil life of theirs, did make it impossible for
them to come to the true faith.

Wherefore (gentle reader) if thou be of an other religion than I am, I beseech
the most hartelye, that layenge a side all hatred, malice and wrathful
contention, let us join together in amendme^t of our lives, and prayeng one
for an other: and God (no doubt) will not suffer us to perish finallye for
want of right faith. And to Catholics I must say further with S. Paul and
S. James, that all 1. Co. 13
their faith will profitt them nothing, except Iaco. 2.
they have charity also, both toward God and man, and thereby do direct
their lives accordinglye. Which God of his holy mercy geeue them (...) to
do, to his honor and their eternal salvation. And I most humblye request the
(good Christian reader) to pray for me also, (if thou take any commodity by
this book) that I be not like the Conduit pipe which brings water to the
city, without drinkinge any it self, or as S. Paul with much less cause
than I have, 1. Cor. 9
feared of him self, to wit, less that after preachinge to other, I become
perchance a reprobate my self. Remember also I beseech the, that most
virtuous good gentilman, who by his first translation, was the cause of this
labor now taken again. He has suffered much sense for the cause of his
conscience, and is at this present under indura^ce for the same, and by that
means, so much the more in disposition to receive fruit by thy prayer, by
how much the more he has suffered for righteousness sake, and is nearer
joined to God by his separation from the world. Our lord bless him and the
also (good reader) and send us all his holy grace, to do his will in this
woorld, that we may reign with him in the world to come. Amen.

Thy hearty welwiller and servant in Christ. R. P.

AN INDVCTION TO THE three books follovvinge.
AL Christian divinity (good reader,) that is, all the business that man has
with God in this life standethe in two points. The one to know: the other to
do. This first part contains Two parts of Christian divinity.
principally our belief, set forth to us in our Creed, and other declarations
about our faith, delivered us by the Catholic church to know and believe
only. The other part containethe the ten commandments, the uses of holy
Sacraments, and the like, prescribed unto Christians not only to know or
believe, but also to exercise and execute in this life. The first of these two
parts is called theorike or speculatyue, because Theorike.
it consists in speculation, that is, in understanding and discourse of the
mind, whereby a man comprehends the things he has to know and believe. The
second part is called practique or active, because it Practike.
stands not only in knowledge, but also in action and execution of those
things which by the first part he has conceived and understood.

In the first part there is less labor and Active divinity harder the^
speculatiue.
difficulty a great deal than in the second. Because it is easier to know,
then to do: to believe aright, then to live accordingly: and the things that
a man has to believe are much fewer, than the things he has to do, and
therefore Christ in the Ghospels, and the Apoostles in their writings, spoke
much more of things to be done, than of things to be known: of good
lyuinge, than of right (...) And amongst Christians few are damned for lack
of knowledge, which commonly all men baptized have sufficient: (except in
times of heresies,) but many thowsandes for evil life dailye. Wherefore Christ
in the Gospel tellinge the reason of such as should be damned, puts
lack of good life, as the reason of their damnation. Depart from me (says
he) Mat. 25.
into everlasting fire: I was Hungry and you gave me not to eat, et ce.

And the reason of this is, for that the things which a man is bound to
believe (as I said before) are few, in respect of the things which a man
has to do, or the vices that he has to auoyed. Again, the The parts of
actio^ more hurt tha^e the parts of understanding by the fall of Adam.
parts in man which appertain to understanding and knowledge, were not so
hurt by the fall of Adam, as the parts appertayninge to action, whereby it
comes, that a man has less difficulty, pain, and resistance in him self
to knowledge, than to good life, where our own corrupt affections make war
against us, and so do make the matter unpleasant for a time, until they be
conquered. For which cause we see many great learned men not to be the best
lyuers, for that to know much is a pleasure to the^, but to do much is a
pain.

For these causes, not only the scriptures (as I noted before) but also the
ancient holy fathers, have made great and long discourses, ample volumes,
and many books, about this second part of Christian divinity, which
consists in action, out of whose worckes, these three books followinge for
the most part are gathered, containinge a perfect and exact instruction or
direction, for all the^ that mean to lead a true Christian life, as also
diverse helps for them which have not yet fullye that determination. For what
so ever is necessary to a Christian after he has once received the faith,
is contained in this work. And to Three things necessary to a Christian in
this life.
speak in particular, three things are necessary. The first is a firm
resolution to serve God for the time to come, and to leave vice. The second is
how to begin to do this. The third is how to persevere and continue unto the
end.

These three things who so ever has, no doubt but he shall both live and
dye a good Christian, and enjoy everlasting life in the world to come. And
for lack of all or some one of these things, many thowsandes (the more is the
pity) do perish daily. For some men are either so careless, or so
carnally geeuen, as they never resolve them selves to live in deed well, and
to forsake wickedness: and these are farof from the state of salvation. Other
resolve them selves often, but they never begin, or a least way they begin
not as they should do, whereby they never come to any perfection. Other do
both resolve and begin well, but they persevere not unto the end, (...) for
lack of instruction, or helps necessary to the same: and these also can not
attain to life everlasting, but rather do leese their labor, for that
Christ has not Mat. 10 and 24.
promised salvation, but only to such as perseruer to the end.

For helpinge therefore Christians in these The diui sio^ of this vvorcke.
three points, this work is divided into three books. In the first book
there are showed many means and helps, whereby The first book.
to bring a man to this necessary resolution, of leauinge vanities to serve
God, with a Christian life, according to his profession. In the second book
is declared in particular, The second (...).
how a man shall begin to putt this resolution in practice, and without error
to begin a new trade of life. In the third book The third book.
are laid down, the means and helps to perseuera^ce unto the end. The
which being done, there remains nothing, but the reapinge of glory in the
life to come, which we shall be able to do without instructions, if it be our
good hap to come to it, which God grant, and send us his grace, that we
mave be as well content to labor for it in this life, as we will be joyful to
possess it in the next, and to avoid the dreadful torments, which those
must needs fall into, who for flovvth, pleasure, or negligence, omit in this
world, to procure the kingdom prepared for gods servants, in the next.

THE FIRST BOOK AND FIRST PART.
Of the end and parts of this book, with a necessary aduertissement to the
reader.

CHAP. I.
THe first book (as I have showed The end of this book.
before) has for his proper end, to persuade a Christian by name, to become a
true Christian in deed, at the least, in resolution of mind. And for that
there be two principal things Two parts of this book.
necessary to this effect: therefore this first book shall be divided into two
parts. And in the first shall be declared important reasons and strong motyues,
to provoke a man to this resolution. In the second shall be refuted all the
impedimentes, which our spiritual enymies (the flesh the world and the
devil) are wont to lay for the stoppinge of the same, knowinge very well,
that of this resolution dependethe all our good in the life to come. For he
that never resolves him self to do well and to leave the dangerous state of
sin wherein he lyuethe, is farof from The necessity of resolution.
ever doing the same. But he that sometimes resolves to do it, although by
frayltie he performethe it not at that time, yet is that resolution much
acceptable before God, and his mind the rediar to return after to the like
resolution again, and by the grace of God, to putt it manfully in execution
But he that wilfully resistethe the good motions of the holly ghost, and
vncurteouslie contemnethe Act. 7.
his Lord, knockinge at the door of his conscience, greatly prouokethe the
indignation Apoc. 3.
of God against him, and co^monlye growethe harder and harder daily, until he
be given over into a reprobate sense, which Romans 1.
is the next door to damnation it self.

One thing therefore I must aduertyse An advertisement.
the reader before I go any further, that he take great heed of a certain
principal deceyt of our ghostlye adversary, whereby he drawethe many millions
of souls into hell daily. Which is, to fear and terrify them from
hearing or readinge any thing contrary to their present humor or
resolution. As for example, a usurer, from readinge books of restitution: a
lecherer, from readinge discourses against that sin: a worldlinge, from
readinge spiritual books or treatyses of devotion. And he uses commonly
this argument to the^ for his purpose: Thou see how thou art not yet resolved
The deuyles argument.
to leave this trade of life, wherein thou art: and therefore the readinge of
these books will but trouble and afflict thy conscience, and cast the into
sorrow and melancholye, and therefore read them not at all. This (I say, is a
cunninge fleyght of Satan, whereby he lead the many blyndfolded to perdition,
even as a faulkener carriethe many hawks quyetly being hooded, which other
wise he could not do, if they hadd the use of their sight.

If all ignorance did excuse sin, than VVil full ignorance increa sethe sin.
this might be some refuge for the^ that would live wickedlye: But this kind
of ignorance, (being voluntary and wilful) increasethe greatly both the
sin and the sinners evil state. For of this man the holy ghost speakethe in
great dysdayne. Noluit intelligere vt Psalm. 35.
been ageret. He would not understand to do well. And again: quia it is
scientiam repulisti, Ose. 4.
repellam te. For that thou have rejected knoledge, I will reject the. And of
the same men in an other place the same holy ghost sayethe: Job. 21.
they do lead their lives in pleasure, and in a moment go down unto hell,
which say to See. S. Au sten of this (...) de gra. and lib. arbi. cap. 3.
and S. Chrysostom. ho ni. 26 in epist. ad Romans
God, go from, us, we will not have the knowledge of thy vvayes. Let every
man therefore be ware of this deceyt, and be (...) at the least, to read good
books, to frequent devout company and other like good means, of his
amendment, albeit he were not yet resolved to follow the same: yea although he
should find some greeff and repugnaunce in him self to do it. For these
things can never do him hurt, but may chance to do him very much good:
and perhaps the very contrariety and repugnance which he bearethe in
frequentinge these things against his inclination, may move our merciful
lord, which seethe his hard case, to give him the victory over him self in
the end, and to send him much more comfort in the same, than before he hadd
dislyke. For he can easelie do it only by alteringe our taste with a little
drop of his holy grace, and so make those things seem most sweet and
pleasant, which before tasted both bitter and unsavory. What mind a man
should bring to the readinge of this book.


Wherefore as I would hartelye wysne every Christian soul, that comethe to
read these considerations folowinge, should come with an indefferent mind,
laid down wholly into gods hands, to resolve and do as it should please
his holy spirit to move him unto, although it wereto the loss of all wordlye
pleasures what so ever: (which resignation is absolutely necessary to every
one that desirethe to be saved:) so if some can not presentlye win that
indifferency of them selves: yet would I counsel the^ in any case to co^quer
their minds to so much patience, as to go through to the end of this book,
and to see what may be said at least to the matter, although it be without
resolution to follow the same. For I doubt not, but God may so pearse these
men's hearts before they come to the end, as their minds may be altered and
they yealde them selves unto the humble and sweet service of their lord and
savior, and that the Angels in heaven (which will not cease to pray for
them while they are readinge may rejoice and triumph of their regayninge, as
Luc. 15.
of sheep most dangerouslye lost before.

How necessary it is to enter into earnest condesiration and meditation of
our estate.

CHAP. II.
THe prophet Jeremy after a long complaynte of the miseries of his time,
fallen upon the Jews by reason of their sins, vtterethe the cause thereof in
these words: All the earth is fallen into utter desolation for that there is
no man Iere. 12.
which co^sidereth deeply in his heart. Signifieng hereby, that if the Jews
would have entered into deep and earnest consideration of their lives and
estate, before that great desolation fell upon them: they might have escaped
the same, as the Ninevites did by the forevvarninge of Jonas: albeit the
svvorde was now drawn, and the hand of God Ion. 3.
stretched out, within fourtye days to distroye them. So important a thing is
this consideration. In figure vvherof all beasts in old time, which did not
ruminate or chevve Leu. 11.
their cudde, were accounted unclean by Deu. 14.
the law of Moses, as no dowt but that soul in the sight of God must needs
be, which reuoluethe not in heart, nor chevvethe in often meditation of
mind the things required at her hands in this life.

For of want of this consideration, and due meditation, all the foul errors
of the vvoorlde are committed, and many thousand Christians do find them
selves vvhithin the very gates of hell, before they mystrust any such matter
toward them, being carried thorowghe the vale of this life blyndfolded,
withdraw the veyle of negligence and inconsideration, as beasts to the
slavvghter house, and never suffered to see their own danger, until it be to
late to remedy the same.

For this cause the holly scripture does reco^mende unto us most carefully,
this exercise of meditation, and diligent consideration of our deutyes, to
deliver us thereby from the peril which inco^sideratio^ eadethe us unto.

Moses having delivered to the people his embassage from God, tovvchinge all
particulars of the law, addethe this clause also from God, as most necessary
These words must remain in thy heart, thou (...) meditate Deuteronomy. 6.
upon them both at home and abroate, when thou go to bed, and when
thourysest again in the morninge. And again in an other place: Deu. 11.
teach your children these things, that they may meditate in their hearts
upon them. The like commandment was geeuen by God him self, to Iosue at his
first election, to govern Iosu. 1.
the people: to wit, that he should meditate upon the law of Moses both
day and night, to the end, he might keep and perform the things written
therein. And God addethe presently the commodity he should reap thereof. For
then (says he) shall thou direct thy way aryght, and shall understand the
same. Signifyinge that without this meditation, a man goethe both amysse, and
also blyndlye, not knovvnge him self whether.

Saint Paul having discribed unto his scholar Tymothye, the perfect devvtye
of a prelate, addethe this advertisement in the end: haec meditare. Meditate,
ponder and consider 1. Tim. 4
upon this. And finally whensoever the holy scripture describethe a wise,
happy, or just man (for all these are one in scripture, for that justice is
only (...) vvisdome and felicity:) one chief point is this. He will Psalm.
1.
meditate upon the law of God, both day and Pro. 15.
night. And for examples in the scripture how Eccl. 14.
good men did use to meditate in times past, I might here rekon up great
store, as that of Genesis 24.
Isaac, who was wont to go forth into the feeldes toward night to
meditate: also that of Ezechias the king, who (as the scripture Esa. 38.
says) did meditate like a dove, that is, in silence, withdraw his heart only,
without noise of words. But above all other, the example of holy David is
singular herein, who every where almost, makethe mention of his continual
exercise in meditation, saying to God. I did meditare upon thy commandementes
Psalm. 118
which I loved. And again: I will meaitate upon the in the morninges. And
Psalm. 62.
again, O lord how have I loved thy law? it Psalm. 118
is my meditation all the day long. And with what feruoure and vehemency he
used to Psalm. 38.
make these his meditations, he shows when he says of him self: my heart
did wax hoote within me, and fire did kyndle in my meditations.

This is recorded by the holy ghost of these annuncient good men, to confound
us which are Christians, who being far more bound to fervor than they, by
reason of the greater benefytes we have received yet do we live so lazelye,
(for the most part of us) as we never almost enter into the meditation and
carneste consideration of gods laws and commandments, of the mysteries of
our faith, of the life and death of our Savior, or of our devvtye toward
him, and much less do we make it our daily studdye and cogitation, as those
holy kings did, notwithstanding all their great business in the commen
wealth. Psa. 118


Who is there of us now a days, which makethe the laws and commandementes
or instifications of God (as the scriptures learnethe him) his daily
meditations, as king David did? neither only in the day time Psalm. 76.
did he this, but also by night in his heart, as in an other place he testy
fiethe of him self. How many of us do pass over whole days, and
months, without ever entringe into these meditatio^s? nay God grant there
be not many Christians in the world, which know not what these
meditatio^s do mean. We believe in gross the mysteryes of Belief in gross.
our Christian faith, as that there is a hell, a heaven, a reward for
virtue, a punyshement for vice, a judgment to come, an account to be made, and
the like: but for that we chue them not well by deep consideration, nor do
not digest them well in our hearts, by the heat of meditation: they help us
little to good life, no more than a preservative putt in a man's pockett can
help his health.

What man in the world would adventure Marvelous effects of i^.
consideration.
so easelye upon mortal sin (as commonly men do which drynk them up as
easily as beasts drynk water) if he did consider in particular the great
danger and loss that commethe by the same, as the loss of grace, the loss
of gods favor, and purchassinge his eternal wrath, also the death of gods
own son sustained for sin, the inestymable torments of hell for the
everlasting punisheme^t of the same? which albeit every Christian in sum
doethe beleyue: yet because the most part do never consider the^ withdraw due
circunstances in their hearts: therefore they are not moved withdraw the same,
but do bear the knowledge thereof locked up in their breasts, without
any sense or feelinge, even as a man carryethe fire about him in a flynte
stone without heat, or perfumes in a pomma^der without smell, except the
one be beaten and the other be chafed.

And (now to come near our matter which we mean to handle in this book:)
what man lyuinge would not resolve him self thorovvlye to serve God in
deed, and to leave all vanities of the world, if he did consider as he should
do, the vvayghtie reasons he has to move him thereunto, the reward he shall
receive for it, and his infinity danger if he do it (...)? but, because (as
I have said) scarce one among a thousand doethe enter into these
consideratio^s, or if he do, it is with less attention or contynuance than
so great a matter requirethe: her eof it commethe, that so many men peryshe
daily, and so fevve are saved: for that, by lack of consideration, they never
resolve them selves to live as they should do, and as the vocation of a
Christian man requirethe. So that we may also complain Iere. 12.
withdraw holy Jeremy, alleged in the (...) that our earth also of
Christianity, is brought to desolation, for that men do not deeply consider
in their hearts. The nature of consideration.


Consideration is the keye which openethe the door to the closet of our
heart, where all our books of account doelye. It is the lookinge glass, or
rather the very eye of our soul, vvherby she seethe her self, and lookethe
into all her whole estate, her riches, her debtes, her duetyes, her
negli^gences, her good gifts, her defectes, her safftie, her danger, her
way she vvalkethe in, her pase she holds, and finallye, the place and end
which she dravvethe unto. And without this consideration, she runnethe on
blindlye into a thousand brakes and briars, stumblinge at every step into
some one inconvenience or other, and continualie in peril of some great and
deadly mischief. And it is a vvounderfull matter to think, that in other
business of this life, men both see and confess, that nothing can be either
begone, prosecuted, or well ended, without consideration, and yet in this
great business of the kyngedome of heaven, no man almost uses or thinkethe
the same necessary.

If a man had to make a iourneye but from A (...) similitude.
England to Co^sta^tinople, albe it he had made the same once or tvvyse
before, yet would he not pass it over withdraw out great and often
consideration, especially whether he were right, and in the way or no,
what pase he held, how near he was to his vvayes end, and the like. And
think thou (my dear brother) to pass from earth to heaven, and that by
so many hills and dales, and daungerouse places, never passed by the before,
and this without any consideration at allichou art deceived if thou
thinckeste so, for this journey has far more need of consideration than
that, being much more subject to bypathes and dangers, every pleasure of
this world, every lust, every dissolute thought, every alluringe sight and
temptynge sovvnde, every devil upon the earth, or instrument of his (which
are infinite,) being a thief, and lyenge in wait to spoil, the, and to
distroie the upon this way toward heaven.

Wherefore I would give counsel to every wise passenger, to look well
about him, and at least wise once a day, to enter into consideration of his
estate, and of the estate of his treasure, which he carryethe with him, in a
brickle vessel, as Saint Paul affirmethe, 2. Cor. 4
I mean his soul, which may as soon be lost by inco^sideratio^, as the
smalleste and nysest Jewel in this world, as partlye shall appear by that
which hereafter I have written for the help of this consideration, whereof
both I my selff and all other Christians do stand in so great need in
respect of our salvation. For suerly if my soul or any other did consider
attentyuelye but a fevve things of many which she knovvethe to be true:
she could not but speedily reform her self, with infinite myslyke and
detestation of her former course. As for example, if she considered thorovvghly
that her only coming into Deuteronomy. 6.
this life was to atte^de to the service of God, Luc. 1.
and that she notwithstanding attendethe only or the most part, to the
vanyties of this world: that she must geeue account at the last day of every
idle word, and yet that Mat. 12.
she makethe none account not only of words, but also, nor of evil deeds:
That nofornicator, 1. Cor. 5.
no adulterer, no usurer, no couetouse Lph. 5.
or unclean person shall ever enjoy the kingdom of heaven, as the scripture
saiethe, and yet she thincketh to'goe thither, lyuinge in the same vices: That
one only sin has been sufficient to damn many thousands Genesis 6.
together, and yet she being Looden withdraw Genesis 19.
many, thinckethe to escape: that the way to heaven is hard, strayte, and
paynefull, by Mat. 7.
the affirmation of God him self, and yet she thinckethe to go in, lyuinge
in pleasures and delytes of the world: that all hollye saints that ever
were (as the Arostles, and mother Act. 1
of Christ her selff, withdraw all good men since) 1. Cor. 4
chose to them selves to live an austere life, in 2. Cor. 4
fasting, prayenge, punishinge there bodies, 6. 11. (...)
and the like, and for all this, lived in fear and 1. Cor. 9
tremblinge of the iudgme^tes of God: and she Phili. 2.
attendinge to none of these things, but folovvinge 1. Cor. 2.
her pastimes, makethe no doubt of her own estate. If I say my soul or any
other, did in deed, and in earneste consider these things, or the least
part of a thousand more that might be considered, and which our Christian
faith doethe teach us to be true: she would not wander (as the most part
of Christian souls do) in such desperate peril thorovve want of
consideration.

What makethe theiues to seem mad A (...)
unto wise men, that saying so many hanged daily for theefte before their
eyes, will yet notvvithstundinge steal again, but only Mat. 7.
lack of consideration? and the very same cause Luc. 12.
makethe the wisest me^ of the world to seem Romans 1.
very fools, and worse than frantickes unto 1. Cor. 1. (...). 3.
God and good men, that knovvinge the vanities of the world and danger of
sinnfull life, Gal. 3.
do follow so much the one, and fear so little the other. If a law were
make by the authority of man, that vvhoesoeuer should ad ve^ture to drink
wine, should vithout delay hold his hand but half an hour in the fire, or
in boylinge lead for a punysheme^t: I think many would forbear wine,
albeit (...) they loved the same: and yet a law being made by the eternal
majesty of God, that who so ever committhe sin, shall boil euerlastinglye
in the fire of hell, without ease or end: Many men for lack of consideration
do committ sin, withdraw as little fear, as they do eat or drink.

To conclude therefore, consideration is a The conclusion of this chapter.
most necessary thing to be taken in hand, especially in these our days,
wherein vanity has so'muche prevailed withdraw the most, as it semethe to be
true vvisdome, and the contrary thereof to be more follye, and contemptible
simplicity. But I doubt not by the assistance of God, and help of
consideration, to discover in that which followethe, the error of this
matter unto the discrete reader, which is not vvillfully blinded, or
obstinatlye given over unto the captivity of his ghostly enemy (for some
such men therebe,) of whom God sayethe as it were pytyeng and lamentinge
their case: they have made aleague withdraw death, and a covenant withdraw Esa. 28.
hell it self: that is, they will not come out of the danger vvherin they
be, but will headelonglye cast them selves into enerlastinge perdition,
rather than by consideration of their estate, to recover to the^ selves
eternal life and glory, from which deadly obstinacy our Lord of his mercy
deliver us all.

Of the end for which man was created and placed in this world.

CHAP. III.
Now then, in the name of almighty God, and with the assistauce of his most
holy spirit, let the Christian man or woman desirous of salvation, first of
all consider attentyuely, as a good marchand factour is wont to do, when he
is arrived in a strange country: or as a captain sent by his prince to some
great exployte is accustomed, when he comethe to the place appointed: that is,
to think for what cause he came thither? why he was sent? to what end?
what to attempt? what to prosecute? what to perform? what shall be expected
and required at his hands upon his return by him that sent him thither? for
these cogitations (no donbt) shall stir him up to attend to that which he
came for, and not to employe him selff in impertinent affairs. The like (I
say) would I have a Christian to consider, and to ask of him self, why,
and to what end was he created of God, and sent hither into this world?
what to do? vvherin to bestow his days? he shall find for no other cause
or end, but only to serve God in this Deu. 6.
life, and by that service to gain everlasting Iosu. 22.
glory in the life to come. This was the condition Gen 14.
of our creation, and this was the only consideration of our redemption,
prophesied by zachary before we were yet redeemed, that we being delivered
from the hands of our Luc. 1.
enymyes, might serve him in holiness and instice all the days of our life. The
(...) co^seque^ce.


Of this it follows first, that saying the end and final cause of our being
in this world, is to serve God in this life and thereby to gain heaven in the
next: that what so ever we do, or endeavor, or bestow our time in, either
contrary or impertinent to this end, which is only to the service of God,
though it were to gain all the kingdoms of the earth: yet is it mere
vanity, folly, and lost labor: and will turn us one day to grefe,
repentance, and confusion: for that it is not the matter for which we came
into this life, or of which we shall be asked account at the last day, except
it be to receive Judgment for the same.

Secondly it folowethe of the premises, The second co^seque^ce.
that saying our only end and business in this world, is to serve God, and
that all other earthelye creatures are putt here to serve us to that end: we
should for our parts be indifferent to all these creatures, as to riches or
poverty, to health or sickness, to honor or contempt: and we should desire
only so much or little of the same, as were best for us to our said end that
we entende: that is, to the service of God: for who soever desiethe or
seekethe these creatures more than this, runnethe from his end for the which he
came hither.

By this now may a careful. Christian take some scantelinge of his own
estate with God, and make a conjecture whether he be in the right way or no
For yff he attend only or principallye to this end, for which he was sent
hither, that is, to serve God, and gain heaven, if his cares, cogitations,
studies, endeavors, labors, talk, and other his actions, run upon this
matter, and that he cares no more for other creatures, as honor, riches,
learning, and the like: then they are necessary unto him for this end,
which he pretendethe. If his days and life (I say) be spent in this study
of the service of God, and procuringe his salvation in fear Phili. 2.
and tremblinge as the Appostle willethe us: then is he doubtless a most happy
and blessede man, and shall at length attain to the kyngedome which he
lookethe for.

But if he find him selff in a contrary ease, that is, not to attend to this
matter for which only he was sent hither, nor to hane in his heart and study
this service of God, and gayninge of heaven, but rather some other vanity of
the world, as promotion, wealth, pleasure, sumptuous apparel, gorgious
buyldinges, beauty, or any other thing else that partaynethe not to this end:
if he spend his time (I say) about these tryfles, having his cares and
cogitations, his talk and delight, more in these, then about the other great
business of gayninge heaven for which he was sent: Then is he in a perilouse
course, leadinge directly to perdition, except he alter and change the same.
For most certain it is, that who soever shall not attend unto the service he
came for, shall never attain to the reward promised to that service.

And because the most part of the world not only of infidels, but also of
Christians, do amiss in this point, and do not attend to this thing for
which they were only created and sent hither. Hence it is that Christ and his
holy saints have always spoken so Luc. 13. 23.
hardly of the small number that shall be saved even among Christians, and have
uttered some speeches which seem very rigorous to flesh and blood, and
scarce true, albe it they must be fulfilled as, that it is easier for a Mat.
19.
camel to go thorovvghe a needles eye then for a Mar. 10.
rich man to enter into heaven. The reason of which saying and many more
standethe in this, that a rich man or worldlinge atte^dinge to heap riches,
can not attend to do that which he came for into this world, and
consequenetly never attain heaven, except God work a miracle, and so cause
him to contemn his riches, and to use the^ only to the service of God as some
times he does: and we have a rare example in the gospel zacheus, who being
a very rich Luc. 19.
man, presently upon the enteringe of Christ into his house, and much more
into his heart, gave half his goods unto the poor, and whom so ever he hadd
iniuried, to him he made four times so much restitutio^. And so entered into
heaven which otherwise he hadd not done.

But hereby now may be seen the lamentable The lamentable state of men of the
world.
state of many a thowsande Christians in the world, which are so farrof from
bestowinge winge there hole time and travel in the service of God and the
gayninge of heaven, as they never almost think of the same, or if they do,
it is with very little care or atte^tio^. Good Lord, how many men and women
be there in the world which bearinge the name of Christians, scarce spend one
hour of four and twenty in the service of God? how many do beat their
brains about wordly matters, and how few are troubled with this care? how
many find time to eat, drink, sleep, disporte, deck and painte the^ selves
out to the world, and yet have no time to bestow in this greatest business of
all other? how many spend over whole days, weeks, months, and years, in
hauking, hunting, and other pastymes, without any care or earnest cogitation of
these things? Other in ambition and promotio^ without making accounte or
regrade of the matter? what shall be come of these people? what will they say at
the day of judgment? what excuse will they have!

If the marchand factour (which I spoke A comparison.
of before) after many years spent beyond the seas, returninge home to geeue
accountes to his master, should yeald a reconninge of so much time spent in
singinge, so much in daunsinge so much in courtinge, and the like: who would
not laughe at his accountes? but being further asked by his master, what time
he bestowed on his merchandise which he sent him for: if he should answer,
none at all, nor that he ever thought or studied upon that matter: who would
not think him worthy of all shame and punishemene? and surelve with much
more shame and confusion shall they stand at the day of judgment, who
being placed here to so great a business, as is the service of almighty God
and the gayninge of his eternal kingdom of heaven, have not withsta^dinge
neglected the same, bestowinge their studdies labors and cogitations in the
vain trifles of this world, which is as much from the purpose, as if men
being placed in a course to run at a golden game of infinite price, (as we
are all placed to run at heaven 1. Cor. 9
as, S. Paul says) they should leave their mark and (...) step a side
after flies or feathers in the air, and some other stand still gatheringe up
the dunge of the ground: and how were these men worthy (trow you) to receive
so great arewarde as was proposed to them?

Wherefore (dear Christian) if thou be wise, consider thy case while thou
haste Gal. 6.
time. Follow the Apostles counsel: examine thy own work and ways, and
deceive not thy self. Yet thowe maiste reform thy self, because the day
time of life yet remains. The dreadful night of death Ioh. 9.
will overtake thee shortly, when there will be no more time of reformation.
What will all thy labor and toil in procuring of worldly, wealth, profitt
or comfort thee, at that hour, when it shall be said to thee, as Christ said
to thy like in the gospel, when he was now come to the topp of his worldly
felicity: thou fool this night shall they take Luc. 1.
away thy soul, and then who shall have the things which thou haste
gotten together? Believe me (dear brother) for I tell the no vntrewth, one
hour bestowed in the service of God, will more comfort the at that time, than
a hundrede years bestowed in aduauncinge thy self and thy family in the
world. And if thou might feel now the case, wherein thy poor heart shall be
then, for omitting of this thing, which it should most have thought upon:
thou would take from thy sleep, and from thy meat, alsoo, to recompense
thy negligence for the time past. The difference betwyxt a wise man and a fool
is this, that the one prouidethe for a mischeef while time serves: but the
other when it is to late.

Resolve thy self therefore good Christian while thou have time. Resolve thy
self without delay, to take in hand presentlye and to apply for the time to
come, the great and weyghtie business for which thou wast sent hither, which
only in deed is wayghtie and of importance, and all other are mere tryfles
and vanities, but only so far furthe as they concern this. Believe not the
world, which for runninge a wrie in this point, is detested by thy Savior,
and every friend thereof, pronounced an enemy to him by his Appostle. Say at
lenght unto thy Savior, Ioh. 7. 8. 12.
I do confess unto the o Lord, I do confess and can not deny, that I have
not 1. Ioh. 2.
hitherto attended to the thing for which I was created, redeemed, and placed
here by thee: I do see my error, I can not dissemble my grievous fault, and I
do thancke the ten thowsande times, that thou have geeuen me the grace to see
it whiles I may yet amend it: which by thy holy grace I mean to do and
wthout delay to alter my course, beseechinge thy divine majesty that as thou
have geeuen me this light of understanding to see my danger and this good
motion to reform the same: So thou wilt continue toward me thy blessed
assistance, for performance of the same, to thy honor and my souls
health.Amen.

Of the end of man more in particular, and of two special things required
at his hands in this life.

CHAP. IIII.
Having spoken of the end of man in general, in the former chapter, and
shevved that it is to serve God in this life, and thereby to gain heaven in the
next: it semethe convenient (for that the matter is of great and singular
importance) to treat some what more in particular, vvherin this service of
God do the consist, that thereby a Christian may judge of him self, whether he
perform the same or no, and co^sequentlye whether he do the thing for which
he was sent into this world.

First therefore it is to be understood, that the whole service which God
requires at a Christian man's hands in this life, Two par tesof our end in
this life.
consists in two things. The one to fly evil, and the other to do good And
albeit these two things were required of us also before our redemption by
Christ, as appears by David whose commandment is general: declyne from
evil and do good; and by Esaias the Psalm. 36.
prophet whose words are: leave to do peruerslie, Esa. 1.
and learn to do well: yet much more particulerlye and with far greater
reason are they demauuded at the hands of Christian people, who by the death
and passion of their redemer, do receive grace and force to be able to
perform these two things, which the old law did not give, albeit it
commanded the same.

But now we being redeemed by Romans 6.
Christ, and receauinge from him not only the renevvinge of the same
commandment, for the performance of these two things, but also force and
ability by his grace, whereby we are made able to do the same: we remain
more bound thereto in reason and dewtie tha^ before, for that this was the
fruit and effect of Christ his holy passion, as. S. Peter says, that we
being dead to sime, 1. Pet. 2.
should live to justice. Or as S. Paul more plainelye declares the same when
he says, the Tit. 2.
grace of God our Saueour has appeared to all men, instructinge us to this
end, that we renouncinge all wickedness and seculer (...), should live soberlye,
iustlye, and godly, in this world. Two (...) tes of the service of God.


These two things then are the service of God, for which we were sent into
this world: the one, to resist sin, the other to follow good works. In
respect of the first Job. 7. 2 Cor. 10 1. Tim. 1.
we are called soldiers, and our life a warfare upon the earth. For that as
soldiers do always lie in wait to resist their enemies: 2. Tim. 2
so ought we to resist sin, and the temptations Pphil. 1.
thereof. And in respect of the second, Heb. 10. and (...).
we are called laborers, sowers, workmen, marchantes, bankers, stewardes,
farmers, and Math. 9 10. 20.
the like, for that as these men attend diligently Luc. 10. 1. Tim. 5.
to their gain and increace of substance Psalm. 125
in this life, so should we to good works, for the increase of our treasure in
the world Mat. 13.
to come.

These two things are the points which a Christian man should meditate
upon: the exercises vvherin he should be occupied: the two legs vvhervppon
he must walk toward his country: the two arms vvhervvith he must
apprehende and lay hold on gods eternal kingdom: and finally the two
vvynges vvherby he must fly and mount to heaven. And whosoever wants any
one of these, though he had the other: yet can he not ascend to heaven no more,
than a bird can fly lackinge one of her vvynges. I say, that nether
innocence is sufficient with out good works: nor good works any thing
available, where innoce^cie from sin is not: the latter is evident by the
people of Israel, whose sacrifices, oblatios, prayers and other good works
commended and commanded by God him self, were often times abominable to
God: for that the doers thereof lived in sin and wickedness, as at large the
prophet Esaye declares: the former also is Esa. 1.
made apparent by the parable of the foolish virgins, who albeit they were
innocent Mat. 25.
from sin, yet because they lacked the oil of good works, they were shutt
ovvt of doors. And at the last day of judgment Luc. 13.
Christ shall say to the damned, because you Mat. 25.
clothed me not, fed me not, and did not other deeds of charity appointed to
your vocation: therefore go you to everlasting fire et ce. Both these points
then are necessary to a Christian for his salvation: and so necessary, as one
without the other avails not, as I have said. And tovvchinge the first,
which is resistinge of sin we are willed to do it How we ought to
resist sin.
(by S. Paul) even unto death and with the last of our blood (if it were
need) and in diverse other places of scripture, the holy ghost wills us
most diligently to prepare our Heb. 12.
selves, to resist the devil manfullye, which Ephesians. 5.
tempts us to sin: and this resista^ce ought Iaco. 4. 1. Pet. 5.
to be made in such perfect manner, as we yealde not vvittinglye and
willingly to any fyn what soever, either in work, word, or consent of
heart: in so much, that who so ever snould geeue secret consent of mind to
the performance of a sin if he had time, Math. 5.
place, and abilytie thereunto: is condemned by the holy scripture in that
sin, even as Exodus 12.
if he had committed the same now in act. Deuteronomy. 5.
And touching the second, which is good works, we are willed to do
them abundantly, How we must do good voorkes.
diligently, ioyfullye, and ineessantlie, for so says the scripture. VVhas
soever thy hand can do, do it (...). And again: walk vvorthie of God,
fructyfiynge in every good Eccle. 9
work: And again S. Paul says Let us do Eccle. 1.
good works unto all men. and again in the Gal. 6.
very same place, let us never leave of to do good, for the time will come
when we shall reap (...) end. And in an other place he wills us to be
stable, immovable, and abundant in good vvorckes knovvinge that our labor
shall not be 1. Cor. 15
unprofitable,

By this it may be seen (dear brother) A description of a Christian.
what a perfect creature, is a good Christian, that is, as S. Paul describes
him, the handvvorke of God and creature of Christ to good works, vvherin he
has prepared that he should Ephe. 2.
vvalcke. It appears (I say) what an exact life the true life of a
Christian is: which is a continual resistance of all sin, both in thought,
word and deed, and a performance or exercise of all good works, that
possibly he can devise to do. What an Angelical life is this? nay more than
Angelical, for that Angels being now placed in their glory, have neither
temptation of sin to resist, nor can do any meritorious work as we may.

If Christians did live according to this The perfection of a Christian life.
their devvtie, that is, in doing all good that they might, and never
consentinge to evil: what needed there almost any temporal laws? what a
goodlye common wealth were Christianity? who will now marvel of the
happy days of our forefathers, vvherin such simplicity, such truth, such
conscience, such alms deeds, such sincerity, such virtue, such religion and
devotion, is reported to have been: the cause was, for that they studied upon
these two points of a Christian man's devvtie, and labored for the performance
thereof, every man as God gave him (...). And we, because we look not into
these matters, are become as loose and wicked in life, as ever the gentiles or
infidels were. And yet is God the same God still, and will accept at our
hands, no other accounte, than he did of our forefathers, for the perfourmance
of these two parts of ourdevvtie toward him. What than shall become of us,
which do not live in any part as they did? And to enter yet some what more
into the particular consideration of these things, who is there now a days
amongst common Christians, (for no dout there be in secrette, many servants
of God which do it) but of those which bear the name of Christians and most
sturr abroad in the world, who is there (I say) that takes any pain about
the first point, that is, towchinge the resistinge of the concupiscence of
sin? which concupiscence or natural motion to sin, remayninge in us, as a
remnant of our natural malady in punishment of the sin of our first father
Adam, is left in us now after baptism, ad agonem, that is, to strive withal,
Aug. lib. 2 co^c. Julian and li. 1. de peccat. mer. ca vl. 10.
and to resist, and by resistinge, to merit increase of glory in heaven. But
alas how many there which do resist (as they should) these evil motions of
concupiscence? who Cassian. 1. 5 c. 12. and deinceps
does ever examine his conscience of the same? who does not yield commonly
consent of heart, to every motion that comes with pleasure, of covetousness,
of anger, of revenge, of pride, of ambition, and above all, of lechery, and
other filthye sins of the flesh: knowinge notwithstanding (by the
protestation of our Saueour Christ him self) that every such consent of
heart, is as much in substance of sin, as the act. Mat. 5.
and makes the soul guilty of eternal damnation?

It is a wounderfull matter to consider, and able to make a man astonnyed to
think, what great care, sear, diligence and labor, good men in old times
did take about this matter of resistinge sin, and how little we take now. Job
the iusl, having less Job. 9.
cause to fear than we, says of him self: I did fear all my doings (o
lord) consideringe that thou do not pardon such as offend the. But the
good king David which had now tasted gods heavy hand for consentinge to
sin before, she wethe him self yet more careful and fearful in the
matter, when he says: I did meditate in the night time together Psalm. 76.
with my heart, and it was my whole exercise, and I did (...) or svveepe
mine own spirit withdraw in me: what a diligent examination of his conscience,
thoughts and cogitations was this in a king? and all this was for the
auoidinge and resistinge of sin: as also it was in S. Paul, woe examined
his conscience so narrowly, and resisted all temptations with such diligence
and attention, as he could pronounce of him self, that to his knoledge 1. Cor.
4
he was guyltie of nothing, albeit he does confess in an other place, that he
had most vile and strong temptations of the flesh laid upon him of the
devil, by Gods permission: 2. Co. 12
marye yet by the grace of Christ he resisted and overcame all. Forth better
performance whereof it is liklye that he used also these external helps and
remedies of much fasting, long prayinge, painful watchinge, 2. Cor. 6 and
11.
and severe chastisinge of his body, whereof he makes mention in his
writings. 1. Tim. 1 1. Cor. 9
As also all godly men by his example, have used the like helps sense, for
the better resistinge of sinful temptations when need required, I mean tbe
helps of abstinence, Remedies used by the ancient fathers for resistinge of
sin.
fasting, watchinge, prayer, chastisinge of the body by heareclothe, lyinge
on the grownde, beatinge, and the like. VVherof I could here recite great
store of examples out of the holy fathers.

But he which would read many heaped together in every one of these particular
10. Cassian. de instit. renunciant and coliat. patrum.
points, let him read the worckes of John Cassian the Eremite, which wrote
almost twelve hundred years past, of the doings of mounkes and other the best
Christians in his days: or let him read Marcus Marulus examples M. Marulus de
factis dictis que memorabili bus.
of the lives of the ancient fathers gathered: out of this Cassian, S. Iherome
and others: where he shall read many things that will make him wounder, and
afeard also (if he be not past fear) to see what extreme pain and diligence
these first Christians took, in watchinge every little fleight of the devil,
and in resistinge every little temptation or cogitatio^ of sin, whereas we
never think of the matter, nor make accounte either of cogitation, consent of
heart, word or work, but do yield to all what soever our concupisce^ce
moves us unto, do swallow down every hook laid us by the devil, and
most greedelye do devour every poysened pleasant bayte, which is offered by
the enimye for the destruction of our sovvles, and thus much about resistinge
of sin. How much we fail in doing good works.


But now touching the second point, which is continual exercisinge our
selves in good works, it is evident in it self, that we utterly fail (for
the most part of us) in the same. I have shevved before how we are in
scripture commanded, to do them, without ceassinge, and most diligently
vvhiles we have time of day to do them in, for as Christ says, the night
Io. 6.
will come when no man can work any more. I might also show how our
forefathers the saints of God, were most diligent and careful in doing
good works in their days, even as the husbandman is careful to cast seed
into the grovvnde vvhyles fair vveather lasts, and the marcha^te to lay out
his monye whiles the good markytt endures: Gal. 6.
they knew the time would not last longo, Phili. 2.
which they had to work heir own salvation in: and therefore they bestirred
the^ selves whiles oprortunitie served: they never ceased but came from on good
work to an other, well knowing what they did, and what gain they hoped for.

If there were nothing else to prove their wounderfull care and diligence
herein: yet the infinite monumentes of their alms deeds, yet extant to the
world, are sufficient testimonies of the same: to wit, the infinite churches
builded and endowed with great and abundant maintenance, for the ministers of
the same: so many bishopprickes, deaneryes, archdeaconryes, Canonryes,
prebendes, chauntryes, and the like: So many hospitalles and houses of
orphans and poor people: so many schools, Colleges, universities: so many
bridges, high ways, and public commodities, so many Abbayes, Nunries,
Priaries, hermitages, and the like, for the se^ruice of God, and repose of
holy people, which would leave the world and betake them selves only to the
conte^plation of heavenly things. Which charitable deeds all (and a thou
sand more both private and public, secret and open, which I can not
report) came out of the purses of our good auncesters: (...) oftentimes not
only gave of their abundance, but also saved from their own mouths and
plucked from their own children and posterity, and bestowed it upon deeds
of charitis for behoof of their sovvels. VVheras we are so farof from geeuinge
away our necessaries, as we will not bestow our very superfluities, but will
imploye the^ rather, upon hawks and dogs, and other brute beasts, and some
times also upon much viler uses, then to the relief of our poor brethren, and
to the ease of our sowles in the life to come.

Alas (dear brother) to what a careless and senseles estate are we come to
wchinge our own salvation and damnation? S. Paul cries out unto us, work
your own salvation Phili. 2.
with fear and tremblinge, And yet no man for that makes accounte thereof. S.
Peter warns us grauelye and ernestlye: brethren take you great care to make
your vocation and election 2. Pet. 1.
suer by good works, and yet who almost will think upon them? Christ him
self thundereth in these words: And I tell you make your selves Luc. 16.
frindes, (in this voorld) of unjust ma^mon, that when you fainte they may
receaise you into eternal tabernacles. That is, by your riches of this
world, purchase unto you the prayers of good people, that by their
intercession, you may enjoy life everlasting. And yet for all that, we are
not moved herevvithall: so dead we are and lumpyshe to all goodness.

If God did exhort us to good deeds for his own commodity, or for any gain
that he is to take thereby: yet in reason we ought to pleasure him therein,
saying we have received all from his only liberality before. But selnge he
asks it at our hands for no need of his own, but only for our gain, and
to pay us home again with usury: it is more reason we should harken unto him.
If a common honest man upon earth should inuit us to do a thing, promisinge
us of his honesty a sufficient reward, we would believe him: but God
making infinite promises unto us in scripture of eternal reward for our
well doing, as that we shall eat Luc. 22.
with him, drink with him, reign with Mat. 13.
him, possess heaven with him, and the like, Romans 8.
can not move us notwithstanding to works Apo. 22.
of charity. Marie because our forefathers were moved here vvithall, as
having hearts of softer metal than ours are of: therefore they brought forth
such abundant fruit as I have shevved.

Of all this then that I have said, the godly Christian may gather, first,
the lamentable estate of the world at this day, when amongst the small
number of those which bear the name of Christians, so many are like to
perish, for not perfourminge of these two principal points of their
vocation. Secondly he may gather the cause of the infinite difference of
reward for good and The different state of a good and eutl man at the day of
death.
evil in the life to come, which some men will seem to meruaille at: but
in deed is most just and reasonable, consideringe the great diversity of
life in good and evil men vvhiles they are in this world. For the good man
does not only live void of mortal syn: but also by resistinge the same,
daily and hovverlye increases his merit. The loose man, by yeldinge consent
to his concupiscence, do the not only lose all merit, but also (...) sin
upon sin without number. The good man, besides auoydinge syn, does insinite
good vvorckes, at the least wise in desire and heart, where greater ability
serves not. But the wicked man, neither in heart or deed does any good at
all, but rather seeks in place thereof to do hurt. the good man imployeth
all his mind, heart, words, and hands, to the service of God and of his
servants for his sake. But the wicked man bends all his force and powers
(...) of body and mind, to the service of vanities, the world, and his
flesh: in so much, that as the good man increases hovverlye in merit, to
which is due increase of grace and glory in heaven: so the evil from time to
time, in thought, word or deed, or in all at once, heapeth up sin and
damnation upon him self, to which is due vengeance, and increase, of
torments in hell: and in this contrary course they pass over their lives for
twenty, thirty, or forty years, and so come to dye.

And is it not reason now, that saying there is so great diversity in their
estates: there should be as great or more diversity also in their reward?
especially saying God is a great God, and revvardeth small things with
great wages, either of everlasting glory, or everlasting pain. Thirdlye
and lastly the diligent and careful Christian may gather of this, what
great cause he has to put in practyse the godly counsel of S. Paul which
is, that every man should Gal. 6.
prove and examine his own work and so be able to judge of him self, in
what case he stands. And if upon this examination, he find him self a
vvrye: to thank God of so gteate a benifite, as is the reueilinge of his
danger, vvhyles yet there is time and place to make amends for all. No doubt
many perish daily by gods justice in their own gross ignorance, who if
they had received this special favor, as to see the pit before they fell
in:happylye they vvoulde have escaped the same. Use gods mercy to thy gain
then (gentle brother) and not to thy further damnation. If thou see by this
examination that hitherto thou have not led a true Christian life: resolve
thy self to begin now, and cast not away vvilfullye that precious soul
of thine, which Christ has bought so dearlye, and which he is most ready
to save and endevv with grace and eternal glory, if thou would yield
the same into his hands, and be content to direct thy life according to his
most holy, easy, and svveete commandments.

Of the severe accounpte that we must yield to God of the matters aforesayed.

CHAP. V.
Amongst other points of a A principal point of vvysedome in a servant.
prudent servant, this is to be esteemed one principal, to consider in every
thing committed to his charge, what accounpte shall be demanded tovvchinge the
same: also what manner of man his master is: whether facile, or rigorous:
mylde, or stern: careless or exquisite in his accountes. Also whether he be of
ability to punish him at his pleasure, findinge him faulty: and (...), how
he has dealt with other before in like matters. For according to these
circumstances (if he be wise) he will govern him self and use more or less
diligence in the charge committed.

The like vvisdome vvoulde I counsel A necessary co^ sideratio^
a Christian to use, in the matters before recited: to wit, tovvchinge our
end for which god sent us hither, and the two principal points thereof,
enjoined for our exercise in this life: to consider (I say) what accounto we
shall be demanded for the same: in what manner: by whom: with what
severity: with what danger of punisament, if we be found negligent and
recheles therein.

For better understanding vvherof, it is to be noted, first, with what order
and with what ceremonies and circumstances God gave us this charge, or rather
made and proclaimed this law of our behaueoure and service toward him. For
albeit he gave the same commandment to Adam in his first creation, and
imprinted it afterward by nature into the hearts of each man before it was
written (as S. Paul testifyeth.) yet for more Romans 2.
plain declarations sake, and to convince us the more of our wickedness, (as
the same Romans 7.
Apostle notes.) he published the same law Gal. 3.
in written tables, upon the mount Synay: Marie withdraw such terror, and
other circumstances of Majesty, (as also S. Paul Heb. 12.
notes to the Hebrevvs) as may greatly (...) the breakers thereof. Let any
man read the nynetenthe chapter of Exodus, and there Exo. 19.
he shall see, what a preparation there was for the publishinge of this
law. First, God The dreadful publication of the law.
caileth Moses up to the hill, and there reckons up all the benefits
which he ever had bestovved upon the people of Israel: and promises them
many more, if they would keep the law which he was then to give them.
Moses went to the people, and returned aunsvvere again, that they would
keep it. Then caused God the people to be sanctified against the third day,
to wash all their garments, and that no man should company with his
wife: also to be charged that none upon pain of death should presume to
mount up to the hill but Moses alone, and that who soever should dare but
to touch the hill, should presently be stoned to death. When the third day
was come, the Angels (as S. Steven interprets it) were ready Act. 7.
there to promulgate the law. The tro^pettes sounded mightilye in the air:
great thunder brake ovvt from the sky, with fearse lightninges, horrible
clovvdes, thick mystes, and terrible smoke rysinge from the mountain. And in
the midst of all this Majesty, and dreadful terror, God spoke in the
hearing of all: I am thy Lord God which Exo. 20.
have brought the out of the land of Egypt, me Deuteronomy. 5.
only shall thou serve: and the rest which follows, containinge a perfect
description of our devvtie in this life, co^monlye called the ten
commandments of God.

All which terror and majesty, S. Paul him self as I have said, applies
to this Heb. 12.
meaning, that we should greatly tremble to break this law, delivered us
with such circumstances of dread and fear: signifiyinge also hereby, that the
exaction of this law, must needs be with greater terror at the day of
judgment, saying that the publication thereof, was with such astonishment and
dread. For so we see alvvaies great princes laws to be executed upon the
offenders with much more terror than they were proclaimed. And this may be a
forcible reason to move a Christian to look unto his devvtie

Secondlye if we consider the sharp God spunishements.
execution used by God upon offenders of this law, both before it was
written and since: we shall find great cause of fear also, as the
vvounderfull punisheme^t upon Genesis 3.
Adam and so many millions of people besides, for his one fault: the
drovvningo of all Genesis 7.
the world together: the burninge of Sodom Genesis 19.
and Gomorra with brimstone: the reprobation 1. Re. 18.
of Saul: the extreme chastisement 2. Re. 12
of David: and the like. Which all being done by God with such rigor for
less and fewer sins than ours are, and also upon them whom he had more
cause to spare than he has to tollerace with us: may be admonishmentes what
we must look for at gods hands, for breach of this law of seruinge him in
this lyse.

Thirdlye if we cousider the speeches Christ's speches.
and behauyour of our lord and master Christ in this matter: we shall have
yet more occasion to doubt cur own case: who albeyt he came now to redeem
us and to pardone all, in all mildenes, humility, clemency and mercy: yet in
this point of our accounte he never showed but austeritie and great rigor,
not only in words and familiar speech with his Apostles, but also in
examples and parables to this purpose. for so in one parable he damneth that
poor servant to hell, (where should be weepinge and gnasshinge of teeth)
only for that he had not Mat. 25.
augmented his talent delivered him. And Christ confesses there of him self,
that he is a hard man, reapinge, where he sowed not, and gathering where he
cast not abroad: expectinge also vsurye at our hands, for the talentes lent
us, and not accepting only his Mat. 24.
own again. And consequently threatening much more rigor to them which shall
mispende his talentes, as the most of us do. Again he damneth the servant
whom he found a sleep: he damned the poor man which was compelled to come
into the weddinge, Mat. 22.
only for that he came without a wedding garment: he damned the five foolish
virgynes, for that they had not their Mat. 25.
oil with them, and were not ready Iumpe at the very hour to go in with
him, and would not know them when they came after: and finally he promises to
damn all those (without exception) which shall work Matt. 13.
iniquity, as S. Matthew restisieth.

Moreover being asked by a certain prince on a time how he might be (...)
woold geeue him no other hope, though he were a prince, but only this, if
thou vvilt enter into life, keep the commandments of God. Luc. 18.
And talkinge with his Disciples at an other Mat. 19.
time of the same matter, he geeueth them no other comfort but this: if ye love
me keep my commandments. As who should say, if you Iho. 14.
were never so much my Disciples, and if ye break my commandments: there is
no more love nor fre^dshippe betwixt us. And S. John (which best of all other
knew his meaning herein) expounds it in this sense, when he says: if a man
(says he) knovveth God, and Ioh. 2.
yet keeps not his commandments, he is a liar, and the truth is not in
him. And more yet (to take away all hope or expectation from his disciples of
any other way of salvation, than by keepinge his commandments) he says in
an other place, that he came not to Math. 5.
take away the law but to fulfill it, and straight way he infers upon
the same, who soever therefore shall break one of the least of these
commandments, shall be called the least in the kingdom of heaven. For which
cause, at his departure out of the world, the very last words that he spoke
to his Apostles were these: that they should teach men to Mat. 28.
observe all his commandments what soever.

By which appears the severe meaning that Christ had to wchinge our accounte
for the keepinge of his commandments in this life. The which also may be
gathered by that being asked whether the number Luc. 13.
were small of them that should be saved: he answers yea, and counsaileth
men to strive to go into the strait gate: for that many should be shut out
yea even of them, which had eaten and (...) whith him, and had enjoyed the
corporal presence of his blessed body, but had not lived as he commanded
them. In which case he signifies that no respect or frindsnippe must take
place with him at the last day. For which cause he said to the man whom he
had healed at the fishepools side in Jerusalem, behold now thou art hole,
seethovv sin no Job. 5.
more, least worse happen to the than before. And generallye he warns us in
S. Mathews Matt. 5.
gospel, that we agree with our adversaries, and make our accountes straight
in this life, otherwise we shall pay the uttermost fardinge in the life to
come. And yet more seuerelye he says in an other place: that we Mat. 12.
shall render account at the day of judgment for every idle word which
we have spoken.

Which day of judgment he vvarneth us of before, and foretells the rigor
and danger in sundry places of holy scripture to the end we should prevent
the same, and so direct our lives while we have time in this world: as we
may present our selves at that day without fear and danger, or rather with
great joy and comfort when so many thowsands of vvhicked people shall
appear there, to their eternal confusion.

And because there is nothing which so Of the day of judgment.
fitlye shows the severity of Christ in taking our accountc at the last
day, as the order and manner of this judgment described most dilige^tlie by
the holy scripture it self: it shall make much for our purpose, to consider
the same. And first of all, it is to be noted, Two iud gements after death.
that there be two judgments appointed after death: the one called
particular, whereby each man presently upon his departure from this world,
receaueth particular sentence, either of punishment or of glory, according
Ioh. 5.
to his deeds in this life (as Christ's Mat. 25. and 16.
own words are) whereof we have examples in Lazarus and the rich gloutton,
who were presently carried, the one to pain, the other to rest, as S. Luke
testifies. And to Luc. 16.
doubt of this, were obstinacy, as S. Austen affirms. The other judgment is
called general, Lib. 2. de anima. chap. 4.
for that it shall be of all men together in the end of the world, where shall a
final sentence be pronounced, (either of reward, or punishment) upon all men
that ever lived, according to the works which they have done, good or bad, in
this life: and afterward never more question be made of alteringe 2. Cor. 5.
their estate: that is, of easinge the pain of the one or endinge the glory
of the other.

Now as towchinge the first of these two The particular oudgement. Aug. tra.
49. In 10.
judgments, albeit the holy ancient fathers, especially S. Austen, do
gather and consider diverse particulers of great severity and fear, as the
passage of our soul from the body to the tribunal seat of God, under the
custody both of good and evil Angels: the fear she has of them: the sodeine
straungenes of the place where she is: the terror of gods presence, the strayte
examination she must abide, and the like) yet for that the most of these
things are to be considered also in the second indgeme^t which is general: I
will pass over to the same: notinge only certain reasons yealded by the
holy fathers, why God after the first judgment, Why there be two iud gements
appointed.
(wherein he had assigned to each man according to his deserts in particular)
would appoint moreover this second general judgment VVherof the first is, for
that the body of man rysinge from his sepulcher, might be 1
partaker of the eternal punishment or glory of the soul, even as it has
been partaker with the same, either in virtue or vice in this life. The second
is. that as Christ was 2
dishonored and put to confusion here in the world publikelye: so much more
he might show his majesty and power, at that day in the sight of all
creatures, and especially of his enimyes.

The third is, that both the wicked and good might receive their reward
openly, 3
to more confusion and heart grief of the one, and triumph of the other,
who commonly in this world have been ouerborne by the wicked. The fourth
is, for that evil men 4
when they dye, do not co^monlie carry with them all their demerite and
evil: for that they leave behind them either their evil Consider vvellthis
reason good reader.
example, or their children and familiars corrupted by them, or else books and
means which may in time corrupt other. All which being not yet done, but
coming to pass after their death, they can not so conveniently receive
their judgment for the same presently: but as the evil falls out: so their
pains are to be increased. The like may be said of the good. So that (for
examples sake) S. Paul's glory is increased daily, and shall be unto the
worlds end, by reason of them that daily profit by his writings and
example: and the pains of the wicked are for the like reason dailye
augmented. But at the last day of judgment, shall be an end of all meryt and
demerit, and then it shall be seen euidentlye what each man has deserved.

Te speak then of this second judgment, Of the general day of judgment
Eccl. 12.
general and common for all the world, vvherin as the scripture says, God
shall bring into judgment every error which has been committed: there are
diverse circunstances to be considered, and diverse men do set down the same
diversely, but in mine opinion, no better, playner, or more effectual
declaration can be made thereof, than the very scricture makes it self,
settinge furthe unto us in most signifieant words, all the manner, order, and
circunstances, with the preparation thereunto as follovveth.

At that day, there shall be signs in the Luc. 21.
Sun and in the moon, and in the stars: Mat. 24.
the Sun shall be darckened: the moon shall Marc. 13
geeue no light: the stars shall fall from the skies: and all the powers of
heaven shall be moved: the firmament shall leave his situation with a great
violence: the elements shall be dissolved with heat: and the earth with all
that is in it shall be consumed with fire: the earth also snall move of her
place, and shall fly like a little dear or sheep. The pressures of nations
upon the earth shall be great, by reason of the confusion of the noise of Esa.
13.
the sea and fluddes, and men shall wither a way for fear and expectation
of these things, that then shall come upon the whole world. Then shall the
sign of the Son of man appear in the sky, and then shall all the tribes of
the earth mourn and vvayle: and they shall see the son of man coming in
the clovvdes of heaven, with much power and glory, great authority and
majesty. And 1. Cor. 13
then in a moment in the twynklynge of an eye, he shall send his Angels with a
trumpet and with a great cry at midnight, and they Mat. 25.
shall gather together his elect, from the four parts of the world, from
heaven to earth. All must be presented before the tribunal 2. Cor. 5.
of Christ: who will bring to light those things which were hidden in
darcknes, and 1. Co4r.
will make manifest the thoughts of men's hearts: and what soever has been
spoken in chambers in the ear, shall be preached upon Lu. (...).
the house top: Accounte shall be asked of Psalm. 74.
eueryeydle word, and he shall judge our very righteousness it self. Then
shall the just stando in great constancy, against those which have afflicted
them in this life. And the wicked seeinge that, shlbe trovvbled Sap. 5.
with a horrible fear, and shall say to the Luc. 23.
hills, fall upon us, and hyde us from the face Apoc. 6.
of him that sits upon the throne, and from the anger of the lamb, for
that the great day of wrath is come. Then shall Christ separate the sheep
from the goats, and shall put the sheep on his right hand, Mat. 25.
and the goats on the left, and shall say to those on the right hand, come ye
blessed of my father, possess the kindome prepared for you, from the
beginning of the world: I was Humgry, and you gave me to eat: I was a
stranger, and you gave me harbor: I was naked, and you clothed me. I was
sick, and you visited me: I was in prison, and you came to me. Then shall the
just say, o lord when have we done, these tainges for the? and the king
shall answer: trewlye when you did them to the least of my brothers, you did
it to me. Then shall he say to them on his left hand: depart from me (you
accursed) into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels: for I
was Hungry, and you fed me not: I was a stranger, and you harbored me not:
I was naked, and you clothed me not: I was sick and in prison, and you
visited me not. Then shall they say, o lord, when have we seen thee
hungry, or thirstio, or a stranger, or naked or sick, or in prison, and did
not minister unto the? and he shall answer, verylye I tell you: seeinge you
have not done it to one of these lesser, you have not done it to me. And then
these men shall go into eternal punishment, and the just into life
everlasting.



Tell me what a dreadful preparation is here laid down how: many
circumstances of fear and horror? it shall be (says the scripture) at
midnight when commonly men are a sleep: it shall be with hydeous noise of
trumpetts, sound of waters, motion of all the elements. What a night will
that be trowest thou, to see the earth shake, the hills and dales moved
from their places, the moon darckened, the stars fall down from heaven, the
whole element shiuered in pieces; and all the world in a flaminge fire?

Saint John savve it in vision, and was Apoc. 6.
maruailous a feared. I saw (faith he) when the lamb had opened one of the
seven seals: and I hard one of the four beasts say (like the voice of a
thunder) come and see, and I saw: and behold a white horse, and one that
satte upon him had a bow, and he went out to conquer. Then went there furthe
a black horse. and he that sat upon him had a pair of bala^ces in his hand:
then went there forth a pale horse, and he that satte upon him was named
death: and hell followed behind him: and he had authority geeuen him to kill
by sword, by death, and by beasts of the earth. The earth did snake, the
sun grew black like a sack: the moon like blood: the stars fell from
heaven: the sky doubled it self like a folded book: every hill and Island
was moved from his place: the kings of the earth and princes and tribunes, and
the the rich and stout, hid them selves in dens, and in the rocks of
hills. Then appeared there seven Angels will seven trumpettes, and each one
prepared him self to blovv his blast, at the first blast came there hayle and
fire mixed with blood. At the second blast came there a whole mountain of
burning fire into the sea, and the third part of the sea was made blood. At
the third blast fell there a great star from heaven named absinthium,
burninge like a torche and infected the ryuers and fountains. At the fourth
blast was stricken down the third part of the sun, moon, and stars: and
an egle flewe in the element cryeinge with a hydeous voice: vvoe, vvoe, woe to
all them that dvvell upon the earth. At the fyfthe blast fell a star from
heaven Apoc. 9.
which had the keye of the pytt of hell, and he opened the pit, and there
arose a smoke as from a great furnace, and there came forth (besides) certain
Locustes like scorpions, to torment them that had not the marcke of god in
their foreheades. And at these days men shall seek death and shall not find
it. And these Locustes were like barbed horses, with crowns on their heads.
Their faces like men, their hear like women, their teeth like lions: and the
noise of their wings like the noise of many chariottes running together:
their tails like scorpions, and their stinges were in their tails: their
king was an Angel of hell, named Abbadon, which signifies an utter
destroyer, At the sixth blast of the triumpet, were loosed sower angels tied
before, and then rushed forth an army of horsemen in number twenty hundred
times ten thousand, and I saw the horses, and they which satte upon them had
breastplates of fire and brymstone. The heads of these horses were as lions,
and out of their mouths came fire and smoke and brymstome, whereby they slew
the third part of men which had not repented, and their strength was in their
tails, which were like serpents. Then was there an angel which puttinge one
foot upon the fea, and an other upon the land, did swear by him that
lyuethe for ever and ever, that after the blast of the seventh trumpett there
should be no more time. And so when the Apo. 11.
seventh angel had sounded, their came great voices from heaven saying, the
kingdom of this world is made to our lord and his Christ, and he shall reign
for ever. And I heard a great voice saying to the seven Apo. 16.
angels: go and power out seven cups of gods wrath upon the earth: and so
they did. And the first brought forth cruel wounds upon men: the second
turned the sea into Read blood: the third turned the rivers and fountains
into blood: the fowrth afflicted men with fire and made them blaspheme God:
the fifthe made them eat their own tougues for sorrow: the sixth dried up the
water. And I saw three foul spirits like frogs issew out of the mouth of a
dragon. And finally the seventh cup being powered out there came a mighty
voice from the throne of God, saying, it is dispatched. And there followed
lyghtninges, and thunders, and voices, and earthquakes, such as never were,
sense men dwelt upon the ground.



Can any tongue in the world express a thing more forcybly than this matter
is expressed by the holy Apostle him self? What mortal heart can but
tremble in the midst of this unspeakable terror? is it marvel if the
very just men and the Angels them selves are said to fear it? and then (as
S. Peter reasons) if the just shall scarce be saved: where 1. Pet. 4.
shall the wicked man and sinner appear? what a dreadful day vvil it be
for the careless and loose Christian, (which has passed his time pleasantlye in
this world) when he shall see so infinite a sea of fears and miseries to
rushe upon him?

But besides all these most terrible and fearce preparations, there will be many
other matters, of no less dreadful consideration: as to see all sepulchers
open at the sound of the trumpett, and to yield forth all their dead bodies
which they have received from the The demandes at the last day.
beginning of the world: to see all men, women, and children, kings and
Queens, princes and potentates, to stand there naked in the face of all
creatures: their sins reueiled, their secret offenses laid open, done and
committed in the closettes of their palacies, and they constrained and
compelled to geeue a counpte of a thowsande matters, whereof they would disdain
to have been told in this life: as how they have spent the time: how they have
employed their wealth: what behauyour they have used toward their brethren:
how they have mortifyed their senses: how they have ruled their appetites: how
they have obeyed the inspirations of the holy ghost? and sinallye how they
used all gods gifts in this life:

Oh (dear brother) it is impossible to express, what a great treasure a good
conscience will be at this day: it will be more worth then ten thowsande
worlds. For wealth will not help: the judge will not be corrupted with monye:
no intercession of worldly frindes shall prevail for us at that day, no not
of the Angels them selves: whose glory shall be then as the prophet says, to
bind kings in fetters, and noble men in iron Psa. 149
manacles, to execute upon them the judgment prescribed, and this shall be glory
to all his saints Alas what will all those wise people do the^, that now live
in delites, and can take no pain for their salvation? what shyft will they
make in those extremities? whether will they turn them? whose help will
they crave? they shall see all things cry vengeance about them, all things
yield cause of fear and terror: but nothing to yield them any hope or
comfort. Above them shall be their judge A pitiful case.
offended with them for their wickedness: beneath them hell open, and the
cruel furnace ready boilynge to receive them: on their right hands shall be
their sins accusinge them: on their left hands the deuilles redye to execute
gods eternal sentence upon them: within them their conscience gnavvinge:
without them, their friends bevvaylinge: on every side the world burninge.
Good Lord what will the vvretched sinner do, environed with all these
miseries? how will his heart sustain these anguishes? what way will he take?
to go back is impossible: to go forward is intolerable: what the^ shall he
do, but (as Christ foretells) he shall dry up for very fear: seek death,
and death shall Mar. 24.
fly from him: cry to the hills to fall upon Apoc. 6.
him, and they refusinge to do him so much Apo. 9.
pleasure, he shall stand there as a most desperate forlorn, and miserable
caytife wretch, until he receive that dreadful and irreuocable sentence: Go
you accursed into everlasting fire. Mat. 25.


Which sentence once pronunced, consider what a doleful cry and shout will
The last sentence pronunced.
straight follow. The good reioysinge and singinge praises in the glory of
their Savior: the wicked bevvailinge, blaspheminge, and cursinge the day of
their nativity. Consider the intolerable vpbraydinge of the wicked infernal
spirits, against these miserable condemned souls, now delivered to them in
pray for ever. With how bitter scoffs and tauntes will they hale them on, to
torments. Consider the eternal separation that then must be made of fathers
and children, mothers and daughters, frindes and companions: the one to glory,
the other to confusion, without ever saying one the other again, and that
(which shall be as great a grief as any other) the son goinge to heaven
shall not pity his own father or mother goinge to hell, but shall rejoice at
the same, for that it turns to gods glory, for the execution of his
justice. What a seperatio^ (I say) shall this be? what a farewell? whose heart
would not break at that day, to make this separation, if a heart could
break at that time, and so end his pains? but that will not be lavvfull.
Where are all our delites now? all our pleasant pastimes become? our bravery
in apparel, our glisteringe in gold, our honor done to us with cappe and
knee; all our delicat fare, all our music, all our wanton daliances and
recreations we were wount to have? all our good frindes and merry (...)
panions, accustomed to laugh and disporte the time with us? where are they
become? Oh (dear brother) how sower will all the pleasures past of this world
seem at that hour? how doleful will their memory be unto us? how vain a
thing will all our dignities, our riches our possessions appear? and on the
contrary side, how joyful will that man be, that has attended in this life
to live virtuously, albeit with pain and contempt of the world? happy
creature shall he be, that ever he was borne, and no tongue, but gods, can
express his happenesse. And now to make no other conclusion of all the
conclusion.
this, but even that which Christ him self makes: let us consider how easy a
matter it is now for us (with a little pain) to avoid the danger of this
day, and for that cause it is foretold us, by our most merciful judge and
Savior, to the end we should by our diligence avoid it. For thus he
concludes after all his former threatenings: Videte Mar. 13.
vigilate etc. Look about you, vvatch and pray, for you know not when the
time shall be. But as I say to you, so I say to all, be vvatchfull. And in an
other place, having reckonede up all the particulers before recited, least
any man should doubt that all should not be fufilled: he says, heaven and
earth shall pass, but my words shall not pass. And then he adds Mat, 24.
this exhortation. Attend therefore unto your A goodly exhot tation of Christ.
selves, that your hearts be not overcome with banquettinge and dronkenns, and
with the cares of this life, and so that day come upon you suddenly. For he
shall come as a snare upon them which inhabit the earth: be you therefore
vvatchfull, and alvvayes pray, that you may be vvorthie to escape all these
things which are to come, and to stand (...) before the son of man at this
day. What a frindlye and fatherly exortation is this of Christ? who could
desire a more kind, gentle or effectual forewarninge? is there any man that
can plead ignorance hereafter? The very like conclusion gathers S. Peter
out of the premises: when he says: The day of our lord shall come as a
thief, in which the elements 2. Pet. 3.
shall be dissolved etc saying then all these things, must be dissolved: what
manner of men ought (...) to be in holy conversation and piety, expectinge and
goinge on to meet the coming of that day of our lord? etc. This meetinge
of the day of judgment (which S. Peter speaks of) is dew examination of
our estate, and speedye amendment of our life past. For so says Eccl. 18.
most notably the wise man, provide thee of a medicine before the sore come,
and examyne thy self before judgment, and so shall how find propitiation in
the sight of God. To which S. 1. Co. 11
Paul agrees when he says, if we vvoold judge our selves, we should not
be judged. But because no man enters into dew judgment of him self, and of
his own life: thereof it comes, that so few do prevent this latter
judgment: so few are watchful, and so many fall a sleep in ignorance of
their own danger. our lord geeue us grace to look better about us.

A consideration of the nature of sin, and of a sinner: for the iustifiynge
of gods rigor shevved in the chapter before.

CHAP. VI.
TO the end that no man may justly complain of the severe accounpte which God
is to take of us at the last day, or of the rigor of his judgment set down
in the chapter before: it shall not be amiss to consider in this chapter, the
cause why God does show such severity against sin and sinners: as both by
that which has been said does appear, Gods hatred to sinners.
and also by the whole course of holy scripture: where he in every place
almost denounces his extreme hatred, wrath and indignation against the same:
as where it is said of Psalm. 5.
him, that he hates all those that work iniquity. And that both the wicked
man and his wickedness, Psalm. 14.
are in hatred with him. And finally, Pro. 15.
that the whole life of sinners, their thoughts, Job. 11.
words, yea and their good actions also are Esa. 1.
abomination in his sight whiles they live Psalm. 13.
in sin. And that (which yet is more) he can Psalm. 49.
not abide nor permit the sinner to praise Eccl. 15.
him, or to name his testament with his mouth as the holy ghost testifies:
and therefore no marvel if he show such rigor to him at the last day whom
he so greatly hates and abhors in this life.

There might be many reasons alleged of this: as the breach of gods
commaundemetes: the ingratitude of a sinner in respect of his benifites, and
the like: which might justify sufficiently his indignation toward The reason
why God so hates a sinner.
him. But there is one reason above the rest, which opens the whole fountain
of the matter: and that is, the intolerable injury dome unto God in every
mortal finne committed: which in deed is such an opprobrious injury and so
dishonorable, as no mean potentate could bear the same at his subjects
hands: and much less God him self (who is the God of majesty) may abide to
have the same so often iterated against him, as commonly it is by a wicked man.

And for the understanding of this injury, we must note that every time we
co^mitt a mortal sin, there does pass thorowgh our heart (though we marcke
it anot) a certain practick discourse of our understanding, (as there does
also in every other election) whereby we lay before us, on the one side, the
profit of that sin which we are to committ, that is, the pleasure that
draws us to it: and on the other part, the offense of God, that is, the
leesinge of his frindshippe by that sin if we do it: and so having as it
were the balances there before us, and The iniu rye done to God by sin?
puttinge God in one end, and in the other the aforesaid pleasure: we stand
in the midst deliberatinge and examininge the wayght of both parts, and
finally we do make choice of the pleasure and do reject God: that is, we do
choose rather to leese the frindshipp of God, with his grace, and what soever he
is worth besides, than to lose that pleasure and delectation of sin. Now what
thing can be more horrible than this? what can be more spiteful to God, than
to prefer a most vile pleasure before his majesty? is not this worse than
that intolerable injury of the Jews, Mat. 17.
who chose Barrabas the murderer, and rejected Mar. 15.
Christ their Savior? surely, how heinous soever that sin of the Jews
were, yet in two points this does seem to exceed it: the one, in that the
Jews knew not whom they refused in their choice, as we do. The other, in
that they refused Christ but once, and we do it often, yea dailye and
howerlye, when we give confent in our hearts to mortal sin.

And is it marvel then that God deals so severely and sharplye in the
world to come with wicked men, who do use him so opprobriouslye and
contemptuouslye in this life? surely the malice of a sinner is great toward
God, and he does not only dishonor him by comtempt of his co^maun dementes,
The malice of a sinner to wards God.
and by preferringe most vile creatures before him: but also bears a secret
hatred and grudge against his majesty, and would (if it lay in his power)
pull him out of his seat, or (at the least wise) wish there were no God at
all to punish sin after this life. Let every sinner examine the botome of
his conscience in this point, whether he could not be content, there were no
immortality of the soul, no reckoninge after this life, no judge, no
punishment, no hell, and consequentlye no God, to the end he might the more
securely enjoy his pleasures?

And because God (which searches the Sap. 1.
heart and reins) seethe well this traiterous Romans 8.
affection of sinners toward him, lurkinge Psalm. 7.
wi^thin their bowels, how smothe so ever their words are: therefore he
denounces them for his enemies in the scripture, and professes open war and
hostility against Rom 5.
them. And then suppose you, what a case these Iac. 4.
unfortunate men are in, (being but seely 1, Ioh. 3.
worms of the earth) when they have such an enemy to fight againstthem, as
does make the very heavens to tremble at his look. And yet that it is so:
hear what he says, what he threatens, what he thu^dreth against them. After
he had by the mouth of Esaye the prophet repeated many sins abominable in
his sight, as the taking of bribes, Sinners enemies to God and God to them.
oppressinge of poor people, and the like He defieth the doers thereof, as his
open enymies, saying: This says the lord of hoostes, the strong lord of
hoostes of Israel: Behold I uvilbe revenged upon my enemies, and uvill
comfort my self in their destruction. And the prophet David, as he was a man
in most high favor with God, and made prceuie to his secrets above all other:
so he (more than any other) does utter this severe meaning and infinite
displeasure in God against sinners, calling them his enemies, vessels of his
wrath, and ordained to eternal ruin and destruction: and complains that the
world will not believe this point An unvvise man (says he) Psalm. 90.
will not learn this, nether uvill the fool understand it. What is this?
how sinners (after they are spronge up) and workers of iniquity (after they
have appeared to the world) do perish everlastingly. And what is the reason
of this? he answers immediately: because thy enemies (o lord), behold o
Lord thy enemies shall perish, and all those that vvorcke iniquity shall be
consumed. By this we see, that all sinners be enemies to God, and God to them,
and we see also upon what ground and reason. But yet (for the further
iustifyinge of gods severity) let us consider in what measure his hatred is
toward sin: how great: how far it proceeds: within what bounds it is
comprehended: or if it has any lymites or bonds at all, as in deed it has
not, but is infinite, that is, without measure or limitation. And (to utter the
matter as in Gods hatred in finite against sin ners.
truth it stands) if all the tongues in the world were made one tongue and
all the understandings of all creatures (I mean of angels and men) were made
one understanding. yet, could nether this tongue express nor this
understanding conceive, the great hatred of gods heart toward every mortal
sin which we committ. And the reason hereof stands in two points. First
for that God by how much more he is better than we are: by so much more he
loves goodness and hates sin, than we do. And because he is infinitely
good: therefore his love to goodness is infinite, as also his hatred to evil,
and consequentlye his rewards to them both are infinite, the one in hell, the
other in heaven.

Secondly we see by experience, that Why every syn ne deserves infinite
punisnen. e^t
how much more great and worthy the person is, against whom an offense is
committed, so much greater the offense is: as the self same blow given to a
servant and to a prince differs greatly in offense, and deseruethe different
hatred and punishment. And for that every mortal sin which we committ, is
done directlye against the person of God him self, as has been declared
before, whose dignity is infinite: therefore the offense or guylt of every such
sin is infinite, and co^seque^tly deserves infinite hatred and infinite
punishment at gods hands. Hereof follows the reason of diverse things both
said and done by God in the scriptures, and taught by divines towchinge
matter of mortal sin, which seem strange unto the wisdom Romans 8.
of the world, and in deed scarce credible: 1. Cor. 1.
as first of all, that dreadful punishment of eternal and irreuocable
damnation of so many thowsandes, yea millions of Angels created The punishment
of angels
to glory, with almost infinite perfection, and that for one only sin, once
committed, and that only in thought, as divines do hold.

Secondlye, the rigourous punishment of Adam and Eve.
of our first parents Adam and Eve and all their posterity, for eatinge of one
seely aple: for which fault besides the chastysinge of the offenders them
selves, and all the creatures of the earth for the same, and all their children
and of spring after them, both before our redemption and sense (for albeit we
are delivered from the guilte of that sin, yet temporal punishments remain
upon us for the same, as hunger thirst, cold, sickness, death, and a thousand
miseries more,) besides also the infinite men damned for the same before the
coming of Christ, by the space of four thousand years, and also since, as
infidels which are not baptized, and others: be sides this, (I say, which in
man's reason may seem severe enough) gods wrath and justice could not be
satisfied, except his own soon had come down into the world, and taken our
flesh upon him, and by his pains satisfied for the same. And when he was come
down and had in our flesh subjected him self unto his fathers justice,
albeit the love his father bare him were infinite, and every little pain that
he took for us, or at leastwise every little dropp of blood which he shed, had been sufficient for the satisfiynge of the whole offenses, for that his flesh
being united to his godhead made every such satisfactorie actio^ of his, of
infinite value and merit, and consequently of infinite satisfaction, for the
infinitnes of Adams sin: yet that God might show the greatness of his hatred
and justice against sin, he never left to lay on, upon his own blessed
dear son, until he had Esa. 53.
left no one whole piece of skin on his flesh, nor drop of blood within
his body: no not then, when he saw him sorrowful unto death, and bathed in a
sweat of blood Mat. 26.
and water, and cryinge, o father mine, if it be Mar. t4.
possible, let this cupp pass from me. And yet more Luc. 22.
pitifully after upon the cross. O my God, why have thou forsaken me.
Notwith standing Mat. 27.
all this (I say,) his, father delivered him not, Psalm. 21.
but laid on strype upon stripe, pain upon Esa. 53.
pain, torment after torment, until he had rendered up his life and soul into
his said fathers hands: which is a wounderfull and dreadful document of
gods hatred against finne.

I might here mention the sin of Esau The esinne of Esau.
in selling his inheritance for a little meat: of which S. Paul says, he
found no place of Genesis 25. and 27. Heb. 12. of Saul. 1. Re. 15. and 16.
repentance after, though he sought the same with tears. Also the sin of
Saul who (his sin being but one sin, and that only of omission, in not
killinge agag the king of Amalech and his cattle, as he was willed) was
utterly cast of by God for the same, 1. Re. 9. and 15. and 16.
(though he were his anointed and chosen servant before): and could not get
remission of the same, though both he and Samuel the prophet did greatly
lament and bewaille the same sin.

Also I might allege the example of king 2. Re. 12. Psalm. 6. 34. 68. 108. 101
29. 2. Re. 12.
David, whose two sins (albeit upon his hearty repentar. ce) God forgave:
yet, besides all the weepinge, fasting, watchinge, lyeinge on grownde,
wearinge of sackeloth, and other punishment of body that David did use, God
punished the same with maruaylous severity, as with the death of Dauides
son, and other continual afliction unto him as long as he lived. And all
this to show his hati ed against sin, and thereby to terrify us from
committinge the same.

Of this also do proceed all those hard and bitter speeches in scripture
towching sinners, which coming from the mouth of the holy ghost, (and
therefore being most true and certain) may iustlye geeue all them great
cause of fear which live in sin as where it is said: death, blood,
contention, Eccl. 40
edge of (...) oppression, hunger, (...), and vvhyppes: all these things are
created Psa. 10
forvvicked sinners. And again: God shall rain snares (...) upon sinners,
brimstone Psa. 9.
with tempestuous vvyndes shall be the portion of their (...). Again, God will be
known at the day of judgment upon the sinner, who shall be taken in the (...)
of his own hands: many whippes belong unto a sinner: let sinners be turned
into hell: God shall Psalm. 3.
scatter all sinners God shall dashe the teeth Psalm. 9
of sinners in their mouths: God shall scoff Psalm. 36.
at a sinner when he seethe his day of destruction Psa. 144
comes on: the sword of sinners shall Psalm. 57
turn into their own hearts, thou shall see Psalm. 36
when sinners shall perish. The arms of sinners Psa. 103.
shall be crushed and broken: sinners shall wither from the earth, desire not the
glory Psa. 140
and riches of a sinner, for thou do not know the subversion which shall
come upon him: God has geeuen him riches to deceive Eccle. 2.
him therewith: behold the day of our lord Psalm. 72.
shall come, (a cruel day and full of indignation, Esa. 13.
wrath and furye) to make desolate. the earth and to crushe in pieces her
sinners within her. The just man shall rejoice saying this revenge, and then
shall he wash his hands Psalm. 51.
in the blood of sinners.

These and a thowsande such sentences more of scripture, which I omit,
uttered by the holy ghost against sinners, may instruct us of their pitiful
estate, and of the unspeakable hatred of God against them, as long as they
perfist in sin.

Of all these considerations the holy scriptures do gather one conclusion
greatly to be noted and considered by us: which is, miseros facit populos
peccatum. Sin brings men Prou. 14
to misery. And again: Qui diligit iniquitatem Psalm. 10.
odit animam suam: he which loves iniquity (...) his own soul: Or (as the
Angel Raphaell utters it in other words) shey which commit Tob. 12.
finne, are open enemies to their own sovvles. Wherefore they lay down to
all men, this general, severe, and most necessary commandment, upon all the
pains before recited. Quasi a facie colubri fuge peccata. Flee from siane
Eccl. 21.
as from the face of a suake. And again: cave ne Tob. 4.
aliquando peccato consentias Bevvare thou never consent to siane. For how
soever the world does make little accounte of this matter, of Psalm. 9.
whom (as a scripture noteh) the sinner is praised in his lusts, and the
wicked man is blessed, 1. Ioh. 3.
yet most certain it is (for that the spirit of God avouches it) qui facit
peccatum ex diabolo est: He which commits sin is of the devil, and
therefore is to receive his portion among devils at the latter day.

And is not all this sufficient (dear brother) The obstinacy of sinners.
to make us detest sin, and to conceive some fear in co^mittinge thereof? nay
is not all this strong enough to batter their hearts which live in state of
sin, and do committ the same daily with out consideration or scruple? what
obstinacy and hardness of heart is this? surely we see the holy ghost
prophesied trewlye of them when he sayede, sinners alienated from God are
possessed with a furye like a serpent and like a deaf cocatrise Psalm. 57.
which stops her hears to the enchaunter: this fury (I say) is the furye
or madness of wilful sinners, which stop their ears like serpents, to
all the holy enchauntmentes that God can use unto them for their conversion,
that is, to all his internal motions and good inspirations, to all remorse of
their own conscicnces, to all threatninges of holy scriptures, to all
admonishmentes of gods servants, and to all the other means which God can use
for their salvation.

Good Lord, who would committ a mortal sin for the gayninge of ten
thowsande worlds, if he considered the infinite dommages, hurtes,
inco^ueniences and miseries which do come by the committinge of one sin? for
first, he that sins mortallie, leeseth 1
the grace of God inherent in his soul: The losses that come by every mortal
sin.
(which is the greatest gift that Cod can geeue to a creature in this life) and
consequentlye he leeseth all those things which did acco^panye that grace: as
the virtues infused, and the seven gifts of the holy ghost, whereby Esa 11. and
Iero, ibid.
the soul was bewtyfied in the sight of her spouse, and armed against the
assaults of her enemies Secondly, he leesethe the favor of 2
God, and consequentlye his fatherlye protection care and providence over him,
and gayneth him to be his professed enemy. Which, how great a loss it is we
may esteem by the state of a worldley courtier, which should leese the favor
of an earthly prince, and incur mortal hatred by the same.

Thirdly he leeseth all inheritance, claim, 3
and title to the kingdom of heaven, which is dew only by grace, as S. Paul
Romans 6.
notes: and consequentlye depriuethe him self, of all dignities and
co^moditiesfolowinge the same in this life: as the condition and high
privilege of a son of God, the communion of saints, the protection of
Angels, and the like. Fowerthlye he leeseth. the 4
quiet, joy, and tranquillity of a good conscience, and all the favors,
cherisnmentes, consolations, and other cu^fortes, wherwithe the holy ghost is
wont to visit the minds of the Just. Pyuethlye, he leeseth the merit 5
and reward of all his good works done sense he was borne, and whatsoever he
does or shall do while he stands in that state. Sixthlye he makes him self
guyltie of eternal punishment, and engrosseth his name in the book of
perdition, and consequently byndeth him self to all these inco^ueniences
whereto the reprobate are subject, that is, to be inheritour of hell fire, to be
in the power of the devil and his Angels, to be subject to all sin and
temptation of sin. and his soul (which was before the temple of the holy
ghost, the habitation of the blessed trinity, and place of repose for the
Angels, to visit) now to be the nest of scorpions, and dongeon of deuilles, and
him self a companion of the miserable damned.

Lastly he abandoneth Christ, and 7
renounceth the portion he had with him, making him self a persecuter of the
same by treadinge him under his feet. And Heb. 10.
crucifyinge him again, and defylinge his Heb. 6.
blood (as S. Paul says) in synninge Romans 6.
against him which dyed for sin, and therefore the same Apostle pronounces a
maruailous heuie sentence against such in these worlds: If we sin
vvillfullye now Heb. 10.
after we have received knowledge of the trevvth: Romans 16
there remains no more sacryfice for sins, but rather a certain terrible
expectation of judgment, and emulation of fire which shall consume the
adversaries. To which S. Peter agrees, when he says: It had been better not
2. Pet. 2.
to have known the way of justice, than after such knowledge to slide back
again from the holy commandment which was geeuen.

Now then let our worldlinges go and Excuse of sin.
solace them selves with sin as much as they will: let them excuse and
pleasantlye defend the same, saying, pride is but a point of gentrye:
glouttonie good fellowship, lecherye and wantonness a trycke of yowth: and the
like: they shall find one day that these excuses will not be received: but
rather that these pleasant devises, will be turned into tears. They shall prove
that God will not be iested with, but that he is the same God still, and will
ask as severe accounte Gal. 6.
of them as he has done of other before, although it please not them now to
keep any accounte of their life at all: but rather to turn all to disporte
and pleasure, persuadinge them selves, that how soever God has dealt with other
before, yet he will forgeeue all to them: but the holy scripture reasons
after an other manner, which I would have every wise Christian to consider.

S. Paul comparinge the Jews sins with ours, makes this collectio^. If God
spared Romans 11.
not the natural boughs. take heed least he spare not the. And there upon he
infers this admonition, noli altum sapere sed time. Be not to high minded,
but fear. Again, he reasons thus upon the old and the new law: he that
broke the law of Moses, being co^uicted by two or three witnesses, died for
the same without Heb. 10.
co^miseration or mercy: and how much more grievous punishment does he deserve
which breaking the law of Christ by wilsull sin, treads the son of God
under his feet, polluteth the blood of the new testament, and reprocheth the
holy ghost? In like manner reasons S. Peter and S. Jude towchinge the sin
of Angels and ours: if God spared 2. Pet. 2.
not the Angels, when they sinned, but did Ep. Iud.
thrust them down to hell there to he tormented, and to be kept unto judgment
with eternal chains under darckenes: how much less will he spare us? And
again: if the Angels which pass us in power and strength, 2. Pet. 2.
are not able to hear gods execrable judgment against the^, what shall we
do? Again in an other place, he reasons thus: if the just man shall har
dlye be saved, where shall the wickedman and sinner appear?

By which examples we are instructed to reason in like 1. Pet. 4.
sort: if God have punished so severely one A good manner of reasoninge.
sin in the Angels, in Adam, and in other before reeited: what shall I look
for which have committed so many sins against him? if God have damned so
many for lesser sins the mine be: what will he do to me for greater? if
Godhath borne longer with me, then he has done with many other whom he has
cut of without giving them time of repentance: what reason is there, that he
should bear longer with me? if David and other after their sins forge even
them, took such pains in afflictinge them selves for satisfaction of the
temporal punishment in this life, what punishment remains for me either
here or in the would to come, for satisfaction of so many sins committed? If
it betrew that our savior says, that the way is hard, and the gate narrow
whereby Math 7.
men go into heaven, and that they shall Luc. 13.
answer for every idle word before they enter there: what shall be come of me
Mat. 12.
which do live so easiea a life, and do keep no accounte of my deeds, and
much less of my words? if good men in old time did take such pains for
their saluatin, and yet as S. Peter says) the very just were scarce saved:
what a state am I in which take no pain at all, but do live in all kind of
pleasure and wordly delytes.

These kinds of consequentes were more true and profitable for us, whereby we
might enter into some consideration of our own danger, and into some fear of
the judgments of God, for want whereof the most part of sins amongst
Christians are committed. For so the holy scripture describinge dyuerscauses
of wickedness among men, puts these two for principal. First, the flatterye
of the world: (...) laudatur peccator in desileriis animae (...). For that the
sinner is praised in his lusts: And secondly, quia (...) iudicia tua a (...)
Psalm. 9.
eius. For that thy judgments (o lord) are not before his face. And in the
contrary side speaking him self he says: I have kept the ways How
necessary it is to fear.
of our lord and have not behaved my self impiouslie toward God. And he
(...) the reason thereof immediately. For that all his (...) are in my sight.
And again I have feared thy judgments o lord. And again, I Psa. 118.
have been mindful of thy judgments. And how profitable this fear is, he
shows in the same place, demaundinge this fear most instantlye at gods
hands: for so he prays, stryke my flesh thorough, with thy fear o lord.
And S. Paul (after he had showed to the Corinthians, that we must all be
presented before the tribunal of Christ), makes this conclusion. We
knovveinge therefore these things 2. Cor. 5.
do persvvsade the fear of our lord unto me^. And S: Peter after a long
declaration of the majesty of God and Christ now rayning in heaven, concludes
thus, (...) you 1. Pet. 1.
call him father which does judge every man according to his works
without (...) of persons: do you lyue'in fear duringe the (...) of this your
habitation. upon earth. A (...) lesson (no doubt) for all men, but specially
for those which by reason of their sins and wicked life, do remain in (...)
and hatred of God, and howerlye subject (as I have showed) to the (...) of his
judgments, which if (...) once fall into, they are both irreuocable and
intolerable, and they may be fallen into as (...), and by as many ways, as a
man may come to death, which are infinite, especially to the^ who by their
wickedness have lost the peculier protection of God and good Angels (as I have
showed) and have subjected them selves to the feendes of darckenes, who do
nothing else but seek their destruction both of body and soul, with as
great diligence as they can. What wise man then would but fear in such a
case? who could eat or drink, or sleep quietlye in his bed until by the
holy sacrament of penance, The (...) of them vvhiche^ live in sin.
he had discharged his conscience of mortal sin? a little stone fallinge from
the house upon his head, or his horse stumblinge under him as he rydeth, or his
enymie meetinge him on the high way, or an agew coming with eatinge or
drinckinge a little to much, or ten thowsande chaun ces besides (whereof he
stands daily and howerlye in danger) may ridd him of this life and put him
in that case, as no creature of this word, nor any continuance of time shall be
able to deliver him thence again And who then would not fear? who would not
tremble? our lord of his mercy geeue us his holy grace, to fear him as we
should do, and to make such accounte of his justice, as he by threatninge the
same would have us to do. And then shall not we delay the time, but resolve
our selves to serve him whiles he his content to accept of our service, and to
pardon us all our offenses. if we would once make this resolution from our
heart.

An other consideration for the further iustifyinge of gods judgments and
declaration of our demerit, taken from the majesty of God and his benefits
toward us.

CHAP. VII.
ALbeit the most part of Christians through their wicked life arrive not to
that state wherein holy David was, when he said to God, thy judgments Psalm.
118
o Lord are pleasant unto me, as in deed they are to all those that live
vertuouselye and have the testimony of a good conscience: yet at least wise,
that we may say with the same prophet, the judgments Psalm. 181.
of our Lord are true and justified in them selves: And again, thou artiust
o Lord and thy judgment is right: I have thought good to add a reason or two
more in this chapter, whereby it may appear how great our offense is toward
God by sinninge as we do, and how righteous his judgments and justice are
against us for the same.

And first of all is to be considered the The majesty of God.
majesty of him against whom we sin: for most certain it is, (as I have
noted before) that every offense is so much the greater, and more grievous,
by how much greater and more noble the person is against whom it is done, and
the party offendinge more base and vile. And in this respect God (to terrisie
us from offendinge him) names him self often with certain titles of
majesty, as to Abraham, I am an ommipotent Lord: And Genesis 17.
again, heaven is my seat, and the earth is my Esa. 66.
footestoole. And again, he commanded Moses to say to the people in his
name, this embassage, harden not your necks any longuer, for Den. 10.
that your Lord and God, is a God of gods and (...) Lord of lords, a great
God both potent and terrible, which accepts nether person nor brybes.

First then I say consider (gentle Christian) of what an infinite majesty he
is, whom thou a poor woorme of the earth, have so often and so
contemptuousely offended in this life. We see in this world, that no man
dares to offend openly, or say a word against the majesty of a prince
within his own dominions: and what is the majesty of all the princes upon
earth, compared to the thowsandth part of the majesty of god, who with a
word made both heaven and Psa. 148
earth and all the creatures therein, and with half a word can destroy the
same again: whom all the creatures which he made, as the Angels, the heavens,
and all the eleme^tes besides, do serve at a beck and dare not offend? only
a sinner is he which emboldeneth Job. 9.
him self against this majesty, and fears not to offend the same, whom (as
the holy Catholic Church does profess daily, in her preface to the
blessed sacrifice) the Angels do praise, the dominations do adore, the powers
do tremble, and the highest heavens together, with Cherubins and Seraphins do
daily honor and celebrate.



Remember then (dear brother) that every time thou do co^mitt a sin thou
geeuest a blow in the face to this great maiesticall God, who (as S. Paul
says) dwells in an (...) light. which no man 1. Tim. 6
in this world, can abide to look upon: As also it appears by the example of
S. John evangelist, who fell down dead for very fear Apoc. 1.
at the appearance of Christ unto him, as him self testifies: and when Moses
desired to see God once in his life, and made humble petition for the same: God
answered, that no man could see him and live: but yet (to satisfy his
request, and to show him in part what a terrible and maiesticall God he was,)
Exo. 33,
he told Moses, that he should see some piece of his glory: mary he added,
that it was needful he should hyde him self in the hole of a rock, and be
covered with gods own hands for his defense, while God, (or rather an Angel
sent from God as all deuines do interpret) did pass by in glory. And when
he was past: God took away his hand and suffered moses to see the hinder
parts only of the Angel, which was notwithstanding, most terrible to
behold.

The prophet Daniell a so describes the majesty of this God, showed unto him
in vision, Dani. 7.
in these words. I did see (says he) when the thrones were set, and the
old of man many days sat down: his apparel was as white as snow: his
hear like unto pure vvoolle, his throne was of a flame of fire, and his
chariottes were burninge fire, a svviste fludd of fire came from his face: a
thousand thovvsandes did serve him, and ten thousand hundred thovvsands did
assist him, he sat in judgment, and the bockes were opened before him. All
this and much more is recorded in scripture, to admonish us thereby what a
prince of majesty he is whom a sinner offends.

Imagine now (brother mine) that thou A conte^plation tion of the may stie of
God.
see this great king sittinge in his chairc of majesty, with chariottes of
fire, unspeakable light, and infinite millions of Angels about him, as the
scripture reports. Imagine further, (which is most true) that thou see all
the creatures in the world stand in his presence, and tremblinge at his
majesty, and most carefully attendinge to do that for which he created them:
as the heavens to move about: the Son, moon, and stars to geeue light:
the earth to bring forth sustenance: and the like. Imagine further that thou
see all these creatures (how big or little so ever they be) to hang and
depend only of the power and virtue of God: whereby they stand, move, and
consist: and that there passes from God, to each creature in the world, yea to
every part that has motion or being in the same, some beam of his virtue:
as from the sun, we see infinite beams to pass into the air. Consider (I
say) that no one part of any creature in the world, (as the fish in the sea,
the grass on the ground, the leaves of the trees, or the parts of man upon
the face of the earth) can grow, move, or consist, without some little stream
of vertne and power come to it co^tinualiie from Cod. So that thou must imagine
God to stand as a most maiesticall sun in the midst: and from him to pass
forth infinite beams or streams of virtue to all the creatures that are
either in heaven, earth, the air, or the water, and to every part therreof
and upon these beams of his virtue, all creatures to hang: and if he should
stopp but any one of them, it would destroy and annihilate presently some
creature or other. This I say if thou shall consider towchinge the majesty of
God, and the infinite dread that all creatures have of him, except only a
sinner: (for the devils also do fear him as S. James says:) thou wilt not
marvel Iac. 2.
of the severe judgment of God, appointed for his offense. For sure I am, that
very shame of the world makes us to have more regard in offendinge the
poorest frinde we have in this life, then a wicked man has in offendinge God:
which is an intolerable contempt of so great a majesty.

But now if we adioine to this contemplation A consideration of the be nefites
of God.
of majesty, an other consideration of his benefits bestowed upon us: our
defaut will grow to be far greater, for that to iniurey him who has done us
good, is a thing most detestable even in nature it self. And there was never
yet so fearce a heart, no not amongst brute beasts, but that it might be
Won with courtesy and benefits: but much more amongst reasonable creatures
does beneficence prevail, especially if it come from great personages,
whose love and frindfaippe (declared unto us but in small gifts) does greatly
bind the hearts of the receauers to love them again.

Consider then (dear Christian) the infinite good turns and benefits which
thou have received at the hands of thisgreat God, thereby to win the to his
love, and that thou should leave of to offend and injury him, and albeit
no toague created either of man or Angel, cna express the one half of these
gifts which thou have received from him, or the value of them, or the great
love and hearty goodwill where with he bestowed them upon the: yet for some
memory sake, I will repeat certain general and principal points thereof,
whereunto the rest may be referred.

First then he has bestowed vppoa The benefice of (...).
the, the benifite of thy creation, whereby he made the ofnothinge to the
likeness of him self, and appointed the to so noble an end as is to serve him
in this life, and to reign with him in the life to come, furnishinge the for
the present with the service and subjection of all creatures. The greatness of
this benefit may partlye be conceived, if thou do imagine thy self to lack
but any one part of thy body, as a leg, an arm, an eye, or the like: and
that one should freely geeue the same unto the: or if thou want but any one
sense, as that thou were dease or blind, and one should restore sight or
hearringe unto the: how wooldest thou esteem of this benefit? how much
would thou profess thy self beholdinge unto him for the same? and if the
gift of one of these parts only would seem such a benefit unto thee: how
great ought thou to esteem the free gyste of so many parts together?

Add to this now, (as I have said) that he has created the to the lykenes of
no other thing, but of him self, to no other end, but to be his honorable
seruante in this world, and his compartener in kynglie glory for all eternity
to come: and this he has done to the, being only a piece of durte or claye
before. Now ymagine thou of what manner of love proceeded this. But yet add
further, how he has created all this magnificent world for the, and all the
creatures thereof to serve thee in this business: the heaven to gouuerne the, and
geeue the light: the earth and air and water to minister most infinite (...)
of creatures for thy use and sustenance: and has made thee Lord of all, to use
them for thy comfort and his service: and what magnificent gifts are these:
and what shameful in gratitude is it, to turn the same to the dishonor and
injury of so louinge a geeuer as thou do, by vsinge them to serve the in
sin. But yet consider a little The benefit of tedemption.
further, the benesite of thy redemption, much greater then all the former:
which is, that thou having lost all those former benefits again, and made
thy self guyltie by sin of eternal punishment whereto the Angels were now
delivered for their sin committed before: God chose to redeem the, and 1.
Pet. 2.
not the Angels, and for satisfyinge of thy fault, to deliver his own only
son to death for the O lord, what heart can conceive the greatness of this
benefit? Imagine thy self, (being a poor man,) had committed a grievous
crime against a kings majesty together with some great man of his cheifest
nobility, and that the king being offended highlye with you both, should
notwith standinge pardon the, and put the noble man to death: and surder also,
(being no other way to save thy life) should lay the pains of death dew to
the, upon his only son and heir, for thy sake: how much would thou
think, that this king loved the? how greatly wooldest thou esteem thy
self beholdinge and bounden to that yo^ge prince, which should offer him self
to his fathers justice to dye for the a poor worm, (and not for the noble man
as he would not dye for the Angels?) and to put his head in the haulter for
thine only offenses? could thou ever have the heart to become enemy to
this man after, or willinglye and wittingly to offend (...): and yet such is
our case, and much more bounden toward Christ and his father, whom the most
of us notwith standinge do daily offend, dishonor, and iniurey by sin.

But yet there follow on more benefits The benefits of vocation and
iustisscation.
of God unto us, as our vocation and iustificaton: vocation, whereby he has
called us from infidelite, to the state of Christians: and thereby made us
partakers of this our redemption, which insidels are not: for albeit he paid
the ransom for all in general: yet he has not imparted the benefit thereof
to all, but to such only as best it pleased his divine Romans 8.
goodness to bestow it upon. After which followed 1. Co. 1.
our justification whereby we were not only set free from all our sins
committed before, and from all pain and punishment dew to the same: but also
our sowles beutified and enriched with the infusion of his holy grace,
accompanied with the Romans 5.
virtues theological, as faith, hope and charity, 1. Co. 13
and with the gifts of the holy ghost: Esa. 11.
and by this grace wear made just and righteous in the sight of God, and
entitled to the most blessed enheritance of the kingdom of heaven.

After these do ensew a great number The (...) of the sacraments.
of benefits together, (as to us being now made the children and dear
frindes of God) and every one of them, of infinite price and value. As the
gvft of the holy sacraments, left for our comfort and preservation, being
nothing else but conduits to convey gods grace unto us, especialie these two
which appertain to all, to wit, the sacrament of penance, and of his blessed
body and blood, whereof the first, is to purge our sowles from sin, the The
use of sacraments.
second to feed and comfort the same after she is purged. The first is as a
bathe made of Christ his own blood, to wash and bath our wounds therein:
the second as a most comfortable and rich garment, to cover our soul withal
after (...) is washed. In the first, Christ has left all his authority with
his spouse the church, which he has in heaven to remit sins: in the second
he has left him self and his own flesh and blood to be a precious food,
to cherishe her withal.

Besides all these, there is yet an other The benefice of preservation and
inspiration.
gift named our preservation, whereby God has preserved us from so many
dangers into which other have fallen, and wherein we had fallen also, if gods
holy hand had not stayed us: as from heresy and infidelity, and many other
grievous sins: and especially from death and damnation, which long a go by
our wickedness, we deserved to have been executed upon us. Also there are the
benefits Apoc. 3.
of godly inspirations and admonitio^s, whereby God has often both knocked in
wardlye at the door of our conscience, and warned us outwardley by so many
ways and means: as are good books, good sermons, good exhortations, good
compagnie, good example of others, and a hunderd means else, which he at diverse
times has and does vfe, thereby to gain us and our sowles unto his eternal
kingdom, by stirringe us to abandon vicious life, and to betake our selves to
his holy and sweet service.

All which rare and singular benefits being measured, either according to
the value of them selves, or according to the love of that heart from which
they do proceed, ought to move us most vehemently, to gratitude toward the
geeuer. Which gratitude should be, to resolve our selves at length to serve
him vnfaynedlie, and to prefer his favor before all wordlye or mortal
respects what soever. Or if we can not obtain so much of our selves, yet at
leastwise not to offend him any more by our sins and wickedness.

There is not so feerse or cruel a nature in the world, (as I noted before)
but is mollified, allured, and won by benefits: And stories do make report
of strange examples in this kind, even among brute beasts, as of the
gratitude of lions, dogs, and the like, toward their masters and
benefactours. Only an obstinate sinner is he, among all the savage creatures
that are, whom A Elian. in hist. animal.
nether benefits can move, nor curtisies can mollify, nor promises can
allure, nor gifts can gain to the faithful service of God his Lord and
master.

The greatest sinner that is in the world, The intolerable ingratitude of a
sinner.
if he geeue his servant but twenty nobles a year, or his tennant some little
farm to live upon, and if for this they serve him not at a beck: he cries
out of their ingratitude: and if they should further malitiouslie seek to
offend him, and to join with his professed enimye against him: how
intolerable a matter woolde it seem in his sight? and yet he him self,
dealinge much more ingratfullie and injuriously with God thinks it a matter
of no consideration, but easily pardonable. I say, he deals more
ingratfullie with God, for that he has received a thousand for one, in respect
of all the benefits that a mortal man can geeue to an other. For he has
received all in all from God: the bread which he eats, the ground which he
treads the light which he beholds together with his eyes to see the sun,
and fynallye what so ever is within or without his body: as also the mind
with the spiritual gifts thereof, whereof each one is more worth then a
thousand bodies: I say also that he deals more injuriously with God, for
that notwithstanding all these benefits he serves gods open enemy the
devil, and commits daily sin and wickedness, which God hates more then
any heart created can hate a mortal enemy, being that in very deed which
persecuted Sinneper secuted Christ un to death.
his Son our Saueoure, with such hostility, as it took his most precious
life from him, and nailed him fast to the wood of the cross.

Of this extreme ingratitude and injury, Gods (...) sinners.
God him self is enforsed to complain in diverse places of the scripture, as
where he says. Retribuebant mihi mala pro bonis. They returned me home evil
for good. And yet much Psa. 34.
more vehemently in an other place, he calls the heavens to witness of this
iniquity, Iere. 2.
saying: Obstispescite coeli super haec. O you heavens be you astonisned at
this. As if he should say by a figurative kind of speech go out of your
wits you heavens with marvel, at this incredible iniquity of man to wards
me. For so he expounds the whole Esa. 1.
matter more at large in an other place: Audite caeli and auribus percipe
terra: harken ye heavens, and (...) earth bend hither thine ears: filios
enutriui and exaltaui, ipsi autem spreuerunt me. I have norished up children
and have exalted them, and now they contemn me.



What a pitefull complainte is this of God against most vile and base worms
of the earth? but yet God amplyfieth this iniquity more by certain examples
and comparisons. The ox (says he) knows his owner, and the ass knows
the maunger of his Lord and master: but yet my people knows not me. Woe be to
the sinful nation, to the people laden with iniquity, (...) this naughty
seed, to wicked children. What complaint can be more vehement then this? what
threatninge can be more dreadful then this woe, coming from the mouth of him
which may punish us at his pleasure?

Wherefore (dear brother) if thou have grace, cease to be ungrateful to god
any longer: cease to offend him which has by so many ways prevented the
with benefits: cease to render evil for good, hatred for love, contempt for
his fatherly affection toward the. He has done for the all that Isa. 4.
he can: he has geeuen the all that thou art: yea and (in a certain manner)
all that he is worth him self: and means besides to make the partaker of
all his glory in the world to come, and requires no more for all this at thy
hands, but love and gratitude. O (dear brother) why vvilt thou not yield him
this? why wilt thou not do as much to him, as thou wooldst have an other man
to do to the, for less then the ten thowsanthe part of these benefits which
thou have received? for I dare well say, that if thou had geeuen a man but
an alms at thy door, thou wooldest think him bound to love the for it,
albeit thou had nothing in thee worth love besides. But now thy lord
(besides these his gifts.) has infinite causes to make the love him that is,
all the causes which any thing in the world has to puchase love, and
infiinte more besides. Causesof love in God besides his bonefites
For, if all the perfections of all things created in heaven and in earth,
(which do procure love) were put together in one? as all their beauty, all
their virtue, all their wisdom, all their sweetness, all their nobility, all
their goodness, and the like: yet thy lord and Sauycur whom thou conte^nest,
does passo all this, and that by infinite, and infinite (...) for that he is
not only all these things together: but also he is very beauty it self,
virtue it self, wisdom it self, sweetenes it self, nobility it selff,
goodness it selff, and the very fountain and welspringe, where hence, all these
things are derived by little pieces and parcels unto his creatures.

Be a shamed then (good Christian) of this thy ingratitudo, to so great, so
good, and beuntifull a Lord: and resolve thy self for the time to come, to
amend thy course of life and behauyour toward him. Say with the prophet,
which had less cause to say so then thou. Domine propitiaro peccato meo Psalm.
24.
multum est enim. O lord pardon me mine offense for it is great in thy sight.
I know there is nothing (o lord) which does so much displease the, or dry
up the fountain of thy mercy, and so byndeth thy hands from doing good, as
ingratitude in the receyuers of thy benefits? wherein hitherto I have exceeded
all others: but I have done it (o lord) in mine ignorance, not conslderinge thy
gifts unto me, nor what accounte thou would demand again of the same.
But now saying thou have vouchsafed to make me worthy of this grace also,
whereby to see and know mine own state and defaut: I hope hereafter by
direction of the same grace of thine, to show my self a better child toward
the. O lord I am overcome at the le^gthe with consideration of thy love: and
how can I have the heart to offend thee hereafter, saying thou have prevented
me so many ways with benefits, eue^ when I demanded not the same? can I
have hands evermore to sin against thee, which have geeuen up thine own
most tender hands, to be nailed on the cross for my sins heretofore? no,
no, it is to great an injury against thee (o lord) and woe worth me that have
done it so often heretofore. But by thy holy assistance, I trust not to
return to such iniquity for the time to come, to which (o lord) I beseech
the for thy mercy sake, from thy holy throne of heaven, to say amen.

Of what opinion and feelinge we shall be, to vvchinge these matters, at the
time of our death.

CHAP. VIII.
THe holy scriptures do teach us, and experience makes it plain, that
duringe the time of this life, the commodities, preferments, and pleasures of
The indu (...) of some har (...)
the world, do possess so stronglye the hearts of many men, and do hold
them chayned with so forcible enchauntmentes, being forsaken also upon their
just deserts of the grace of God: say and threaten what a man can, and bring
against them all the whole scripture even from the beginning of genesis to the
end of the Apocalips, (as in deed it is all against sin and sinners): yet
will it prevail nothing with them, being in that lamentable case, as other
they believe not, or esteem not, what so ever is said to that purpose,
against their settled life and resolution to the contrary. Of this we have
infinite examples in scripture: Genesis 19.
as of Sodom and Gomorra, with the cities about, which could not hear the
war ninges that good Lot gave unto them. Also of Exo. 6. 7. 8. 9.
Pharao, whom, all that ever Moses could do, either by signs or sayings,
moved nothing. Also of Judas, who by no fair means Mat. 26
or threatninges, used to him by his master, would change his wicked
resolution. But especialye the prophets sent from God, from time to time, to
dissuade the people from their naughty life, and consequentlye from the
plagues hanginge over them, do geeue abundant testimony of this, complainiage
every where, of the hardness of sinners hearts, that would not be moved with all
the exhortations, preachings, promises, allurementes, exclamations,
threatenings, thunderinges that they could use. The prophet zachary Zach. 7.
shall testify for all in this matter who says of the people of Israel a
little before their destruction. Hoc ait do minus exercituum et ce. This says
the Lord of hosts: judge justly: and so forth. And presently he adds:
And they would not attend, but turninge their backs uvent auvaye, and
stopped their ears, to the end they might not hear, and they did put their
hearts as an adamant stone, to the end they might not hear the law and the
vuordes which God did send in his spirit; by the hands of the former
prophets, vvherby gods great indignation was sturred up:

This then is and always has been the fashion of worldlinges, and reprobate
persons, to harden their hearts as an adamant stone, against any thing that
shall be told the^ for the amendment of their lives, and for the sauinge of
their souls. VVhyles they are in health and prosperity, they will not know
God, as in an other place he complains Marye Esa. 1.
yet as the prophet says: God will have his day, with these men also when he
will be known. And that is, cognoscetur dominus iudicia Psalm. 9.
faciens, God will e known uvhen he begins to do judgment, and this is
at the day of death, which is the next door to judgment, as S. Paul
testifies, saying, it is appointed for evil men once to dye, and after that
ensewe (...) Heb. 9.


This I say is the day of God, most terrible, Isa. 2. 13. 34. 37. 61.
sorrowful, and full of tribulation, to the wicked, wherein God will be known, to
be a righteous God, and to restore to every man according as he has done
while he lived: As S. 2. Cor. 5
Panle says or as the prophet describes it, he will be known then to be a
terrible God, and Psalm. 75.
such a one, as takes away the spirit of princes, a terrible God to the
kings of the (...). At this The grea te change of thingesat the day of death.
day, as there will be a great change in all other things, as mirth will be
turned into sorrow, laughinges into weepinges, pleasures into pains, stoutnes
into fear, pride into despair, and the like: so especially will there be a
strange alteration in judgment and opinion: for that the wisdom of God,
whereof I have spoken in the former chapters, and which (as the scripture
says) is accounted folly 1 Cor. 2.
of the wise of the world, will then appear in her likeness, and, as it is in
very deed, will be confessed by her greatest enimyes, to be onlietrew wisdom:
and all carnal wisdom of Romans 8. 1. Cor. 1.
worldlinges, to be mere folly, as God callethe it.

This the holy scripture sets down clerelye when it describes the very
speeches and lamentations of the wise men of this world at the last day,
saying (...) the virtuous whom they despised in this life. Sap. 8.
Nos insensati etc. we senseles me^ did esteem their life to be madness, and
their end to be dishonorable. but look how they are now accounted among the
children of God, and their portion is with the saints? We have erred from
the way of trewfh, and the light of righteousness, has not shyned before us,
necher has the son of understanding appeared unto us. We have weried out
our seues in the way of iniquity and perdition, and we have walked craggye
paths: but the way of our lord we have not known.

Hitherto are the words of scripture: whereby we may perceive, what great
change of judgment there will be, at the last day, from that which men have
now, of matters: what confessinge of folly, what acknowledginge of error, what
hearty sorrow for labor lost, what fruiteles repentance for having run
a-wrie. Oh that men would consider these things now. We have vveried out our
selves (say thee miserable men) in the way of (...) and perdition, and we
have vvalked craggie paths. What a description is this of lamentable
wordlinges, who beat their brains (...), and weary out them selves in
pursuyte of vanity and chafe of this world, for which they suffer notwith
standinge more pain often times, tha^ the just do in purchasinge of heaven?
and when they arrive to, at the last day, werly ed and worn out with trouble
and toil, they sinde that all their labor is lost, all their vexatioh taken
in vain. For that the little pelf which they haugotten in the world, and for
which they have strugled so sore, will help them nothing, but rather greatly
afflicte and torment them. For better understanding whereof, it is to be
considered, that three things will principally molest these men at the day
of their death, and unto these may all the rest be referred. The first matter
of misery i^ death.


The first is the excessyue pains which commonly men suffer in the
separation of the soul and body, which have lived so long together as two
dear friends, united in love and pleasure, and therefore most loathe to part
now, but only that they are enforced thereunto. This pain may partlye be
conceived by that, if we would drive out life, but from the least part of our
body, (as for example out of our little singer, as surgeans are wont to do
when they will mortifye any place, to make it breacke): what a pain does a man
suffer before he be dead? what raginge grief does he abide? and if the
mortyfyinge of one little part only, does so much afflicte us: Imagine, what
the violent mortyfiinge of all the parts together will do. For we see that
first the soul i^s driven by death to leave the extremest parts, as the
toes, feet and fyngers: then the legs and arms, and so consequentlye one
part dies after an other, until life be restrained only to the heart, which
holds out longest as the principal part, but yet must finallye be
constrained to render it self though with never so much pain and resistance,
which pain how great and strong it is, may appear by the breakinge in
pieces of the very stringes and holds wherewith it was enuyroned, thorough the
excessyue vehemency of this deadlye torment.

Marye yet before it come to this point to yield, no man can express the
cruel conflict that is betwixt death and her, and what distresses she abides
in time of her agony. Imagyne that a prince possessed a goodlye city in all
peace, wealth and pleasure, and A similitude expressinge the pains of death.
greatly frinded of all his neighbors about him, who promise to assiste him
in all his needs and affayrs, and that upon the sudden, his mortal enymie
should come and besyege this city, and taking one hold after an other, one
wall after another, one castle after an other, should drive this prince only
to a little tower and besiege him therein, all his other holds being beaten
down, and his men slain in his sight: what fear anguishe and misery woold
this prince be in: how often would he look out at the windows and loope holes
of his tower, to see whether his friends and neighbors would come to help
him or no? and if he saw them all to abandone him, and his cruel enemy even
ready to break in upon him: would he not be in a pityfull plight trow you?
And even so fares it with a poor soul, at the hour of death. The body
wherein she reigned like a iolye princess in all pleasure, whiles it flourished,
is now battered and overthrown by her enemy, which is death: the arms,
legs, and other parts where with she was fortified, as with walls and
wards duringe time of health, are now surprised and beaten to the ground, and
she is driven only to the heart, as to the last and extremest refuge, wheresne
is also most fearcelye assailed in such sort as she can not hold out long.
Her dear friends which soothed her in time of prosperity, and promised
assistance, as yowth, physic, and other humane helps, do now utterly
abandone her: the enemy will not be pacified or make any league, but night and
day assaulteth this turret where in she is, and which now begins to snake
and shiuer in pieces, and she looks howerlye when her enemy in most raginge
and dreadful manner, will enter upon her. What think you is now the state of
this afflicted soul? It is no marvel if a wise man become a fool, or a
stowte vvorldlinge most abject, in this instant of extremity, as we often see
they do in such sort, as they can dispose of nothing well either toward
God or the world at this hour: the cause is the extremity of pains,
oppressinge their minds, as Ser. 48. ad Frat. in cremo
S. Austen also proves, and geeueth us therwithall a most (...) forevvarninge,
if men were so happy as to follovv it. When you shall be in your last sickness
dear brethren (says he) o how hard and painful a thing will it be for
you to repent of your faults committed, and of good deeds omitted, and why
is this? but only for that, all the intention of your mind vvil run
thither, where all the force of your pain is. Many impedimeates shall let
men at that day. As the pain of the body, the fear of death, the sight of
children, for the which their fathers shall often times think them selves
often damned, the weepinge of the wife, the flattery of the world, the
temptation of the devil the dissimulation of physicians for lucre sake, and
the like. and believe thou ((...)) which read this, that thou (...)
quickelye prove all this true upon thy self, and therefore I beseech the that
thou wilt do penance before thou come unto this last day: dispose of thy
house and make thy testament while thou art whole, while thou art wise, while
thou art thine own man: for if thowtarye until the last date, thou shall be
ledd whether thou would not. Hitherto are S. Austens words.



The second thing which shall make The second (...) of mi serie in (...)
death terrible and grievous to a worldly man is the sudden partinge, (and
that for ever and ever) from all the things which he loved most dearly in
this life, as from his (...), possessios honors, offices, fair buildinges,
with their commodities, goodlye apparel with (...) jewels from wife, and
children, kyndred and frindes, and the like: where with he thought him self a
blessed man in this life, and now to be plucked from them upon the sudden,
without ever hope to see or use them again, oh what a grief, what a torment
will this be? for which cause the holy scripture says: O mors quam amara
Eccl. 41.
est memoriatua, homini pacem habenti in substantiis suis? O death how bitter
is thy memory unto a man, that has peace and rest in his substance and
riches? as who would say, there is no more bytternes or grief in the world
to such a man, than to remember or think on death only, but much more to go
to it him self, and that out of hand, when it shall be said unto him, as
Christ reports it was to the great wealthy man in the gospel, which had
his barnes full and was come now to the highest topp of felicity. Siulte hac
nocte animam tuam repetunt Luc. 12.
a te, quae autem parafti, ouius erunt? thou fool, even this night they will
take thy soul from the, and then who shall have all that thou have scraped
together?

It is impossible I say for any tongue The sorrow of leauinge all.
to express the doleful state of a worldly man in this instant of death,
when nothing that ever he has gathered together with so much labor and
(...), and wherein he was went to have so much confidence, will now do him good
any longer, but rather afflict him with the memory thereof, consideringe that
he must leave all to other and go him self to geeue accounte for the getting
and vsinge of the same, (perhaps to his eternal damnation) whiles in the mean
time other men in the world do live merylye and plesantlie upon that he has
gotten, little remembringe and less caringe for him, which lies perhapps
burninge in unquenchable fire for the riches left unto them. This is a woeful
and lamentable point, which is to bring many a man, to great sorrow and
anguyshe of heart at the last day, when all earthly joys must be left, all
pleasures and commodities for ever abandoned. Oh what a doleful day of
partinge will this be? what wilt thou say, (my friend) at this day? when all
thy glory, all thy wealth, all thy pomp, is come to an end. What art thou
the better now to have lived in credit with the world? in favor of princes?
exalted of men? feared, reverenced, and advanced, saying now all is ended, and
that thou can use these things no more?

But yet there is a third thing which the third matterof misery in death.
more then all the rest will make this day of death to be trovvblesome and
miserable unto a vvorldlye man, and that is, the consideration what shall
become of him, both in body, and soul, and for his body it will be no small
horror to think that it Eccl. (...).
must inherit serpents beasts and worms, as the scripture says: that is,
it must be cast out to serve for the food of vermen, that body I mean which
was so delicatelie handled before, with variety of meats, pillovves, and
beds of down, so trymlye set forth in apparel, and other ornaments,
where upon the vvynde might not blovv, nor the sun shine: that body (I
say) of whose beavvtie there was so much pride taken, and vvherby so great
vanity and sin was committed: that body, which in this world was
accustomed to all pamperinge, and could abide no austeritie or discipline must
now come to be abandoned of all men, and left (...) cogitation of the bo die.
only to be devoured of worms, VVhi^che thing albeit it can not but breed
much horror in the heart of him that lies a dyinge: yet is it nothing in
respect of the dreadful cogitations, which he shall have to vvchinge his
soul: as what shalbecome of it? whether it shall go after her departure
out of the body? and then consideringe that it must go to the judgment seat
of God, and there to receive sentence, either of unspeakable glory, or
insupportable pains: he falls to cs^ider more in particular, the danger
thereof, by comparinge gods justice and threats (set down in scripture
against sinners) with his own life: he begins to examine the witness
which is his conscience, and he finds it ready to lay infinite accusations
against him, when he comes to the place of justice.

And now (dear brother) begins the misery of this man. For there is not a
severe saying of God in all the scripture, which comes not now to his
mind to terrify him vvithall at this instant: as if thou Mar. 19.
vvilt enter into life, keep the commandments. He that says he knovveth
God and 1. Ioh. 2.
keeps not his commandments, is a liar. many shall say unto me at that
day, Lord Matt. 7.
Lord, etc. not the hearers of the law, but the doers of the law shall be
justified go from Romans 2.
me all workers of iniquity into everlasting Luc. 13.
fyar. do not you know that wicked men 1. Cor. 6.
shall not possess the kingdom of God? be not deceived, for nether
fornicatours, nor Idolatours, nor adulterers, nor unclean handlers of their
own bodies, nor Sodomites, nor thieves, nor covetous men, nor dronkardes, nor
backbyters, nor extorsioners, shall ever possess the kingdom of God. if you
live according to the flesh you shall dye: Romans 8.
and the works of the flesh are manifest, as fornication, uncleanness,
vvantonnes, luxury, Call. 5.
poyseninges, enimities, contentions, emulations, hatred, strife, dissentions,
sects, envy murder, dronkenes glouttonie, and the like. VVherof I foretell
you as I have told you before, that they which do these things 2. Cor. 5.
shall never attain to the kingdom of god. We must all be presented before
he tribunal of Christ, and every man roceyue particularly, Iere. 2.
according as he has done in Apo. 20.
this life good or evil, every man shall receive 2. Pet. 2.
according to his works: God spared not the Angels when they sinned. You
shall geeue accounte of every idle word 1. Pet. 4.
at the day of judgment, if the just shall scarce be saved, where shall the
wicked man and sinner (...) fevv are saved, and a rich Mat. 19.
man shall hardly enter into the kyndome of heaven.



All these things (I say) and a thousand more towchinge the severity of
gods justice, and the accounte which shall be demanded at that day, will come
into his mind that lies a dyinge, and our ghostlye enemy (which in this life
labored to keep these things from our eyes, thereby the easier to draw us to
sin) will now lay all and more too, before our face, amplyfiynge and vrginge
every point to the uttermost, alleaginge alvvayes our conscience for his
witness. Which when the poor soul in dieinge can not deny, it must needs
terrify her greatly: for so we see that it does daily, even many good and
virtuous men. S. Iereme reported of holy S. Hillarion, whose soul being
greatly afeard, upon these considerations, to go out of the body, after
long conflict, he took Ierom. in vita Hilarionis abba.
courage in the end and said to his soul: Go out my soul, go out why art
thou afeard: thou have served Christ almost threescore and ten years, and art
thou now a fearde of death? And to like effect the holy martyr, Saint Cyp.
lib. de morta lit.
Cyprian tells of a virtuous and godly bishop, which dyinge in his time,
was greatly a feared notwithstanding his good life, until Christ appeared
unto him in the form of a goodlye young man, and did chyde him for it,
saying: You are a feared to suffer, and you will not go out of this life:
what shall I do Possidon in vita August.
to you? which example saint Austen did often use to recounte talkinge of this
matter, as his scholar Possidonius does write in his life.

Now then, if good men and saints are so a fearde at this passage, yea such as
had served God with all purity of life, and perfect zeal for three score and
ten years together: what shall they be, which scarce have served God trewlie
one day in all their lives, but rather have spent all their years in sin
and vanity of the world? must not these men be needs in great extremity at
this passage? surely S. Augusten does describe the same marvelously in a
certain sermon of his. And (according to his manner) does geeue a notable
exhortation upon the same. If you vvil Ser. 50. ad fratres in Eremo and cap. 1.
de vanitate seculi.
know dearly beloved (says he) with what great fear and pain the
soul passes from the body: mark diligently what I will say. The Angels
at that hour, do come to take the soul and to bring her before the
judgment seat of a most dreadful judge and then she calling to mind her
wicked deeds begins greatly to tremble, and would gladly seek to fly
and to leave her deeds behind her, seekinge to entreat the Angels and to
request but one hour space of delay. But that will not be granted: and her
evil works cryeinge out all together shall speak against her, and say,
we will not stay behind or part from the, thou have done us, and we are
thy works, and therefore we vvil follovv the whether foeuer thou go,
even unto the seat of judgment. And this is the state of a sinners soul
which partinge from his body, with most horrible fear, goes onvvardes to
judgment looden with sins, and with infinite confusion. Contrariwise the
just man's soul goes out of his body with great joy and comfort, the
good Angels accompaininge her, with exultation. Wherefore brethren saying
these things are so, do you fear this terrible hour of death now, that
you may not fear it when you come to it. Foresee it now, that you may be
secure then. Thus far S. Augusten.



And because S. Austen makes mention Apparitions to the^ that lie a die (...).
of good and evil Angels here, which are ready to receive the sovvles of
the just and wicked men, at the hour of their death: it is to be noted, that
often times God does permit the visions of Angels both good and evil, as also
of other saints, to men lyinge on their death beds, before they depart this
life, for a taste either of (...) or sorrow to (...) that which shall ensevve
after, in the world to come: and this is one singular privilege, belonginge
to this passadge also. And so concerning the just I have shevved before in
example out of S. Cyprian and S. Austen tovvchinge one to whom Christ
appeared at the (...) his death, and S. Gregory Lib. 4. ca. 11. 12 13. 14 etc.
the great, has diverse other like exaples in the fourth book of his
dialogues for diverse chapiters together, as of one vrsinus to whom the
blessed Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul appeared, and the like: but of dreadful
appanitious of diverse and wicked Angels, which snevvedethe^ selves unto
diverse sinners at the honor of their death, and denounced to them, their
eternal damnation, and their horrible torments appointed in hell, we have
many also and most terrible examples, recorded in the ancient vvriters. As
that Lib. (...). dial c 3. 8.
in S. Gregonie of one (...) a great and rich man, but as full of sin as of
wealth, as S. Gregory says, to who me lyinge on (...) deathbed, the
infernal fiendes in most vglye manner appeared, shevvinge how now he was
delivered into their power, and so never left him until he died, and left his
soul unto Lib. 5. hist. Aug. cap. 14.
the^ to be carried away to eternal torments. The like does S. Beede write
of diverse in England at his time, as of a courtyer of king Coenride, a most
wicked man, though in great favor of the prince, to whom lyinge in his
panges of death, and being now a little recovered, both the good and evil
Angels appeared visibly, the one layinge before him a little small book of his
good deeds, the other a great huge volume of his mischievous factes. The
which after they had caused him to read, by the permissio^ of the good Angels
from God, they seized upon him, appointinge him also what hour de should
dye, as him self confessed openly to all that came to visit him, and as by
this horrible and desperate death ensueinge at the hour by them appointed,
manifestly was confirmed. The like Beda lib. 5. cap. 15.
story he sheyveth in the chapter folovvinge, of one whom he knevv him
self, and as both he and S. Gregory, and S. Cyprian also do note, all these
and the like visions, were permitted for our sakes which do live, and may
take commodity by the same, and not for theirs which dyed, whom they
profited nothing. Now then (dear Christian) these things being so, that
is, this passage of death being so terrible, so dangerous, and yet so
unavoidable as it is: saying so many men perish and are over whelmed dailye in
the same, as it can not be denied but there do: and both holy scriptures and
ancient fathers do testify it by examples and records unto us: what man of
discretion would not learn to be wise by other men's danger? or what
reasonable creature would not take heed and look a boute him, being warned
so manifestly, and apparantlie, of his own (...)? if thou be a Christian, and
do believe in deed the things which Christian faith does teach the: then
do thou know and most certainly believe also, that of what state, age,
strength, dignity, or condition, so ever thou be now, yet that thou thy self
( I say) which now in health and mirth read this, and think that it
little pertains to thee, must one of these days (and that perhaps shortly
after the readinge hereof,) come to prove all these things upon thy self,
which I have here written: that is, thou must with sorrow and grief be enforced
to thy bed, and there after all thy strugglings with the darts of death, thou
must yield thy body which thou love so much, to the bait of worms, and
thy soul to the trial of justice, A very profitable consideration.
for her doings in this lyse.

Imagine then (my freende) thou I say which art so fresh and froelicke at
this day, that the ten, twenty, or two years, or perhaps two months, which
thou have yet to live, were now ended, and that thou were even at this present,
stretched out upon a bed, wearied and worn with dolor and pain, thy carnal
frindes about the weepinge and howlinge, the physicians (...) with their
fees, as having geeuen the over, and thou lyinge there alone mute and dumme in
most pitiful agony, expectinge from moment to moment, the last stroke of
death to be geeuen the. Tell me in this instant, what would all the pleasures
and commodities of this world do the good? what comfort would it be to the,
to have been of honor in this world, to have been rich and purchassed much,
to have borne office, and been in the princes favor? (...) have left thy
children or kynred wealthye, to have trodden down thine enemies, to have
sturred much, and borne great swaye in this life? what ease (I say) or
comfort would it be to the, to have been fair, to have been gallant in apparel,
goodly in personage, glytteringe in gold? The cogi tation and speech of the
soul at the last day.
would not all these things rather afflict than profit the at this instant? for
now should thou see the vanity of these trifles: now would thy heart begin to
say within the? o follye and unfortunate blindenes of mine, Lo, here is an
end now of all my delytes and prosperities: all my joys, all my pleasures, all
my mirth, all (...) pastymes are now finished. where are my frindes which were
wont to laugh with me? my servants wont to attend me, my children wont to
disporte me? where are all my coches and horses, wherewith I was wont to make so
goodly a show, the cappes and knees of people wont to honor me, the troops
of suitors followinge me? where are all my daliances and tricks of love? all my
pleasant music, all my gorgeous buyldinges, all my costly feasts and
banquettinges? and above all other, where are my dear and sweet frindes, who
seemed they would never have forsaken me? but all are now gone, and has left
me here alone to answer the reckoninge for all, and none of them will do so
much as to go with me to judgment, or to speak one word in my behalf.

VVoe worth to me, that I had not foreseen this day rather, and so have made
better provision for the same: it is now to late, and I fear me I have
purchased eternal damnation, for a little pleasure, and lost unspeakable
glory, for a slootinge vanity. Oh how happy and twice fortunate are they
which so live as they may not be a fearde of this day? I now see the
difference betwixt the ends of good Psa. 115.
and evil, and marvel not thought the scriptures Psalm. 33.
say of the one, the death of saints are precious: And of the other, the
death of sinners is miserable: Oh that I had lived so vertuouslye as some other
have done, or as I had often inspirations from God to do: or that I had done
the good deeds I might have done: how sweet and confortable woold they be to
me now in this my last, and extremest distress?



To these cogitations and speeches (dear brother) shall thy heart be enforced,
of what estate soever thou be, at the hour of death, if thou do not (...) it
now by good life and virtuous actions, which only can yield the comfort in
that sorrowful day. For of good men the judge him self says. His Luc. 21.
autem fieri incipientibus, respicite and leuate capita vestra, quoniam
appropinquat redemptio vestra. When these terrible things begin to come upon
other men do you look about you, and lift up your heads, for that yourred
emption comes on, from the labors and toils of this world.

And the holy prophet says of the virtuous man which has done good works
in this life, that he shall be at this time beatus vir, a happy man, and he
(...) Psalm. 4.
the cause, quia in die mala liberabit eumdominus, and open feret illi super
lectum doloris eius. For that God will deliver him in this evil day, and will
assist him upon the bed of his sorrow.

Which is meant (no doubt) of the bed of his last departure, especialye for
that of all other beds this is the most sorrowful, as I have showed, being
nothing else but a heap of all sorrows together, especially to them which
are drawn unto it before they are ready for the same, as commonly all they
are, which defer their ame^dement from day to day, and do not attend to
live in such sort now, as they shall wish they had done when they come to
that last passage.

Of the pains appointed for sin after this life and of two sorts of the
same.

CHAP. IX.
Amongst all the means which God uses to wards the children of men, to
move them to this resolution, whereof I entreat; the strongest and most
forcible is, the consideration of punishments prepared by him for rebellious
sinners, and transgressors of his co^maundeme^ts. Wherefore he uses this
motyue often, as may appear by all the prophets, who do almost nothing
else but threaten plagues and destruction to offenders. And this mean has
often time prevailed more than any other that could be used, by reason of the
natural The force of fear.
love which we bear toward our selves: and consequently the natural fear
which we have of our own dannger. So we read Ion. 5.
that nothing could move the Ninevites so much as the foretell nge them of
their imminent Math. 3.
destruction. And S. John Baptist, although he came in a simple and
co^temptible manner yet preachinge unto the people the terror of vengeance to
come, and that the axe Marc. 1.
was now put to the tree to cut down for the fire all those which repented
not: he moved the very Luc. 3.
publicanes and soldiers to fear, (which otherwise are people of very hard
metal) who came unto him upon this terrible embassage, and asked what they
should do to avoid these punishments?

After then that we have considered of death and of gods severe iudgmente,
which ensues after death, and wherein every man has to receive according to
his works in 2. Cor. 5.
this life, as the scripture says: it follows that we consider also of the
punishments which are appointed for them that shall be found faulty, in that
accounte, hereby at leastwise (if no other consideration will serve) to induce
Christians to this resolution of seruinge God. For as I have noted before, if
every man have naturally a love of him self and desire to conserve his own
ease: then should he also have fear of peril. whereby he is to fall into the
extreme calamity. This expresses S. Bernard excellently according In sermon.
de primordiis.
to his wounte. O man (saiethe he) if thou have left all shame. (which
appertains to so noble a creature as thou art:) if thou feel no sorrow (as
carnal men do not:) yet leese not fear also which is found in very beasts.
We use to load an ass and to werie him out with labor and he cares not,
because he is an ass: but if thou would thrust him into fire, or flynge him
into a ditche, he woold avoid it as much as he could, for that he loves
life and (...) death. Fear thou then, and be not more insensible than a beast.
Fear death, fear judgment, fear hell, this fear is called the beginning
of Pro. 9.
wisdom, and not shame or sorrow, for that the spirit of fear is more potent
to resist sin, than the spirit of shame or sorrow. wherefore it is said,
remember the end and thou shall never sin, that is remember the final
Eccle. 7.
punishments appointed for sin, after this life. Thus far S. Bernarde.



First therefore to speak in general of the punishments reserved for the life
to come, if the scriptures did not declare in particular their greatness unto
us: yet are there many reasons to persuade us that they are most feuere, Gods
majesty.
dolorous and intolerable. For first, as God is a God in all his works, that
is to say, Psalm. 71.
great, wounderfull, and terrible: so especialie Deu. 10.
he shows the same in his punishments, being called for that cause in
scripture deus Psalm. 4.
iustitiae. God of justice as also, deus vltionum Psalm. 93.
God of revenge. Wherefore saying all his other works, are maiestical and
exceedinge our capacities: we may likewise gather that his hand in
punishment, must be wounderfull also. God him self teaches us to reason in
this manner, when he sayethe: And will ye not then fear me! and will ye not
tremble Iere. 9.
before my face which have putt the sand as a stopp unto the sea, and have
geeuen the water a commandment never to pass it, no not when it is most
trovvbled and the flooddes most outrageous? as who would say: if I am
wounderfull and do pass your imagination, in these works of the sea and
other which you see daily: you have cause to fear me, co^sideringe that my
punishments are like to be correspondent to the same.

An other conjecture of the great and severe Gods (...)
justice of God, may be the consideration of his infinite and unspeakable
mercy the which as it is the very nature of God, and without end or
measure, as his godhead is: Psalm. 84.
so is also his justice. And these two, are the two (...) (as it were) of God,
embracinge and kyssnge one the other, as the scripture says, Therefore as in a
man of this world, if we had the measure of one arm, we might easily
conjecture of the other: so saying the wounderfull examples daily of gods
infinite mercy toward them, that do repent: we may imagyne by the same,
his severe justice toward them, who he reserueth to punishment in the next
life, and whom for that cause, he calls in the scriptures Vasa Esa. 13.
furoris. Vessels of his furye, or vessels to show Psalm. 7.
his furye upon.

A third reason to persuade us of the Gods patience.
greatness of these punishments, may be the maruailous patience, and long
sufferinge of God in this life, as for example, in that he sufferethe diverse
men from one sin to an other, from one day to an other, from one year to an
other, from one age to an other, to spend all (I say) in dishonor and
dispite of his majesty, addinge offense to offense, and refusinge all
persuasions, allurementes, good inspirations, or other means of frindshipp,
that his mercy can devise to offer for their amendment. And what man in the
world could suffer this? or what mortal heart can show such patience? but now
if all this should not be requited with severity of punishment, in the world
to come, upon the obstinate: it might seem against the law of justice and
equity, and one arm in God might seem longer than the other. S. Paul
touches this reason in his epistle to the Romans, where he says: do thou
not know Romans 2.
that the benignity of God is used to bring thee to repentance? and thou by
thy hard and impenitent heart do hoord up vengeance unto thy self, in the
day of wrath, and appearance of Gods just judgments, which shall restore
to every man according to his works? he uses here the words of hoordinge
up of vengeance, to signify that even as the covetous man, does hoorde up
money to money daily, to make his heap great: so the unrepentant sinner
does hoorde up sin to sin: and God on the contrary side hoordeth up
vengeance to vengeance, until his measure be full, to restore Esa. 27.
in the end, measure against measure, as the prophet says, and to pay us home
according Iere. 16.
to the multitude of our own obhominations. Genesis 15.
This God meant when he said to Abraham that the iniquities of the Amorrheans
were not yet full up. Also in the revelations unto S. John Evangelist, when
he used this conclusion Apo. 221
of that book. He that does evil let, him do yet more evil: and he that
lies in filth, let him yet become more filthy: for behold I come quicklye,
and my reward is with me, to render to every man according to his deeds.
By which words God signifies that his bearinge and tolleratinge with sinners
in this life, is an argument of his greater serueritie in the life to come,
which the prophet David also declares when talkinge of a careless sinner he
says: Dominus irridebit eum quoniam (...) quod Psalm. 30.
veniet dies eius. Our God shall scoff at him foreseinge that his day shall
come. This day (no dout) is to be understood the day of accounte and
punishment, after this life, for so does God more at large declare him self
in an other place, in these words. And Ezec. 7.
thou son of man, this says thy lord God: the end is come now (I say) the
end is come upon the. And I will show in the my furye, and will judge the
acoordinge to thy ways. I will lay against the all thy abominations, and my
eye shall not spare the, nor will I take any mercy upon the, but I will put
thine own ways upon the, and thou shall know that I am the lord. Behold
affliction comes on, the end is come, the end (I say) is come: it has
watched against the, and behold it is come: crusshinge is now come upon the:
the time is come: the day of slaughter is at hand. Shortly will I pour out
my wrath upon the, and I will fill my furye in the, and I will judge the
according to thy ways, and I will lay all thy wickedness upon the: my eye
shall not pity the: nor vvil I take any compassion upon the, but I will lay
thy ways upon the, and thy abominations in the (...) of the, and thou
shall know that I am the lord that strikes.

Hitherto is the speech of God him self. Of pains in particular.


Saying then now we understand in general, that the punishments of Cod in
the life to come are most certain to be great and severe, to all such as
fall into them: for which cause S. Paul says: Horrendum est incidere in
Heb. 10.
manus dei viuentis: it is is a (...) thing to fall into the hands of our
lyuinge God:

Let us consider some what in particular what manner of pains and punishments
they shall be. Tvvosort of sinners that dye.
For better conceauinge whereof, it is to be noted, that as there are two sorts
of sinners, the one which dye in the guylt of mortal sin, and in the
dissauoure and displeasure Psalm. 9.
of God, of whom it is said, conuertantur peccatores 1. Ioh. 5.
in infernum: Let sinners be turned into hell. And again: there is a sin
unto death, Apoc. 21
and I do not say that any man should pray for that. And again: the
portion of wicked men, shall be in the lake burninge with fire and brymstone:
which is called the second death:

An other sort of sinners there are, which have the guylt of their sins
pardoned by their repentance in this life, but yet have not made that temporal
satisfaction to gods justice, nor are so thoroughlie purged in this life, as
they may pass to heaven without punishment: and of these it is 1. Co. 3.
written: Detrimentum patientur, (...) autem salui erunt, sic tamem quast
perignem. They shall suffer hurt and damage but yet they shall be Psalm. 37.
saved as by fire.

Upon which words of S. Paul, the holy father S. Austen writes thus: Because
S. Paul says that these men shall be saved by fire, therefore this fire is
contemned. The severity of (...) gatorie.
But surely though they shall be saved by it: yet is this fire more grievous than
what soever a man can suffer in this life: and yet you know how great and
intolerable things men have Hom. 16 ex 50. ho mi.
or may suffer. The same S. Austen in an other place says thus: They which
have done things worthy of temporal punisnment (of whom the Apostle
says: They shall be saved (...). Co. 3.
by fire) must pass thorough a fiery river, and most horrible shallowes of
burninge flames, signisied by the prophet, when he says, and Dan. 7.
a fludd of fire went before him, and look how much matter there is in
their sins, so lon ge must they stick in passinge thorough, how much the
fault requires, so much shall the punishment of this fire revenge. And
because the word of God do the compare the soul of a sinner, to a pott of
brass, saying: put the pott empty upon the coals, until all the rust be
melted of: therefore in this fire all idle speeches, all filthy cogitations,
all light sins, shall boil out, which by a short way might have been
separated from the soul in this life, by alms and tears. Hitherto S. Austen.



And the same holy father in an other De (...) and falsa (...) C 18.
place has these words. If a sinner by his conversion escape death, and
obtain life, yet, for all that I can not promise him, that he, shall escape
all pain or punishment. For he that differred the fruits of repentance till
the next life, must be perfited in purgatory fire. and this fire (I tell you)
though it be not everlasting, yet is it passinge grievous, for it does far
exceed all pains that man can suffer in this life. Never was there found out
yet so great a pain in flesh, as that is, though martyrs have abydden
strange torments, and many wicked men have suffered exceedinge In Psalm.
tertiu^ pae (...).
great punishments. To like effect does S. Gregory Write of the severity
of this punishment, expoundinge those words of David. O Lord rebuke me not in
thy furye nor correct. Psa. 6. 37
me in thy wrath. This is as if he said (says S. Gregoire) I know that
after this life, some must be cleansed by purginge fire. And other must receive
sentence of eternal damnation. But because I esteem that purginge fire
(though it be transitory) to be more intolerable, than all the tribulation
which in this life may be suffered: therefore I do not only desire not to be
rebuked in the fury of eternal damnation, but also I greatly fear to be
purged in the wrath of transitory correction: thus far S. Gregory.

And I might add a hundred like sayings more out of the holy fathers
towchinge the extreme severity of this purginge fire after death, and of the
great fear which they had of it, but this shall be sufficient to warn
Catholics which beeleue it, to look better about them than they do, for
the auoydinge of the rigor of this fire by their good life in this world,
especially by these two means of alms and tears, which S. Austen in the
place before recited, does mention: which holy father also in the same place,
makes this collection: We see what men do or may suffer in this life: what
rackinge, what tearinge, what burninge and the like: and yet they are nothing
in respect of that fire: whereof he infers this conclusion. 1 Psa. 37
ista ergo etc. These things therefore which we suffer here, are much easiar
than that fire: and yet you see that men will do any thing rather than suffer
them: how much more then ought we to do that little which God commands us,
to avoid that fire, far and much more greeuouse? The fear that old saints
had of the fire of purgatory. Sermon. 55. in (...).




It is a strange matter to consider, what great fear holy men had of this
fire, and how little we have now a days, having much more cause than they. S.
Barnarde has these words of him self: Oh would to God some man would now
before hand provide for my head abundance of watters and to my eyes a fountain
of tears, for so perhaps the burninge fire should take no hold, where iu^ning
tears had cleansed before, And again, I tremble and shake for fear, of
falling into Gods hands. I would gladly present my self before his face,
alredie judged of my self, and not to be judged then of him. Therefore I will
make a reckonyng whiles I am here of my good deces and of my badde. My evil
shall be corrected with better works: they shall be watered with tears they
shall be punished by fasting: they shall be amended by sharp discipline: I will
ripp up the very bottom of my ways and all my devises, that he may find
nothing untried at that day, or not fullye discussed to his hands. And then I
hope in his mercy, that he will not judge the same faults again, and the
second time, as Naum. 1.
he has promised.

The like fear utters S. Ambrose in these words: O Lord if Praecat.
Rraeparat 2. Ad mif sam.
thou reserve any whit in me to be revenged in the next life: yet I humbly
ask of the that thou give me not up to the power of wicked spirits, whiles
thou wypest away my sins, by the pains of purgatory. And again, in an
other place: I shall be searched and Sermon. 2. in Psalm. 118.
examined as lead (in this fire) and I must burn until all the lead be
melted away. And if then there be found no silver matter in me: woe be to me.
For I must be thrust down to the nethermost parts of hell, or else wholly
1. Cor. 3.
waste away as straw in the fire. But if any gold or silver be fownd in me,
not through my works, but by grace and Christ's mercy, and through the
ministorie of my prestehoode: I shall also once say: surely they Psalm. 30.
that trust in the, shall never be confounded.



And thus much of this temporal punishment reserved even for the purging of
gods servants in the life to come. Of hell and the pu (...) of the damned.


But now touching the reprobate and such as for their wickedness have to die
everlastingly: we must Imagine that the case stands much more hardlye: for
to that purpose sounds Christ's sayeing to the good women of Jerusalem, when
he was goeing to his passion: If they do these things to grene vvood: what
Luc. 23.
shalbecome of that which is dry? which words S. Peter seems in some
part to expo^de, when he says: If the Judgment of God (...) 1. Pet. 4.
with us which are his servants: what shall the end of vvrcked men be? As
who would say, that in all reason, their end must be intolerable. For more
particular co^ceauing whereof, be cause the matter is of great importance for
all Christians to know: it suall not be perhaps amiss, to consider breeflie,
what the holy scriptures and ancient fathers of the Catholic ehurche,
(directed no doubt by the holy Ghost) have revealed unto us, concerning this
Of the name of hell in di uers tongues.
punishment. And first of all, to wchinge the place of punishment appointed
for the damned, co^monlie called hell, the scripture in diverse languages,
uses diverse names, but all tending to express the greeuousnesse of
punishment, there suffered: As in latin it is called, Esa. 5. and 33.
Infernus, a place beneathe or under ground (as most of the old fathers do
interpret) But whether it be under ground or no, most certain it is, that it
is a place most opposite to heaven, which is said to be above, and from Job. 11.
which lucifer was thrown down. And this Esa. 14.
name is used to signify the miserable suppressing and hurling down of the
damned, to be trodden under the feet, not only of God, but also of good men for
ever. For so says Mala. 4.
the scripture. Behold the day of the lord comes burning like a furnace,
and all proud and wicked men shall be straw to that furnace, and you that
fear my name shall tread them dovven, and they shall be as burnt ashes under the
soles of your feet in that (...) And this shall be one of the greatest miseries
that can happen to the proud and stowte potentates of the world, to be thrown
down, with such contempt and to be trodden under feet of them, whom they so
much despised in this world.

The Hebrew word which the scripture Esa. 14.
uses for hell, is Seol, which fignifieth a Mat. 14.
great ditche or dungeon. In which sense it Apo. 14.
is also called in the Apocalips lacus irae dei the lake of the wrath of God.
And again, Apo. 21.
Stagnum ardens igne and sulphur: a poole burning with fire and brimstone. In
greek the scripture uses three words for the same Matt. 11
place. The first is. Hades, used in the gospel, In com. supra ver ba viue
(...) tenter. (...). Pet. 4. Job. 10.
which (as plutarche notes) signifies a place where no light is: The second
is zophos, in S. Peter, which signifies darkness it self. In which sense it
is called also of Job, terra tenebrosa and operta mortis caligine. A dark Mat.
22. and 25. a. Pe. 4.
land and over whelmed with deadly obscurity, Also in the gospel tenebra
exteriores, utter darkness. The third greek word is tartaros, used also by
S. Peter: which word being derived of the verb tarasso, (which signifies
to terrifye, trouble, and vex) imports an horrible confusion of tormentors
in that place: even as Job says of it, ibi nullus ordo, sed sempiternus
horror inhabitat, there Job. 10.
dwells no order, but everlasting horror.

The chaldie word which is also used in hebrew, and translated to the greek)
is gehenna. Mat. 5. 10. 18. 23.
First of all used by Christ, for the place of them which are damned, as S.
Ierom notes upon the tenth chapter of S. Mathewes Mar. 9.
gospel. And this word being compounded Luc. 12.
of gee and hinnom signifies a valley nighe to The valley hinnom.
Jerusalem, called the valley of hinnom, in which the old Idolatrous Jews,
were wont to burn alive their own children in the honor of the devil, and
to sownd with tru^pets, tymprills, and other loud instruments, whiles they were
doeinge thereof that, the childerens voices and cries might not be heard: which
place was afterward used also for the receipt of all filthiness, as of doung,
dead carions, and the like: And it is most probable, that our Savior used
this word above all other for hell, thereby to signify the miserable
burninge of souls in that place the pitiful clamours and cries of the
tormented, the confuse and barbarous no yse of the tormentors, together with
the most lothesom sillthynesse of the place, which is otherwise described in
the scriptures, by the names of adders, snakes, (...), scorpions, and other
venemouse creatures, as shall be afterward declared.

Having declared the names of this place and thereby also in some part, the
nature: yt remains now, that we consider, what manner of pains men suffer
there, For declaration whereof, we must note, that as heaven and hell are
contrary, assigned to contrary The pains of hell universal.
persons, for contrary causes: so have they in all respects contrary
properties, conditions, and effects, in such sort, as what soever is spoken
of the felicitye of the one, may serve 1. Co. 2.
to infer the contrary of the other. As when S. Paul says that no eye has
seen, nor ear heard, nor heart conceived the joys that God has prepared for
them that shall be saved: We may infer that the payns of the damned must be as
great. Again, when the scripture says that the felicity of them in heaven is
a perfect felicity, co^taining omne bonum, all goodness: Exo. 33.
So that no one kind of pleasure can be imagined which they have not: we must
think on the contrary! part, that the misery of the damned, must be also a
perfect misery, containing all afflictions that may be, without wanting any.
So that, as the happiness of the good is infinite, and universal: so also is
the calamity of the wicked infinite and universal. Now in this life all the
miseries and pains which fall upon man, are but particular and not universal.
As for example: we see one man pained in his eyes, an other in his teeth, an
other in his stomak, an other in his back: which particular pains
notwithstanding some times are so extreme, as life is not able to resist
them, and a man would not suffer the^ long for the gayning of many worlds to
gether. But suppose now, a man were tormented in all the parts of his body at
once, as in his head, his eyes his tongue, his teeth, his throote, his stomak,
his belly, his back, his heart, his sides, his thighs, and in all the joints
of his body besides: suppose (I say) he were most cruelly tormented with
extreme pains in all these parts together, without ease or intermission. What
thing could be more miserable than this? what sight more lamentable? If thou
should see a dog lie in the street so afflicted: I know thou could not
but take compassion upon him. Well then, consider what difference there is
between abydinge these pains for a week, or for all eternity: in suffering
them upon a soft bed, or upon a burning grydyron and boiling furnace: among a
man's friends comforting him, or among the furies of hell whipping and
tormentinge him. Consider this (I say gentle reader,) and if thou would take
a great deal of labor, rather than abide the one, in this life: be content
to sustain a little pain rather than to incur the other in the life to come.
Peculiar torments to every part.


But to consider these things yet further, not only all these parts of the
body which have been instruments to sin, shall be tormented together, but also
every sense both external and internal for the same cause shall be afflicted,
with this particular torment, contrary to the object wherein it delited most,
and took pleasure in this world. As for example, the lasciuiouse eyes shall be
afflicted with the ugly and fearful sight of devils: the delicate ears
with the horrible noise of damned spirits: the nyse smell, with poisoned
stenche of brimstone and other unsupportable filthe: the dainty taste with most
rauynouse hungar and thirst: and all the sensible parts of the body with
burning fire. Again, the Imagination, shall be tormented, with the apprehension
of pains present, and to come: the memory, with the remembrance of pleasures
past, the understanding, with consideration of the felicity lost, and the
misery now come on. O poor Christian, what will thou do amiddest the
multitude of so greuouse calamites? The pai^s of hell exercised


It is a wounderfull matter, and able (as one father says) to make a
reasonable man go out of his wits, to consider what God has for torment,
not for punishment.
reueyled unto us in the scriptures, of the dreadful circumstances of this
punishment, and yet to see, how little the rechelesse men of the world do
fear it. For first, touching the universality, variety, and greatness of
the pain, not only the reasons before alleged, but also diverse other
considerations in the scriptures do declare. As where it is said of the
damned. cruciabuntur die and nocte, they Apo. 20. and 14.
shall be tormented day and night. And again, Date illi tormentum, give her,
torment, speaking Apo. 18.
of babylon in hell, by which is signified that Luc. 16.
the pains in hell are exercised, not for punisheme^t, but for torment of the
parties. And torments commonly we see in this world to be as great and as
extreme, as the wit of man can reach to devise. Imagine then, when God shall
lay his head to devise torments (as he has done in hell) what manner of
torments will they be.

If creating an eleme^t here for our comfort The fearse nature of the fise of
hell
(I mean the fire) he could create the same so terrible as it is, in such sort
as a man would not hold his only hand in it one day, for to gain a
kingdom: what a fire think you has he provided for hell, which is not
created for comfort, but only for torment, of the parties? Our fire has a
thousand differences from that, and therefore is truly said of the holy
fathers, to be but a painted and fained fire in respect of that. For our fire
was made to comfort (as I have said and that, to torment. Our fire has need
to be fed co^tinuallie with wood or else it goes out: that burns
co^tinuallie, without feeding. Our gives light: that gives none: Our is out
of his natural place, and therefore shifteth to ascend, and to get from us, as
we see: but that is in the natural place, where it was created, and therefore
it abides there perpetually. Our consumes the matter laid in it, and so
quickelie dispatcheth the pain: that tormenteth but consumes not, to the end
the pain may be everlasting. Our fire is extinguished with water, and greatly
abated by the coldenesse of the air about it: that has no such abateme^t, or
qualificatio^. Finally what a strange and incredible kind of fire that is,
appears by these words of our Savior so often repeated: There shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth. We Matt. 8. 13. 22. 14.
ping is to be referred to the effect of extreme burning in that fire, for that
the torment of Luc. 13.
scalding and burning enforces tears sooner than any other torment, as
appears in them, which upon the sudden do put a hot thing in to their
mouth, or skalde any other part of their body. And gnashing of teeth (as
every man knows) proceeds only of great and extreme cold. Imagine then
what a fire this is which has such extreme effects both of heat and cold.
O mighty Lord what a strange God art thou! how wonderful and terrible in
all thy works and inuentio^s? how bountiful art thou to those that love and
serve the? and how severe to them which contemn thy commandments? Have thou
devised a way how they which lieeee burning in a lake of fire and brimstone
shall Apo. 21.
also be tormented with extreme cold? what understanding of man can conceive
Psalm. 35.
how this may be? but thy Judgments (o lord) are a depthe without bottom,
and therefore I leave this to thy only providence, praising the eternallye
for the same.

Besides these general pains common to Particular pains for particular
offenders
all that be in that place, the scripture signifies also that there shallbe
particular torments, peculiar both in quality and quantity to the sins and
offenses of each offender. For to that end says the prophet Esaias to God.
thou uviltiudge in measure against measure. And Esa. 27.
God says of him self: I will exercise Judgment Esa. 28.
in weight, and Iustics in measure. And that is the meaning of all those
threats of God Iere. 2.
to sinners, where he says that he will pay Apo. 20.
them home according to their particular Psa. 27. 98.
works, and according to the inventions of their own hearts. In this sese
it is said in the Eze. 24.
Apocalipse, of Babylon, now thrown down Osee. 12.
in to the lake: Look how much she has Zach. 1.
glorified her self, and has lived in delites: so Apo. 18.
much torment and affliction give her. Where of the holy fathers have
gathered the variety of torments that shall be in that place As there Li. de
(...). poen. c. a.
be differences of sins: so shall there be variety of torments, (says old
Ephraem) for the adulterer shall have one kind of torment, the murderer an
other, the thief an other, the drunkarde an other: the liar an other:

And so he follows on, shevveinge how the provvde man shall be (...) under
feet to recompense his pride: the gloutton suffer inestimable hungar: the
drunkards extreme thirst: the delitiouse mouth filled up with gaul: and the
delicate body seared with hot burning yrons.

The holy Ghost signifies such a thingwhen he says in the scriptures, of
the wicked worldling: His bread in his belly shall be Job. 20.
turned in to the gaul of serpents: he shall be constrained A maruai lous
description used by the scripture.
to spue out again the riches which he has devoured: Nay, God shall pull
them out of his belly again: he shallbe constrained to suck the gauls of
cocatrices, and tongue of an adder shall kill him: he shall pay svvetelie for
all that ever he bathe done: and yet shall he not be consumed, but shall suffer
according to the multitude of all his devises: utter darkness lies in vvayt
for him: and fire which needs no kindling shall eat him up: this is the
wicked man's portion from God, By which words is plainly showed, that
woorldlings shall receive particular torments for their gluttony, for their
delicate fare, for extorsion, and the like, Which torments shall be greater
than any mortal tongue can express: As may appear by the vehement and
horrible words which the holy ghost here uses to insinuate the same.

There is reported (by men of good credit) a vision of a servant of God, that
he had in his A vision of the ha^ dling of avvicked man in hell.
prayers of the handling of a certain wicked man in hell. Yt is not unlike to
some which the holy prophets recount of other matters. And therefore I will
rehearse it, for that it makes to our purpose. This servant then of God saw,
that as soon as this rich worldling, was dead, he was brought by the damned
spirits to the place of torment, and there a captain deuell sitting in a chair
of burning hot iron, rose up for reverence, and told him, for that he had
been a man of honor and state in the world, he would give him that place, and
so perforce made him sit down. VVhereat he cryeing out horrible, there came
two other deuells with two huge trompetts full of wild fire and brimstone, and
said they would make him some music to his song, for that he had loved music
well in the world, and so blew the fire and brimstome in to his ears. Then
for that he cried he was dry: there came a devil and put in to his mouth a
pot of venemouse liquore made of the gauls of toads and serpents, sayeing, this
must be your drink in stead of your delicate wines which you were accustomed:
to taste in the world. And eftsons followed two other ugly feendes with a great
company of foul and fearse snakes, which clasped him about the mydle, and
fastened their teeth in his body, the devils sayeing, that for so much as he
liked so well to embrace dames in the world, he should not want embraseme^ts
now also? And after that followed a great route of furiouse spirits, with
whippes and hooks in their hands, which all assaulted him, renting and tearing
his floshe, and sayeing, that these recreations were reserved for him in that
place for ever and ever.

These things God suffered this holy man to see, not for that perhaps these
material things are there, in deed, but that by these we might conceive the
insupportable torments prepared for the wicked in that place: even as he showed
him self and his glory, by visible things to Daniel: though in deed Dan. 7.
he be invisible.

Beside this, the scripture shows unto The straitnes of pains in hell.
us not only the universality, particularitie and severity of these pains,
but also the straitness thereof, without aid, help, ease, or comfort, when it
says we shall be cast in (...) Mat. 22.
both hand and feet: for it is some kind of comfort in this world, to be
able to resist or strive against our afflictions, but here we must lie still
and suffer all. Again, when it says: Mat. 25.
clausa est ianua, the gate is shutt: that is, the gate of all mercy, of all
pardon, of all ease, of all intermission, of all comfort, is shutt up from
heaven, from earth, from the creator, and from creatures: inso much as no
consolation is ever to be hoped for more: as in all the miseries of this life
there is always some. This straytnesse is likewise most lyuelie expressed in
that dreadful parable of the rich gloutto^ in hell: Who was driven to that
Luc. 16.
necessity, as he desired that Lazarus might dypp the topp of his fingar in
water to cool his tongue, in the mids of that fire wherein The wonderful
example of the ry che glout ton.
he says he was: and yet could not he obtain yt. A small refreshing it seems
it would have been unto him, if he had obtained the same. But yet to show the
straitness of the place, it was denied him. Oh you that live in sinful
vvelthe of the world, consider but this one example of gods severity, and be
afearde. This man was in that Royalty a little before as he would not give
the crommes of his table to Lazarus, to buy heaven vvithall and now would he
give a thousand worlds (if he had them) for one dropp of water to cool his
tongue. What demaud could be less than this? he durst not ask to be
delivered thense, onto have his torments diminished, or to ask a great vessel
of water to refreshe his whole body therein: but only so much as vvoold
stick on the topp of a ma^s fingar, to cool his tongue. To what need was
this poor man now driven? what a great imagination had he of the force of one
dropp of water? to what pitiful change, was his tongue now come unto, that
was vvount to be so diligently applied with all kinds of pleasant liquours!
Oh that one man can not take example by an other: either this is true or else the
son of God is a liar. And the^ what men are we, that seeing our selves in
danger of this misery, do not seek with more diligence to avoid the same?

In respect of these extremities and strait dealings of God in denyeing all
comfort and consolation at this day: The scripture says, that men shall fall
in to rage, fury, and utter impatie^ce, blaspheming God, and cursing the Apo.
16.
day of their nativity, with eating their own Eccl. 23.
tongues for grief, and desiring the rocks Apo. 23.
and mountains to come and fall on them, to Luc. 13.
end their pains.

Now if we add to this the eternity and The eter nitie of the pains.
everlasting continuance of these torments: we shall see that it increases the
matter greatly. For in this world there is no torment so great, but that time
either takes away or diminishes the same. For either the tormenter, or the
tormented dies, or some occasion or other happens to alter or mitigte the
matter. But here is no such Apo. 21.
hope or comfort: but cruciabuntur (says the scripture) in secula seculorum,
in stagno ardente igne and sulphur: They shall be tormented for ever and ever,
in a poole burning with fire and brimstone.

As long as God is God, so long shall they burn there: Nether shall the
tormentour nor the tormented dye, but both live eternally, for the eternal
misery of the parties to be punished.

Oh (says one father in a godly meditation) A vvonderfull (...).
if a sinner damned in hell did know that he had to suffer those torments there
no more thousand years, than there be sands in the sea, and grass in the
ground: or no mo thousand millions of ages than there be creatures in heaven,
and in earth: he would greatly rejoice thereof, for he would comfort him self
at the least with this cogitation, that once yet the matter would have an end.
But now (says this good man) this word Never, breaks his heart, when he
thinks on yt, and that after a hundred thousand millions of worlds there
suffered, he has as far to his end as he had at the first day of his
entrance to these torments. Consider (good Christian) what a length one hour
would seem unto the, if thou had but to hold thy hand in fire and
brimstone only during the space thereof. We see if a man be greuouslie
(...), though he be laid upon a very soft bed, yet one night seems a long
time unto him. He turns and tosseth him self from side to side, telling the
clock, and counting every hour, as it passes, which seems to him a whole
day. And if a man should say unto him, that he were to abide that pain but
seven years to gether: he would go nighe to dispare for grief. Now if one
night seem so long and tediouse to him that lies on a good soft bed,
afflicted only with a little ague: what will the lyeing in fire and brimstone
do, when he shall know evidently, that he shall never have end thereof? Oh
(dear brother) the satietie of continuance is lothesome, even in things that
are not evil of them selves. Yfthow should be bound allways to eat one
only meat: yt would be displeasant to the in the end. If thou should be
bound to sit still all thy life in one place, without moving: yt would be
greuouse unto the, albeit no man did torment the in that place. What then will
it be to lie eternally, that is world without end, in most exquisite
torments? is it any way tolerable? What judgment then, what wit, what
discretion is there left in men, which make no more account of this matter than
they do?

I might here add an other circumsta^ce, which the scripture adds, to wit,
that all Da rcke. nes in hell.
these torments shall be in darkness: A thing dreadful of it self, unto man's
nature, for Matt. 8. 22.
there is not the stowtest man in the world, if he found him self alone, and
naked in extreme darkness, and should hear a noise of spirits coming
toward him, but he would fear, albeit he felt never a lashe from them, on his
body. I might also add an other circumstance, that the prophet adds, which
is, that good and good men shall laugh at them Psalm. 36.
that day, which will be no small affiction. For as to be moned by a man's
freende in time of adversity, is some comfort: so to be laughed at, specially
by them, who only may help him, is a great and intolerable increase of his
misery.

And now all this that I have spoken of hitherto, is but one part of a damned
man's punishment only, called by divines paena sensus, the pain of sense or
feeling, that is, the pain or punishment sensibly inflicted upon the soul
and dodye. But (...) beside this, there is an other part of his punisheme^t
called Pains of damage which the damned suffer.
poena damni, the pain of loss or damage: which (by all learned men's
opinion) is either great, or no less than the former. And this is, the
infinite loss which a damned man has in being excluded for ever and ever,
from the sight of his creator, and his glory. Which sight only, being
suffici^ent to make happy and blessed all them that are admitted unto it, must
medes be an infinite misery to the damned man to lack yt eternallye. And
therefore this is put as one of the first and chiefest plagues to be laid upon
him: Tollatur impius ne videat gloriam dei: Let the wicked Esa. 26.
man be taken away, to hell to the end he may not see the glory of God.

And this loss contains all other losses and damages in yt: as the loss of
eternal bliss, and Joy, (as I have said) of eternal glory, of eternal
society, with the Angels, and the like: which losses when a damned man
considers (as he can not but consider them still,) he takes more greef
thereof (as divines do prove) than by all the other sensible torments that he
abides besides.

And therefore here follows now the Thevvor, me of co^ science.
last and one of the greatest torments of all, and for that cause so often
repeated in scripture. Mar. 9.
Which is, the worm of our conscience, so called, Esa. 66.
for that, as a worm Lies eating and Eccle 7.
gnawing the wood where in she abides: so Iudit. 16.
shall the remorse of our own conscience, lie within us griping and torme^ting
us for ever. And this worm or remorse shall principally consiste in bringing
to our minds, all the The cogitations of the damned.
means and causes of our present extreme calamities. as our negligences,
whereby we lost the felicity which other men have gotten. And at every one
of these considerations, this worm shall give us a deadly bite, even unto
the heart. As when it shall lay before us all the occasions that we had
offered to avoid this misery, vvherin now we are fallen, and to gain the
glory which we have lost: how easy yt had been to have done yt: how nighe
we were oftentimes to resolve our felues to do yt: and yet how vnfortunallie
we left of that cogitation again: how many times we were foretold of this
danger, and yet how little care and fear we took of the same. How vain the
wordlie trifles were, wherein we spent our time, and for which we lost heave,
and sell in to this intolerable misery: how they are exalted, whom we
thought fools in the world: And how we are now proved fools and laughed
at, which thought our selves wise. These things (I say) and a thousand
more being laid before us, by our own conscience shall yield us infinite
grief. For that it is now to late to amend them. And this grief is called
the worm or remorse of our own confeie^ce vvhiche^ worm shall more enforce
men to weep and (...), than any torment else, consideringe how negligentlie,
foolishlie, and vairrlie they are come in to those so insupportable torments,
and that now there is no more time to redress their errors.

Now only is the time of weeping and lameting for these men: but all in
vain. Now shall they begin to freat end sum, and marvel at them selves,
sayenig: where was our wit: where was our understanding? where was our
Judgment, when we followed vanities, and cotened these matters? This is the
talk Sap. (...)
of sinners in hell (says the scripture) what has ^ way of iniquity and
perdition, but the way of our Lord we have not known. This (I say) must
be the everlasting song of the damned wormeaten conscience in hell: Eternal
repentance without profitt. Whereby he shall be brought to such desperation (as
the scripture notes) as he shall turn into fury against him self, tear his
own flesh, rent his own foul (if it were possible) and inuit the feendes to
torment him, seeing he has so beastly behaved him self, in this world, as
not to provide in time for this principal matter, only in deed to have been
thought upon. Oh if he could have but an other life to live in the world
again, how would he pass (...) over? with what diligence? with what severity?
but it is not lawful: we only which are yet alive have that singular benefit,
if we knew, or would resolve our selves to make the most of yt. One of these
days, we shall be past it also, and shall not recover it again, no not one
hour, if we would give a thousand worlds, for the same, as in deed the
damned would do, if they might. Let us now therefore so use the benefit of
our present time, as when we are past hense, we have not need to wish our
selves here again.

Now is the time we may avoid all: now is the time we may put our selves out
of danger of these matters: now (I say) if we resolve our selves out of
hand. For we know not what shall become of us to morrow. Yt may be to
morrow our hearts will be as hard and careless of these things as they have
been, heretofore, and; as Pharao his heart was, after Moses departure from him.
Oh that he had resolved him self throvvghlie while Moses was with him,
how happy had he been? if the rich glutton had taken the time while Lazarus
lay at his door, how blyssed a man had he been? he was foretold of his
misery (as we are now) by Moses and Luc. 16.
the prophets, as Christ signifies: but he would not hear Afterward he was
in such admiration of his own folly, that he would have had Lazarus sent from
Abraham's bosom unto his brethren to vvarne them of his success. But Abraham
told him, it was bootelesse, for they would not have believed La zarus, but
rather have persecuted him as a liar and defamer of their honorable brother
dead, if he should have come and told the^ of his torments. In deed so would
the wicked of the world do now if one should come and tell them that their
parents or friends are damned in hell, for such and such things: and do
beseech them to look better to their lives, to the end by their coming
thither they do not increase the others pains, for being some cause of their
damnation (for this is only the cause of care which the damned have
toward the living, and not for ani^ love they now bear them:) if (I say)
such a message should come from hell, to the flourishing sinners of this world,
would they not laugh at yt? would they not persecute eagarlie the partles that
should bring such nevve^ What then can God devise to do for the saving of
these men? what way, what means may he take, when nether warning, nor example
of others, nor threats, nor exhortations will do any good? we know, or may
know, that leading the life which we do, we can not be saved. We know or
ought to know, that many before us have been damned for less matters. We
know and can not choose but know, that we must shortly dye, and receive our
selves, as they have received: living as they did, or worse. We see, by this
laid down before, that the pains are intolerable, and yet eternal, which do
expect us, for the same. We confess them most unfortunate that for any
pleasure or commodity of this world, are now fallen in to those pains. What
then should let us to resolve, to dispache our selves quickly of all
impediments? to breacke violently from all bonds and chains of this wicked
world, that do let us from this true and zealouse service of God? whyshowld
we sleep one night in sin, seeing that night may chance to be our last, and
so the everlasting cutting of, of all hope for the time to come?

Resolve thy self therefore (my dear brother) if thou be wise, and clear thy
self from this danger, while God is willing to receive the, and moves the
thereunto by these means, as he did the rich man by, Moses and the prophets
while he was yet in his prosperity. Let his example be often before thine
eyes, and consider it thoroughly, and it shall do the good. God is a
wounderful God, and to show his patience and infinite goodness, he woweth us in
this life, seeks unto us, and lays him self (as it were) it our feet, to
move us to our own good, to win us, to draw us, and to save us from
perdition. But after this life he alters his course of dealing: he turns
over the leaf, and changes his style. Of a lamb he becomes a lion to the
wicked: and of a Savior, a just and severe punisher. What can be said or done
more to move us? he, that is forewarned and sees his own danger, before his
face, and yet is not stirred nor made the more weary or fearful there by, but
notwithstanding will come or slide in to the same: may well be pityed, but
surely by no means can he be helped, making him self incapable of all
remedies, that may be used.

Of the most honorable and munificent rewards proposed to all them that
truly serve God.

CHAP. X.
THe motives and consideratios laid down before, in the former chapiters
might well suffice, to stir up the heart of any reasonable Christian to take
in hand this resolution whereof we talk, and whereunto I so much covet to
persuade the (for thy onelio good, and gain) gentle reader. But for that all
hearts are not of one constitution in this respect, nor all drawn and stirred
with the same means: I purpose to adioyne here a consideration of commodity,
whereunto co^monlie, each man is prone by nature. And therefore I am in hope it
shall be more forcible to that we go about than any thing else that hitherto
has been spoken: I mean the^ to treat of the benefits which are reaped by
service of God, of the gain drawn thence, and of the good pay and most
liberal reward which God performs to his servants, above all the God the
best pay master.
masters created, that may be served. And though the just fear of punishment,
(if we serve him not) might be sufficient to drive us to this resolution: and
the infinite benefits allredie received, might induce us to the same, in
respect of gratitude, (of both which somewhat has been said before:) yet am
I content so far to enlarge this liberty to thee, (good reader,) that except
I show this resolution, which I crave, to be more gainful and profitable than
any thing else in the world that can be thought of: thou shall not be bound
unto yt for any thing that hitherto has been said in that behalf. For as
God in all other things is a maiesticall God, full of bounty, liberality and
princely magnifice^ce. So in this point above all other: in such sort, as
albeit what so ever we do or can do, is but due dett unto him: and of it
self deserves nothing: yet of his Mat. 10.
munificent Majesty, he lets pass no one Marc. 9.
jot of our service, unrewarded, no not so much as a cup of cold water.

God commanded Abraham to sacrifice Genesis 22.
unto him his only son Isaac, which he loved so much. But when he was
ready to do the same: God said do it not: it is enoughe for me that I see
thy obedience. And because thou have not refused to do it I swear to thee
(says he) by my self, that I will multiply thy seed as the stars of
heaven, and the sands of the sea: and among them also one shall be Christ, the
Savior of the world. Was not this a good pay for so little 2. Re. 7.
pains? king David one night, began to think with him self, that he had
now a house of Cedar, and the arcke of God lay but under a tent, and therefore
resolved to build a house for the said Arcke. Which only cogitation God
took in so good part, as he sent Nathan the prophet unto him presently, to
refuse the thing, but yet to tell him, that for so much as he had determined
such a matter: God would build a house, or rather a kingdom, to him, and his
posterity, which should last for ever, and from which he would never take
away his mercy, what Psa. 88.
sins or offenses so ever they committed. Which promise we see now
fullfilled, in Christ his Church, raised out of that family. What should I
recite many like examples? Christ gives a general note hereof, when he
calls the workmen and pays to each man his wages so duly: as also when
Matt. 20
he says of him self behold I come quickly, Apo. 22.
and my reward is with me. By which places is evident, that God suffers no
labor in his service to be lost or unpaid. And albeit (as after in place
convenient shall be showed) he pays also (and that abundantly) in this life:
yet (as by these two texts appears) he deferreth his chief pay, unto his
coming in the end of the day, that is, after this life, in the resurrection of
the just, as him self says Luc. 14.
in an other place.

Of this payment then reserved for gods servants in the life to come, we are
now to consider, what, and what manner a thing it is, and whether it be woorthe
so much labor and trauail, as the service of God requires or no. And first
of all, if we will belecue the holy scripture, calling it a kingdom, Mat. 25.
2. Tim. 4 2. Pet. 1.
a heavenly kingdom, an eternal kingdom, a most blessed kingdom: we must
needs confess it to be a maruailous great reward: Luc. 14.
for that wordlie princes do not use to give kingdoms to their servants for
recompense of their labors. And if they did, or were hable to do it: yet
could it be nether heavenly nor eternal, nor blessed kingdom. Secondly, if
we credit that which S. Paul says of it, that nether eye has seen, nor
(...) heard, nor 1. Cor. 2.
heart of man conceived, how great a matter it is: Esa. 64.
then must we yet admit a greater opinion thereof. For that we have seen many
wounderfull things, in our days: we have heard more wounderfull: we may
conceive most wounderfull, and almost infinite. How then shall we come to
understand the greatness and value of this reward? surely no tongue created
either of man or Angel can express the same, no imagination conceive, no
understanding comprehend it. Christ him self has said, nemo scit nisi qui
accipit: No man Apoc. (...)
knows it but he that enjoys yt.

And therefore he calls it hidden manna, in the same place. Notwithstanding,
as it is reported of a learned Geometrician that fynding the length of
Hercules foot, upon the hill Olimpus, drew out his whole body, by the
proportion of that one part: so we by some things set down in scripture,
and by some other circumstances agreing thereunto, may frame a conjecture of
the matter, thought it come far behind the thing it self.

I have, showed before how the scripture calls it heavenly, everlasting and
most blessed kingdom. Whereby is signified, that all must be kings that are
admitted thither. To like effect it is called in other places, a Apoc. 2. and 3.
(...) of glory, a throne of majesty, a paradise, or place of pleasure, a
life everlasting. S. John Mat. 16.
the Evangelist being in his banifnement by Luc. 10.
special privilege, made pryuie to some knowledge and feeling thereof, as well
for his own comfort, as for ouers, takes in hand to describe it, by comparison
of a city: Affirming, Apo. 21. and 22.
that the whole city was of pure gold, with a great and high wall of the
pretiouse stone, The description of paradise.
called Iaspis. This wall had also twelve foundations, made of twelve distinct
pretiouse stones which he there names: also twelve gates made of twelve rich
stones called margarits, and, every gate was an entire margarit. The streets
of the city were paued with gold, interlayed also with pearls and pretiouse
stones. The light of the city was the clearenesse and shinyng of Christ him
self, sitting in the midst thereof: from whose seat proceeded a river of
water, as clear as cristall, to refresh the city: and on both sides of the
banks, there grew the tree of life, giving out continual and perpetual
fruit: there was no night in that city, nor any defiled thing entered there:
but they which are within shall reign (says he) for ever and ever.



By this deseription of the most rich and pretiouse things that this world
has, S. John would give us to understand the infinite value, glory and
Majesty of this felicity, prepared for us in heaven: though (as I have noted
before) it being the princely inheritance Heb. 1.
of our Savior Christ, the kingdom of his Mat. 13.
father, the eternal habitatio^ of the holy Trinity, prepared before all
worlds to set out the glory, and express the power of him that has no end
or measure, either in power or glory: we may very well think with S. Paul,
that nether tongue can declare it, not heart imagine it.

When God shall take upon him to do a thing for the vttermoste declaration
(in a certain sort) of his power, wisdom, and Majesty: imagine you what a
thing it will be. It pleased him at a certain time, to make certain The erea tion
of Angels.
creatures to serve him in his presence, and to be witnesses of his glory: and
thereupon with a word, created the Angels, both for numberand perfection so
strange and wounderfull, as makes man's understanding astonished to think of
it. For as for their number they were almost infinite, passing the number of
all the creatures of this inferior woorlde, as diverse learned men and some
ancient fathers do think: though Daniel (according to the fashion of the
scripture) do putt a certain number for an uncertain, when he says of
Angels, a thousand Dan. (...).
thovvsands did minister unto him (that is unto God ( and tenn thousand times
a hundreed thousand, did stand abovvt him to assist. And for their Psa. (...).
perfection of nature, it is such, (being, as the scripture says, spirits
and like burning fire) as they far surpass all inferior creatures, in
natural knowledge, power, and the like, wherein one Angel does exceed all
men in t^he world put together. What an infinite Majesty does this argue in
the creator?

After this, when many of these Angels The etea tio^ of the world, to expres
se the power. of God.
were fallen: it pleased God to creat an other creature, far inferior to
this, for to fill up the places of such as had fallen: and there upon created
man of a piece of claye as you know, appointing him to live a certain time in a
place distant from heaven, created for this purpose, which is this world: a
place of entertainmet and trial for a time, which afterward is to be
destroyed again. But yet in creating of this transitory world, (which is
but a cotage to his owh eternal habitatio^) what power, what magnificence,
what Majesty has he showed? what heavens and how wounderfull has he created?
what infinite stars and other lights has he devised? what elements has he
framed? and how marvelously has he co^pacte the^ together? The seas tossing
and tumbling without rest, and replenished with infinite sorts of fish: the
ryuers running incessantly through the earth like veins in the body, and yet
never to be empty nor ouerflow the same: the earth it self so furnished with
all variety of creatures, as the hundredth part thereof, is not employed by
man, but only remains to show the full hand, and strong arm of the
creator. And all this (as I said) was done in an instant, with one word
only: and that for the use of a small time, in respect of the eternity to
come. What then shall we imagine that the habitatio^ prepared for that eterni
tie shall be? if the cotage of his meanest servant (and that made only for a
time to bearof as it were a shower of rain) be so princely, so gorgeouse, so
magnificet, so Maiesticall, as we see this world is what must we think that
the kings palace it self is, appointed for all eternity, for him and his
friends to reign together? We must needs think it to be as great, as the
power and wisdom of the maker could reach unto, to perform: and that is,
incomparably, and above all measure infinite. The great king Assuerus, which
reigned Ester. 1.
in Asia over a hundred twenty and seven provinces, to discover his power and
riches to his subjects, made a feast (as the scripture says) in his city of
Susa, to all princes, states and potentates, of his dominions, for a hundred
and fovverscore days together. Esaias the prophet says, that our God and Esa.
25.
lord of hoosts, will make a solemn banquet to all his people upon the hill
and mount of heaven, and that a harvest banquet, of fatt meats and pure
vvines. And this ba^quet shall be so solemn, as the very son of God him Lu. 12.
self, chief Lord of the feast, shall be content to gyrd him self, and to
serve in the same, as by his own words he promises. What manner of banquet
then shall this be? how magnificent! how maiesticall especially seeing it
has not only to endure a hundred and four score days, (as that of Assuerus
did,) but more than a hundred and fourscore millions of ages: not served by men
(as assuerus feast was) but by angels, and the very son of God him self:
not to open the power and riches of a hundred twenty and seven provinces,
but of God him self, king of kings, and lord of lords, whose power and
riches are without end, and greater than all his creatures together can
conceive? How gloriouse a banquet (...) this be then? how triumpha^t a joy of
this festival day? o miserable and foolish childeren of men, that are borne to
so rare and singular a dignity, and yet can not be brought to cousider, love,
or esteem of the same. The plea sures and commo^dities of this life.


Other such considerations there be to show the greatness of this felicity:
as that, if God has given so many pleasures and comfortable gyfts in this
life, (as we see are in the world) being a place notwthstanding of banishment,
a place of sinners, a vale of misery, and the time of repenting, weeping, and
wayling: what will he do in the life to come, to the just, to his friends, in
the time of Apo. 19. In solilo quiis any mae ad Deum.
joy, and marriage of his son? This was a most forcible consideration with
good S. Augustine, who in the secret speech of his soul with god, said thus:
O Lord, if thou for this vile body of ours, give us so great and Innumerable
benefits, from the firmament, from the air, from the earth, from the sea: by
light, by darkness, by heat, by shadow: by dewes, by showers, by winds, by
raines: by byrds, by fishes, by beasts, by trees: by multitu de of herbs, and
variety of plants, and by the ministry of all thy creatures: O sweet lord
what manner of things, how great, how good, and how innumerable, are those which
thou haste prepared in our heavenly country, where we shall see thee face
to face? if thou do so great things for us in our priso: what vvilt thou
give us in our palace? if thou geuest so many things in this world, to good
and evil men together: what have thou laid up for only good men in the
world to come? if thine enemies and friends together are so well provided for
in this life: what shall thy only friends receive in the life to come: if
there be so great solaces in these days of tears what joy shall there be in
that day of Apo. 19.
Marriage? if our iayle co^tain so great matters: what shall our country and
kingdom do? O my lord and God, thou art a great God, and great is the
multitude of thy magnificence and Psalm. 30.
sweetness. And as there is no end of thy greatness, nor number of thy wisdom,
nor measure of thy benignity: so is there nether end, number, nor measure of
thy rewards, toward them that love and fight for thee. Hither to S. Augustine.
How much God honoreth man.




An other way to conjecture of this felicity is, to consider the great
promises which God makes in the scriptures, to honor and glorify man in the
life to come. Who so 1. Re. 2.
ever shall honor me (says God) I will glorify Psa. 138.
him. And the prophet David, as it were complains joyfully. that Gods
friends were to much honored by him. Which he might with much more cause
have said, if he had lived in the new testament, and had Luc. 12.
heard that promise of Christ whereof I spoke before, that his servants should
sit down and banquet, and that him self would serve and minister unto them in
the kingdom of his father. What understanding can conceive, how great this
honor shall be? But yet i^ some part it may be gessed, by that he says, that
they Ma. 19.
shall sit in judgment with him: and (as S. Luc. 22.
Paul adds,) shall be Judges not only of 1. Co. 6.
men, but also of Angels. It may also be coniectured by the exceedinge great
honor which god at certain times has done to Mat. 10.
his servants, even, in this life. VVherin notwithstanding they are placed to
be despised and not to be honored. What great honor Genesis 12. L4: 20.
was that he did to Abraham in the sight of so many kings of the earth, as of
pharao, Abimalech, Exo. 5. 6 7. 8.
Melchiseedech, and the like? What honor was that he did to Moses and Aaron
in the face of Pharao and all his court, by the wonderful signs that they
wrought? What excessive honor was that he did to holy Iosue, when in the
sight of all his army he stayed the sun and Moon in the midst of the
firmament, at Iosue his appointement, Iosu. 10.
obeyng therein (as the scripture says) to the voice of a man? what honor
Esa. 38.
was that he did to Esaias in the sight of king Ezechias, when he made the sun
to go back ten degrees in the heavens? what honor was that he did to
helias in the sight 3. Re. 17.
of wicked Achab, when he yielded the (...) in to his hands, and permitted him
to say, that nether rain nor dew should fall upon the ground (for certain
years) but by the words of his mouth only? what honor was that he did to
Elizeus in the sight 4. Re. 5.
of Naaman the noble Syrian, whom he cured only by his word from the
Liprosie? 4. Re. 13
and his bones after his death raised (by only touching) he dead to life?
finally (not to allege more examples heerin,) what singular honor was that,
he gave to all the Apostles of his son, that as many as ever they laid hands
on, were healed from all infirmities, Act. 5.
as S. Luck says? Nay (which is yet more) the very girdles and napkins of
S. Act. 19.
Paul did the same effect, and yet more than that also, as many as came within
the only shadow of S. Peter, were healed from their Act. 5.
diseases. Is not this maruailous honor even in this life? was there ever
Monarche, prince, or potentate of the world, which could vaunt of such
points of honor? And if Christ did this, even in this world to his servants,
whereof notwithstanding he says his kingdom was not: what honor shall Ioh.
18.
we think he has reserved for the world to 2. Ti. 4.
come, where his kingdom shall be, and where Apo. 4.
all his servants shall be crowned as kings with him? The three placesvvher to
a man is appointed.


An other declaration yet of this matter is laid down by divines for opening of
the greatness of this beatitude in heaven: and that is, the consideration of
three places, whereto man by his creation is appointed. The first is his
mothers womb, the second this present world, the third is caelum Empireum,
which is the place of bliss in the life to come. Now in these three places,
we must hold the proportion (by all reason) which we see sensibly to be
observed between the first two. So that Look in what proportion the socond
does differ from the first: in like measure must the third differ from the
second, or rather much more: seeing that the whole earth put together, is by
all Philosophy, but as a prick or small point in respect of the maruailouse
greatness of the heavens. By this proportion then we must say, that as far
as the whole world does pass the womb of one private woman: so much in all
beauty, delites, and majesty does the place of bliss pass all this whole
world. And as much as a man living in the world does pass a child in his
mothers belly, in strength of body, beauty, wit understanding, learning and
knowledge: so much and far more, does a Saint in heaven pass men of this
world, in all these things, and many more besides. And as much horror as a
man would have, to turn into his mothers womb again: so much would a
glorified soul have, to return into this world again. The nyene months
also of life in the mothers womb, are not so little in respect of man's life in
the world, as is the longest life upon earth, in respect of the eternal life
in heaven. Nor the blyndenesse, ignorance, and other miseries of the child in
his mothers womb, are any way comparable to the blyndenesse, ignorance, and
other miseries of this life, in respect of the light, clear knowledge, and
other felicities of the life to come. So that by this also, some conjecture may
be made of the matter which we have in hand.

But yet to consider the thing more in Two parts of (...) in heaven.
particular, it is to be noted, that this glory of heaven shall have two
parts, the one called effentiall, belonging to the soul: the other called
accidental, belonging to the body. The accedentall. part.
The essential co^ststeth in the vision of God, as shall be showed after. The
accidental consists in the change and glorification of our flesh, after the
general resurrection, that is, whereby this corruptible body of ours, shall 1.
Co. 15.
put on incorruption (as S. Paul says) and of mortal become immortal. All
this flesh (I Sap. 9.
say) of ours, that now is so combersome and Ephesians. 4.
aggreeueth the mind: that now is so infested with so many inconveniences,
subject to so many mutations: vexed with so many diseases: defilede with so
many corruptions: replenished with so infinite miseries and calamities: shall
then be made g'oriouse, and most perfect to endure for ever, without mutatio^,
and to reign with the soul world without end. And for this purpose (as
divines do prove) it shall be endewed with certain qualities and gifts from
God, which holy S. In lib de similitudinibus c. 48. 49. and sequen tibus.
Anselm whom in this matter I will follow) does reckon to be seven, to wit,
beawtie, agilitie, fortitude, penetrabilitie, health, pleasure, and
perpetuity, all which, either want in the damned bodies, or else the
contraries thereof are fownd in the same. And first touching 1. Beauty
the beauty of glorified bodies, how great it shall be, our Savior him self
declares, Mat. 13.
when he says. At that day shall the Just shine as the sun in the kingdom
of their father. A maruailouse sayeing of Christ, and in humane sense almost
incredible, that our putrified bodies should shine and become as clear as the
sun. Whereas in the contrary part, the bodies of the damned shall be as
black and ugly, as silthe it self. The second quality is agilitie or
velocitie. whereby the glorified 2. Agilitie.
body, is delivered from this lumpishe heuinesse, wherewith it was pestered in
this life, and made as light as the Angels them selves, which are spirits, and
do pass from place to place with infinite swiftness, as also do ascend and
desce^d of them selves, against the nature of corruptible bodies: whereas in
the mean space, the damned bodies shall be bound both hand and foot, not able
to move, Mat. 22.
as the scripture signifies.

The third quality is strength, where 3. Stre^gthe.
with the glorified body shall so abunde (as Anselmus says) as he shall be
able to move Cap. 52.
the whole earth if he would: and co^trarywise, the damned body shall be so
weak and impotent, as he shall not be able o remove the very worms from his
own face and eyes. The 4 Pene (...)
fowerth quality shall be penetrabilitie, or liberty of passage, whereby the
glorisied body shall be able to pearse and penetrate any other body? as to go
thorough walls, doors, the earth or firmament without resistance, contrary
to the nature of a corruptible, body. So we see that Christ his body
glorified, after his resurrection, passed in to his disciples, the doors being
shut, and pearsed Ioh. 20.
also the heavens at his ascension, as the scripture says. The fyfthe
quality is health, whereby the glorified body shall be delivered Heb. 4.
from all diseases and pains of this life, 5 Health.
and from all troubles and encombrances belonging to the same: as sin,
eating, drinking sleeping, and the like: and shall be set in a most perfect and
flourishing state of health, never decayable again: whereas the damned body
incontrarye manner, shall be filled and stuffed with as many diseases pains
and torments both invvardlie and ovvtvvardlie as by the vvisdome of God may
be devised.

The sixthe quality is pleasure vvherevvith 6. Pleasis re.
the glorisied body above all measure shall be replenished, all their senses
together, finding now their proper objects, in much more excellency than
ever they could in this world (as shall be shevved after) Now (I say) every
part, sense, member, and joint shall be filled with exceeding pleasure: even
as the same shall be tormented in the damned. I will here allege Anselmus
his words for that they express lively this matter. All Cap. 57.
the glorified body (says he) shall be filled with abundance of all kind of
pleasure, the eyes, the ears, the nose, the mouth, the hands the throote, the
lungs, the heart, the stomach, the back, the boones, the marovve, the entrales
them selves, and every part thereof, shall be replenished with such
unspeakable svvetenesse and pleasure, that truly it may be said, that the
whole man is made to drink of the river of Gods divine pleasures, and made
Psalm. 35.
dronken with the abundance of Gods house.



In contrary wise the damned body, shall be tormented in all his parts and
members: eue^ as if you savve a man that had a burning yro^ thrust in to his
eyes, an other into his mouth, an other into his breest, an other into his
ribs, and so through all the ioints, parts, and members of his body. Would
you not think him miserable, and the other man happy?

The last quality is perpetuity of life whereby the body is made sure now
never ^
to die, or alter from his felicity, according to the sayeing of scripture,
that the just shall live Sap. 5.
for ever. this is one of the cheifest prerogatives of a glorified body. For
by this, all care and fear is taken away, all danger of hurt and noyance, for
if all the world should fall upon a glorified body, it could not hurt or
harm it any thing at all: where^ as the damned body lies always in dyeing,
and is subject to the grief of every blow and torment laid upon it, and so
must remayn world without end, These seven qualities then do make a glorified
body happy. And albeit this happiness be but accidental (as I have said)
and nothing in deed to the essential felicity of the soul: yet is it no
small matter as you see, but such as if any body in this life had but one of
these seven qualities, we should think him most happy, and rather a God
than a man. And to obtain one of them in this woalde, many men would spend
much and adventure far: whereas to get them all in the life to come, none
allmoste will take any pains.

But now to come to the essential point The essential felicity of the soul
of this felicity which pertayneth to the soul, as the principal part: it
is to be understood, that albeit there be many things that do concur in
this felicity, for the accomplishment and perfection of happiness. Yet the
fontaine of all is but one only thing, called by divines Visi, dei beatifica:
the sight of god that makes us happy? Hec sola est summum bonum nostrum,
says S. Auguston: Aug. 1. de (...). c. 13
this only sight of god, is our happiness: Which Christ also affirms,
when he says to his father, this is life everlasting, that men Ioh. 17.
know the true god, and Jesus Christ uvhome thou have sent. S. Paul also
puts our felicity, in seeing god, face to face. And S. John, in seeing god,
as 1. Co. 13
he is. And the reason of this is, for that all the pleasures and co^te^tatio^s
in the world being only little sparkles and parcells sent out from god: they
are all contained much more perfectly and excellently in god him self, than
they are in their own natures created: as also all the perfections of his
creatures are more fully in him, han in them selves. Whereof it follows,
that who soever is admitted to the vision and presence of god, he has all
the goodness and perfections of creatures in the world united together, and
presented unto him at once. So that what soever deliteth either body or soul,
there he enjoys it wholye knit up together as it were in one bundle, and with
the presence thereof is ravished in all parts both of mind and body: as he
can not imagine, think, or wish for auie joy what soever, but there he
finds it in his perfection: there he (...) all knowledge, all wisdom, all
beauty, all riches, all no bitie, all goodness, all delight, and what so ever
boside deserves either love and admiration, or woorketh either pleasure or
contentation. All the powers of the mind shall be filled with this sight,
presence, and fruition of God: all the senses of our body (...) satisfied: God
shall be the universal: felicity of all his saints, contaning in him self all
particular felicities, without end, number, or measure. He shall be aglasse to
our eyes; music to our ears, honey to our mowthes, most sweet and pleasant
balm to our smell: he shall be light to our understanding, contentation to our
will, continuation of eternity to our memory. In him shall we enjoy all the
variety of times, that delight us here: all the beauty, of creatures that
allure us here: all the pleasures and Joys that content Hug. lib. 4. de anima.
ca. 15
us here. In this vision of God (says one doctor) we shall know, we shall
love, we shall rejoice we shall praise. We shall know the very secrets and
judgments of God. which are a depthe vuithout bottom: Also, the causes
knovvleige.
natures, beginnings, ofsprings, and ends of all creatures. Well all love
inco^patablie, both, Psa. 35. Love.
God, (for the infinity canses of love that we see in him:) and our
companions as much as our seluos, for that we shall see them as much loved of
God as our selves, and that also for the same for which we are loved: whereof
enseweth, that our joy shall be without measure: both for that we shall have a
particular joy for every thing we love in God (which are infinite:) and also
for that, The grea tenes of joy in heaven.
we shall reloyse at the felicity of (...) of our companions, as much as at
our own: and by that means we shall have so many distinct felicities, as we
shall have distinct companions in our felicity: which being without number: it
is no marvel though Christ said Mat. 25.
go in to the joy of they Lord, and not, let the lords joy enter in to
thee: for that no one heart created can receive the fulness and greatness of
this joy. Hereof it follows lastly, that we shall praise God without end or
weariness, with all our heart, with all our strength, with all our powers,
with all our parts: according as the scripture says: Psalm. 83.
Happy are they that live, in thy house (o lord) for they shall praise the
(...) rnallye without end.

Of this most blessed vision of God, the Tra. 4. in (...) Ioh.
liolie father S. Austen writes thus: Happy are the cleene of heart. For they
shall see God (says Matt. 5.
our savior:) then is there a vision of God (dear brethren) which makes us
happy: A vision (I say) which nether eye has seen in this world, nor ear
has heard, nor heart conceived. A vision, that passes all the beauty of p.
Co. 3.
earthly things, of gold, of silver, of woods, of feeldes, of sea, of air,
of sun, of moon, Aug. c. 36 soliloq.
of stars, of Angels: for that all these things have their beauty from
thence. We 1. Co. 13.
shall see him face to face (says the Apostle,) and we shall know him, as
vue are knouven. We shall know the power of the father: we shall know the
wisdom of the son, we shall know the goodness of the holy gho ste: we shall
know the (...) nature of the most blessed trinity. And this seeing of the face
of God, is the joy of Angels, and all saints in heaven. This is the reward of
life everlasting: this is the glory of blessed spirits, their everlasting
pleasure, their croune of honor, their game of felicity, their rich rest,
their beautiful peace, their. inward and outward joy, their divine paradise,
their heavenly Jerusalem, their felicity of life, their fulness of bliss,
their eternal joy, their peace of God, that passes all understanding. Psalm.
4.
This sight of God, is the full beatitude, the total glorification of man, to
see him (I say) that made both heauene and earth, to see him that made the,
that redeemed the, that glorified the. For in seeing him, thou shall know him,
in knoweing him, thou shall possess him, in possessing him, thou shall love
him, in loving him thou shall praise him. For he is the inheritance of his
people, he is the possession of their folicitie, he is the reward of their
expectation. I will be thy great Genesis 15.
revvard (says he) o Abraham. O lord thou art great, and therefore no marvel
if thou be a great reward. The sight of thee therefore is all our hyare, all our
reward, all our joy and felicity, that we expect: seeing thou have said, that
this is life everlasting, to see and Io. 17.
know thee our true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent.



Having now declared the two general parts of heavenly felicity, the one
appertayning to our soul, the other to our body: it is not hard to esteem,
what excess of joy, both of them joined together shall work, at that
happy day of our glorification. O joy above all joys passing all Joy, Ca.
35. so (...).
and without which there is no joy, when shall I enter in to thee (says S.
Austen?) when shall I enjoy thee to see my God that dwells in thee? o
everlasting kingdom, o kingdom Phil. 4.
of all eternities, o light without end, o peace of God that passes all
understanding, in which, the souls of Saints do rest with thee, and
everlasting joy is upon their heads, Esa. 51.
they possess joy and exultation, and all pain Esa. 35.
and sorrow is fled from them. O how gloriouse a kingdom is thine (o lord)
wherein all Saintesdoe reign with thee, adorned with Psa. 103.
light as with apparel, and having crowns of Psalm. 20.
pretiouse stones on their heads? O kingdom of everlasting bless, where thou
o lord the hope of all saints art, and the diadem of their perpetual glory,
rejoicing them on every side, with thy blessed sight. In this kingdom of
thine, there is infinite joy, and myrthe without sadness: health without
sorrow: life without labor: light without darkness: felicity without
abatement: all goodness without any evil. Where youth florisheth that never
waxes old: life that knows no end: beauty that never fades: love that
never cools: health that never diminishes: joy that never cease. Where
sorrow is never fealt, complaint is never heard, matter of sadness is never
seen, nor evil success is ever feared. For that they possess thee (o Lord)
which art the perfection of their felicity.



If we would enter into these co^sideratio^s, as this holy man, and other his
like did: no doubt but we should more be inflamed with the love of this
felicity, prepared for us, than we are: and consequently should strive more
to gain it than we do. And to the end thou may conceive some more feeling
in A comfortable consideration
the matter (gentle reader:) consider a little with me, what a joyful day shall
that be at thy house, when having lived in the fear of god, and atchiued in
his service the end of thy peregrination, thou shall come (by the means of
death) to pass from misery and labor to immortality: and in that passage
(when other men begin to fear) thou shall lift up thy head in hope,
according as Christ promi Luc. 21.
seth, for that the time of thy salvation comes on: tell me, what a day shall
that be when thy soul stepping forth of prison, and conducted by the Angeles
to the tabernacle of heaven, shall be received there with the honorable
companies and troops of that place? with all Ephe. 1.
those hierarchies of blessed spirits mentioned Colos. 1.
in scripture, as principalities, powers, virtues, 1. The. 1.
Dominatio^s, Thrones, Angels, Archeangels, Esa. 6.
Cherubines, and Seraphines? also with the holy Apostles and Disciples of
Christ, Patriarchs, Prophets, Martyrs, Virgins, Innocents, Confessors,
Bishopes, Priests, and Luc. 15.
Saints of Cod? All which, as they did rejoice at thy conversion from sin: so
shall they triumph now at thy coronation and glorification. What joy will
thy soul receive in that day, when she shall be presented by her good Angel, in
the presence of all these states, before the seat and Majesty of the blessed
Trinity, with recital and declaration of all thy good works, and travails
suffered for the love and service of God? when (I say) those blessed spirits
shall lay down in that honorable consistory, all thy virtuous deeds in
particular, all thy alms, all thy prayers, all thy fastinges, all thy
innoce^cie of life, all thy patience in injuries, all thy constancy in
adversities, all thy temperance in meats, all the virtues of thy whole life?
when all (I say) shall be recounted there, all commended, all rewarded: shall
thou not see now the valor and profit of virtuous life? shall thou not
confess that gaynefull and honorable, is the service of God? shall thou not
now be glad and bless the hour, wherein first thou resoluedst thy self to
leave the service of the woorlde, to serve God? shall thou not think thy self
beholden to him or her that persuaded thee unto yt? yes verily.

But yet more than this, when thou shall The joy of security.
consider in to what a port and haven of security thou art come, and shall
look back upon the dangers which thou have passed, and wherein other men
are yet in hazard: thy cause of joy shall greatly be increased. For thou
shall see evidently how infinite times thou were to perish in that journey,
if God had not held his special hand over thee. Thou shall see the Dangers
wherein other men are, the death and damnation whereinto many of thy friends
and acquayntance have fallen: the eternal pains of hell incurred by many that
used to laughe and be merye with thee in the world. All which shall augment
the felicity of this thy so fortunate a lot. And now for thy self, thou
may be secure, thou art out of all danger for ever and ever. There is no
more need now of fear, of wache, of labor, or of care. Thou may lay down
all armoure now, as the Iosu. 21.
children of Israel did when they came into 22.
the land of promise: for there is no more enemy Gene. 3.
to assail thee: there is no more wyelie Sap. 17.
serpent to beguile thee: all is peace, all is rest, all is joy, all is
security. Good S. Paul has 1. Co. 9.
no more need now to fast, to wache, to punish his body: Good old Jerome,
may now Iero. ep. 22. ad Eusto.
cease to afflict him self both night and day for the conquering of his
spiritual enemy. Thy only exercise must be now to rejoice Apo. 19.
to triumph, to sing alleluya to the Lamb, which has brought the to this
felicity, and will keep thee in the same, world without end. What a comfort
will it be to see that lamb sittinge on his seat of state? if the three Mat. 2.
wise men of the East, came so far of, and so reioysed to see him lyeing in a
Manger: what will it be to see him sitting in his glory? If Luc. 1.
S. John Baptist did leap at his presence in his mothers belly: what shall his
presence do in this his royal and eternal kingdom? It passes all other
glory that saints have in heaven Sermon. 37. de sanctis
(says S. Austen) to be admitted to the inestimable sight of Christ his face,
and to receive the beams of glory from the splendoure of his majesty. And if
we were to suffer torments every day, yea to tolerate the very pains of
hell for a time, therbye to gain the sight of Christ, and to be joined in
glory to the number of his saints: it were nothing in respect of the reward.

O that we made such account of this matter as this holy and learned man did:
we would not live as we do, nor leese the same for such tryfles as most men
do.

But to goo forward yet further in Meetinge withdraw our fryndes in heaven.
this consideration: Imagine besides all this, what a joy it shall be unto thy
soul at that day, to meet with all her godly friends in heaven, with
father, with mother, with brothers, with sisters: with wife, with husband, with
master, with scholares: with neighbors, with familiares, with kynred, with
acquayntance: the welcomes, the myrthe, the sweet embracementes that shall be
there, the joy whereof (as notes well S. Cyprian) Cyp. lib. de mortalitate.
shall be unspeakable. Add to this, the dalye feasting and inestimable triumph,
which shall be there, at the ariuall of new brethren and sisters coming thither
from time to time with the spoils of their enemies, conquered and vanquyshed
in this world. O what a comfortable sight will it be to see those seats of
Angels fallen, filled up again with men and women from day to day? to see
the crowns of glory set upon their heads, and that in 2. Ti. 4.
variety, according to the variety of their co^questes. Apoc. 2. 3. 4.
One for martyrdom, or confession against the persecutor: an other for
virginity or chastity against the flesh: an other for poverty or humility
against the world an other for many conquestes together against the devil?
There the gloriouse quyar of Apo Lib, de (...)
stles, (says holy Cyprian) there the number of rejoicing prophets, there
the innumerable multitude of Martyrs shall receive the crounes of their deaths
and sufferinges. There, triumphing virgins which have overcome concupiscence
with the strength of continency: there, the good aulmners which have
liberally fedd the poor, and (keeping gods commandments) have transferred
their earthly riches to the storehowse of heaven, shall receive their due and
peculiar reward.

O how shall virtue show her self at this day? how shall good deeds content
their doers? And among all other joys and contentations, this shall not be the
least, to see the poor souls that come thither at a iumpe, either from the
misery of this life, or from the torments of the purging fire, how they (I
say) shall remain astonished, and as it were, beside them selves, at the
sudden mutation, and excessive honor done unto them. If a poor man, that
were out of his way, wanderinge A comparison.
alone in a durtie lane, in the myddest of a dark and tempestuous night, far
from company, destitute of money, beaten with rain, terrified with thunder,
styffe with cold, wearied out with labor, almost famished with hungre and
thurst, and near brought to despare with multitude of miseries, should upon
the sudden, in the twinkling of an eye, be placed in a goodly large and rich
palace, furnished with all kind of clear lights, warm fire, sweet smelles,
dayntie meats, soft beds, pleasant music, fine apparel, and honorable
company: all prepared for him, and attending his coming, to serve him, to
honor him, and to annoint and crown him a king for ever: what would this poor
man do? how would he look? what could he say? surely I think he could say
nothing, but rather would weep in silence for joy, his heart being not able to
contain the sudden and exceeding greatness thereof.

Well then, so shall it be and much more with these twyse happy sowles, that
come to heaven. For never was there cold shadow so pleasant in a hoate burning
sunnye day: nor the welspring to the poor trauailer in his greatest thirst of
the summer: nor the repose of an easy bed to the weari^ed seruat after his
labor at night: as shall be this rest of heaven to an afflicted soul which
comes thither. O that we could conceive this, that we could imprint this in
our hearts (dear brother) Would we follow vanities as we do? would we neglect
this matter as we do? Surely our coldenes in purchasing these joys does
proceed of the small opinion we do conceive of them. For if we made such
account and estimate of this Jewel, as other marcha^ts before us (more
skillful The great acceu^t that saints ma de of hea (...)
and wyser than our selves) have done: we would bydde for it as they did, or at
leastwyse would not let it pass so negligent ie, which they sought after so
carefullye S. Paul says of Christ him self, propofito (...) Heb. 12.
gaudio sustinuit crucem: He layinge before his eyes, the joys of heaven,
sustained the cross.

A great est imation of the matter, which he would buy at so dear a rate.
But what counsel gives he to other men about the same? surely none other,
but to go and sell all Mat. 13.
that ever they have to purchase this treasure. S. Paul of him self, what
says he? verily, that he esteemed all the uvorld as Doung, in respect Phil.
3.
of the purchasing of this Lewell. S. Paul's scholar Ignatius, what byddeth he?
hear his Ierom. in catalogo
own words. Fire, galowes, beasts, breaking of my bones, quartering of my
members, crusshing of my body, all the torments of the devil together, let
them come upon me, so I may enjoy this treasure of heaven.

S. Austen Ser. 31. de sanctis.
that learned bishop, what offers he! you have now heard, before that he
would be co^te^t to suffer torments every day, yea the very torments of hell it
self to gain this joy: Good Lord, how far did these holy Saints differ
from us? how contrary were their judgments to ours in these matters? who
will now maruayle of the wisdom of the world, judged folly by God, and of the
wisdom of god 1. Cor. 1.
judged folly by the world? Oh children of 2. and 3.
men (says the prophet) why do ye love vanity Psalm. 4.
and seek after a lie? why do you embrace straw and contemn gold? straw
(I say) and most vile chafe, and such as finally will set your own house on
fire, and be your ruin and eternal perdition?

But now to draw toward an end in Whereto a Christian is borne by baptism.
this matter (though there be no end in the thing it self:) let the Christian
consider whereto he is borne, and whereof he is in possibility, if he will. He
is borne heir apparet to the kingdom of heaven: a kingdom without end, a
kingdom without measure, Gal. 3. and 4.
a kingdom of bliss, the kingdom of God him self: he is borne to be joint
heir Ephe. 1. and 5.
with Jesus Christ the son of God: to reign with him: to triumph with him:
to sit in Colos. 3.
Judgment of Majesty with him: to judge Tit. 3.
the very Angeles of heaven with him. What Romans 8.
more glory can be thought upon, except it Iac. 2.
were to become God him self? All the Heb. 1. 9.
joys, all the riches, all the glory, that heaven 1. Pe. 1. 3
contains shall be poured out upon 2. Pet. 3,
him. And to make this honor yet more: the Apoc. 1.
gloriouse lamb that sits on the throne Mat. 19.
of Majesty, with his eyes like fire, his feet Luc. 22.
like burning copper, and all his face more 1. Co. 6.
shynyng than preciouse stone: from whose Apo. 1. and 4.
seat there proceeds thunder and lightening without end: and at whose feet the
four and Luc. 12.
twenty elders lay down their erownes: this lamb (I say) shall rise and
honor him with his own service. Who will not esteem of this royal
inheritance? especially seeing the gayning thereof by the benefit of our
redemption, and grace pnrchased to us therein, is brought now to be in our own
hands? The kingdom of heaven suffers violence (says Mat. 11.
Christ) and men lay hands now on it by force: That is, by force of gods
covenant made with Matt. 5. and 9.
Christians, that living vertuouslre, they shall have the same. What soever
Christian then, Ioh. 14.
does good works and lives virtuously, 1. Co. 7.
takes heaven by force (as it were) and by 1. Ioh. 2.
violence. The matter is put in the power of the doer (says S. Austen,) for
that the kingdom of Sermon 37. de sactis.
heaven suffers violence. This thing (o man) that is, the kingdom of heaven,
requires no other price but thy self: yt is so much vvoorthe as thou art
vvoorthe: give thy self and thou shall have it. By which he signifies, that
every man, how poor or needye soever he be in this world, may gain this a^
herita^ce to him self: may make him self a prince, a king, a Monarche if he
will: even the moanest and miserablest man in the wourlde. O wunderfull bounty
and liberality of our Savior: o princely heart and unspeakable mercy: o
incredible prodigality (as I may say) of God in treasures so inestimable, as
are his infinite and endless riches.

Tell me now (gentle read) why will thou not accept of this his offer? why
will thou not account of this his kingdom? why will thou not buy this glory
of him for so little a labor as he requires? Suadeo tibi emere Apoc. 3.
a me aurum ignitum, probatum, vt locuples fies (says Christ.) I counsel
the to buy pure and tried gold of me, to the end thou may be rich.

Why will thou not follow this counsel (dear brother?) sepecialie of a
marcha^t that means not to deceive thee? Nothing greeueth this our Savior
more, than that men will seek with such pains to buy Exodus 5.
straw in Egypt, whereas he would sell them fine gold at a lower price: and
that they will purchase pudle water, with more labor, than he would require
for ten times as (...). 2.
much pure liquor out of the very sontaine Apo. 21.
it self. There is not the whickedest man in the world, but takes more
travail in gayning of hell, (as after shallbe showed) than the most paynfull
servant of God in purchasing of heaven.

Follow thou not their folly then (dear brother) for thou shall see them do
heavy The vanity of worldly men.
penance for it one day, when thy heart shall be full glad, thou have no part
among them. Let them go now and bestow their time in vanity, in pleasures, in
delites of the world. Let them buyld palaces, purchase dignities, add pieces
and paches of ground together: let them hunt after honors and buyld castells
in the air: the day will come (if thou believe Christ him self) wherein Luc 6.
thou shall have small cause to envy their Luc. 12.
felicity. If they talk baselie of the glory Mat. 26.
and riches of Saints in heaven: not esteeming them in deed in respect of
their own, or contemnyng them, for that carnal pleasures are not reckonned
therein: make little account of their words. For that the sensual 1. Co. 2.
man understands not the things which Ep. Iud.
are of God. If horses were promised by their A similitude.
masters, a good banquet, they could imagine nothing else but prouander and
water, to be their best cheer, for that they have no know lege of dayntier
dishes: so these men accustomed to the pudle of their fleshly pleasures, can
mount with their mind no higher than the same. But I have showed thee before
(gentle reader) some ways and considerations, to conceive greater matters,
albeit as I have advertised the often, we must confess still, with S. Paul,
that no human heart 1. Cor. 2.
can conceive the least part thereof, for which cause also it is not unlike
that S. Paul him 2. Co. 12.
self was forbidden to utter the things which he had seen and heard, in his
miraculouse assumption unto the third heaven.

To conclude then, this game and gole 1. Cor. 6.
is set up for them that will run, as S. Paul Phil. 3.
notes: and no man is crowned in this glory 2. Tim. 2
but such only as will fight, as the same 1. Ti. 6.
Apostle teaches. It is not every one that says Heb. 12.
to Christ, lord lord, shall enter into the Matt. 7. 19. 25.
kingdom of heaven: but they only which shall do the will of Christ his
father in heaven. Though this kingdom of Christ be set out to all: yet
every man shall not come to reign with Christ, but such only as shall Romans 8.
be content to suffer with Christ. Though the Mat. 11.
kingdom of heaven be subject to violence: yet no man can enter there by
force, but he Apo. 14, and 20.
only whose good deeds go with him, to help open the gates: that is,
except he enter without spott, and has vvroght justice, as the Psalm. 14.
prophet testifyeth. My meaning is, that as I have showed the greatness and
woorthynesse of this treasure (gentle reader:) so thou should also conceive
the right way of gayning the same: which is no other, but only by holy and
virtuous life, as God him self has assured the. Thou art therefore Matt. 7.
and 19.
to sit down and consider according to thy Saviors counsel, what thou will
do, Ioh. 14.
whether thou have so much spiritual money Luc. 14.
as is sufficient to buyld this tower, and make this war, or no: that is,
whether thou have so much good will and holy manhood in thee, as to bestow
the pains of a virtuous life, (if it be rather to be called pains than
pleasure) required for the gayning of this kingdom. This is the question, this
is the very whole issue of the matter, and hitherto has appertayned what
soever has been spoken in this book before, either of thy particular end, or
of the Majesty, bowntie and justice of God: and of the account he will demand
of thee: also of the punishment or reward laid up for thee: All this (I say)
was meant by me to this only end, that thou (measuring the one part and the
other,) should finally resolve what thou would do, and not to pass over
thy time in careless negligence as many do, never spyeing their own error
until it be too late to amend yt.

For the love of God then (dear brother) and for the love thou bear to thy
own soul, shake of this daungerouse security, which flesh and blood is
wont to lulle men in: and make some earnest resolution, for looking to thy
soul for the life to come. Remember often that worthy sentence: Hoe A saying
to be remebred.
momentum, vnde pendet aeternitas: This life is a moment of time, whereof all
eternity of life or death, to come, depends.

If it be a moment, and a moment of so great importance: how is it passed over
by worldly men with so little care, as it is? I might have alleged here
infinite other reasons and considerations to move men unto this resolution,
whereof I have talked: and surely no measure of volume were sufficient to
(...) so much as might be said in this matter. For that all the creatures under
heaven, yea and in heaven it self, as also, in hell: all (I say) from the
first to the last, are arguments and motives unto this point: all are books
and sermons, all do preach and cry, (some by their punishment, some by
their glory, some by their beauty, and all by their creation,) that we ought
without delay, to make this resolutio, and that all is vanity, all is folly,
all is iniquity, all is misery, beside the only service of our maker and
redymer. But yet not withstanding (as I have said) I thought good only to
choose out these few considerations before laid down, as chief and principal
among the rest, to work in any true Christian heart. And if these can not enter
with thee (good reader) little hope is there that any other would do thee good.
Wherefore here I end this first part, reserving a few things to be said in
the second, for removing of some impedime^ts, which our spiritual adversary
is wo^t to cast against this good woor ke, as against the first stepp to our
salauation. Our Lord God and savior Jesus Christ, which was content to pay
his own blood for the purchasing of this noble inheritance unto us, give us
his holy grace, to esteem of it as the great weight of the matter requires,
and not by negligence to leese our portions therein.

The end of the first part.
THE SECOND PART OF THIS FIRST BOOK
Of impedimentes that let men from this resolution: and first, of the
difficulty or hardness, uuhiche seems to many to be in virtuous life.

CHAP. I.
NOtwithstanding all the motives and consideratio^s before set down, for
inducing men to this necessary resolution of serving God, for their salvation:
there want not many Christians abrodei^ the world, whose hearts, either Ep. Iud.
entangled with the pleasures of this life, or Romans 1.
given over by God to a reprobate sense, do yield no whit at all to this
battery, that has been made, but sheweing them selves more hard than adamant,
do not only resist and contemn, but also do seek excuses for their Pro.
18. and 20.
slothe and wickedness, and do allege reasons of their own perdition. Reasons
I call Psa. 140
them, according to the common phrase, though in deed, there be no one thing
more against reason, than that a man should become enemy to his own soul, as
the scripture affirms Tob. 12.
obstinate sinners to be. But yet (as I Pro. 29.
say) they have their excuses. And the first and principal of all is that,
virtuous life is painful and hard, and therefore they can not endure to solow
the same: especially such as have been brought up delicatlye, and never were
acquainted with such asperitie, as (they say) we require at their hands. And
this is a great, large, and universal impediment, which stays infinite men
from embracinge the means of their salvation. For which cause yt is fully to
be answered in this place.

First then supposing that the way of virtue were so hard in deed, as the
enemy makes it seem yet might I well say with S. John Lib. de co^punct.
cordis.
Chrisostom, that seeing the reward is so great and infinite as now we have
declared: no labor should seem great for gayning of the same. Again, I might
say with holy S. Hom. 16. ex 50.
Austen, That seeing we take daily so great pain in this world, for avoiding
of small inco^ueniences, as of sickness, imprysoneme^tes loss of goods and the
like: what pains should we refuse for avoiding the eternity of hell fire set
down before? The first of these co^sideratio^s S. Paul used when he said, the
sufferinges of this life are not uvorthie of the Romans 8.
glory which shall be revealed in the next. The 2. Pet. 2.
second, S. Peter used, when he said, seeing the heauenes must be dissolved,
and Christ come in Judgment to restore to every man according to his works:
what manner of men ought we to be in holy conversation?

As who would say: No labor, no pains, no travail ought to seem hard or
great unto us, to the end we might avoid the terror of that day. S. Austen
asks this question: what we think the rich gloutton in hell Luc. 16.
would do, if he were now in this life again? would he take pains or no?
would he bestyrre him self, rather than turn into that place of torment
again? I might add to this, the infinite pains that Christ took for us: the
infinite benefits he has bestowed upon us: the infinite sins we have
committed against him: the infinite examples of Saints, that have trooden this
pathe before us: in respect of all which, we ought to make no boones at little
pains and labor, if it were true that gods service were so trauailsome as
many do esteem yt. The way of ver tue is not hard.


But now in very deed the matter is nothing so, and this is but a subtle
deceate of the enemy for our discourageme^t. The testimony of Christ him
self is clear in this point: Iugum meum suaue est, and onus meum leave: Mat.
12.
My yooke is sweet, and my burden light.

And the dearly beloved disciple S. John, who had best cause to know his
masters secret herein, says playnlie. Mandata eius grauia 1. Ioh. 5.
non sunt, his commandments are not greeuouse.

What is the cause then why so many men do conceive such a difficulty in
this matter? surely, one cause is, (beside the subtilitie of the devil which
is the cheifest) The cause ofpretended difficulti
for that men feel the disease of concupiscence in their bodies, but do not
consider the strength of the medicine given us against the same, they erye
with S. Paul, that they find a law in their members repugning to the law of
their mind, (which is the rebellion of concupiscence left in our flesh by
original sin:) but they confess not, or consider not with the same S. Paul,
that the grace Ibidem.
of God, by Jesus Christ, shall deliver them from the same. They remember not
the comfortable sayeing of Christ to S. Paul, in his greatest temptations:
Sufficittibi gratia mea: My grace is 2. Co. 12.
sufficient to strengthen thee against them all. These men do as Helizeus his
disciple did,

who casting his eyes only upon his enemies, 4. Re. 6.
that is upon the huge army of Syrians ready to assault him, thought him self
lost and impossible to stand in their sight, until by the prayers of the holy
prophet he was permitted from God, to see the Angels that stood there present
to fight on his side, and then he well perceived that his part was the
stronger.

So these men, beholding only our miseries 1. Thefor ce of gra ce forth
easing of virtuous life.
and infirmities of nature, whereby daily, tentations do rise against us: do
account the battaill paynfull, and the victory impossible, having not tasted
in deed, nor ever proved (through their own negligence) the manifold helps of
grace and spiritual succors, which God always sends to them, who are
content (for his sake) to take this conflict in hand. S. Paul had well tasted
that aid, which having reckned up all the hardest matters that could be,
adds: Sed in his omnibus superamus propter eum qui dilexit nos: But we
overcome Romans 8.
in all these combats, by his assistance, that loves us. And then falls he
to that wounderful protestation: that nether death, nor life, nor Angels, nor
the like, should separate him:

and all this upon the confidence of spiritual aid fto^ Christ, whereby he
sticks not to avouch Phil. 4.
that he could do all things. David also had proved the force of this
assistance, who said, Psa. 118.
I did run the uvay of thy co^maudeme^tes, when thou dyddest enlarge my
heart. This enlargeme^t of heart, was by spiritual consolation of internal
unction, whereby the heart drawn together by anguishe is opened and enlarged:
when grace is powered in, even as a dry purse is softened and enlarged by
annoynting it with oil. Which grace being present, David said, he did not
only walk the way of gods commandments easily, but that he ran them:
Even as a carte wheel which cries and co^pleyneth, under a small burden
being dry, runs merilye and without noise, when a little oil is put unto
it. Which thing aptlye expresses our state and condition, who without gods
help, are able to do nothing, but with the aid thereof, are hable to conquer
and overcome any thing.

And surely I would ask these men that imagine the way of Gods law to be so
hard and full of difficulty, how the prophet could say, I have taken pleasure
(o lord) in the way of thy commandments as in all the riches of the Psa.
118.
world. And in an other place: That they were more pleasant and to be
desired, than gold or precious stone, and more svveter than honey or the Psa.
18.
honey comb? by which words he yields to virtuous life, not only due
estimation above all treasures in the world: but also pleasure, delight, and
sweetness: thereby to confound all those that abandone and forsike the same,
upon idle pretensed and feyned difficulties. And if David could say this much
in the old law: how much more justly may we say so now in the new, when
grace is given more abundantly, as the scripture Ioh. 10.
says? And thou poor Christian Romans 5.
which deceauest thy self with this imagination: Heb. 6.
tell me, why came Christ into this world? why labored he and took he so
much pains here? why shed he his blood? why prayed he to his father so
often for thee? why appointed he the sacraments as co^duites of grace? why
sent he the holy ghost into the world? what signifies gospel or good
tidings? what means the word grace and mercy brought with him? what
imports the comfortable name of Jesus? is not all this to deliver us from
sin? from sin past, (I say) by his only death: from sin to come, by the
same Matt. 1.
death and by the assistance of his holy grace bestowed on us more abundantly
than before by all these means? was not this one of the principal effects of
Christ his coming as the prophet noted: that craggie vuayes should Esa. 40.
be made straight, and hard vuayes plain? was Esa. 11.
not this the cause why he indewed his chur Et vide Jer. ibi. Amb. lib. (...).
sp: S. c. 20. Au. ser. 209. de temp.
che with the seven blessed gifts of the holy ghost? and with the virtues
infused, to make the yookeof his service sweet, the exercise of good life
easy, the walking in his commandments pleasant, in such sort, as men might
now sing in tribulations, have Matt. 5.
confidence in periles, security in afflictions, Luc. 6.
and asseurance of victory in all temptations? is Act. 4.
not this the beginning, mydle, and end, of the 2. Co. 4.
gospel? were not these the promises of the prophets, the tydinges of the
eua^gelistes, the preachinges of the Apostles, the doctrine, belief, Esa. 10.
and practice of all saints? and finally is not this verbum abbreuiatum: The
word of God abbreuiated, wherein do consist all the riches and treasures of
Christiantie? Of the force of grace.


If any man will be contentiouse and ask me how God does this maruailous
work: I answer him (as I have done before) that he does it by the
assistance of his holy grace, poured into the soul of man, whereby it is
beautified and strengthened against all temptations as S. Paul was in
particular against 2. Co. 12
temptations of the flesh. And this grace is, of such efficacy and force in
the soul where it enters, that it alters the whole state thereof, making
those things clear which were obscure before: those things pleasant, which
were bitter before: those things easy, which were hard and difficult before.
And for this cause also it is said in scripture, to make a new spirit and a
new heart. As where Ezechiel talking of this matter says in the Exo ca. 11.
and 36
person of God: I will give unto them a new heart, and will put a nevu
spirit in their bovvelles that they may vualke in my precepts and keep my
commandments. Can any thing in the world bespoken more playnlie? Now for
mortifyeing and conquering of our passions, which by robellion do make the
way of gods commandments unpleasant: S. Paul testifies clearlie, that
abunda^t grace is geeue^ to us also by the death of Christ, to do the same:
for so he says: This uve know that our Romans 6,
old man is crucified also to the end that the body of sin may be
destroyed, and we serve no more unto sin. By the old man and the body of
Sin S. Paul understands our rebellious appetite and concupiscence, which is
so crucified and destroyed by the most noble sacrifice of Christ, as we may by
the grace purchased So proncth S. Au. li. 2. de pecca. merit cap. 6.
us in that sacrifice, resist and conquer this appetite, and so keep our
selves from servitude of sin: that is from any consent or taste of sin, if
we will our selves. And this is that noble and entire victory, which God
promised so long ago to every Christian soul by the means of Christ, when
he said: Esa. 41.
Be not a feared for I am with thee: stepp not aside, for I thy God have
strengthened thee, and have assisted thee: and the right hand of my just (man,)
has taken thy defense. Behold all that fight against thee shall be confounded
and put to shame: thou shall seek thy rebels, and shall not find the^: they
shall be as though they were not, for that I am thy Lord and God.



Lo here a full victory promised upon our rebels, by the help, of the
right hand of gods just man, that is upon our disordinate passions by the aid
of grace fro Jesus Christ. And albeit these rebels are not here promised to
be taken clean away, but only to be conquered and confounded: yet is it
said that they shall be as though they were not. VVherby is signified, that
they shall not hinder us in the way of our salvation, but rather A (...).
further the same, if we will. For as wild beasts which of nature are fearse,
and would rather hurt tha^ profitt mankind, being maistred and tamed, become
very co^modiouse and necessary for our uses: so these rebelliouse passions of
ours, which of them selves would utterly overthrow us, being once subdued and
mortified by gods graces and our own The use of (...) moderated.
diligence: do stand us in singular stead to the practice and exercise of all
kind of virtues: as choler or anger to the inkyndeling of zeal: hatred to the
pursewinge of sin: a hautie mind, to the rejecting of the world: love, to
the embracing of all great and heroical attemptes in consideration of the
benefits received from God. Beside this the very conflict and combat it
self, in subdewing these passions is left unto us for our great good: that
is, for our patience, humility, and victory in this life: and for our merit,
glory, and croune in the life to come: as S. Paul affirmed 2. Tim. 4
of him self, and confirmed to all others, by sexample.

Now then lest slothefull Christian go putt his hands under his gyrdle, as
the scripture Pro. 26.
dayeth, and say: There is a lion in the (...), and a lioness in the pathe,
ready to dououre him, that he dare not go furthe of doors. Let him say: It is
cold, and therefore he dares not Pro. 20.
go to plovve. Let him say, it is uneasy to labor: and therfure he can not
purge his vyneyarde of nettles and thystles, nor buyld any wall about Pro. 24.
the same. That is, let him say his passions are strong, and therefore he can
not conquer them: his body is delicate, and therefore he dare not put it to
travail: the way of virtuous life is hard and uneasy, and therefore he can
not apply him self thereunto. Let him say all this, and much more, which
idle and slothefull Christians do use to bring for their excuse: let him
allege it (I say) as much and as often as he will: it is but an excuse, and a
false excuse, and an excuse most dishonorable and detractorie to the force of
Christ his grace, purchased us by his bitter passion: that now his yoke should
be unpleasant, seeing he has Mat. 11.
made it sweet: that now his burden, should be heavy, seeing he has made it
light: that now his commandments should be grievous, 1. Ioh. 5.
saying the holy ghost affirms the Ioh. 8.
contrary: that now we should be in servitude Romans 7.
of our passions, saying he has by his grace delivered us, and made us
truly free. Romans 8.
If God be with, us who vuill be against us, Psalm. 26.
says the Apostle? God is my helper and defender 27.
(saves holy David,) whom shall I fear, or tremble? If whole armies should
rise against me:

yet will I allway hope to have the victory. And what is the reason? for that
thouv Psalm. 22.
are uvith me (o lord:) thou fyghtest on my side: thou assistest me with thy
grace: by help whereof I shall have the victory, thoghe all the squadrones of
my enemies, that is, of the flesh, the world, and the devil, should rise
against me at once: and I shall not only have the victory, but also shall
have it easily, and with pleasure and delight. For, so much signifies S. John
in that. (having said 1. Ioh. 5.
that the commandments of Christ are not grievous:) he in ferreth
prese^tlie, as the cause thereof: Quoniam omne quod natum est ex deo vincit
mundum.

For that all which is borne of God, conquerith the world: that is, his grace
and heavenly assistance sent us from God does both co^quer the world, with
all difficulties and temptations thereof: and also makes the commandments of
God easy, and virtuous life most pleasant and sweet. An objection, ans vvered.


But perhaps you will say: Christ him self confesses it to be a yoke, and
a burden: how then can it be so pleasant and easy as you make yt? I answer,
that Christ adds that it is a sweet yoke and a light burden. VVherby your
objection is taken away: and also is signified further, that there is a burden
which greeueth not the bearer, but rather helps and refreshes the same: as
the burden of feathers upon a birds back bears up the byrd, and is
nothing at all grievous unto her: So also thoghe it be a yoke, yet is it a
sweet yoke, a comfortable yoke, a yoke more pleasant than honey or honey comb,
as says Psa. 118.
the prophet. And why so? because we draw therein, with a sweet companion, we
draw with Christ: that is, his grace at one end, and our endeavor at the
other. And because when a great ox and a little do draw together, the weight
lies all upon the greater ox his neck, for that he bears up quite the
yoke from the other: thereof it comes, that we draweing in this yoke together
with Christ, which is greater than we are: he lighteneth us of the whole
burden, and only requires that we should go on with him comfortablie, and
not refuse to enter under the yoke with him, for that the pain shall be his, and
the pleasure ours. This he signifies expresselie when he says: come you to
me all that labor and are heavy laden Mat. 11.
and I will refreshe you. Here you see that he moves us to this yoke, only
thereby to refreshe and disburden us: to disburden us (I say) and to refreshe
us, and not any way to load or agreeue us: to disburden us of the heavy
loadinges and yokes of this world: as from the burden of a guilty conscience,
the burden of care, the burden of melancholy, the burden of envy, hatred, and
malice, the burden of pride, the burden of ambition, the burden of covetousness,
the burden of wrath, the burden of fear, the burden of wickedness, and hell
fire it self. From all these burdens and miserable yokes, Christ would deliver
us, by coueringe our necks only with his yoke and burden, so lightened and
sweetened by his holy grace, as the bearinge thereof is not trauailsome, but most
easy, pleasant; and confortable, as has been showed.

An other cause why this yoke is so sweet (...). Love makes the way
pleasant.
this burden so light, and this way of gods commandments so pleasant to
good men, is love: love (I mean) toward God, whose commandments they are:
for every man can tell, and has experienced in him self, what a strong
passion, the passion of love is, The force of love.
and how it makes easy the very greatest pains that are in this world.
What makes the mother to take such pains in the bringing up of her child,
but only love? what causes the wife to sytt so attentyue at the bed side
of her sick husband, but only love? what moves the beasts and birds of
the air, to spare from their own food, and to endaunger their own lives, for
the feedinge and defendinge of their little ones, but only the force of love?
S. Austen does Ser. 9. de verbis domini.
prosecute this point at large by many other examples, as of Marchantes that
refuse no adventure of sea, for love of gain: of huntars, that refuse no
season of evil weather, for love of game: of soldiers that refuse no danger
of death, for love of spoil. And he adds in the end: that if the love of
man can be so great toward creatures here, as to make labor easy, and i^
deed to seem no labor, but rather pleasure: how much more shall the love of
good men toward god make all their labor comfortable, which they take in
his service.

This extreme love was the cause why all The love of Christ to his sainces,
and of his saites to him.
the pains and afflictions which Christ suffered for us, seemed nothing unto
him. And this love also was the cause why all the travails and torments
which many Christianes have suffered for Christ, seemed nothing unto them.
Imprisonme^ntes torments, loss of honor, goods, and life, seemed tryfles to
diverse servants of God, in respect of this burning love. This love drove
infinite virgins, and tender children to offer them selves, in time of
persecution, for the love of him which in the cause was persecuted. This love
caused holy Apollonia of Alexandria, being brought to the fire to be burned
for Christ, to Eusebius. 11. 6. c. 34.
slypp out of the hands of such as led her, and joyfully to run into the
fire, of her self. Ietom in catalogo
This love moved Ignatius, the ancient Martyr to say (being condemned to
beasts, and (...) lest they would refuse his body, as they had done of
diverse. Martyrs before) that he would not permit them so to do, but would
provoke and stir them to come upon him, and to take his life from him, by
tearing his body in pieces.

These are the effects then of fervent love, which makes, even the things
that are most difficult and dreadful of them selves, to appear sweet and
pleasant: and much more the laws and commandments of God, which in them
selves are most just, reasonable, Psa. 6. and 18.
holy and easy. Da amantem (says S. Austen speaking of this (...),) and
sentit quod Mat. 11.
dico: S. autem srigido loquor, nescit quid loquar: 1. 10. 5.
Give me a man that is in love with God: Tra. 26. in Ioha^.
and he feels this to be true, which I say: but if I talk to a cold
Christian: he understands not what I say.

And this is the cause why Christ talking of the keeping of his
commandments, repeateth so often this word love, as the only sure cause
of keeping the same: for want whereof in the world, the world keeps them not,
as there he shows If you love me, keep my commandments: Ioh. 14.
says he: and again: He that has my commandments, and keeps them, he
is he, that loves me. Again: He which loves me, will keep my commandment:
and he that loves me not: keeps not my comaundeme^tes. In which last
words, is to be noted, that to the lover, he says his commandment in the
singular number: Mark this observation.
for that to such a one all his commandments are but one commandment,
according to the sayeing of S. Paul: That love Romans 13.
is the fulness of the lauve: For that it comprehends all. But to him that
loves not, Christ says his commandments in the plural number:
signifyeing thereby, that they are both many and heavy to him: for that he
wants love, which should make them easy. Which, S. John also expresses,
when he says: this is the love of God, when we keep 1. Io. 5.
his commandments, and his commandments are not heavy. That is, they are
not heavy to him, which has the love of God: otherwise no marvel though
they be most heavy. For that every thing feemeth heavy which we do
against our lyking. And so by this also (gentle reader) thou may guess,
whether the love of God be in thee, or no.

And these are two means now, whereby 3. Peculiar light of understanding.
the life of good men is made easy in this world. There follow diverse other to
the end that these negligent excusers may see, how unjust and untrue this
excuse of theyrs is co^cerninge the pretended hardness of virtuous living:
which in very deed is indewed with infinite privileges of comfort, above the
life of wicked men, even in this world. And the next that I will name for
example sake after the former, is a certain special and peculiar light of
understanding, pertaining Prou. 9.
to the just, and called in scripture prudentia sanctorum. The wisdom of
Saints: which is nothing eles but a certain sparkle of heavenly wisdom,
bestowed by singular privilege upon the virtuous in this life: whereby they
receive most comfortable light, and understanding in spiritual matters,
especially towching their own salvation, and things necessary thereunto. Of
which the prophet David meant, when he said, notas mihi fecisti Psalm. 16.
vias vitae. Thou have made the ways of life known to me.

Also when he said of him self. Super senes intellexi. I have understood
Psa. 118.
more than old men. And again in an other place: Incerta and occulta
sapientiae tuae Psalm. 50.
manifestasti mihi: Thou have opened to me the unknown and hydden secrets of
thy wisdom.

This is that light wherewith S. John says that Christ lighteneth his
servants: Ioh. 1.
as also that unction of the holy ghost, which the same Apostle teaches to
be given to the godly, to instruct them in all things 1. Io. 2.
behoofefull for their salvation. In like wise this is that writing of gods
law in men's hearts, which he promises by the prophet Jeremy: as also the
instruction of men immediatlye Iero. 31.
from God him self, promised by the Esa. 54.
prophet Esaye. And finally this is that sovereign understanding in the law,
commandments, and iustificationes of God, which holy David so much
desired, and so often demanded in that most divine psalm, which begins:
Blessed are the unspotted in Ps. 118
the uvaye: That is, in this life.

By this light of understanding, and supernatural knowledge and feeling from
the holy ghost, in spiritual things, the virtuous are greatly helped in
the way of rightetousnes for that they are made able to discern, for their
own direction in mattors that occur, according to the sayeing of S. Paul:
Spiritualis omnia iudicat: A spiritual man judges 1. Co. 2.
of all things: Animalis autem homo non percipit quae sunt spiritus dei: But
the carnal man conceaueth not the things which appertain to the spirit of
God.

Does not this greathe discover the privilege of a virtuous life? the joy
comfort and consolation of the same? with the exceeding great misery of the
contrary part? for if two should walk together, the one blind, and the
other of perfect sight, which of them wore like to be weary first? whose
journey were like to be more paynfull? does not a little grownde weary out a
blind man? consider then in how wearysome darkness the wicked do walk:
Consider whether they be blind or no. S. Paul says in the place before
alleged, 1. Cor. 2.
that they can not conceive any spiritual knowledge: is not this a great
darkness: Again, the prophet Esaias describes their Esa. 65.
state further, when he says in the person of the wicked, vue have grooped
(...) blind men after the vualles, and have stumbled at myddaye, even as if it
had been in darkness. And in an other place, the scripture describes the
same, yet more effectuouslie, with the paynfullnesse thereof, even from the
mouths of the wicked them selves, in these words: The light of Justice has
not shyned unto us, Sap. 5.
and the sun of understanding has not appeared unto our eyes: we are
uvearyed out in the vuaye of iniquity and perdition etc. This is the talk of
sinners in hell. By which words appears, not only that wicked men do
live in great darkness: but also that this darkness is most paynefull unto
them: and consequently that the contrary light, is a great easement to the
way of the virtuous.

An other principal matter which makes the way of virtue easy and pleasant
to 4. Internal con solation.
them that walk therein, is a certain hidden and secret consolation, which
God pours in to the hearts of them that serve him. I call yt secret: for that
it is known but of such only as have felt it: for which cause, Christ Apo. 2.
him self calls yt, hydden manna known only to them that receive it. And
the prophet says of yt, great is the multitude of thy sweetness Psa. 30.
(o Lord,) vuhich thou haste hydden for them that sear thee. And again, in an
other place, thou shall lay aside (o Lord) a special chosen rain Psalm. 67.
or dew for thine inheritance. And an other prophet says in the person of
god, talking of the devout soul that serves him: I will leede her a side
into a wilderness, and there 1 Ose. 2.
vuill talk unto her heart. By all which words, of wilderness, separating,
choyfe, and hydden, is signified, that this is a secret privilege bestowed
only upon the virtuous, and that the carnal hearts of wicked men, have no
part or portion therein. But now, how great and inestimable the sweetness of
this heavenly consolation is, no tongue of man can express: but we may
conjecture by these Psalm. 35. and 64.
words of David, who, talking of this celestial wine, attributes to yt
such force, as to make all those drounken that taste of the same: that is, to
take from them, all sense and feeling of terrestrial matters, even as S. Peter
having drounke a little of yt upon the mount Thabor, forgate him self
presently, Mat. 17.
and talked as a man distracted, of building tabernacles Marc. 9.
there, and resting in that place for Luc. 9.
ever. This is that turrens voluptatis, that (...) Psalm. 31.
stream of pleasure, as the prophet calls yt, which coming from the
mountains of Esa. 29.
heaven, waters (by secret ways and passages) the hearts, and spirits of
the godly, and makes the^ drounken with the unspeakable joy which it brings
with yt. This is a little taste in this life of the very Joys of heaven,
bestowed upon good men, to comfort them withal, and to encourage them to go
forward. For as Marcha^tes desirous to sell their A similitude.
wares, are content to let you see and handle, and some times also to taste the
same, thereby to induce you to buy: so God almighty willing, to sell us the
joys of heaven, is content to Apoc. 3.
imparte a certain taste before hand to such as he sees are willing to buy:
thereby to make them come of roundlye with the price, and not to stycke in
payeinge so much, and more, as he requires. This is that exceeding joy and
jubilee in the hearts of just me^, which the prophet means, when he says:
The voice of exultation and salvation is in the Psa 117.
tabernacles of the just. And again, Blessed is that people that knouveth
iubilation: That is, that has experienced this extreme joy and pleasure of
internal consolation. S. Paul had tasted it when he wrote these words,
amiddest 2. Cor. 7.
all his labors for Christ. I am filled with consolation, I (...) uve or
superabounde in all joy, amyddest our tribulations. What can be more
effectually said or alleged, to prove the service of god pleasant, than this?
Surely (good reader) if thou had tasted once, but one drop of this
heaue^lie joy: thou would give the whole world to have an other of the
same, or at the leastwise, not to leese that one again.

But thou will ask me perhaps, why The way to come to spi rituall co^
folation.
thou being a Christian as well as other, have yet never tasted of this
consolation? to which I answer, that (as it has been showed before) this is
not meat for every mouth: but a chosen moisture laid aside for gods
inheritance Psa. 67.
only. This is wine of gods own seller, laid up for his spouse, as the
Canticles declare: That is, Can. 1.
for the devout soul dedicated unto gods service. This is a teate of comfort,
only for the child to suck, and fill him self withal, as the prophet
Esaye testifies. The soul that Esa. 66.
is drouned in sin and pleasures of the world can not be partaker of this
benefit: nether the heart replenished with carnal cares and cogitations. For
as gods Arcke and the Idol 1. Re. 5.
dagon could not stand together upon one 10. 8. 14. 15. 16.
Altar: so can not Christ and the world stand together in one heart. God sent
not the pleasant 1. Io. 2.
Manna unto the people of Israel as long Exo. 16.
as their flower and chyboles of Egypt lasted: so nether will he send this
heavenly consolation unto thee, until thou have rydde thy self of the
cogitations of vanity. He is a wise merchant, though a liberal. He vvil not
give a taste of his treasure, where he knows there is no will to buy.
Resolve thy self once in deed to serve God, and thou shall then feel this
joy, that I talk of, as many thousands before thee have done, and never yet
any man was herein deceived. Moses first ran out of Egypt, to the hills
Exodus 2.
of Madian, hefore God appeared unto him: and so must thy soul do out of
worldly vanity, before she can look for these consolations. But thou shall
no sooner offer thy self thorowglye to gods service, than thou shall find
entertaynement above thy expectation. For that, his love is more tender in
deed upon them that come newlye to his service, than upon those which have
served him of old: as he shows playnelye by the parable of the prodigal
son: whom he cheryshed with much more dalyance and Luc. 15.
good cheer, than he did the elder brother, which had served him of long time.
And the Begyrners chee felie cherished with spi rituall consolation.
causes hereof are two: the one, for the joy of the new gotten servant, as is
expressed by S. Luc in the text: the other, lest he fynding no consolation, at
the beginning, should turn back to Egypt again: as God by a figure in the
children of Israel declares manyfestlie Exo. 13.
in these words: When Pharao had let go the people of Israel out of
Egypt: God brought them not by the country of philistines, which was the
nearest way, thinking with him self, lest perhaps it might repent them,
if they should see vvarres straight way rise against them, and so should
return into Egypt again. Upon which two causes thou may assure thy self,
of singular consolations and comfort. in the service of God (if thou woold est
resolve thy self thereunto) as all other men have found before thee, and by
reason thereof have proved the way not hard, as worldly men Matt. 11
imagine yt, but most easy: pleasant, and comfortable, as Christ has
promised. 5. The quiet of conscience.


After this privilege of internal consolation enseueth an other, making the
service of God pleasant, which is the testimony of a good conscience, whereof
S. Paul made so great accounte, as he called it his glory. And 2. Cor. 1.
the holy ghost says of it further, by the mouth of the wise man: Secura
men's quast judge Pro. 15.
conuiuium: a secure mind, or good conscience is as a perpetual feast. Of
which we may infer, that the virtuous man having always this secure mind
and peace of conscience, lives all ways, in festival glory, and gloriouse
feasting. And how then is this life hard, or unpleasant, as you imagine? In
the contrary side, the wicked man, having his conscience vexed with the
priuitie of sin, is always tormented with in it self: as we read that Cayn
was, having killed his brother Abel: and Antiochus for his wickedness Genesis 4.
done to Jerusalem: and Judas for his treason 1. Ma. 6.
against his master: and Christ signifies it Mat. 27.
generally of all naughty men, when he says Act. 1.
that they have a worm which gnaweth Marc 9.
their conscience within. The reason whereof, the scripture opens in an other
place, when it says All wickedness is full of fear, giving Sap. 7.
testimony of damnation against it self: and therefore a troubled conscience
alvvaies presumes oruell matters. That is, it presumes cruel things to be
imminent over it self, as it makes account to have deserved. But yet further,
above all other, holy Iobe most lively sets forth this miserable slate of
wiked men, in these words: A wicked man is provved all the days of his
life, though the time be (...) how long he shall play the tyrant: the sound
of terroure Job. 15.
is always in his ears: and although The trou ble of an evil con science.
ye be in time of peace, yet he alvvay suspecteth some treason against him: he
bele eucth not that he can rise again from darkness to light: expecting on
every side the svvoorde to come upon him: when he sits down to eat, he
remembers that the day of darkness is ready at hand for him: tribulation
terrifieth him, and anguishe of mind enuironeth him, even as a king is
environed with soldiers, when he goes to war.

Is not this a maruailous description of a wicked conscience, uttered by the
holy ghost him self? what can be imagined more miserable than this man, which
has such a boucherie, and slaughterhouse with in his, own heart? what
fears, what anguishes, Hom. 8. ad pop. Antiochenum.
what desperatio^s are here touched? S. Chriso stome discourses notably upon
this point: Such is the custom of sinners, (says he) that they supect all
things, they dowte their own shadows, they are afeard at every little noise,
and they think every man that comes toward them, to come against them. If
men talk together, they think they speak of their sins: such a thing sin
is, as it bewrays it self, though no man accuse yt: It condemns it self,
though no man bear witness against it: It makes always the sinner fearful,
as Justice does the contrary. Hear how the scripture does describe the
sinners fear, and the just mans' liberty The Pro. 28
wicked man flies though no man pursue him (says the scripture.) Why
does he fly if no man do pursue him? Mary, for that he has within his
conscience an accuser purfueing him, whom always he carries about with him.
And as he can not fly from him self: so can he not fly from this accuser
within his conscience, but where soever he goes, he is purseued and whipped by
the same, and his wound is incurab'e. But the' just man is nothing so: The
just man (says Salamon) is as confident as a lion.

Hitherto are Pro. 28.
the words of S. Chrysostom.

VVherby, as also by the scriptures alleged, 6. The ho pe of (...) men.
we take notice yet of an other prerogative of virtuous life, which is hope or
co^fide^ce, the greatest treasure, the richest Jewel, that Christian men have
left them in this life. For by this we pass through all afflictions, all
tribulations and adversities, most ioyfullye, as S. James signifies. By this
we say with Jacob. 1.
S. Paul: We do glory in our tribulations, knovveing Romans 5.
that tribulation works patience, and patience proof, and proof hoope,
which confounds us not. This is our most strong and mighty comfort: this is
our sure Ancker in all tempestuous times, as S. Paul says We have a most
Heb. 6.
strong (...) (says he) which do fly unto the hope proposed, to lay
hands on the same, which hope we hold as a sure and firm Ancker of our
Ephesians. 6.
soul. This is that noble galea salutis: head 1. The. 5
piece of salvation, as the same Apostle calls yt, which bears of all the
blows that this world can lay upon us. And finally, this is the only rest
set up in the heart of a virtuous man, that come life, come death: come
health, come sickness: come wealth, come poverty: come prospertie, come
adversity: come never so tempestuous storms of persecution, he sits down
quietlye, and says calmelie with the prophet, my trust is Psalm. 55.
in God, and therefore I fear (...) what flesh can do unto me. Nay further
with holy Job, amiddest Job. 13.
all his miseries, he says, si occiderit me, in ipso sperabo: if God should
kill me, yet would I trust in him. And this is (as the scripture said before)
to be as confident as a Lion, whose propertye is, to show most courage, when he
is in greatest peril, and nearest his death.

But now, as the holy ghost sayethe, non Psa. 1.
sic impii, non sic. The wicked can not say this, they have no part in this
confidence, no interest in this consolation: Quia spes impiorum Pro. 10.
peribit, says the scripture: the hope of wicked men is vain, and shall
perish. And again, praestolatio impiorum furor, the expectation Pro. 11.
of wicked men is fury: And yet further, spes impiorum abhominatio animae: The
hope of wicked Job. 11.
men is abomination, and not a comfort unto their foul. And the reason hereof
is double. First, for that in very deed (though they say the contrary in
words) wicked men do not put their hope and confidence in God, but in the
world, in their riches, in their strength, friends, and authority, and Iere.
17.
finally in the deceauing arm of man: even as the prophet expresses in their
person, when Esa. 28.
he says: We have put a lie for our hope: That is, we have put our hope in
thiges tra^sitorie, which have deceived us And this is yet more expressed by
the scripture, sayeing, the hope Sap. 5.
of wicked men is as chafe, which the vvynde blovveth away: and as a
buble of water which a storm disperseth: and as the smoke which the vvynde
blovveth abroad: and as the remembrance of a gest that stays but one day in
his Inn. By all which metaphores, the holy ghost expresses unto us, both
the vanity of the things wherein, in deed the wicked do put their trust,
and how the same fails them, after a little time, upon every small occasion
of adversity that falls owte.

This is that also which God means when he so stormeth and thundreth against
those which go into Egypt for help, and dce Esa. 30. and 36.
put their confidence in the strength of Pharao, accursing them for the same:
and promising, that it shall turn to their own confusion: which is properly
to be understood of Iere. 17. 48.
all those, which put their chief confidence in wordlie helps: as all wicked
men do, what soever they dissemble in words to the contrary. For which
cause also of dissimulation, they are called hypocrites by Job: for where as
the wyseman says, the hope of Pro. 10.
wicked men shall perish: Job says, the hope Job. 8.
of hypocrites shall parish, calling wicked men hypocrites: for that, they
say, they put their hope in God, where as in deed they do put it in the
world. Which thing, beside scripture, is evident also by experience. For with
whom does the wicked man consult in his affairs and doubts? with God
principally, or with the world? whom does he seek too in his afflictiens?
whom does he call upon in his syckenes? from whom hops he comfort in his
adversities? to whom yields he thanks in his prosperities? when a worldly
man takes in hand any work of importance, does he first consult with God,
about the event thereof? does he fall down on his knees, and ask his aid?
does he refer it wholly or principally unto his honor? if he do not: ho
we can he hope for aid therein at his hands? how can he repair to him for
assistance in the dangers and lettes that fall out about the same? how can he
have any confidence in him, which has no part at all in that work? It is
hypocrisy then (as' Job truly says) for this man to affirm that his
confidence is in God: whereas in deed it is in the world, it is in Pharao, yt
is in Egypt, yt is in the arm of man, it is in a lie. He buyldeth not his
house with the wise man, upon a rock: but with the fool, upon the sands: and
therefore (as Christ well assures him) when the rain shall Matt. 7.
come and fluddes descend, and vvyndes blow, and al together shall rushe upon
that house (which shall be at the hour of his death:) then shall this house
fall, and the fall of yt shall be great. Great, for the great change which he
shall see: great, for the great horroure which he shall conceive: great, for
the great misery which he shall suffer: great, for the unspeakable joys of
heaven lost: great, for the eternal pains of hell fallen into: great every
way, assure thy self (dear brother) or else the mouth of God would never
have used this word great. And this is sufficient for the first reason, why
the hope of wicked men is vain: for that in deed they putt it not in God, but
in the world.

The second reason is for that, albeit they should put their hope in God, yet
(living Wicked men can not hope in God.
wickedlie) it is vain and rather to be called presumption, than hope. For
understanding whereof; it is to be noted that, as there are two kind of
fayethes recounted in scripture, the one a dead fayeth without good works
Jacob 2.
that is, which believes all you say of Mat. 7.
Christ, but yet observes not his commandments: 1. Co. 13. and 15.
the other a lyuelie, a iustifieing fayeth, which believes not only, but
also woorketh by charity, as S. Paul's words are: Romans 1.
So are there two hopes foloweing these Gal. 3.
two fayethes: the one of the good, proceeding Ephesians. 2.
of a good conscience, whereof I have spoken before: the other of the wicked,
resting in a guyltie conscience, which is in deed no true hope, but rather
presumption. This S. John proves playnlie, when he says. 1. Io. 3.
Brethren if our heart reprehende us not, then have we confidence with God:
That is, if our heart be not guyltie of wicked life. And the words
immediately folovveing do more express the same, which are these: What so
ever we ask, we (...) of him, for that we keep his commandments, and
do those things which are pleasing in his sight. The same confirms S.
Paul, when he says, that 1. Ti. (...)
the end of Gods commandments is charity, from a pure heart and a good
conscience: Which words S. Auston expoundinge in diverse places of his
works, proves at large, that without a good conscience, there is no true S.
Austc^, lib. 1. de doc. chri. cap. 37.
hope can be conceived. S. Paul (says he) adds (from a good conscience)
because of hope: for he which has the scruple of an evil conscience
dispareth to attain that which he believes. And again. Every man's hope is
in his own conscience according as he feels him self to love God. And
again in an other book, the Apostle S. Austen in prefat.
puts a good conscience for hope: for he only hops Psalm. 31.
peth uvhich has a good (...): and he whom the guylt of an evil conscience
does prycke, retyreth back from hope, and hops nothing but his own
damnation. I might here repeat a great many more privileges, and
prerogatives of a virtuous lyse, which make the same easy, pleasant, and
comfortable, but that this chapter grows to be long: and therefore I will
only touch (as it were in passing bye) two or three other points of the
most principal: which notwithstanding would require large discourses to
declare the same, according to their dignities. And the first is the
inestimable privilege of liberty and freedom, 7. Liberty of foul.
which the virtuous do enjoy above the wicked, according as Christ promises
I^ these words: If you abide in my commandments, 1 oh. 8.
you shall be my scholares in deed, and you shall knouve the truth, and the
truth shall set you free: Which words S. Paul as it were expounding,
says, where the spirit of our lord 2. Co. 3.
is, there is freedom. And this freedom is meant, from the tyranny and
thraldom of our corrupt sensuality and concupiscence; called by divines the
inferior part of our mind: whereuto the wicked are so in thraldom, as there
was never bondeman so in thraldom to a most cruel, and merciless tyrant.
This in part may be conceived by this one example.

If a man had married a rich, beautiful, An exam ple to ex
and noble gentle woman, adorned with all gifts and graces, which may be
devised to press the bond age of wicked me^ to their sensuality.
be in a woman: and yet not vvithstanding should be so sotted and entangled
with the love of some foul and disnonest beggar, or seruyle maid of his
house, as for her sake to abandone the company and freendship of his said
wise: to spend his time in dalia^ce and service of this base woman: to
run, to go, to stand at her appointment: to putt all his living and
reueneues into her hands, for her to consume and spoil at her pleasure: to
deny her nothing, but to wait and serve her at a beck: yea and to compel
his said wife to do the same: would you not think this man's lyse miserable
and most servile? And yet surely the servitude where of we talk, is far
greater and more intolerable than this. For no woman or other creature in this
world, is or can be of that beauty or nobility as lady reason is, to whom
man by his creation was espovvsed: which notvvithsta^ding we see abandoned,
contemned and rejected by him, for the love of sensuality, her hand maid, and
a most deformed creature in respect of reason: in whose love notvvithstanding
or rather servitude, we see wicked men so drowned, as they serve her day
and night with all pains, perils, and expenses, and do constrayne also
reason her self, to be subject to all the beckes and commandments of this
new mistress. For, wherefore do they labor? wherefore do they wache?
wherefore do they heap riches together, but only to serve their
sensuality, and her desyers? wherefore do they beat their brains, but only
to satisfy this cruel tyrant and her passions?

And if you will see in deed how cruel and pytifull this servitude is:
consider The mise rye of a man ruled byse^ sualitie:
but some particular examples thereof. Take a man whom she over rules in any
passion: as for example, in the lust of the flesh: what pains takes he for
her? how does he labor, hovvdoeth he sweat in this servitude? how potent
and strong does he feel her tyranny? remember the strength of Samson, the
vvisdome of Solomon, 2. Re. 11.
the sanctity of David overthrown Iud. 14.
by this tyranny: Jupiter, Mars, and hereoules. 3. Re. 11
who for their valiant acts other wise, were accounted gods of the panymes:
were they not overcome, and made slaves by the enchauntement of this tyrant?
And if you will yet futher see of what strength she is, and how cruelly
she executes the same upon those, that Christ has not delivered from her
bondage: consider (for examples sake in this kind) the pytyfull case of some
disfloyall wife, who though she know that by comitting adultery, she
runs into a thousand daungers'and inconveniences, as the loss of gods
favor, the hatred of her husband, the danger of punishment, the offense of
her friends, the utter dishonor of her person, (if it be known) and
finally the ruin or peril of body and soul: yet to satisfy this tyrant,
she will venture to committ the sin, notwithstanding any dangers or perilles
what soever.

Nether is it only in this one point of carnal lust, but in all other,
wherein a man is in servitude to this tirant, and her passious. An ambi tious
man.
Look upon an ambitious or vaynglorious man: see how he serves this
mistress: with what care and diligence he attends her commandments: that
is, to follow after a little wind of men's mouths: to pursue a little fether
flyeing before him in the air. You shall see that he omitteth no one thing, no
one time, no one circumstance for gayning thereof. He ryseth betime: goes late
to bed: trotteth by day: studieth by night: here he flattereth, there he
disse^bleth: here he stoupeth, there he Looks bygge: here he makes
friends, there he preuenteth enemies: and to this only end he refers all
his actions, and applies all his other matters: as his order of life, his
companic keeping, his suits of apparel, his house, his table, his horses, his
servants, his talk, his behauyour, his iestes, his looks, and his very
goeyng in the street.

In likewise he that serves this lady A covetous man.
in the passion of covetousness: what a miserable slavery. (...) he abide?
his heart being so walled into prison with money, as he must only think
thereof, talk thereof, dream other of, and imagine only new ways to get the
same, and nothing else. If you should see a Christian man in slavery under the
great Turk, tied in a galley by the leg with chains, there to serve by
roweing for ever: you could not but take compassion of his case. And what then
shall we do of the misery of this man, who stands in captivity to a more
base creature, than a Turke^, or any other reasonable creature, that is, to a
piece of metal, in whose prison he lies bownde, not only by the feet, in
such sort, as he may not go any where, against the commodity and
commandment of the same: but also by the hands, by the mouth, by the eyes,
by the ears, and by the heart: so as he may nether do, speak, see, hcare, or
think any thing, but in service of the same? Was there ever servitude so
great as this? does not Christ say truly now, Ioh. 8.
qui facit peccatu^ seruus est peccati: He that does Romans 6.
sin is a slave unto sin? does not S. Peter 2. Pet. 2.
say well, a quo quis superatus est, huius and seruus est: A man is a slave to
that, whereof he is conquered?



From this slaueriethen are the virtuous delivered, by the power of Christ, and
his assistance: in so much, as they rule over their passions and sensuality,
and are not ruled thereby. This God promised by the prophet Ezechiel, sayeing.
And they shall know, Eze. 34.
that I am their lord, when I shall break the chains of their yoke, and
shall deliver the^ from the power of those, that over ruled them before. And
this benefit holy David acknowleged in him self, when he used these most
affectuouse words to God O lord I am thy servant, I am thy servant, and the
child of thy hand Psalm. 90.
maid: thou have broken my bands, and I will sacrifice to the, a sacrifice
of praise.

This benesit also acknovvleged S. Paul, when he said, that our old man was
crucified, to the end Romans 6.
the body of sin might be destroyed, and we be no more in servitude to sin:

understanding by the old man, and the body of sin, our concupiscence,
mortified by the grace of Christ in the virtuous.

After this privilege of freedom, follows 8. Peace of mind.
an other, of no less importance than this, and that is a certain heavenly
peace, and tranquillity of mind, according to the Psalm. 75
sayeing of the prophet: Factus est in pace locus eius, his place is made in
peace. And in an Psa. 118.
other place: Pax multa diligentibus legem tuam, there is great peace to them
that love thy law.

And on the contrary side, the prophet Esaias repeateth this sentence often from
God, non est pax impiis dicit dominus: Our lord Esa. 48. 57.
says, there is no peace unto the wicked. And an other prophet says of the
same, men.

Contrition and infelicitie is in their ways, Psalm. 13.
and they have not knovve^ the way of peace. The reason of this difference
has been declared before in that which I have noted of the diversity, of
good and evil men touching their passions. For the virtuous having now (by
the aid of Christ his grace) subdewed their said passions, do pass on their
life most sweetly, and calmely under the guide of reason, without any
pertuibatio^s that trouble them in the greatest oocurrents of this life But the
wicked men not having mortified Romans 11.
the said passions, are to ssed and tombled with the same as with vehement and
contrary wyndes. And therefore their state is Esa. 57. lac. 3.
compared by Esaye to a tempestuouse sea, that never is quiet, and by S. James,
to a city, Two cau ses of dis quietness in wieked men
or country, where the inhabitants are at war and sedition among them
selves. And the causes hereof are two: first, for that the passions of
concupiscence being many and almost infinite in number, do lust after
infinite things, and are never satisfied, but are Pro. 30.
like those bloodsuckers which the wise man speaks of, that cry all ways
geeue geeue, and never say hoe. As for example: when is the ambitious man
satisfied with honor? or the incontinent man with carnalitie? or the covetous
man with money? never truly: and therefore as that mother can not but be
greatly afflicted which should have many children cryeing at once for meat,
she having no bread at all to break unto them: so the wicked man being
greedily called upon without ceasing by almost insinite passions to yield
them their desires: must needs be vexed and pitifully tormented, especially
being not able to satisfy any one of their smallest demaundes.

An other cause of vexation is, for that these passions of disordinate
concupiscence, be often times contrary one to the other, and do demand
contrary things, representing most lyuelie the confusion of Babel: where one
tongue spoke against an other, and Genesis 11.
that in diverse and contrary languages. So we see oftentimes that the desire
of honor says spend here: But the passion of avarice says, hold thy
hands. I echerie says, venture here: But pride says. No, it may turn
thee to dishonor Anger says, revenge thy self here: But ambition says,
it is better to dissemble. And finally, here is fullfilled that which Psalm. 54
the prophet says, vidi iniquitate^ and coniradictionem in ciuitate: I have
seen iniquity and co^tradiction in the self same city:

Iniquity, for that all the demaundes of these passions are most unjust, in
that they are against reason her self: Contradiction, for that one
co^tradicteth the other their demaundes. From all which miseries God has
delivered the Phil. 4.
just by giving them his peace, which passes Ioh. 14. 17.
all understanding, as the Apostle says, and which the world can nether give
nor taste Matt. 10
of, as Christ him self affirms.

And these many causes may be alleged now (beside many other which I pass
over) to justify Christ's words, that his yoke is sweet and easy: to wit,
the assistance of grace, the love of God, the light of understanding from the
holy ghost, the internal consolation of the mind, the quiet of conscience,
the confidence thereof proceeding, the liberty of soul and body, with the
sweet rest and peace of our spirits, both toward, God, toward our
neighbors, and toward our selves. By all which means, helps, privileges
and singular benefits, the virtuous are assisted above the wicked, as has
been showed, and their way made easy, light and pleasant. To which also we
may add as the last but not the least co^sort, the expectation of reward:
that is, of eternal glory and felicity 9. Expectation of reward
to the virtuous: and everlasting damnation unto the wicked. O how great a
matter is this, to comfort the one, if their life were paynefull, and to
afflict the other, amyddest all their great pleasures? The labourer when he
thinks of his good pay at night, is encouraged to go thorough, though it be
paynfull An exam ple.
to him. Two that should pass together toward their country, the one to
receive honor for good service done abroad, the other as prisoner to be
arraygned of treaso^s, committed in foreign dominions, against his Sovereign,
could not be like merry in their Inn upon the way, as it seems to me: and
though he that stood in danger should sing, or make show of courage and
innocence, and set a good face upon the matter: yet the other might well
think that his heart had many a cold pull within him: as no doubt but all
wicked men have, when they think with the^ selves, of the life to come. If
Joseph and Pharaos baker had known both their distinct lottes in prison: to
wit, that on such a day, one should be called forth to be Genesis 40 41. 43.
made lord of Egypt, and the other to be hanged on a pair of new gallows:
they could hardly have been equally merye, whiles they lived together in
time of their imprisonment. The like may be said, and much more truly, of
virtuous and wicked me^ in this world. For when the one do but think upon
the day of death, (which is to be the day of their deliverance from this
prison:) their hearts can not but leap for very joy, considering what is to
ensewe unto them after. But the other are afflicted, and do fall into
Melancholy, as often as mention, or remembrance of death is offered: for that
they are sure, that it brings with yt their Pro. (...)
bane, according as the scripture says: The wicked man being dead, there
remains no more hope unto him.

Well then (dear brother) if all these things be so: what should stay thee
now at length to make this resolution, which I exhort thee unto? will thou
yet say (notwithstanding all this) that the matter is hard, and the way
unpleasant? or wilt thou believe other that tell thee so, though they know
less of the matter than thy self? believe rather the word and promise of
Mat. 11.
Christ, which assures thee the contrary: Believe the reasons before
alleged, which do prove it euydentlie: Believe the testimonies of them which
have experienced it in them selves as of king David, S. Paul, S. John
Evangelist: whose testimonies I have alleged before, of their own proof:
Believe many hundredes, which by the grace of God, are converted daily in
Christendom from vicious life, to perfect service of God: all which do
protest, them selves to have fownde more, than I have said, or can say in
this matter.

And for that, thou may perhaps replye here, and say, that such men are
not where thou art to give this testimony of their experience: I can and do
assure thee upon my conscience before God, that I have talked with no small
number of such my self, to my singular comfort in beholding the strong hand
and exceeding bountifullnesse of gods sweetness toward them in this case. Oh
dear brother, no tongue can express what I have seen herein: and yet savve I
not the least part of that which they felt. But yet this may I say, that
those which attend in the Catholic Curche, to deal with souls in the holy
sacrament of confession, are in deed those, whereof the prophet says, that
they voorke in multitudes of waters, and do Psa. 106.
see the maruailes of God in the depthe: In tho depthe (I say) of men's
consciences uttered with infinite multitudes of tears, when God touches the
same with his holy grace. Believe me (good reader,) for I speak in truth
before our Lord I esus, I have seen so great and exceeding consolations in
diverse great sinners after their conversion, as no heart can almost conceive:
and the hearts which received them, were hardly able to contayno the same: so
abundantly stylled down that heanenlie dew from the most liberal and
bowntefull hand of God. And that this may not seem strange unto thee: thou
must know, that it is recorded of one holy man Vide pra tum spiri tuale S.
Patrum.
called Effrem, that he had so maruailous great consolations after his
conversion, as he was often constrained to cry out to God: O Lord retire thy
hand from me a little, for that my heart is not able to receive so extreme joy.
And Gofr: in vita barn.
the like is written of S. Barnard: who for a certain time after his
conversion from the world, remained as is it were deprived of his senses, by
the excessive consolations he had from God.

But yet, if all this can not move thee, but that thou will still remain in
thy distrust: hear the testimony of one, whom I am sure thou will not
discredit, especially speaking of his own experience in him self: And this
is the holy martyr and doctor S. Cyprian, Li. ep. 1.
who writing of the very same matter to a secret friend of his called Donatus,
confesses that he was before his conversion, of the same opinion that thou art
of: to wit, that it was impossible for him, to change his manners, and to
find such comfort in a virtuous life, as after he did: being accustomed before
to all kind of loose behavior. Therefore he begins his narration to his
friend in this sort: Accipe quod sentitur anteque discitur, etc. Take that,
which is first felt before yt be lear ned:

and so follows on with a large discourso, sheweing that he proved now by
experience, which he could never believe before his conversion, thoghe God had
promised the Li. 6. confess. c. 12.
same. The like writes S. Austen of him self in his books of confession:
showing that his passions would needs persuade him, before his conversion, that
he should never be able to abide the austeritie of a virtuous life, especially
touching the sins of the flesh (wherein he had lived wantonlie, until that
time:) it seemed impossible that he could ever abandon the same, and live
chaste: which notwithstanding he fownd both easy, pleasant, and without all
difficultye afterward. For which he breaks into these words, to God: my
God let me remember and confess Li 8. confess. ca. 1.
thy mercyes to wards me: let my very bones rejoice and say unto thee: O
lord who Psalm. 34.
is like unto thee? thou have broken my chains, and I will sacrifice to thee a
sacrifice of thankesgeuing.

These chains were the chains Psa. 115.
of concupiscence, whereby he stood bounden in captivity before his
conversion, as he there confesses: but presently thereupon he was delivered
of the same, by the blessed help of gods most holy grace.

My counsel should be therefore (gentle reader) that seeing thou have so many
testimonies, examples, reasones, and promises of this matter: thou should at
least, prove once, by thine own experience, whether this thing be true or no:
especially seying it is a matter of so great importance, and so worthy thy
trial: that is, concerning so near thy eternal salvation as it does. If a
mean fellow should come unto thee, and offer for hazarding of one crown of
gold to make thee a thowsa^d by Alchymie: though thou should suspect him for
a cousiner: yet the hope of gain being so great: and the adventure, of so
small loss: thou would go nighe for once, to prove the matter. And how
much more should thou do it in this case, where by proof thou canste
leese nothing: and if thou speed well, thou may gain as much as the
everlasting joy of heaven is woorthe?

But yet here by the way I may not let Resistance at the beginning.
pass to admonish thee of one thing, which the ancient fathers and saints
of God that have passed over this river before thee (I mean the river dividing
between gods service and the world) do affirm of their own experience: and
that is, that as soon as thou take this work or resolution in hand, thou
must expect great encounters, strong impedimentes, sharp contradictions, and
fearce temptations: thou must expect assaults, combats, and open war within
Cyp. li. r. ep 1.
thy self. This S. Cyprian, S. Austen, S. Gregory, and S. Barnard do affirm
upon their Aug. li (...) doct. c. 23
own proof. This do Cyrill and Origin Greg. li.
show in diverse places at large. This does S. Mor. 4. c. 24. li 32. cap. 18.
Hillarie prove both by reasones and examples. This does the scripture it
self forewarne Barn. in psa. 90.
thee of: sayeinge, My son when thou art to come to the service of God,
stand fast Cyr li. de orat.
in justice and in fear, and prepare thy mind unto temptation. And the reason
of this is, for that Orig. ho. 3. in Exo. and 9. in le uit. and 11. in Iosue.
the devil possessing quietly thy soul before, lay still, and sought only
means to content the same, by putting in new and new delites and pleasures of
the flesh. But when Hill in psa. 118.
he sees thou offerest to go from him: he Eccle. 2.
begins straight to rage, and to move sedition within thee, and to toss up
and down both heaven and earth, before he will leese his kingdom in thy
soul. This is evident by the example of him whom Christ, coming down from
the hill, after his transfiguration, delivered from a deaf and dumme Marc. 9.
spirit. For albeyt this devil would seem nether to hear nor speak, while
he possessed that body quietly: yet when Christ commanded him to go out: he
both heard and cried out, and did so tear and rent that poor body, before
he departed, as all the standers by thought it in deed to be dead. This also
in figure was showed, by the story of Laban, who never persecuted his son in
Genesis 31.
law Jacob, until he would depart from him. And yet more was this expressed in
the doeinges of Pharao, who after once he perceived that the people of Israel
meant to depart his kingdom, never ceased greeuouslie Exodus 5.
to afflict the^ (as Moses testifies) until God had utterly delivered them
out of his hands, with the ruin and destruction of all their enemies. Which
event all the holy doctors and saints in gods church, have expounded to be a
playnfigure of the delivery of souls from the tyranny of the devil

And now if thou would have a lyuelie example of all this that I have said
before, I could allege thee many: but for breuities The eonuersion of S. (...)
sake, one only of S. Austens conversion shall suffice, testified by him
self in his books of co^fessio. It is a maruailouse example, and contains
many most notable and comfortable points. And surely whosoever shall but
read the whole at large, especialie in his sixthe, seventh and eigth books,
of his co^fessio^s, shall greatly be moved and instructed thereby. And I
beseech the reader that understands the latin tongue, to vewe over at
least but certain chapiters of the eigthe book, where this Saints final
conversion (after infinite combats) is recounted. It were too long to repeat
all here, though I deed it be such matter, as no man could ever be weary
to hear yt. There he shows, how he was tossed and tombled in this conflict
between the flesh and the spirit: between God draweing on one side, and the
world, the flesh, and the devil holding back on the Li. 8. con sess. c. 1.
and 2.
other part. He went to Simplicianus a learned old man and devout Christian:
he went (...) Ambrose by shope of Millane. And after his co^fere^ce with the^,
he was more troubled than before. He consulted with his companions Nebridius
and Alipius: but all would not ease him. One day after dynner there Cap. 6.
came into his house, a Christian courtier and captain named Potinian: and
finding by chance S. Paul's epistles upon the boorde, where Austen and his
fellows were at play: by occasion thereof fell into talk of spiritual
matters: and among other things, to recite unto the^ the life of S. Anthony,
the monk of Egypt, and the infinite virtues and miracles of the same, which
he had found in a book among Christianes, a little before, and thereby was him
self converted to Christianity. Which story after Austen had heard: as
also, that there was a monastery of those monks, without the walls of
Millan, A monastery of monks at milla^ before S. Au stens time.
(in which City this happened) nourished by S. Ambrose, the byshope, (whereof
Austen before this, knew nothing:) he was much more afflicted tha^ before: and
after Potinian was departed, withdraweing him self a side, Cap. 7.
had a most terrible combat with him self: whereof he writes thus. What did
I not say against my self in this conflict? how did I beat and whyppe my own
soul, to make her follow thee (o lord?) But she held back: she refused, and
excused her self: and when all her arguments were convicted, she remained
trembling and fearing as death to be restrained from her loose custom of
sin: whereby she consumed her self eue^ unto death.

After this he went into a garden Cap. 8.
with Alipius, his companion: and there cried out unto him. Quid hoc est? quid
patimur? surgunt indocti and caelum rapiunt, and nos cum doctrinis nostris sine
(...), ecce vbi volutamur in carne and sanguine. What is this? (Alipius) what
suffer we under the tyranny of sin? unlearned men (such as Anthony and
other) do take heaven by violence: and we with all our learning, without
hearts, behold, how we lie groueling in flesh and blood?

And he goes forward in that place, sheweing the wounderfull and almost
incredible tribulatio^s that he had in this fight, that day. After this, he
went further into an orcharde: and there he had yet a greater conflict. For
Mark this gentle reader
there, all his pleasures past represented them selves before his eyes,
saieing? Demities ne nos, and a momento isto non eximus tecum vltra in
aeternum? etc. What, will thou depart from us? and shall not we be with thee,
no more for ever, after this moment? shall it not be lawful for the to-doe
this and that, no more hereafter? And then (says S. Austen.) O Lord, turn
from the mind of thy servant, to think of that, which they objected to my
soul. What filthe, what shameful pleasures did they lay before mine eyes!

At le^gthe he sayethe Cap. (...)
that after long and tedyous co^bates maruailous tempest of weeping came upon
him: and being not able to resist, he ran away from Alipius, and cast him
self, on the ground under a figg tree, and gave full scoope unto his eyes,
which brought forth presentlye whole fluddes of tears. Which after they
were a little past over: he began to speak to Li. 8. c. (...)
God in this sort: Et it is domine, vsquequo? quam diu? quam diu, cras, and cras?
quare non modo? quare non hac hora finis est turpitudinis meae? O Lord, how
long will thou suffer me thus? how long, how long, shall I say to morrow, to
morrow? why should I not do it now? why should there not be an end of my
filthy life, even at this hour?

And after this follows his final and miraculous conversion, together with
the conversion of Alipius, his companion: which because it is set down
breeflie by him self: I will recite his own words, which are, as follows
immediately upon those that went before,

I did talk this to God, and did weep S. Auste^s final conversion by a voice
from heaven.
most bitterly, with a deep co^trition of my heart and behold, I heard a
voice, as if it had been of a boy or maid singing fro some house by, and
often repeating, take up, and read: take up and reae: And straight ways; I
changing my countenance, began to think most earnestlye with my self,
whether children were wont to sing any such thing, in any kind of game that
they used: but I could never remember, that I had heard any such thing before.
Wherefore repressing the force of my tears: I rose up, interpreting no other
thing, but that this voice came from heaven, to bydde me open the book that I
had with me (which was S. Paul's epistles) and to read the first chapter that
I should find. For I had heard before of S. Anthonye, how he S Anthonies
conversion.
was admonished to his conversion, by hearing a sentence of the gospel, which
wasredde, when he by chance came into the church, Athanasiusin vita Antonii.
and the sentence was: Go and sell all thou have, and give to the poor, and
thou shall have a treasure in heaven, and come and follow me. Which Mat. 19.
sayeing S. Anthony taking as spoken to him in particular: was presently
converted to thee (o Lord.) Wherefore I went in haste to the place where
Alipius satt, for that I lad left my book there when I departed. I snatched it
up, and opened it, and read in silence the first chapter that offered it
self unto my eyes: and therein were these words: Not in banquettinges, or in
dronke^nes: not in vva^tonnes, and chamber Romans 13.
works: not in contention and emulation: but do you put on our Lord Jesus
Christ. and do you not perform the providence of flesh, in concupiscences.

Further than this sentence I would not read: nether was it needful. For
presently with the end of this sentence, as if the light of security had been
poured into my heart: all the darkness of my doutfullnes fledd away. Where
upon, putting in my finger, or some other sign, (which now I remember not,)
upon the place: I closed the book, and with a quiet countenance opened the
whole matter to Alipius. And he by this means, uttered also that which now
wroght in him, (which I before knew not:) he desired that he might see what I
had read: and I showed him. He marked it all, and went further also than I had
read. For it followed in S. Paul, (which I knew not) take unto you him, that is
Romans 14
yet vveake in faith. Which sayeing, Alipius applied unto him self, and
opened his whole state of doutefulnes, unto me. But by this ad monition of S.
Paul, he was established, and was joined to me in my good purpose, but yet
calmelie, and without any troublesome cunctation, according to his nature and
manners, whereby he differed always greatly from me, in the better part.

After this we went in together, to my Her name was monica, a very holy we
man as he shows Li. 9. c. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13.
mo there: we tell her the matter: she reioyseth: we recite unto her the whole
order of the thing: she exulteth and triumphs, and blesses thee (o Lord,
which art more strong and liberal than we can ask or understand,) for that
sue saw now, much more granted to her from thee, touching me, than she was
wo^t to ask with her pitiful and lamentable sighs. For thou. had so
converted me now to thee, that I nether soght for wife, nor any other hope at
all, of this world: living and abiding in that This was the religious rule of
monastical life which S. Austen after pro fessed. pos sid. in vita Augu.
rule of fayeth, in which thou dyddest reveal me unto her, so many years
before. And so thou did turn her sorrow now, into more abundant joy, than
she could wish: and into much more dear and chaste joy, tha^ she could
require, by my childeren, her nepheues, if I had taken wife. O Lord, I am thy
servant, I am now thy servant, and child of thy handmayde: thou have broken my
chains, and I will sacrifice to thee therefore, a sacrifice of praise. Let my
heart and tongue praise the: and let my bones say to thee. O Lord, who is
like unto thee? Let them say it (o Lord,) and do thou answer, (I beseech
thee,) and say to my soul: I am thy salvation.

Hither to are S. Austens words. Annotatio^s upon this conversion.


In this maruailous example of this famous ma^s conversion, there be diverse
things to be noted, both for our comfort, and also for our instruction. First
is to be marked, the great conflict he had with his ghostelye enemy, before he
could get out of his possession and dominion: which was so much the more (no
dowt:) for that he was to be so great a pillar afterward in gods church. And
we see, Alipius found not so great resistance: for that the enemy saw there
was much less in him, to hurt his kingdom, than in Austen: which ought
greatly to animate them, that feel great resistance, and Those that are to
be best men. have gr^ea test conflicte in their conversion.
strong temptations, against their vocation, assuring them selves that this is
a sign, of more grace and favor, if they manfullye go through. So was S.
Paul called (as we read) most viole^tlie, being stricken down to the ground,
and made blind by Christ, before his conversion: for that he was a chosen
Act. 9.
vessel, to bear Christ's name unto the Gentyles.

Secondlye is to be noted, that althoghe this man had most strong passions,
before his conversion, and that in the greatest, and most incurable diseases,
which commonly afflict worldly men: as in ambition, covetousness, and sins
of the flesh, (as him self Li. 6. c. 6. and 15.
before confesses:) which maladies possessed him so strongly in deed, as he
thought it impossible (before his conversion,) ever to subdue and conquer the
same: yet afterward, he proved the contrary, by the help of gods omnipotent
grace. Thyrdlye also is to be noted, that he had not only the victory over
these passions, but also found great sweetness in the way of virtuous life.
For a little after his conversion, he writes thus: I could not be satisfied (o
Lord) in those days, with the Li. 9. c. 6.
maruailous sweetness which thou gave me. how much did I weep in thy hymns
and canticles, being vehemently stirred up with the voices of thy church,
singyng most sweetlye? Those voices did run into my ears, and thy truth
did melt into my heart, and thence did boil out an affection of pyetie, and
made tears to run from me, and I was in most happy state with them.



Fourethlie is to be noted for our instruction S. Auste^s diligence intryeing
ovvc his vocation.
and imitatio^, the behavior of this man about his vocation First in searching
and tryeing out the same, by his repair to S. Ambrose, Simplicianus, and
others: by reading of good books, frequenting of good company, and the like:
which thou ought alsc (good reader) to do when thou feel thy self
inwardly moved: and not to lie dead, as many are wont, resisting openly the
holy ghost, with all his good motions, and not so much as once to give ear
to the knocking of Christ at the door of their consciences. Apoc. 3.
Moreover, S. Austen (as we see) refused not the means to know his vocation,
but prayed, wept, and often retired him self alone from company to talk with
God, in that matter. Which many of us will never do: but rather do detest
and fly all means that may bring us in to those cogitations of our
conversion. Finally, S. Austen, after he had once seen clearelie the will and
pleasure of God: made no more stay of the matter, but bracke of strongly from
all the world and vanities thereof: gave over his rhetorike lecture at
Millane: left all hope of Li. 9. c. 2.
promotion in the court: and betook him self to serve God thoroughly: and
therefore, no maruayle, if he received so great consolation and advancement
from God afterward, as to be so woorthye a member in his church. Which
example is to be followed of all them that desire perfection, so farforth as
each man's condition and state of life permits.

And here by this occasion I may not Violence to bevsed at the be gynning of
our co^ uersion.
let pass to advertise thee (good reader) and also by S. Auste^s example to
fore warn thee, that who soever means to make this resolution thoroughly,
must use some violence at the beginning. For as a fire, if you rushe in upon it
with force, is easily put out: but if you deal softly, putting in one hand
after an other, you may rather hurt your self tha^ extinguishe the same: so is
it with our passions, who require manhood and courage for a time, at the
beginning. Which who soever shall use (together with the other means set
down in the second book of this treatise:) he shall most certaynelie find
that thing easy, which now he thinks heavy: and that most sweet, which
now he esteems so vnsauorye. For proof whereof, as also for conclusion of
this chapter, I will allege a short discourse out of S. Barnard: who after
his fashion, proves the same most fyttlie out of the scriptures.

Christ says unto us: take my yoke, you Bernard. in verba Euangelii: ecce nos
reliquimus omnia.
shall find rest. This is a maruailous novelty, but that it comes from him
which makes all things new. He that takes up a yoke, finds rest: he that
leaves all, finds a hundred times so much. He knew well this (I mean that
man according to the heart of God) which Psalm. (...).
said in his Psalm: Does the seat of iniquity cleave to thee (o lord
(which faignest a labor in thy commandment? is not this a feigned labor
(dear brethren) in a commau^deme^t (I mean) a light burden, a sweet yoke,
an anointed cross? so in old time Genesis 22.
he said to Abraham, take thy sone Isaac, uvhome thou love, and offer him to
me in sacrifice. This was a feigned labor i^ a commandment. For Isaac being
offered, he was not killed, but sanctified thereby. Thou therefore, if thou hear
the voice of God within thy heart, willing thee to offer up Isaac (which
signifies joy or laughter): fear not to obey yt faithefullye, and
constantly: what so ever thy corrupt affection judges of the matter, be thou
secure: Not Isaac, but the Ram shall die for yt: Thy Joy shall not perish,
but thy stubbur nes onclie, whose horns are entangled with thorns, and can
not be in thee, without the prickynges of anxietie. Thy lord does but tempt
the, as he did Abraham, to see what thou wilt do. Isaac (that is thy joy in
this life) shall not die, as thou imaginest, but shall live: one ie he must be
lyfted up, upon the wood, to the end, thy joy may be on high, and that thou
may glory, not in thy own flesh, but only in the cross of thy lord,
by whom thy self also art crucified: crucified, Gall. 3.
(I say) but crucified to the world: forvnto God thou lyuest still, and that
much more, than thou did before.



Of the second impediment, which is persecution, affliction, and tribulation,
vvherby many men are kept from the service of God.

CHAP. II.
MAny there are in the world abroad who: either upon these considerations
before laid down: or for that, they see some good men to live as merylye as
the^ selves are content to yield this much, that in very deed they esteem
vertouse life to be pleasant enough, to such as are once entered in thereunto.
And that in good soothe, for their own parts, they could be content to follow
the fame, if they might do it with quiet and peace of all hands: Mary to
request the^ unto yt in such time or place, or with such order and
circumstances, as tribulation, affliction, or persecution may fall upon them,
for the same: they think it a matter unreasonable, to be demanded, and them
selves very excusable, both before God, and man, for refusing it. But this
excuse is no better, than the other going before, of the pretended difficulty:
for that it stands upon a false ground, as also upon an unjust illation,
made upon that ground. The ground is this, that a man may, live virtuously,
and serve God truly, with all worldly ease, and without any affliction,
tribulation, or persecution: which is false. For that, albeit external
contradictions and persecutions be more in one time than in an other: more in
this place, than in that: yet can there not be any time or place without some,
both external and internal. Which althoghe (as I have showed before) in
respect of the manyfolde helps and consolations sent from God in counterpoyze
of the same, they seem not heavy nor unpleasant unto the godly: yet are they
in them selves both great and weighty, as would appear if they fell upon the
wicked and impatient. Secondly, the illation made upon this ground, is
unjust: for that it alleges tribulation, as a sufficient reason to abandone
gods service, which God him self has ordained for a mean to the contrary
effect: that is, to draw men thereby Four points to be ha^ dled in this
chapter.
unto his service. For better declaration whereof (the matter being of very
great importance) I will handle in this chapter, these four points. First,
whether it be ordinary for all that must be saved, to suffer some kind of 1.
persecution, tribulation or affliction? that is whether this be appointed an
ordinary mea nes of man's salvation in this life or no? Seco^dlie, 2
what are the causes why God (loving us as he do the) would choose and appoint
these means of our salvation? Thyrdlie, what 3
principal reasons of comfort, a man may have in tribulation? Fowerthlie,
what is required 4
at his hands in that state? which four points, being declared, I doubt not
but great light shall appear (...) this whole matter, which seems to flesne
and blood to be so full of darkness and improbabilities.

And touching the first, there needs 1. Whether all good me^ must suf fer
tiibulation or no.
little proof: for that Christ him self says to his Disciples, and by them
to all other his servants: In mundo pressuram sustinebitis. In the world you
shall sustain affliction: And in an other place: In your patience shall you
possess your souls: That is, by suffering patiently in Ioh. 26.
adversities: which S. Paul yet vtrereth more playnelie when he says: All
those that uuill Luc. 11.
live godly in Jesus Christ, shall suffer persecution.

If all, then none can be excepted. And to signify 2. Ti. 3.
yet further the necessity of this matter, both Paul and Barnabas also did
teach (as S. Luke reports) that we of necessity must Act. 14.
enter into the kingdom of god, by many tribulations: using the word
oportet, which signifies a certain necessity. And Christ him self yet more
reuealeth this secret, when he Apo. 3.
says to S. John Evangelist, that he chastyneth all those uvhome he loves:
Which words S. Paul as it were expounding to the hebrews Heb. 12.
says, flagellat omnem filium quem recipit. He whippeth every child whom he
receaueth. And S. Paul urges this matter so sarre in that place, as he
affirms playnlie all those Ver. 8.
to be bastardes, and no children of God, which are not afflicted by him in
this life. The same position he holds to Timothy: Sisuftinemus and
conregnabimus. If we suffer 2. Ti. 2.
with Christ, we shall reign with Christ, and no otherwise.

VVherin also concurreth holy David, when be says, Multae tribulationer Psa.
33.
(...): The just are appointed to many tribulations.

The same might be proved by many other means, as by that, Christ says. He
came not Mat. 10.
to bring peace, but the svvord into the uvoorld. Also by that S. Paul says.
That no man can be 2. Tim. 2
crowned except he fight laufullie. But how can we fight, if we have no enemy
to oppugn us? The same signifies Christ in the Apocalips, Ca. and 3.
when he repeateth so often, that heaven is only for him that conquereth. The
very same is signified by the ship, where into Matt. 8.
Christ entered with his disciples, which was tossed and tumbled, as if it
would have been drouned: this (I say) by all the ancient fathers exposition,
was a figure of the troubles and afflictions, that all those should suffer,
which do row in the same ship with Christ our savior. The same also is
proved Job. 7.
by that, the life of man is called a warfare upon earth: and by that, he is
appointed to Job. 5.
labor and travail, while he is here: also by that, his life is replenished
with many miseries, Job. 13.
even by the appointement of God after man's fall: The same also is showed by
that, that God has appointed every man to pass through the pains of death,
before he come to joy: Also, by the infinite contradictions and tribulations,
both within and without, left unto man in this life: as for example, within,
are the rebellions of his concupiscence and other miseries of his mind,
wherewith he has co^tinualie to make war, if he will save his soul.
Without, are the world, and the devil, which do never cease to assault him,
now by fair means, and now by foul: now by flattery, and now by threats:
now alluring by pleasure and promotion, now terrifieinge by affliction and
persecution: Against all which the good Christian has to resist ma^fullie, or
else he leeseth the crown of his eternal salvation.

The very same also may beshewed by The example of saints.
the examples of all the most renowned saints, from the begyning: who were
not only assaulted internallye with the rebellyon of their own flesh: but
also persecuted and afflicted outwardlye: thereby to confirm more many festlye
this purpose of God. As we see in Abell, persecuted and slain by Gene. 4.
his own brother, as soon as ever he began to serve God: Also in Abraham,
afflicted diversely after he was once chosen by God: and Genesis 22.
most of all by making him yield to the kylling of his own dear and only
child: Iudit. 8.
Of the same cup drank all his children and posterity that succeeded him, in
gods favor: as Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, Moses, and all the prophets: of which
Christ him self gives testimony, how their blood was shed Ma. 5. 23
most cruellye by the world: the affliction also Luc. 13.
of Job is wou^derfull, seeing the scripture affirms it to have come upon him
by gods special Job. 1.
appoyntme^t, he being a most just man: But yet more wou^derful was the
affliction of holy Tobias, who among other calamities, Tob. 2.
was strycken blind by the falling down of swallows dung into his eyes: of
which the Angel Raphael told him afterward: Because thou were a man
grateful to God, it uvas Tob 12.
of necessity that this tentation should prove thee. Behold the necessity of
afflictions to good men. I might add to this, the example of David and others:
but that S. Paul gives a general testimony of all the saints of the old
Heb. 11.
testamet, sayeing: That some were racked, some reproched, some whipped, some
chained, some imprisoned: other were stoned, cut in pieces, rempted, and
slain with the swoorde: some went about in hear clothe, in skynnes of goats,
in great need, pressed and afflicted: wandering and hyding them selves in
wildernesses, in hills, in caves, and holes under ground, the world not
being worthy of them. Of all which he pronounces this comfortable
sentence, to be noted of all men: Non suscipientes redemptionem, vt meliorem
inuenirent resurrectionem: That is, God would not deliver them from these
afflictions in this life, to the end their resurrection and reward in the life
to come might be more glorious.

And this of the saints of the old testament.

But now in the new testament, founded expresselie upon the cross, the matter
stands much more plain, and that with great reason. Luc. 24.
For if Christ could not go into this glory, but by suffering, as the
scripture says: then by the most reasonable rule of Christ affirming, that
the seruante has not privilege above Mat. 10.
his master: It must needs follow, that all have Luc. 6.
to drink of Christ's cup, which are appointed Mat. 10.
to be partakers of his glory. And for proof hereof, look upon the dearest
fre^endes that ever Christ had in this life, and see whether they had part
thereof or no? Of his mother, old Simeon prophesied and told her at Luc. 2.
the beginning, that the svuoorde of tribulations should pass her heart,
signifieing thereby, the extreme afflictions that she felt afterward in the
death of her son, and other miseries heaped upon her. Of the Apostles it is
evident, that beside all the labors, travails, needs, sufferinges,
persecutions and calamities' which were infinite, and in man's sight
intolerable, (if we believe S. Paul recou^ting the 1. Cor. 4
same:) beside all this (I say) God would not 2. Cor. 4
be satisfied, except he had their blood also: 6. 11. 12.
and so we see that he suffered none of the Act. 20.
to dye naturally, but only S. John by a special Romans 8.
privilege by name granted him from Ioh. 21.
Christ: albeyt if we consider what John also suffered in so long a life as he
lived, being banished by domitian to pathmos: and at an other time, thrust
into a tonne of heat oil (...). de prescrip. hereti.
at Rome (as Tertulian and S. Jerome do report:) we shall see that his part
was no less Ierom. li. contr. Iauin.
tha^ others. in this cup of his master. I might reckon up here infinite
other examples: but it needs not: for it may suffice, that Christ Mat. 10.
has given this general rule in the new testament: He that takes not up his
cross and follows me, is not vvoorthie of me. By which, is resolved
playnelie, that there is no salvation now to be had, but only for them that
take up (that is do bear willingly) their propper crosses, and therewith do
follow their captain, walking on with his cross on his shoulders before them.

But here perhaps some man may An objection ansvvered.
say: if this be so, that no man can be saved without a cross: that is,
without affliction, and tribulation: how do all those that live in peacible
times and places, where no persecution is, no trouble, no affliction, or
tribulation? To which I answer, first, that if there were any such time or
place: the men living therein should be in great danger, according to the
sayeing of the prophet, they are Psalm. 72.
not in the labor of other men, nor yet uvhipped and punished as others are.
And therefore pride possessed them, and they were covered with iniquity and
impiety: and their iniquity proceeded of their fatness, or abundance. Beside
this, thoghe men suffered nothing in this life, yet (as saint Austen largelye
proves:) if they dyed out of the state of mortal sin: they might be saved
In ps. 73. and de vera and falsa penite^tia c. 18.
by suffering the purging fire in the next, according to the sayeing of Saint
Paul: that such as build not gold, or silver upon the foundation, but wood,
straw, or stuble: shall 1. Cor. 3.
receive damage thereof at the day of our Lord, to be reueyled in fire: but
yet by that fire they shall be saved.

Second: ie, I answer, that there is no such time and place so void of
tribulation, but that there is always a cross to be found, for them that
will take yt up. For either is there poverty, sickness, slander, enemitie,
injury, contradiction, or some like affliction offered continually. For that,
those men never want in the world, whereof the prophet said: These that do
render evil Psalm. 37.
for good, did detract from me, for that I folouved goodness. At the
leastwyse, there never want those domestical enemies, of which Christ Matt. 7.
speaks: I mean, either our kynred and carnal friends, which commonly
resist us, if we begin once thoroughly to serve God: or else our own
disordinate affections, which are the most perylouse enemies of all: for that
they make us war upon our own ground. Again, there never want the
temptations of the world and devil: the resisting whereof is much more
difficult in time Time of peace more dangerous than of persecution.
of peace and wealth, than in time of external affliction and persecution:
for that these enemies are stronger in slatterie, than in force: which a godly
father expresses by this parable: The sun and wind (says he) agreed one
day to prove their several strengthes A parable.
in taking a cloak from a wayesarynge man. And in the forenoone, the wynd used
all violence that he could to blow of the said cloak: But the more he blewe,
the more fast held the trauailer his clock, and gathered it more closely about
him. At after noone the sun sent forth her pleasant beams, and by little
and little so entered into this man, as he caused him to yield and put of, not
only his cloak, but also his cote. Whereby is proved (says this father)
that the alluremetes of pleasure are more strong, and harder to be resisted,
than the violence of persecution. The like is showed by the example of David,
2. Rc. (...)
who resisted easily many assaults of adversity: but yet fell dangerously
in time of prosperity. VVherby appearethe that virtuous men have no less
war in time of peace, than in time of persecution: Nor ever wants there
occasion of bearing the cross, and suffering affliction, to him that will
accept of the same. And this may suffice for this first point, to prove that
every man must enter into heaven by tribulation as S. Paul says. 2. The cause
why God sends affliction to the god lie.


Touching the second, why God would have this matter so: yt were sufficient to
answer, that yt pleased him best so, without seeking any further reason of his
meaning herein: even as it pleased him, without all reason in our sight, to
abase his son so much, as to send him hither into this world to suffer and
dye for us: Or if we will needs have a reason hereof: this one might be
sufficient for all: that seeing we look for so great a glory as we do: we
should labor a little first for the same, and so show our selves worthy of
gods favor, and exaltation. But yet, for that yt has pleased his divine
majesty, not only to open unto us his will and determination for our
suffering in this life: but also diverse reasons of his most holy purpose and
pleasure therein, for our further encouragement and consolation which do
suffer: I will in this place repeat some of the same, for declaration of his
exceeding great love, and fatherly care toward us. 1. Increase of glory


The first cause then, and the most principal, is to increase thereby our
merit and glory in the life to come. For having appointed by his eternal
wisdom and justice, that none shall be crowned there, but according to the 2.
Tim. 2
measure of his fight in this world: the more Apoc. 2.
and greater co^bates that he gives (together with sufficient grace to
overcome therein:) the greater crown of glory prepares he for us at our
resurrection. This cause touches Heb. 11.
S. Paul in the words before alleged of the saints of the old testament:
to Wit, that they received no redemption from their miseries in this world,
to the end they might find a better resurrection in the world to come.

This also meant Christ expresselie when Mat. 5.
he said: Happy are they which suffer persecution, for theyrs is the
kingdom of heaven: happy are you when men speak evil, and persecute you
etc. rejoice and be glad (I say,) for that your reward is great in heaven.
Hither also do appertain all those promyses: of gayning life by Mat. 10.
leesing life: of, receiving a hundred for one, and Mat. 19.
the like. Here hence do proceed all those Esa. 56.
large promyses to virginity, and chastity: and Mat. 19.
to such as geld them selves for the kyndome 1. Cor. 7.
of heaven: to voluntary poverty, and to the Psalm. 67.
renovvncing of our own will by obedience. Mat. 19.
All which are great conflictes against the Luc. 12.
flesh, woorld, and our own sensuality, and Pro. 21
can not be performed but by sufferinges and Luc. 9.
affliction. Finally S. Paul declares this matter 2. Cor. 4.
fully, when he says: that a little and short tribulation in this life
works a weight of glory above all measure in the hight of heaven.

The second cause why God appointed 2 Hate of the world.
this is to draw us thereby from the love of the world, his professed enemy: as
in the next chapter shall be shevved at large. This cause S. Paul utters in
these words: We are punished 1. Co. 11.
of God, to the end we should not be damned with this world. Even then, as a
Nurse, that to vveane her child from the lykyng of her milk, does anoynte her
teat with Alloes, or some other such bitter thing: so our merciful father,
that would retire us from the love of worldly delytes, whereby infinite men
do perish daily, uses to send tribulation: which of all other things has
most force to work that effect: as we see in the example of the prodigal
son, who could by no means be stayed from his pleasures, Luc. 15.
but onelyeby affliction.

Thirdly, God uses tribulation as a most 3. Amedici^ to cure our diseases.
present and sovereign medicine to heal us of many diseases, otherwise
almost incurable. As first of a certain blyndenes, and careless negligence in
our estate, contracted by wealth, and prosperity. In which sense the
scripture says, that affliction gives understanding. Eccl. 28.
And the wise man affirms, that Pro. 29.
the rod brings uvisdome. This was showed in figure, when the sight of
Tobie was restored Tob. 12.
by the bitter gaul of a fish. And we have clear examples in Nabuchadonasar,
Saul, Dan. 4.
Antiochus, and Manasses: all which came to 2. Mac. 9
see their own faults by tribulation, which 2. Paral.
they would never have done in time of prosperity. 33.
The like we read of the brethren of Joseph, who falling some affliction in
Egypt, presently entered into their own conscience, and said: We suffer
those things Genesis 42.
vvoorthely, for that we sinned against our brother. And as tribulation
brings this light, whereby we see our own defectes: so helps yt greatly
to remove and cure the same: wherein it may be well lykened unto the rod of
Moses. For as that rod strikinge the hard rocks, hrought forth water, as
Exo. 17.
the scripture says: so, this rod of affliction Deuteronomy. 8.
falling upon stonye hearted sinners mollyfyeth Psalm. 77.
them to contrition, and often times brings forth the fluddes of tears to
Tob. 3.
repentance. In respect whereof, holy Tobye says to God: In time of
tribulation thou forgeuest sins. And for like effect, it is compared Job. 23.
also to a fyle of iron which takes away Prou. 17.
the rust of the soul: Also to a purgation that Eccle. 2.
drives out corrupt humors: And finally to Esa. 1.
a gold smythes fire which co^sumeth away Ier. 9.
the refuse metalls, and fineth the gold to his perfection. I will try thee
by fire to the quick (says God to a sinner by Esaias the prophet) and I will
take away all thy tynne, and refuse metal. And again by Jeremy, I will
melt them, and try them by fire. This he meant of the fire of tribulation,
whose property is (according as the scripture says) to purge and fine the
soul, as fire purges and Sap. 3.
fineth gold in the furnace. For besides the Zach. 13.
purging and removing of greater sins, by consideration, and contrition
(which tribulation woorketh, as has been showed: it purges also the ruste of
infinite evil passions, appetites, and humors in man: as the humor of pride,
of vain glory, of slouthe, of choler, of delicate nysenes, and a thousand
more, which prosperity ingendereth in us. This God declares by the prophet
Ezechiel, sayeing, Ezec. 24
of a rustie soul: put her naked upon the hoote cooles, and let her heat
there, until her brass be melted from her, and until her corruption be
burned out, and her ruste consumed. There has been much labor and sweat
taken about her, and yet her over much ruste is not gone out of her.

This also Job. 33.
signifies holy Job, when having said, that God instructs a man by
discipline (or correction) to the end he may turn him from the things that he
has done, and deliver him from pride: (which is understood of his sinful
acts,) he adds a little after, the manner of this purgation, sayeing, his
flesh being consumed by punishementes, let him return again to the days
Ver. 25.
of his youth: That is, all his fleshly humors and passions being now
consumed by punishementes and tribulations, let him begin to live again in
such purity of soul, as he did at the beginning of his youth, before he had
contracted these evil humors and diseases.

Nether only is tribulation a strong medicine to heal sin: and to purge
away the 4. A preservative.
refuse metalles in us of brass, tynne, iron, lead, and dross, as God by
Ezechiel says: Eze. 22.
but also a most excellent preservative against sin for the time to come:
According as good king David said, the discipline (o Lord) has Psalm. 17.
corrected me for evermore: That is, it has made me wary, and wachefull, not
to co^mitt sin again, according as the scripture says in an other place: A
grievous infirmity or affliction Eccl. 31.
makes the foul sober: For which cause the prophet Jeremy calls
tribulation, virgam Iere. 1.
vigilantem: A wachefull rod: that is, (as S. Jerome expounds it) a rod
that makith a man wachefull. The same signified God, Ose. 2.
when he said by Ose the prophet: I uvil hedge in thy way withdraw thorns:
That is, I will so close thy life on every side with the remembrance and
fear of affliction, that thou shall not dare to tread a-vvrie, lest thou
tread upon a thorn. All which good David expresses Psalm. 18.
of him self in these words: before I was humbled and brought low by
affliction, I did sin and offend the (o Lord:) but after that time, I have
kept thy commandments.



Of this also appears an other cause, 5. A preuetion of the punishment in
purgatory.
why God afflicts his elect in this life: and that is, to prevent his justice
upon them, in the world to come. I mean that Justice, which otherwise
remains to be executed upon every one after their departure hence in that
most grievous fire, whereof I spoke before: touching which S. Barnard says
thus: Oh Ser. 55. in cantie.
would to God some man would now beforehand, provide for my head abundance of
waters, and to mine eyes a fountain of tears: for so happily the burning
fire should take no hold, where running tears had cleansed before. And the
reason of this is, (as that holy man him self notes after) for that God has
said by Naum the prophet, Nau^. 1.
I have afflicted the once, and I will not affiicte thee again: there shall
not come from me a double tribulation.

Sixthelie, God sends tribulation upon 6. To prove us.
his servants, to prove them thereby, whether they be fathefull and constant or
no: That is, to make them selves and other men see and confess, how faythefull
or unfaithful they are. This in figure was signified, when Isaac Genesis 27.
would grope and touch his son Jacob, before he would bless him. And this
the scripture expresses playnelie, when talking of the tribulations laid upon
Abraham, It adds, tentauit deus Abraham: God tempted Genesis 22.
Abraham, by these means to prove him. And Moses said to the people of
Israel: Thou shaltreme^bre how thy God led thee forty years Deuteronomy. 8.
about the desert to afflict thee, and tempt thee: to the end it might appear
what was in thy heart: whether thou vvoldest keep his c^omaundementes or no.
And again, a few chapiters after: Your God and Lord does tempt you, to the
end it Deu. 13.
may be manifest whether you love him or no, with all your heart and with all
your soul. In which sense, also the scripture says of Ezechias, after many
praises given unto him, that God left him for a time to be tempted, that the
thoughts of his heart might thereby be made manyseftie. And 2. Paral.
that this is gods fashion toward all good 32.
men, king David shows in the person of all, when he says, Thon have
proved us (o lord) thou have examined us by fire: thou have laid tribulation
Psalm. 63.
upon our backs, and have brought men upon our heads. And yet how well he
lyked of this matter, he signifies, when he calls for more thereof in an
other place: sayeing, Try Psa. 25.
me (o Lord) and tempt me: burn my reins and heart within me. That is, try
me by the way of tribulation and persecution: search out the secrets of my
heart and reins: let the world see whether I will stick to thee in adversity
or no. Thus said that holy prophet, well knoweing that which in an other
place the holy ghost utters: that as the furnace tries the potters
vessels, so tribulation Eccl. 27.
tries men. For as the sound vessels only, do hold when they come to the
furnace, and those which are crased do break in pieces: so in time of
tribulation and persecution, the virtuous only stand to yt, and the
counterfeit bewraye them selves: according to the sayeing of Christ: In tempere
tentationis Luc. 8.
recedunt: They depart from me in time of temptation.

The seventh reason, why God lays 7. To make men run to God.
tribulation upon the virtuous is, thereby to make them run unto him for aid
and help: even as the mother, to make her child more to love her, and to run
unto her, procures the same to be made afearde and terrisied by others. This,
God expresses playnelie by the prophet Ose, sayeing of those Ose. 11.
that he loved: I will dravv them unto me, in the ropes of Adam, in the
chains ofloue, and will seem unto them as though I raised a yoke upon their
iavv bones. By the ropes of Adam, he means affliction, whereby he drew Adam
to know him self: as also appears by that he addethe of the heavy yoke of
tribulation, which he will lay upon the heads and faces of his servants,
as chains of love, thereby to draw them unto him. This chain had Psalm. 31.
drawn David unto him when he said, O lord thouv art my refuge from the
tribulation of sinners. As also those whereof Esaias says, Esa. 26.
they sought the out (o lord) in their affliction. Also those of whom David
said, Infirmities Psalm. 15.
were multiplied upon them, and after that, they made haste to come. And God
says generally of all good men: They will rise betimes in the Ose. 6.
morninge, and come to me in their tribulation. Wherefore holy king David
desiring to do Psalm. 82.
certain men good, and to win them to God, says in one of his psalms:
Fill their faces (o lord) with shame, and confusion, and the^ will they seek
unto thy name. And this is true (as I said) in the elect and chosen servants
of God: but in the reprobate, this rope draws not, this yoke holds not, nor
does this chain of love win them unto God: whereof God him self
complains, sayeing, Iere. 2.
In vain have I strycken your children, for they have not received my
discipline. And again the prophet Jeremy sayethe of them to God, Iere. 5.
thou have crushed them and they have refused to receive thy discipline: they
have hardened their faces even as a rock, and will not return to thee.
Behold, they have rent the yoke, and broken the chains.

Of this now enseueth an eigthe reason, 8 To manifest gods power and love in
deliue ring.
why God brings his servants into (...): to wytt, thereby to show his power
and love in delyuering them. For as in this world a princelye mind desires
nothing more, than to have occasion whereby to show his ability and good will
unto his dear friend: so God which has all occasions in his own hands, and
passes all his creatures together in greatness of love and nobility of
mind, woorketh purposelye diverse occasions and oportunities, whereby to show
and exercise the same. So he brought the three children into the burning
furnace, thereby to show his power and love in delivering them. So he brought
Daniel, into the lions den: Susanna, unto the point Dan. 3. 6. 13.
of death: Job, into extreme misery: Joseph, into prison: Tobye unto
blyndenes: thereby Job. 1. 2.
to show his power and love in their deliue ra^ce. Gen 31.
For this cause also did Christ suffer the Tob. 2. 12.
ship to be almost drowned, before he would awake: and S. Peter to be
almost under Matt. 8.
water, before he would take him by the Mat. 14.
hand.

And of this one reason, many other reasones 9. The joy of delinerance.
and most comfortable causes do appear of gods dealyng herein. As first,
that we being delivered from our afflictions, might take more joy and delight
thereof, than if we had never suffered the same. For as water is more grateful
to the vvayefayring man, after a long drythe: and a calm more pleasant unto
passingers after a troublesome tempest: so is our delyuerie more sweet after
persecution or tribulation: according as the scripture Eccle. 35
says: Speciosa misericordia dei in tempore tribulationis: The mercy of God
is beautyfull and pleasant in time of tribulation. This signified also Christ,
when he said, your sorrow shall be Ioh. 16.
turned into joy: That is, you shall rejoice, that ever you were sorrowful.
This had David proved when he said, thy rod (o Lord) and Psalm. 22.
thy staff have comforted me: that is, I take great comfort that ever I was
chastyned with them. Psalm. 93.
And again, according to the multitude of my sorrows, thy consolations have
made joyful my mind: That is, for every sorrow that I received in time of
affliction, I receive now a consolation after my delyuerance. And again, in an
other plaee, I vuill exult and rejoice in thy mercy o Lord. And wherefore (good
king) wilt Psalm. 30.
thou so rejoice? yt follows immediately: For that thou have respected my
abasement, and have delivered my foul from the necessity vuherin soee was,
nor have not left me in the hands of mine enemy. This then, is one most
graciouse meaning of our loving and merciful father, in afflicting us for a
tymee to the end, our joy may be the greater after our delyuerance, as no
doubt but it was, in all those whom I have named before, delivered by gods
mercy: I mean, Abraham, Joseph, Daniel, Sidrach, Misach, and Abdenago,
Susanna, Job, Thobias, peter and the rest: who took more joy after their
deliverance, than if they had never been in affliction at all. When Judith had
Judith. 6. 14. 15.
delivered Bethulia, and returned thither with Holofernes head: there was more
hearty joy in that city, than ever there would have been, if it had not been
in distress. When S. Peter was dolyuered out of prison Act. 12.
by the Angel: there was more joy for his deliverance in the church, then
could have been, if he had never been in prison at all.

Out of this great joy resulteth an other 10. Thanks geuiug for our
deliverance.
effect of our tribulation, much pleasant to God, and comfortable to our
selves: and that is, a most hearty and earnest thanks giving to God for our
deliverance: such as the prophet used when he said, after his deliverance: I
for my part will sing of thy strength, and will Psalm. 58.
exalt thy merice betymes in the morning for that thou have been my ayder and
refuge, in the day of my tribulation. Such hearty thanks and praise did the
children of Israel yield to God for their delyuerance, when they were passed
over the read sea, in that notable song of theirs, which begins Cantemus
domino: Exo. 15.
And is regestred by Moses in Exodus. From 1. Re. 2.
like hearty affect came also those songs of Iudic. 5.
Anna, Debora, and Judith, mowed thereunto Iudi. 12.
by the remembrance of their afflictions past. And finally, this is one of the
cheifest things that God esteems and desires at our hands: as he testifies
by the prophet, sayeing, call Psalm. 49.
upon me in the day of tribulation: I will deliver thee, and thou shall
honor me.

Besides all these, God has yet further 11. Embolde ning us in gods service.
reasones of layeing persecution upon us: as for example: for that by
suffering, and perceiving in deed gods assistance and consolation therein, we
come to be so hardy, bold, and constant in his service, as nothing afterward
can dismaye us: even as Moses, thoghe Exo. 4.
he were first a feared of the serpent made of his rodd, and fledd away from
it: yet, after by gods commandemente he had once taken yt by the tail, he
feared it no more. This the Psalm. 45
prophet David expresses notably, when he says: God has been our refuge,
and strength, and helper in our great tribulations: and therefore we will not
fear if the whole earth should be troubled, and the mountains cast into the
midst of the sea.

what greater confidence can be imagined than this?

Again, by persecution and affliction God 12. The exercise of all the virtues.
Faith.
brings his children to the exercise and perfect possession of all the
virtues belonging to a Christian man. As for example, faith is exercised in
time of tribulation, in considering the causes of gods permissio^, and
beleeui^g most assuredly the promises he has made for our deliverance. Hope
is exercised in conceauing Hope.
and assuring her self of the reward promised to them that suffer patiently.
Charity Charity
is exercised, in considering the love of Christ suffering for us, and thereby
provoke the afflicted to suffer again for him. Obedience Obedience.
is exercised in conforming our wills to the will of Christ. Patience, in
bearing Patience Humility.
quietlye. Humility, in abasing our selves in the sight of God. And so
likewise all other virtues, belonging to a good Christian, are stirrd up,
exercised, confirmed, strengthened, and establyshed in man by tribulation,
according to the sayeing of S. Peter: God shall make 1. Pet. 5.
perfect, confirm, and establishe those, which have suffered a little for his
name.

Finally, gods meaning is by layeing persecution 13. To make us like unto
Christ. Esa. 53.
and affliction, upon us, to make us perfect Christians: that is like unto
Christ our captain, whom the prophet calls Virum dolorum, and scientem
infirmitatem: A man of sorrows, and one that had tasted of all manner of
infirmities:

thereby to receive the more glory at his return to heaven, and to make more
glorious all those, that will take his part therein. To speak in one word:
God Cracified Christians.
would make us by tribulation crucified Christians: Which is the most
honorable title that can be given unto a creature: crucified (I say) and
mortified to the vanities of this world: to the flesh: and to our own
concupiscence and carnal desires: but quick and full of all lyuelie spirit,
to virtue, godliness, and devotion. This is the heavenly meaning of our
Sovereign Lord and God, in sending us persecution, tribulation, and
affliction: in respect whereof holy Job dowteth not to say: Blessed is the
man that is afflicted by God. And Job. 5.
Christ him self yet more expresselie: Happy Matt. 5.
are they which suffer persecution. If they are happy and blessed thereby:
then is the worldly greatly a-vvrie, which so much abhors the suffera^ce
thereof the^ is god but vntha^kfullie dealt withal by many of his children, who
repyne at this happiness bestowed upon the^: where as in deed they should
accept it with joy and thanks giving. For proof and better declaration
whereof, I will enter now into the third point of this chapter, to examine
what reasones and causes there be to induce us to this ioyfullnes and
contentation of tribulation.

And first, the reasones laid down alredie of gods merciful, and fatherly
meaning 3 The third part of this chapter whi tribulations should be re ceaued
laufullie.
in sending us affliction, might be sufficient for this matter: That is, to
comfort and content any Christian man or woman, who takethe delight in gods
holy providence toward them. For if God do send affliction unto us, for the
increase of our glory in the life to come: for draweing us from infection of
the world: for opening our eyes, and curing our diseases: and for preserving
our souls from sin hereafter: as has been showed: who can be justly
displeased therewith, but such as are enemies unto their own good? we see
that, for the obtaining of bodily health, we are content, not only to
admit many bitter and unpleasant medicines: but also (if need require) to
yield willingly some part of our blood to be taken from us. And how much
more should we do this, for the eternal health and salvation of our soul?
But now further, if this medicine have so many more commodities besides, as
have been declared: if it serve here for the punisheme^t of our sins, due
otherwise at an other place, in far greater quantity and rigor of justice:
if it make a trial of our estate, and do draw us to god: if it procure gods
love toward us: yield matter of joy by our delyuerance: provoke us to
thankefullnes: embolden and strengthen us: and finally, if yt furnishe us with
all virtues, and do make us like to Christ him self: then is there singular
great cause, why we should take comfort and consolation therein: for that, to
come near and to be like unto Christ, is the greatest dignity and preeminence
in the world. Lastly, if gods eternal wisdom has so ordained and
appointed, that this shall be the means of his servants salvation: the badge
and lyuerie of his son: the high way to heaven under the sta^darde of his
cross: then ought we not to abhor this means, not to refuse this lyuerie:
not to fly this way: but rather, with good peter Act. 5.
and John to esteem it a great dignity to be made worthy of the most
blessed participatio thereof. We see that to wear the colors of the prince,
is thought a prerogative among courtiers in this world: but to wear the robe
or crown yt self, were to great a dignity for any inferior subject, to
receive. Yet Christ our lord and king is content to imparte both of his, with
us. And how then ought we (I pray you) to accept thereof?

And now (as I have said) these reasons Special Considerations, of comfort in
affliction.
might he sufficient to comfort and make joyful all those that are called to
suffer affliction and tribulation. But yet there want not some more particular
co^sideratio^s besides. VVherof the first and most principal is, that this
matter of persecution comes not by chances or casualtie, or by any certain
general direction from higher powers: but by the special providence and
peculiar disposition of God: Mat. 10.
as Christ shewethe at large in S. Mathews gospel: That is, this heavenly
medecin or potion is made unto us, by gods own hand in particulare. Which
Christ signifiethe when he sayethe: Shall I not drink the cup Ioh. 18.
which my father has given me? That is, seeing my father has tempered a
potion for me, shall I not drink yt? as who would say, it were too much
ingratitude. Secondly is to be noted, that the very same hand of God, which
tempered the cup for Christ, his own son, has done the same also for us,
according to Christ his sayeing: You shall Mat. 10.
drynk of my cup. That is, of the same cup which my father has tempered
for me. Heerof it follows, that, with what heart and love God te^pered this
cup unto his own son: with the same he has tempered it also to us: that
is, altogether for our good and his glory. Thirdly is to be noted, that this
cup is tempered with such special care (as Christ says) that, what
trouble or danger soever it seem to work: yet shall not one hear of our
head perish by the same. Luc. 21.
Nay further, is to be noted, that which the Mat. 10.
prophet says, O Lord thou shall give us to Psalm. 79.
drink in tears, in measure. That is, the cup of tears and tribulation
shall be so tempered in measure by our heavenly physician, as no man shall
have above his strength. The dose of Aloes and other bitter ingredientes
shall be qualified with manna and sufficient sweetness of heavenly co^solatio^.
God is faithful (says S. Paul) and vuill not suffer you to be tempted 1. Co.
10
above your ability. This is a singular point of comfort, and ought always to
be in our remembrance.

Beside this, we must consider, that the appointing and tempering of this
cup, being now in the hands of Christ our Savior, by the full commission
granted him from his Mat. 28.
father: and he having learned by his own Heb. 5.
sufferinges (as S. Paul notifieth) what it is to suffer, in flesh and blood:
we may besure that he will not lay upon us more, than we can bear. For, as if
a man had a father or brother, a most skyllfull physician, and should receive
a purgation from them, tempered with their own hands, he might be sure it
would never hurt him, what rombling soever it made in his be lie, for the
time: so and much more may we be assured of the potion of tribulation
ministered us, by the hand of Christ: Heb. 12.
though (as S. Paul says) it seem unto us unpleasant for a time. But above
all other comfortable cogitations, this is the greatest and most comfortable,
to consider, that he divides this cup only of love, as him self
protests, and S. Paul proves: that is, he gives Apoc. 3.
out portions of his cross (the richest Heb. 12.
Jewel that he makes account of) as worldly Gods measure of tribulation
goethe accordin ge to the measure of his love
princes do their treasure, unto none, but unto chosen and pycked friends:
and among them also, not equally to each man, but to eueire one a measure,
according to the measure of good will, wherewith he loves him. This is evident
by the examples before set down of his dearest friends, most of all
afflicted in this life: that is, they received greater portions of this
treasure, for that his good will was greater toward them. This also may be
seen manifestly in the example of S. Paul: of whom after Christ had said to
Ananias, vas electionis est mihi, he is a chosen Act. 9.
vessel unto me: he gives immediately the reason thereof: For I will show
unto him, what great things he must suffer for my name. Lo here: for that
he was a chosen vessel, therefore he must suffer great matters. Does not the
measure of suffering go then according to the measure of gods love unto us?
Surely S.Peter knew well how the matter 1. Pet. 2.
went, and therefore he writes thus: If you living well, do suffer uvith
patience, this is a grace (or privilege) before God. And again a little after:
If you sufferreproche in the name of 1. Pet. 4.
Christ, you are happy: for that the honor and glory, and power of God,
and of his holy spirit, shall rest upon you.

Can there be any greater reward promised, or any more excellent dignity,
than to be made partaker of the honor, glory, and power of Christ? Is it
maruayle now if Christ said, Happy are you when men revile Matt. 5.
and persecute you? Is it marvel though he said, gaudete in illa die, and
exultate, rejoice and Luc. 6.
triumph ye at that day? Is it marvel, though S. Paul said, I take great
pleasure, and 2. Co. 12
do glory in my infirmities or afflictions, in my repreches, in my
necessities, in my persecutions, in my distresses for Christ?

Is it marvel if Peter and John being reproched Act. 5.
and beaten at the Judgment seat of the Jews, went away rejoicing that they
were esteemed worthy to suffer contumely for the name of lesus? Is it
marvel though S. Paul accounted this such a high privilege given to the
Philippiens when he said, It is given to Philip. 1
you, not only to believe in Christ, but also to suffer for him, and to have
the same combat, which you have seen in me, and now hear of me: All this
is no marvel (I say,) (...) that suffering with Christ, and bearing the
cross with Christ, is as great a preferment in the court of heaven, as yt
should be in an earthlye court, for the prince to take of his own garment,
and to lay yt on the back of one of his servants.

Of this now follows an other consequent Tribulation a sign of predestination.
of singular consolation, in time of affliction: and that is, that tribulation
(especially when grace is also given to bear it patiently) is a great
conjecture of our predestination to eternal life. For, so much do all those
arguments before touched insinuat, as also in the contrary part, to live in
continual prosperity, is a dreadful sign of everlasting reprobation. This
point is marvelously proved by Saint Paul unto the Heb. 12.
hebrews, and greatly urged. And Christ gives a plain signification in S.
Luke, when Luc. 6.
he says: Happy are you that weep now, for you shall laughe. And on the
other side: VVoe unto you that laughe now, for you shall weep: vvoe unto you
rich me^, which have your co^solatio^ here in this life. And yet more
veheme^tlie tha^ all this, does the sayeing of Abraham to the rich man in
hell, (or rather Christ's words parabolicallye attributted unto Abraham)
confirm this matter: For he says to the rich man co^playning of his
torment: Remember child, that thou receauest good in thy life time: Luc. 16.
He does not say (as S. Barnard well notes) apuisti thou tookest them by
violence: but recepisti, thou receauest them. And yet, this now is objected
against him as we see. David handles this matter in diverse places, but
purposelie in two of his psalms, and that Psalm. 27. and 143.
at large. And after long search, and much admiration, his conelusion of
wicked men prospered above other in the world is this: Veruntamen propter
dolos posuisti eis, deiecisti Psalm. 37.
eos dum alleuarentur. Thou have given them ver. 18.
prosperity (o lord) to deceive the^ withal: and thou have in deed thrown
them down, by exalting them:

That is, thou have throwe^ them down to the sentence of damnation, in thy
secret and inscrutable determination. Here the comparison of S. Gregory
takes Com. in. Job.
place: that as the oxen appointed to the slaughter, are let run afatting at
their pleasure, and the other kept under daily labor of the yoke: so fares
it with evil and good men. In like manner, the tree that bears no fruit, is
never beaten (as we see) but only the fruitful: and yet the other (as
Christ says) is reserved for the fire. The syck man that is past all hope of
life, is suffered by the Ma. 3. 7.
physician to have what so ever he lusts after: Ep. Iud.
But he whose health is not dispaired, can not have that liberty granted. To
conclude, the stones that must serve for the glorious 3. To 6.
temple of Solomon, were hewed, beaten, and polyshed without the church, at
the quarrie side: For that no stroke of hammer might be heard within the
temple. S. Peter says, that 1. Pet. 2.
the virtuous are chosen stones, to be placed in the spiritual building of God
in heaven, where there is no beating, no sorrow, no tribulation. Apo. 21.
Here then must we be polyshed, hewed, and made fytt for that glorious temple:
here (I say) in the quarrie of this world: here must we be fined, here must
we feel the blow of the hammer, and be most glad, when we hear or feel
the same: for that it is a sign of our election, to that most glorious house
of gods eternal mansion.

Beside this matter of predestination and Tribulation brin geth the company of
God him self.
election, there is yet an other thing of no small comfort to the godly
afflicted, fownded on these words of God: cum ipso sum in tribulatione: I am
with him in tribulation. VVherby is promised the company of God him self in
affliction and persecution. This Psalm. 90.
is a singular motive (says S. Barnard) to stir men up withal to embrace
tribulation, seeing in this world for good company, men adventure to do any
thing. Joseph was carried Genesis 37 Sap. 10
captive into Egypt, and God went down with him (as the scripture says:) yea
more than that, he went into the dongeon, and was in chains with him. Sidrach,
Misac, and Abdenago were cast into a burning furnace, and presently there was
a fowerth came to bear them compagnie, of whom Nabuchodonasar says thus:
did we not Dan. 3.
put three men only bound into the fire? And his servants answered: yea
verily. But behold (says he) see four men unbound walking in the myddest
of the fire: and the shape of the fowerth is like the son of God.

Christ restored, as he passed by, a certain beggar unto his sight, which
hadd been blind from his nativity. For which Ioh. 9.
thing, the man being called in question, and speaking somewhat in the praise
of Christ, Note this example.
for the benefit received, he was cast out of the synagoge by the pharasies:
Whereof Christ hearing, sought him out presently, and conforting his heart,
bestowed upon him the light of mind, much more of importance than that of
the body geeuen him before. By this and like examples, it appears, that a
man is no sooner in affliction and tribulation for justice sake, but straight
way Christ is at hand to bear him company: and if his eyes might be opened,
as the eyes of Elizeus his 4. Re. 16
disciple was, to see his companions, the troops of Angels (I mean) which
attend upon their lord in this his visitation: no doubt but his heart would
greatly be comforted therwithe. The assistance of gods grace in tribulation.


But that which the eye can not see, the soul fe: leth: that is, she feels
the assistance of gods grace amyddest the depthe of all tribulations. this he
has promised again and again: this he has sworn: and this he performs
most faythfullye to all those that suffer meeklie for his name. This S. Paul
most certaynlie assured him self of, when he said, that he did glory in all
his infirmities and tribulations, to the end, that Christ his virtue might
dwell in him:

that is, to the end that Christ should assist him more abundantly with his
grace: Cum enim infirmor, tune potens sum: For when I am in most infirmity,
then am I most strong, says he:

That is, the more tribulations and afflictions are laid upon me, the more
potent is the aid of Christ's grace unto me. And therefore the same Apostle
writes thus of all the Apostles together: We suffer 2. Co. 4.
tribulation in all things, but yet we are not distressed: we are brought
into perplexities, but yet we are not forsaken: we suffer persecution, but
yet we are not abandoned: we are flong down to the ground, but yet we
perishenot. This then ought to be a most sure and secure staff in the hand of
all Christians afflicted, that, what soever befall unto the^: yet the grace of
God will never fail to hold them up, and bear them out therein: for most
true and certain is that sayeing of S. Austen, so often repeated Ser. 88. de
temp. and de not. and gr. ca. 26.
by him in his works: that God never forsakes any man, except he be
rejected and first forfaken by man.

For the last reason of comfort in affliction, I will join two things
together, of great force and efficacy to this matter. The first whereof, is the
expectation of reward: the other is the shortness of time wherein we 2. Co. 4.
have to suffer: both are touched by S. Paul in one sentence, when he says,
that a little, and momentarie tribulation in this world, works an eternal
weight of glory in the byghth of heaven. By momentarie he shewethe the little
time we have to suffer: and by eternal weight of glory he expresses the
greatness of the reward prepared in heaven for recompense of that suffering.
Christ also ioynethe both these comfortes together, when he sayethe: Apo. 22.
Behold I come quickly, and my reward is with me. In that he promises to
come quicklye, he signifiethe that our tribulation shall not endure long: by
that he bringethe his reward with him, he assures us that he will not come
empty handed, but ready furnished, to recompense our labor throughelie. And
what greater means of encouragement could he use than this? If a man did bear
a very heavy burden: yet if he were sure to be well paid for his labor, and
that he had but a little way to bear the same: he would strain him self
greatly, to go through to his ways end, rather than for sparing so snorte a
labor, to leese so large and so present a reward. This is our lords most
merciful dealing, to comfort us in our affliction, and to animate us to hold
out ma^fullie for a time, thoghe the poyse seem heavy on our shoulders: the
coming Iac. 5.
of our Lord is even at hand, and the judge is Mat. 11.
before the gates, who shall refreshe us, and Apoc. 7.
wype away all our tears, and place us in 21.
his kingdom to reap joy without fayntinge. Gal. 6.
And then shall we prove the sayeing of holy S. Paul to be true: That the
sufferinges of this uvorld are not vvoorthie of that glory Romans 8.
which shall be revealed in us. And this may be sufficient for the reasones left
us of comforts in tribulation and affliction. The fovverthe


And thus having declared the first three points promised in this chapter:
there remains part of this chapter.
only to say a word or two of the fowerth: that is, what we have to do
for our parts in time of persecution and affliction. And this might be
dispatched in sayeing only that we have to conform our selves to the will
and meaning of God, uttered before in the causes of tribulation. But yet for
more ease and better remembrance of the same, I will breeflye run over the
principal points thereof. First the^ we have to aspire to that (if we can)
which Christ counsaileth, Gaudete and exultate, rejoice and triumph: 1. To
reioy se in tribalation or at least wise to have patience.
Or, if we can not arryue to this perfection: yet to do as the Apostle
wills, omne gaudium existimate cum in varias tentationes incideritis, esteem
it a mattter worthy of all joy, when ye fall into diverse temptations: that
is, if we can not rejoice at it in deed: yet to think it a matter in yt
self woorthye of Luc. 6.
reioysement: reprehendinge our selves, for Iac. 1.
that we can not reach unto it. And if we can not come thus the high way
nether, (as in deed we ought to do: yet in any case to re member, what in an
other place he sayethe: patientia vobis necessaria est, vt reportetis
promissionem: Heb. 10.
You must of necessity have patience, if you will receive gods promise of
everlasting life.



Secondly, we ought to do as the Apostles 2. To come to God by fervent prayer.
did, when they were in the most terrible tempest of the sea (Christ being
with them, but a sleep:) that is, we must go and a wake him: we must cry
unto him with Mat. 8.
the prophet: Exurge, quare obdormis domine? O Psalm. 43.
Lord arise, why do thou sleep in our misery? This wakening of Christ
does please him wonderfully, as has been showed: but specially if it be
done, with that assured co^fide^ce, and of true affectioned children, wherwithe
Marc. 4.
S. Mark describes the Apostles to have awakened Christ. For their words
were these: Master: does it not appertain unto you that we perish here? As
who would say, are not we your Disciples and servants? are not you our I
orde and Master? is not the cause yours? is not all our trust and hope in you?
how chances it then, that you sleep and suffer us to be thus tossed and
tombled, as if we appertained nothing unto you? with this affection prayed
Esaye, when he Esa. 63.
said. Attend (o Lord) from heaven: look hither from the holy habitation of
thy glory: where is thy zeal? where is thy fortitude? where is the multitude
of thy merciful bowelles? Have they shutt the^ selves up now toward me?
thou art our father Abraham has not known us, and Israel has been ignorant
of us: thou art our father (o lord) turn thy self about for thy servants
sake, for love of the trybe of thine inheritance.

Thus I say we must call upon God: thus we must awaken him, when he seems to
sleep in our miseries, with earnest, with devout, with continual prayer:
always having in our mind that most comfortable parable of Christ, wherein
he says, that if we Luc. 11.
should come to our neighbors door, and knock at mydnyght, to boro we some
bread, when he were in bed with, his children, and most (...) the to rise:
yet if we persevere in asking, and beating at his door still, though he were
not our friend, yet would he rise at length, and geeue us our demand,
thereby at least to be rydde of our cryeing. And how much more will God do this
(says Christ) who both louethe us, and tenderethe our case, most
mercyfullye?

But yet here is one thing to be noted 4. An important note.
in this matter: and that is, that Christ suffered the ship almost to be
covered with waves (as the Evangelist says) before he Matt. 8.
would awake, thereby to signify that the measure of temptationes is to be left
only unto him self: yt is sufficient for us to rest upon 1. Co. 10
the Apostles words: He is faithful, and therefore he will not suffer us to
be tempted above our flrengthe. We may not examine or mistruste his doeyngs:
We may not inquire why does he this? or why suffers he that? or how long
will he permit these evils to raygne? God is a great God in all his doeyngs:
and when he fendeth tribulation, he sends a great deal together, to the end
he may show his great power, in deliueringe us, and recompense it after, with
great measure of comfort. His te^ptatio^s often times do go very deep,
thereby to try the very hearts and reins of men. He wet far with Elias,
when he caused him to fly into a mountain, and there most desirous of
death, to say: They have killed all thy prophettes (o Lord) and I am 3. Re.
19.
left alone, and now they seek to kill me also. He went far with David, when
he made him cry out: why do thou turn thy face away from me (o Lord?)
why do thou forget my pouertic and tribulation? And in Psalm. 30.
an other place again: I said with my self in the excess of my mind: I am
cast out from the face of thy eyes, o Lord. God went far with the Apostles,
when he enforced one of 2. Cor. 1.
them to write, we will not have you ignorant (brethren) of our tribulation in
Asia, wherein we were oppressed above all measure, and above all strength: in
so much as it lothed us to live any longer.

But yet above all others, he went furthest with his own dear son, when he
constrained him to utter those pityfull and most lamentable words upon the
cross: My God, my God, why have thou for Mat. 27.
saken me? Who can now complain of any Psalm. 21.
proof or temptation what soever laid upon him, seeing God would go so far
with his own dear only son?

Hereof then enseweth the third thing 3. Magnanimity with a strong. faith.
necessary unto us in tribulation: which is magnanimity: grounded upon
astrong and invincible faith of gods assistance, and of our (...) deliverance,
how long soever he delay the matter, and how terrible soever the storm do
seem for the time. This God requires at our hands, as may be seen by the
example of the disciples, who cried not, we perish before the waves had
covered the ship, as S. Matthew writes: and yet Christ said Matt 8.
unto them, vbi est fides vestra? where is your Luc. 8.
faith? S. Peter also was not a fearde until he was almost vndet water, as
the same Evangelist records: and yet Christ reprehended Mat. 14.
him sayeing, thou man of little faith, why did thou doubt? What then
must we do in this case, dear brother? surely we must putt on that
magnanimous faith of valiant king David, who upon the most assured trust he
had of gods assistance, said In deo meo transgrediar Psalm. 17.
murum. In the help of my God I will go through a wall. Of which
invincible faith S. Paul was also, when he said: Omnia possum Phili. 4.
in eo qui me (...): I can do all things in him that comforteh and
strengthens me: Nothing is impossible, nothing is to hard for me, by his
assistance. We must be (as the Prou. 28
scripture says) quasi leo confidens absque terrore. Like a bold and
confident lion which is without terror: that is, we must not be astonyed at
any tempest, any tribulation, any adversity: we must say with the prophet
David, experienced in these matters: I Psalm. 3.
will not fear many thousands of people that should enuirone or beseyge me
together. Psalm. 21.
If I should walk amyddest the shadow Psalm. 26.
of death, I will not fear. If whole armies should stand against me, yet my
heart should not tremble. My hope is in God, and therefore I will not fear
what man can do Psalm. 55.
unto me. God is my ayder, and I will not fear what flesh can do unto me.

God is my helper, and protector, and therefore I will despise Psa. 117.
and contemn mine enemies. And an Esa. 12.
other prophet in like sense: Behold, God is my savior, and therefore will I
deal confidentlie, and will not fear. These were the speeches of holy
prophettes: of men that knew well what they said, and had often tasted of
affliction, them selves: and therefore could say of their own experience, how
infallible gods assistance is therein.

To this supreme courage, magnanimity, (...) fortitude.
and Christian fortitude, the scripture exhorts us, when it says: If the
spirit of one that is in authority, do rise against thee: see thou Eccl. 10.
yield not from thy place unto him. And again, an Eccle. 4.
other scripture says: strive for justice, even to the loss of thy life: and
stand for equity unto death it self and God shall euerthrow thine enemies
for thee. And Christ him self yet more effectually reco^mendeth this matter
Luc. 12.
in these words: I say unto you my friends be not a fearde of them which
kill the body, and afterward have nothing else to do against you.

And S. Peter adds further, 1. Pet. 3.
neque conturbemini: That is, do not only, not fear them, but (which is
less) do not so much as be troubled for all that flesh and blood can do
against you.

Christ goes further in the Apocalypse, and uses maruailous speeches to entyse
us to this fortitude. For these are his words: Apoc. 2.
he that has an ear to hear, let him hear what the spirit says unto the
churches. To him that shall conquer, I will give to eat of the tree of life,
which is in the paradise of my God. This says the first and the last: he
that was dead, and now is a live: I know thy tribulation, and thy poverty:
but thou art rich in deed, and art blasphemed by those that say they are
true Israelites, and are (...): But are rather the Sinagoge of Satan. Fear
nothing of that which you are to suffer: behold, the devil will cause some of
you to be thrust into prison, to the end you may be tempted: and you shall have
tribulation for Those t^ne days some (...) have been the te^ ne general perse
(...), within the first 300 years, after Christ.
te^ne days. But be faythefull unto death, and I will give the a crown of
life. He that has an ear to hear, let him hear what the spirit says
unto the churches: he that shall overcome, shall not be hurt by the second
death. And he that shall overcome, and keep my works unto the end: I will
give unto him authority over nations, even as I have received it from my
father: and I will give him besides, the morning star. He that shall
overcome, shall be appareled in white Cap. 3.
garments: and I will not blott his name out of the book of life, but will
confess his name before my father, and before his Angels. Behold, I come
quickelie: hold fast that thou have, lest an other man receive thy crown. He
that shall conquer, I will make him a pillar in the temple of my God, and he
shall never go forth more: and I will write upon him the name of my God, and
the name of the city of my God, which is new Jerusalem. He that shall conquer,
I will give unto him to sit with me in my throne: even as I have conquered,
and do sit with my father in his throne.



Hitherto are the words of Christ to S. Ioh. And in the end of the same book,
after he had described the joys and glory of heaven at large, he concludes
thus. And he that satte, on the throne said to me. Write these words, for
that they are most faithful and true.

Qui vicerit possidebit haec, and ero illi Cap. 21.
deus, and ille erit mihi filius: timidis autem and incredulis etc. pars
illorum erit in stagno ardenti, igne and sulphur, quod est mors secunda. He
that shall conquer, shall possess all the joys that I have here spoken of:
and I will be his God, and he shall be my son. But they which shall be
fearful to fight, or incredulous of these things that I have said: their
portion shall be in the lake burning with fire and brymstone, which is the
second death.



Here now we see both allurement and threats: good and evil: life and
death, the Eccl. 15.
Joys of heaven, and the burning lake, proposed unto us. We may streache
owte our hands unto which we will. If we fight and conquer (as by gods grace
we may) the^ are we to enjoy the promises laid down before. If we show our
selves either unbelieving in these promises, or fearful to take the fight in
hand, being offered unto us: then fall we into the danger of the contrary
threats: even as S. John affirms, in an other place, that certain noble men
did, among the Jews, who believed in Christ, Ioh. 12.
but yet durst not confess him, for fear of persecution.

Here the^ must ensewe an other virtue A firm resolution
in us, most necessary to all tribulation and affliction, and that is, a
strong and firm resolution, to stand and go through, what opposition or
contradiction soever we find in the world, either of fawning flattery, or
persecuting cruelty. This the scripture teaches Eccl. 9.
cryeing unto us, esto firmus in via domini: Be firm and immouable in the way
of our 1. Co. 16.
lord. And again, State in fide: viriliter agite: Stand to your faith, and
play you the men. Eccl. 11.
And yet further, confide in deo, and mane in loco tuo: Trust in God, and abide
firm in thy 2. Par. 15
place. And finalie, confortamini and no^ dissoluantur manus vestrae. Take
courage unto you, and let not your hands be dissolved from the work you have
begone.



This resolution had the three children (...), Misach, and Abdenago, when
having heard the flattering speech, and infinite threats of cruel
Nabuchodonasar, they answered Dan. 3.
with a quiet spirit. O king: we may not answer you, to this long speech of
youres. For behold our God is able (if he will) to deliver us from this
furnace of fire, which you threaten, and from all that you can do otherwise
against us. But yet if it should not please him so to do: yet you must know
(Sir king) that we do not woorshippe your gods, nor yet adore your golden
ydole, which you have set up.



This resolution had peter and John, who being so often (...) before the
council, and both commanded, threatened, and beaten, Act. 4. 5.
to talk no more of Christ: answered still: Obedire oportet deo magis quam
hominibus, we must obey God, rather than men. The same had S. Paul also, when
being requested with tears of the Christianes in Cesarea, that he Act. 21.
would forbear to go to Jerusalem, for that the holy ghost had revealed to
many the troubles which expected him there: he answered, what mean you to
weep thus; and to afflict my heart? I am not only ready to be in bonds for
Christ name in Jerusalem:

but also to suffer death for the same. And in his epistle to the Romans, he
yet further Romans 8.
expresses this resolution of his, when he says: what then shall we say to
these things? if God be with us, who will be against us? who shall separate
us from the love of Christ? shall tribulation? shall distress? shall hungar?
shall nakedness? shall peril? shall persecution? shall the swoore? I am
certain that nether death, nor life, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor
powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor strength, nor hyghthe, nor
depthe, nor any creature else, shall be able to separate us from the love of God,
which is in Jesus Christ, our Lord.



Finallye, this was the resolution of all the holy martyrs and confessors,
and other servants of God: whereby they have withstoode the temptations of the
devil, the allurementes of flesh and blood, and all the persecutions of
tyrants, exacting things unlawful at their hands. I will allege one example
more owte of the scripture, and that before the coming of Christ, but yet
nighe unto the same, and therefore no maruaylle (as the fathers do note) thoghe
it took some heat of Christian fervor and constancy toward martyrdom.
The example is wounderfull, for that in man's sight it was but for a small
matter required at their hands, by the tyrants commandment: that is, only
to eat a piece of swynes flesh: for thus it is recorded in the scripture.

It happened seven brethren to be apprehended together in those days, and to
be 2. Mac. 7 A maruai lous consia^cie of the seven Machabees and their mo there.
brought (with their mother) to the king Antiochus, and there to be compelled
with torments of whipping, and other instruments, to the eating of swynes
flesh against the law. At what time one of them, (which was the eldest) said:
what do thou seek? or what will thou learn out of us o king? we are ready
here rather to dye, than to break the ancient laws of our God. VVherat the
king being greatly offended, commanded the fryeing pannes and pottes of
brass to be made burning hot: which being ready, he caused this first man's
tongue to be cut of, with the tops of his fingers, and toes, as also with
the skin of his head, the mother and other brothers looking on, and after
that to be fried until he was dead. Which being done, the second brother was
brought to torment, and after his hear plucked of from his head, together with
the skin, they asked him whether he would yet eat swynes flesh or no,
before he was put to the rest of his torments? whereto he answered, Noe: and
there upon was (after many torments) slain with the other. Who being dead
the third was take in hand, and being willed to putt forth his tongue: he
held it forth quicklye together with both his hands, to be cut of,
sayeing confidentlie: I received both tougne and hands from heaven, and now
I despise them Avvorthie say eing.
both for the lavue of God, for that I hope to receive them all of him again.
And after they had in this sort tormented and putt to death syx of the
brethren, every one most constantly protesting his faith, and the joy he
had to dye for gods cause: there remained only the youngest, whom Antiochus
(being a shamed that he could pervert never a one of the former) endeavored by
all means possible to draw from his purpose, by promising and swearing, that
he should be a rich and happy man, and one of his chief friends, if he would
yield. But when the youth was nothing moved therewith: Antiochus called to him
the mother, and exhorted her to save her sons life, by persuading him to
yield: which she faigning to do, thereby to have liberty to speak to her
son: made a most vehement exhortation to him in the hebrew tongue, to stand
to yt, and to dye for his conscieuce: which speech being ended, the youth
cried out with a loud voice, and uttered this noble sentence worthy to be
remembered: Quem sustinetis? non obtempero praecepto regis, sed praecepto legis:
Whom do you stay for? I do not obey the commandment of the king, but the
commandment of the law of God. Where upon both he and his mother were
presently (after many and sundry torments) putt to death.



This then is the constant and immouable resolution which a Christian man
should have in all adversity of this life. VVherof Li. 1. offi. c. 38.
S. Ambrose says thus. Gratia preparandus est animus, exercenda men's, and
stabilienda ad constantiam: vt nullis perturbari animus possit terroribus,
nullis frangi molestiis, nullis suppliciis cedere. Our mind is to be prepared
with grace, to be exercised, and to be so established in constantie, as it may
not be troubled with any terrors, broken with any aduersiities, yield to
any punishementes or torments what soever.



If you ask me here how a man may come How a man may come to an invincible
resolution.
to this resolution: I answer, that S. Ambrose in the same place, puttethe two
ways: the one is to remember the endless and intolerable pains of hell, if we
do yt not: and the other is to think of the unspeakable glory of heaven, if
we do yt. VVhereto I will add the third, which with a noble heart, may
perhaps prevail, as much as either of them both: and that is, to consider
what others have suffered before us, especially Christ him self, and that
only of mere love and affection toward us. We see that in this world,
loving subjects do glory of nothing more, than of their dangers or hurtes
taken in battle for their prince, thoghe he never took blow for them
again. What then would they do, if their prince had been afflicted
voluntarily for them, as Christ has been for us? But if this great example
of Christ seem unto thee to high for to imitate: look upon some of thy
brethren before thee, made of flesh and blood as thou art: see what they have
suffered before they could enter into heaven: and think not thy self hardlye
dealt withal, if thou be called to suffer a little also.

Saint Paul writes of all the Apostles 2. Cor. 4.
together: even unto this hour we suffer The suffe ringes of the Apostle.
hungar and thirst, and lack of apparel: we are beaten with men's fistes: we
are vagabondes, not having where to stay: we labor and work with our own
hands: we are cursed, and we do bless: we are persecuted, and we take it
patiently: we are blasphemed, and we pray for them that blaspheme us: we are
made as it were the very owte castes and purginges of this world even unto
this day:

That is, thoghe we be Apostles, thoghe we have wroght so many miracles, and
converted so many milions of people: yet even unto this day are we thus used.
And a little after, describing yet further their 2. Cor. 6
lives, he says: we show our selves as the ministers of God, in much
patience, in tribulatio^s, in necessities, in distresses, in beatinges, in
imprisonmentes, in seditio^s, in labors, in waches, in fastinges, in
chastity, in longanimitie, 1. Co. 11.
in sweetenes of behavior. And of The particular sufferinges of S. Paul
him self in particular he says, In laboribus plurimis, etc. I am the
minister of God in many labors, in imprisonmentes more than the rest, in
beatinges above measure, and oftentimes in doathe it self. Five times have I
been beaten of the Jews, and at every time had fortye lashes lacking one:
three times have I been whipped with rods: once I was stoned: three times have
I suffered shipwrake: A day and a night was I in the bottom of the sea:
oftentimes in iourneyes, in dangers of fluddes: in dangers of thieves: in
dangers of Jews: in dangers of Gentyles, in dangers of the city: in
dangers of wilderness: in dangers of sea: in dangers of false brethren: in
labor and travail: in much waching: in hungar and thyrst: in much fasting:
in cold and lack of clothes: and beside all these external things, the
matters that daily do depend upon me, for my universal care of all churches.



By this we may see now whether the Apo stles taught us more by words, than
they showed by example, about the necessity of suffering in this life. Christ
might have provided for them if he would, at least wise things necessary to
their bodies and not have suffered them to come into these extremities of
lacking clothes to their backs: meat to their mouces, and the like. He that
gave the authority to do so manieother miracles, might have suffered them at
least to have wroght sufficient maintenance for their bodies, which should be
the first miracle that wordlie men would work, if they had such authority.
Christ might have said to Peter when he sent him to take his tribute from owte
of the fyshes mouth: take so much more, as will suffice your necessary
expenses, Mat. 17.
as you travail the country: But he would not, nor yet diminishe the great
afflictions which I have showed before, though he loved them as dearly, as
ever he loved his own soul. All which was done, (as S. Peter 1. Pet. 2.
interprets) to give us example, what to folo we, what to look for, what to
desire, what to comfort our selves, in amyddest the greatest of all our
tribulations.

Saint paul uses this, as a principal consiration, Heb. 12.
when he writes thus to the hebrews, upon the recital of the sufferinges of
A notableexhor tation of S. Paul.
other saints before them: wherefore we also (brethren) having so great a
multitude of witnesses (that have suffered before us,) let us lay of all
burdens of sin hanging upon us: and let us run by patience unto the
battle offered us, fyxing our eyes upon the author of our faith, and
fulfiller of the same, Jesus, who putting the joys of heaven before his eyes,
sustained patiently the cross, contemning the shame: and confusion thereof,
and therefore now sits at the right hand of the seat of God. Think vpo^hym
(I say) which sustained such a co^tradictio^ against him self, at the hands
of sinners: and be not weary, nor fainte not in courage. For you have not yet
resisted against sin unto blood: and you have forgotten (perhapps) that
comfortable sayeing, which speaks unto you as unto children: My son, do
not (...) the discipliue of our Lord, and be not (...) when thou art
chastened of him. For whom Prou. 3.
God loves he chasteneth, and he whippeth Job. 5.
every son whom he receauethe. Persevere Apoc. 3.
therefore in the correction laid upon you. God offerethe him self to you as
to his children. For what child is there whom the father corrects not? if
you be out of correction, whereof all his children are made partakers: then are
bastardes, and not children. All correction, for the present time when it is
suffered, seems unpleasant and sorrowful: but yet after, it brings forth
most quiet fruit of justice, unto the^ that are exercised by yt. Wherefore
strengthe^n up your weary hands, and loosed knees: make way to your feet?
etc.

That is, take courage unto you, and go forward valiantlye under the cross
laid upon you. This was the exhortation of this holy captain unto his
country me^, souldyers of lesus Christ, the Jews.

Saint James the brother of our Lord Iac. 5.
uses an other exhortation in his Catho like The exhortation of S. James.
epistle, to all Catholics, not much different from this. Be you therefore
patient my brethren (say the he) until the coming of our lord. Behold, the
husbandman expects for a time, the fruit of the earth, so precious unto
him, bearing patiently until he may receive the same in his season: be you
therefore patient, and comfort your hearts, for that the coming of our lord
will shortly draw near. Be not sad, and complain not one of an other.
Behold the Judge is even at the gate. Take the prophets for an example of
labor and patience, which spoke unto us in the name of God. Behold, we
account the^ blessed which have suffered. You have heard of the sufferance of
Job, and you have seen the end of our lord with him: you have seen (I say)
that our lord is merciful and full of compassion.



I might here allege many things more out of the scripture to this purpose,
for that the scripture is most copious heerin: and in very deed, if it should
all be melted and poured out, yt would yield us nothing else almost, but
touching the cross, and patient bearing of tribulation in this life. But I
must end, for that this chapter ryseth to be long, as the other before did:
And therefore I will only, for my conclusion, set down the confession, and
most excellent exhortation of old Mathathias, in the time of the cruel
persecution of Antiochus against the Jews. The story is thus reported in the
scripture. 1. Mac 2


At that time the officers of Antiochus The consession and exhortation of
Mathathias.
said unto Mathathias: thou art a prince, and of greatest estate in this city,
adorned with children and brethren: come thou therefore first, and do the
kings commandment, as other men have done in Judah and Jerusalem, and thou
and thy children shall be the kings friends, and enryched with gold and silver,
and many guyftes from him. Whereto Mathathias answered with a loud voice: if
all nations should obey Antiochus, to depart from the obedience of the laws
of their ancestors: yet I, and my childredn, and brethren will follow the
laws of our fathers, Let God be merciful unto us at his pleasure etc. And the
days came of Mathathias his death, and then he said unto his children: Now is
the time that pride is in her strength: Now is the time of chastisement
toward us: of euersion and indignation come. Now therefore (o children) be you
zealous in the law of God: yield up your lives for the testaments of your
fathers: remember the works of your ancestors, what they have done in their
generations, and so shall you receive great glory, and eternal name. Gen 12.
Was not Abraham fownde faythefull in time Genesis 41.
of temptation, and yt was reputed unto Nu^. 25.
him for justice? Joseph in time of his didistresse, kept gods commandments,
and was made Lord over all Egypt. Phinees our father, for his zeal toward
the law of God, received the testament of an everlasting Iosue (...)
preesthode. Iosue for that he fullfilled Iud. 14.
gods word, was made a captain over all Israel. Caleb for that he testified
in the church, received an inheritance. David for his 2. To. 2.
mercy obtained the seat of an eternal kingdom. 4. Re. 2.
Elias for that he was zealous in zeal of the law, was taken up to heaven.
Ananias Dan. 3.
Azarias and Misael through their belief, were delivered from the flame of
the fire. Daniel for his simplicity was delivered from Dan. 9.
the mouth of lions. And so do you run over, by cogitation, all
generations, and you shall see that all those that hope in God shall not be
vanquyshed. And do you not fear the words of a sinful man: for his glory
is nothing else but dung and worms: to day he is great and exalted, and to
morrow he shall not be fownde: for he shall return unto his earth again, and
all his fond cogitations shall perish. Wherefore take courage unto you (my
children) and play the men in the law of God. For therein shall be your honor
and glory.

Hitherto are the words of scripture, which shall suffice, for the end of this
chapter.

Of the third impediment that lets men from resolution: which is, the love
of the uuorlde.

CHAP. III.
AS the two impedimentes removed before, be in deed great stays to many men
from the resolution we talk of: so this that now I take in hand, is not
only of it self a strong impediment, but also a great cause and common
ground (as it were) to all the other impedimentes that be. For if a man could
touch the very pulse of all those, who refuse, or neglect, or differ this
resolution: he should find the foundation thereof to be the love of this world,
what soever other excuse they pretended besides. The noble men of lewrie,
pretended, fear to be the cause, why they could not resolve, to confess
Christ openly: but S. John that felt their pulse, utters the true cause to
have been, for that they loved the Ioh. 12.
glory of men, more than the glory of God. Demas that forsook S. Paul in his
bands, even a little before his death, pretended an other cause of his
departure to Thessalonica, but 2. Ti. 4.
S. Paul says it was, quia diligebat hoc (...) For that he loved this world.
So that this is a general and universal impediment, and more in deed
dispersed, than owtwardlye appears: for that it brings forth diverse other
excuses, thereby to cover her self in many men.

This may be confirmed by that most excellent Mat. 13.
parable of Christ, recorded by threEua^gelistes, Marc. 4.
of the three sorts of men which Luc. 8.
are to be damned, and the three causes of their damnation: whereof the third,
and last, and most general (including as it were both the rest) is, the love
of this world. For the first sort of men, are compared to a high way, where
all seed of life that is sown, either withers presentlye, or else is eaten up
by the birds of the air: that is, (as Christ The exposition of the pa rabble
of the, seed.
expounds it) by the devil in careless men, that contemn what soever is said
unto the^: as infidels, heretics, and other such obstinate and contemptuous
people. The second sort are compared to rockye grounds, in which, for lack
of deep root, the seed co^tinuethe not: whereby are signified, light and
vnco^sta^t men, that now choppe in, and now ru^ne owte: now are fervent, and by
and by, keye cold again: and so I^ time of te^ptatio, they are gone. The
third sort are compared to a feeld, where the seed grows up, but yet there
are so many thorns on the same (which Christ expounds to be the cares,
troubles, miseries, and deceyuable vanities of this life) as the good corn is
choked up, and brings forth no fruit. By which last words our Savior
signifies, that whersoeuer the doctrine of Christ grows up, and yet brings
not forth due fruit: that is, whersoeuer it is received, and embraced (as it
is among all Christians) and yet bringethe not forth good life: there the
cause is, for that it is choked with the vanities of this world.

This is a parable of maruailous great The importance of this parable.
importance, as may appear, both for that Christ after the recital thereof,
cried out with a loud voice: He that has ears to Mat. 13.
hear, let him hear: As also, for that he expounded it him self in secret
only to his Disciples: And principally, for that before the exposition
thereof, he used such a solemn preface: sayeing, to you it is given to know
the mysteries if the kingdom of heaven, but to others not: for that they seeing
do not see, and hearing do not hear, nor understand. VVherby Christ
signisieth, that the understanding of this parable, among others, is of
singular importance, for conceauing the true mysteries of the kingdom of
heaven: and that many are blind, which seem to see: and many deaf and
ignorant, that seem to hear and know: for that they understand not well the
mysteries of this parable. For which cause also Christ makes this conclusion
before he beginnethe to expound the parable. Happy are your eyes that see,
and blessed are your ears that hear. After which words, he begins his
exposition, with this admonition: Vos ergo audite parabolam: Do you therefore
hear and understand this parable.

And for that this parable does co^tayne and touch so much in deed, as may
or needs be said, for remouinge of this great and dangerous impediment, of
worldly love: I mean to stay my self only upon the explication thereof in
this place, and will declare the force and truth of certain words here
uttered by Christ, of the world and worldly pleasures: and for some order and
methodes sake, I will draw all to these six points foloweing.

First how and in what sense all the world 1.
and commodities thereof are vanities, and of The parts of this ehapiter.
no value, (as Christ here signifies:) and co^sequentlie, ought not to be an
impediment, to let us from so great a matter, as the kingdom of heaven and
serving of God is.

Sccondlie how they are not only vanities 2.
and tryfles in them selves, but also, Deceptions, as Christ says, that is,
deceytes, not performing to us in deed, those little tryfles which they do
promis.

Thyrdlie, how they are spinae, that is, 3.
princking thorns, as Christ says, thoghe they seem to worldly men to be
most sweet and pleasant.

Fowerthlye how they are aerumnae, that 4.
is, my seryes, and afflictions, as also Christ's words are.

Fyuethlie, quomodo suffocant, how they 5.
strangle or choke us, as Christ affirms.

Sixthelie, how we may use them notwithstanding, 6.
without these dangers, and evils, and to our great comfort, gain, and
preferment.

And touching the first, I do not see how 1. The first part: how all the
world is vanity.
it may be better proved, that all the pleasures and goodsie shows of this
world are vanities, as Christ here says: than to allege the testimony of
one, which has proved them all: that is of one which speakethe not of
speculation, but of his own proof and practice: And this, is king Salomo^: of
whom the scripture reportethe wounderfull matters, 2. Par. 9.
touching his peace, prosperity, riches, and glory, in this world: as that,
all the kings of The vvoridlie pro speritie of king Solomon
the earth desired to see his face, for his wisdom and renowned felicity:
that all the princes living besides, were not like him in wealth: that he had
six hundred. sixty and six talents of gold (which is an infinite sum)
brought him in yerelie, besides all other that he had from the kings of
Arabia, and other princes: that silver was as plentiful with him as heaps of
stones, and not esteemed, for the great store, and abundance he had thereof:
that his plate and Iewelles had no end: that his seat of majesty, with
stools, lions to bear it up, and other furniture, was of gold, passing all
other kyngely seats in the world: that his precious apparel, and armoure were
infinite: that he had all the kings, from the river of the philistians, unto
Egypt, to serve him: that he had forty thousand horses in his stables to ride,
and twelve thousand chariottes, with horses and other furniture, redye to them,
for his use: that he had two hundred spears of gold, borne before him, and
six hundred crowns of gold, bestowed in every spear: as also three hundred
buckelers, and three hundred crowns of gold, bestowed in the guylding of
every buckler: that he spent every day in his house, a thousand, nine
hundred, thirty and 3. Re. 4.
seven quarters of meal, and flower: thirty 30 Cori (...): and 60 cori farina
and every corus is 21. quarters and odd.
oxen: with a hundred wethers: beside all other flesh: that he had seven
hundred wives, as queens, and three hundred other, as concubynes. All this,
and much more does scripture report of Salomons worldly wealth, wisdom,
riches, and prosperity: which he having tasted, and used to his fill,
pronounced 3. Re. 11.
yet at the last, this sentence, of it all: Vanitas vanitatum, and omnia
vanitas: Vanity of Eccle. 1.
vanities, and all is vanity: by vanity of vanities meaning, (as S. Jerome
interprets) the greatenesse In cap. 1. ecelesias.
of this vanity, above all other vanyties that may be devised. (...) sayeing
of him self.




Nether only does Solomon affirm this thing, but does prove it also by
examples of him self. I have been king of Israel Eccl. 1.
in Jerusalem (says he,) and I purposed with my self, to seek out by
wisdom all things: And I have seen that all under the sun, are mere
vanities, and affliction of spirit. I said in my heart, I will go and abound
in delites, and in every pleasure that may be had: and I saw that this was
also vanity. I Cap. 2.
took great works in hand, builded howses to my self, planted vineyardes,
made orchardes and gardens, and besett them with all kind of trees: I made me
fyshe pondes to water my trees: I possessed servants and hand maids, and had
a great family, great heardes of cattle, above any that ever were before me
in Jerusalem: I gathered together gold and silver, the riches of kings and
provinces: I appointed to my self syngars, both men and women, which are the
delytes of the children of men: fine cups also to drink wine with all: and
what soever my eyes did desire, I denied it not unto them: nether did: I let
my heart from using any pleasure, to delight it self in these things which I
had prepared: And when I turned my self to all that my hands had made, and to
all the labors, wherein I had taken such pains and sweat: I saw in the^
all, vanity, and affliction of the mind.



This is the testimony of Solomon, upon his own proof, in these matters: and
if he had spoken yt upon his wisdom only (being such as yt was:) we ought
to believe him: but much more, seeing he affirm eth yt, of his own experience.
But yet, if any man be not moved with this: let us bring yet an other
wyitnesse owte of the new testament, and such an one, as was pryuie to the
opinion of Christ heerin: that is S. John the Evangelist, whose words are
these: 1. Ioh. 2.
Do not love the world, nor those things that are in the world: if any man
love the world: the love of god the father, is not in him. For that, all
which is in the world, is either concupiscence of the flesh, or
concupiscence of the eyes, or pride of life. In which words S. John, beside
his threate against fuche as love and follow the Three ge nerall points of
worldly vanities.
world, reduces all the vanities thereof, unto three general points or
branches: that is, to concupisce^ce of the flesh (wherein he comprehends
all carnal pleasures,) to concupiscence of the eyes, (wherein he contains,
all matters of riches:) and to pride of life, whereby he signifiethe the humor,
and disease of wordly ambition. These then are the three general and
principal vanities of this life, wherein woorldlye men do weary owte them
selves: Ambition, covetousness, and carnal pleasure: whereunto all other
vanities are addressed, as to their superiors, And therefore it shall not be
amiss to consider of these three, in this place.

And first to Ambition or pride of life, Vaingloric.
belongs vainglorie: that is a certain disordinate desire to be well thought
of, well spoken of, praised and glorified of men: and this is as great a
vanity, (thoghe yt be common to many) as if a man should funne up and down
the streets, after a fether, (...) in the air, tossed hither and thither,
with the blastes of infinite men's mouths For as this man might weary (...)
him self before he gatt the thing which he followed and yet when he had yt, he
had gotten but a fether: so. a vainglorious man may labor a good while,
before he attain to the praise which he desirethe: and when he has it, it
is not woorthe three chyppes, being but the breathe of a few men's mouths,
that alters upon every light occasion, and now makes him great, now
little, now nothing at all. Christ him self may be an example of this: who was
tossed to and fro in the speech of men: some said he was a Samaritan, Mat. 27.
and had the devil: other said he was a prophet: Ioh. 8.
other said he could not be a prophet, or of God: for that he kept not the
Sabbath day: others asked, if he were not of God, how he could do so many
miracles? So that there was a schism or division among them, Ioh. 9.
abowte this matter, as S. John affirms. Finally, upon Palm sundaye, they
received Matt. 21.
him into Jerusalem, with triumph of hosan Mar. 11.
na, casting their apparel under his feet. But Mat. 27.
the thursedaye, and frydaye next ensueing, they cried, Crueifige against him,
and preferred Luc. 23.
the life of Barrabas, a wicked murderer, before his.

Now my friend, if they dealt thus with Christ, which was a better man, than
ever thou will be: and did more glorious miracles, than ever thou will do, to
purchase the name and honor with the people: why do thou so labor, and
beat thy self about this vanity of vainglorie? why do thou cast thy
travails into the wind of men's mouths? why do thou put thy riches in the
lyppes of mutable men, where every flatterer may rob the of them? have thou
no better a cheest to lock them up in? S. Paul was of an other mind, when he
said: I esteem 1. Cor. 4.
little to be judged of you, or of the day of man. And he had reason surely.
For what carethe he that runs at tylt, if the ignorant people give sentence
against him, so the Judges give yt with him? If the blind man, in Luc. 18.
the way to Jericho, had depended of the lyking and approbation of the goers
bye: he had never received the benefit of his sight: for that, they disuaded
him from runnyng, and cryeing so vehemently after Christ. It is a miserable
thing for a man to be a wyndemill, which makethe no meal, but according as
the blast endurethe. If the gale bestrong, he sourgeth about lustelye. But if
the wind slake: he relentethe presently. So, praise the waynglorious man, and
ye make him run: if he feel not the gale blow, he is owte of heart: he is
like the Babilonians, who, with a little sweet music were made Dan. 3.
to adore any thing what soever.

The scripture says most truly; As Pro. 27.
silver is tried in the fire by blovveing to it: so is a man tried in the
mouth of him that prayseth. For as silver, if it be good, takes no hurt
thereby: but if it be evil, it goethe all into fume: so a vain man, by praise
and commendation How many have we seen puffed up with men's praises, and
almost put beside them selves, for joy thereof: and yet after ward brought
down, with a contrary wind, and driven full near to desperation by
contempt? how many do we see daily (as the prophet did in his days)
commended in their Psalm. 9.
sins, and blessed in their wickedness? How many palpable and intolerable
flateries do we hear both used, and accepted daily, and Psa. 140.
no man cryethe with good king David, away uuithe this oil, and oyntement
of sinners, let it not come upon my head? Is not all this vanity? Psalm. 39.
Is it not madness, as the scripture callethe it? The glorious Angels in heaven
seek no honor unto the^ selves, but all unto God: and thou poor worm of the
earth desyrest to be glorified? the four and twenty Apoc. 4.
elders in the Apocalips took of their crounes, and cast them at the feet of
the lamb: and thou would pluck, fortye from the lamb to thy self, if thou
could. O fond creature: Psa. 143
how truly sayethe the prophet, homo vanitati similis factus est: A man is
made like unto vanity: that is, like unto his own vanity: as light as the
very vanities them selves, which he follows. And yet the wife man more
expresselie, In vanitate sua appenditur Eccl. 23.
peccator, the finner is weighed in his vanity: that is, by the vanity,
which he follows is seen how light and vain a sinner is.

The second vanity that belongs to VVorldhe honor, and promoti^on.
Ambition, is desire of worldly honor, dignity and promotion. And this is a
great matter in the sight of a worldly man: this is a Jewel of rare price,
and worthy to be bought, even with any labor, travail, or peril what
soever. The love of this, let the great men. that were Christians in Iewrie,
from confessing of Christ openly. The love Ioh. 11.
of this, let pilat from delyuering Jesus, according as in conscience he
saw he was Ioh. 19.
bound. The love of this, let Agrippa, and festus, from making them selves
Christians, Act. 26.
albeit they esteemed Paul's doctrine to be true. The love of this, lets
infinite men daily from embrasing the means of their salvation. But (alas)
these men do not so the vanity heerof. S. Paul says not without just cause,
Nolite esse pueri sensibus, be you not children 1. Co. 14
in understanding. It is the fashion of Children, to esteem more of a painted
babble, than of a rich Jewel: And such is the painted dignity of this
world: gotten with much labor, maintained with great expenses, and lost
with intolerable grief and sorrow. For better co^ceauing whereof, ponder a
little with thy self (gentle reader) any state of dignity that thou would
desire: and think how many have had that before thee. Remember how they mounted
up, and how they descended down again: and Imagine with thy self, which
was greater, either the loye in getting, or the sorrow in leesing it. Where are
now all these emperors, these kings, these princes, and prelates, which
reioysed so much once, at their own aduanceme^? where are they now, I say?
who talks, or thynkethe of them? are they not forgotten, and cast into their
graves, long ago? And do not men boldelye walk ever their heads now,
whose faces might not be looked on, without fear, I^ this world? what then
have their dignities done them good?

It is a vvounderfull thing to consider the vanity of this vvordlie honor. It
is like a The vanity of vvorldlye honor.
man's own shadovve, which the more a man runs after, the more it flies:
and when he flyethe from it, it follows him again: and the only way to
cache it, is to fall down to the ground upon it. So we see, that those men
which desired honor in this world, are now forgotten: and those which most
fledd from it, and cast them selves lowest of all men, by humility: are now
most of all honored: honored (I say) most, even by the world it self,
whose enemies they were, while they lived. For who is honored more now,
who is more commended, and remembered, than S. Paul, and his like, which so
much despised worldly honor in this life, according to the sayeing of the
prophet, thy friends (o Lord) are to too much honored? Psa. 138.
Most vain then is the pursuyte of this worldly honor and promotion: seeing
it nether co^tenteth the mind, nor co^tinuethe withdraw the possessor, nor is
void of great dangers, both in this life, and in the life to come,
according to the sayeing of scripture, Most severe judgment shall be used upon
those that are over other: the mean man shall obtain Sap. 6.
mercy: but the great and strong shall suffer torments stronglye.

The third vanity that belongs to ambition The vani tie of
or pride of life, is nobility of flesh, and blood: a great pearl in the
eye of the worldly nobility
world: but in deed in it self, and in the sight of God, a mere trifle and
vanity. Which holy Job well understood, when he wrote Job. 17.
these words: I said unto rottenness, thou art my father: and unto
worms, you are my mother and sisters. He that will behold the gentrye of his
auncestoures: Let him look into their graves, and see whether Job say the
truly or no. True nobility was never begone but by virtue: and therefore, as
it is a testimony of virtue to the predecessors: so is it an other of virtue
unto the successors. And he which holdethe the name thereof by descent,
without virtue, is a mere monster, in respect of his auncestoures: for that,
he breaks the limits of the nature of nobility. Of which sort of men, God
says by Ose. 9.
one prophet: They are made abominable, even as the things which they love:
their glory is from their nativity, from the bellye, and from their
co^ception.

It is a miserable vanity, to go beg credit of dead men, where as we
deserve none our selves: to seek up old titles of honor from our
ancestors, we being utterly incapable thereof, by our own base manners and
behauyour. Christ clearlie confounded this vanity, when being descended him
self of the greatest nobility, that ever was in this world: and besides that,
being also the son of God: yet called he him self ordinarily, the Math. 8.
son of man: That is, the son of the virgin 20. 24. 26.
Marie (for otherwise he was no son of man) and further than this also,
called him Ioh. 10.
self a shepeheard, which in the world is a name of contempt. He soght not up
this and that old title of honor, to furnishe his style withal, as our men
do. Nether, when he had to make a king first in Israel, did he seek out the
auncientest blood: but took 1. Re. 9.
Saul, of the basest tribe of Jews: and after him, David the poorest
sheephearde of all his 1. Re. 16
breethren. And when he came into the world: he soght not out the noblest men
to make Matt. 4.
princes of the earth: that is, to make Apostles: Psalm. 44.
but took of the poorest, and simplest, 1. Cor. 1.
thereby to confound (as one of them says) the foolish vanity of this world:
in making so great account of the preemine^ce of a little flesh and blood, in
this life.

The fourth vanity that belongs to The vanitre of worldly vvisdome.
ambition, or pride of life, is worldly vvisdome, vvherof the Apostle says:
The vvisdome of this world is folly vuith God. If it be folly, then great
vanite (no dovvbt) to delight so 1. Cor. 3.
in it, as men do. It is a strange thing to see, how contrary the
Judgments of God are to the Judgments of me^. The people of Israel would
needs have a king (as I have said:) and they thought God would have given
the^ presently some great mighty prince to rule over them: but he chose ovvte
a poor felovve, that sought asses about the country. 1. Re. 9.
After that, when God would displace this man again for his sins: he sent
Samuel to anoint one of I say his sons: and being come to the house, I say
brought forth his eldest 1. Re. 16.
son, Eliab, a lusty taule felovve, thinkyng him in deed most fytte to
govern: but God answered, respect not his countenance, nor his taulnes of
personage: for I have rejected him: nor do I judge according to the
countenance of man. After that, I say brought in his second son, Abinadab:
and after him, Samma, and so the rest, until he had showed him seven of his
sons: All which being refused by Samuel, they maruayled, and said, there
was no more left but only a little read headed boy, that kept the sheep,
called David: which Samuel caused to be sent for. And as soon as he came in
sight: God said to Samuel, this is the man that I have chosen.

When the Messiah was promised unto the Jews to be a king: they imagined
presently according to their worldly wisdom, that he should be some great
prince: and therefore they refused Christ, that came in poverty. James and John
being yet but carnal, seeing the Samaritanes co^temptuouslie to refuse Christ's
disciples sent to them, and knoweing what Christ was, thought streightwaye, that
he must in revenge, have called down fire from heaven to consume them: But
Christ rebuked them, sayeing, you know Luc. 9.
not of what spirit you are. The Apostles preaching the cross, and necessity
of suffering, to the wise Gentiles, and Philosophers, were 1. Cor. 1.
thought presentlye fools for their labors. Festus, the Emperors lieutenant,
hearing paul to speak so much of abandoning the world, and foloweing Christ,
said, he Act. 26.
was mad. Finally, this is the fashion of all worldly wise men: to condemn
the wisdom of Christ, and of his saints. For so the holy scripture reports,
of theyrowne confession, being now in place of torment: nos insensati Sap. 5.
vitam illorum aestimabamus insaniam, we fond men, esteemed the lives of
Saints as madness. Wherefore, this is also great vanity (as I have said) to
make such accoumpt of worldly wisdom: which is not only folly, but also
madness, by the testimony of the holy ghost him self.

Who would not think, but that, the wise men of this world, were the fittest
to be chosen to do Christ service in his church? 1. Cor. 1.
Yet S. Paul says, non mul i sapientes, secundum carnem, God has not chosen
many wise men according to the flesh. Who would not think, but that, a
worldly wise man might easilye also make a wise Christian? yet S. Paul says,
no: except first he become a fool, (...) fiat, vt sit sapiens: If any 1. Cor.
3.
man seem wise amongst you: let him become a fool, to the end he may be
made wise. Vain then, and of no account, is the wisdom of this world, except
it be subject to the wisdom of God. The vanity of beauty.


The fyfthe vanity belonging to pride of life, is corporal beauty: whereof
the wyseman Prou. 31
says, vain is beauty, and deceaueable is the grace of countynance. VVherof
also, king David understood properly, when he said, Psa. 118.
Turn a^vaye my eyes (o lord,) that they behold not vanity: This is a
singular great vanity, dangerous, and deceatfull: but yet greatly esteemed
of the children of men: whose property is, to love vanity, as the prophet say
the. Psalm. 4.
Beauty is compared by holy men, to a painted snake, which is fair without,
and full of deadlye poison within. If a man did consider what infinite ruynes,
and destructions have come, by over light giving credit thereunto: he would
beware of yt. And if he remembered what foul dross lyethe under a fair
skin: he would little be in love therewith, says one father. God has
imparted certain sparckes of beauty unto his creatures: thereby to draw us to
the confideration, and love of his own beauty: whereof the other is but a
shadow: even as a man fynding a little issue of water, may seek out the
fou^tane thereby: or happenyng upon a small vain of gold, may thereby come, to
the whole mynne it self. But we like babes, delight our selves only with the
fair cover of the A lesson to be read in the beau tie of (...) creacures.
book, and never do consider what is written therein. In all fair creatures,
that man does behold, he ought to read this, say the one father: that if God
could make a piece of earth so fair and lovely, with imparting unto yt some
little spark of his beauty: how infinite fair is he him self, and how
woorthye of all love and admiration? And how happy shall we be, when we shall
come to enjoy his beautiful presence, whereof now all creatures do take their
beauty?

If we would exercise our selves in these manner of cogitations: We might
easilye keep our hearts pure and unspotted before God, in beholding the
beauty of his creatures. But for that we use not this passage from the
creature to the creator: but do rest only in the eternal appearance of a
deceatfull face: letting go the bridle to foul cogitations, and setting
wilfully on fire our own concupiscences: hence is it, that infinite men do
peryshe daily by occasion of this fond vanity. I call it fond, for that
every child may discrie the deceate and vahitie thereof. For take the fairest
face in the world, wherwithe infinite folishe men fall in love, upon the sight:
and raze yt over but with a little scrache, and all the matter of love is gone:
let there come but an Ague, and all this goodly beauty is distroyed: let the
soul depart but one half hour from the body, and this loving face is vglye
to look on: let yt lie but two days in the grave, and those which were so
hot in love with yt before, will skarse abide to behold yt, or come near
yt. And if none of those things happen unto yt: yet quickly comes on old
age, which riueleth the skin, draws in the eyes, sets out the teethe,
and so disfigurethe the whole visage, as yt becomes more contemptible now,
than it was beautiful and alluringe before. And what then can be more vanity
than this? What more madness, than either to take pride of it, if I (...) it
my self: or to endaunger my soul for yt, if I see it in others?

The sixthe vanity belonging to pride of The vani tie of apparel.
life, is the glory of fine apparel: against which the scripture says, In
vestitu ne gloriaris Eccl 11.
vnque See thou never take glory in apparelle. Of all vanities this is the
greatest, which we see so common among men of this world. If Adam had never
fallen: we had never used apparel. For that, apparel was devised to cover our
shame of nakedness, and other i^firmities co^tracted by that fall. Wherefore, we
that take pride and glory in apparel, do as much as if a beggar should
glory and take pride of the old cloutes that do cover his sores. S. Paul said
unto a byshope, 1. Ti. 6.
If we have vvhervuithall to cover our selves, let us be content. And Christ
touched deeply the danger of nyce apparel, when he commended so much S.
John Baptist for his austere Ma. 3. 11
attire: adding for the contradictorie, Qui Luc. 7.
mollibus vestiuntur in domibus regni sunt: They which are apparelled in soft
and delicate apparel, are in kings courts: In kings courts of this world,
but not in the kings court of heaven. For which cause in the description of
the rich man damned, this is not omitted by Christ: That he was apparelled in
purple and Luc. 16.
sylke.

It is a wounderfull thing to consider the different proceeding of God and the
world Genesis 3.
heerin. God was the first tailor that ever made apparel in the world: and he
made it for the most noble of all our auncestous, in paradise: and yet he made
it but of beasts skynnes. Heb. 12.
And S. Paul testifiethe of the noblest saints of the old testament, that
they were covered only with goats skynnes, and with the hears of Camelles.
What vanity is it then for us, to be so curious in apparel, and to take
such pride therein, as we do? we rob and spoil all creatures, almost in
the world, to cover our backs, and adorn our bodies withal. From one, we
take his woolle: from The extreme va nitie and pouercie of man.
an other his skin: from an other his furro: and from some other their very
excrementes, as the silk, which is nothing else, but the excreme^tes of worms.
Nor co^te^t with this, we come to fishes, and do beg of them certain
pearls to hang about us. We go down into the ground for gold and silver:
and turn up the sands of the sea, for precious stones: and having borrowed all
this of other creatures, we iett up and down, provoking men to look upon us:
as if all this now were our own. When the stone shyneth upon our fingar: we
will seem (forsoothe) thereby to shine. When the silver and silks do glyster
on our backs: we look big, as if all that beauty came from us. And so (as
the prophet Psalm. 77.
says,) we pass over our days in vanity, and do not perceive our own
extreme folly.

The second general branch, which 2. Concupiscence of the eyes.
S. John appoints, unto the vanity of this life, is concupiscence of the
eyes: whereunto the ancient fathers have referred all vanities of riches, and
wealth of this world. Of this S. Paul writes to Timothy: Give commandment
1. Ti. 6.
to the rich me^ of this world, not to be high minded, nor to put hope in
the uncertainty of their riches. The reason of which speech is uttered by the
scripture, in an other place, when it says: Riches shall not profitt a man in
Piou. 11
the day of revenge. That is, at the day of death and Ludgement: which
thing, the rich men of this world, do confess them selves, thoghe to late,
when they cry, diuitiarum iactantia Sap. 5.
quid nobis contulit? what has the bravery of The vani tie and peril of
vvorldly wealth.
our riches profited vst All which does evidently declare the great vanity
of worldly riches, which can do the possessoure no good at all, when he
has most reed of their help. Rich men have slept their sleep, (says Psalm.
75.
the prophet) and have found nothing in their hands: that is, rich men have
passed over this life, as men do pass over a sleep, imaginyng them selves to
have golden mountains, and treasures: and when they a wake (at the day of
their death) they find themselves to have nothing in their hands. In
respect whereof, the prophet Baruch asks this question: Where are they novu,
which Cap. 3.
heaped together gold and silver, and which made no end of their scrapyng
together? And he answers him self immediately: Exterminati sunt, and ad
inferos descenderu^t: They are now rooted owte, and are gone down unto hell.
To like effect says S. James. Now go to, you rich men: weep, and howl in
your Iac. 5.
miseries, that come upon you: your riches are rotten: and your gold and
silver is rustie: and the rust thereof shall be in testimony against you: it
shall feed on your flesh as fire: you have hoarded up wrath for your selves
in the last day.



If wealth of this world be not only so vain, but also so perilous as here
is affirmed: what vanity then is yt for men to set their minds upon it, as
they do? S. Paul says of him self, that he esteemed it all but as dung.
(...). 3.
And he had great reason surely to say so, seeing in deed they are but dung:
that is, the very excrementes of the earth, and fownde only in the most
barraine places thereof: as they Job. 28.
can tell which have seen their mines. What a base matter is this then for a
man to tie his love unto? God commanded in the old law, that what soever did
go with his breast Leui. 11.
upon the ground, should be unto us in abomination. How much more then, a
reasonable man, that has glewed his heart and soul unto a piece of earth?
We came in naked unto Cap. 1.
this world, and naked we must go forth again, saycthe Job. The mylle
wheel stirrethe much about, and beats it self from day to day, and yet
at the years end it is in the same place, as it was in the beginning: so, rich
men, let them toil and labor what they can, yet at their death must they be
as poor, as at the first day wherein they were borne. When the rich man
dies (say the Job. 27.
Job) he shall take nothing with him, but shall close up his eyes, and find
nothing. Poverty shall lay hands upon him, and a tempest shall oppress him
in the night: a burning wind shall take him away, and a hurl wind shall
(...) him from his place: yt shall rushe upon him, and shall not spare him: it
shall bind his hands upon him, and shall hysse over him. For that it sees
his place whether he must go.



The prophet David in like wise forewarneth us of the same, in these words:
be not afeard when thou see a man made rich, and the glory of his house
multiplied. For when he dies, he shall take nothing with him, nor shall his
glory descend to the place whether he goes: he shall pass into the progenies
of his auncestoures (that is, he shall go to the place where they are, who
have lived as he has done) and world without end he shall see no more light.



All this and much more is spoken by the holy ghost, to signify the
dangerous vanity of worldly weal the: and the folly of those men, who labor
so much to procure the same, with the eternal peril of their souls, as the
scripture assures us. If so many physicians, as I have here alleged
scriptures, should agree together, that such, or such meats were vencomus
and perillsome: I think few would give the adventure to eat them, thoghe
otherwise in taste they appeared sweet, and pleasant. How then comes it to
pass, that so many earnest admonitions of God him self, can not stay us
from the love of this dangerous vanity? (...) cor apponere, says God by the
prophet: that is, lay not Psalm. 61.
your heart unto the love of riches. Qui diligit Eccl. 31.
aurum non iustificabitur, say the the wise man:

he that loves gold shall never be iustifed. Cap. 1.
I am angry greatelye upon rich nations, sayethe God by Zachary. Christ
says: Amen Mat. 19.
dico vuhis, quia dives difficile intrabit in regnum caelorum: Truly I say
unto you, that a rich man shall hardly get into the kingdom of heaven.

And again, vvobe to you rich men, for Lue. 6.
that you have received your consolation in this life. Finally S. Paul says
generally of all, and to all: They which will be rich, do faell into
temptation, 1. Ti. 6.
and into the snare of the devil, and into many unprofitable and hurtful
desires, which do drown men in destruction and perdition.

Can any thing in the world be spoken more effectually, to dissuade from the
love of riches tha^ this? must not here now the covetous men, either deny God,
or condemn them selves in their own consciences? let them The pretense of
wife and children refuted,
go, and excuse them selves, by the pretense of wife and children, as they are
wont: sayeing, they mean nothing else, but to provide for their sufficiency.
Does Christ, or S. Paul admit this excuse? ought we so much to love wife, or
children, or other kynred, as to endaunger our souls for the same? what
comfort may it be to an afflicted father in hell, to remember, that by his
means, his wife and children do live wealthelie in earth? all this is
vanity (dear brother) and mere deceate of our spiritual enemy For within
one moment after we are dead, we shall care no more for wife, children, father,
mother, or brother, in this matter, than we shall for a mere stranger: and
one penye given in alms while we lived for gods sake, shall comfort us more at
that day, than thowsandes of pounds bestowed upon our kynne, for the natural
love we bear unto our own flesh and blood: The which, I would to Christ
worldly men did consider: And then (no dowte) they would never take such care
for kynred, as they do: especially upon their death beds: whence
presently they are to depart to that place, where flesh and blood holds
no more privilege: nor riches have any power to deliver: but only such, as
were well bestowed in the service of God, or given to the poor for his names
sake. And this shall be sufficient for this point of riches.

The third branch of worldly vanities 3. Of the vanity of world lie
pleasures.
is called by S. John co^cupisce^ce of the flesh: which conteyneth all
pleasures and carnal recreatio^s: as banqueting, laughing, playeing, and the
like, wherewithe our flesh is much delyted in this world. And albeit in this
kind, there is a certain measure to be allowed unto the godly, for the
convenient maintenance of their health: as also in riches it is not to be
reprehended: yet, that all these worldly solaces, are not only vain, but
also dangerous, in that excess and abundance, as worldly men seek and use
them: appears playnelie by these words of Christ. VVo be Ioh. 16.
unto you which now do laughe, for you shall weep. VVo be unto you that now
live in fill, and satietie:

for the time shall come, when you shall suffer hunger. And again, in Ioh. 16
S. John's gospel, speaking to his Apostles, and by them to all other, he
says. You shall uveepe and pule: but the world shall rejoice: making it a
sign distinctiue between the good and the badde: that the one shall mourn in
this life, and the other rejoice, and make them selves merye.

The very same does Job confirm both of Job. 21.
the one, and the other sort: for of worldlinges he says: that they solace
them selves with all kind of Music, and do pass over their days in
pleasure, and in a very moment do go down into hell. But of the god: ie he
says in his own person: that they sighe Job. 3.
before they eat their bread. And in an other place: that they fear all
their works, Job 9.
(...) that God spares not him which offe^deth.

The reason whereof the wise man yet further expresses. sayeing: That the
uvorkes Eccle 9
of good men are in the hands of God: and no man knovveth whether he be
vvoorthie of love or hatred, at gods hands: but all is kept uncertain for the
time to come. And old Tobias insinuates Tob. 5.
yet an other cause, when he says: What joy can I have or receive, seeing I
sytt here in darkness? Speaking literallye of his corporal blyndenes, but yet
leauinge it also to be understand of spiritual, and internal darkness.

These are then the causes (beside external Why good me^ are sadd i^ this
life.
affliction which God often sends) why the godly do live more sad and
fearful in this life, than wicked men do, 1. Co. 2.
according to the counsel of S. Paul: and 2. Co. 7.
why also they sighe often and weep, as Philip. 2
Job and Christ do affirm: for that they remember Job. 3.
often the Justice of God: their own Ioh. 16.
frayltie in sinning: the secret judgment of gods predestination uncertain
to us: the vale of misery and desolation, wherein they live here: which made
even the Apostles to Romans (...)
groan, as S. Paul says, though they had less cause thereof than we. In
respect whereof Ephe: 4.
we are willed to pass over this life in carefullnes, Mat. 24.
wachefullnes, fear and trembling, 2. Cor. 5. and 7.
and in respect whereof also, the wyseman Eccle. 7.
says: It is better to go to the house of sorrow, tha^ to the house of
feasting. And again. Where sadness is, there is the heart of vvysemen: but
where myrthe is, there is the heart of (...). Finally, in respect of this the
scripture says: Beatus homo Prou. 28
qui semper est pauidus: Happy is the man which always is fearful. Which
is nothing else, but that which the holy ghost commaundethe every man, by
Micheas the Mich. 6.
Prophet, solicitum ambulare cum deo: To walk careful an diligent with God,
thinking upon his commandments, how we keep and observe the same, how we
resist, and mortify our members upon earth and the like: which cogitations,
if they might have place with us, would cut of a great deal of those
wordlie pastimes, wherwithe the careless sort of sinners are overwhelmed. I
mean of those good feloushippes of eatings, drynkings, laughings, syngings,
disputings, and other such vanities that distract us most.

Hereof, Christ gave us a most notable advertisement, in that he wept often:
as at his nativity: at the resuscitation of Lazarus: upon Ioh. 10.
Jerusalem and upon the cross. But he is never Luc. 19.
read to have laughte in all his life. Heerof also is his own nativity and
death a signification which, being both in gods hands, are appointed unto
us, with sorrow and grief, as we see. But the middle part thereof, that is, our
life, being left in our own hands (by gods appointement:) we pass it over
with vain delytes, never thinking whence we came, nor whether we go.

A wise trauailer passing by his Inn, though he see pleasant meats offered
him: A similitude.
yet he forbeareth, upon consideration of the price, and the journey he has
to make: and takes in nothing, but so much, as he knowethe well, how to
discharge, the next morning, at his departure: But a fool Laycthe hands on
every delicate bayte that is presented to his sight: and plays the prince,
for a night or two. Marie, when it comethe to the reckening: he wishes, that
he had lived, only with bread and drink, rather than to be so troubled, as
he is, for the payment. The custom of goods church is, to fast the even of
every feast, and then to make merye the next day: that is, upon the
feastiuall day it self: which representethe the abstinent life of good men in
this world, thereby to be merye in the world to come. But the fashion of the
world is contrary: that is, to eat and drink merrily first, at the tavern:
And after, to let the host bring in his reckening. They eat, drink, and
laughe: and the host, he skoreth up all in the mean space: And when the time
comes, that they must pay: many a heart is sad, that was pleasant before.

This the scripture affirmethe also, of the pleasures of this world: Risus
dolor miscebitur Prou. 14
and extrema gaudii luctus occupat: Laughter shall be myngled with sorrow: and
mourning shall ensue at the hinder end of myrthe. The devil, that plays the
host, in this world, and will serve you, with what delight or pleasure you
desire, wrytethe up all in his book: and at the day of your departure, (that
is, at your death) will he bring the whole reckening, and charge you with it
all and the^ shall follow that, which God promises to Amos. 2.
worldlinges, by the prophet Amos: Your mirthe Tob. 2.
shall be turned into mourning and lamentation. Yea, and more than this, if you
he not able to discharge the re kening: you may chance to hear that other
dreadful sentence of Apo. 18.
Christ, in the Apocalips, quantum in delitiis fuit, tantum date illi
tormentum: Look, how much he has been in his delites, so much torment do
you lay upon him.

Wherefore, to conclude this point, and there withal this first part, touching
(...): truly may we say with the prephet David, of a wordlye minded man:
(...) vanitas Psalm. 38.
omnis homo viuens: The life of such men contains all kind of vanity: That
is, vanity in ambition, vanity in riches, vanity in pleasures, vanity in
all things which they (...) esteem. And therefore, I may well end with the
words of God, by the prophet Esaias, vae vobis, qui (...) iniquitatem in
funlculis vanicatis: Esa. 59.
VVo be unto you, which do draw wickedness in the ropes of vanity. These
ropes are those vanities of vainglorie, pmotio^, The ropes of va nitie.
dignity, nobility, beauty, riches, deiites, and other before touched: which
always draw with them some iniquity and sin. For which cause David says
unto God: Thou hate ( o Lord) obseruers of superfluous vanities. And the
Psalm. 3.
scripture reporting the cause why God destroyed utterly the famylye and
lineage of 4. Re. 17
Baasa king of Israel, say the, yt was, For that they had provoked God in their
vanities. And lastly, for this cause the holy ghost pronounces generally
of all men: Beatus vir qui non respexit in vanitates, and insanias falsas:
Blessed Psalm. 39.
is that man, which has not respected vanities, and the false madness of this
world.

Now come I then to the second part 2. How worldly vanities are also
deceytes.
proposed in this chapter: to show how this world, with the commodities
thereof, are not only vanities, but also deceytes: as Christ terms them: for
that in deed, they perform not unto their folowers, those idle Mat. 13.
vanities which they do promise. VVherin, the world may be compared to that
wreched, and ungrateful deceyuer, Laban: who made poor Jacob to serve him
seven years for Genesis 29 False pro mises of the world.
fair Rachell, and in the end deceived him with foul Lia. What false
promises does the world make daily? to one it promisethe long life and
health: and cutteth him of in the myddest of his days: To an other it
promises great wealth, and promotion: and after long service, performs no
part thereof: to an other it promises great honor by large expenses: but
vnder-hande it castethe him into contempt, by beggarie: to an other it assures
great advancement by marriage: but yet never gives him ability to come to his
desire. Go you over the whole world: behold countries: vewe provinces: look
into cities: hearken at the doors and windows of pri uate houses, of princes
palaces, of secret cha^bers: and you shall see, and hear nothing, but
lamentable complaints: one, for that he has lost: an other, for that he
has not won: a third for that he is not satisfied: ten thousand, for that
they are deceived. The false promises of renovvme.


Can there be a greater deceit (for examples sake) than to promis renown, and
memory, as the world does to her folowers: and yet to forget them as soon as
they are dead? who does remember now one, of forty thousand iolye fellows in
this world, captains, souldiars, counsaillers, Dukes, Earls, princes,
prelates, and Emperoures, kings and queen's, Lords and ladies? who
remembrethe them (I say?) who once thynkethe or speakethe of them now? has
not their memory perished with their sound, as the prophet Psalm. 9
says? did not Job promise truly, that their Job. 13.
remembrance should be as ashes trodden under foot? Psalm. 1.
And David: That they should be as dust blovvne Ierom. in vita Pauli heremitae.
abroad with the vvynde? S. Paul the first heremite hydd him self fowerskore
and ten years in a wilderness, without knowing, or speaking with any man,
or once showing or revealing him self to the world: And yet now, the world
both reme^breth, and honoreth his memory. But many a king, and Emperor have
stryued and labored, all their life, to be known in the world, and yet are
now forgotten: So that the world is like, in this point, (as one says) unto
a couetouse and forgetful A compa rison.
host, who, if he see his old gest come bye, in beggarlie estate, all his
money being spent: he makes sembla^ce not to know him. And if the gest
marvel thereat: and say, that he has come often that way, and spent much
money in the house: the other answers: yt may be so, for there pass this
way so many, as we use not to keep account thereof. But, what is the way to
make this host to remember you (says this. Anthor?) the way is (says he)
to use him evil as you pass by: beat him well, or do some other notable
injury unto him (as Paul, and his like did unto the world:) and he will
remember you, as long as he lives, and many times will talk of you, when you
are far of from him.

Infinite are the deceytes, and dissimulations What the decei tes of the
world are.
of the world: It seems goodlye, fair and gorgeous, in utter show: but when
it comes to handling, it is nothing but a fether: when it comes to sight, it
is nothing but a shadow: when it comes to weight, it is nothing but smoke:
when it comes to opening, it is nothing but an image of plaster woork, full
of old rags and paches within. To know the miseries of the world, you must A
similitude.
go a little out from yt. For, as they which walk in a mist, do not see it
so well, as they which stand upon a hill from yt: so fares it, in discerning
the world: whose property is, to blind them that come to it, to the end they
may not see their own estate: even as a Raven, first of all, strykethe owte
the poor shepes eyes, to the end, she may not see the way, to escape from
his tyranie.

After the world has once bereft the worldlyng, of his spiritual sight,
that he can judge no longer, between good, and evil, vanity, and verity:
then, it rockethe him a sleep, at ease and pleasure: it byndethe him
sweetly: it deceyuethe him pleasantly: it torme^tethe him in great peace and
rest: it has a proud spirit streightwayes, to place Math. 4.
him in the pinnacle of greedy ambition, and there hence, to show him all the
dignities, and prefermentes of the world: it has twenty false marchantes, to
show him in the dark, the first and former ends, of fair and precious
clothes: Marie, he may not look into the whole pieces, nor carry them to the
light: It has four hundred false prophettes to flatter him, as Achab had,
which must keep 3. Re. 22.
him from the hearing of Micheas his counsel: that is, from the remorse of
his own conscience, which tells him truethe: It has a thowsa^d cunning
fishers, to lay before him pleasant baytes, but all furnyshed with dangerous
hooks within: It has infinite strumpettes of Babylon, to offer him drink in
golden cups, but all myngled with Apo. 17.
most deadly poison: It has in every door an alluring Iahel, to entise
him into the Iudic. 4.
milk of pleasures and delites, but all have their hammers and nails in their
hands, to murder him in the brain, when he fallethe a sleep. It has in
every corner, a flattering Ioab, to embrace with one arm, and kill (...).
Re. 20
with the other: A false Judas, to give a kiss, and therewith to betraye.
Finally it has Luc. 22.
all the deceites, all the dissimulations, all the flatteries, all the
treasons, that possibly may be devised. It hates them, that love yt:
deceives them, that trust it: afflicts them, that serve yt: reprocheth them,
that honor it: damneth them, that follow it: and most of all forgets them,
that labor and travail most of all for it. And to be brief in this matter,
do you what you can for this world, and love it, and adore it, as much as
you will: yet in the end, you shall find yt a right Nabal: who after many
benefits received from David, yet when David came to have need of him, he
ansvvered, uvhoe is David? or who is the son of Isay, that I should know
him? upon great cause then said the 1. Re. 25.
prophet David, O you children of men, hovue long will you be so dull hearted?
Why do you love vanity, and seek after a lie? He callethe the Psalm. 4.
world, not a liar, but a lie it self: for the exceeding great fraud, and
deceit, which yt uses.

The third name or property that Christ 3. How pleasures of the world are
thor nes.
ascribethe unto the pleasures and riches of the world is, that they are
thorns: of which, S. Gregory writethe thus, who ever would have believed me
if I had called riches thorns, as Christ here does, seeing thorns do
prick, and riches are so pleasant? And yet surely Hom. 15. in euarg.
they are thorns, for that, with the pricks of their careful cogitations,
they tear, and make bloodye the minds of wordlye men.

By which words, this holy father signifies, that even, as a man's naked
body, tossed and tumbled among many thorns, can not be but much rent and
torn, and made bloody with the pricks thereof: so a worldly man's soul beaten
with the cares and cogitations of this life, can not but be vexed with restles
pricking of the same, and wounded also with many temptations of sin, which
do occur. This does Salomo^ (in the places before alleged) signify, when
he does not only call the riches and pleasures of this world, vanity of
vanities, that is, the greatest vanity: Eccle. 1. 2. 3. 4.
of all other vanities: but also affliction of spirit: Giving us to
understand, that where these vanities are, and the love of the^ once entered:
there is no more the peace of God, which Phil. 4.
passes all understanding: there is no longer rest, or quiet of mind: but
war of desires: vexation of thoughts: tribulation of fears: pricking of
cares, unquietness of soul: which is in deed a most miserable and pityfull
affliction of spirit.

And the reason hereof is, that as a clock A compa rison.
can never stand still from runnynge, so long as the peazes do hang thereat: so
a worldly man, having infinite cares, cogitations, and anxieties hanging upon
his mind, as peazes upon the clock, can never have rest, or repose day or
night, but is enforced to beat his brains, when other men sleep, for the
co^passing of those trifles, where with he is incombred. Oh, how many rich men
in the world do feel to be true, that I now say? how many ambitious me^ do
prove it daily, and yet, will not deliver them selves, out of the same?

Of all the plagues sent unto Egypt, that Exodus 8.
of the flies was one of the most trouble some, and fastidious. For, they never
suffered men to rest: but the more they were beaten of, the more. they came
upon him. So, of all the miseries, and vexations, that God lays upon
worldlinges, this is not the least, to be tormented with the cares of that,
which they esteem their greatest felicity: and can not beat them of, by any
means they can devise: They rushe upon them in the morning, as soon as they a
wake: they accompanye them in the day: they forsake them not at night: they
follow them to bed: they let them from their sleep: they aflict them in
their dreams: and sinallie, they are those importune and unmercifully tyrants,
which God threatnethe Iere. 16.
to wicked men, by Jeremy the prophet, qui nocte ac die non (...) requiem,
which shall give them no rest, either by day or night. And the cause hereof,
which God alleges in the same chapter, is, quia abst ili pacem mea^ a populo
isto (dicit dominu,) nisericordiam, and miserationes For that I have taken away
my peace from this kind of people (says God) I hau taken away my mercy, and
co^miseratio^s: a very heavy sentence to all them, that lie under the yoke,
and bondage of these miserable vanities.

But yet, the prophet Esaye has a much Esa. 59.
more terrible description of these men's estate: They put their trust in
things of nothing, and do talk vanities: They conceive labor, and bring
forth iniquity: they break the eggs of serpents, and vveaue the vvebbes
of spyders: he that shall eat of their eggs, shall dye: and that which is
hached thence, shall be a Cocatrice: their vvebbes shall not make clothe, to
cover them: for that, their works are unprofitable: and the work of
iniquity is in their hands. These are the words The explication of the
words of Esaias.
of Esaias, declaring unto us, by most significant similitudes, how dangerous
thorns the riches and pleasures of this world are. And first he says, they
put their hope in things of nothing, and do talk vanities: To signify, that
he meanethe of the vanities, and vain men of this world: who commonly do
talk of the things which they love best, and wherein they place their
greatest affiance. Secondly he says, they conceive labor, and bringfoorthe
iniquity: alluding herein, to the chyldbyrthe of women, who first, do conce
aue in their womb: and after a great deal of travail, do bring forth
their infant: so, worldly men, after a great time of travail, and labor in
vanities, do bring forth no other fruit, than sin and iniquity For that
is the effect of those vanities, as he speaks in the same chapter, crieinge
owte to such kind of men: VVoe be unto voas, which do (...) iniquity in
the ropes of vanity.

But, yet to express this matter more forciblye, he uses two other
similitudes: sayeing, they break the eggs of serpents, and do vveaue the
vvebbes of spiders: Signifieing by the one, the vanity of these worldly
cares: and by the other, the danger thereof. The spider we see, takethe great
pains and labor many days together, to weaue her self a web: and in the
end, when all is done, comes a puff of wind, or some other little chance,
and breaks all in pieces: even as he in the gospel, which had taken great
travail and care, Luc. 12.
in heaping riches together, in plucking down his old barnes, and buylding up
of now: and when he was come to say to his soul, Now be merry: That night
his soul was taken from him, and all his labor lost. Therefore Esaias says in
this place, that the vvebbes of these vveauers shall not make them clothe to
cover them with all? for that their works are unprofitable.

The other comparison contains matter of great danger and fear. For, as the
bird that sits upon the eggs of serpents, by breaking and hatching them,
brings forth a perilous brood, to her own destruction: so those that sytt
a brood upon these vanities of the world (says Esaias) do hatche at last
their own destruction. The reason whereof is, (as he says) for that the
work of iniquity is in their hand: Still harping upon this stringe, that a
man can not love and follow these vanities, or entangle him self with their
ropes (as his phrase is) but that he must in deed draw on much iniquity
there with: that is, he must mingle much sin and offense of God with the
same: which effect of sin, because it kylleth the soul, that consents
unto it: therefore Esaias compares it unto the brood of serpe^tes, that kylleth
the byrd which brings the^ forth to the world. And finally, Moses uses
the like similitudes, when he says, of vain and wicked men. Their vineyard
is Deuteronomy. 32
the vineyarde of Sodomites, their grape is the grape of gaul, and their
clusters of grapes are most bitter: their wine is the gaul of dragons, and
the poison of cocatrices, incurable. By which dreadful and lothesome
comparisons, he would give us to understand, that the sweet pleasures of this
world are in deed deceytes, and will prove them selves, one day, most bitter
and dangerous.

The fowerth point that we have to consider The fovverth part, how the world
is misery.
is, how this word, aerumna, that is, misery and calamity, may be verified
of the world, and the felicity thereof. Which thing, thoghe it may appear
sufficiently, by that which has been said before: yet will I (for promise
sake) discuss it a little further in this place, by some particulars. And among
Brevity
many miseries which I might here recount, the first, and one of the greatest,
is, the brevity and uncertainty of all worldly prosperity. Oh, how great a
miserye is this unto a worldly man, that would have his pleasures constant and
perpetual? O death Eccl. 41.
how bitter is thy remembrance (sayethe the scripture) unto a man that has
peace in his riches? we have seen many men advanced, and not endured two
months in their prosperity: we have heard of diverse married in great joy,
and not have lived six days in their felicity: we have read of strange
matters happened out in this kind: and we see with our eyes no few examples
daily. What 1. Mac. 1
a grief was it (think you) to Alexander the great, that having subdewed, in
twelve years, the most part of all the world, should be then enforced to
dye, when he was most desirous to live? and when he was to take most joy,
and comfort of his victories? what a sorrow was it to the rich man in the
gospel, to hear upon the suddayne, hac nocte: Luc. 12.
Even this night thou must dye? what a misery will this be to many wordlings,
when it comes: who now buyld palaces, purchase lands, heap riches, procure
dignities, make marriages, join kynredes: as though there were never an end of
these matters? what a doolefull day, will this be to them (I say) when they
must forgo all these things, which they so much love? when they must be
turned of, as princes mules are wont to be, at the iourneys end: that is,
their treasure taken from them, and their gauld backs only, left unto them
selves? for, as we see these mules A comparison.
of princes go, all the day long, laden with treasure, and covered with
fair clothes, but at night shaken of, into a sorry stable, much bruised, and
gauled, with the carriage of those treasures: so rich men, that pass through
this world, laden with gold, and silver, and do gaul greatly, their souls
in carriage thereof: are despoyled of their burden at the day of death, and are
turned of, with their wounded consciences, to the lothesome stable of hell and
damnation.

An other misery joined to the prosperity Discontenteme^t
of this world, is the grievous counterpeaze of discontenteme^tes, that every
worldly pleasure has with it. Run over every pleasure in this life, and
see what sauce it has adjoined. Ask them that have had most proof thereof,
whether they remain contented, or no? The possession of riches is accompanied
with so many fears, and cares, as has been showed: The advancement of
honors is subject to all miserable servitude that may be devised. The
pleasure of the flesh, though yt be laufull and honest: yet, is it called by
S. Paul, tribulation of the flesh: 1. Cor. 7.
But, if it be with sin: ten thousand times more, is it environed, with all
kind of miseries.

Who can reckon up the calamities of Miseries of body
our body? so many diseases, so many infirmities, so many mischances, so many
dangers? who can tell the passions of our mind that Ofminde
do afflict us, now with angar, now with sorrow, now with envy, now with
fury? Of goods.
who can recounte the adversities, and misfortunes that come by our goods?
who can number the hurtes, and discontentations, that Of neighbors.
daily ensewe upon us, from our neighbors? ne calls us into law for our
goods: an other pursues us for our life: a third, by slander impugueth our
good name: one afflicts us by hatred, an other by envy, an other by
flattery, an other by deceyte, an other by revenge, an other by false witness,
an other by open arms. There are not so many days, nor hours in our lives,
as there are miseries and contrarieties in the same. And further than this, the
evil has this prerogative above the good, in our life, that one defect
only ouerwhelmeth and drowneth a great number of good things together: as if
a man had all the felicities heaped together, which this world could yield, and
yet had but one toothe out of tune: all the other pleasures would not make him
merry. Heerof you have a clear example in Aman, chief counsailer of king
Heste. 5.
Assuerus: who, for that, Mardochaeus the Jew did not rise to him when he went
by, nor did honor him, as other me^ did: he said to his wife and friends,
that all his other felicities were nothing, in respect of this one affliction.
The misery of blindenes.


Add now to this the misery of darkness and blindenes, wherein worldly men
live, (as in part I have touched before) most fitly prefigured by the
palpable darkness of Egypt, Exo. 10.
wherein no man could see his neighbor, no man could see his work, no man
could see his way: such is the darkness wherein worldly me^ Mat. 13.
walk. They have eyes, but they see not, says Christ: that is, though they
have eyes to see the matters of this world: yet they are blind, for that they
see not the things they should see in deed: The children of this world are
wyser in their generation, than the children of Luc. 16.
light. But that is only, in matters of this world, in matters of darkness,
not in matters of light, whereof they are no children: for that, the carnal man
understands not the things which are of God. Walk over the world, and 1.
Cor. 2.
you shall find men as sharp eyed as Egles in things of earth: but the same
men as blind as betles in matters of heaven: heerof ensewe those lamentable
effects, that we see daily, of man's laws so carefully respected, and gods
commandments so contemptuously rejected: of earthly goods sought for, and
heavenly goods not thought upon: of so much travail taken for the body,
and so little care used for the soul. Finally, if you will see in what great
blindenes the world does live: remember that S. Paul coming Act. 9.
from a worldlinge to be a good Christain, had skales taken from his eyes by
Ananias, which covered his sight before, when he was in his pride, and ruff
of the world.

Beside all these miseries, there is yet an Temptations and dangers.
other misery, greater in some respect, than the former, and that is, the
infinite number of temptations, of snares, of intisementes in the world, whereby
men are drawn to perdition daily. Athanasius writes of S. Anthony the
Athan, in vita Antonii.
heremite, that God revealed unto him, one day, the state of the world, and he
saw it all hanged full of nets in every corner, and deuilles sitting by, to
watch the same. The prophet David, to signify the very same thing, that is,
the infinite multitude of snares in this world, says, God shall rain snares
Psalm. 10.
upon sinners: that is, God shall permit wicked men to fall into snares: which
are as plentyfull in the world, as are the drops of rain, which fall down
from heaven. Every thing almost, is a deadly snare, unto a carnal, and loo
se hearted man. Every sight that he sees, every word that he hears, every
thought that he co^ceaueth: his youth, his age: his friends, his enemies: his
honor, his disgrace: his riches, his Poverty: his compagnie keeping: his
prosperity, his adversity: his meat that he eats: his apparel that he
vveareth: all are snares, to dravve him to destruction, that is not vvatchefull:

Of this then, and of the blyndenes declared Facility of sinning.
before, does follow the last, and greatest misery of all, which can be in
this life: And that is, the facility whereby worldly me^ do run into sin.
For truclie says the Pro. 14.
scripture, miseros facit populos peccatum: Sin is the thing that makes
people miserable. And yet, how easily men of the world do committ sin, and
how little scruple they make of the matter, Job signifies, vhen, talking of
such a man, he says, bibit quasi aquam iniquitatem: Job. 15.
He suppeth up sin, as it were water: that is, with as great facility,
custom, and ease, passes he down any kind of sin, that is offered him, as
a man drinks water, when he is a thirst. He that will not believe the sayeing
of Job: let him prove alitle, by his own experience, whether the matter be so
or no: let him walk out, into the streets, behold the doeinges of men, vewe
their behauioure, consider what is done in shoppes, in halles, in consistories,
in judgment seats, in palaces, and in common meetinge places abroad: what
lyeinge: what slanderinge: what deceyuinge there is. He shall find, that of
all things vvherof men make any account, nothing is so little accounted of, as
to sin. He shall see justice sold, verity The sinful state of the world.
wrested, shame lost, and equity despised. He shall see the Innocent
condemned: the guilty delivered: the wicked advanced: the virtuous oppressed.
He shall see many thieves florishe: many usurers bear great swaye, many
murderers and extorsioners reuere^ced and honored: many fools putt in
authority: and diverse which have nothing in them but the form of men, by
reason of money, to be placed in great dignities for the government of others.
He shall hear at every man's mouth, almost, vanity, pride, detraction,
envy, deceyte, dissimulatio^, wanto^nesse, dissolution, lyeing, swearing,
perjury, and blaspheming. Finally, he shall see the most part of men, to
govern them selves absolutely, even as beasts do, by the motion of there
passions, not by law of justice, reason, religion, or virtue. The syueth part
of this chapter.


Of this does ensue the fiueth point that Christ touches in his parable, and
which I promised here to handle: to wit, that the love of this world choketh
up and strangleth every man, whom it possesses, from all celestial and
spiritual life, for that it fills him with a plain contrary spirit, to
the spirit of God. The Apostle faieth, Si quis Romans 8.
spiritum Christi non habet, hic non est eius: If any man have not the spirit
of Christ, this fellow belongs not unto him. Now, how contrary the spirit of
Christ, and the spirit of the world is, may appear by the twelve Gal. 5.
fruits of Christ's spirit reckened up by The effects of the spirit of
Christ.
S. Paul unto the Galathians: to wit. Charity, which is the root and mother
of all good works: Joy, in serving God: peace, or tranquillity of mind in
the storms of this world: Patience, in adversity: Longanimitie, in expecting
our reward: Bonytye, in hurting noman: Benignity, in sweet behauioure:
Gentleness, in occasion given of anger: Faythefullnes, in performing our
promises: Modesty, without arrogancy Continency, from all kind of
wickedness: Chastity, in conseruing a pure mind in a clean and unspotted
body. Against Gal. 5.
these men (says S. Paul) there is no law. The effects of the spirit of
this world.
And in the very same chapter he expresses the spirit of the world by the
contrary effects, sayeing, the worckes of flesh are manifest, which are,
fornication, uncleanness, wanto^nes, lechery, Idolatry, poysonninges,
enemities, contentions, emulatio^s, wrath, strife, dissension, sects, envy,
murder, dronkennes gluttony, and the like: of which I foretell you: as I have
told you before, that those men which do such things shall never obtain
the kingdom of heaven. Two rules of S. Paul to know our spirits.




Here now may every man judge of the spirit of the world and the spirit, of
Christ: and (applieing it to him self) may conjecture, whether he holds of
the one, or of the other. S. Paul geeueth two pretty short rules in the very
same place to try the same: The first is, They which are of Christ, have
crucified Gal. 5.
their flesh, uvithe the vices, and concupisce^ces thereof: That is, they have
so mortified their own bodies, as they committ none of the vices and sins
repeated before, nor yield not unto the concupiscences or temptations thereof.
The second rule is, yfvve live in spirit, then let us walk in spirit: That
is, our vvalking and behauioure is a sign whether we be alive or dead. For
if our vvalking be spiritual, such as I have declared before by the twelve
fruits thereof: then do we live and have life in spirit: but if our works
be carnal, such as S. Paul now has described: then are we carnal and
dead in spirit, nor have we any thing to do with Christ, or portion in the
kingdom of heaven. And for that all the world is full of those carnull
works, and brings forth no fruits in deed of Christ's spirit, nor
permittethe them to grow or prosper within her: thence is yt, Christ and the
world. enemies.
that the scripture alvvayes puts Christ, and the world for opposite and
open enemies.

Christ him self saves, that the world can not receaus the spirit of
truth. And again in Ioh. 14.
the same Evangelist, he says, that nether he, Ioh. 15. 17.
nor any of his, are of the world, though they live in the world: And yet
further, in his most vehement prayer unto his father, pater just, mundus te
non cognouit:

Just father the world has not known thee For which Ioh. 17
cause S. John writes, If any man love the world the love of the father is
not in him: And yet further Ioh. 2.
S. James, that who soever but desires to be Iac. 4.
friend of this world, is thereby made an enemy to God. What will worldly men
say to this? 1. Co. 11.
S. Paul affirms plainly, that this world is to be damned: And Christ
insinuates the same in S. John's gospel: but most of all, in that Ioh. 12.
wonderful fact of his, when prayeing to his father, for other matters, he
excepteth the world by name. Non pro mundo rogo says he? Ioh. 17.
I do not ask mercy, and perdone for the world, But for those which thou
have given me out of the world. Oh what a dreadful exception is this, made by
the Savior of Ioh. 1.
the world, by the lamb, that takes away all Luc. 23.
sins, by him that asked perdone, even for his tourmentoures, and crucifiers,
to except now the world by name from his mercy? Oh that worldly men would
consider but this one point only: they would not (I think) live so void of
fear as they do.

Can any man maruayle now why S. Paul cries so carefully to us, nolite
conformari huic Romans 12.
saeculo, conform not your selfs to this world? and again: that we should
renounce utterly Tit. 2.
all secular desires? can any maruayle why S. John, which was most privy,
above all other, to Christ's holy meaning, here in says to us in such
earnest sort. Nolite diligere mu^dum neque ea quae in mundo sunt, Do not love
the world, nor any thing that is in the world. 1. Ioh. 2.
If we may nether love it, nor so much as conform our selves unto it, under
so great pains (as are before rehearsed) of the enemitie of God and eternal
damnation: what shall become of those men that do not only conform them
selves unto it, and the vanities thereof: but also do follow it, seek after
it, rest in it, and do bestow all their labors, and travails upon it.

If you ask me the cause why Christ so Whi Christ hates the world.
hates and abhors this world: S John tells you, (...) mundus totus in
maligno posius est, for that all the whole world is set on naughtynes: for
that it has a spirit contrary 1. Io. 5.
to the spirit of Christ, as has been showed:

for that it teaches pride, vainglorie, ambition, envy, revenge, malice, with
pleasures of the flesh, and all kind of vanities: And Christ, on the
contrary side, humility, meekenes, perdonyng of enemies, abstin ce,
chastity, sufferance, mortisicatio^, bearing the cross, with contempt of all
earthelye pleasures for the kingdom of heaven: for that it persecuteth the
good, and aduanceth the evil: for that it rooteth out virtue, and planteth all
vice: And finalie, for that it shuts the Apoc. 3.
doors against Christ when he knocks, and strangleth the heart that once it
possessethe. A description of the world.


Wherefore to conclude this part, seeing this world is such a thing as it is:
so vain, so deceytfull, so troublesome, so daunger^us: seeing it is a professed
enemy to Christ, excommunicated and damned to the pit of hell: seeing it is
(as one father says) an arcke of travail, a school of vanities, a fear of
deceit, a labirin the of error: seeing it is nothing else but a barraine
wilderness, a stonye fyeld, a durtye Stye, a tempestuous sea: seeing it is a
grove full of thorns, a medowe full of scorpions, a flourishing garden without
fruit, a cave full of poisoned and deadly basiliskes: seeing it is finally
(as I have showed, a fountain of miseries, a river of tears, a feigned fable,
a delectable frenzy: seeing (as S. Austen Au. ep. 39
says) the joy of this world has nothing else but faise delight, true
asperitie, certain sorrow, uncertain pleasure, trauailsome labor, fearful
rest: grievous misery, vain hope of selicitie: seeing it has nothing in it
(as S. Chrysostom says) but tears, shame, Hom. 22. ad pop. antioch.
repentance, reproach, sadness, negligences, labors, terrors, sickness, sin,
and death it self: seeing the worlds repose is full of anguishe: his security
without foundation: his fear without cause: his travails without fruit: his
sorrow without profitt: his desires without success: his hope without reward:
his myrthe without continuance: his miseries without remedies: seeing these and
a thousand evils more are in it: and no one good thing can be had from it:
who will be deceived with this visard, or allured with this vanity hereafter?
who will be stayed from the noble service of God by the love of so fond a
trifle as is this world? And this, to a reasonable man may be sufficient to
declare the insufficencie of this third impediment. The last part of this
chapter how we


But yet for the satissieing of my promise in the beginning of this chapter:
I have to add a word or two in this place, how we may avoid the danger of
this world, and also use it unto our gain and commodity. may (...) de the
evil of the vvorl de.
And for the first, to avoid the dangers, seeing there are so many snares and
trappes, as has been declared: there is no other way but only to use the
resuge of birds in avoiding the dangerous snares of fowlers: that is, to
mount up into the air, and so to Pro. 1.
fly over them all. (...) rete ante oculos pennatorum: says the wise man:
that is, the nett is laid in vain before the eyes of such as have wings,
and can fly. The spies of Hierico, thoghe many snares were laid for them by
their enemies: yet they escaped all, for that they walked by hills, says the
Ho. 1. in Iosue.
scripture: which place Origin expounding, says, that there is no way to
avoid the dangers of this world, but to walk upon hills, and to imitate
David, that said, Leuaui Psa. 120
oculos meos ad montes, vnde veniet anxilium mihi. I lyfted up mine eyes unto
the hills, wherhe^ce all mine aid and assistance came, for avoiding the
snares of this world. And Psa. 123.
then shall we say with the same David, Anima nostra sicut passer crepta est
de laquco venantium: Our soul is delivered as a sparowe from the snare of the
fowlers. We must say with Phill. 3
S. Paul, Our conversation is in heaven. And then shall we little fear all
these deceytes, and dangers upon earth. For as the fowler has no hope to
cache the bird, except he can allure her to pyche, and come down, by some
means: so has the devil, no way to entangle us, but to say as he did to
Christ, mitte te Matt. 4.
deorsum, throw thy self down: that is, piche down upon the baytes which I
have laid: eat and devour them: enamour thy self with them: tie thine
appetite unto them: and the like.

Which gross and open temptation he that will avoyde, by contemning the
allurement of these baytes: by flyeing over them: by placeyng his love and
cogitations in the mountains of heavenly joys and eternity: he shall
easily escape all dangers and perilles. King David was past them all when he
said to God: What is there for me in heaven, Psalm. 72.
or what do I desire besides thee upon earth? my flesh and my heart have
faynted for desire of thee. Thou art the God of my heart, and my portion (o
Lord) for ever.

Saint Paul also was past over these dangers, when he said, that now he was
crucified Gal. 6.
to the world, and the world unto him: and that Phili. 3.
he esteemed all the wealth of this world as 2. Co. 10.
mere dung: And that albeit he lived in flesh, yet lived he not according to
the flesh. Which glorious example if we would follow, in contemning and
despising the vanities of this world, and sixing our minds, in the noble
riches of gods kingdom to come: the snares of the devil would prevail
nothing at all against us in this life.

Touching the second point: how to use How to use vvorl dlie wealth to our a
sua^ toge.
the riches and commodities of this world to our advantage: Christ has laid
down playnlie the means: Facite vobis amicos de Ma^mona iniquitatis: Make
unto you free^des of the riches of iniquity. The rich gloutton might Luc. 16.
have escapede his torments, and have made him self a happy man by help of
worldly Luc. 16.
wealth, if he would. And so might many a thousand which now live, and will
go to hell for the same. Oh, that men would take warning and be wise whiles
they have time. Gala. 4.
S. Paul says: Deceive not your selves: Look 2. Cor. 9.
vuhat a man sovueth, and that shall he reap. What a plentiful harvest then
might rich men provide them selves, if they would: which have such stoore of
seed, and so much ground offered the^ daily to sow it in? why do they not
remember that sweet harvest song: Come ye blessed of my father, enter into the
Mat. 25.
kingdom prepared for you: for I vuas hungry, and you fedd me: I was
thirsty, and you gave me to drink: I vuas naked and you appareled me? Or if
they do not care for this: why do they not fear at least the black Sanctus
that must be chaunted to them for the contrary? Agite Iac. 5.
nunc diuites, plorate, vlulantes in miseriis vestris quae aluenient vobis: go
to now you rich me^ weep and howl in your miseries that shall come upon you?

The holy father John Damascen reports Dam. in hist. Barlaam and Iosaphat
cap. 14. A parable.
a goodly parable of Barlaam the heremite, to our purpose There was (says he)
a certain city, or common wealth, which used to choose them selves a king
from among the poorest sort of people, and to advance him to great honor,
wealth, and pleasures for a time: But after a while, when they were weary of
him, there fashion was to rise against him, and to dispoyle him of all his
felicity, yea the very clothes of his back, and so to banishe him naked into
an yland of a far country: where, bringing nothing with him, he should live
in great misery, and be putt to great slavery for ever. Which practice
one king at a certain time considering, by good advise: (for all the other,
though they knew that fashion, yet through negligence and pleasures of their
present felicity, cared not for it,) took resolute order with him self how
to prevent this misery: which was by this means. He saved every day great
sommes of money from his superfluities, and idle expe^ces, and so, secretly
made over before hand a great treasure unto that yland, wheru^to he was in
danger daily to be sent. And when the time came, that I^ deed they deposed
him from his kingedome, and turned him away naked, as they had done the other
before: he went to the yland with joy and confidence, where his treasure lay:
and was received there, with exceeding great triumph: and placed presently in
greater glory, than ever he was before.

This parable teaches as much as possibly may be said in this point. For the
city The application of this pa rabble.
or common wealth is this present world, which aduauncethe to authority,
poor men: that is, such as come naked into this life: and upon the sudden
when they look least for it, does it pull them down again, and turns them
of naked into their graves, and so into an other world: where bringing no
treasure of good works with them, they are like to find little favor, but
rather eternal misery. The wise king that prevented this calamity, is he,
which in time of wealth in this life (according to the cou^sayll of Christ)
Luc. 12.
do the seek to lay up treasure in heaven by alms deeds and other, good
works, against the day of his death, when he must be banished hence naked,
as all the princes of that city were. At which time, if their good deeds do
follow them (as God promyssethe) Apo. 14.
shall they be happy men, and placed in much Mat. 25.
more glory, than ever this world was able to give them: But if they come
without oil in their lamps: then is there nothing for the^ to expect, but
nescio vos: I know you not. And Mat. 25.
when they are known: Ite (...) in ignem aeternum, go you accursed into fire
everlasting.

Of the fovverthe impediment: which is, to much presuming of the mercy of
God.

CHAP. IIII.
THere are a certain kind of people in the world, who will not take the
pains to think of, or to allege any of the said impedime^tes before but have
a shorter way for all, and more plausrble, as it seems to the^: And that is,
to lay the whole matter upon the back of Christ him self, and to answer what
soever you can say against them, with this onclye sentence: God is merciful.
Of these men Christ complayneth greeuouslie by the prophet, sayeing: Supra
dorsum meum fabricauerunt peccatores, Psa. 118.
prolongauerunt iniquitatem: Sinners have buylt upon my back, they have
prolo^ged Building on gods back.
their iniquity. By which words he signifies, that prolonging of our
iniquities, in hope of gods mercy, is to buyld our sins on his back. But
what follows? will God bear it? no verlie: for the next words ensewing are:
Dominus iustus, concidet ceruices peccatorum: God is just, he will cut the
necks of sinners. Here are two coolyng cards, for the two warm imaginations
before. Mean you (Sir) to prolong your iniquity, for that God is merciful?
remember also, that he is just, says the prophet. Are ye gotten up, upon the
back of God, to make your nest of sin there? take heed: for he will fetch
you down again, and break your neck downward, except ye repent: for that
in deed there is no one thing which may be so injurious to God, as to make
him the foundation of our sinful life, which lost his own life for the
extinguishing of sin.

But you will say perhaps: and is not How God is both merciful and just.
God then merciful? yes truly (dear brother,) he is most merciful, and
there is nether end nor measure of his mercy: he is even mercy it self: it
is his nature and essence: and he can no more leave to be merciful, than he
can leave to be God. But yet (as the prophet here says) he is just also. We
must not so remember his mercy, as we forgett his justice. Dulcis and rectus
dominus. Our lord is sweet, but yet upright and just too, says David: And in
the same place, all the vvayes Psalm. 24.
of our lord are mercy and truth: Which words Ser. 52. paruoru^. The two
feet of God.
holy Barnard expounding in a certain sermon of his, says thus: there be
two feet of our lord, whereby he walks his ways: That is, mercy and
truth: And God fastneth both these feet upon the hearts of them which
turn unto him. And every sinner that will truly convert him self, must
lay hand fast on both these feet. For if he should lay hands on mercy
only, letting pass truth and justice: he would perish by presumption. And
on the other side, if he should apprehend justice only, without mercy: he
would perish by desperation. To the end therefore that he may be saved: he must
humbly fall down and kiss both these feet: that in respect of gods justice
he may retain fear: and in respect of his mercy, he may eonceiue hope. And
in an other Ser. 6. in cant.
place: happy is that soul, upon which our lord Jesus Christ has placed
both his feet. I will not sing unto thee, Judgment alone, Psa. 110
nor yet mercy alone (my God:) but I will sing unto thee, with the prophet
David, mercy Psa. 148.
and judgment joined together. And I will never Tract. 33. in John.
forgett these iustifications of thine.



S. Austen handles this point most excellently in diverse places of his
works. Let them mark (says he) which love so much mercy and gentleness
in our lord: let them mark (I say) and fear also his truth. For (as the
prophet says) God is both sweet and just. Do thou love that he is
sweet? Psalm. 24.
fear also that he is just. As a sweet lord he said, I have held my peace at
your sins: But as a just lord he adds. And think you that I uvill hold my
peace still? God is merciful, Psa. 102.
and full of mercies, say you: it is most certain: yea add unto yt, that he
bears long. But yet fear that which comes in the verses end, and verax:
That is, he is also true and just. There be two things whereby sinners do Two
dangers of sinners.
stand in danger: the one, in hoping to much, (which is presumption:) the
other, in hoping to little, which is desperation. Who is deceived by hoping to
much? He which says to him self, God is a good God: a merciful God: and
therefore I will do what pleases me, and why so? because God is a merciful
god: a good god: a gentle God. These men run into danger by hoping to much.
Who are in danger by despair? those, which seeing their sins grievous, and
thinking yt now impossible to be perdoned, say within them selves: well, we
are once to be damned: why do not we then, what soever pleases us best in
this life: these men are murdered by desperation: the other by hope: what
therefore does God for gaininge of both these men? To him which is in danger
by hope, he says: Do not say with thy self: the (...) of God is great,
he vuill be merciful to the multitude Eccle 5.
of my sins: for the face of his uvrathe is upon sinners. To him that is in
danger by desperation he says:

At what time soever a sinner shall turn him self to me, I vvil forgett
Ezec. 18
his iniquities: Thus far S. Austen, beside much more which he adds in
the same place, touching the great peril and folly of those, which upon
vain hope of gods mercy do persevere in their evil life.

It is a very evil consequent and most unjust kind of reasoning, to say:
that for so much as God is merciful and long suffering, therefore will I abuse
his mercy, and continue in my wickedness. The scripture teaches us not to
reason so, but rather quite contrary. God is merciful, and expects my
conversion, and the longer he expects, the more grievous will be his
punishment when it comes, if I neglect this patience. And therefore I ought
presently to accept of his mercy. So reasons, S. Paul, which says, Romans
2.
do thou contemn the riches of his long suffering, and gentleness? Do
thou not know that the patience of God toward thee, is used to bring the to
repentance? But thou through the hardness of thy heart, and irrepe^tant mind,
do hoarde up to thy self wrath, in the day of vengeance, at the
revelation of gods just judgment.

In which words S. Paul signifies, that the longer that God suffers us
with patience in our wickedness, the greater heap of vengeance does he gather
against us, if we persist obstinate in the same. Tract. 33. in Joan.
Whereto S. Austen adds an other consideration of great dread and fear: and
that is, if he offer thee grace (says he) to day: thou know not whether he
will do it to morrow or no. If he give thee life and memory this week: thou
know not whether thou shall enjoy it, the next week or no.



The holy prophet beginning his seuentithe Gods goodness nothing helps those
that persevere in finne.
and second Psalm of the dangerous prosperity of worldly men, uses these
words of admiration: Hovu good a God, is the God of Israel unto them that be
of a right heart? And yet in all that Psalm, he does nothing else but show the
heavy justice of God toward Psa. 72.
the wicked, even when he gives the most prosperities, and worldly wealth:
and his conclusion is: behold (o Lord) they shall perish uvhich depart from
thee: thou have destroyed all those that have broken their faith of vvedlocke
vuith the. By which is signified, that, how good soever God be unto the just:
yet that pertayneth nothing to the relief of the wicked, who are to receive
just vengeance at his hands, amyddest the greatest mercies, bestowed Psa. 33.
upon the godly. The eyes of our Lord are upon the just, (says the same
prophet,) and his ears are bent to hear their praeyers: but the face of our
Lord is upon them that do evil, to destroy their memory, from ovvt the
earth.

It was an old practice of deceyuing prophettes, resisted strongly by the
prophettes of God, to cry, peace peace, unto wicked me^: when in deed their
was nothing toward Ier. 6. 8.
them but danger, sword and destruction, as the true prophets fortolde, and
as the event proved. Wherefore, the prophet David gives Ezec. 13.
us, a notable and sure rule to govern our hope and confidence withal,
sacrificate sacrificium iustitiae, and sperate in domino, do you sacrifice
unto God the sacrifice of righteousness, and then trust in him. VVherwith S.
John agrees when he says, if our heart or conscience 1. Io. 3.
do not reprehend us for wicked life: then have we confidence with God: as
who would say, if our conscience be guyltie of lewd and wicked life, and we
resolved to dwell and continue therein: then in vain have we confidence in the
mercyes of God, unto whose just judgment we stand subject for our wickedness.

It is most wounderfull, and dreadful to The severity of gods punisheme^t
upon sin.
consider, how God has used him self toward his best beloved in this
world, upon offense given by occasion of sin: how easelye he has changed
countenance: how soon he has brocken of frendshype: how straightly he has
taken account: and how seuerelye The Angels.
he has punished. The Angels that he created with so great care and love,
and to whom he imparted so singular privileges, of all kind of perfections,
as he made them almost very Esa. 14.
gods, (in a certain manner:) committed but only one sin of pride,
against his majesty, and that only in thought, as divines do hold: and yet
presently, all that good will and favor was changed into justice: and that
also so severe, as they were thrown down to eternal torments, without
redemption, 2. Pet. 2.
chayned for ever, to abide the rigor Ep. Iud.
of hell fire and intolerable darkness.

After this, God made him self an other Adam and Eve.
new free^de of flesh and blood, which was our father Adam in paradise:
where God conuersed with him, so friendly and familiarlie, as is most
wounderfull to considere: he called him, he talked with him, he made all
creatures in the world subject unto him: he brought them all before him, to the
end that he, and not God, should give them their names: he made a mate and
companion for him: he blessed them both: and finally, showed all possible
tokens of love, that might be. But what ensewed? Adam committed but one sin:
and that, at the entisement of an other: and that also a sin of small
importance, (as it may seem to man's reason,) being but the eating of an aple
forbidden: And yet the matter was no sooner done, but all friendship was broken
between God and him: he was thrust out of paradise, condemned to perpetuell
misery, and all his prosperity to eternal damnation, together with him
self, if he had not repented. And how severely this grievous sentence was
executed afterward, may appear by the infinite millions that went to hell
for this sin, for the space of sower thousand years, that passed before it
was ransomed: which finally could not be done, but by the coming down of
gods own son, the second person in Trinity, into this flesh: and by his
intolerable sufferinges, and death in the same.

The two miracles of the world, Moses Moyse^s and Aaron
and Aaron, were of singular authority and favor with God: in so much as
they could obtain any thing at his hands for other Nu^. 20. 27. 33.
men: And yet, when they offended God once them selves, at the waters of
contradiction in Deu. 10. 32. 34.
the desert of Sin, for that they dowted somewhat of the miracle promised to
them from God, and thereby did dishonor his majesty before the people, as he
says: they were presently rebuked most sharpelye for the same: and thoghe
they repented hartilye that offense: and so, obtained remission of the fault or
guilt: yet was there laid upon them a grievous punishment for the same: and
that was, that they should not enter them selves into the land of promise: but
should dye when they came within the sight thereof. And albeit they entreated
God most earnestly for the release of this penance: yet could they never
obtain the same at his hands: but always he answered them: seeing you have
dishonored me before the people, you shall dye for it, and shall not enter
into the land of promise.

In what special great favor was Saul Saul.
with God, when he chose him to be the first king of his people: caused Samuel
the prophet 1. Re. 10 and 11.
so much to honor him, and to anoint him prince upon gods own inheritance
as Act. 13.
he calls it? when he commended him so much, and took such tender care
over him? An yet afterwad, for that he bracke gods commandment in reserving
certain spoils of war, which he should have destroyed: 1. Re. 13. 15. 16.
yea, though he reserved them to honor God withal, as he pretended: yet was
he presently cast of by God, degraded of his dignity, given over to the
hands of an evil 1. Re. 16
spirit, brought to infinite miseries, (thoghe he shifted out for a time,) and
finally so forsaken 1. Re. 31.
and abandoned by God, as he slew him self, his sons were crucified on a
cross by 1. Par. 10
his enemies, and all his family and lineage extinguished for ever.

David was the chosen and dear friend David.
of God, and honored with the title of one that was according to gods own
heart, But yet, 2. Re. 12.
as soon as he had sinned: the prophet Nathan was sent to denounce gods heavy
displeasure and punishment upon him. And so it ensued, not withstanding his
great, and voluntary penance that him self added for the Psalm. 34.
pacifieing of gods wrath, by fasting, prayer, 68. 108.
weeping, wearing of sack, eating of ashes, and 101.
the like. By which is evident, that how great Psalm. 29.
gods mercy is to the that fear him: so great is his justice to them that
offend him.

The scripture has infinite examples of Genesis 4.
this matter, as the reiection of Cain and his posterity straight upon his
murder. The pitiful Gene. 8.
drowning of the whole world in the time of Noe. The dreadful consuming of
Sodom Genesis 19.
and Gomorra, with the cities about yt, by (...) and brimston: the sending
down quick Number. 16.
to hell of Chore, Dathan and Abyron, with the slaughter of two hundred and
fifty 1. Le. 10.
their adherents, for rebellion against Moses and Aaron: The sudden killing
of Nadab and Abiu, sons of Aaron, and chosen priests, for once offering of
other fire on the Altar than was appointed them. The most terrible striking
dead of Ananias and Saphira, for retaining Act. 5.
some part of their own goods, by deceit, from the Apostles: with many mo
such examples, which the scripture does recounte.

And for the greeuousnes of gods justice, The heaviness of gods hand
and heaviness of his hand, when it lights upon us, though it may appear
sufficiently by all these examples before alleged, wherein the particular
punishementes (as you see) are most rigorous: yet will I repeat one act of God
more, out of the scripture, which expresses the same in wounderfull manner. It
is well known that Benjamin among all the twelve sons of Jacob, was the
dearest unto his father, Genesis 42 43.
as appears in the book of genesis, and therefore also greatly respected by
God: and his tribe placed in the best part of all the land of promise, upon the
division thereof, having Jerusalem, Iosu. 18.
Jericho, and other the best cities within it. Yet notwithstanding for one
only sin committed by certain private men in the city of Gabaa, upon the
wife of a leuit, God punished the whole tribe, in this order, Iudi. 19. 20.
as the scripture recounteth. He caused all the other eleven tribes to rise
against them: and first, to come to the house of God in Silo, to ask his
advise, and follow his direction in this war against their brethren. And
thence having by gods appointement entered battle twice with the tribe of
Benjamin, the third day God gave them so great a victory, as they slew all
the living creatures, within the compass of that tribe, except only six
hundred men that escaped away into the desert: the rest were slain both man,
woman, children, and infantes, together with all the beasts: and cattall, and
all the cities, villages, and howses burnt with fire: And all this, for one
sin committed only at one time, with one woman.

And who will not then confess with Moy Deu. 10.
ses, that God is a just God, a great God, and a terrible God? who will not
confess with S. Paul, Heb. 10.
It is horrible to fall into the hands of the living God? Who will not say
with holy David: A Iuditiis tuis timui: I have feared at the remembrance Psa.
118.
of thy judgments. If God would not spare the destroyeing of a whole tribe
for one sin only: if he would not perdon Chore, Dathan, and Abiron for
once: the sons of Aaron for once: Ananias, and Saphira, for once: if he would
not forgive Esau, though he demanded it with tears, as S. Paul says: if he
would not remitt the punisheme^t of one Heb. 12.
fault to Moses and Aaron, though they asked it with great instance: if he
would not forgive one proud cogitation, unto the Angels: nor one eatinge of
an apple unto Adam, without infinite punishment: nor would not pass over the
cup of affliction from his own son, though he asked it thrice upon
hysknees, with the sweat of blood and water: what reason have thou to think
that he Mat. 26.
will let pass so many sins of thine unpunished? what cause have thou to
induce the imagination, that he will deal extraordinarily with thee, and
break the course of his justice for thy sake? art thou better the^ those whom
I have named? have thou any privilege from God above them?

If thou would consider the great and Great and strange effects of gods
justice.
strange effects of gods justice, which we see daily executed in the world:
thou should have little cause to persuade thy self so favorably, or rather
to flatter thy self so daugerouslie, as thou do. We see that,
notwithstanding gods mercy, yea after the death and passion of Christ our
Savior, for saving of the whole world: yet so many infinite millions to be
damned daily, by the justice of God: so many infideles, heathens, Jews and
Turks, that remain in the darkness of their own ignorance: and among
Christians so many hereti ques and misbeleuers: and among Catholics so many
evil lyuers, as Christ truly said, that few were they which Ma. 7. 20
should be saved: albeit his death was paid for all, if they made not them
selves unworthy thereof. And before the coming of our Savior much more we
see, that all the world went a-wrye to da^natio^ for many thousand years
together, excepting a few Jews, which were the people of God. And yet among
them also, the greater part perhaps were not saved, as may be coniectured by
the speeches of the prophets from time to time: and specially by the sayeings
of Christ to the pharisees and other rulers thereof. Now then, if God for the
satisfieing of his justice, could let so many millio^s perish, through
their own sins, as he does also now daily permit, without any prejudice
or impechement to his mercy: why may not he also damn thee, for thy sins,
notwithstanding his mercy, seeing thou do not only co^mitt them without
fear, but also do confidentlie persist in the same?

But here perhaps some man may say, Whether gods mercy be greater than his
justice.
if this be so, that God is so severe in punishment of every sin: and that
he damnethe so many thousands for one that he saves: how is it true, that the
mercies of God are above all his other vuoorkes, (as the scripture says,) and
that it passes and exalts it self above his Psalm. 14.
judgment? for if the number of the damned Iac. 2.
do exceed so much the number of those which are saved: it seems that the
work of justice does pass the work of mercy. To which I answer, that
touching the small number of those that are saved, and infinite quantity of
such as are damned, we may in no wise dowte: for that beside all other
prophets, Christ our Savior has made the Matt. 7. and 20.
matter certain, and out of question. We have to see therefore, how,
notwithstanding all this, the mercy of God does exceed his other worckes.

And first, his mercy may be said to exceed, for that, all our salvation is
of his mercy, and our damnation from our selves, as from the first and
principal causes thereof, according to the sayeing of God, by the prophet,
Perditio tua Israel: taniummodo in me auxilium tuum. Thy only perdition is
from thy self Ose. 13.
(o Israel) and thy assistance to do good, is only from me.

So that, as we must acknowledge gods grace and mercy for the author of every
good thought, and act that we do, and consequenlie ascribe all our salvation
unto him: so none of our evil acts (for which we are damned) do proceed
from him, but only from our selves, and so he is no cause at all of our
damnation: and in this does his mercy exceed his justice.

Secondly his mercy does exceed, in 2.
that he desires all men to be saved, as S. Paul 1. Ti. 2.
teaches, and him self protests, when he says, I will not the death of
a sinner, but rather Eze. 18.
that he turn from his uvickednes and live. And again by the prophet Jeremy,
he co^playneth greeuouslie that men will not accept of his mercy offered.
Turn from your uvicked vvayes Iere. 3.
(says he,) why uvill ye dye, you house of Isreal? By which appears that
he offers his mercy most willingly and freely to all, but uses his
justice only upon necessity (as it were:) constrained thereunto hy our
obstinate behauioure. This, Christ signifies more plainly, when he says to
Jerusalem: O Jerusalem, Mat. 25.
Jerusalem, which kyllest the prophets: and stonest them to death that are
sent unto thee: how often would I have gathered thy children together, as the
hen clocketh her chickyns underneath her wings, but thou would not?
behold thy house (for this cause) shall be made desert, and left without
children.

Here you see thee mercy of God often offered unto the Jews: but, for that
they refused it, he was enforced (in a certain manner) to pronounce this heavy
sentence of destruction and desolatio^ upon them: which he fullsilled within
forty, or fifty years after, Joseph de bello Iud. li. 1. c. 1. 2. 3.
by the hands of Titus, and Vespasian, Emperors of Rome: who utterly
discomfaited the city of Jerusalem, and whole nation of Jews, whom we see
dispersed over the world at this day in bondage, both of body and soul.
Which work of gods Justice, thoghe it be most terrible: yet was his mercy
greater to them, as appears by Christ's words, if they had not rejected the
son.

Thirdly, his mercy exceeds his Justice, 3.
even toward the damned them selves: in that he used many means to save them
in this life, by giving them freewill, and assisting the same with his grace to
do good: by moving them inwardly with infinite good inspirations: by
alluringe them owtwardlie, with exhortatio^s, promises, examples of other, as
also by sickness, adversities, and other gentle corrections: by geuinge them
space to repent, with occasions, opportunities, and excitations unto the same:
by threatening them eternal death, if they repented not. All which things
being effects of mercy, and goodness toward; them: they must needs confess
amyddest their greatest fury, and torments, that his judgments are true,
and justified in them selves, and no ways to be compared with the greatness of
his mercies.

By this then we see that to be true, which Psalm. 83.
the prophet says, Misericordiam and veritatem diligit dominus: God loves
mercy and truth. And again: Mercy and truth have met together: Justice
and peace have kyssed them selves. Psa. 84.
We see the reason why the same prophet Psa. 100
protests of him self: I will sing unto thee mercy and judgment (o Lord,)
not mercy alone, nor judgment alone, but mercy and judgment together: that
is, I will not so presume of thy mercy, as I will not fear thy judgment: nor
will I so fear of thy judgment, as I will ever despair of thy mercy The
fear of Gods judgment is always to be joined with our confidence in gods
mercy: yea in very saints them selves, as David says. But what fear? that
fear truly, which the scripture Psa. 33.
describes, when it says: the fear of our Lord expels sin: the fear
of God Ec. le. 1.
hates all evil: he that fears God, neglects Prou. 1.
nothing: he that fears God will turn Eccle. 7.
and look into his own heart: he that fears Eccl. 15.
God will do good works. They which Eccle. 7.
fear God, will not be incredulous to that Eccle. 2.
which he say (...): but will keep his ways, and seek out the things that
are pleasant unto him: They will prepare their (...), and sanctify their
sowles in his sight.



This is the description of the true fear The pray se of true fear.
of God, set down by the scripture. This is the description of that fear,
which is so much commended and commanded in every part and parcel of gods
word: Of that fear (I say) which is called (...) vitae, radix prudentiae,
Pro. 14.
corona, and plenitudo sapientia gloria and gloriatio, beatum donum: That is,
the fountain of life, Eccle. 1.
the root of prudence, the crown and fulness of 15.
wisdom, the glory and gloriation of a Christian man, a happy gift.



Of him that has this fear the scripture says, happy is the Psa. 111.
man vuhiche fears our Lord, for he will place his mind upon his
commandments. And again, the man that fears god shall be happy at the
Eccle. 1.
last end, and shall be blessed at the day of his death. Finally, of such as
have this fear, the scripture says, that God is their foundation: God has
prepared great multitude Psalm. 24.
of sweetness for them: God has purchased Psalm. 30.
them an inheritance: God is as merciful Psalm. 60.
to them, as the father is merciful unto his Psalm. 62.
children: And (to conclude) Voluntatem time^tium Psa. 144
se faciet: God will do the will of those that fear him with this fear.

This holy fear had good Job, when he said to god: I feared all my works:
And he yealdeth Job. 9.
the reason thereof: For that I knevve that thou sparest not him that offends
thee. This fear backed the other of whom the prophet says: The sinner has
exaspered God, by sayeing, Psalm. 9.
that god will not take acco^pte of his doeings, in the multitude of wrath.
Thy judgments (o Lord) are removed from his sight. And again: wherefore has
the wicked man styrred up god against him self, by sayeing god will not take
account of my doeyngs.

yt is a great wickedness (no dowt) and a great exasperation of God against us,
to take the one half of gods nature from him, which is: to make him merciful
without justice: and to live so, as though God would take no account of our
life: whereas he has protested most earnestly the contrary, sayeing that he
is a hard and eouetous man, which will not be Matt. 25
co^te^t to receive his own again, but also will Luc. 16.
have usury: that he will have a reckening of all his goods lent us: that he
will have Matt. 7.
fruit for all his labors bestowed upon us: Luc. 13.
and finally, that he will have account for every Mat. 12.
word that we have spoken.

Christ in the three score and eight psalm, Mat. 27.
which in sundry places of the gospel he interprets Marc. 15
to be written of him self, among other dreadful curses, which he sets
down, Ioh. 2.
against the reprobate, he has these: let their eyes be daseled in such
sort as they may not see: power owte thy wrath (my father) upon them: let
the fury of thy vengeance take hand fast on them: add inquitie upon their
iniquity: and let him not enter into thy justice: Let them be blotted out of
the book of life: and let them not be enrolled together with the just.

Here (lo) we see, that the greatest curse, which God can lay upon us, next
before our blotting out of the book of life, is to suffer us to be so blinded,
as to add iniquity upon iniquity, and not to enter into consideration of his
justice. For which D. Tho, secunda secundae. q. 14. art. 1 2 3.
cause also, this confident kind of sinning upon hope of gods mercy, is
accounted by divines, for the first of the six grievous sins against the holy
ghost, which our Savior in the gospel, signifies, to be so hardly Why
presumption is a sin against the holieghoste.
perdoned unto men by his father: and the reason why they call this a sin
against the hoyle ghost, is, for that it rejects willfullye one of the
principal means left by the ho lie ghost, to retire us from sin, which is
the fear and respect of gods justice upon sinners.

Wherefore, to conclude this matter of presumption: me think, we may use the
same kind of argument touching the fear of Romans 13
gods justice, as S. Paul uses to the Romans of the fear of gods ministers,
which are temporal princes: would thou not fear the power of a temporal
prince, says he? do well then: and thou shall not only not fear, but also
receive laud and praise therefore. But if thou do evil: then fear. For he
bears not the swoorde without a cause.

In like sort may we say to those good fellows, which make god so merciful,
as no man ought to fear his justice. Would ye not fear (my brethren) the
justice of god in punishment? live virtuously then: and you shall be as void
of fear, as lions are fayeth the wiseman: Prou. 28 1. Ioh. 4.
For that, perfect charity expels fear. But if you live wickedlie: then
have you cause to fear: for god called not him self a just judge for nothing.
2. Ti. 4.


If the matter had been so secure, as many men by flattery do persuade
themselves it is: S. Peter would never have said unto Christianes now baptized:
Walk you in fear, 1. Pet. 1
during the time of this your earthelie habitatio^. Nor S. Paul to the same
men: Work your Philip. 2
own salvation in fear and tremblyng. But here perhaps, some men will
ask, how then An objection ansvvered.
does the same Apostle in an other place say: That God has not given us the
spirit of fear, but 2. Ti. 1.
of virtue, love, and, sobriety? to which I answer: that our spirit is not a
spirit of servile fear: that is, to live in fear, only for dread of
Servile fear, and the fear of children.
punishment, without love: but a spirit of love joined with the fear of
children, whereby they fear to offend their father, not only in respect of
his punishment, but principally for his goodness toward them, and benefits
Romans 8.
bestowed upon them. This S. Paul declares playnlie to the Romans, putting
the difference between servile fear, and the fear of childeren: you have not
received again the spirit of servitude (says he) in fear, but the spirit
of adoption of children, vvherby vue cry to God, Abha father. He says here
to the Romans: you have not received again the spirit of servitude in fear,
for that their former spirit, (being gentiles,) was only in How the fear
of gentiles was servile.
servile fear: for that they honored and adored their Idols, not for any
love they bear unto them, being so infinite as they were, and such notable
lewdnes reported of the (I mean of Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and the like:) but
only for fear of hurt from them, if they did not serve, and adore the same.

Saint Peter also in one sentence expounds 1. Pet. 3.
all this matter. For having said timoreincorum ne timueritis, fear not their
fear: meaning of the servile fear of wicked men: he adds presently,
Dominu^ autem Christum sanctificate in cordibus vesiris etc cum modestia, and
timore, conscientiam habentes bonam: That is, do you sanctify our Lord Jesus
Christ in your hearts: having a good conscience, with modesty and fear.

So that the spirit of servile fear, which is grounded only upon respect of
punisheme^t, is forbidden us: but the loving fear of children is commanded.
And yet also about this, are there two things to be noted.

The first, that albeit the spirit of servile Two things to be noted.
fear be forbidden us: (especially when we are now entered into the service
of God,) yet is it most profitable for sinners, and such as yet but begin to
serve God: for that it moves them to repentance, and to look about them: for
which cause it is called by the wyseman, the beginning of vvisdome. And
therefore, Prou. 1.
both Jonas to the Ninevites, and S. John Baptist Ion. 13.
to the jews, and all the prophets to sinners Matt. 3.
have used to stir up this fear, by threatening the dangers and
punishementes which were imminent to them, if they repented not. But yet
afterward, when men are converted to God, and do go forward in his service:
they change every day this seruyle fear into love, until they arrive at
last, unto that state whereof S. John says, that 1. Ioh. 4.
perfect love, or charity expels fear. Whereupon Tract. 9. in ep. 1. Ioh.
S. Austen says, that fear is the servant sent before to prepare place in
our hearts, for his mystres, which is charity: Who being once entered in,
and perfectly placed: fear goes owte again, and gives place unto the same.
But where this fear never enters at all, there, is it impossible for
charity ever to come and dwell, fayeth this holy father.

The second thing to be noted is, that albeyt this fear of punishment be not
in very perfect men, or at leastwyse, is less in them, than in others, as S.
John teaches: yet being joined with love and reverence: (as it ought to be:
(it is most profitable, and necessary for all common Christianes, whose life
is not so perfect, nor charity so great, as that perfection whereof S. John
speakethe. This appears by that, that Christ persuaded also this fear, even
unto his Apostles, sayeing, fear you him, which after he (...) the body,
has power (...) to send both body and Luc. 12.
soul unto hell fire: this I say (...) you fear him. Mat. 10.
The same does S. Paul to the (...), who were good Christians, layeing down
first the justice of God, and thereupon persuading them to fear: All we (says
he) must 2. Co. 5.
be preseted before the tribunal seat of Christ, to receive, each man his
proper deserts, according as he has done, good or evil in this life. And for
that we know this: we do persuade the fear of our Lord unto men.

Nay (that which is more) S. Paul testifies, that notwithstanding all his
favors received from God: he retained yet him self this fear of Gods
justice, as appears by those words of his: I do chastyne my body, and do
bring 1. Co. 9.
it into servitude, least porchaunce, when I have preached to other, I become
a reprobate my self.

Now (my friend) if S. Paul stood in awe The conclusion.
of the justice of God notwitsta^ding his Apostleshipp: and that he was guilty
to him self 1. Cor. 4.
of no one sin or offense, as he protests: what ought thou to be, whose
conscience remains guyltie of so many misdeedes, and wickedness? This know
you (says S. Paul) Ephe. 5.
that no fornicator, unclean person, couetouse man, or the like can have
inheritance in the kingdom of Christ. And immediately after, as thoghe this
had not been sufficient, he adds, for preventing the folly of sinners, which
flatter them selves: Let no man deceive you, uvith vain words: for the
wrath of God comes for these things, upon the children of unbelief. Be not
you therefore partakers of them: As if he should say, those that flatter you
and say, tushe God is merciful, and will perdone easily all these and like
sins: these men deceive you (says S. Paul), for that the wrath and
vengeance of God lyghteth upon the children of unbelief, for these matters:
that is, upon those which will not believe gods justice, nor his threats
against sin: but presuming of his mercy do persevere in the same, until
upon the sudden, gods wrath do rushe upon them: and then is it toolate to
amend. Wherefore (says he) if you be wise: be not partakers of their folly:
but amend your lives presently, while you have time. And this admonition of S.
Paul shall be sufficient to end this chapter: against all those that refuse,
or defer their resolution of amendment, upon vain hope of gods perdon, or
tolleration.

Of the fyueth impediment: vuhich is, delay of resolution from time to time,
upon hope to do it better, or with more case, afterward.

CHAP. V.
Tthe reasons hitherto alleged, might seem (I think) sufficient to a
reasonable man, for proving the necessity of this resolution, we talk of: and
for removing the impedimentes that let the same. But yet, for that (as the
wiseman Prou. 18
says) he which is minded to break with his friend, seeks occasions how to
do yt with some color and show: there be many in the world, who having no
other excuse of their breaking and holding of from God, do seek to cover it
with this pretense, that they mean, by his grace, to amend all in time: And
this time is driven of from day to day, until God, in whose hands only
the momentes of time are, do shutt them owte of all time, and do send them to
pains eternal without time, for that they abused the singular benefit of
time in this world.

This is one of the greatest and most dangerous deceites, and yet the most
ordinary and universal, that the enemy of mankind does use toward the
children of Adam: and I dare say boldlye, that more do perish by this
deceyte, than by all his other guiles and subtilities besides. He well knows
the force The causes why the devil persuadeth us to delay
of this snare above all others, and therefore urges it so much unto every
man. He considers, better than we do, the importance of delay, in a matter
so weighty, as is our conversion, and salvation: he is not ignorant how one
sin draws on an other: how he that is not fit to day, will be less fit
to morrow: how custom grows, into nature: how old diseases are hardly
cured: how God withdraws his grace: how his justice is ready to punish
every sin: how by delay we exasperate the same, and heap vengeance on our
own heads, as S. Paul says. He is privy to the uncertainty and perils of
our life: to the dangerous chances we pass through: Romans 2.
to the impedimentes that will come daily more and more, to let our
conversion. All this he knows, and well considers, and for that cause
persuadeth so many to delay as he does. For being not able any longer to
blind the understanding of many Christians, but that they must needs see
clearlie, the necessity, and utility of this resolution, and that all
impedimentes in the world are but trifles, and mere deceites, which keep
back from the same: he runnethe to this only refuge, that is, to persuade
men, that they defer a little, and that in time to come they shall have better
occasion and opportunity to do yt than presentely they have.

This, S. Austen proved in his conversion, as him self writes. For that after
he was Li 8. con fess ca 7. 12.
persuaded, that no salvation could be unto, him, but by change and amendment
of his life: yet the enemy held him, for a time, in delay, sayeing unto him:
yet a little stay: yet defer for a time: Thereby (as he says) to bind him
more fast in the custom of sin, until, by the omnipotent power of gods
grace, and his own most earnest endeavor, he bracke vyolentlie from him,
crieing to God, ^hie shall I longer say to morouv to morovv? why shall I not
do it even at this instant? And so he did, even in his very yowthe, living
afterward a most holy and severe Christian life.

But if we will discover yet further, the The causes which make our conversion
harder by delaie
greatness and peril of this deceyt: let us consider the causes that may let
our resolution and conversion at this present: and we shall see them all
increased, and strengthened by delay: and confequentlie, the matter made more
hard and difficult, for the time to come, than now it is. For first (as I have
said) the 1.
continuance of sin brings custom: which once having gotten prescription
upon us, is so hard to remove, as by experience we prove daily in all habites
that have taken root within us. Who can remove, (for examples sake) without
great difficulty, a long custom of dronkennes? of swearing? or of any other
evil habit, once settled upon us? Secondly, the longer we persist in our 2.
sinful life, the more God plucketh his grace and assistance from us: which
is the only means that makes the way of virtue aeasie unto men. Thirdly,
the power, and kingdom 3.
of the devil is more established, and confirmed in us by continuance: and so,
the more harder to be removed. Fowerthlie, the 4.
liberty of our free will is more and more weakened, and daunted by
frequentation of sin, though not extinguished. Fiuethlie, 5.
the faculties of our mind, are more corrupted, as the understanding is more
darkened, the will more perverted, the appetite more disordered. Sixtelie and
lastly, our inferior 6.
parts and passions are more styrred up, and strengthened against the rule of
reason, and harder to be repressed, by continuance of time, than they were
before.

Well then, put all this together (my friend) and consider indiffere^tlie
within thy self, whether it be more likely, that thou shall rather make this
resolution hereafter, than now. Hereafter, (I say) when, by longer custom of
sin, the habit shall be more fastyned in thee: the devil more in possession
upon the: gods help further of from thee: thy mind more infe^cted; thy
judgment more weakened: thy good de sires extinguished: thy passions
confirmed: thy body corrupted: thy strength diminished: and all thy whole
common wealth more perverted.

We see by experience, that a shypp The same shevved by comparisons.
which leaketh, is more easilye empted at the beginning, than afterward. We
see, that a ruinous palace, the longer it is let run, the more charge and
labor yt will require in the repayring. We see, that if a man drive in a
nail with a hammer, the more blows he gives to yt, the more hard it is to
pluck it out again. How then think thou to committ sin upon sin, and
by perseverance therein, to find the redress more easy hereafter, than now?
It is written among In prato spirituali sanctoru^ patrum. An exa^. ple.
the lives of old heremites, how that on a time, an Angel shevved to one of
them, in the vvyldernes, a certain good fellow that hevved down vvood, and
having made to him self a great burden to carry thence, laid it on his back:
and for that, it satte uneasy, and pressed him much: he cast it down
again, and put a great deal more unto yt, and then began to lift at yt
again. But when he felt it more heavy than before: he fell into a great
rage, and added tvvyse as much more to yt, thereby to make yt lighter. VVhereat
when this holy man mused much: the Angel told him, that this was a figure
of those in the world, who fynding it somevvhat unpleasant to resist one or
two vices at the beginning, do defer their conversion, and do add
twenty, or forty more unto them: thinking to find the matter more easy
afterward.

Saint Austen expounding the miracle Tract. 491 in Ioh.
of our Savior, in raising Lazarus from death to life, which had been dead
now four days, as the euange list says: examineth Ioh. 11.
the causo why Christ wept, and cried, Matt. 9.
and troubled him self in spirit, before the Luc. 7.
doing of this act, where as he raised other with greater facility. And he
concludes. the mystery to have been, for that Lazarus was now dead four
days, and also buried: which signifies, the four degrees of a sinner: the
first, in voluntary delectation of sin: the second, in consent: the third,
in fulfilling it by work: the fowerth, in continuance or custom thereof:
wherein, who soever is once buried (says this holy father) he is hardly
raised to life again, without a great miracle of God, and many tears of his
own part.

The reason heerof is, that which the wise man says, languor prolixior grauat
medicum, Eccl. 10.
an old sickness does trouble the physician: Breuem autem languorem praecidit
medicus: But the physician cutteth of quickly a new or fresh disease, which
has endured but a little time. The very bones of an old wicked man shall be
replenished with the vices of his Job. 20.
yowthe: (says Job) and they shall sleep with him in the dust, when he goes
to his grave.

We read that Moses, in part of punisheme^t Exo. 32.
to the people, that had sinned in adoring the golden calfe, broke the same in
pieces, and made them drink it: So, the vices, wherein we delyted during our
youth, are so dispersed, by custom, in our bodies and bones: that when old
age do the come on, we can not rid them at our pleasure, without great
difficulty and pain. What folly then is it, to defer our amendment unto
our old age, when we shall have more impedimentes and difficulties, by a
great deal, than we have now?

If it seem hard to thee to do penance now: to fast, to pray, and to take
upon thee other afflictions, which the church prescribes to sinners at
their conversion: how vvilt thou do yt in thy old age? when thy body
shall have more need of cheryshing, than of punishment? If thou find yt
unpleasant to resist thy sins now, and to root them ovvte, after the
continunace of two, three, or four years: what will it be after twenty
years more adjoined unto them? How mad a man vvoldest thou esteem A
comparisou.
him, that trauayling on the way, and having great choice of lustye strong
horses, should let them all go empty, and lay all his carriage upon some one
poor and lean beast, that could skarse bear yt self, and much less stand
under so many bags cast upon yt? And surely no less unreasonable is that
man, who passing over Idly the lusty days, and times of his life,
reserueth all the labor and travail unto feeble old age.

But to let pass the folly of this deceyte, Ingratitnde.
tell me, (good Christian) what lngratitude and injustice is this, toward
God, having received so many benefits from him all ready, and expecting so
greare a pay, as the kingdom of heaven is, for thy service: to appoint out,
notwithstanding, the least, and last, and worst part of thy life unto his
service: and that, whereof thou art most uncertain, whether it shall ever be,
or never, or whether God will accept yt, when it comes? He is accursed by the
prophet, which having whole and sownde cattall, does offer unto God the lame,
or halting part thereof. Malac. 1
How much more shall thou be accursed, that having so many days of youth,
strength, and vigoure, do appoint unto gods service, only thy lymping
old age? In the law Deu. 25.
it was forbydde^, under a most severe threate, for any man to have two
measures in his house for his neighbor: one greater, to his friend: and an
other lesser, for other men. And yet thou art not ashamed, to use two measures
of thy life, most unequal, in prejudice of thy Lord and God: whereby thou
alottest to him, a little, short, maimed, and uncertain time: and unto his
enemy the greatest, the fairest, the surest part thereof.

O dear brother, what reason is there, why God should thus be used at thy
hands? what law, justice or equity is there, that after thou have served the
world, flesh, and devil all thy youth, and best days: in the end to come,
and clappe thy old bones, defiled and worn out with sin, in the dyshe of
God? his enemies to have the best, and he the leauinges? His enemies the wine,
and he the lies and dreagges? do thou not remember, that he will have the
fatt and best part offered Leui. 3.
to him? Do thou not think of the punishment Number. 18
of those, which offered the worst Mala. 1.
part of their substance to God? follow the counsel the^ of the holy ghost,
if thou be wise, which warns thee, in these words: Eccle. 5.
be myndefull of thy creator in the days of thy youth, before the time of
affliction come on, and before those years draw near, of which thou shall
say, they please me not.



How many have thou seen cut of in the myddest of their days, whiles they
purposed in time to come, to change their life? How many have come to old age
yt self, and yet then have felt less will of amendment than before? How
many have driven of, even unto the very hour of death, and then least of all
have remembered their own state? but have dyed, as dumme and sensles beasts,
according to the sayeing of holy S. Gregory, The sinner has also this
affliction laid upon him, that when he comes. o dye, he forgets Sermon.
10. de sanctis
him self, uvhich in his life time did forgett God? O, how many examples are
there seen hereof daily? how many worldly men, that have lived in sesualitie:
how many great sinners, that have passed their life in wickedness, do end and
dye, as if they went into some place insensible, where no account, no
reckeninge should be demanded? they take such care in their testamentes for
flesh and blood, and commodities of this world, as if they should live
still, or should have their part of these vanities when they are gone. In
truth, to speak as the matter is, they dye as if there were no immortality
of the soul, and that, in very deed, is their inward persuasion.

But suppose now, that all this were not The loss of merit
so, and that a man might as easily, commodiouselie, yea and as surely also,
convert him self in old age as in youth, and that the matter were also
acceptable enough to God: yet tell me, what great time is their lost in this
delay? what great treasure of merit is there omitted, which might have been
gotten, by labor in gods service? if whiles the captain and other soldiers
did enter a rych A compa rison.
city, to take the spoil, one soldier should say, I will stay and come in
the next day after, when all the spoil is gone: would you not think him
both a coward, and also most unwise? So it is, that Christ our Sauyoure and
all his good soldiers, took the spoil of this life: enryched them selves
with the merits of their labors: carried the same with them as bylles of
exchange, to the bancke of heaven, and there received pay of eternal glory
for them. And is it not great folly and peruersences in us, to pass over this
life without the gayning of any merit at all? Now is the time of fight for
gayning of our crown: now is the day of spoil to seize on o^ur booty now is
the market, to buie the kingdom of heaven: now is the time of running to get
the game and price: now is the day of sowyng, to provide us corn for the
harvest that comes on. If we omit this time: there is no more crown, no
more bootye, no more Pro. 20.
kingdom, no more price, no more harvest to be looked for. For as the
scripture assures us, he that for slouthe will not sow in the winter, shall
beg in the summer, and no man shall give unto him.

But if this consideration of gain can not move thee (gentle reader) as in
deed it ought to do, being of such importance as it is, and irreuocable when
it is once past: yet weyghe with thy self, what obligation and The obli^
gation and charge by delay.
charge thou drawest on thee, by every day which thou deferrest thy
conversion, and lyuest in sin. Thou make each day knottes, which thou must
once undo again: thou heapest that together, which thou must once disperse
again: thou eatest and drinkest that howrelie, which thou must once vomyte up
again: I mean, if the best fall out unto thee: that is, if thou do repent in
time, and God do accept thereof (for other wise, woe be unto thee, for that thou
hoardest (as S. Paul says) Romans (...)
wrath, and vengeance on thine own head) but supposing that thou receive
grace hereafter to repent, which refusest it now: yet (I say) thou have to
weep, for that thou laughest at now: thou have to be heartily sorry for that
wherein thou delytest now: thou have to curse the day wherein thou ever gave
consent to sin, or else thy repentance will do thee no good. This thou
know now, and this thou beleeuest now, or else thou art no Christian. How
then art thou so mad, as to offend God now, both willingly, and
deliberatlie: of whom thou know that thou must once ask pardon with
tears? If thou think he will pardone the: what ingratitude is it to offend
so good a Lord? If thou think he vill not pardone thee: what folly can be
more, than to offend a prince without hope of pardone?

Make thine account now as thou vvilt: if thou never do repent and change
thy life: then every sin thou committest, and every day that thou lyuest
therein, is increase of wrath and vengeance upon thee in Romans 2.
hell, as S. Paul proves. If thou do, by gods mercy, hereafter repent and
turn (for this is not in thy hands:) then must thou one day Satisfaction for
delay.
lament, and bewail, and do penance for this delay, which now thou make:
then must thou make satisfaction to gods justice, either in this life, or in the
life to come, for that which now thou passest over so pleasantly. And this
satisfaction must be so sharp and rigorous, if we believe the ancient
fathers, and counsels of Christ his church: as it must be answerable to the
weight and continuance of thy sins, as I shall have occasion to show in the
second book, talking of satisfaction. So that, by how much the more thou
prolongest, and encreasest thy sin: so much greater must be thy pain and
sorrow in satisfaction. Alto vu^neri diligens and longa adhibenda est medicina:
Li. dela and 1 5 ep. 5. ad cor.
paenitentia crimine minor non sit (says S. Ciprian) A diligent and long
medicine is to be used to a deep sore: and the penance may not be less tha^
the fault.

And the^ he shows in what order it must be: with prayer, with tears, with
waching, with lyeing on the ground, with wearing of hear clothe, and the like.
It is not enoughe (says S. Austen) to change Hom. vlt. and 50. ho.
our manners, and to leave to sin, except we make satisfaction also to God for
our sins past, by sorrowful penance, humble sighs, co^trition of heart, and
giving of Alms. Our body Ep. 27. ad Eustoch.
that has lived in many delytes must be afflicted:

(says S. Ierom:) our long laughing must be recompensed with long weepinge:
our soft lynnen, and fine silk apparel, must be changed into sharp
hearclothe. Finally, Ad virg. lap sam. c. S.
S. Ambrofe agreeing with the rest says, Grandi plagae alta and prolixa opus
est medicina. Grande scelus grandem necessariam habet satisfactionem. Unto a
great wound, a deep and long medicine is needful. A great offense requires
of necessity a great satisfaction.



Mark here (dear brother) that this satisfaction must be both great and
long, and also of necessity. What madness is it then for the, now to enlarge
the wound, knoweing that the medicine must after wards be so paynfull? what
cruelty can be more against thy self, tha^ to drive in thorns into thine
own flesh, which thou must after pull owte again with so many tears? would
thou drink that cup of poisoned liquour for a little pleasure in the taste,
which would cast thee soon after into a burning fever, torment thy bowels
within thee, and either dispache thy life, or put the in great ieoperdie?

But here I know thy refuge will be, as it is to all them, whereof the prophet
says, mentita Psalm. 26.
est iniquitas (...) Iniquity has flattered and lied unto her (...): thy
refuge (I say) will be, The example of the thief sa ued on the cross discussed.
to allege the example of the good thief, saved even at the last hour, upon
the cross, and carried to paradise that same day with Christ, without any
further penance, or satisfaction. This example is greatly noted, and urged by
all those which defer their conversion, as surely it is, and ought to be,
of great comfort to every man, which finds him self now at the last cast,
and therefore commonly tempted by the enemy to despair of gods mercy, which
in no case he ought to do. For the same God which saved that great sinner at
that last hour, ca^ also, (and will) save all them that heartily turn unto
him, even in that last hour. But (alas) many men do flatter and deceive them
selves with misunderstanding, or rather mysvsing of this example.

For we must understand (as S. Austen well notes) that this was but one
particular act of Christ, which makes no general rule: eue^ as we see, that
a temporal prince perdoneth some time a malefactor, when he is come to the
very place of execution: yet were it not for every malefactor to trust
thereupon. For that, this is but an extraordinary act of the prince his
favor, and nether showed, nor promised to all me^. Besides this, this act was
a special miracle reserved for the manifestation of Christ his power and
glory, at that hour upon the cross. Again, this act was upon a most rare
confession made by the thief, in that instant, when all the world forsook
Christ, and even the Apostles them selves, either dowted, or lost their faith
of his godhead. Beside all this, the confession of this thief was at such a
time, as he could nether be baptized, nor have further time of penance. And we
hold: that at a man's first conversion, there is required no other penance, or
satisfaction at all, but only to be baptized, for the gayning of heaven. But
it shall not be amysse perhaps, to put to S. Austens very words upon this
matter. For thus he writes. Ser. 120. de tem.


It is a remedyles peril, when a man gives him self over so much to vices,
as he forgets that he must give account thereof to God! and the reason why I
am of this opinion is, for that it is a great punishment of sin, to have
lost the fear and memory of the judgment to come, etce. But (dearly
beloved) least perhaps, the new felicity of the believing thief on the
cross, do make any of you too secure and remiss: least peradventure some of
you say in his heart, my guyltie conscience shall not trouble nor torment me:
my naughty life shall not make me very sad, for that I see even in a moment
all sins forgeuen unto the thief: we must consider first in that thief, not
only the shortness of his belief and confession, but his devotion, and the
occasion of that time, even when the perfection of the just did staggar.
Seco^dlie, show me the faith of that thief in thy self, and then promise to
thy self his felicity. The devil does put into thy head this security, to
the end he may bring thee to perdition. And it is impossible to number all
them, which have perished by the shadow of this deceitful hope. He decerueth
him self, and makes but a Ieste of his own damnation, which thinks that
gods mercy at the last day shall help or relieve him. It is hateful before
God, when a man, upon confidence of penance in his old age, does sin the
more freely. The happy thief whereof we have spoken, happy (I say) not for
that he laid snares in the way, but for that he took hold of the way it
self in Christ, layeing hands on the pray of life: and after a straung
manner, making a booty of his own death: he (I say) nether did defer the
time of his salvation wittinglie, nether did he deceytfullie put the remedy of
his state, in the last moment of his life: nether did he desperately reseruo
the hope of his redemption unto the hour of his death: nether had he any
knowledge either of religion, or of Christ before that time. For yfhe had:
perhaps he would not have been the last in number among the Apostles, which
was first in the kyndome of heaven.

By these words of S. Austen we are admonyshed, (as you see) that this
particular fact of Christ makes no general rule of remission to all men:
not, for that Christ is not always redye to receive the penitent, as he
promises: but, for that every man has not the time or grace to repent, as he
should, at that hour, according as has been declared before. The general
way that God proposes to all is that, which S. Paul says: Finis The
general way. 2. Co. 11.
secundum opera ipsorum: The end of evil men is according to their works.
Look how they live, and so they dye. To that affect says the prophet. Once
God spoke, and I heard these two things from his mouth. Power belongs to
God: and mercy unto thee, (o Lord) for that thou Psalm. 61.
vviltrender to every man, according to his works. The wise man makes this
plain, sayeing, the way of sinners is paued with stones, and Ec el. 23
their end is hell, darkness, and punishments. Finally, S. Paul makes this
general and peremptory conclusion:

Be not deceived: God is Gala. 6.
not mocked, look what a man sows, and that shall he reap. He that
savveth in flesh shall reap corruption: he that sows in spirit shall reap
life everlasting. In which words, he does not only lay down unto us
the general rule whereto we must trust: But also says further, that to
persuade our selves the contrary thereof, were to mock and abuse God, which
has laid down this law vato us.

Notvvithstanding (as I have said) this That the conversion made at the last
day is insufsicient.
barreth not the mercy of God from using a privilege to some at the very last
cast. But yet miserable is that man, which places the Ancker of his eternal
wealth or vvoe, upon so tyclesome a point as this us. I call it ticlesome,
for that, all divines, which have written of this matter, do speak very
dovvtfullie of the penance or conversion of a man, at the last end. And
although they do not absolutely condemn yt, in all, but do leave it as
uncertain unto gods secret judgment: yet do they incline to the negative
part: and do allege four reasons, for which, that conversion is to be
dovvted, as insufficient for a man's salvation.

The first reason is, for that the extreme The first reason
fear and pains of death, being (as the philosopher says) the most
terrible, of all terrible things, do not permit a man, so to gather his
spirits and senses, at that time, as is required, for the treating of so
weighty a matter with God, as is our conversion and salvation. And if we see
often, that a very good man can not fyxe his mind earnestly upon heavenly
cogitations, at such time as he is troubled with the passions of cholique, or
other sharp diseases: how much less in the anguishes of death can a
worldly man do the same, being vnaequainted with that exercise, and laden
with the guilt of many and great sins, and cloyed with the love, both of
his body, and things belonginge thereunto?

The second reason is, for that, the conversion, The second reason.
which a man makes at the last day, is not (for the most part) voluntary,
but upon necessity, and for fear: such as was the repentance of Semei, who
having greeuouslie offended king David, in time of his affliction: 2. Re. 16.
afterward, when he saw him in prosperity again, and him self in danger of
punishment: 2. Re. 19
he came, and foll down before him, and asked him forgyuenes with tears. But
yet, David well perceived the matter how it stood: and therefore, though he
spared him for that day, wherein he would not trouble the myrthe with
execution of justice: yet, after he gave order, that he should be used
according to 3. Reg. 2.
his deserts.

The third reason is, for that, the custom The third reason.
of sin, which has continued all the life long, can not be removed upon the
instant being grown into nature it self, as it were, For which cause, God
says to evil me^, by the prophet Jeremy: if an Ethiopian can Iere: 13.
change his black skin, or a leoparde his spots, that are on his back:
then can you also do well, having learned all days of your life to do evil.



The fovverth cause is, for that, the acts The fovverth reason.
of virtue them selves, can not be of so great value with God, in that
instant, as if they had been done in time of health before. For, what great
matter is yt (for example sake) to pardone thy enemies at that time, when
thou can hurt them no more? to give thy goods, away, when thou cannest
use them no more? to abandon thy concubine, when thou cannest keep her no
longer? to leave of to sin, when sin must leave thee? All these things
are good and holy, and to be done by him, which is in that last state: but
yet, they are of no such value, as otherwise they would be, by reason of
this circumstance of time, which I have shevved.

These are the reasons why the holy fathers and doctors of Christ his
church, do speak so dovvtfullie of this last conversion: not, for any want
on gods part, but on theirs which are to do that great act. I might here
allege great store of authorities for this purpose: But one place of S.
Austen shall serve for all. Thus then he vvriteth How. 47. ex ho. 50
of this matter in a certain homily of his: If a man have done penance
truly, and do dye, being absolved from the bonds wherewith he was tied, and
separated from the body of Christ: he goes to God, he goes to rest But if a
man in the extreme necessity of his sicknenesse, do desire to receyuo
penance, and do (...) it, and do pass hence reconciled: I confess unto you,
that we do not deny him that, which he demands: but yet we presume not,
that he goes hence in good case. I do not presume (I tell you playnelie,) I
do not presume. A faythefull man that has lived well, goes away securely.
He that dies the same hour he was baptized, goes hence securely. He that is
reconciled in his health, and does penance, and afterward I yueth well:
goes hence securely. But he that is reconciled, and does penance at the last
cast: I am not secure, that he goes hence securely. Where I am secure: I do
tell you, and do give security. And where I am not secure, I may give
penance, but I can give no security. But here perhaps some man will say to
me: good pryest, if you know not in what state a man goes hence: nor can not
give security that he is saved, to whom penance was assigned at his death:
teach us (I beseech you) how we must live after our conversion and penance. I
say unto you: abstain from drunkenness, from concupiscence of the flesh,
from theft, from much babbling, from immoderate laughter, from idle words,
for which men are to give account in the day of judgment. Lo how small
things I have named in your sight. But yet, all Mat. 12.
these are great matters, and peftilent to those which commit them But yet, I
tell you further: a man must not only at stain from these vices, and the
like, after penance: but also before, when he is in health. For if he drive it
of to the last end of his life: he can not tell, whether he shall be able to
receive penance, and to confess his sins to God, and to the pryest, or no.
Behold the cause why I said unto you, that a man should live well before
penance, and after penance better. Mark well what I say: and perhaps it
shall be needful to expound my meaning more plainly, lest any man mistake
me. What say I then? that this man which repents at the end shall be damhed?
I do not say so. What the^? Do I say he shall be saved? no. What the^ do I
say? I say, I know not: I say. I pre^me not: I promise not I know not. VVilt
thou deliver thy self forth of this dowte? wilt thou escape this dangerous,
and uncertain point? do penance then whiles thou art hole. For if thou do
penance while thou art in health, and the last day chance to come upon thee
run presently to be reconciled: and so doeinge, thou art safe. And why art
thou safe? for that thou did penance in that time, wherein thou myghtest
have finned. But if thou wilt do penance then, when A norable sayeing.
thou cannest sin no longer: thou leauest not sin, but sin leaves thee
But you will say to me: how know thou whether God will forgive a man's
sins at the last hour, or no? you say well: I know it not. For, if I knew
that penance would not profit a man at the last hour: I would not give yt him.
Again, if I knew that it would deliver him: I would not warn you, I would not
terrifye you, as I do. Two things there are in this matter: either God
perdoneth a man, doing penance, at the hour of death: or he does not
pardone him. Which of these two shall be, I know not, wherefore, if thou be
wise: take that which is certain, and let go the uncertain.

Hitherto are S. Austens words of the dowtfull case of those, which do
penance at the last day.

And here now would I have the careful Christian to consider, (with me) but
this one comparison that I will make. If those which repent, and do such
penance as they may at the last day, do pass hence, notwithstanding, in
such dangerous dowtfullnes as S. Austen shows: what shall we think of all
those, which lack either time^ or ability, or will, or place, or means, or
grace to do any penance at all, at that hour? what shall we say of all
those, which are cut of before? which dye suddenly? which are stricken
dumme, or deaf, or senseles, or frentike, as we see many are? what shall we
say of those, which are abandoned by God, and left unto vice, even unto the
last breathe in their body? I have showed before owte of S. Paul, that
ordinarily, sinners dye, according as they live. 2. Co. 11,
So that, it is a privilege for a wicked man, to do penance at his death. And
then, if his penance (when it is done) be so dowtfull, as S. Austen has
declared: what a pitiful case are all other in? I mean the more part, which
repent not at all: but dye as they lived, and are forsaken of God in that
extremity, according as he promises, when he says: Pro. 1.
for that I have called you, and you have Iere. 35.
refused to come: for that, I have held out my hand, and none of you would
vouch safe to look toward me: I will laughe also at your destruction, when
anguyshe and calamity comes on you. You shall call upon me, and I will not
hear: you shall rise betymes in the morning to see me, but you shall not find
me.



It is both dreadefull and lamentable which the prophet says, of such as
defer their conversion, from time to time: Conuertentur Psalm. 58.
ad vesperam: and famem (...) vt canes, and circuibunt ciuitatem: They will
convert them selves to God at the euenyng, and then shall they suffer hungar,
as dogs:

and shall run about the city. The words that go immediately before, and
do immediately ensue after, do express more playnlie the greatness of this
threate For before, the verse is: Aitend (o Lord) to visit all nations: take no
mercy upon all those, which work iniquity. That is, which work
iniquity unto the end. And immediatlye after enseweth: These men shall speak
uuith their mouth, and a svvorde shall be in their lypper: for who has
heard them? and thou (o Lord) snalt skoffe at them. That is, these men in their
last extremity shall cry vehemently for help: and their cry shall be as
sharp to pearse men's ears, as a sword is: and yet notwithstanding, no man
shall hear them: and thou (o Lord) which only cannest help them, shall be
so far of from hearing or pityeing their case, as thou shall also laugh at
their misery and destruction. By all which is signified, the great calamity
of such as defer their conversion unto the last day, expressed by three
circumstances, in the former sentence alleged.

For first he says, they will turn at the euenyng: that is, at the hour of
death. For as the evening is the end of the day, and the beginning of night:
even so is this time, the end of light, and the beginning of all darkness unto
the wicked. In which sense Christ said: I must work the works of him that
sent Ioh. 9.
me, vvhiles the day lasts: for night will come on, when no man can work
more. At this time the^, that is, at this evening, in this twye light, between
day and darkness, when the pleasant brightness, and heat of all sun beams
is past: the brightness (I mean) of honor, of vainglorie, and of worldly
pomp is consumed: when the heat of co^cupisce^ce, of carnal love, of delicate
pleasures is quenshed: when the beautyfull summer day of this life is ended,
and the boisterous winter night of death draws on: then (says the prophet)
will the wicked man turn unto God, then will he repent, then will he resolve
him self, and make his conversion.

But what? shall this be accepted? you have heard the prophets request to God:
Non miserearis: Do not take mercy on them: Not, for that the prophet wishes
God to be unmerciful: but for that he knew gods justice toward such men.
Whose misery, in this extremity, he expresses further, by sayeing, they
shall suffer hungar as dogs: which is, as if he should have said: even as
dogs, when they are hungry, are ravynous, and do seek by all means, for
meat, be it never so homelye: and will refuse nothing that is offered, but
will devour all those things most gredilie, which they contemned whiles their
bellies were full: so these men that would not hear of penance, while they
were in health, will now admit any thing, and make strange of nothing: Now (I
say) when they can live no longer, will they promise any pains: what prayer
you will: what fasting you will: what alms deeds you can desire: what
austeritie soever you can imagine, they will promise it, (I say) upon
condition they might have life again: upon condition that the day might be
prolonged unto them: thoghe, if God should grant them their request, (as many
times he does) they would perform no one point thereof: but be as careless, as
they were before: yet for the preset, you shall see them as hungry as dogs,
says the prophet, most redye to (...) any thing, that may be devised for
their salvation.

And not co^temed with this, the same prophet adds yet a further clause of
misery: And that is, that they shall circuit or run about the citle: even
as dogs do, when they are hungry, putting in their heads at every door
for (...), ^Wors^ it be with great (...) to be beaten out again. This
expresses an unspeakable distress and calamity of wicked men, at the last
day: when they shall circuit, and run about the whole city of God, both
in heaven, and earth, to seek help, and shall find none: When they shall
cry, with sighs and groones, as pearsing as a swoorde, and yet shall not be
heard. For, whether will they turn them selves in this distress? unto their
worldly wealth, power, or riches? alas, they are gone: and the scripture
says, riches shall not profitt in the day of revenge. Prou. 11.
Will they turn unto their carnal friends? But what comfort can they give,
besides only weeping, and comfortles mourning? will they ask help of the
saints in heaven to pray for the^ in this instant? it is good, surely, so to
do: but yet, they can not choose but remember what is written The saints shall
Psa. 149
rejoice in glory, exultation shall be in their throotes, and two edged
svvoordes in their hands, to take (...) upon nations, and increpations upon
people: to bind kings in fetters, and noble men in manacles of iron: to
execute upon them the prescript judgment of God: and this is the glory of all
his (...). Their only refuge then must be unto God, who in deed is the only
surest refuge of all: but yet in this (...), the prophet says here, that he
shall not hear them: but rather contemn; and (...) he at their misery. Prou.
1.
Not, that he is contrary to his promise of receiving Psa. 58
a sinner, at what time soever he repents, and turns from his sin. But,
for that, this turning at the last day is not commonly true repentance and
conversion, for the causes before rehearsed.

To conclude then this matter of delay, what wise men is there in the woorlde;
who reading this, will not fear the deferring of his co^uersio^, though it
were but for one day? who does know whether this shall be the last day, or no,
that ever God will call him in? God says, I called, and you refused to come:
I held out my hand; and you would, not look toward me: and therefore will I
forsake you, in your extremity. He does not Prou. 1.
say, how many times, or how long he did call and hold out his hand. God
says, I stand at the door, and knock. But he says not, how often he does
that, or how many knockes he geeueth. Again, he said of wicked Iezabel, Apoc.
2.
the feigned prophetess in the Apocalips: I have given her time to do
penance, and she would not, and therefore shall she perish: but he says not,
how long this time of repentance endured. We read of wounderfull examples
heerin. HEROD the father had a call HEROD.
given him, and that a loud one, when John baptist was sent unto him, and when
his heart was so far touched, as he willingly heard Marc. 6.
him, and followed his counsel in many things, as one evangelist notes: but
yet, because he deferred the matter, and took not time, HEROD. the second.
when yt was offered: he was cast of again, and his last doeings made worse
than his former. HEROD tetrarche, the son, had a call also, Luc. 11.
when he felt that desire to see Christ, and some Luc. 23.
miracle done by him: but, for that he answered Mat. 14.
not unto the call: it did him no good, but rather much hurt. What a great
knock, had PYLATE given him at his heart, if he had PILATE.
been so fortunate, as to have opened the door presently, when he was made to
understand the innocence of Christ: as appears Mat. 27.
by washing his hands in testimony thereof, and his wife also sent him an
admonition about the same? No less knock had king AGRIPPA at his dor^, when
he cried ovvt, upon AGRIPPA.
the hearing of S. Paul: O Paul, thou persuadest me a little, to be a
Christian. But, because he deferred Act. 26.
the matter: this motion passed away again.

Twyse happy had PHARAO been, if he PHARAO
had resolved him self presently, upon that motion that he felt, when he
cried to Moses, I have sinned, and God is just. But by delay he Exodus 9.
became worse tha^ ever he was before. S. Luke Act. 24.
reports how FELIX, the governor of Iewrie FELIX.
for the Romans, co^ferred (...) oftentimes with S. Paul, that was his
prisonner: and heard of him the faith in Christ: wherwithe he was greatly
moved, especially at one time, when Paul disputed of gods justice, and the
day of judgment, whereat FELIX trembled But yet, he deferred this resolution,
willing Paul to depart, and to come again an other time: and so the matter by
delation came to no effect. How many men do perish daily, some cut of by
death: some left by god, and given over to a reprobate sense: which might have
saved them selves, if they had not deferred their conversion from day to day,
but had made their resolution presentlye; when they felt God to call within
their hearts.

God is most bountiful to knock and The danger of passinge the day of our vo
cation.
call: but yet, he byndeth him self to no time or space, but comes and goes
at his pleasure: and they which take not their times when they are offered,
are excuseles before his justice, and do not know whether ever it shall be
offered them again, or no: for that, this thing is only in the will and
knowledge Exo. 33.
of God alone: who takes mercy where it pleases him best, and is bound to
none: Romans 9.
And when the prefixed time of calling is once past: vvo be unto that party.
For a thousand worlds will not purchase it again. Christ shovveth
vvonderfullie the importance of this matter when, entering into Jerusalem upon
palm sunday, a-middest all his mirthe and glory of receyuinge, he could not
choose but weep upon that city, considering (as most men think) that this
was the last day of mercy and vocation, that ever should be used to the same:
and therefore he said with tears: O Jerusalem, if thou knevvest also, Luc. 21
those things which appertain to thy peace, even in this thy day: but now
these things are hydden from thee: As if he had said, if thou knevvest
(Jerusalem) as well as I do, what mercy is offered thee, even this day,
which is the last day, that ever such offer shall be made: thou vvoldest not
do as thou do: but vvoldest presently accept thereof: but now this secret
judgment of my father is hidden from thee: and therefore thou make little
account thereof, until thy destruction shall come suddenly upon thee. As sone
after it did.

By this now may be considered the great reason of the wise man's exhortation:
Eccle. 5.
Forslovv not to turn to God: nor do not defer it from day to day: for his
wrath uvill come upon the, at the sudden: and in time of revenge it will
destroy thee. It may be seen also upon what great cause, S. Paul exhorted the
Hebrews Heb. 3.
so vehemently, Dum cognominatur hodie: To accept of grace even vvhiles that
very day endured: and not to let pass the occasion offered. Which every
man applyeing to him self, should follow, in obeing the motions of gods
spirit within him: and acceptinge of gods vocation without delay:
consideringe what a grievous sin it is to resist the holy ghost: Every man
ought (I say) when he Act. 7.
feels a good motion in his heart, to think with him self: now God
knocks at my door: if I open presently, he will enter, and Apoc. 3.
dvvell within me: But if I defer it until to morovv: I know not whether
he vvil knock again, or no. Every man ought to remember still that sayeing
of the prophet, touching gods spirit: Hodie si vocem eius (...), nolite Psalm.
94.
obdurare corda vestra: if you chance to hear his voice calling you to day,
do not harden your hearts, but presently yield unto him.

Alas (dear brother) what hope of gain have thou by this perilous dilatio^,
which thou make? thy accounte is increased thereby. as I have showed: thy debt
of satisfaction is made more grievous: thy enemy more strong: thy self more
feeble: thy difficulties of conversion multiplied: what have thou then to
withholde thee one day from resolution? the gayning perhaps of a little time
in vanity. But I have proved to thee before, how this time is not gained but
lost, being spent without merit, Merry by good dee des, the only, gain of
time.
which is in deed the only true gain of time. If it seem pleasant to thee
for the present: yet remember what the prophet says, (...) est dies
perditionis, and adesse festinant tempora: The day of perdition is at hand,
and the Deu. 32.
times of destruction make haste to come on. Which day being once come, I
marvel what hope thou vvilt conceive.

Do thou Exodus 9.
think (perchance) to cry (...)? it shall be well truly, if thou cannest
do it: but yet, thou know, that Pharao did so, and gat nothing by it.
Do thou intend to make a good testament, and to be liberal in alms deeds,
at that time? this (no doubt) is very commendable: but yet thou must remember
also, that the virgins which filled their lamps, at the very instant, were
shutt ovvt, and utterly rejected Mat. 25.
by Christ. Do thou think to weep, and mourn, and to move thy judge with
tears, at that instant? first, this is not in thy hands to do at thy
pleasure: and yet thou must consider also, that Esau found no place of penance,
thoghe he sought it with tears, as S. Paul well notethe. Do thou mean to
have many good purposes, to make great promises Heb. 12.
and vows in that distress? call to mind the case of Antiochus in his
extremities: what 2. Mac. 9
promises of good deeds, what voues of virtuous life made he to God upon
condition he might escape, and yet prevailed he nothing thereby. All this is
spoken, not to put them in despair which are now in those last calamities:
but to dissuade others from falling in to the same: assuring thee (gentle
reader) that the P phet said not without a cause, seek unto God while he may
be fovvnd: call upon him vuhile Esa. (...).
he is near at hand. Now is the time acceptable, now is the day of
salvation, says S. Paul. 2. Co. 6.
Now is God to be fovvnd, and near at hand to embrace all them that truly
turn unto him, and make firm resolution of virtuous life hereafter. If we
defer this time: we have no warrant that he will either call us, or receive us
hereafter: but rather many threats to the contrary, as has been showed.
Wherefore I will end with this one sentence of S. Tract. 33. in Ioh.
Austen: that he is both a careless and most graceles man, which, knoweing all
this, will venture notwitstanding the eternity of his salvation and damnation,
upon the doubtful event of his final repentance.

Of three other impedimentes that hinder men from resolution: vuhiche are
slothe, negligence, and hardness of heart.

CHAP. VI.
BEsides all impedimentes which hitherto have been named, there are yet diverse
other to be found: if a man could examine the particular consciences of all
such as do not resolve. But these three here mentioned, and to be handeled
in this chapter, are so public and known: as I may not pass them over,
without discovering the same: for that, many times men are evil affected, and
know not their own diseases: the only declaration whereof (to such as are
desirous of their own health) is sufficient to avoid the danger of the
sickness.

First then, the impediment of slouthe is a great and ordinary let of
resolution to many 1. Of slothe
men: but especially in idle and delicate people, whose life has been in all
ease and rest, and therefore do persuade them selves, that they can take no
pains, nor abide no hardness, thoghe never so feign they would. Of 1. Co. 6.
which S. Paul says, that nise people shall not inherit the kingdom of
heaven. These men will confess to be true, as much and more than is said
before: and that they would also gladly put the same in execution, but that
they can not. Their bodies may not bear it: they can not fast: they can not
watch: they can not pray. They can not leave their disportes, recreations,
and merye companions: they should dye presentlye (as they say) with
melancholy, if they did it: yet in their hearts they desire (forsoothe,) that
they could do the same, which seeing they can not: no doubt (say they,) God
will accept our good desires. But (...) them hearken a little what the scripture
says hereof: desires do kill the slothefull man (says Solomon:) his hands
Pro. 21.
will not fall to any work: all the day long he coueteth and desires: but
he that is just, will do, and will not cesse. Take the slothefull and
unprofitable servant (says Christ) and Matt. 25
flyng him into utter darkness, where shall be weeping and gnashyng of teethe.
And when he passed by the way and found a fig tree Mat. 21.
with leaves, without fruit (Which fignified desires without works:) he gave
it presently an everlasting curse. Finally, the prophet David detesteth those
men, and says also, they are detested of God, qui in labor hominum non Psalm.
72.
sunt, which are not in the labors of men.



Of this fountain of slouthe do proceed Four of fectes of slouthe.
many effects that hinder the slothefull from resolution. And the first is a
certain heauynes, and sleepie drow sines toward all goodness, 1. DROVVSYNES.
according as the scripture says, pigredo immittit soporem, slouthe does
bring drowsines. Pro. 19.
For which cause S. Paul says, surge qui Ephe. 5.
dormis, arise thou which art a sleep: and Christ Marc. 13
cries out so often, videte, vigilate, look about Mat. 24. and 25.
you, and wache. You shall see many men in the world, with whom if you talk
of a cow or a calfe, of a fatt ox, of a piece of ground, or the like: they can
both hear and talk willinglye and freshelie: but if you reason with them of
their salvation, and their inheritance in the kingdom of heaven: they answer
not at all: but will hear, as if they were in a dream. Prou. 6. and 24.
Of these men then says the wise man: how long will thou sleep (...)
slouthefull fellow? when will thou arise out of thy dream? A little yet will thou sleep: a little longer will thou slumber: a little will thou close thy
hands together, and take rest: and so, prouertie shall hasten upon thee as a
running post, and beggarye as an armed man shall take and possess thee.



The second effect of slouthe, is fond fear, 2. FEAR.
of pains and labor, and casting of dowtes where none be, according as the
scripture says, Pro. 19.
pigrum deiici^t timor, fear discourageth the sloth efull man. And the prophet
says of Psalm. 52.
the like, they shake for fear where there is no fear. These men do frame
unto them selves. strange imaginations of the service of God, and dangerous
euentes, if they should follow the same. One says, If I should fast much: it
would without dowte corrupt my blood. An other says, if I should pray, and
be bareheaded much: I should dye most certainly with reume. A third says,
if I should keep account of all my sins, to confess the^: it would quickly
kill me with sadness. And yet all this is nothing else but slouthe, as the
scripture Pro. 22.
testifies in these words: Dicit piger, leo est foris: in medio platearum
occidendus sum. The flouthefull man says, sitting still in his house: there is
a lion without: if I should go out of doors to labor, I should certainly
be slain in the midst of the streets.



A third effect of slouthe is pusillanimitie 3. PVSILLANIMITIE.
and faintnes of heart: whereby the slouthefull man is overthrown, and
discouraged by every little contrariety or difficulty which he finds in
virtue, or which he imagines to find therein. Which the scripture
signifies, when it says, in lapide luteo lapidatus est piger, the Eccl. 22.
slouthefull man, is stoned to death with a stone of dirt:

that is, he is overthrown with a difficulty of no importance. Again: De
stercore boum lapidatus est piger, the slouthefull man is stoned dead with the
dung of oxen: which commonly is of matter so soft, as it can hurt no man.

A fowerth effect of slouthe is idle lazynes: 4. LAZYNES.
which we see in many men that will talk and consult of this and that, about
their amendment, but will execute nothing. Which is most fytlie expressed
by the holy ghost in these words: Sicut ostium vertitur in cardine Pro. 26.
suo, ita piger in tectulo suo. As a door is tossed in and owte upon his
hyngells, so is a slouthefull man, lieing lazelie upon his bed. And again
Pro. 13.
(...) and non vult piger: A slothefull man will and will not:

that is, he turns him self to and fro in his bed, and between willinge
and nilling he does nothing. And yet further, in an other place the scripture
describes this lazynesse, sayeing, the slothefull man (...) hands under his
girdle, and will not vouchesafe Pro. 19.
to life them up to his mouth, for that it is painful.

All these and many more are the effects of slouthe: but these four
especially, have I thought good to touch in this place: for that, they let
and hinder greatly this resolution which we talk of. For he that lives in a
slumber, and will not hear, or attend to any thing, that is said of the life
to come: and beside this, imagines fearful matters in the same: and
thirdly, is thrown down by every little block, that he finds in the way:
and lastly is so lazye, as he can bear no labor at all: this man (I say)
is past hope, to be gained, to any such purpose as we speak for.

To remove therefore this impediment, Means to remove slothe
this sort of men ought to lay before their eyes, the labors of Christ, and
of his saints: the exhortations they used to other men, to take like pains:
the threats made in scripture against them which labor not: the condition
of our present warfare, that requires travail: the crown prepared for it:
and the misery enseweing upon idle and lazye people. And finally, if they can
not bear the labor of virtuous life, which in deed is accompanied with so
many confolations, as it may not rightfullie be called a labor: how will they
abide the labor and torments of the life to come, which must be both
intolerable and everlasting?

Saint Paul says of him self and others, These. 3.
to the Thessalonians: we did not eat our bread of free cost when we were
with you: but did work in labor and weariness, both day and night: thereby
to give you an example of imitation: denouncing further unto you, that if any
man would not work he should not eat.

Christ went forth into the streets twyse in one day, and still reprehe^ded
greuouslie those that stood idle there: Quid hic statis tota die otiosi? Why
do ye stand Mat. 20.
here all the day idle and doeyng nothing? I am a vine, (says Christ) and
my father Ioh. 15
is a husband man: every branch that bears not fruit in me, my father will
cut of, and cast into the fire. And in an other place: Cut down the
unprofitable tree: why does Luc. 13
it stand here, and occupy up the ground for nothing? And again: the kindome
of heaven is subject to force: and men do gain it by Mat. 11.
violence and labor. For which cause, the wise Ecc. 9.
man also says: what soever thy hand can do in this life, do it instanlie:
for there is nether time; nor reason, nor wisdom, or knowledge Prou. 10
that we can emplove. And again the same wise man says: The lazy hand
works beggarie to it self, but the laboursome and valyant hand heapeth up
great riches. And Prou. 20
yet further to the same effect: The slothefull man will not sow in the
winter, for that it is cold: and therefore he shall beg in the: somer, and no
man shall take pity of him.



All this pertayneth to show, how that this life is a time of labor, and not
of ydlenes: and appointed unto us for the gayning of heaven: it is the Marquet,
wherein we must buy: the battaille wherein we must fight, and gain our
crown: the winter wherein we must sow: the day of labor wherein we must
sweat and gain our penny: And he that passes over lazilie this day (as the
most part of men do) must suffer eternal poverty, and need in the ^fe to
come: as in the first part of this Ca. (...). 24.
book more at large has been declared. Wherefore, the wise man (or rather
the holy ghost by his mouth) gives each one of us a Prou. 6.
most vehement admonition and exhortatio, in these words. Run about: make
haste: stir up thy friend: give no sleep unto thy eyes: let not thine eye
lyddes slumber: skyppe out as a do from the hands of him that held her: and
as a byrd out of the hand of the fowler: go unto the Emmet (thou slothefull
man, (and consider her doeinges, and learn to be wise: she having no guide,
teacher, or captain, provides meat for her self in the summer, and
gathers together in the harvest, that which may serve her to feed upon in
the winter.

By which words we are admonished in what order we ought to behave our
selves in this life, and how diligent and careful we should be in doeinge of
all Coloss. 1
good works, (as S. Paul also teaches) considermge, Romans (...)
that as the Emmet labors most Cala. 6.
earnestly in the harvest time to lay up for the vvynter to come: so we
should for the next world: And that slothefullnes to this effect, is the
greatest and most dangerous let at may be. For, as the Emmet should dye in
the winter most certainly for hunger, if she should live ydelie in the fomer:
so without all dowte they are to suffer extreme need and misery in the world
to come, who now for slouthe do omit to labor.

The second impediment is called by 2. Of negligence.
me, in the title of this chapter, negligence. But I do understand thereby a
further matter than commonly this word imports. For I do comprehend under
the name of negligent, all careless, and dissolute people, which take to heart
nothing that pertayneth to God or godlynes, but only attend to woorldlie
affairs, making their salvation the least part of their cogitations. And
under this kind of negligence is contained both Epicurisme, Epicurisme, or
life of Epicures.
(as S. Paul noted in some Christianes of his days, who began only to
attend to eat and drink, and to make their bellies their Phili. 3.
God, as our Christians now do:) and also a Romans 16
secret kind of Atheism, or denieing of God: that is, of denieing him in life
and behavior, as S. Paul expounds it For albeit these men Tit. 1.
in words do confess God, and profess the selves to be as good Christians
as the rest: yet secretly in deed they do not believe God: as their life and
doeings do declare. Which thing the scripture discovers plainly, when it
says, (...) dissolutis cord qui non oredunt Eccl. 2.
deo: woe be unto the dissolute and careless in heart, which do not believe
God. That is, though they profess that they believe and trust in him: yet by
their dissolute and careless doeings, they testify that in their hearts they
believe him not: for that, they have nether care nor cogitatio^ of matters
pertaining to him.

These kind of men are those which the Of careless Atheistes.
scripture notes, and detesteth for ploweyng with an ox and an Ass together:
for soweing Deu. 12.
their ground with myngled seed: for wearing appatell of linsie woolsie, that
is made of flax and wool together. These are they of whom Christ says in
the reuelatio^s. I would Apoc. 3.
thou were either cold or hoate. But for that thou art luke vvarme, and nether
cold nor hoate: therefore will I begin to vomit thee out of my mouth: These
are they which can accord all religions together, and take up all
controversies by only sayeing, that either they are differences of small
importance, or else that they appertain only to learned men to think upon,
and not unto them. These are they which can apply them selves to any
company, to any time, to any princes pleasure, for matters of (...) to come.
These men forbid all talk of spirit, religion, or devotion in their (...)
only they will have men eat, drink, and be merry with them: tell news of
the court and affairs abroad, sing, dance, laugh, and play at cards, and
so pass over this life in less consideration of God, than the very heathens
did. And has not the scripture reason then, in sayeing that these men in their
hearts and works are Atheistes? yes (...). And yt may be proved by many rules
of Christ. As for example: this is one rule set down by him self: By their
fruits ye shall know the^: For such as the tree is within, such is the
fruit Luc. 6.
which that tree sendethe forth. Again, the mouth speakethe from the
abundance of the Mat. 12.
heart: and consequently, seeing their talk is nothing but of worldly
vanities: yt is a sign, there is nothing in their heart, but that. And then yt
follows also by a third rule, where the treasure is, there is the heart, and
so, Matt. 6.
seeing their hearts are only set upon the world: the world is their only
treasure, and not God. And consequentelie they prefer that before God, as in
deed Atheistes.

This impedimente reaches far and Two causes of Atheism at this day.
wide at this day: and infinite are the men which are entangled therewith: and
the causes thereof are two especially. The first is heresye: which by moving
many questions and dowts wearyeth out a man's wit, and in the end brinheth him
to care for no part, but rather to contemn all. The second is inordinate love
of the world: which brings me^ to hate god, and to conceive enemytie against
him, as the Apostle says: and therefore, no maruayle (...). Ioh. 2.
thoghe in deed they nether believe, nor delight in him. And of all other men
these are the hardest to be reclaymed, and brought to any resolution of
amendment: for that, they are insensible: and beside that, do also fly all
means, whereby they may be cured. For, as there were small hope to be
conceived of that A compa rison.
patient, which being greuouslie sick should nether feel his disease, nor
believe that he were distempered, nor abide to hear of physic, or phisitio^,
nor accept of any cou^sail that should be offered, nor admit any talk or
co^sultation about his curing: so these men are in more dangerous estate tha^
any other, for that, they know not their own danger, but persuading them
selves to be more wise tha^ their neigbours, do remove from their cogitations
all things, whereby their health might be procured. The way to cure careless
men.


The only way to do these men good, (if there be any way at all) is to
make them know that they are sick, and in great danger: which in our case
may be done best (as it seems to me) by giving them to understand, how far
they are of, from any one piece of true Christianity, and consequently from
all hope of salvation that may be had, thereby. God requires at our hands,
that we Deuteronomy. 6.
should love him and serve him, with all our Mat. 22.
heart, with all our soul, and with all our streengthe. Luc. 10.
These are the prescript woo des of god, set down both in the old and new
law. And how far (I pray the) are these men of from this, which employe not
the half of their heart, nor the half of their soul, nor the haife of their
strength in gods service, nay, not the least part thereof? God requires at our
hands, that we should make his laws Deuteronomy. 6. and 11.
and precepts our study and cogitatio^s: that we should think of the^
co^tinuallie, and meditate Ioh. 1.
upon them both day and night, at home and abroad, early and late, when we go
to bed, and when we rise in the morning: this is his commandment, and there
is no dispensation therein. But how far are these me^ from this, which
bestow not the third part of their thoughts upon this matter, no not the
hundredth part, nor scarce once in a year do talk thereof? can these men say,
they are Christians, or that they believe in god?

Christ making the estimate of things in this life, pronounced this sentence:
Vnum est Luc. 10.
necessarium, one only thing is necessary, or of necessity in this world,
meaning the diligent and careful service of God. These me^ find many things
necessary beside this one thing, and this nothing necessary at all. How far
do they differ then in judgment 1. Ioh. 2.
from Christ? Christ's Apostle says, that a Christian must nether love the
world, nor any thing in the world. These men love nothing else but that
which is of the world: he says, That who soever is a friend to the world,
is an enemy to Christ: These men are enemies to who soever is not a freer de
to the world. How then can these men hold of Christ? Christ says, we
should pray still. These men Luc. 18.
pray never Christ's Apostie says, that covetousness, Ephe. 5.
(...), or scurrilitie should not be so much as once named among Christians:
Luc. 21.
these men have no other talk but such. Finally, Mat. 24.
the whole course and canon of scripture Mich. 6.
runs, that Christians should be attenti, Romans 11.
vigilantes, soliciti, instantes, feruentes, persouerantes Romans 12.
sine intermissione: That is, attent, vigilant, careful, Mat. 10.
instant, fervent, and perseuerant without intermission in the service of God:
but these men have no one of these points, nor any one degree of any one of
these points: but I every one the clean contrary. For they are nether
attent to those things which appertain unto God, nor vigilant, nor
solicitouse nor careful: and much less, instant and fervent, and least of all
perseuerant without intermissio^: for that they never begin. But on the
contrary side, they are careless, negligent, lumpishe, remiss, key cold,
perverse contemning and despising, yea loothing and abhorringe all matters that
appertain to the mortifieing of them selves, and true service of God. What
part have these men then in the lot and portion of Christians, beside only
the bare name, which profits nothing?

And this is sufficient te show how great and dangerous an impediment this
careless, senseles, and supine negligence is, to the resolution whereof we
entreat. For if Christ require Mat. 13.
to the perfection of this resolution, that who soever once espyeth out the
treasure hidden in the fyeld: (that is the kingdom of heaven, and the right
way to gain it) he should presently go and sell all that he has, and bye
that fyeld: that is, he should prefer the pursuit of this kingdom of heaven,
before all the commodities of this life what soever: and rather venture them
all, than to omit this treasure: if Christ (I say) require this, as he does:
when will those men ever be brought to this point, which will not give the
least part of their goods to purchase that fyeld? nor go forth of door to
treat the byeinge thereof? nor will so much as think or talk of the same, nor
allow of him which shall offer the means and ways to compass it?

Wherefore, who soever finds him self in this disease, I would counsel him
to read some chapiters of the first part of this book, especially the third
and fowerth, entreating Page 24. and 32.
of the causes for which we were sent into this woorld: as also the siueth, of
the account, which we must yield to God, of our time here spent: and he shall
there by understand (I dowt not) the error and danger he stands in, by this
damnable negligence wherein he sleeps, attending only to those things
which are mere vanities, and for which he came not into this world: and
passing over other matters, without care or cogitation, which only are of
importance, and to have been studied and thought upon by him.

The third and last impediment, that I Ofhardnes of heart.
purpose to handle in this book, is a certain^ (...), or evil disposition in
some men, called by the scriptures, hardness of heart, or in other words,
(...) of mind. VVher by a man is settled in (...), never to yield from the
state of sin wherein he lives, what so ever shall or may be said against the
same. And I have reserved this impediment, for the last place in this book:
for that, it is the last, and worst of all other impedimentes discovered
before, containing all the euillin it self that any of the other before
rehearsed, have: and adding besides, a most wilful and malicious resolution
of sin, quyte contrary to that resolution which we so much endeavor to
induce men unto.

This hardness of heart has diverse degrees Two degrees of hardness of heart.
in diverse men, and in some much more grievous than in other. For some are
arrived to that high and chief obduration, which I named before, in such
sort, as albeit they well know that they are amysse: yet for some worldly
respect or other, they will not yield, nor change their course. Such was the
obduratio^ Mat. 27.
of Pilate: though he knew that he condemned Christ wro^gfullie: yet, not to
leese the favor of the Jews, or incur displeasure with his prince, he
proceeded, and gave sentence against Exodus 6. 7. 8.
him. This also was the obduration of Pharao: who, thoghe he saw the miracles
of Moses and Aaron, and felt the strong hand of God upon his kingdom: yet,
not to seem to be overcome by such simple people as they were: nor that men
should thynk he would be enforced by any means to relent: he perseuered still
in his wilful wickedness, until his last and utter destruction came upon
him. Act. 26. 27.
This hardness of heart was also in king Agrippa, and foelix gouuernour of
Iewrie: who, thoghe in their own conscience they thought that S. Paul spoke
truth unto them: yet, not to hazard their credit in the world, they continued
still, and perished in their own vanities. Persecutors.
And commonly this obduration is in all persecutors of vertus, and virtuous
men: whom, thoghe they see evidently to be innocent, and to have equity on
their side: yet, to maintain their estate, credit, and favor in the world,
they persist without, either mercy or release, until God cut them of, in the
midst of their malice and furious cogitations.

Others there are, who have not this obduration A second degree of obduration.
in so high a degree, as to persist in wickedness directly against their own
knowleige: but yet they have it in an other sort: for that, they are settled in
firm purpose to follow the trade, which all ready they have begun: and will
not understand the dangers thereof: but do seek rather means to persuade
them selves, and quiet their consciences therein: and nothing is so offensive
unto the^, as to hear any thing against the same. Of these men holy Job
says: Dixerunt deo, recede Job. 21.
a nobis and scientia^ viarum tuarum nolumus: They say to God, depart from us,
we will not have the knowledge of thy ways.

And the Psalm. 57.
prophet David yet more expresselye: Their fury is like the fury of
serpents, like unto cocatrices that stop their ears, and will not hear the
voice of the inchaunter. By this inchaunter he means the holy ghost, which
seeks by all means possible to charm the^ from the bewitching wherein they
stand, called by the wise man, fascinatio nugacitatis: The bewitching of Sap. 4
vanity: but (as the prophet says) they will not hear, they turn their
backs, they stop their Zach. 7
ears, to the end they may not understand: they put their hearts as an
Adama^s stone, lest perhaps they should hear gods law, and beconuerted.

The nation of jews is peculiarly noted to have been always given to this
great sin, The hard hearted. Jews.
as S. Stephen (...), when he said unto their own faces. You styffe necked
Jews, you have always resisted the holy ghost, meaning thereby (as Christ
declares more at large) Act. 7.
that they resisted the propheres and Saints of god, in whom the holy ghost
spoke unto Matt. 5.
them from time to time, for amendment of Luc. 11. 13.
their life: and for that, through the light of knowledge which they had by
hearing of gods law, they could not in truth or show condemn the things
which were said, or avoid the just reprehensions used toward them: and yet
resolved with them selves not to obey, or change custom of thei^r
proceedings: therefore fell they in fine to persecute sharplye their
reprehendors: whereof the only cause was hardness of heart. Indurauerunt facies
suas supra petram, and noluerunt reuerti: says God by the mouth of Jeremy:
they have hardened Iere. 5.
their (faces above the hardness of a rock, and they will not turn to me.

And in an other place of the same prophet he complayneth greeuouslie of this
peruersenes: Quare ergo auersus est populus iste in Jerusalem, auerstone Iere.
8.
contentiosa? And why then is this people in Jerusalem revolted from me, by so
contentious and perverse an alienation, as they will not hear me any more etc?

And yet again in an other place: Quare moriemini domus Israel? why Ezec. 18
will you dye, you house of Israel? why will you damn your selves? why are you
so obstinate, as not to hear? so perverse, as not to learn? so cruel to your
selves, as you will not know the dangers wherein you live? nor understand the
misery that hangs over you?

Doe'st thou not ymagine (dear brother) that God uses this kind of speech,
not only to the Jews, but also to many thousand Christians, and perhaps
also unto thy self many times every day: for that thou refusest his good
motions, and other means sent from him, to draw thee to his service, thou
being resolved not to yield there unto, but to follow thy pursuit, what soever
persuasions shall come to the contrary? Alas, how many Christians be there,
who say to God daily, (as they did whom I have named before) Job. 21.
deparie from us, we will not have the knowledge of thy uuayes? How many be
there, which abhor to hear good counsel? fear and tremble to read good
books? fly and detest the frequentation of godly company, lest perhaps by
such occasions they might be touched in conscience, converted, and saved? how
many be there, which say with those most unfortunate hard hearted men, whereof
the prophet speaks: Percustimus foedus cum Esa. 28.
morte, and cum inferno fecimus pactum: We have stricken a league with death,
and have made a bargayne with hell it self:

which is as much to say, as if they had said: trouble: us not, moleste us
not with thy persuations: spend not thy words and labor in vain: talk unto
others who are not yet settled: let them take heaven that take it will: we for
our parts are resolved we are at a point: we have made a league that must be
kept: we have made a bargain that must be performed, yea The de scription of
a hard heart.
thoghe it be with hell, and death everlasting.

It is a wounderfull fury, the obduratio^ of a hard heart: and not without
cause compared Psa. 75
by the prophet (as I have showed before) to the wilful fury and rage of
serpents. And an other place of scripture describes it thus: Esa. 48.
Durus es, and neruus ferreus ceruix tua, and fro^s tua aerea: Thou art hard
hearted, and thy neck is a sinowe of iron, and thy forehead is of brass. What
can be more vehemently spoken to express the hardness of this metal? but
yet Li. 1. de co^sid. ad Eug. c. 2.
S. Barnard expresses it more at large, in these words: Quid ergo cor durum?
and what is the^ a hard heart? and he answers immediately: A hard heart is
that, which is nether cut by compunction, nor softened by godlynes, nor moved
with prayers, nor yields to threatening, nor is any thing helped, but rather
hardyned, by chastening. A hard heart, is that which is ingreatefull to gods
benefits, disobedient to his counsails, made cruel by his judgments,
dissolute by his allurementes, unshamefast to filthiness, feareles to perils,
discourteous in humane affairs, recheles in matters pertaining to God,
forgetful of things past, negligent in things present, improuident for things
to come.



By this description of S. Barnard it appears, The explication of S. Barnards
words.
that a hard heart is almost a desperate and remedyles disease, where it
falls. For what will you do (says this good father) to amend it? if you
lay the greuousnes of his sins before him: he is not touched with
compunction. Is you allege him all the reasons in the world, why we ought to
serve god, and why we ought not to offend and dishonor him: he is not
mollified by this consideration of piotie. If you would request him and beseech
him with tears, even on your knees: he is not moved. If you threaten gods
wrath against him: he yields nothing thereunto. If God scourge him in deed:
he waxes furious, and becomes much more hard tha before. If God bestow
benefits on him: he is ungrateful. If he counsel him for his salvation: he
obeys not. If you tell him of gods secret and severe judgments: it dryueth
him to desperation, and to more cruelty. If you allure him with gods mercy:
it makes him dissolute If you tell him of his own filthiness: he blusheth not.
If you admonish him of his perils: he fears not. If he deal in matters
toward me^: he is proud, and discourteous. If he deal in matters toward
God: he is rash, light, and contemptuous. Finally, he forgets what soever
has passed before him toward other men, either in reward of godliness, or in
punishment of sinners. For the time present, he neglects it, nor makes any
account of using it to his benefit. And of things to come, either of bliss or
misery, he is utterly improvident: nor will esteem thereof, lay you them
never so often, or vehemently before his face. And what way is The danger of
a hard heart
there then, to do this man good?

Not without great cause surely did the wise man pray so heartily to God:
Animae irreuerenti Eccle. 23
and infrumitae ne tradas me: deliver me not over (o Lord) unto a shameless
and unruly foul: that is, unto a hard and obstinate heart. VVherof he gives
the reason in an other Eccle. 3.
place, of the same book: Cor enim durum habebit male in nouissimo: for that a
hard (...) shall be in an evil ca^e at the last day. Oh that all hard hearted
people would note this reason of the scripture. But S. Barnard goes on, and
opens the terror heerof more fully, when he says. Nemo duri cordis
salutem vnque adeptus Li. 1. de co^sid. c. 2.
est, nisi quem forte miserans deus abstulit ab eo Ezec. 36
(iuxta prophetam) cor lapideum, and dedit cor carneum: There was never yet
hard hearted man saved, except perchance God by his mercy did take away his
stonye heart, and give him a heart of flesh, according to the prophet. By
which words S. Bernard signifies, and Two kinds of hearts in me^, with
their pro perties.
proves ovvt of the prophet, that there are two kinds of hearts in men: the
one a fleshie heart, which bleedeth if you but prick it: that is, it falls to
contrition, repentance and tears upon never so small a check for sin. The
other is a stony heart, which if you beat and buffet never so much with
hammers, you may as soon break it in pieces, as either be^d it, or make it
bleed. And of these two hearts in this life depends all our misery, or
felicity for the life to come. For as God, when he would take vengeance of
Pharao, had no more grievous way to do it, than to say, Indurabo cor
Pharaonis: I will harden the heart Exo. 4. 7. 14. Au. q. 18. super exodus and
ser. 18. se temp.
of Pharao: that is as S. Austen expounds) I will take away my grace, and
so permit him to harden his own heart: so when he would show mercy to
Israel, he had no more forcible means to express the same, than to say; I
will take away the stony heart ovvt of Eze. 36.
your flesh, and give you a fleshie heart in stead thereof. That is, I will
take away your hard heart and give you a soft heart, that will be moved when it is
spoken unto. And of all other blessings and benefits which God does bestow
upon mortabll men in this life, this soft and tender heart is one of the
greatest: I mean such a heart as is soon moved to repentance, soon checked
and co^trolled, soon pearsed, soon made to bleed, soon styrred to
ame^deme^t. And on the contrary part, there can be no greater curse or
malediction laid upon a Christian, than to have a hard and obstinate heart,
which heapeth every day vengeance unto it self and his master, also, as S.
Paul says: Heb. 6.
and is compared by the same Apostle unto the grownde which no store of rain
can make fruitful, though it fall never so often upon the same: and therefore
he pronounces thereof, Reproba est and maledicto proxima, euius consummatio in
combustionem: That is, it is reprobate, and next door to maledictio^, whose
end or consummation must be fire and burning.

Which thing being so, no marvel though the holy scripture do dehort us
so carefully from this obduration and hardness of heart, as from the most
dangerous and desperate disease, that possibly may fall upon the Christian,
being in deed (as S. Paul signifies Heb. 6.
) the next door to reprobation it self. The same Apostle therefore cries,
nolite contristare, Ephe. 4.
nolite extinguere spiritum dei do you 1. The. 5
not contristate or make sad, do you not extinguishe the spirit of God, by
obduration, by resisting and impugning the same Again uon obduretur quis ex
vobis fallacia peccati: Let Heb. 3.
no man be hard hearted among you, through the deceit of sin. The prophet
David also Psalm. 94.
cries, hodie si vocem eius audieritis, nolite obdurare corda vestra: Even
this day, if you hear the voice of God calling you to repentance: see you
harden not your hearts against him. All which earnest speeches, used by gods
holy spirit do give us to understand, how carefully we have to fly this
most pestilent infection of a hard heart: which almighty God of his mercy
give us grace to do, and indue us with a tender heart toward the full
obodience of his divine Majesty: such a soft heart (I say) as the wise man
desired, when he said to God: Da seruo tuo cor docile: Give unto. 3. Re. 3.
me thy servant (o lord) a heart that is docible, and tractable to be
instructed: such a heart as God him self describes to be in all them whom he
loves, sayeing, ad quem respiciam Esa. 66.
nisi ad pauper culum and contritum cord, and time^tem sermones meos? To whom
will I have regard or show my favor, but unto the poor and humble of heart,
unto the contrite spirit, and to such as tremblethe at my speeches?

Behold (dear brother) what a heart God requires at thy hands? A little poor
and humble heart: (for so much imports the diminitiue pauperculus) Also a
contrite heart, for thy offenses past: and a heart that trembles at every word
that comes to thee from God, by his ministers. How then wilt thou not fear at
so many words, and whole discourses as have been used before, for thy
a-wakening, for openyng thy peril, for styrring the to amendment? how will thou not fear the threats and judgments of this great Lord for thy sins?
how will thou dare to proceed any further in his displeasure? how will thou
defer this resolution any longer? surely the least part of that which has
been said, might suffice to move a tender heart, an humble and contrite
spirit, to present resolution and earnest amendment of life. But if all
together, can not move thee to do the same: I can say no more, but that thou
have a very hard heart in deed: which I beseech our heavenly father to
soften for thy salvation, with the precious hoate blood of his only son,
our savior, who was content to shed it for that effect upon the cross.

And thus now having said so much as time permitted me, concerning the first
The conclusion of this who (...) book
general point required at our hands for our salvation: that is, concerning
resolution, appointed by my division in the beginning, to be the subject or
matter of this first book: I will Page 9.
end here: deferring for a time the perfor mance of my purpose for the other
two books, upon the causes and reasons set down in an advertisement to the
reader at the very first entrance unto this book: nothing dowtynge but if
God shall vouchesafe to work in any man's heart by means of this book, or
otherwise, this first point of resolution, the most hard of all other: then
will he also give means to perfect the work begun Phil. 2.
of him self, and will supply by other ways the two points foloweing: that
is, both right beginning, and constant perseverance, whereunto my other two
books promised, are appointed. It will not be hard for him that were once
resolved, to find helpers and instructours enoughe, beside the holy ghost,
which in this case will always be at hand: there want not good books, and
better men (God be glorified for it) in our own country at this day, which
are well able to guide a zealous spirit, in the right way to virtue: and yet
as I have promised before, so mean I (by gods most holy help and assistance)
to send thee (gentle reader) as my time and ability will permit, the other
two books also: especially, if it shall please his divine Majesty to
comfort me thereunto, with the gain or good of any one soul by this which is
alredie done: that is, if I shall conceive or hope, that any one scule so
dearly purchased by the pretiouse blood of the son of God, shall be moved to
resolution by any thing that is here said: that is, shall be reclamed (...) the
bondage of sin, and restored to the service of our maker and redemer: which
is the only end of my writing, as his majesty best knows.

And surely (gentle reader) though I must confess that much more might be
said for this point of resolution, than is here touched by me, or than any
man can well utter in any competent kind of book or volume: yet am I of
opinion, that either these reasons here alleged are sufficient, or else nothing
will suffice, for the co^quering of our The of fecte of that whi che has been
said in this book.
obstinacy, and beating down of our rebellious disobedience in this point.
Here thou may see the principal arguments inducing thee to the service of
God, and detestation of vice. Here thou may est see the cause and end why
thou was created: the occasion In the first par te.
of thy coming hither: the things required at thy hands in particular: the
account that will be demanded of thee: the justice and severity of God
therein: his goodness toward thee: his wachefullnes over thee: his desire to win thee: his reward, if thou do well: his infinite punishment, if thou
do evil: his calls: his baytes: his allurementes to save thee. And on the
contrary part, here are In the se co^d (...).
discovered unto thee, the vanities, and deceytes of those impedimentes,
hynderances, or excuses, which any way might let, stay, or discourage thy
resolution: the feigned diffyculties of virtuous life are removed: the
conceyted fears of gods service are taken away: the alluringe slatteryes of
worldly vanity are opened: the foolyshe presumption upon gods mercy: the
danger of delay: the dissimulation of slothe: the desperate peril of careless
and stony hearts are declared. What then will thou desire more to move thee?
what further argument will thou expect, to draw the from vice and wickedness,
than all this is?

If all this stir the not, what will stirro thee (gentle reader?) if when
thou have read this, thou lay down the book again, and walk on in thy
careless life as quietlye as before: what hope (I beseech thee) may there be
conceived of thy salvation? will thou go to heaven living as thou do? it is
impossible: as soon thou may drive God out of heaven as get thither thy
self, by this kind of life. What then? wilt thou forgo heaven, and yet
escape hell too? this is less possible, what soever the Atheistes of this
world do persuade thee. VVilt thou perhaps defer the matter, and think of
yt hereafter? I have told thee my opinion heerof before. Thou shall never have
more ability to do it than now, and perhaps never half so much. If thou
refuse it now: I may greatly fear, that thou will be refused hereafter thy
self. There is no way then so good (dear brother) as to do it presently
whiles it is offered. Break from that tyrant, which detayneth thee in
servitude: shake of his chains: cut a sunder his bands: run violently to
Christ, which stands redye to embrace, thee with his arms open on the
cross. Make joyful all the Angels, and court Luc. 15.
of heaven with thy conversion: strike once the stroke with God again: make a
manlye resolution: say with that old courageous soldier of Jesus Christ S.
Jerome, If my father A notable sayeing of S. Jerome.
stood weeping on his knees before me, and my mother hanging on my neck
behind me: and all my brethren, sisters, children, and kynsefolkes howling on
every side to retain me in sinful life with them: I would fling of my mother
to the ground: dispyse all my kynred, run over my father and tread him
under my feet, thereby to run to Christ when he calls me.



Oh that we had such hearts as this servant of God had: such courage, such
manhood, such fervent love to our Master. Who would lie one day drowned in
sin? who would live one day in such slavery as we do? who would eat
hulkes with the prodigal son among swyne, seeing he may return home, and
be so honorablye received, and entertaynede by his old father, have so good
cheer, and banquetinge, and hear so great melody, joy, and triumph for
his return? I say no more Luc. 15.
heerin, (dear brother) than thou art assured of, by the word, and promise
of gods own mouth: from which can proceed nether falshode nor deceyte.
Return then I beseech thee: lay hand fast on his promise, who will not
fail thee: run to him now he calls, whiles thou have time: and esteem not
all this world woorthe a straw, in respect of this one act. For so shall
thou be a most happy, and thryse happy man, and shall bless hereafter the
hour and moment that ever thou made this fortunate resolution. And I (...)
my part (I trust) shall not be void of some portion of thy good hap and
felicity: At leastwise I doubt not, but thy holy conversion shall treat for
me with our common father, who is the God of mercies, for remission of my many
fold sins, and that I may serve and honor him together with thee all the
days of my life: which ought to be both our petytyons: and therefore in
both our names I beseech his divine Majesty to grant it to us. For ever and
ever.

Amen.
The end of the first book: touching resolution.

