PARADISI IN SOLE Paradisus Terrestris. or A Garden of all sorts of pleasant
flowers which our English air will permit to be noursed up: with A Kitchen
garden of all manner of herbs, roots, and fruits, for meat or sause used
with us, and An Orchard of all sort of fruitbearing Trees and shrubbes fit for
our Land together With the right orderinge planting and preserving of them and
their uses and virtues

Collected by John Parkinson Apothecary of London 1629

Qui veut parangonner L'artifice a Nature
Et nos parcs a L'Eden, indiscret il mesure.
Le pas de l'Elephant par le pas du ciron,
Et de l'Aigle Le vol parcil du mouscheron.
a decorative engraving of a figurative sun, wind and clouds, supported by
flower urns, with an oval Garden of Eden with prelapsarian Adam and Eve,
surrounded by flowers, trees and animals. A Siritzer


TO THE QVEENES MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY.
Madame,
KNowing your Majesty so much delighted with all the fair Flowers of a
Garden, and furnished with them as far beyond others, as you are eminent
before them; this my Work of a Garden, long before this intended to be
published, and but now only finished, seemed as it were destined, to be first
offered into your Highness hands, as of right challenging the propriety of
Patronage from all others. Accept, I beseech your Majesty, this speaking
Garden, that may inform you in all the particulars of your store, as well as
wants, when you cannot see any of them fresh upon the ground: and it shall
further encourage him to accomplish the remainder; who, in praying that your
Highness may enjoy the heavenly Paradise, after the many years fruition of
this earthly, submits to be

Your Majesty's in all humble devotion, JOHN PARKINSON.

TO THE COURTEOUS READER.
ALthough the ancient Heathens did appropriate the first invention of the
knowledge of Herbs, and so consequently of Physic, some unto Chiron the
Centaure, and others unto Apollo or Aeculapius his son; yet we that are
Christians have out of a better School learned, that God, the Creator of
Heaven and Earth, at the beginning when he created Adam, inspired him with the
knowledge of all natural things (which successively descended to Noah
afterward, and to his Posterity): for, as he was able to give names to all
the living Creatures, according to their several natures; so no doubt but he
had also the knowledge, both what Herbs and Fruits were fit, either for Meat
or Medicine, for Use or for Delight. And that Adam might exercise this
knowledge, God planted a Garden for him to live in, (wherein even in his
innocence he was to labor and spend his time) which he stored with the best
and choysest Herbs and Fruits the earth could produce, that he might have not
only for necessity whereon to feed, but for pleasure also; the place or
garden called Paradise importing as much, and more plainly the words set down
in Genesis the second, which are these; Out of the ground the Lord God made to
grow every tree pleasant to the sight and good for meat; and in the 24. of
Numbers, the Parable of Balaam, mentioning the Aloe trees that God planted; and
in other places if there were need to recite them. But my purpose is only to
show you, that Paradise was a place (whether you will call it a Garden, or
Orchard, or both, no doubt of some large extent) wherein Adam was first placed
to abide; that God was the Planter thereof, having furnished it with trees and
herbs, as well pleasant to the sight, as good for meat, and that he being to
dress and keep this place, must of necessity know all the things that grew
therein, and to what uses they served, or else his labor about them, and
knowledge in them, had been in vain. And although Adam lost the place for his
transgression, yet he lost not the natural knowledge, nor use of them: but
that, as God made the whole world, and all the Creatures therein for Man, so
he may use all things as well of pleasure as of necessity, to be helps unto
him to serve his God. Let men therefore, according to their first institution,
so use their service, that they also in them may remember their service to God,
and not (like our Grandmother Eve) set their affections so strongly on the
pleasure in them, as to deserve the loss of them in this Paradise, yea and of
Heaven also. For truly from all sorts of Herbs and Flowers we may draw matter
at all times not only to magnify the Creator that has given them such
diversities of forms, sents and colors, that the most cunning Worke-man
cannot imitate, and such virtues and properties, that although we know many,
yet many more lie hidden and unknown, but many good instructions also to our
selves: That as many herbs and flowers with their fragrant sweet smells do
comfort, and as it were revive the spirits, and perfume a whole house; even so
such men as live virtuously, laboring to do good, and profit the Church of
God and the Common wealth by their pains or pen, do as it were send forth a
pleasing savor of sweet instructions, not only to that time wherein they live,
and are fresh, but being dry, withered and dead, cease not in all after ages
to do as much or more. Many herbs and flowers that have small beauty or
savor to commend them, have much more good use and virtue: so many men of
excellent rare parts and good qualities do lie hid unknown and not respected,
until time and use of them do set forth their properties. Again, many
flowers have a glorious show of beauty and bravery, yet stinking in smell, or
else of no other use: so many do make a glorious ostentation, and flourish in
the world, when as if they stink not horribly before God, and all good men,
yet surely they have no other virtue then their outside to commend them, or
leave behind them. Some also rise up and appear like a Lilly among Thorns, or
as a goodly Flower among many Weeds or Grass, either by their honorable
authority, or eminence of learning or riches, whereby they excel others, and
thereby may do good to many. The frailty also of Man's life is learned by the
soon fading of them before their flowring, or in their pride, or soon after,
being either cropped by the hand of the spectator, or by a sudden blast withered
and parched, or by the revolution of time decaying of it own nature: as also
that the fairest flowers or fruits first ripe, are soonest and first gathered.
The mutabilitie also of states and persons, by this, that as where many goodly
flowers and fruits did grow this year and age, in another they are quite
pulled or dug up, and either weeds and grass grow in their place, or some
building erected thereon, and their place is no more known. The Civil respects
to be learned from them are many also: for the delight of the varieties both of
forms, colors and properties of Herbs and Flowers, has ever been powerful
over dull, unnurtured, rusticke and savage people, led only by Natures
instinct; how much (...) powerful is it, or should be in the minds of
generous persons? for it may well be said, he is not humane, that is not
allured with this object. The study, knowledge, and travel in them, as they
have been entertained of great Kings, Princes and Potentates, without
disparagement to their Greatness, or hinderance to their more serious and
weighty Affairs: so no doubt unto all that are capable thereof, it is not
only pleasant, but profitable, by comforting the mind, spirits and senses
with an harmless delight, and by enabling the judgment to confer and apply
help to many dangerous diseases. It is also an Instructor in the verity of the
genuine Plants of the Ancients, and a Correcter of the many errors whereunto
the world by continuance has bin diuerted, and almost therein fixed, by
eradicating in time, and by degrees, the pertinacious wilfulness of many, who
because they were brought up in their errors, are most unwilling to leave them
without consideration of the good or evil, the right or wrong, they draw on
therewith. And for my self I may well say, that had not mine own pains and
studies by a natural inclination been more powerful in me then any others
help (although some through an evil disposition and ignorance have so far
traduced me as to say this was rather another man's work then mine own, but I
leave them to their folly) I had never done so much as I here publish; nor been
fit or prepared for a larger, as time may suddenly (by Gods permission) bring
to light, if the maleuolent dispositions of degenerate spirits do not hinder
the accomplishment. But persuading my self there is no shower that produces
not some fruit, or no word but works some effect, either of good to persuade,
or of reproof to euince; I could not but declare my mind herein, let others
judge or say what they please. For I have always held it a thing unfit, to
conceal or bury that knowledge God has given, and not to impart it, and
further others therewith as much as is convenient, yet without ostentation,
which I have ever hated. Now further to inform the courteous Reader, both of
the occasion that led me on to this work, and the other occurrences to it.
First, having perused many Herbals in Latin, I observed that most of them have
either neglected or not known the many diversities of the flower Plants, and
rare fruits are known to us at this time, and (except Clusius) have made
mention but of a very few. In English likewise we have some extant, as Turner
and Dodonaeus translated, who have have said little of Flowers, Gerard who is
last, has no doubt given us the knowledge of as many as he attained unto in
his time, but since his days we have had many more varieties, then he or they
ever heard of, as may be perceived by the store I have here produced. And none
of them have particularly severed those that are beautiful flower plants, fit
to store a garden of delight and pleasure, from the wild and unfit: but have
enterlaced many, one among another, whereby many that have desired to have
fair flowers, have not known either what to choose, or what to desire. Diverse
Books of Flowers also have been set forth, some in our own Country, and more
in others, all which are as it were but handfuls snatched from the plentiful
Treasury of Nature, none of them being willing or able to open all sorts, and
declare them fully; but the greatest hinderance of all men's delight was, that
none of them had given any description of them, but the bare name only. To
satisfy therefore their desires that are lovers of such Delights, I took upon
me this labor and charge, and have here selected and set forth a Garden of all
the chiefest for choice, and fairest for show, from among all the several
Tribes and Kindreds of Natures beauty, and have ranked them as near as I
could, or as the work would permit, in affinity one unto another. Secondly,
and for their sakes that are studious in Authors, I have set down the names
have bin formerly given unto them, with some of their errors, not intending to
cumber this work with all that might be said of them, because the deciding of
the many controversies, doubts, and questions that concern them, pertain more
fitly to a general History: yet I have been in some places more copious and
ample then at the first I had intended, the occasion drawing on my desire to
inform others with what I thought was fit to be known, reserving what else
might be said to another time and work; wherein (God willing) I will enlarge
my self, the subject matter requiring it at my hands, in what my small ability
can effect. Thirdly, I have also to embellish this Work set forth the figures
of all such plants and flowers as are material and different one from another:
but not as some others have done, that is, a number of the figures of one sort
of plant that have nothing to distinguish them but the color, for that I hold
to be superfluous and waste. Fourthly, I have also set down the Virtues and
Properties of them in a brief manner, rather desiring to give you the
knowledge of a few certain and true, then to relate, as others have done, a
needless and false multiplicitie, that so there might as well profit as
pleasure be taken from them, and that nothing might be wanting to accomplish it
fully. And so much for this first part, my Garden of pleasant and delightful
Flowers. My next Garden consists of Herbs and Roots, fit to be eaten of the
rich and poor as nourishment and food, as sauce or condiment, as sallet or
refreshing, for pleasure or profit; where I do as well play the Gardener, to
show you (in brief, but not at large) the times and manner of sowing, setting,
planting, replanting, and the like (although all these things, and many more
then are true, are set down very largely in the several books that others
have written of this subject) as also to show some of the Kitchen uses (because
they are Kitchen herbs etc.) although I confess but very sparingly, not
intending a treatise of cookery, but briefly to give a touch thereof; and also
the Physical properties, to show somewhat that others have not set forth; yet
not to play the Empericke, and give you receipts of medicines for all diseases,
but only to show in some sort the qualities of Herbs, to quicken the minds of
the studious. And lastly an Orchard of all sorts of domesticke or foreign,
rare and good fruits, fit for this our Land and Country, which is at this time
better stored and furnished then ever in any age before. I have herein
endeavored, as in the other Gardens, to set forth the varieties of every sort
in as brief a manner as possibly could be, without superfluous repetitions of
descriptions, and only with especial notes of difference in leaves, flowers
and fruits. Some few properties also are set down, rather the chiefest then
the most, as the work did require. And moreover before every of these parts I
have given Treatises of the ordering, preparing and keeping the several
Gardens and Orchard, with whatsoever I thought was convenient to be known for
every of them.

Thus have I showed you both the occasion and scope of this Work, and herein
have spent my time, pains and charge, which if well accepted, I shall think
well employed, and may the sooner hasten the fourth Part, A Garden of Simples;
which will be quiet no longer at home, then that it can bring his Master news
of fair weather for the journey.

Thine in what he may, JOHN PARKINSON.

Ioanni Parkinsono Pharmacopoeo Londinensi sclertissimo Botanico
consummatissimo T.D.M. S.P.D.
POema panegyricum Opus tuum indefessi laboris, vtilitatis eximiae postulat,
and meriti iure a me extorqueret (mi Parkinsone) si fauentibus Musis, and
secundo Apolline in bicipiti somniare Parnasso, and repent Poetae mihi prodire
liceret. In foetus tui bouis auibus in lucem editi, and prolixiorem nepotum
seriem promittentis lauds, alii Deopleni Enthousiastae carmine suos pangant
elenchos; quos sub figmentis ampullata hyperbolicarum vocum mulcedine, vates
fere auribus mentibusue insinuant. Veritas nuditatis amans, fuco natiuum
candorem obumbranti non illustranti perpetuum indixit bellum: In simplicitate,
quam assertionum neruosa breuitas exprimit, exultat. Audi quid de te sentiam,
Tu mihi sis in posterum Crateuas Brittannus; inter omnes, quotquot mihi hic
innotuerunt, peritissimus, exercitatissimus, oculatissimus, and emunctissimae
naris Botanicus: Cuius opera in fortunata hac Insula rem herbariam tractari,
emendari, augeri, and popularibus tuis vernaculo sermon ad amussim tradi, non
decentiae modo, sed etiam necessitatis est. Macte tua sedulitate (Vir optime)
neque te laborum tam arduis lucubrationibus datorum hactenus poeniteat, vel
deinceps impendendorum pigeat. Difficilia quae pulchra. Leniet debitae laudis
dulcedo vigiliarum acerbitatem, and Olympicum stadium cito pede, a carceribus
ad metas alacriter decurrentem nobile manet (...). Sed memento Artem longam,
Vitam esse breuem. (...). Vide quid ad antiquum illum, cuius si non animam,
saltem genium induisti, Crateuam scribat Hippocrates, (...). Nobilissimam
Medicinae partem Botanicam esse reputa. Florae nunc litasti and Pomonae,
Apollini vt audio propediem HORTO MEDICO facturus. Amabo integrae Vestae sacra
conficito, eiusque variegatum multis simplicium morbifugorum myriadibus sinum
absolute pandito, quem sine velo nobis exhibeas. Nulla dies abeat sine linea.
Sic tandem fructus gloriae referes vberrimos, quos just sudoribus partos, vt
in cruda and viridi senectute decerpas diu, iisque longum fruaris opto. Vale.
Datum Londini Calendas Octobris anno salutis 1629.

Theodorus de Mayerne Eques aurat. in Aula Regum Magnae Britanniae Iacobi and
Caroli P. and F. Archiatrorum Comes.

Ad eximium art and vsu Pharmacopaeum and Botanographum I. Parkinsonum.
Gu. Turnerus. M.D.
HErbarum vires, primus te (magne Britannae)
Edocuit medicas, inclytus art sophus.
Io. Gerardus Chirurgus.
Atque cluens herbis alter, Chironis alumnus,
Descripsit plantas, neu cadat vlla salus.
Fortunate senex, sis tu nunc tertius Heroes
Hortos qui reseras, deliciasque soli,
Et flores Veneris laetos, herbas que virentes,
Arboreos faetus, pharmacum and art potens.
Posteritas iustos posthac tibi solvet honores,
Laudabit que tuae dexteritatis opus.
Ottuellus Meuerell. D.M. and Collegiae Med. Land. socius.

Amico suo Ioanni Parkinsono.
EXtollunt alij quos (Parkinsone) labores
Da mihi iam veniam comminuisse tuos.
Extremos poteris credi migrasse per Indos:
Cum liber haud aliud quam tuus hortus hic est:
Ipse habitare Indos tecum facis, haud petis Indos
I nunc, and tua me comminuisse refer.
Est liber Effigies, tuus hic qui pingitur hortus,
Digna manu facies haec, facieque manus!
Vidi ego splendentem varigatis vndique gemmis
Vna fuit Solomon, turba quid ergo fuit?
Vt vario splendent Pallacia regia sumptu,
Et Procerum turbis Atria tota nitent:
Tunc cum festa dies veniam dedit esse superbis
Quosque fious texit, nunc tria rura tegunt:
Plena tuo pariter spectatur Curia in Horto,
Hic Princeps, Dux hic, Sponsaque pulchra Ducis.
Quaeque dies est festa dies, nec parcius vnquam
Luxuriant, lauta haec; Quotidiana tamen.
Ecce velut Patriae Paradisi haud immemor Exul,
Hunc naturali pingit amore sibi.
Pingit and ad vivum sub eodem nomine, and hic est
Fronticuli sudor quem cerebrique dedit:
Astat Adam medius Paradiso noster in isto
Et species nomen cuique dat ipse suum.
Hos cape pro meritis, qui florem nomine donas
Aeternum florens tu tibi Nomen habe.
Guilielmus Atkins.

Ad Amicum Ioannem Parkinsonum Pharmacopaeum, and Archibotanicum Londinensem.
AFrica quas profert Plantas, quas India mittit,
Quas tua dat tellus, has tuus hortus habet:
Atque harum Species, florendi tempora, vires,
Et varias formas iste libellus habet:
Nescio plus librum talem mirabor, an hortum
Totus inest horto mundus; at iste libro.
Parkinsone tuus liber, and labor, and tua sit laus,
Herbas dum nobis das; datur herba tibi.
Guilielmus Brodus Pharmacopaeus ac Philobotanicus Londinensis.

Ad Amicum Ioannem Parkinsonum Pharmacopaeum and Botanicum insignem. Carmen.
QVam magno pandis Florae penetralia nixu
Atque facis coelo liberiore frui?
Omnibus vt placeas, o quam propensa voluntas,
Solicitus que labor nocte dieque premit?
Quam magno cultum studio conquirere in hortum
Herbarum quicquid mundus in orb tenet,
Immensus sumptus, multosque extensus in annos
Te labor afficiunt? and data nulla quies.
Talia quaerenti, surgit novus ardor habendi,
Nec tibi tot soli munera magna petis;
Descriptos viva profers sub imagine flores,
Tum profers mensae quicquid and hortus alit,
Laudatos nobis fructus and promis honores,
Profers, quas celebrant nullibi scripta virum,
Herbarum species, quibus est quoque grata venustas
Sic nos multiplici munere, Amice, beas.
Hoc cape pro meritis, florum dum gratia floret,
Suntque herbis vires; en tibi Nomen erit.
In serum semper tua gloria floreat aevum,
Gloria quae in longum non peritura diem.
Thomas Johnson vtriusque Societatis consors.

IOANNIS PARKINSONI PHARMACOPOEI LONDINENSIS EFFIGIES ^ LXII AETATIS ANNVM A
GENTIS ^ A NATO CHRISTO MDCXXIX
portrait of John Parkinson, the author

THE ORDERING OF THE GARDEN OF PLEASVRE.
CHAP. I. The situation of a Garden of pleasure, with the nature of soyles, and
how to amend the defects that are in many sorts of situations and grounds.
THE several situations of men's dwellings, are for the most part vnauoideable
and unremovable; for most men cannot appoint forth such a manner of situation
for their dwelling, as is most fit to avoid all the inconveniences of wind
and weather, but must be content with such as the place will afford them; yet
all men do well know, that some situations are more excellent than others:
according therefore to the several situation of men's dwellings, so are the
situations of their gardens also for the most part. And although diverse do
diversely prefer their own several places which they have chosen, or wherein
they dwell. As some those places that are near unto a river or brook to be
best for the pleasantness of the water, the case of transportation of
themselves, their friends and goods, as also for the fertility of the soil,
which is seldom bad near unto a rivers side; And others extol the side or
top of an hill, be it small or great, for the prospects sake; And again, some
the plain or champian ground, for the even level thereof: every one of which,
as they have their commodities accompanying them, so have they also their
discommodities belonging unto them, according to the Latin Proverb, Omne
commodum fert suum incommodum. Yet to show you for every of these situations
which is the fittest place to plant your garden in, and how to defend it from
the injuries of the cold winds and frosts that may annoy it, will, I hope, be
well accepted. And first, for the water side, I suppose the North side of the
water to be the best side for your garden, that it may have the comfort of the
South Sun to lie upon it and face it, and the dwelling house to be above it,
to defend the cold winds and frosts both from your herbs, and flowers, and
early fruits. And so likewise I judge for the hill side, that it may lie full
open to the South Sun, and the house above it, both for the comfort the
ground shall receive of the water and rain descending into it, and of defense
from winter and colds. Now for the plain level ground, the buildings of the
house should be on the North side of the garden, that so they might be a
defense of much sufficiency to safeguard it from many injurious cold nights and
days, which else might spoil the pride thereof in the bud. But because every
one cannot so appoint his dwelling, as I here appoint the fittest place for it
to be, every ones pleasure thereof shall be according to the site, cost, and
endeauours they bestow, to cause it come nearest to this proportion, by such
helps of brick or stone walls to defend it, or by the help of high grown and
well spread trees, planted on the North side thereof, to keep it the warmer.
And every of these three situations, having the fairest buildings of the house
facing the garden in this manner before specified, besides the benefit of
shelter it shall have from them, the buildings and rooms abutting thereon,
shall have reciprocally the beautiful prospect into it, and have both sight
and sent of whatsoever is excellent, and worthy to give content out from it,
which is one of the greatest pleasures a garden can yield his Master. Now
having showed you the best place where this your garden should be, let me
likewise advise you where it should not be, at least that it is the worst place
wherein it may be, if it be either on the West or East side of your house, or
that it stand in a moorish ground, or other unwholesome air (for many, both
fruits, herbs, and flowers that are tender, participate with the air, taking
in a manner their chiefest thriuing from thence) or near any common
Lay-stalles, or common Sewers, or else near any great Brew House, Dye-house,
or any other place where there is much smoke, whether it be of straw, wood, or
especially of sea-coales, which of all other is the worst, as our City of
London can give proof sufficient, wherein neither herb nor tree will long
prosper, nor has done ever since the use of sea-coales began to be frequent
therein. And likewise that it is much the worse, if it be near unto any
Barnes or Stackes of corn or hey, because that from thence will continually
with the wind be brought into the garden the straw and chafe of the corn,
the dust and seed of the hey to choke or pester it. Next unto the place or
situation, let me show you the grounds or soyles for it, either natural or
artificial. No man will deny, but the natural black mould is not only the
fattest and richest, but far exceeds any other either natural or
artificial, as well in goodness as durability. And next thereunto, I hold the
sandy loame (which is light and yet firm, but not loose as sand, nor stiff
like unto clay) to be little inferior for this our Garden of pleasure; for
that it does cause all bulbous and tuberous rooted plants to thrive
sufficiently therein, as likewise all other flower-plants, Roses, Trees, etc.
which if it shall decay by much turning and working out the heart of it, may
soon be helped with old stable manure of horses, being well turned in, when it
is old and almost converted to mould. Other grounds, as chalk, sand, gravel,
or clay, are every of them one more or less fertile or barren than other; and
therefore do require such helps as is most fit for them. And those grounds
that are over dry, loose, and dustie, the manure of stall fed beasts and
cattle being buried or trenched into the earth, and when it is thorough rotten
(which will require twice the time that the stable soil of horses will) well
turned and mixed with the earth, is the best soil to temper both the heat and
dryness of them. So contrariwise the stable dung of horses is the best for
cold grounds, to give them heat and life. But of all other sorts of grounds,
the stiff clay is the very worst for this purpose, for that although you
should dig out the whole compass of your Garden, carry it away, and bring
other good mould in the stead thereof, and fill up the place, yet the nature of
that clay is so predominant, that in a small time it will eat out the heart of
the good mould, and convert it to its own nature, or very near unto it: so
that to bring it to any good, there must be continual labor bestowed
thereon, by bringing into it good store of chalk, lime, or sand, or else ashes
either of wood or of sea-coales (which is the best for this ground) well mixed
and turned in with it. And as this stiff clay is the worst, so what ground
soever comes nearest unto the nature thereof, is nearest unto it in badnesse,
the signs whereof are the overmuch moisture thereof in Winter, and the much
cleaving and chapping thereof in Summer, when the heat of the year has
consumed the moisture, which tied and bound it fast together, as also the
stiff and hard working therein: but if the nature of the clay be not too
stiff, but as it were tempered and mixed with sand or other earths, your old
stable soil of horses will help well the small rifting or chapping thereof,
to be plentifully bestowed therein in a fit season. Some also do commend the
casting of ponds and ditches, to help to manure these stiff chapping grounds.
Other grounds, that are ouermoist by springs, that lie too near the upper face
of the earth, besides that the beds thereof had need to be laid up higher, and
the allies, as trenches and furrows, to lie lower, the ground it self had
need to have some good store of chalke-stones bestowed thereon, some certain
years, if it may be, before it be laid into a Garden, that the Winter frosts
may break the chalk small, and the Rain dissolve it into mould, that so they
may be well mixed together; than which, there is not any better manure to
soil such a moist ground, to help to dry up the moisture, and to give heat
and life to the coldness thereof, which does always accompany these moist
grounds, and also to cause it abide longer in heart than any other. For the
sandy and grauelly grounds, although I know the well mollified manure of beasts
and cattle to be excellent good, yet I know also, that some commend a white
Marle, and some a clay to be well spread thereon, and after turned thereinto:
and for the chalkie ground, e conuerso, I commend fat clay to help it. You
must understand, that the less rich or more barren that your ground is, there
needs the more care, labor, and cost to be bestowed thereon, both to order
it rightly, and so to preserve it from time to time: for no artificial or
forced ground can endure good any long time, but that within a few years it
must be refreshed more or less, according as it does require. Yet you shall
likewise understand, that this Garden of pleasure stored with these Outlandish
flowers; that is, bulbous and tuberous rooted plants, and other fine flowers,
that I have hereafter described, and assigned unto it, needs not so much or
so often manuring with soil, etc. as another Garden planted with the other
sorts of English flowers, or a Garden of ordinary Kitchen herbs does. Your
ground likewise for this Garden had need to be well cleansed from all
annoyances (that may hinder the well doing or prospering of the flowers
therein) as stones, weeds, roots of trees, bushes, etc. and all other things
cumbersome or hurtful; and therefore the earth being not naturally fine enough
of it self, is used to be sifted to make it the finer, and that either
through a hurdle made of sticks, or lathes, or through square or round sieues
platted with fine and strong thin sticks, or with wyers in the bottom. Or
else the whole earth of the Garden being course, may be cast in the same manner
that men use to try or fine sand from gravel, that is, against a wall; whereby
the courser and more stony, falling down from the fine, is to betaken away
from the foot of the heap, the finer sand and ground remaining still above,
and on the heap. Or else in the want of a wall to cast it against, I have
seen earth fined by it self in this manner: Having made the floor or upper
part of a large plat of ground clean from stones, etc. let there a reasonable
round heap of fine earth be set in the midst thereof, or instead thereof a
large Garden flower-pot, or other great pot, the bottom turned upwards, and
then pour your course earth on the top or head thereof, one shouell full after
another somewhat gently, and thereby all the course stuff and stones will fall
down to the bottom round about the heap, which must continually be carefully
taken away, and thus you may make your earth as fine as if it were cast against
a wall, the heap being grown great, serving in stead thereof. Those that will
not prepare their grounds in some of these manners aforesaid, shall soon find
to their loss the neglect thereof: for the trash and stones shall so hinder
the increase of their roots, that they will be half lost in the earth among
the stones, which else might be saved to serve to plant wheresoever they please.

CHAP. II. The frame or form of a Garden of delight and pleasure, with the
several varieties thereof.
ALthough many men must be content with any plat of ground, of what form or
quantity soever it be, more or less, for their Garden, because a more large
or convenient cannot be had to their habitation: Yet I persuade my self, that
Gentlemen of the better sort and quality, will provide such a parcel of ground
to be laid out for their Garden, and in such convenient manner, as may be fit
and answerable to the degree they hold. To prescribe one form for every man to
follow, were too great presumption and folly: for every man will please his
own fancy, according to the extent he designeth out for that purpose, be it
orbicular or round, triangular or three square, quadrangular or four square,
or more long than broad. I will only show you here the several forms that
many men have taken and delighted in, let every man choose which him likes
best, or may most fitly agree to that proportion of ground he has set out for
that purpose. The orbicular or round form is held in it own proper existence
to be the most absolute form, containing within it all other forms
whatsoever; but few I think will choose such a proportion to be joined to their
habitation, being not accepted any where I think, but for the general Garden
to the University at Padoa. The triangular or three square is such a form
also, as is seldom chosen by any that may make another choice, and as I think
is only had where another form cannot be had, necessity constraining them to
be therewith content. The four square form is the most usually accepted with
all, and does best agree to any man's dwelling, being (as I said before) behind
the house, all the back windows thereof opening into it. Yet if it be longer
than the breadth, or broader than the length, the proportion of walks,
squares, and knots may be soon brought to the square form, and be so cast, as
the beauty thereof may diagrams of formal pleasure gardens be no less than
the four square proportion, or any other better form, if any be. To form it
therefore with walks, cross the middle both ways, and round about it also with
hedges, with squares, knots and trayles, or any other work within the four
square parts, is according as every man's conceit allows of it, and they will
be at the charge: For there may be therein walks either open or close, either
public or private, a maze or wilderness, a rock or mount, with a fountain
in the midst thereof to convey water to every part of the Garden, either in
pipes under the ground, or brought by hand, and emptied into large Cisternes or
great Turkey Iarres, placed in convenient places, to serve as an ease to water
the nearest parts thereunto. Arbours also being both graceful and necessary,
may be appointed in such convenient places, as the corners, or else where, as
may be most fit, to serve both for shadow and rest after walking. And because
many are desirous to see the forms of trayles, knots, and other compartiments,
and because the open knots are more proper for these Outlandish flowers; I
have here caused some to be drawn, to satisfy their desires, not intending to
cumber this work with over many, in that it would be almost endless, to
express so many as might be conceived and set down, for that every man may
invent others far differing from these, or any other can be set forth. Let
every man therefore, if he like of these, take what may please his mind, or
out of these or his own conceit, frame any other to his fancy, or cause others
to be done as he likes best, observing this decorum, that according to his
ground he do cast out his knots, with convenient room for allies and walks;
for the fairer and larger your allies and walks be, the more grace your Garden
shall have, the less harm the herbs and flowers shall receive, by passing by
them that grow next unto the allies sides, and the better shall your Weeders
cleanse both the beds and the allies.

CHAP. III. The many sorts of herbs and other things, wherewith the beds and
parts of knots are bordered to set out the form of them, with their
commodities and discommodities.
IT is necessary also, that I show you the several materials, wherewith these
knots and trayles are set forth and bordered; which are of two sorts: The one
are living herbs, and the other are dead materials; as lead, boords, bones,
tyles, etc. Of herbs, there are many sorts wherewith the knots and beds in a
Garden are used to be set, to show forth the form of them, and to preserve
them the longer in their form, as also to be as green, and sweet herbs,
while they grow, to be cut to perfume the house, keeping them in such order and
proportion, as may be most convenient for their several natures, and every
man's pleasure and fancy: Of all which, I intend to give you the knowledge here
in this place; and first, to begin with that which has been most anciently
received, which is Thrift. This is an everliving green herb, which many take
to border their beds, and set their knots and trayles, and therein much
delight, because it will grow thick and bushie, and may be kept, being cut
with a pair of Garden sheeres, in some good handsome manner and proportion for
a time, and besides, in the Summer time send forth many short stalks of
pleasant flowers, to deck up an house among other sweet herbs: Yet these
inconveniences do accompany it; it will not only in a small time ouergrow the
knot or trayle in many places, by growing so thick and bushie, that it will
put out the form of a knot in many places: but also much thereof will dye with
the frosts and snowes in Winter, and with the drought in Summer, whereby many
void places will be seen in the knot, which does much deforme it, and must
therefore be yearly refreshed: the thickness also and bushing thereof does
hide and shelter snayles and other small noisome worms so plentifully, that
Gilloflowers, and other fine herbs and flowers being planted therein, are much
spoiled by them, and cannot be helped without much industry, and very great and
daily attendance to destroy them. Germander is another herb, in former times
also much used, and yet also in many places; and because it will grow thick,
and may be kept also in some form and proportion with cutting, and that the
cuttings are much used as a strawing herb for houses, being pretty and sweet,
is also much affected by diverse: but this also will often dye and grow out of
form, and besides that, the stalks will grow too great, hard and stubby, the
roots do so far shoot under ground, that upon a little continuance
thereof, will spread into many places within the knot, which it continually
they be not plucked up, they will spoil the whole knot it self; and therefore
once in three or four years at the most, it must be taken up and new set, or
else it will grow too roynish and cumbersome. Hyssope has also been used to be
set about a knot, and being sweet, will serve for strewings, as Germander: But
this, although the roots do not run or creep like it, yet the stalks do
quickly grow great above ground, and dye often after the first years setting,
whereby the grace of the knot will be much lost. Marierome, Sauorie, and Thyme,
in the like manner being sweet herbs, are used to border up beds and knots,
and will be kept for a little while, with cutting, into some conformity; but
all and every of them serve most commonly but for one years use, and will
soon decay and perish: and therefore none of these, no more than any of the
former, do I commend for a good bordering herb for this purpose. Lauander
Cotton also being finely slipped and set, is of many, and those of the highest
respect of late days, accepted, both for the beauty and form of the herb,
being of a whitish green mealy color, for his sent smelling somewhat strong,
and being everliving and abiding green all the Winter, will, by cutting, be
kept in as even proportion as any other herb may be. This will likewise soon
grow great and stubbed, notwithstanding the cutting, and besides will now and
then perish in some places, especially if you do not strike or put off the
snow, before the Sun lying upon it dissolve it: The rarity and nouelty of
this herb, being for the most part but in the Gardens of great persons, does
cause it to be of the greater regard, it must therefore be renewed wholly every
second or third year at the most, because of the great growing thereof. Slips
of Juniper or Yew are also received of some and planted, because they are
always green, and that the Juniper especially has not that ill sent that Box
has, which I will presently commend unto you, yet both Juniper and Yew will
soon grow too great and stubbed, and force you to take up your knot sooner,
than if it were planted with Box. Which lastly, I chiefly and above all other
herbs commend unto you, and being a small, low, or dwarf kind, is called
French or Dutch Box, and serves very well to set out any knot, or border out
any beds: for besides that it is ever green, it being reasonable thick set,
will easily be cut and formed into any fashion one will, according to the
nature thereof, which is to grow very slowly, and will not in a long time rise
to be of any height, but shooting forth many small branches from the root,
will grow very thick, and yet not require so great tending, nor so much perish
as any of the former, and is only received into the Gardens of those that are
curious. This (as I before said) I commend and hold to be the best and surest
herb to abide fair and green in all the bitter storms of the sharpest
Winter, and all the great heates and droughts of Summer, and does recompense
the want of a good sweet sent with his fresh verdure, even proportion, and long
lasting continuance. Yet these inconveniences it has, that besides the
unpleasing sent which many mislike, and yet is but small, the roots of this
Box do so much spread themselves into the ground of the knot, and do draw
from thence so much nourishment, that it robs all the herbs that grow near
it of their sap and substance, thereby making all the earth about it barren, or
at least less fertile. Wherefore to show you the remedy of this inconvenience
of spreading, without either taking up the Box of the border, or the herbs
and flowers in the knot, is I think a secret known but unto a few, which is
this: You shall take a broad pointed Iron like unto a Slise or Chessill, which
thrust down right into the ground a good depth all along the inside of the
border of Box somewhat close thereunto, you may thereby cut away the spreading
roots thereof, which draw so much moisture from the other herbs on the
inside, and by this means both preserve your herbs and flowers in the knot,
and your Box also, for that the Box will be nourished sufficiently from the
rest of the roots it shoots on all the other sides. And thus much for the
living herbs, that serve to set or border up any knot. Now for the dead
materials, they are also, as I said before diverse: as first, Lead, which some
that are curious do border their knots withal, causing it to be cut of the
breadth of four fingers, bowing the lower edge a little outward, that it may
lie under the upper crust of the ground, and that it may stand the faster, and
making the upper edge either plain, or cut out like unto the battlements of a
Church: this fashion has delighted some, who have accounted it stately (at the
least costly) and fit for their degree, and the rather, because it will be
bowed and bended into any round square, angular, or other proportion as one
lists, and is not much to be misliked, in that the Lead does not easily
break or spoil without much injury, and keeps up a knot for a very long
time in his due proportion: but in my opinion, the Lead is ouer-hot for
Summer, and ouer-cold for Winter. Others do take Oaken inch boords, and sawing
them four or five inches broad, do hold up their knot therewith: but in that
these boordes cannot be drawn compass into any small scantling, they must
serve rather for long outright beds, or such knots as have no rounds, half
rounds, or compassings in them. And besides, these boordes are not long
lasting, because they stand continually in the weather, especially the ends
where they are fastened together will soonest rot and perish, and so the whole
form will be spoiled. To prevent that fault, some others have chosen the
shanke bones of Sheep, which after they have been well cleansed and boiled, to
take out the fat from them, are stuck into the ground the small end
downwards, and the knockle head upwards, and thus being set side to side, or
end to end close together, they set out the whole knot therewith, which heads
of bones although they look not white the first year, yet after they have
abiden some frosts and heates will become white, and prettily grace out the
ground: but this inconvenience is incident to them, that the Winter frosts will
raise them out of the ground oftentimes, and if by chance the knockle head of
any do break, or be struck off with any ones foot, etc. going by, from your
store, that lies by you of the same sort, set another in the place, having
first taken away the broken piece: although these will last long in form and
order, yet because they are but bones many mislike them, and indeed I know but
few that use them. Tyles are also used by some, which by reason they may be
brought compass into any fashion many are pleased with them, who do not take
the whole Tyle at length, but half Tyles, and other broken pieces set somewhat
deep into the ground, that they may stand fast, and these take up but little
room, and keep up the edge of the beds and knots in a pretty comely manner,
but they are often out of frame, in that many of them are broken and spoiled,
both with men's feet passing by, the weather and weight of the earth beating
them down and breaking them, but especially the frosts in Winter do so crack
off their edges, both at the tops and sides that stand close one unto
another, that they must be continually tended and repaired, with fresh and
sound ones put in the place of them that are broken or decayed. And lastly (for
it is the latest invention) round whitish or bluish pebble stones, of some
reasonable proportion and bigness, neither too great nor too little, have
been used by some to be set, or rather in a manner but laid upon the ground
to fashion out the traile or knot, or all along by the large grauelly walk
sides to set out the walk, and makes a pretty handsome show, and because the
stones will not decay with the injuries of any time or weather, and will be
placed in their places again, if any should be thrust out by any accident, as
also that their sight is so conspicuous upon the ground, especially if they be
not hid with the store of herbs growing in the knot; is accounted both for
durability, beauty of the sight, handsomnesse in the work, and ease in the
working and charge, to be of all other dead materials the chiefest. And thus,
Gentlemen, I have showed you all the varieties that I know are used by any in
our Country, that are worth the reciting (but as for the fashion of
Iawe-bones, used by some in the Low Countries, and other places beyond the
Seas, being too gross and base, I make no mention of them) among which every
one may take what pleases him best, or may most fitly be had, or may best
agree with the ground or knot. Moreover, all these herbs that serve for
borderings, do serve as well to be set upon the ground of a leuelled knot;
that is, where the allies and foot-pathes are of the same level with the knot,
as they may serve also for the raised knot, that is, where the beds of the knot
are raised higher than the allies: but both Lead, Boordes, Bones, and Tyles,
are only for the raised ground, be it knot or beds. The pebble stones again
are only for the leuelled ground, because they are so shallow, that as I said
before, they rather lie upon the earth than are thrust any way into it. All
this that I have here set down, you must understand is proper for the knots
alone of a Garden. But for to border the whole square or knot about, to serve
as a hedge thereunto, every one takes what likes him best; as either Priuet
alone, or sweet Bryer, and white Thorn enterlaced together, and Roses of one,
or two, or more sorts placed here and there amongst them. Some also take
Lauander, Rosemary, Sage, Southernwood, Lauander Cotton, or some such other
thing. Some again plant Cornell Trees, and plash them, or keep them low, to
form them into an hedge. And some again take a low prickly shrubbe, that
abides always green, described in the end of this Book, called in Latin
Pyracantha, which in time will make an ever green hedge or border, and when it
bears fruit, which are red berries like unto Hawthorne berries, make a
glorious show among the green leaves in the Winter time, when no other
shrubbes have fruit or leaves.

CHAP. IV. The nature and names of diners Outlandish flowers, that for their
pride, beauty, and earliness, are to be planted in Gardens of pleasure for
delight.
Having thus formed out a Garden, and divided it into his fit and due
proportion, with all the graceful knots, arbours, walks, etc. likewise what
is fit to keep it in the same comely order, is appointed unto it, both for the
borders of the squares, and for the knots and beds themselves; let us now come
and furnish the inward parts, and beds with those fine flowers that (being
strangers unto us, and giving the beauty and bravery of their colors so early
before many of our own bred flowers, the more to entice us to their delight)
are most beseeming it: and namely, with Daffodils, Fritillarias, Iacinthes,
Saffron-flowers, Lillies, Flowerdeluces, Tulipas, Anemones, French Cowslips, or
Bears ears, and a number of such other flowers, very beautiful, delightful,
and pleasant, hereafter described at full, whereof although many have little
sweet sent to commend them, yet their earliness and exceeding great beauty
and variety does so far counteruaile that defect (and yet I must tell you
with all, that there is among the many sorts of them some, and that not a few,
that do excel in sweetness, being so strong and heady, that they rather
offend by too much than by too little sent, and some again are of so mild and
moderate temper, that they scarce come short of your most delicate and dantiest
flowers) that they are almost in all places with all persons, especially with
the better sort of the Gentry of the Land, as greatly desired and accepted as
any other the most choicest, and the rather, for that the most part of these
Outlandish flowers, do show forth their beauty and colors so early in the
year, that they seem to make a Garden of delight even in the Winter time, and
do so give their flowers one after another, that all their bravery is not
fully spent, until that Gilliflowers, the pride of our English Gardens, do show
themselves: So that whosoever would have of every sort of these flowers, may
have for every month several colors and varieties, even from Christmas
until Midsommer, or after; and then, after some little respite, until
Christmas again, and that in some plenty, with great content and without
forcing; so that every man may have them in every place, if they will take any
care of them. And because there be many Gentlewomen and others, that would
gladly have some fine flowers to furnish their Gardens, but know not what the
names of those things are that they desire, nor what are the times of their
flowring, nor the skill and knowledge of their right ordering, planting,
displanting, transplanting, and replanting; I have here for their sakes set
down the nature, names, times, and manner of ordering in a brief manner,
referring the more ample declaration of them to the work following. And first
of their names and natures: Of Daffodils there are almost an hundred sorts, as
they are severally described hereafter, every one to be distinguished from
other, both in their times, forms, and colors, some being either white, or
yellow, or mixed, or else being small or great, single or double, and some
having but one flower upon a stalk, others many, whereof many are so exceeding
sweet, that a very few are sufficient to perfume a whole chamber, and besides,
many of them be so fair and double, either one upon a stalk, or many upon a
stalk, that one or two stalks of flowers are in stead of a whole nose-gay, or
bundell of flowers tied together. This I do affirm upon good knowledge and
certain experience, and not as a great many others do, tell of the wonders of
another world, which themselves never saw nor ever heard of, except some
superficial relation, which themselves have augmented according to their own
fancy and conceit. Again, let me here also by the way tell you, that many
idle and ignorant Gardiners and others, who get names by stealth, as they do
many other things, do call some of these Daffodils Narcisses, when as all know
that know any Latin, that Narcissus is the Latin name, and Daffodill the
English of one and the same thing; and therefore alone without any other
Epithet cannot properly distinguish several things. I would willingly
therefore that all would grow judicious, and call every thing by his proper
English name in speaking English, or else by such Latin name as every thing
has that has not a proper English name, that thereby they may distinguish the
several varieties of things and not confound them, as also to take away all
excuses of mistaking; as for example: The single English bastard Daffodill
(which grows wild in many Woods, Groves, and Orchards in England.) The
double English bastard Daffodill. The French single white Daffodill many upon a
stalk. The French double yellow Daffodill. The great, or the little, or the
least Spanish yellow bastard Daffodill, or the great or little Spanish white
Daffodill. The Turkey single white Daffodill, or, The Turkey single or double
white Daffodill many upon a stalk, etc. Of Fritillaria, or the checkerd
Daffodill, there are half a score several sorts, both white and red, both
yellow and black, which are a wonderful grace and ornament to a Garden in
regard of the Checker like spots are in the flowers. Of Iacinthes there are
above half an hundred sorts, as they are specified hereafter; some like unto
little bells or stars, others like unto little bottles or pearls, both white
and blew, sky-colored and blush, and some starlike of many pretty various
forms, and all to give delight to them that will be curious to observe them.
Of Crocus or Saffron flowers, there are also twenty sorts; some of the Spring
time, others flowring only in the Autumn or Fall, earlier or later than
another, some whereof abide but a while, others endure above a month in their
glorious beauty. The Colchicum or Medowe Saffron, which some call the son
before the father, but not properly, is of many sorts also; some flowring in
the Spring of the year, but the most in Autumn, whereof some have fair double
flowers very delightful to behold, and some party colored both single and
double so variable, that it would make any one admire the work of the Creator
in the various spots and stripes of these flowers. Then have we of Lillies
twenty several sorts and colors, among whom I must reckon the Crown
Imperial, that for his stately form deserves some special place in this
Garden, as also the Martagons, both white and red, both blush and yellow, that
require to be set by themselves apart, as it were in a small round or square of
a knot, without many other, or tall flowers growing near them. But to tell you
of all the sorts of Tulipas (which are the pride of delight) they are so many,
and as I may say, almost infinite, does both pass my ability, and as I believe
the skill of any other. They are of two especial sorts, some flowring earlier,
and others later than their fellows, and that naturally in all grounds,
wherein there is such a wonderful variety and mixture of colors, that it is
almost impossible for the wit of man to descipher them thoroughly, and to give
names that may be true and several distinctions to every flower, threescore
several sorts of colors simple and mixed of each kind I can reckon up that I
have, and of especial note, and yet I doubt not, but for every one of them
there are ten others differing from them, which may be seen at several times,
and in several places: and besides this glory of variety in colors that these
flowers have, they carry so stately and delightful a form, and do abide so
long in their bravery (enduring above three whole months from the first unto
the last) that there is no Lady or Gentlewoman of any worth that is not caught
with this delight, or not delighted with these flowers. The Anemones likewise
or Windeflowers are so full of variety and so dainty, so pleasant and so
delightsome flowers, that the sight of them does enforce an earnest longing
desire in the mind of any one to be a possessour of some of them at the least:
For without all doubt, this one kind of flower, so variable in colors, so
differing in form (being almost as many sorts of them double as single) so
plentiful in bearing flowers, and so durable in lasting, and also so easy
both to preserve and to increase, is of it self alone almost sufficient to
furnish a garden with their flowers for almost half the year, as I shall show
you in a fit and convenient place. The Bears ears or French Cowslips must not
want their deserved commendations, seeing that their flowers, being many set
together upon a stalk, do seem every one of them to be a Nosegay alone of
it self: and besides the many differing colors that are to be seen in them,
as white, yellow, blush, purple, red, tawney, murrey, hair color, etc. which
increase much delight in all sorts of the Gentry of the Land, they are not
unfurnished with a pretty sweet sent, which does add an increase of pleasure
in those that make them an ornament for their wearing. Flowerdeluces also are
of many sorts, but divided into two especial kinds; the one bearing a leaf
like a flagge, whose roots are tuberous, thick and short (one kind of them
being the Orris roots that are sold at the Apothecaries, whereof sweet
powders are made to lie among garments) the other having round roots like unto
Onions, and narrow long leaves somewhat like grass: Of both these kinds there
is much variety, especially in their colors. The greater Flagge kind is
frequent enough and dispersed in this Land, and well does serve to deck up
both a Garden and House with natures beauties: But the chief of all is your
Sable flower, so fit for a mourning habit, that I think in the whole compass
of natures store, there is not a more patheticall, or of greater
correspondency, nor yet among all the flowers I know any one coming near unto
the color of it. The other kind which has bulbous or Onion like roots,
diuersifieth it self also into so many fine colors, being of a more neat
shape and succinct form than the former, that it must not be wanting to
furnish this Garden. The Hepatica or Noble Liuerwoort is another flower of
account, whereof some are white, others red, or blew, or purple, somewhat
resembling Violets, but that there are white threads in the midst of their
flowers, which add the more grace unto them; and one kind of them is so
double, that it resembles a double thick Dasie or Marigold, but being small
and of an excellent blew color, is like unto a Button: but that which
commends the flower as much as the beauty, is the earliness in flowring, for
that it is one of the very first flowers that open themselves after Christmas,
even in the midst of Winter. The Cyclamen or Sowebread is a flower of rare
receipt, because it is naturally hard to increase, and that the flowers are
like unto red or blush colored Violets, flowring in the end of Summer or
beginning of Autumn: the leaves likewise hereof have no small delight in their
pleasant color, being spotted and circled white upon green, and that which
most prefers it, is the Physical properties thereof for women, which I will
declare when I shall show you the several descriptions of the varieties in his
proper place. Many other sorts of flowers there are fit to furnish this Garden,
as Leucoium or Bulbous Violet, both early and late flowring. Muscari or Musk
Grape flower. Star flowers of diverse sorts. Phalangium or Spiderwort, the
chief of many is that sort whose flowers are like unto a white Lilly. Winter
Crowfoote or Wolfes bane. The Christmas flower like unto a single white Rose.
Bell flowers of many kinds. Yellow Larkes spur, the prettiest flower of a
score in a Garden. Flower-gentle or Floramour. Flower of the Sun. The
Marvel of Peru or of the world. Double Marsh Marigold or double yellow
Buttons, much differing and far exceeding your double yellow Crowfoote, which
some call Batchelours Buttons. Double French Marigolds that smell well, and is
a greater kind than the ordinary, and far surpasses it. The double red
Ranunculus or Crowfoote (far excelling the most glorious double Anemone) and
is like unto our great yellow double Crowfoote. Thus having given you the
knowledge of some of the choicest flowers for the beds of this Garden, let me
also show you what are fittest for your borders, and for your arbours. The
Iasmine white and yellow. The double Honysockle. The Ladies Bower, both white,
and red, and purple single and double, are the fittest of Outlandish plants to
set by arbours and banqueting houses, that are open, both before and above to
help to cover them, and to give both sight, smell, and delight. The sorts of
Roses are fittest for standards in the hedges or borders. The Cherry Bay or
Laurocerasus. The Rose Bay or Oleander. The white and the blew Syringa or Pipe
tree, are all graceful and delightful to set at several distances in the
borders of knots; for some of them give beautiful and sweet flowers. The
Pyracantha or Prickly Coral tree does remain with green leaves all the
year, and may be plashed, or laid down, or tied to make a fine hedge to
border the whole knot, as is said before. The Wild Bay or Laurus Tinus, does
chiefly desire to be sheltered under a wall, where it will best thrive, and
give you his beautiful flowers in Winter for your delight, in recompense of
his fenced dwelling. The Dwarf Bay or Mesereon, is most commonly either placed
in the midst of a knot, or at the corners thereof, and sometimes all along a
walk for the more grace. And thus to fit every ones fancy, I have showed you
the variety of natures store in some part for you to dispose of them to your
best content.

CHAP. V. The nature and names of those that are called usually English flowers.
THose flowers that have been usually planted in former times in Gardens of
this Kingdom (when as our forefathers knew few or none of those that are
recited before) have by time and custom attained the name of English flowers,
although the most of them were never natural of this our Land, but brought in
from other Countries at one time or other, by those that took pleasure in them
where they first saw them: and I doubt not, but many other sorts than here are
set down, or now known to us, have been brought, which either have perished
by their negligence or want of skill that brought them, or else because they
could not abide our cold Winters; those only remaining with us that have
endured of themselves, and by their increasing have been distributed over the
whole Land. If I should make any large discourse of them, being so well known
to all, I doubt I should make a long tale to small purpose: I will therefore
but briefly recite them, that you may have them together in one place, with
some little declaration of the nature and quality of them, and so pass to
other matters. And first of Primroses and Cowslips, whereof there are many
pretty varieties; some better known in the West parts of this Kingdom,
others in the North, than in any other, until of late being observed by some
curious lovers of varieties, they have been transplanted diversely, and so made
more common: for although we have had formerly in these parts about London
green Primroses usually, yet we never saw or heard of green Cowslips both
single and double but of late days, and so likewise for Primroses to be both
single and double from one root, and diverse upon one stalk of diverse
fashions, I am sure is not usual: all which desire rather to be planted under
some hedge, or fence, or in the shade, than in the Sun. Single Rose Campions,
both white, red, and blush, and the double red Rose Campion also is known
sufficiently, and will abide moderate Sun as well as the shade. The flower of
Bristow or Nonesuch is likewise another kind of Campion, whereof there is
both white flowring plants and blush as well as Orange color, all of them
being single flowers require a moderate Sun and not the shadow: But the
Orange color Nonesuch with double flowers, as it is rare and not common, so
for his bravery does well deserve a Master of account that will take care to
keep and preserve it. Batchelours Buttons both white and red, are kinds of
wild Campions of a very double form, and will reasonably well like the Sun
but not the shade. Wall-flowers are common in every Garden, as well the
ordinary double as the single, and the double kind desires no more shade than
the single, but the greater kinds both double and single must have the Sun.
Stock-Gilloflowers likewise are almost as common as Wall-flowers, especially
the single kinds in every woman's Garden, but the double kinds are much more
rare, and possessed but of a few, and those only that will be careful to
preserve them in Winter; for besides that the most of them are more tender,
they yield no seed as the single kinds do to preserve them, although one
kind from the sowing of the seed yield double flowers: They will all require
the comfort of the Sun, especially the double kinds, and to be defended from
cold, yet so as in the Summer they do not want water wherein they much joy,
and which is as it were their life. Queens Gilloflowers (which some call Dames
Violets, and some Winter Gilloflowers, are a kind of Stock-Gilloflower)
planted in Gardens to serve to fill up the parts thereof for want of better
things, having in mine opinion neither sight nor sent much to commend them.
Violets are the Springs chief flowers for beauty, smell, and use, both single
and double, the more shadie and moist they stand the better. Snapdragon are
flowers of much more delight, and in that they are more tender to keep, and
will hardly endure the sharp Winters, unless they stand well defended, are
scarce seen in many Gardens. Columbines single and double, of many sorts,
fashions, and colors, very variable both speckled and party colored, are
flowers of that respect, as that no Garden would willingly be without them,
that could tell how to have them, yet the rarer the flowers are, the more
trouble to keep; the ordinary sorts on the contrary part will not be lost, do
what one will. Larkes heels, or spurs, or toes, as in several Countries
they are called, exceed in the variety of colors, both single and double, any
of the former times; for until of late days none of the most pleasant colors
were seen or heard of: but now the single kinds are reasonable well dispersed
over the Land, yet the double kinds of all those pleasant colors (and some
other also as beautiful) which stand like little double Roses, are enjoyed but
of a few: all of them rise from seed, and must be sown every year, the double
as well as the single. Pansyes or Hearts eases of diverse colors, and although
without sent, yet not without some respect and delight. Double Poppies are
flowers of a great and goodly proportion, adorning a Garden with their variable
colors to the delight of the beholders, wherein there is some special care to
be taken, lest they turn single; and that is, if you see them grow up too
thick, that you must pull them up, and not suffer them to grow within less
than half a yard distance, or more one from another. Double Daisies are
flowers not to be forgotten, although they be common enough in every Garden,
being both white and red, both blush and speckled, or party colored, besides
that which is called Jack an Apes on horseback, they require a moist and
shadowie place; for they are scorched away, if they stand in the Sun in any
dry place. Double Marigolds also are the most common in all Gardens. And so are
the French Marigolds that have a strong heady sent, both single and double,
whose glorious show for color would cause any to believe there were some rare
goodness or virtue in them. These all are sometimes preserved in the Winter,
if they be well defended from the cold. But what shall I say to the Queen of
delight and of flowers, Carnations and Gilloflowers, whose bravery, variety,
and sweet smell joined together, tyeth every ones affection with great
earnestness, both to like and to have them? Those that were known, and
enjoyed in former times with much acceptance, are now for the most part less
accounted of, except a very few: for now there are so many other varieties of
later invention, that troubles the other both in number, beauty, and worth:
The names of them do differ very variably, in that names are imposed and
altered as every ones fancy will have them, that carried or sent them into the
several Countries from London, where their truest name is to be had, in mine
opinion. I will here but give you the names of some, and refer you to the
work ensuing for your further knowledge. The red and the gray Hulo. The old
Carnation, differing from them both. The Gran Pere. The Cambersiue. The
Sauadge. The Crystal. The Prince. The white Carnation, or Delicate. The
ground Carnation. The French Carnation. The Dover. The Oxford. The Bristow. The
Westminster. The Dainty. The Granado, and many other Gilloflowers too tedious
to recite in this place, because I have amply declared them in the book
following. But there is another sort of great delight and variety, called the
Orange tawny Gilloflower, which for the most part has risen from seed, and
does give seed in a more plentiful manner than any of the former sorts, and
likewise by the sowing of the seed there has been gained so many varieties of
that excellent worth and respect, that it can hardly be expressed or believed,
and called by diverse names according to the marking of the flowers; as The
Infanta. The Stripped Tawny. The Speckled Tawny. The Flackt Tawny. The Griseld
Tawny, and many others, every one to be distinguished from others: Some also
have their flowers more double and large than others, and some from the same
seed have single flowers like broad single Pinkes: the further relation of
them, viz. their order to sow, increase, and preserve them, you shall have in
the subsequent discourse in a place by it self. Pinkes likewise both single
and double are of much variety, all of them very sweet, coming near the
Gilloflowers. Sweet Williams and Sweet John's, both single and double, both
white, red, and spotted, as they are kinds of wild Pinkes, so for their grace
and beauty help to furnish a Garden, yet desire not to stand so open to the
Sun as the former. Double and single Peonies are fit flowers to furnish a
Garden, and by reason of their durability, give out fresh pleasure every year
without any further trouble of sowing. And lastly, Hollihocks both single and
double, of many and sundry colors, yield out their flowers like Roses on their
tall branches, like Trees, to suit you with flowers, when almost you have no
other to grace out your Garden: the single and double do both yield seed, and
yet do after their seeding abide many years. Thus have I showed you most of
the English, as well as (I did before) the Outlandish flowers, that are fit to
furnish the knots, trailes, beds, and borders of this Garden. Roses only, as I
said before, I reserve to circle or encompasse all the rest, because that for
the most part they are planted in the outer borders of the quarters, and
sometimes by themselves in the middle of long beds, the sorts or kinds whereof
are many, as they are declared in their proper place: but the White Rose, the
Red, and the Damask, are the most ancient Standards in England, and therefore
accounted natural.

CHAP. VI. The order and manner to plant and replant all the sorts of
Outlandish flowers spoken of before, as well those with bulbous roots, as
others with stringie roots.
WHereas it is the usual custom of most in this Land, to turn up their
Gardens, and to plant them again in the Spring of the year, which is the best
time that may be chosen for all English flowers, yet it is not so for your
Outlandish flowers. And herein indeed has been not only the error of a
great many to hinder their roots from bearing out their flowers as they
should, but also to hinder many to take delight in them, because as they say
they will not thrive and prosper with them, when as the whole fault is in the
want of knowledge of the fit and convenient time wherein they should be
planted. And because our English Gardiners are all or the most of them utterly
ignorant in the ordering of these Outlandish flowers, as not being trained up
to know them, I have here taken upon me the form of a new Gardener, to give
instructions to those that will take pleasure in them, that they may be the
better enabled with these helps I shall show them, both to know how they
should be ordered, and to direct their Gardiners that are ignorant thereof,
rightly to dispose them according to their natural qualities. And I do
wishall Gentlemen and Gentlewomen, whom it may concern for their own good, to
be as careful whom they trust with the planting and replanting of these fine
flowers, as they would be with so many Jewels; for the roots of many of them
being small, and of great value, may be soon conveyed away, and a cleanly tale
fair told, that such a root is rotten, or perished in the ground if none be
seen where it should be, or else that the flower has changed his color, when
it has been taken away, or a counterfeit one has been put in the place
thereof; and thus many have been deceived of their daintiest flowers, without
remedy or true knowledge of the defect. You shall therefore, if you will take
the right course that is proper for these kinds of flowers, not set or plant
them among your English flowers; for that when the one may be removed, the
other may not be stirred: but plant those roots that are bulbous, or round
like Onions, either in knots or beds by themselves which is the best, or with
but very few English or Outlandish flower plants that have stringie roots:
For you must take this for a general rule, that all those roots that are like
Lillies or Onions, are to be planted in the months of July or August, or unto
the middle or end of September at the furthest, if you will have them to
prosper as they should; and not in the Spring of the year, when other
gardening is used. Yet I must likewise give you to understand, that if Tulipas,
and Daffodils, and some other that are firm and hard roots, and not limber or
spongie, being taken up out of the ground in their fit season, that is, in
June, July, and August, and likewise kept well and dry, may be reserved out of
the ground until Christmas or after, and then (if they could not be set
sooner) being set, will thrive reasonable well, but not altogether so well as
the former, being set long before: but if you shall remove these bulbous roots
again, either presently after their planting having shot their small fibers
under the round roots, and sprung likewise upwards, or before they be in
flower at the soonest (yet Tulipas, Daffodils, and many other bulbous, may be
safely removed being in flower, and transplanted into other places, so as they
be not kept too long out of the ground) you shall much endanger them either
utterly to perish, or to be hindered from bearing out their flowers they then
would have borne, and for two or three years after from bearing flowers again.
For the order of their planting there are diverse ways, some whereof I will
show you in this place: Your knot or beds being prepared fitly, as before is
declared, you may place and order your roots therein thus, Either many roots
of one kind set together in a round or cluster, or longwise cross a bed one by
another, whereby the beauty of many flowers of one kind being together, may
make a fair show well pleasing to many; Or else you may plant one or two in a
place dispersedly over the whole knot, or in a proportion or diameter one place
answering another of the knot, as your store will suffer you, or your knot
permit: Or you may also mingle these roots in their planting many of diverse
sorts together, that they may give the more glorious show when they are in
flower; and that you may so do, you must first observe the several kinds of
them, which do flower at one and the same time, and then to place them in such
order and so near one unto another, that their flowers appearing together of
several colors, will cause the more admiration in the beholders: as thus, The
Vernall Crocus or Saffron flowers of the Spring, white, purple, yellow, and
stripped, with some Vernall Colchicum or Meadow Saffron among them, some Deus
Caninus or Dogs teeth, and some of the small early Leucoium or Bulbous
Violet, all planted in some proportion as near one unto another as is fit for
them, will give such a grace to the Garden, that the place will seem like a
piece of tapestry of many glorious colors, to increase every ones delight: Or
else many of one sort together, as the blew, white and blush Grape flowers in
the same manner intermingled, do make a marvelous delectable show, especially
because all of them rise almost to an equal height, which causes the greater
grace, as well near hand as far of. The like order may be kept with many
other things, as the Hepatica, white, blew, purple, and red set or sown
together, will make many to believe that one root does bear all those
colors: But above and beyond all others, the Tulipas may be so matched, one
color answering and setting of another, that the place where they stand may
resemble a piece of curious needle-worke, or piece of painting: and I have
known in a Garden, the Master as much commended for this artificial form in
placing the colors of Tulipas, as for the goodness of his flowers, or any
other thing. The diverse sorts and colors of Anemones or Winde-flowers may be
so ordered likewise, which are very beautiful, to have the several varieties
planted one near unto another, that their several colors appearing in one
place will be a very great grace in a Garden, or if they be dispersed among the
other sorts of flowers, they will make a glorious show. Another order in
planting you may observe; which is this, That those plants that grow low, as
the Aconitum Hyemale or Winter-wolues bane, the Vernall Crocus or
Saffron-flowers of diverse sorts, the little early Leucoium or Bulbous Violet,
and some such other as rise not up high, as also some Anemones may be very well
placed somewhat near or about your Martagons, Lillies, or Crowns Imperial,
both because these little plants will flower earlier than they, and so will be
gone and past, before the other greater plants will rise up to any height to
hinder them; which is a way may well be admitted in those Gardens that are
small, to save room, and to place things to the most advantage. Thus having
showed you diverse ways and orders how to plant your roots, that your flowers
may give the greater grace in the Garden, let me show you likewise how to set
these kinds of roots into the ground; for many know not well either which end
to set upwards or downwards, nor yet to what depth they should be placed in
the ground. Daffodils if they be great roots, will require (as must be
observed in all other great plants) to be planted somewhat deeper then the
smaller of the same kind, as also that the tops or heads of the roots be
about two or three fingers breadth hid underground. The Tulipas likewise if you
set them deep, they will be the safer from frosts if your ground be cold,
which will also cause them to be a little later before they be in flower, yet
usually if the mould be good, they are to be set a good hand breadth deep
within the ground, so that there may be three or four inches of earth at the
least above the head, which is the smaller end of the root: for if they shall
lie too near the upper face or crust of the earth, the colds and frosts will
pierce and pinch them the sooner. After the same order and manner must
Hyacinthes, whether great or small, and other such great roots be planted.
Your greater roots, as Martagons, Lillies, and Crowns Imperial, must be set
much deeper then any other bulbous root, because they are greater roots then
others, and by themselves also, as is most usual either in some square, round,
triangle, or other small part in the Garden, because they spread and take up a
very great deal of ground. All of them likewise are to be set with the broad
end of the root downwards, and the small end upwards, that is, both Lillies,
Daffodils, Hyacinthes, and Tulipas, and all other sorts of round roots, which
show one end to be smaller than another. But the Colchicum or Medow-Saffron
only requires an exception to this general rule, in regard the root thereof
has a small eminence or part on the one side thereof, which must be set or
planted downward, and not upward; for you shall observe, if the root lie a
little moist out of the ground, that it will shoot fibers out at the small
long end thereof, although you may perceive when you take it up, that the
fibers were at the other broad end or side of the root. As for the Crown
Imperial, which is a broad round root and flat withal, having a hole in the
middle, for the most part quite through, when it is taken up in his due time out
of the ground, you shall perceive the scales or cloves of the roots to be a
little open on the vpperside, and close and flat on the vnderside, which will
direct you which part to set upward, as also that the hole is bigger above then
it is below. The Persian Lilly is almost like unto the Crown Imperial, but
that the root thereof is not so flat, and that it has a smaller head at the
one part, whereby it may be discerned the plainer how to be set. The
Fritillaria is a small white root divided as it were into two parts, so that
many have doubted, as formerly in the Crown Imperial, what part to set
uppermost; you shall therefore mark, that the two parts of the root are
joined together at the bottom, where it shoots out fibers or small stringie
roots, as all other sorts of bulbous roots do, and withal you shall see,
that between the two parts of the root a small head will appear, which is
the burgeon that will spring up to bear leaves and flowers. In the roots of
Anemones there are small round swelling heads, easy enough to be observed if
you mark it, which must be set upwards. All other sorts of stringie rooted
plants (and not bulbous or tuberous rooted) that lose their green leaves in
Winter, will show a head from whence the leaves and flowers will spring, and
all others that keep their green leaves, are to be planted in the same
manner that other herbs and flower-plants are accustomed to be. But yet for
the better thriuing of the stringie rooted plants, when you will plant them,
let me inform you of the best way of planting, and the most sure to cause any
plant to comprehend in the ground without failing, and is no common way with
any Gardener in this Kingdom, that ever I heard or knew, which is thus:
Presuming that the stringie rooted plant is fresh and not old gathered, and a
plant that being removed will grow again, make a hole in the ground large
enough where you mean to set this root, and raise the earth within the hole a
little higher in the middle then on the sides, and set the root thereon,
spreading the strings all abroad about the middle, that they may as it were
cover the middle, and then put the earth gently round about it, pressing it a
little close, and afterward water it well, if it be in Summer, or in a dry
time, or otherwise moderately: thus shall every several string of the root
have earth enough to cause it to shoot forth, and thereby to increase far
better than by the usual way, which is without any great care and respect to
thrust the roots together into the ground. Diverse other flower plants are but
annual, to be new sown every year; as the Marvel of the world, the Indian
Cresses, or yellow Larkes heels, the Flower of the Sun, and diverse other:
they therefore that will take pleasure in them, that they may enjoy their
flowers the earlier in the year, and thereby have ripe seed of them while
warm weather lasts, must nurse up their seeds in a bed of hot dung, as
Melons and Cowcumbers are, but your bed must be provided earlier for these
seeds, than for Melons, etc. that they may have the more comfort of the Summer,
which are to be carefully tended after they are transplanted from the hot bed,
and covered with straw from colds, whereby you shall not fail to gain ripe
seed every year, which otherwise if you should miss of a very kindly and hot
Summer, you should never have. Some of these seeds need likewise to be
transplanted from the bed of dung under a warm wall, as the Flower of the
Sun, and the Marvel of the world, and some others, and that for a while
after their transplanting, as also in the heat of Summer, you water them at
the root with water that has stood a day or two in the Sun, having first
laid a round wispe of hay or such other thing round about the root, that so
all helps may further their giving of ripe seed. One or two rules more I will
give you concerning these dainty flowers, the first whereof is this, That you
shall not be careful to water any of your bulbous or tuberous rooted plants
at any time; for they all of them do better prosper in a dry ground than in a
wet, only all sorts of tuberous rooted Flower deluces upon their remouall had
need of a little water, and some will do so also to such Tulipas and other
bulbous roots as they transplant, when they are in flower, and this is I grant
in some sort tolerable, if it be not too much, and done only to cause the
stalk and flower to abide sometime the longer before they wither, but else in
no other case to be permitted. The second rule is, That I would advise you to
water none of your dainty flowers or herbs, with any water that has presently
before been drawn out of a well or pumpe, but only with such water that has
stood open in the Sun in some cisterne, tubbe, or pot for a day at the least,
if more the better: for that water which is presently drawn out of a well,
etc. is so cold, that it presently chilleth and kills any dainty plant be it
younger or elder grown, whereof I have had sufficient proof: and therefore I
give you this caution by mine own experience. Thus have I directed you from
point to point, in all the particulars of preparing and planting that belong to
this Garden, saving only that yet I would further inform you, of the time of
the flowring of these Outlandish plants, according to the several months in
the year, that every one may know what flowers every month yields, and may
choose what them likes best, in that they may see hat there is no month, but
glories in some peculiar sorts of rare flowers. I would likewise rather in
this place show you, the true and best manner and order to increase and
preserve all sorts of Gilloflowers and Carnations, then join it with the
Chapter of Gilloflowers in the work following, because it would in that place
take up too much room. And lastly, I must of necessity oppose three sundry
errors, that have possessed the minds of many both in former and later times,
which are, that any flower may be made to grow double by art, that was but
single before by nature: And that one may by art cause any flower to grow of
what color they will: And that any plants may be forced to flower out of their
due seasons, either earlier or later, by an art which some can use. All which
being declared. I then suppose enough is spoken for an introduction to this
work, referring many other things to the several directions in the Chapters
of the book.

CHAP. VII. The several times of the flowring of these Outlandish flowers,
according to the several months of the year.
I Intend in this place only to give you briefly, the names of some of the
chiefest of these Outlandish flowers, according to the several months of the
year wherein they flower, that every one seeing what sorts of flowers every
month yields, may take of them which they like best. I begin with January,
as the first month of the year, wherein if the frosts be not extreme, you
shall have these flowers of plants; the Christmas flower or Helleborus niger
verus, Winter wolves bane or Aconitum hyemale, Hepatica or Noble Liver wort
blew and red, and of shrubbes, the Laurus Tinus or Wild Bay tree, and Mesereon
or the dwarf Bay: but because January is oftentimes too deep in frosts and
snow, I therefore refer the Hepaticas unto the month following, which is
February, wherein the weather begins to be a little milder, and then they
will flower much better, as also diverse sorts of Crocus or Saffron flower will
appear, the little early Summer fool or Leucoium bulbosum, and toward the
latter end thereof the Vernall Colchicum, the Dogs tooth Violet or Deus
Caminus, and some Anemones, both single and double, which in some places will
flower all the Winter long. March will yield more varieties; for besides that
it holds some of the flowers of the former month, it will yield you both the
double blew Hepatica, and the white and the blush single: then also you shall
have diverse other sorts of Crocus or Saffron flowers, Double yellow Daffodils,
Oriental Iacinths and others, the Crown Imperial, diverse sorts of early
Tulipas, some sorts of French Cowslips, both tawney, murry, yellow, and blush,
the early Fritillaria or checkerd Daffodill, and some other sorts of early
Daffodils, and many sorts of Anemones. In April comes on the pride of these
strangers; for herein you may behold all the sorts of Auricula Vrsi or Bears
Ears, many sorts of Anemones, both single and double, both the sorts of
Tulipas, the earlier until the middle of the month, and the later then
beginning; which are of so many different colors, that it is almost impossible
to express them, the white, red, black, and yellow Fritillarias, the Muscari
or Musk Grape flower, both ash color and yellow. Diverse other sorts of
Iacinths and Daffodils, both single and double, the smaller sorts of
Flowerdeluces, the Velvet Flowerdeluce and double Honysuckles, with diverse
others. May likewise at the beginning seems as glorious as April, although
toward the end it does decline, in regard the heat of the Sun has by this
time drawn forth all the store of natures tenderest dainties, which are
usually spent by the end of this month, and then those of stronger
constitution come forward. Herein are to be seen at the beginning the middle
flowring Tulipas, and at the end the later sort: some kinds of Daffodils, the
Day Lillies, the great white Star flower, the Flowerdeluce of Constantinople
or the mourning Sable flower, the other sorts of Flowerdeluces. Single and
double white Crowfoote, and single and double red Crowfoot, the glory of a
Garden: the early red Martagon, the Persian Lilly, the yellow Martagon, the
Gladiolus or Corn flagge, both white, red, and blush: the double yellow Rose,
and some other sorts of Roses. In June do flower the white and the blush
Martagon, the Martagon Imperial, the mountain Lillies, and the other sorts of
white and red Lillies, the bulbous Flowerdeluces of diverse sorts, the red
flowred Ladies bower, the single and double purple flowred Ladies bower, the
white Syringa or Pipetree, for the blew Pipe tree flowreth earlier, the white
and the yellow Iasmin. July holds in flower some of the Ladies bowers and
Ias^ (...) besides does glory in the Female Balsame apple, the Indian Cresses
or yellow ^ar^ ^purres, the purple Flower-gentle and the Rose Bay. In August
begin some of the Autumn bulbous flowers to appear, as the white and the
purple Colchicum or Meadow Saffron, the purple mountain Crocus or Saffron
flower, the little Autumn Leucoium and Autumn Iacinth, the Italian
Starrewort, called of some the purple Marigold, the Marvel of Peru or of the
world, the Flower of the S^^ne, the great blew Bell-flower, the great double
French Marigold. September flourishes with the Flower of the Sun; the
Marvel of the world, the purple Marigold, and blew Bell-flower spoken of
before, and likewise the other sorts of Meadow Saffron, and the double kind
likewise, the silver Crocus, the Autumn yellow Daffodill, Cyclamen also or
Sowbread show their flowers in the end of this month. October also will show
the flowers of Cyclamen, and some of the Meadow Saffrons. In November, as also
sometimes in the month before, the party colored Meadow Saffron may be seen,
that will longest hold his flower, because it is the latest that shows it
self, and the ash colored mountain Crocus. And even December it self will
not want the true black Hellebor or Christmas flower, and the glorious show of
the Laurus Tinus or wild Bay tree. Thus have I showed you some of the flowers
for every month, but I refer you to the more ample declarion of them and all
the others, unto the work following.

CHAP. VIII. The true manner and order to increase and preserve all sorts of
Gilloflowers, as well by slippes as seeds.
BEcause that Carnations and Gilloflowers be the chiefest flowers of account
in all our English Gardens, I have thought good to entreat somewhat amply of
them, and that a part by it self, as I said a little before, in regard there
is so much to be said concerning them, and that if all the matters to be
entreated of should have been inserted in the Chapter of Gilloflowers, it
would have made it too tedious and large, and taken up too much room. The
particular matters whereof I mean in this place to entreat are these: How to
increase Gilloflowers by planting and by sowing, and how to preserve them being
increased, both in Summer from noisome and hurtful vermin that destroy them,
and in Winter from frosts, snowes, and winds, that spoil them. There are two
ways of planting, whereby to increase these fair flowers; the one is by
slipping, which is the old and ready usual way, best known in this Kingdom;
the other is more sure, perfect, ready, and of later invention, videlicet, by
laying down the branches. The way to increase Gilloflowers by slipping, is so
common with all that ever kept any of them, that I think most persons may
think meidle, to spend time to set down in writing that which is so well
known unto all: Yet give me leave to tell them that so might imagine, that
(when they have heard or read what I have written thereof, if they did know
fully as much before) what I here write, was not to inform them, but such as
did not know the best, or so good a way as I teach them: For I am assured, the
greatest number do use, and follow the most usual way, and that is not
always the best, especially when by good experience a better way is found, and
may be learned; and therefore if some can do a thing better than others, I
think it is no shame to learn it of them. You shall not then (to take the
surest course) take any long spindled branches, nor those branches that have
any young shootes from the joints on them, nor yet sliue or tear any slip or
branch from the root; for all these ways are usual and common with most,
which causes so many good roots to rot and perish, and also so many slippes
to be lost, when as for the most part, not the one half, or with some, not a
third part does grow and thrive of those slippes they set. And although many
that have store of plants, do not so much care what havoc they make to gain
some, yet to save both labor and plants, I do wish them to observe these
orders: Take from those roots from whence you intend to make your increase,
those shootes only that are reasonable strong, but yet young, and not either
too small and slender, or having any shootes from the (...) upon them; cut
these slippes or shootes off from the stem or root with a knife, as
conveniently as the shoot or branch will permit, that is, either close unto
the maine branch, if it be short, or leaving a joint or two behind you, if it
be long enough, at which it may shoot anew: When you have cut off your
slippes, you may either set them by and by, or else as the best Gardiners use
to do, cast them into a tubbe or pot with water for a day or two, and then
having prepared a place convenient to set them in, which had need to be of
the finest, richest, and best mould you can provide, that they may thrive
therein the better, cut off your slip close at the joint, and having cut away
the lowest leaves close to the stalk, and the uppermost even at the top, with
a little stick make a little hole in the earth, and put your slip therein so
deep, as that the upper leaves may be wholly above the ground, (some use to
clean the stalk in the middle, and put a little earth or clay within the
cleft, but many good and skillful Gardiners do not use it), put the earth a
little close to the slip with your finger and thumb, and there let it rest,
and in this manner do with as many slippes as you have, setting them somewhat
close together, and not too far in sunder, both to save ground and cost
thereon, in that a small compass will serve for the first planting, and also
the better to give them shadow: For you must remember in any case, that these
slippes new set, have no sight of the Sun, until they be well taken in the
ground, and shot above ground, and also that they want not water, both upon the
new planting and after. When these slippes are well grown up, they must be
transplanted into such other places as you think meet; that is, either into
the ground in beds, or otherwise, or into pots, which that you may the more
safely do, after you have well watered the ground, for half a day before you
intend to transplant them, you shall separate them severally, by putting down a
broad pointed knife on each side of the slip, so cutting it out, take every
one by it self, with the earth cleaving close unto the root, which by reason
of the moisture it had formerly, and that which you gave presently before, will
be sufficient with any care had, to cause it to hold fast unto the root for
the transplanting of it: for if the earth were dry, and that it should fall
away from the root in the transplanting, it would hazard and endanger the
root very much, i^ it did thrive at all. You must remember also, that upon the
removing of these slips, you shadow them from the heat of the Sun for a
while with some straw or other thing, until they have taken hold in their new
place. Thus although it be a little more labor and care than the ordinary way
is, yet it is surer, and will give you plants that will be so strongly grown
before Winter, that with the care hereafter specified, you shall have them
bear flowers the next year after, and yield you increase of slippes also. To
give you any set time, wherein these slippes will take root, and begin to
shoot above ground, is very hard to do; for that every slip, or yet every
kind of Gilloflower is not alike apt to grow; nor is every earth in like
manner fit to produce and bring forward the slippes that are set therein: but
if both the slip be apt to grow, and the earth of the best, fit to produce, I
think within a fortnight or three weeks, you shall see them begin to put
forth young leaves in the middle, or else it may be a month and more before
you shall see any springing. The best time likewise when to plant, is a
special thing to be known, and of as great consequence as any thing else: For
if you slip and set in September, as many use to do, or yet in August, as
some may think will do well, yet (unless they be the most ordinary sorts,
which are likely to grow at any time, and in any place) the most of them, if
not all, will either assuredly perish, or never prosper well: for the more
excellent and dainty the Gilloflower is, the more tender for the most part, and
hard to nurse up will the slippes be. The best time therefore is, that you cut
off such slippes as are likely, and such as your roots may spare, from the
beginning of May until the middle of June at the furthest, and order them as I
have showed you before, that so you may have fair plants, plenty of flowers,
and increase sufficient for new supply, without offense or loss of your store.
For the enriching likewise of your earth, wherein you shall plant your slippes,
that they may the better thrive and prosper, diverse have used diverse sorts of
manure; as stable soil of horse, beasts or kine, of sheep, and pigeons, all
which are very good when they are thoroughly turned to mould, to mix with your
other earth, or being steeped in water, may serve to water the earth at times,
and turned in with it. And some have likewise proved Tanners earth, that is,
their bark, which after they have used, does lie on heaps and rot in their
yards, or the like mould from wood-stackes or yards; but especially, and beyond
all other is commended the Willow earth, that is, that mould which is found in
the hollow of old Willow trees, to be the most principal to mix with other
good earth for this purpose. And as I have now given you directions for the
first way to increase them by slipping, so before I come to the other way, let
me give you a caveat or two for the preserving of them, when they are
beginning to run utterly to decay and perish. The one is, that whereas many
are over greedy to have their plants to give them flowers, and therefore let
them run all to flower, so far spending themselves thereby, that after they
have done flowring, they grow so weak, having out spent themselves, that they
cannot possibly be preserved from the injuries of the succeeding Winter; you
shall therefore keep the kind of any sort you are delighted withal, if you
carefully look that too many branches do not run up and spindle for
flowers, but rather either cut some of them down, before they are run up too
high, within two or three joints of the roots; or else pluck away the
innermost leaves where it springs forwards, which you see in the middle of
every branch, before it be run up too high, which will cause them to break
out the faster into slips and suckers at the joints, to hinder their forward
luxury, and to preserve them the longer: The other is, If you shall perceive
any of your Gilloflower leaves to change their natural fresh verdure, and
turn yellowish, or begin to wither in any part or branch thereof, it is a
sure sign that the root is infected with some cancker or rottenness, and
will soon show it self in all the rest of the branches, whereby the plant
will quickly be lost: to preserve it therefore, you shall be time, before it be
run too far, (for otherwise it is impossible to save it) either cover all
or most of the branches with fresh earth, or else take the fairest slippes from
it, as many as you can possibly, and cast them into a pot or tubbe with water,
and let them there abide for two or three days at the least: the first way
has recovered many, being taken in time. Thus you shall see them recover their
former stiffenesse and color, and then you may plant them as you have been
heretofore directed; and although many of them may perish, yet shall you have
some of them that will grow to continue the kind again. The other or second
way to increase Gilloflowers by planting, is, as I said before, by in laying or
laying down the branches of them, and is a way of later invention, and as
frequently used, not only for the tawney or yellow Gilloflower, and all the
varieties thereof, but with the other kinds of Gilloflowers, whereof experience
has showed that they will likewise take if they be so used; the manner whereof
is thus: You must choose out the youngest, likeliest, and lowest branches that
are nearest the ground (for the upper branches will sooner break at the joint,
than bend down so low into the earth, without some pot with earth raised up
unto them) and cut it on the vnderside thereof upwards at the second joint next
unto the root, to the middle of the branch, and no more, and not quite
thorough in any case, and then from that second joint unto the third, slit or
cut the branch in the middle longwise, that so it may be the more easily bended
into the ground, the cut joint seeming like the end of a slip, when you have
bended down the branch where it is cut into the ground (which must be done
very gently for fear of breaking) with a little stick or two thrust
slopewise, cross over it, keep it down within the earth, and raise up
sufficient earth over it, that there it may lie and take root, which commonly
will be effected within six weeks or two months in the Summer time, and then
(or longer if you doubt the time too short for it to take sufficient root) you
may take or cut it away, and transplant it where you think good, yet so as in
any case you shadow it from the heat of the Sun, until it have taken good
hold in the ground. The other way to increase Gilloflowers, is by sowing the
seed: It is not usual with all sorts of Gilloflowers to give seed, but such
of them as do yield seed may be increased thereby, in the same manner as is
here set down. The Orange tawney Gilloflower and the varieties thereof is the
most usual kind, (and it is a kind by it self, how various soever the
plants be that rise from the seed) that does give seed, and is sown, and
from thence arises so many varieties of colors, both plain and mixed, both
single and double, that one can hardly set them down in writing: yet such as I
have observed and marked, you shall find expressed in the Chapter of
Gilloflowers in the work following. First therefore make choice of your seed
that you intend to sow (if you do not desire to have as many more single
flowers as double) that it be taken from double flowers, and not from single,
and from the best colors, howsoever some may boast to have had double and
stripped flowers from the seed of a single one; which if it were so, yet one
Swallow (as we say) makes no Summer, nor a thing coming by chance cannot be
reckoned for a certain and constant rule; you may be assured they will not
usually do so: but the best, fairest, and most double flowers come always, or
for the most part, from the seed of those flowers that were best, fairest, and
most double, and I do advise you to take the best and most double: for even
from them you shall have single ones enough, you need not to sow any worser
sort. And again, see that your seed be new, of the last years gathering,
and also that it was full ripe before it was gathered, lest you lose your
labor, or miss of your purpose, which is, to have fair and double flowers.
Having now made choice of your seed, and prepared you a bed to sow them on,
the earth whereof must be rich and good, and likewise sifted to make it the
finer; for the better it is, the better shall your profit and pleasure be:
hereon, being first made level, plain, and smooth, sow your seed somewhat
thin, and not too thick in any case, and as euenly as you can, that they be
not too many in one place, and too few in another, which afterward cover with
fine sifted earth over them about one fingers thickness; let this be done in
the middle of April, if the time of the year be temperate, and not too cold,
or else stay until the end of the month: after they are sprung up and grown
to be somewhat big, let them be drawn forth that are too close and near
one unto another, and plant them in such place where they shall continue, so
that they stand half a yard of ground distance asunder, which after the
planting, let be shadowed for a time, as is before specified; and this may be
done in the end of July, or sooner if there because. I have not set down in
all this discourse of planting, transplanting, sowing, setting, etc. any
mention of watering those slips or plants, not doubting but that every ones
reason will induce them to think, that they cannot prosper without watering:
But let this Caveat be a sufficient remembrance unto you, that you never water
any of these Gilloflowers, nor yet indeed any other fine herb or plant with
cold water, such as you have presently before drawn out from a pumpe or Well,
etc. but with such water as has stood open in the air in a cisterne, tubbe,
or pot, for one whole day at the least; if it be two or three days it will be
never the worse, but rather the better, as I have related before: yet take
especial heed that you do not give them too much to ouer-glut them at any
time, but temperately to irrorate, bedew or sprinkle them often. From the
seeds of these Gilloflowers has risen both white, red, blush, stamell, tawny
lighter and sadder, marbled, speckled, striped, flaked, and that in diverse
manners, both single and double flowers, as you shall see them set down in a
more ample manner in the Chapter of Gilloflowers. And thus much for their
increase by the two ways of planting and sowing: For as for a third way, by
grafting one into or upon another, I know none such to be true, nor to be of
any more worth than an old Wives tale, both nature, reason, and experience, all
contesting against such an idle fancy, let men make what ostentation they
please. It now rests, that we also show you the manner how to preserve them,
as well in Summer from all noisome and hurtful things, as in the Winter and
Spring from the sharp and chilling colds, and the sharp and bitter killing
winds in March. The hurtful things in the Summer are especially these, too
much heat of the Sun which scorcheth them, which you must be careful to
prevent, by placing boughs, boords, clothes or mats, etc. before them, if they
be in the ground; or else if they be in pots, to remove into them into the
shadow, to give them refreshing from the heat, and give them water also for
their life: too much water, or too little is another annoyance, which you must
order as you see there is just cause, by withholding or giving them water
gently out of a watering pot, and not cast on by dishfuls: Some also to water
their Gilloflowers, use to set their pots into tubbes or pots half full of
water, that so the water may soake in at the lower holes in each flower pot, to
give moisture to the roots of the Gilloflowers only, without casting any water
upon the leaves, and assuredly it is an excellent way to moisten the roots so
sufficiently at one time, that it does save a great deal of pains many other
times. Earwickes are a most infestuous vermin, to spoil the whole beauty of
your flowers, and that in one night or day; for these creatures delighting to
creep into any hollow or shadowie place, do creep into the long green pods
of the Gilloflowers, and do eat away the white bottomes of their leaves,
which are sweet, whereby the leaves of the flowers being loose, do either
fall away of themselves before, or when they are gathered, or handled, or
presently wither within the pods before they are gathered, and blown away with
the wind. To avoid which inconvenience, many have devised many ways and
inventions to destroy them, as pots with double verges or brimmes, containing a
hollow gutter between them, which being filled with water, will not suffer
these small vermin to pass over it to the Gilloflowers to spoil them. Others
have used old shoes, and such like hollow things to be set by them to take
them in: but the best and most usual things now used, are either long hollow
canes, or else beasts hoofes, which being turned down upon sticks ends set
into the ground, or into the pots of earth, will soon draw into them many
Earwickes, lying hid therein from sun, wind, and rain, and by care and
diligence may soon be destroyed, if every morning and evening one take the
hoofes gently off from the sticks, and knocking them against the ground in a
plain allie, shake out all the Earwicks that are crept into them, which quickly
with ones foot may be trod to pieces. For sudden blasting with thunder and
lightening, or fierce sharp winds, etc. I know no other remedy, unless you
can cover them therefrom when you first foresee the danger, but patiently to
abide the loss, whatsoever some have advised, to lay litter about them to
avoid blasting; for if any shall make trial thereof, I am in doubt, he shall
more endanger his roots thereby, being the Summer time, when any such fear of
blasting is, than any wise save them from it, or do them any good. For the
Winter preservation of them, some have advised to cover them with Bee-hiues, or
else with small Willow sticks, pricked crossewise into the ground over your
flowers, and bowed archwise, and with litter laid thereon, to cover the
Gilloflowers quite over, after they have been sprinkled with soap ashes and
lyme mixed together: and this way is commended by some that have written
thereof, to be such an admirable defense unto them in Winter, that neither
Ants, nor Snailes, nor Earwickes shall touch them, because of the soap ashes
and lyme, and neither frosts nor storms shall hurt them, because of the litter
which so well will defend them; and hereby also your Gilloflowers will be
ready to flower, not only in the Spring very early, but even all the Winter.
But whosoever shall follow these directions, may peradventure find them in
some part true, as they are there set down for the Winter time, and while they
are kept close and covered; but let them be assured, that all such plants, or
the most part of them, will certainly perish and dye before the Summer be at
an end: for the soap ashes and lyme will burn up and spoil any herb; and
again, it is impossible for any plant that is kept so warm in Winter, to
abide either the cold or the wind in the Spring following, or any heat of the
Sun, but that both of them will scorch them, and carry them quite away. One
great hurt unto them, and to all other herbs that we preserve in Winter, is
to suffer the snow to lie upon them any time after it is fallen, for that it
does so chill them, that the Sun afterward, although in Winter, does scorch
them and burn them up: look therefore unto your Gilloflowers in those times,
and shake or strike off the snow gently off from them, not suffering it to
abide on them any day or night if you can; for assure your self, if it does
not abide on them, the better they will be. The frosts likewise is another
great annoyance unto them, to corrupt the roots, and to cause them to swell,
rot, and break: to prevent which inconvenience, I would advise you to take the
straw or litter of your horse stable, and lay some thereof about every root of
your Gilloflowers (especially those of the best account) close unto them upon
the ground, but be as careful as you can, that none thereof lie upon the
green leaves, or as little as may be, and by this only way have they been
better defended from the frosts that spoil them in Winter, then by any other
that I have seen or known. The winds in March, and Sunneshine days then, are
one of the greatest inconveniences that happens unto them: for they that have
had hundreds of plants, that have kept fair and green all the Winter until
the beginning or middle of March, before the end thereof, have had scarce one
of many, that either has not utterly perished, or been so tainted, that
quickly after have not been lost; which has happened chiefly by the neglect of
these cautions before specified, or in not defending them from the bitter
sharp winds and sun in this month of March. You shall therefore for their
better preservation, besides the litter laid about the roots, which I advise
you not to remove as yet, shelter them somewhat from the winds, with either
bottomless pots, pales, or such like things, to keep away the violent force
both of winds and sun for that month, and for sometime before and after it
also: yet so, that they be not covered close above, but open to receive air
and rain. Some also use to wind withes of hey or straw about the roots of
their Gilloflowers, and fasten them with sticks thrust into the ground, which
serve very well in the stead of the other. Thus have I showed you the whole
preservation of these worthy and dainty flowers, with the whole manner of
ordering them for their increase: if any one have any other better way, I shall
be as willing to learn it of them, as I have been to give them or any others
the knowledge of that I have here set down.

CHAP. IX. That there is not any art whereby any flower may be made to grow
double, that was naturally single, nor of any other sent or color than it
first had by nature; nor that the sowing or planting of herbs one deeper than
other, will cause them to be in flower one after another, every month in the
year.
THe wonderful desire that many have to see fair, double, and sweet flowers,
has transported them beyond both reason and nature, feigning and boasting
often of what they would have, as if they had it. And I think, from this
desire and boasting has risen all the false tales and reports, of making
flowers double as they list, and of giving them color and sent as they please,
and to flower likewise at what time they will, I doubt not, but that some of
these errors are ancient, and continued long by tradition, and others are of
later invention: and therefore the more to be condemned, that men of wit and
judgment in these days should expose themselves in their writings, to be
rather laughed at, then believed for such idle tales. And although in the
contradiction of them, I know I shall undergo many calumnies, yet
notwithstanding, I will endeavor to set down and declare so much, as I hope
may by reason persuade many in the truth, although I cannot hope of all, some
being so strongly wedded to their own will, and the errors they have been
bred in, that no reason may alter them. First therefore I say, that if there
were any art to make some flowers to grow double, that naturally were single,
by the same art, all sorts of flowers that are single by nature, may be made to
grow double: but the sorts of flowers that are single by nature, whereof some
are double, were never made double by art; for many sorts abide still single,
whereof there was never seen double: and therefore there is no such art in any
man's knowledge to bring it to pass. If any man shall say, that because there
are many flowers double, whereof there are single also of the same kin^^, as
for example, Violets, Marigolds, Daisyes, Daffodils, Anemones, and many other,
that therefore those double flowers were so made by the art of man: viz. by the
observation of the change of the Moon, the constellations or conjunctions of
Planets, or some other Stars or celestial bodies. Although I do confess
and acknowledge, that I think some constellations, and peradventure changes of
the Moon, etc. were appointed by the God of nature, as conducing and helping
to the making of those flowers double, that nature has so produced; yet I do
deny, that any man has or shall ever be able to prove, that it was done by any
art of man, or that any man can tell the true causes and seasons, what changes
of the Moon, or constellations of the Planets, wrought together for the
producing of those double flowers, or can imitate nature, or rather the God of
nature, to do the like. If it shall be demanded, From whence then came these
double flowers that we have, if they were not so made by art? I answer, that
assuredly all such flowers did first grow wild, and were so found double, as
they do now grow in Gardens, but for how long before they were found they
became double, no man can tell; we only have them as nature has produced
them, and so they remain. Again, if any shall say, that it is likely that
these double flowers were forced so to be, by the often planting and
transplanting of them, because it is observed in most of them, that if they
stand long in any one place, and not be often removed, they will grow still
less double, and in the end turn single. I do confess, that Facilior est
descensus quam ascensus, and that the unfruitfulness of the ground they are
planted in, or the neglect or little care had of them, or the growing of them
too thick or too long, are oftentimes a cause of the diminishing of the
flowers doubleness; but withal you shall observe, that the same roots that
did bear double flowers (and not any other that never were double before) have
returned to their former doubleness again, by good ordering and looking unto:
single flowers have only been made somewhat fairer or larger, by being planted
in the richer and more fruitful ground of the Garden, than they were found
wild by nature; but never made to grow double, as that which is naturally so
found of it self: For I will show you mine own experience in the matter. I
have been as inquisitiue as any man might be, with every one I knew, that made
any such report, or that I thought could say any thing therein, but I never
could find any one, that could assuredly resolve me, that he knew certainly
any such thing to be done: all that they could say was but report, for the
observation of the Moon, to remove plants before the change, that is, as some
say, the full of the Moon, others the new Moon, whereupon I have made trial
at many times, and in many sorts of plants, accordingly, and as I thought fit,
by planting and transplanting them, but I could never see the effect desired,
but rather in many of them the loss of my plants. And were there indeed such a
certain art, to make single flowers to grow double, it would have been known
certainly to some that would practice it, and there are so many single flowers,
whereof there were never any of the kind seen double, that to produce such of
them to be double, would procure both credit and coin enough to him that
should use it; but Vltra posse non est esse: and therefore let no man believe
any such reports, be they never so ancient; for they are but mere tales and
fables. Concerning colors and sents, the many rules and directions extant in
many men's writings, to cause flowers to grow yellow, red, green, or white,
that never were so naturally, as also to be of the sent of Cinnamon, Musk, etc.
would almost persuade any, that the matters thus set down by such persons, and
with some show of probability, were constant and assured proofs thereof: but
when they come to the trial, they all vanish away like smoke. I will in a few
words show you the matters and manners of their proceedings to effect this
purpose: First (they say) if you shall steep your seeds in the lees of red
Wine, you shall have the flowers of those plants to be of a purple color. If
you will have Lillies or Gilloflowers to be of a Scarlet red color, you shall
put Vermillion or Cynaber between the rind and the small heads growing about
the root: if you will have them blew, you shall dissolve Azur or Byse between
the rind and the heads: if yellow, Orpiment: if green, Vardigrease, and thus
of any other color. Others do advise to open the head of the root, and pour
into it any color dissolved, so that there be no fretting or corroding thing
therein for fear of hurting the root, and look what color you put in, just
such or near unto it shall the color of the flower be. Some again do
advise to water the plants you would have changed, with such colored liquor as
you desire the flower to be of, and they shall grow to be so. Also to make
Roses to be yellow, that you should graft a white Rose (some say a Damask)
upon a Broom stalk, and the flower will be yellow, supposing because the
Broom flower is yellow, therefore the Rose will be yellow. Some affirm the
like, if a Rose be grafted on a Barbery bush, because both the blossom and the
bark of the Barbery is yellow, etc. In the like manner for sents, they have
set down in their writings, that by putting Cloves, Musk, Cinnamon, Benzoin,
or any other such sweet thing, bruised with Rose water, between the bark and
the body of trees, the fruit of them will smell and taste of the same that is
put unto them; and if they be put unto the top of the roots, or else bound
unto the head of the root, they will cause the flowers to smell of that sent
the matter put unto them is of: as also to steep the seeds of Roses, and other
plants in the water of such like sweet things, and then to sow them, and water
them morning and evening with such like liquor, until they be grown up;
besides a number of such like rules and directions set down in books, so
confidently, as if the matters were without all doubt or question: whenas
without all doubt and question I will assure you, that they are all but mere
idle tales and fancies, without all reason or truth, or shadow of reason or
truth: For sents and colors are both such qualities as follow the essence of
plants, even as forms are also; and one may as well make any plant to grow of
what form you will, as to make it of what sent or color you will; and if any
man can form plants at his will and pleasure, he can do as much as God
himself that created them. For the things they would add unto the plants to
give them color, are all corporeal, or of a bodily substance, and whatsoever
should give any color unto a living and growing plant, must be spiritual: for
no solid corporeal substance can join it self with the life and essence of
an herb or tree, and the spiritual part of the color thereof is not the same
with the bodily substance, but is a mere vapor that rises from the
substance, and feeds the plant, whereby it grows, so that there is no
ground or color of reason, that a substantial color should give color to a
growing herb or tree: but for sent (which is a mere vapor) you will say
there is more probability. Yet consider also, that what sweet sent soever you
bind or put unto the roots of herbs or trees, must be either buried, or as
good as buried in the earth, or bark of the tree, whereby the substance will
in a small time corrupt and rot, and before it can join it self with the
life, spirit, and essence of the plant, the sent also will perish with the
substance: For no heterogeneall things can be mixed naturally together, as
Iron and Clay; and no other thing but homogeneall, can be nourishment or
conuertible into the substance of man or beast: And as the stomach of man or
beast alters both forms, sents, and colors of all digestible things; so
whatsoever sent or color is wholesome, and not poysonfull to nature, being
received into the body of man or beast, does neither change the blood or skin
into that color or sent was received: no more does any color or sent to any
plant; for the plants are only nourished by the moisture they draw naturally
unto them, be it of wine or any other liquor is put unto them, and not by any
corporeal substance, or heterogeneall vapor or sent, because the earth like
unto the stomach does soon alter them, before they are converted into the
nature and substance of the plant. Now for the last part I undertook to
confute, that no man can by art make all flowers to spring at what time of the
year he will; although, as I have here before showed, there are flowers for
every month of the year, yet I hope there is not any one, that has any
knowledge in flowers and gardening, but knows that the flowers that appear
and show themselves in the several months of the year, are not one and the
same, and so made to flower by art; but that they are several sorts of plants,
which will flower naturally and constantly in the same months one year, that
they use to do in another, or with but little alteration, if the years prove
not alike kindly: As for example, those plants that do flower in January and
February, will by no art or industry of man be caused to flower in Summer or in
Autumn; and those that flower in April and May, will not flower in January or
February; or those in July, August, etc. either in the Winter or Spring: but
every one knows their own appointed natural times, which they constantly
observe and keep, according to the temperature of the year, or the temper of
the climate, being further North or South, to bring them on earlier or later,
as it does with all other fruits, flowers, and growing green herbs, etc.
except that by chance, some one or other extraordinarily may be hindered in
their due season of flowring, and so give their flowers out of time, or else to
give their flowers twice in the year, by the superaboundance of nourishment,
or the mildness of the season, by moderate showers of rain, etc. as it
sometimes also happens with fruits, which chance, as it is seldom, and not
constant, so we then term it but Lusus naturae: or else by forcing them in hot
stoues, which then will perish, when they have given their flowers or fruits.
It is not then, as some have written, the sowing of the seeds of Lillies, or
any other plants a foot deep, or half a foot deep, or two inches deep,
that will cause them to be in flower one after another, as they are sown every
month of the year; for it were too gross to think, that any man of reason
and judgment would so believe. Nor is it likewise in the power of any man, to
make the same plants to abide a month, two, or three, or longer in their
beauty of flowring, then naturally they use to do; for I think that were no
humane art, but a supernatural work. For nature still bends and tends to
perfection, that is, after flowring to give fruit or seed; nor can it be
hindered in the course thereof without manifest danger of destruction, even as
it is in all other fruit-bearing creatures, which stay no longer, then their
appointed time is natural unto them, without apparent damage. Some things I
grant may be so ordered in the planting, that according to that order and time
which is observed in their planting, they shall show forth their fair flowers,
and they are Anemones, which will in that manner, that I have showed in the
work following, flower in several months of the year; which thing as it is
incident to none or very few other plants, and is found out but of late, so
likewise is it known but unto a very few. Thus have I showed you the true
solution of these doubts: And although they have not been amplified with such
Philosophical arguments and reasons, as one of greater learning might have
done, yet are they truly and sincerely set down, that they may serve tanquam
galcatum, against all the calumnies and objections of wilful and obdurate
persons, that will not be reformed. As first, that all double flowers were so
found wild, being the work of nature alone, and not the art of any man, by
planting or transplanting, at or before the new or full Moon, or any other
observation of time, that has caused the flower to grow double, that naturally
was single: Secondly, that the rules and directions, to cause flowers to be of
contrary or different colors or sents, from that they were or would be
naturally, are mere fancies of men, without any ground of reason or truth. And
thirdly, that there is no power or art in man, to cause flowers to show their
beauty diverse months before their natural time, nor to abide in their beauty
longer then the appointed natural time for every one of them.

THE GARDEN OF PLEASANT FLOWERS.
CHAP. I.
Corona Imperialis. The Crown Imperial.
BEcause the Lilly is the more stately flower among many: and amongst the
wonderful variety of Lillies, known to us in these days, much more then in
former times, whereof some are white, others blush, some purple, others red or
yellow, some spotted, others without spots, some standing upright, others
hanging or turning downwards, The Crown Imperial for his stately
beautifulness, deserves the first place in this our Garden of delight, to be
here entreated of before all other Lillies: but because it is so well known to
most persons, being in a manner every where common, I shall need only to give
you a relation of the chief parts thereof (as I intend in such other things)
which are these: The root is yellowish on the outside, composed of fewer, but
much thicker scales, then any other Lilly but the Persian, and does grow
sometimes to be as great as a pretty big childs head, but somewhat flat
withal, from the sides whereof, and not from the bottom, it shoots forth
thick long fibers, which perish every year, having a hole in the midst
thereof, at the end of the year, when the old stalk is dry and withered, and
out of the which a new stalk does spring again (from a bud or head to be seen
within the hollownesse on the one side) the year following: the stalk then
filling up the hollownesse, rises up three or four foot high, being great,
round, and of a purplish color at the bottom, but green above, beset from
thence to the middle thereof with many long and broad green leaves, very like
to the leaves of our ordinary white Lilly, but somewhat shorter and narrower,
confusedly without order, and from the middle is bare or naked without leaves,
for a certain space upwards, and then bears four, six, or ten flowers,
more or less, according to the age of the plant, and the fertility of the
soil where it grows: The buddes at the first appearing are whitish, standing
upright among a bush or tuft of green leaves, smaller then those below, and
standing above the flowers, after a while they turn themselves, and hang
downwards every one upon his own footestalke, round about the great stem
or stalk, sometimes of an even depth, and other while one lower or higher than
another, which flowers are near the form of an ordinary Lilly, yet somewhat
lesser and closer, consisting of six leaves of an Orange color, striped with
purplish lines and veins, which add a great grace to the flowers: At the
bottom of the flower next unto the stalk, every leaf thereof has on the
outside a certain bunch or eminence, of a dark purplish color, and on the
inside there lies in those hollow bunched places, certain clear drops of
water like unto pearls, of a very sweet taste almost like sugar: in the midst
of each flower is a long white style or pointell, forked or divided at the end,
and six white chiues tipped with yellowish pendents, standing close about it:
after the flowers are past, appear six square seed vessels standing upright,
winged as it were or welted on the edges, yet seeming but three square, because
each couple of those welted edges are joined closer together, wherein are
contained broad, flat, and thin seeds, of a pale brownish color, like unto
other Lillies, but much greater and thicker also. The stalk of this plant does
oftentimes grow flat, two, three, or four fingers broad, and then bears many
more flowers, but for the most part smaller then when it bears round stalks.
And sometimes it happens the stalk to be divided at the top, carrying two or
three tufts of green leaves, without any flowers on them. And sometimes
likewise, to bear two or three rows or crowns of flowers one above another
upon one stalk, which is seldom and scarce seen, and besides, is but mere
accidental: the whole plant and every part thereof, as well roots, as leaves
and flowers, do smell somewhat strong as it were the savor of a Fox, so that
if any do but come near it, he cannot but smell it, which yet is not
unwholesome.

I have not observed any variety in the color of this flower, more then that
it will be fairer in a clear open air, and paler, or as it were blasted in a
muddy or smoakie air. And although some have boasted of one with white
flowers, yet I could never hear that any such has endured in one uniform
color.

The Place.
This plant was first brought from Constantinople into these Christian
Countries, and by the relation of some that sent it, grows naturally in
Persia.

The Time.
It flowreth most commonly in the end of March, if the weather be mild, and
springs not out of the ground until the end of February, or beginning of
March, so quick it is in the springing: the heads with seed are ripe in the
end of May.

The Names.
It is of some called Lilium Persicum, the Persian Lilly: but because we have
another, which is more usually called by that name, as shall be showed in the
next Chapter, I had rather with Alphonsus Pancius the Duke of Florence his
Physician, (who first sent the figure thereof unto Msr. John de Brancion) call
it Corona Imperialis, The Crown Imperial, then by any other name, as also for
that this name is now more generally received. It has been sent also by the
name Tusai, and Tuschai, and Turfani, or Turfanda, being, as it is like, the
Turkish names.

The Virtues.
For any Physical Virtues that are in it, I know of none, nor have heard that
any has been found out: notwithstanding the strong sent would persuade it
might be applied to good purpose.

CHAP. II.
Lilium Persicum. The Persian Lilly.
THe root of the Persian Lilly is very like unto the root of the Crown
Imperial, and losing his fibers in like manner every year, having a hole
therein likewise where the old stalk grew, but whiter, rounder, and a little
longer, smaller, and not stinking at all like it, from whence springs up a
round whitish green stalk, not 1 Corona Imperialis. The Crown Imperial. 2
Liliu^^ Persicum. The Persian Lilly. 3 Martagon Imperiale. The Martagon
Imperial.
depiction of flowers much lower than the Crown Imperial, but much smaller,
beset from the bottom to the middle thereof, with many long and narrow leaves,
of a whitish or bluish green color, almost like to the leaf of a Tulipa:
from the middle upwards, to the top of the stalk, stand many flowers one
above another round about it, with leaves at the foot of every one of them,
each whereof is pendulous or hanging down the head, like unto the Crown
Imperial, and not turning up any of the flowers again, but smaller than in
any other kind of Lilly, yea not so big as the flower of a Fritillaria,
consisting of six leaves a piece, of a dead or ouerworne purplish color,
having in the midst a small long pointell, with certain chiues tipped with
yellow pendents: after the flowers are past (which abide open a long time, and
for the most part flower by degrees, the lowest first, and so upwards) if the
weather be temperate, come six square heads or seed vessels, seeming to be
but three square, by reason of the wings, very like to the heads of the Crown
Imperial, but smaller and shorter, wherein are contained such like flat seed,
but smaller also, and of a darker color.

The Place.
This was, as it is thought, first brought from Persia unto Constantinople, and
from thence, sent unto us by the means of diverse Turkey Merchants, and in
especial, by the procurement of Mr. Nicholas Let, a worthy Merchant, and a
lover of all fair flowers.

The Time.
It springs out of the ground very near a month before the Crown
Imperial, but does not flower till it be quite past (that is to say) not
until the latter end of April, or beginning of May: the seed (when it does
come to perfection, as it seldom does) is not ripe until July.

The Names.
It has been sent by the name of Pennachio Persiano, and we thereupon do
most usually call it Lilium Persicum, The Persian Lilly. Clusius says it has
been sent into the Low Countries under the name of Susam giul, and he thereupon
thinking it came from Susis in Persia, called it Lilium Susianum, The Lilly of
Susis.

The Virtues.
We have not yet heard, that this has been applied for any Physical respect.

CHAP. III.
Martagon Imperiale, sieve Lilium Montanum maius, The Martagon Imperial.
Under this title of Lilium Montanum, or Lilium Siluestre, I do comprehend only
those kinds of Lillies, which carry diverse circles of green leaves set
together at certain distances, round about the stalk, and not sparsedly as
the two former, and as other kinds that follow, do. And although there be
many of this sort, yet because their chiefest difference is in the color of
the flower, we will contain them all in one Chapter, and begin with the most
stately of them all, because of the number of flowers it bears upon one
stalk. The Imperial Lilly has a scaly root, like unto all the rest of the
Lillies, but of a paler yellow color, closely compact or set together, being
short and small oftentimes, in comparison of the greatness of the stem
growing from it. The stalk is brownish and round at the bottom, and sometimes
flat from the middle upwards, three foot high or more, beset at certain
distances with rondles or circles of many broad leaves, larger and broader for
the most part than any other of this kind, and of a dark green color: It
has two or three, and sometimes four of these rondles or circles of leaves,
and bare without any leaf between; but above toward the tops of the stalks,
it has here and there some leaves upon it, but smaller than any of the other
leaves: at the top of the stalk come forth many flowers, sometime three or
four score, thick thrust, or confusedly set together, and not thin or
sparsedly one above another, as in the lesser of this kind of Mountain Lilly.
It has been sometimes also observed in this kind, that it has borne many
flowers at three several spaces of the stalk, one above another, which has
made a goodly show; each flower whereof is pendulous, hanging down, and each
leaf of the flower turning up again, being thick or fleshy, of a fine
delayed purple color, spotted with many blackish or brownish spots, of a very
pleasant sweet sent, which makes it the more acceptable: in the middle of the
flower hangs down a style or pointell, knobbed or buttoned at the end with
six yellow chiues, tipped with loose pendents of an Orient red or Vermillion
color, which will easily stick like dust upon any thing that touches them:
the heads or seed vessels are small and round, with small edges about them,
wherein is contained flat brown seed like other Lillies, but lesser. The root
is very apt to increase or set of, as we call it, whereby the plant seldom
comes to so great a head of flowers, but rises up with many stalks, and
then carry fewer flowers.

Of this kind there is sometimes one found, that bears flowers without any
spots: Martagon Imperiale flore non punctato.
the leaves whereof and stalk likewise are paler, but not else differing.

Martagon flore albo. The White Martagon.
We have also some other of this kind, the first whereof has his stalk and
leaf greener than the former, the stalk is a little higher, but not bearing
so thick a head of flowers, although much more plentiful than the lesser
Mountain Lilly, being altogether of a fine white color, without any spots, or
but very few, and that but sometimes also: the pendents in the middle of this
flower are not red, as the former, but yellow; the root of this, and of the
other two that follow, are of a pale yellow color, the cloves or scales of
them being brittle, and not closely compact, yet so as if two, and sometimes
three scales or cloves grew one upon the head or upper part of another; which
difference is a special note to know these three kinds, from any other kind
of Mountain Lilly, as in all old roots that I have seen, I have observed, as
also in them that are reasonably well grown, but in the young roots it is not
yet so manifest.

Martagon flore albo maculato. The White spotted Martagon.
The second is like unto the first in all things, save in this, that the
flowers hereof are not altogether so white, and besides has many reddish spots
on the inside of the leaves of the flower, and the stalk also is not so green
but brownish.

Martagon flore carneo. The blush Martagon.
A third sort there is of this kind, whose flowers are wholly of a delayed
flesh color, with many spots on the flowers, and this is the difference hereof
from the former.

Lilium Montanum sieve siluestre minus. The lesser Mountain Lilly.
The lesser Mountain Lilly is so like in root unto the greater that is first
described, that it is hard to distinguish them asunder; but when this is sprung
up out of the ground, which is a month after the first: it also carries his
leaves in rondles about the stalk, although not altogether so great nor so
many. The flowers are more thinly set on the stalks one above another, with
more distance between each flower than the former, and are of a little deeper
flesh color or purple, spotted in the same manner. The buds 1 Martagon flore
albo. The white Martagon. 2 Martagon sine Lilium Canadense maculatum. The
spotted Martagon, or Lilly of Canada. 3 Martagon Pomponeum. The Martagon
Pompony, or early red Martagon.
depiction of flowers or heads of flowers, in some of these before they be
blown, are hoary white, or hairie, whereas in others, there is no hoarinesse
at all, but the buddes are smooth and purplish: in others, things this
differs not from the former.

Of this sort also there is one that has but few spots on the flowers, Lilium
Montanum non maculatum.
whose color is somewhat paler than the other.

Martagon Canadense maculatum. The spotted Martagon of Canada.
Although this strange Lilly has not his flowers hanging down, and turning up
again, as the former kinds set forth in this Chapter; yet because the green
leaves stand at several joints as they do, I must needs insert it here, not
knowing where more fitly to place it. It has a small scaly root, with many
small long fibers thereat, from whence rises up a reasonable great stalk,
almost as high as any of the former, bearing at three or four distances many
long and narrow green leaves, but not so many or so broad as the former, with
diverse ribs in them: from among the uppermost rundle of leaves break forth
four or five flowers together, every one standing on a long slender foot
stalk, being almost as large as a red Lilly, but a little bending downwards,
and of a fair yellow color, spotted on the inside with diverse blackish purple
spots or strakes, having a middle pointell, and six chiues, with pendents on
them.

The Place.
All these Lillies have been found in the diverse Countries of Germany, as
Austria, Hungaria, Pannonia, Stiria, etc. and are all made Denisons in our
London Gardens, where they flourish as in their own natural places. The last
was was brought into France from Canada by the French Colonie, and from thence
unto us.

The Time.
They flower about the later end of June for the most part, yet the first
springs out of the ground a month at the least before the other, which are
most usually in flower before it, like unto the Serotine Tulipas, all of them
being early up, and never the near.

The Names.
The first is usually called Martagon Imperiale, the Imperial Martagon, and is
Lilium Montanum maius, the greatest Mountain Lilly; for so it deserves the
name, because of the number of flowers upon a head or stalk. Some have called
it Lilium Sarasenicum, and some Hemerocallis, but neither of them does so fitly
agree unto it.

The second is Lilium Montanum maius flore albo, and of some Martagon Imperiale
flore albo, but most usually Martagon flore albo, the white Martagon. The
second sort of this second kind, is called Martagon flore albo maculato, the
spotted white Martagon. And the third, Martagon flore carneo, the blush
Martagon.

The third kind is called Lilium Montanum, the Mountain Lilly, and some add
the title ^inus, the lesser, to know it more distinctly from the other. Some
also Lilium Siluestre, as Clusius, and some others, and of Matthiolus Martagon.
Of diverse women here in England, from the Dutch name, Lilly of Nazareth. The
last has his title Americanum and Canadense, and in English accordingly.

CHAP. IV.
1. Martagon Pomponeum sine Lilium rubrum praecox, vel Lilium Macedonicum. The
early red Martagon, or Martagon Pompony.
AS in the former Chapter we described unto you such Lillies, whose flowers
being pendulous, turn their leaves back again, and have their green leaves,
set by spaces about the stalk: so in this we will set down those sorts,
which carry their green leaves more sparsedly, and all along the stalk, their
flowers hanging down, and turning up again as the former, and begin with that
which is of greatest beauty, or at least of most rarity.

1. Martagon Pomponeum angusti folium praecox.
1. This rare Martagon has a scaly root closely compact, with broader and
thinner scales than others, in time growing very great, and of a more deep
yellow color then the former, from whence does spring up a round green stalk
in some plants, and flat in others, two or three foot high, bearing a number
of small, long, and narrow green leaves, very like unto the leaves of Pinkes,
but greener, set very thick together, and without order about the stalk, up
almost unto the top, and lesser by degrees upwards, where stand many flowers,
according to the age of the plant, and thriuing in the place where it grows;
in those that are young, but a few, and more sparsedly, and in others that are
old many more, and thicker set: for I have reckoned threescore flowers and
more, growing thick together on one plant with me, and an hundred flowers on
another: these flowers are of a pale or yellowish red color, and not so deep
red as the red Martagon of Constantinople, hereafter set down, nor fully so
large: yet of the same fashion, that is, every flower hanging down, and
turning up his leaves again. It is not so plentiful in bearing of seed as
the other Lillies, but when it does, it differs not but in being less.

2. Martagon angusti folium magis serotinum.
There is another, whose green leaves are not so thick set on the stalk, but
else differs not but in flowring a fortnight later.

There is another also of this kind, so like unto the former in root, stalk,
flower, and manner of growing, 3. Martagon Pomponeum latifolium praecox.
that the difference is hardly discerned; but consists chiefly in these two
points: First, that the leaves of this are a little broader and shorter then
the former; and secondly, that it bears his flowers a fortnight earlier than
the first. In the color or form of the flower, there can no difference be
discerned, nor (as I said) in any other thing. All these Lillies do spring
very late out of the ground, even as the yellow Martagons do, but are sooner
in flower then any others.

4. Martagon flore phaeniceo.
A fourth kind hereof has of late been known to us, whose leaves are broader
and shorter then the last, and the flowers of a paler red, tending to yellow,
of some called a golden red color: but flowreth not so early as they.

2. Lilium rubrum Byzantinum, sieve Martagon Constantinopolitanum. The red
Martagon of Constantinople.
1. The red Martagon of Constantinople is become so common every where, and so
well known to all lovers of these delights, that I shall seem unto them to
lose time, to bestow many lines upon it; yet because it is so fair a flower,
and was at the first so highly esteemed, it deserves his place and
commendations, howsoever increasing the plenty has not made it dainty. It
rises out of the ground early in the spring, before many other Lillies, from a
great thick yellow scaly root, bearing a round brownish stalk, beset with
many fair green leaves confusedly thereon, but not so broad as the common
white Lilly, upon the top whereof stand one, two, or three, or more flowers,
upon long footestalkes, which hang down their heads, and turn up their leaves
again, of an excellent red crimson color, and sometimes paler, having a long
pointell in the middle, compassed with six whitish chiues, tipped with loose
yellow pendents, of a reasonable good sent, but somewhat faint. It likewise
bears seed in heads, like unto the other, but greater.

Martagon Constantinopolitanum maculatum. The red spotted Martagon of
Constantinople.
We have another of this kind, that grows somewhat greater and higher, with
a larger flower, and of a deeper color, spotted with diverse black spots, or
strakes and lines, as is to be seen in the Mountain Lillies, and in some
other hereafter to be described; but is not so in the former of this kind,
which has no show of spots at all. The whole plant as it is rare, so it is of
much more beauty then the former.

2. Martagon Pannonicum, sieve Exoticum flore spadiceo. The bright red Martagon
of Hungary.
Although this Martagon or Lilly be of another Country, yet by reason of the
neerenesse both in leaf and flower unto the former, may more fitly be placed
next unto them, then in any other place. It has his root very like the other,
but the leaves are somewhat larger, and more sparsedly set upon the stalk,
else not much unlike: the flowers bend down, and turn up their leaves again,
but somewhat larger, and of a bright red, tending to an Orange color, that is,
somewhat yellowish, and not crimson, like the other.

3. Martagon Luteum punctatum. The Yellow spotted Martagon.
1. This Yellow Martagon has a great scaly or cloued root, and yellow, like
unto all these sorts of turning Lillies, from whence springs up a round
green strong stalk, three foot high at the least, confusedly set with narrow
long green leaves, white on the edges up to the very top thereof almost,
having diverse flowers on the head, turning up again as the former do, of a
faint yellowish, or greenish yellow color, with many black spots or strakes
about the middle of the leaf of every flower, and a forked pointell, with six
chiues about it, tipped with reddish pendents, of a heavy strong smell, not very
pleasant to many. It bears seed very plentifully, in great heads, like unto
the other former Lillies, but a little paler.

2. Martagon Luteum non maculatum. The Yellow Martagon without spots.
The other yellow Martagon differs in no other thing from the former, but
only that it has no spots at all upon any of the leaves of the flowers;
agreeing with the former, in color, form, height, and all things else.

3. Martagon Luteum serotinum. The late flowring Yellow Martagon.
There is yet another yellow Martagon, that has no other difference then the
time of his flowring, which is not until July, unless in this, that the
flower is of a deeper yellow color.

The Place.
The knowledge of the first kinds of these early Martagons has come from
Italy, from whence they have bin sent into the Low Countries, and to us, and,
as it seems by the name, whereby they have bin sent by some into these parts,
his original should be from the mountains in Macedonia.

The second sort is sufficiently known by his name, being first brought from
Constantinople, his natural place being not far from thence, as it is
likely. But the next sort of this second kind, does plainly tell us his place
of birth to be the mountains of Pannonia or Hungary.

The third kinds grow on the Pyrenaean mountains, where they have been
searched out, and found by diverse lovers of plants, as also in the Kingdom of
Naples.

The Time.
The first early Martagons flower in the end of May, or beginning of June, and
that is a month at the least before those that come from Constantinople, which
is the second kind. The two first yellow Martagons flower somewhat more early,
then the early red Martagons, and sometimes at the same time with them. But the
third yellow Martagon, as is said, flowreth a month later or more, and is in
flower when the red Martagon of Constantinople flowreth. And although the early
red and yellow Martagons, spring later then the other Martagons or Lillies, yet
they are in flower before them.

The Names.
The first early red Lillies or Martagons have been sent unto us by several
names, as Martagon Pomponeum, and thereafter are called Martagon of Pompony,
and also Lilium or Martagon Macedonicum, the Lilly or Martagon of Macedonia.
They are also called by Clusius Lilium rubrum praecox, the one angustiore
folio, the other latiore folio. And the last of this kind has the title flore
phaeniceo added or given unto it, that is, the Martagon or Lilly of Macedonia
with gold red flowers.

The Martagons of Constantinople have been sent by the Turkish name Zufiniare,
and is called Martagon, or Lilium Byzantinum by some, and Hemerocallis
Chalcedonica by others; but by the name of the Martagon of Constantinople they
are most commonly received with us, with the distinction of maculatum to the
one, to distinguish the sorts. The last kind in this classis, has his name in
his title, as it has been sent unto us.

The Yellow Martagons are distinguished in their several titles, as much as is
convenient for them.

CHAP. V.
Lilium Aureum and Lilium Rubrum. The Gold and Red Lillies.
THere are yet some other kinds of red Lillies to be described, which differ
from all the former, and remain to be spoken of in this place. Some of them
grow high, and some low, some have small knots, which we call bulbes, growing
upon the stalks, at the joints of the leaves or flowers, and some have none:
all which shall be entreated of in their several orders.

Lilium pumilum cruentum. The dwarf red Lilly.
The dwarfered Lilly has a scaly root, somewhat like unto other Lillies, but
white, and not yellow at all, and the cloves or scales thicker, shorter, and
fewer in number, then in most of the former: the stalk hereof is not above a
foot and a half high, round and green, set confusedly with many fair and
short green leaves, on the top of which do stand sometimes but a few
flowers, and sometimes many of a fair purplish red color, and a little paler
in the middle, every flower standing upright, and not hanging down, as in the
former, on the leaves whereof here and there are some black spots, lines or
marks, and in the middle of the flower a long pointell, with some chiues about
it, as is in the rest of these Lillies.

Lilium rubrum multiplici flore.
This kind is sometimes found to yield double flowers, as if all the single
flowers should grow into one, and so make it consist of many leaves, which
notwithstanding 1 Martagon rubrum sieve luteum. The red or the yellow Martagon.
2 Lilium Bulbiferum. The red bulbed Lilly. 3 Lilium aureum. The gold red Lilly.
4 Lilium album. The white Lilly.
depiction of flowers his so continuing sundry years, upon transplanting, will
redire ad ingentum, that is, quickly come again to his old by as or form.

Lilium Aureum. The Gold red Lilly.
The second red Lilly without bulbes grows much higher then the first, and
almost as high as any other Lilly: the root hereof is white and scaly, the
leaves are somewhat longer, and of a dark or sad green color; the flowers
are many and large, standing upright as all these sorts of red Lillies do, of
a paler red color tending to an Orange on the inside, with many black spots,
and lines on them, as in the former, and more yellow on the outside: the seed
vessels are like unto the roundish heads of other Lillies, and so are the
seeds in them likewise.

1. Lilium minus bulbiferum. The dwarf bulbed Lilly.
The first of the Lillies that carries bulbes on the stalk, has a white
scaly root like the former; from whence rises up a small round stalk, not
much higher then the first dwarf Lilly, seeming to be edged, having many
leaves thereon of a sad green color set about it, close thrust together: the
green heads for flowers, will have a kind of woollinesse on them, before the
flowers begin to open, and between these heads of flowers, as also under them,
and among the uppermost leaves, appear small bulbes or heads, which being ripe
if they be put into the ground, or if they fall of themselves, will shoot
forth leaves, and bear flowers within two or three years like the mother
plant, and so will the bulbes of the other hereafter described: the flowers of
this Lilly are of a fair gold yellow color, shadowed over with a show of
purple, but not so red as the first, or the next to be described. This Lilly
will shoot strings under ground, like as the last red Lilly will do also,
whereat will grow white bulbed roots, like the roots of the mother plant,
thereby quickly increasing it self.

2. Lilium Cruentum bulbiferum. The Fiery red bulbed Lilly.
The second bulbed Lilly rises up with his stalk as high as any of these
Lillies, carrying many long and narrow dark green leaves about it, and at the
top many fair red flowers, as large or larger then any of the former, and of
a deeper red color, with spots on them likewise, having greater bulbes growing
about the top of the stalk and among the flowers, then any else.

Lilium Cruentum flore pleno. The Fiery red double Lilly.
The difference of this does chiefly consist in the flower, which is composed
of many leaves, as if many flowers went to make one, spotted with black spots,
and without any bulbes when it thus bears, which is but accidental, as the
former double Lilly is said to be.

3. Lilium maius bulbiferum. The greater bulbed red Lilly.
The third red Lilly with bulbes, rises up almost as high as the last, and is
the most common kind we have bearing bulbes. It has many leaves about the
stalk, but not of so sad a green color as the former: the flowers are of as
pale a reddish yellow color as any of the former, and coming nearest unto the
color of the Gold red Lilly. This is more plentiful in bulbes, and in
shooting strings, to increase roots under ground, then the others.

The Place.
These Lillies do all grew in Gardens, but their natural places of growing is
the Mountains and the Valleys near them in Italy, as Matthiolus says: and in
many Countries of Germany, as Hungary, Austria, Stiria, and Bohemia, as
Clusius and other do report.

The Time.
They flower for the most part in June, yet the first of these is the earliest
of all the rest.

The Names.
All these Lillies are called Lilia Rubra, Red Lillies: Some call them Lilium
Aureum, Lilium Purpureum, Lilium Puniceum, and Lilium Cruentum. Some also call
them Martagon Chimistarum. Clusius calls these bulbed Lillies Martagon
Bulbiferum. It is thought to be Hyacinthus Poetarum, but I refer the
discussing thereof to a fitter time. We have, to distinguish them most fitly
(as I take it) given their proper names in their several titles.

CHAP. VI.
Lilium Album. The White Lilly.
NOw remains only the White Lilly, of all the whole family or stock of the
Lillies, to be spoken of, which is of two sorts. The one is our common or
vulgar White Lilly; and the other, that which was brought from Constantinople.

Lilium Album vulgar. The ordinary White Lilly.
The ordinary White Lilly scarce needs any description, it is so well known,
and so frequent in every Garden; but to say somewhat thereof, as I use to do
of every thing, be it never so common and known; it has a cloued or scaly
root, yellower and bigger then any of the red Lillies: the stalk is of a
blackish green color, and rises as high as most of the Lillies, having many
fair, broad, and long green leaves thereon, larger and longer beneath, and
smaller upon the stalk upwards; the flowers are many or few, according to the
age of the plant, fertility of the soil, and time of standing where it
grows: and stand upon long green footstalkes, of a fair white color, with
a long pointell in the middle, and white chiues tipped with yellow pendents about
it; the smell is somewhat heady and strong.

Lilium Album Byzantinum. The White Lilly of Constantinople.
The other White Lilly, differs but little from the former White Lilly,
either in root, leaf, or flower, but only that this usually grows with more
number of flowers, then ever we saw in our ordinary White Lilly: for I have
seen the stalk of this Lilly turn flat, of the breadth of an hand, bearing
near two hundred flowers upon a head, yet most commonly it bears not above a
dozen, or twenty flowers, but smaller then the ordinary, as the green leaves
are likewise.

The Place.
The first grows only in Gardens, and has not been declared where it is
found wild, by any that I can hear of. The other has been sent from
Constantinople, among other roots, and therefore is likely to grow in some
parts near thereunto.

The Time.
They flower in June or thereabouts, but shoot forth green leaves in Autumn,
which abide green all the Winter, the stalk springing up between the lower
leaves in the Spring.

The Names.
It is called Lilium Album, the White Lilly, by most Writers; but by Poets Rosa
Iunonis, Juno's Rose. The other has his name in his title.

The Virtues.
This Lilly above all the rest, yea, and I think this only, and none of the
rest is used in medicines now adays, although in former times Empericks used
the red; and therefore I have spoken nothing of them in the end of their
Chapters, reserving what is to be said in this. This has a mollifying,
digesting, and cleansing quality, helping to suppurate tumors, and to digest
them, for which purpose the root is much used. The water of the flowers
distilled, is of excellent virtue for women in travel of child bearing, to
procure an easy delivery, as Matthiolus and Camerarius report. It is used also
of diverse women outwardly, for their fa^es to cleanse the skin, and make it
white and fresh. Diverse other properties there are in these Lillies, which my
purpose is not to declare in this place. Nor is it the scope of this work;
this that has been said is sufficient: for were it not, that I would give you
some taste of the qua^ities of plants (as I said in my Preface) as I go along
with them, a general work were fitter to declare them then this.

CHAP. VII.
Fritillaria. The checkerd Daffodill.
ALthough diverse learned men do by the name given unto this delightful plant,
think it does in some things partake with a Tulipa or Daffodill, and have
therefore placed it between them; yet I, finding it most like unto a little
Lilly, both in root, stalk, leaf, flower, and seed, have (as you see here)
placed it next unto the Lillies, and before them. Hereof there are many sorts
found out of late, as white, red, black, and yellow, besides the purple, which
was first known; and of each of them there are also diverse sorts: and first of
that which is most frequent, and then of the rest, every one in his place and
order.

1. Frillaria vulgaris. The common checkerd Daffodill.
The ordinary checkerd Daffodill (as it is usually called, but might more
properly be called the small checkerd Lilly) has a small round white root,
and somewhat flat, made as it were of two cloves, and divided in a manner into
two parts, yet joining together at the bottom or seat of the root, which
holds them both together: from between this cleft or division, the budde for
the stalk etc. appears, which in time rises up a foot, or a foot and a
half high, being round and of a brownish green color, especially near unto
the ground, whereon there stands dispersedly four or five narrow long and
green leaves, being a little hollow: at the top of the stalk, between the
upper leaves (which are smaller then the lowest) the flower shows it self,
hanging or turning down the head, but not turning up again any of his leaves,
as some of the Lillies before described do; (sometimes this stalk bears two
flowers, and very seldom three) consisting of six leaves, of a reddish purple
color, spotted diversely with great spots, appearing like unto square checkers,
of a deeper color; the inside of the flower is of a brighter color then the
outside, which has some greenness at the bottom of every leaf: within the
flower there appear 1 Fritillaria vulgaris. The common Fritillaria. 2
Fritillaria flore atrorubente. The dark red Fritillaria. 4 Fritillaria alba.
The white Fritillaria. 7 Fritillaria lutea punctata. The yellow checkerd
Fritillaria. 8 Fritillaria lutea Italica. The great yellow Italian Fritillaria.
10 Fritillaria lutea Lusitanica. The small yellow Fritillaria of Portugal. 11
Fritillaria Pyrenaea. The black Fritillaria. 12 Fritillaria vmbellifera. The
Spanish black Fritillaria.
depiction of flowers six chiues tipped with yellow pendents, and a three-forked
style or pointell compassing a green head, which when the flower is past,
rises upright again, and becomes the seed vessel, being somewhat long and
round, yet having a small show of edges, flat at the head, like the head of a
Lilly, and without any crown as the Tulipa has, wherein is contained pale
colored flat seed, like unto a Lilly, but smaller.

Fritillaria vulgaris pallidior, praecox, and serotina.
There is some variety to be seen in this flower; for in some the color is
paler, and in others again of a very high or deep color: sometimes also they
have eight leaves, and sometimes ten or twelve, as if two flowers were made
one, which some thereupon have called a Double Fritillaria. Some of them
likewise do flower very early, even with or before the early flowring Tulipas;
and some again flower not until a month or more after the former.

2. Fritillaria flore atrorubente. The blood red Fritillaria.
The root of this Fritillaria is somewhat rounder and closer then the former,
from whence the stalk rises up, being shorter and lower then in any other of
these kinds, having one or two leaves thereon, and at the top thereof two or
three more set closer together, which are broader, shorter, and whiter then any
of them before, almost like unto the leaves of the yellow Fritillaria, from
among which top leaves comes forth the flower, somewhat bending down, or
rather standing forth, being larger then any of the former, and almost equal
in bigness unto the yellow Fritillaria, of a duskie gray color all over on
the outside, and of a very dark red color on the inside, diversely spotted or
straked: this very hardly increases by the root, and as seldom gives ripe
seed, but flowreth with the other first sorts, and before the black, and
abides less time in flower then any.

3. Fritillaria maxima purpurea siuerubra. The great purple or red Fritillaria.
This great Fritillaria has his root equal to the bigness of the rest of
his parts, from whence rises up one, and oftentimes two stalks, having one,
two or three flowers a piece on them, as nature and the seasons are fitting:
every one of these flowers are larger and greater then any of the former
described, and pendulous as they are, of a sad red or purplish color, with
many thwart lines on them, and small long marks, which hardly seem
checkerwise, nor are so eminent or conspicuous as in the former: the stalk is
strong and high, whereon are set diverse long whitish green leaves, larger and
broader then those of the former.

4. Fritillaria alba. The white Fritillaria.
The white Fritillaria is so like unto the first, that I shall not need to
make another description of this: it shall (I hope) be sufficient to show the
chief differences, and so proceed to the rest. The stalk and leaves of this
are wholly green, whereby it may easily be known from the former, which, as
is said, is brownish at the bottom. The flower is white, without almost any
show of spot or mark in it, yet in some the marks are somewhat more plainly
to beseene, and in some again there is a show of a faint kind of blush color
to be seen in the flower, especially in the inside, the bottomes of the leaves
of every flower sometimes are greenish, having also a small list of green,
coming down toward the middle of each leaf: the head or seed vessel, as
also the seed and the root, are so like unto the former, that the most
cunning cannot distinguish them.

5. Fritillaria flore duplici albicante. The double blush Fritillaria.
This Fritillaria has a round flattish white root, very like unto the last
Fritillaria, bearing a stalk with long green leaves thereon, little differing
from it, or the first ordinary Fritillaria: the flower is said to be constant,
composed of many leaves, being ten at the least, and most usually twelve, of a
pale whitish purple color, spotted like unto the paler ordinary Fritillaria
that is early, so that one would verily think it were but an accidental kind
thereof, whereas it is (as is said before) held to be constant, continuing in
this manner.

6. Fritillaria flore luteo puro. The pure yellow Fritillaria.
The pure yellow Fritillaria has a more round, and not so flat a whitish root
as the former kinds, and of a mean bigness; from the middle rises up a
stalk a foot and a half high, and sometimes higher, whereon are set without
order diverse long and somewhat broad leaves of a whitish green color, like
unto the leaves of the black Fritillaria, but not above half so broad: the
flower is somewhat small and long, not much unlike to the black for shape and
fashion, but that the leaves are smaller and rounder pointed, of a faint
yellowish color, without any show of spots or checkers at all, either within
or without the flower, having some chiues and yellow pendents in the middle, as
is to be seen in all of them: the seed is like the first kind.

7. Fritillaria flore luteo vario sieve punctato. The checkerd yellow
Fritillaria.
This Fritillaria grows not much lower then the former, and brownish at the
rising up, having his leaves whiter, broader, and shorter then it, and almost
round pointed. The flower is greater, and larger spread then any other before,
of a fair pale yellow color, spotted in very good order, with fine small
checkers, which add a wonderful pleasing beauty thereunto: it has also some
lists of green running down the back of every leaf. It seldom gives
seed; the root also is like the other, but not so flat.

8. Fritillaria lutea maxima Italica. The great yellow Italian Fritillaria.
This kind of Fritillaria rises up with a round and brown green stalk,
whereon are set diverse leaves somewhat broad and short, which compass the
stalk at the bottom of them, of a dark green color; at the top of the
stalk, which bends a little downwards, do most usually stand three or
four leaves, between which comes forth most usually but one flower, which
is longer then the last, hanging down the head as all the others do,
consisting of six leaves, of a dark yellowish purple color, spotted with
some small red checkers. This kind flowreth late, and not until all the rest
are past.

9. Fritillaria Italorum polyanthos flore paruo. The small Italian Fritillaria.
This small Italian Fritillaria carries more store of flowers on the stalk,
but they are much smaller, and of a yellowish green color, spotted with long
and small dark red checkers or marks: the stalk has diverse small short
green leaves thereon, unto the very top.

10. Fritillaria lutea Iuncifoliu Lufitanica. The small yellow Fritillaria of
Portugal.
The leaves of this Fritillaria are so small, narrow and long, that it has
caused them to take the name of rushes, as if you should call it, The rush
leafed Fritillaria, which stand on a long weak round stalk, set without
order: the flower is small and yellow, but thicker checkerd with red spots then
any of the other yellow Fritillaria's; the stalk of the flower, at the head
thereof, being also of a yellowish color.

11. Fritillaria Pyrenaea five Apenniuea. The black Fritillaria.
The root of this kind does often grow so great, that it seems like unto
the root of a small Crown Imperial: the stalk is strong, round, and high,
set without order, with broader and whiter green leaves then any of the
former, bearing one, two, or three flowers; sometimes at the top, being not
so large as those of the ordinary purple Fritillaria, but smaller, longer, and
rounder, sometimes a little turning up the brims or edges of the leaves again,
and are of a yellowish shining green color on the inside, sometimes spotted
with red spots almost through the whole inside of the flower, unto the very
edge, which abides of a pale yellow color, and sometimes there are very few
spots to be seen, and those from the middle only on the inside (for on the
outside there never appears any spots at all in this kind) and sometimes
with no show of spots at all, sometimes also of a more pale green, and
sometime of a more yellow color: the outside of the flowers do likewise vary,
for in some the outside of the leaves are of a dark sullen yellow, etc. else
more pale yellow, and in other of a dark purplish yellow color, which in some
is so deep, and so much, that it rather seems black then purple or yellow,
and this especially about the bottom of the flower, next unto the stalk, but
the edges are still of a yellowish green: the head of seed, and the seed
likewise is like unto the former, but bigger in all respects.

12. Fritillaria Hispanica vmbellifera. The Spanish black Fritillaria.
This Fritillaria is no doubt of kindred to the last recited, it is so like,
but greater in all parts thereof, as if growing in a more fruitful soil, it
were the stronger and lustier to bear more store of flowers: the flowers grow
four or five from the head together, hanging down round about the stalk,
like unto a Crown Imperial, and are of a yellowish green color on the
inside, spotted with a few red spots, the outside being blackish as the former.

The Place.
The first of these plants was first brought to our knowledge from France,
where it grows plentifully about Orleance; the other sorts grow in diverse
other Countries, as some in Portugal, Spain, Italy, etc. as their names do
import, and as in time they have been observed by those that were curious
searchers of these rarities, have been sent to us.

The Time.
The early kinds do flower in the beginning of April or thereabouts,
according to the mildness or sharpness of the precedent Winter. The other
do flower after the first are past, for a months space one after another, and
the great yellow is very late, not flowring until about the middle or end of
May.

The Names.
This has received diverse names: some calling it Flos Meleagridis, the Ginny
Hen Flower, of the variety of the colors in the flower, agreeing with the
feathers of that Bird. Some call it Narcissus Caparonius, of the name of the
first inuentor or finder thereof, called Noel Caperon, an Apothecary dwelling
in Orleance, at the time he first found it, and was shortly after the finding
thereof taken away in the Massacre in France. It is now generally called
Fritillaria, of the word Fritillus, which diverse do take for the Chesse board
or table whereon they play, whereunto, by reason of the resemblance of the
great squares or spots so like it, they did presently refer it. It is called
by Lobel Lilionarcissus purpureus variegatus, and tessulatus, making it a kind
of Tulipa; but as I said in the beginning of the Chapter, it does most nearly
resemble a small pendulous Lilly, and might therefore rightly hold the name of
Lilium variegatum, or in English, the checkerd Lilly. But because the error
which first referred it to a Daffodill, is grown strong by custom of
continuance, I leave to every one their own will, to call it in English either
Fritillaria, as it is called of most, or the checkerd Daffodill, or the Ginnie
Hen flower, or, as I do, the checkerd Lilly. I shall not need in this place
further to explain the several names of every of them, having given you them
in their titles.

The Virtues.
I have not found or heard by any others of any property peculiar in this
plant, to be applied either inwardly or outwardly for any disease: the chief
or only use thereof is, to be an ornament for the Gardens of the curious
lovers of these delights, and to be worn of them abroad, which for the gallant
beauty of many of them, deserves their courteous entertainment, among many
other the like pleasures.

CHAP. VIII.
Tulipa. The Turks Cap.
NExt unto the Lillies, and before the Narcissi or Daffodils, the discourse of
Tulipas deserves his place, for that it partaketh of both their natures;
agreeing with the Lillies in leaves, flowers, and seed, and somewhat with the
Daffodils in roots. There are not only diverse kinds of Tulipas, but sundry
diversities of colors in them, found out in these later days by many the
searchers of natures varieties, which have not formerly been observed: our age
being more delighted in the search, curiosity, and rarities of these pleasant
delights, then any age I think before. But indeed, this flower, above many
other, deserves his true commendations and acceptance with all lovers of these
beauties, both for the stately aspect, and for the admirable variety of
colors, that daily do arise in them, far beyond all other plants that grow,
in so much, that I doubt, although I shall in this Chapter set down the
varieties of a great many, I shall leave more unspoken of, then I shall
describe; for I may well say, there is in this one plant no end of diversity to
be expected, every year yielding a mixture and variety that has not before
been observed, and all this arising from the sowing of the seed. The chief
division of Tulipas, is into two sorts: Praecoces, early flowring Tulipas, and
Serotinae, late flowring Tulipas. For that sort which is called Mediae or
Dubiae, that is, which flower in the middle time between them both, and may be
thought to be a kind or sort by it self, as well as any of the other two: yet
because they do nearer participate with the Serotinae then with the Praecoces,
not only in the color of the leaf, being of the same greenness with the
Serotinae, and most usually also, for that it bears his stalk and flower,
high and large like as the Serotinae do; but especially, for that the seed of
a Media Tulipa did never bring forth a Praecox flower (although I know Clusius,
an industrious, learned, and painful searcher and publisher of these rarities,
says otherwise) so far as ever I could, by mine own care or knowledge, in
sowing their seed apart, or the assurance of any others, the lovers and sowers
of Tulipa seed, observe, learn, or know: and because also that the seed of
the Serotinae brings forth Medias, and the seed of Medias Serotinae, they
may well be comprehended under the general title of Serotinae: But because
they have generally received the name of Media, or middle flowring Tulipas, to
distinguish between them, and those that usually do flower after them; I am
content to set them down, and speak of them severally, as of three sorts.
Unto the place and rank likewise of the Praecoces, or early flowring Tulipas,
there are some other several kinds of Tulipas to be added, which are notably
differing, not only from the former Praecox Tulipa, but every one of them, one
from another, in some special note or other: as the Tulipa Boloniensis flore
rubro, the red Bolonia Tulipa. Tulipa Boloniensis flore luteo, the yellow
Bolonia Tulipa. Tulipa Persica, the Persian Tulipa. Tulipa Cretica, the Candie
Tulipa, and others: all which shall be described and entreated of, every one
apart by it self, in the end of the rank of the Praecoces, because all of
them flower much about their time. To begin then with the Praecox, or early
flowring Tulipas, and after them with the Medias and Serotines, I shall for the
better method, divide their flowers into four primary or principal colors,
that is to say, White, Purple, Red, and Yellow, and under every one of these
colors, set down the several varieties of mixtures we have seen and
observed in them, that so they may be both the better described by me, and the
better conceived by others, and every one placed in their proper rank. Yet I
shall in this, as I intend to do in diverse other plants that are variable,
give but one description in general of the plant, and then set down the
variety of form or color afterward briefly by themselves.

Tulipa praecox. The early flowring Tulipa.
The early Tulipa (and so all other Tulipas) springs out of the ground with
his leaves folded one within another, the first or lowest leaf rises up
first, sharp pointed, and folded round together, until it be an inch or two
above the ground, which then opens it self, showing another leaf folded
also in the bosom or belly of the first, which in time likewise opening it
self, shows forth a third, and sometimes a fourth and a fifth: the lower
leaves are larger then the upper, and are fair, thick, broad, long, and
hollow like a gutter, and sometimes crumpled on the edges, which will hold
water that falls thereon a long time, of a pale or whitish green color,
(and the Mediae and Serotinae more green) covered over as it were with a
mealinesse or hoarinesse, with an eye or show of redness toward the bottom
of the leaves, and the edges in this kind being more notable white, which are
two principal notes to know a Praecox Tulipa from a Media or Serotina: the
stalk with the flower rises up in the middle, as it were through these
leaves, which in time stand one above another, compassing it at certain
unequal distances, and is often observed to bend it self crookedly down to
the ground, as if it would thrust his head thereinto, but turning up his head
(which will be the flower) again, afterward stands upright, sometimes but
three or four fingers or inches high, but more often half a foot, and a foot
high, but the Medias, and Serotinas much higher, carrying (for the most part)
but one flower on the top thereof, like unto a Lilly for the form,
consisting of six leaves, green at the first, and afterward changing into
diverse and sundry several colors and varieties, the bottomes likewise of the
leaves of these sometimes, but most especially of the Mediae, being as variable
as the flower, which are in some yellow, or green, or black, in others white,
blew, purple, or tawnie; and sometimes one color circling another: some of
them have little or no sent at all, and some have a better then others. After
it has been blown open three or four days or more, it will in the heat of
the Sun spread it self open, and lay it self almost flat to the stalk: in
the middle of the flower stands a green long head (which will be the seed
vessel) compassed about with six chiues, which do much vary, in being
sometimes of one, and sometimes of another color, tipped with pendents diversely
varied likewise: the head in the middle of the flower grows after the flower
is fallen, to be long, round, and edged, as it were three square, the edges
meeting at the top, where it is smallest, and making as it were a crown
(which is not seen in the head of any Lilly) and when it is ripe, divides it
self on the inside into six rows, of flat, thin, brownish, gristly seed,
very like unto the seed of the Lillies, but brighter, stiffer, and more
transparent: the root being well grown is round, and somewhat great, small
and pointed at the top, and broader, yet roundish at the bottom, with a
certain eminence or seat on the one side, as the root of the Colchicum has;
but not so long, or great, it has also an hollownesse on the one side (if it
have borne a flower) where the stalk grew, (for although in the time of the
first springing up, until it show the budde for flower, the stalk with the
leaves thereon rise up out of the middle of the root; yet when the stalk is
risen up, and shows the budde for flower, it comes to one side, making an
impression therein) covered over with a brownish thin coat or skin, like an
Onion, having a little woollinesse at the bottom; but white within, and firm,
yet composed of many coats, one folding within another, as the root of the
Daffodils be, of a reasonable good taste, neither very sweet, nor yet
unpleasant. This description may well serve for the other Tulipas, being Medias
or Serotinas, concerning their springing and bearing, which have not any other
great variety therein worth the note, which is not expressed here; the chief
difference resting in the variety of the colors of the flower, and their
several mixtures and marks, as I said before: saving only, that the flowers
of some are great and large, and of others smaller, and the leaves of some long
1 Tulipa praecox alba sieve rubra, etc. vnius coloris. The early white or red
Tulipa, etc. being of one color. 2 Tulipa praecox purpurea oris albis. The
early purple Tulipa with white edges, or the Prince. 3 Tulipa praecox
variegata. The early stripped Tulipa. 4 Tulipa praecox rubra otis luteis. The
early red Tulipa with yellow edges, or the Duke.
depiction of flowers and pointed, and of others broad and round, or bluntly
pointed, as shall be showed in the end of the Chapter: I shall therefore only
express the colors, with the mixture or composure of them, and give you
withal the names of some of them, (for it is impossible I think to any man,
to give several names to all varieties) as they are called by those that
chiefly delight in them with us.

Tulipa praecox Alba. The early White Tulipa. 1 Niuea tota interdum purpureis
staminibus, vel saltem luteis, fundo puro haud luteo. 1 The flower whereof is
either pure snow white, with purple sometimes, or at least with yellow chiues,
without any yellow bottom. 2 Alba sieve niuea fundo luteo. 2 Or pure white with
a yellow bottom. 3 Albida. 3 Or milk white that is not so pure white. 4 Alba,
venis caeruleis in dorso. 4 White with blew veins on the outside. 5 Alba
purpureis oris. Harum flores vel constantes, vel dispergentes. 5 White with
purple edges. Some of these abiding constant, and others spreading or running.
6 Alba carneis oris. Harum flores vel constantes, vel dispergentes. 6 White
with blush edges. Some of these abiding constant, and others spreading or
running. 7 Alba sanguineis oris. Harum flores vel constantes, vel dispergentes.
7 White with red edges. Some of these abiding constant, and others spreading or
running. 8 Alba oris magnis carneis, and venis intro respicientibus. 8 White
with great blush edges, and some strakes running from the edge inward. 9 Alba
extra, carnei vero coloris intus, or as habens carneas saturatiores. 9 White
without, and somewhat blush within, with edges of a deeper blush. 10 Albida,
oris rubris, vel oris purpureis. 10 Whitish, or pale white with red or purple
edges. 11 Albida purpurascentibus maculis extra, intuc vero carnei vinacissimi.
11 Whitish without, with some purplish veins and spots, and of a lively blush
within. 12 Alba, purpureis maculis aspersa extra, intus vero alba purpurantibus
oris. 12 White without, spotted with small purple spots, and white within with
purple edges. 13 Dux Alba, i. e. coceineis and albis variat^ flammis, a medio
ad oras intercursantibus. 13 A white Duke, that is, parted with white and
crimson flames, from the middle of each leaf to the edge. 14 Princessa, i.e.
argentei coloris maculis purpurascentibus. 14 The Princess, that is, a silver
color spotted with fine deep blush spots. 15 Regina pulcherrima, albis and
sanguineis aspersa radijs and punctis. 15 The Queen, that is, a fine white
sprinkled with blood red spots, and greater strakes.

Tulipa praecox purpurea. The early purple Tulipa. 1 Purpurea satura rubescens,
vel violacea. 1 A deep reddish purple, or more violet. 2 Purpurea pallida,
Columbina dicta. 2 A pale purple, called a Dove color. 3 Persici coloris
saturi. 3 A deep Peach color. 4 Persici coloris pallidioris. 4 A paler Peach
color. 5 Paoniae floris coloris. 5 A Peony flower color. 6 Rosea. 6 A Rose
color. 7 Chermesiua peramaena. 7 A Crimson very bright. 8 Chermesiua parum
striata. 8 A Crimson stripped with a little white. 9 Princeps, i.e. purpurea
saturatior vel dilutior, oris albis magnis vel paruis, fundo luteo, vel albo
orb, quae multum variatur, and color, and oris, ita vt purpurea elegans oris
magnis albis, dicta est, Princeps excellens, and 9 A Prince or Bracklar, that
is, a deep or pale purple, with white edges, greater or smaller, and a yellow
bottom, or circled with white, which varieth much, both in the purple and
edges, so that a fair deep purple, with great white edges, is called, The best
or chief Prince, and 10 Princeps Columbina, purpurea dilutior. 10 A paler
purple with white edges, called a Dove colored Prince. 11 Purpurea Chermesiua,
rubicandioris coloris, albidis vel albis oris. 11 A Crimson Prince or Bracklar.
12 Purpurea, vel obsoleta albidis oris Princeps Brancion. 12 A Brancion Prince,
or purple Brancion. 13 Purpurea diluta, oris dilutioris purpurei coloris. 13 A
purple with more pale purple edges. 14 Purpurea in exterioribus, carnei vero ad
medium intus, oris albis, fundoluteo. 14 Purple without, and blush half way
within, with white edges, and a yellow bottom. 15 Purpurea albo plumata extra,
oris albis, purpurascens intus, fundo luteo, vel orb albo. 15 Purple feathered
with white on the out side, with white edges, and pale purple within, the
ground being a little yellow, or circled with white. 16 Alia, minus elegans
plumata, minoribusque oris albidis. 16 Another very near unto it, but not so
fairly feathered, being more obscure, and the edges not so great or whitish.

Tulipa praecox rubra. The early red Tulipa. 1 Rubra vulgaris fundo luteo, and
aliquando nigro. 1 An ordinary red, with a yellow, and sometimes a black
bottom. 2 Rubra satura oris luteis paruis, dicta Roan. 2 A deep red, with a
small edge of yellow, called a Roane. 3 Baro, i.e. rubra megis intensa, oris
luteis paruis. 3 A Baron, that is, a fair red with a small yellow edge. 4 Dux
mayor and minor, i.e. rubra magis aut minus elegans satura, oris luteis
maximis, vel minoribus, and fundo luteo magno. Alia alijs est magis amoena, in
alijs etiam fundo nigro vel obscuro viridi. 4 A Duke, a greater and a lesser,
that is, a more or less fair deep red, with greater or lesser yellow edges,
and a great yellow bottom. Some of this sort are much more or less fair then
others, some also have a black or dark green bottom. 5 Ducissa, i.e. Duci
similis, at plus lutei quam rubri, oris magnis luteis, and rubore magis aut
minus intus in gyrum acto, fundo item luteo magno. 5 A Duchess, that is like
unto the Duke, but more yellow then red, with greater yellow edges, and the red
more or less circling the middle of the flower on the inside, with a large
yellow bottom. 6 Testamentum Brancion, i.e. rubra sanguinea satura, aut minus
rubra, oris pallidis, magnis vel paruis: alia alijs magis aut minus elegans
diuer simodo. 6 A Testament Brancion, or a Brancion Duke, that is, a fair
deep red, or less red, with a pale yellow or butter colored edge, some
larger others smaller: and some more pleasing then others, in a very variable
manner. 7 Flambans, ex rubore and flauedine radiata, vel striata fundo luteo. 7
A Flambant, differing from the Duchess; for this has no such great yellow
edge, but streaks of yellow through the leaf unto the very edge. 8 Mali
Aurantij coloris, ex rubore, and flauedine integre, non separatim mixta, oris
luteis paruis, vel absque oris. 8 An Orange color, that is, a reddish yellow,
or a red and yellow equally mixed, with small yellow edges, and sometimes
without. 9 Minij, sieve Cinabaris coloris, i.e. ex purpurea, rubedine, and
flauedine radiata, vnguibus luteis, and aliquando oris. 9 A Vermillion, that
is, a purplish red, streamed with yellow, the bottom yellow, and sometimes the
edges. 10 Rex Tuliparum, i.e. ex sanguineo and aureo radiatim mixta, a flammea
diuersa, fundo luteo, orb rubro. 10 The Kings flower, that is, a crimson or
blood red, streamed with a gold yellow, differing from the Flambant, the
bottom yellow, circled with red. 11 Tunica Morionis, i.e. ex rubore and aureo
separatim diuisa. 11 A Fools coat, parted with red and yellow guardes.

Tulipa praecox lutea. The early yellow Tulipa. 1 Lutea sieve flaua. 1 A fair
gold yellow without mixture. 2 Pallida lutea sieve straminea. 2 A straw color.
3 Aurea, oris rubicundis. 3 A fair yellow with reddish edges. 4 Straminea,
oris rubris. 4 A straw color, with red edges. 5 Aurea, rubore perfusa extra.
5 A fair yellow, reddish on the outside only. 6 Aurea, vel magis pallida,
rubore in gyrum acta simillima Ducissae, nisi minus rubedinis habet. 6 A gold
or paler yellow, circled on the inside a little with red, very like the
Duchess, but that it has less red therein. 7 Aurea, extremitatibus rubris,
dici potest, Morionis Pilaeus praecox. 7 A gold yellow with red tops, and may
be called, The early Fools Cap.

Tulipa de Caffa. The Tulipa of Caffa.
There is another sort or kind of early Tulipa, differing from the former,
whose pale green leaves being as broad and large as they, and sometimes
crumpled or waued at the edges, in some have the edges only of the said leaves
for a good breadth, of a whitish or whitish yellow color, and in others, the
leaves are listed or parted with whitish yellow and green: the stalk rises
not up so high as the former, and bears a flower at the top like unto the
former, in some of a reddish yellow color, with a russet colored ground or
bottom, and in others, of other several colors: the seed and root is so
like unto others of this kind, that they cannot be distinguished.

There is (as I do hear) of this kind, both Praecoces, and Serotinae, early
flowring, and late flowring, whereof although we have not so exact knowledge,
as of the rest, yet I thought good to speak so much, as I could hitherto
understand of them, and give others leave (if I do not) hereafter to amplify
it.

Tulipa Boloniensis, sieve Bombycina flore rubro major. The greater red Bolonia
Tulipa.
There are likewise other kinds of early Tulipas to be spoken of, and first
of the red Bolonia Tulipa; the root whereof is plainly discerned, to be
differing from all others: for that it is longer, and not having so plain an
eminence at the bottom thereof, as the former and later Tulipas, but more
especially because the top is plentifully stored with a yellowish silke-like
woollinesse: the outside likewise or skin is of a brighter or paler red, not
so easy to be pilled away, and runs under ground both downeright and
sidewise (especially in the Country ground and air, where it will increase
abundantly, but not either in our London air, or forced grounds) somewhat
like unto the yellow Bolonia Tulipa next following. It shoots out of the
ground with broad and long leaves, like the former; but neither so broad, nor
of so white or mealy a green color as the former, but more dark then the
late flowring Tulipa, so that this may be easily discerned by his leaf from
any other Tulipa above the ground, by one that is skillful. It bears likewise
three or four leaves upon the stalk, like the former, and a flower also at
the top of the same fashion, but that the leaves hereof are always long, and
somewhat narrow, having a large black bottom, made like unto a cheuerne, the
point whereof rises up unto the middle of the leaf, higher then any other
Tulipa; the flower is of a pale red color, nothing so lively as in the early
or late red Tulipas, yet sweeter for the most part then any of them, and
nearest unto the yellow Bolonia Tulipa, which is much about the same sent.

Tulipa pumilio rubra, sieve Bergomensis rubra media and minor. The dwarf red
Bergomo Tulipa, a bigger and a lesser.
There are two other sorts hereof, and because they were found about Bergomo,
do carry that name, the one bigger or lesser then another, yet neither so great
as the former, having very little other difference to be observed in them,
then that they are smaller in all parts of them.

Tulipa Boloniensis flore luteo. The yellow Bolonia Tulipa.
The root of this Tulipa may likewise be known from the former red (or any
other Tulipa) in that it seldom comes to be so big, and is not so woolly
at the top, and the skin or outside is somewhat paler, harder, and sharper
pointed: but the bottom is like the former red, and not so eminent as the
early or late Tulipas. This bears much longer and narrower leaves then any
(except the Persian and dwarf yellow Tulipas) and of a whitish green color:
it bears sometimes but one flower on a stalk, and sometimes two or three
wholly yellow, but smaller, and more open then the other kinds, and (as I said)
smells sweet, the head for seed is smaller then in others, and has not
that crown at the head thereof, yet the seed is like, but smaller.

Tulipa Narbonensis, sieve Monspeliensis vel pumilio. The French or dwarf
yellow Tulipa.
This Tulipa is very like unto the yellow Bolonia Tulipa, both in root, leaf,
and flower, as also in the color thereof, being yellow: the only difference
is, that it is in all things lesser and lower, and is not so apt to bear, nor
so plentiful to increase by the root.

Tulipa Italica mayor and minor. The Italian Tulipa the greater and the lesser.
Both these kinds of Tulipas do so near resemble the last kind, that I
might almost say they were the same, but that some difference which I saw in
them, makes me set them apart; and consists in these things, the stalks of
neither of both these rise so high, as of the first yellow Bolonia Tulipa: the
leaves of both sorts are writhed in and out at the edges, or made like a wave
of the sea, lying nearer the ground, and the flower being yellow within, is
brownish or reddish on the back, in the middle of the three outer leaves the
edges appearing yellow. Both these kinds do differ one from the other in
nothing, but in that one is bigger, and the other smaller then the other which
I saw with John Tradescante, my very good friend often remembered.

Tulipa Lusitanica, sieve pumilio versicolor. The dwarf stripped Tulipa.
This dwarf Tulipa is also of the same kindred with the three last described;
for there is no other difference in this from them, then that the flower has
some red veins running in the leaves thereof.

There are two other sorts of dwarf Tulipas with white flowers, whereof Lobel
has made mention in the Appendix to his Aduersaria; the one whereof is the
same that Clusius sets forth, under the title of Pumilio altera: but because
I have not seen either of them both, I speak no further of them.

Tulipa pumilio alba. The white dwarf Tulipa.
But that white flower that John Tradescante showed me, and as he says, was
delivered him for a white Pumilio, had a stalk longer then they set out theirs
to have, and the flower also larger, but yet had narrower leaves then other
sorts of white Tulipas have.

Tulipa Bicolor. The small party colored Tulipa.
Unto these kinds, I may well add this kind of Tulipa also, which was sent
out of Italy, whose leaves are small, long, and narrow, and of a dark green
color, somewhat like unto the leaves of an Hyacinth: the flower is small also,
consisting of six leaves, as all other Tulipas do, three whereof are wholly
of a red color, and the other three wholly of a yellow.

Tulipa Persica. The Persian Tulipa.
This rare Tulipa, wherewith we have been but lately acquainted, does most
fitly deserve to be described in this place, because it does so nearly
participate with the Bolonia and Italian Tulipas, in root, leaf, and flower:
the root hereof is small, covered with a thick hard blackish shell or skin,
with a yellowish woollinesse both at the top, and under the shell. It rises
out of the ground at the first, with one very long and small round leaf, which
when it is three or four inches high, does open it self, and show forth
another small leaf (as long almost as the former) breaking out of the one side
thereat, and after it a third, and sometimes a fourth, and a fifth; but each
shorter then other, which afterward be of the breadth of the dwarf yellow
Tulipa, or somewhat broader, but much longer then any other, and abiding more
hollow, and of the color of the early Tulipas on the inside: the stalk rises
up a foot and a half 1 Tulipa Bombycina flore rubro. The red Bolonia Tulipa. 2
Tulipa Boloniensis flore luteo. The yellow Bolonia Tulipa. 3 Tulipa pupilio
rubra five lutea. The red or yellow dwarf Tulipa. 4 Folium Tulipa de Caffa per
totum striatum. The leaf of the Tulipa of Caffa striped throughout the whole
leaf. 5 Folium Tulipa de Caffa per oras striatum. The leaf of the Tulipa of
Caffa striped at the edges only. 6 Tulipa Perfica. The Persian Tulipa. 7
Tulipa Cretica. The Tulipa of Candie. 8 Tulipa Armeniaca. The Tulipa of Armenia.
depiction of flowers high sometimes, bearing one flower thereon, composed of
six long and pointed leaves of the form of other small Tulipas, and not
showing much bigger then the yellow Italian Tulipa, and is wholly white, both
inside and outside of all the leaves, except the three outtermost, which have
on the back of them, from the middle toward the edges, a show of a brownish
blush, or pale red color, yet deeper in the midst, and the edges remaining
wholly white: the bottomes of all these leaves are of a dark or dun tawnie
color, and the chiues and tippes of a darkish purple or tawnie also. This does
bear seed but seldom in our Country, that ever I could understand, but when
it does, it is small like unto the Bolonia or dwarf yellow Tulipas, being not
so plentiful also in parting, or setting of by the root as they, and never
grows nor abides so great as it is brought unto us, and seldom likewise
flowreth after the first year: for the roots for the most part with every one
grow less and less, decaying every year, and so perish for the most part by
reason of the frosts and cold, and yet they have been set deep to defend them,
although of their own nature they will run down deep into the ground.

Tulipa Byzantina duobus floribus Clusij. The small Tulipa of Constantinople.
The small Tulipa of Constantinople, bears for the most part but two leaves
on the stalk, which are fair and broad, almost like unto the Candy Tulipa,
next hereunto to be described: the stalk it self rises not above a foot
high, bearing sometimes but one flower, but most commonly two thereon, one
below another, and are no bigger then the flowers of the yellow Bolonia Tulipa,
but differing in color; for this is on the outside of a purplish color, mixed
with white and green, and on the inside of a fair blush color, the bottom
and chiues being yellow, and the tippes or pendents blackish: the root is very
like the yellow Bolonia Tulipa.

Tulipa Cretica. The Tulipa of Candie.
This Tulipa is of later knowledge with us then the Persian, but does more
hardly thrive, in regard of our cold climate; the description whereof, for so
much as we have knowledge, by the sight of the root and leaf, and relation
from others of the flower, (for I have not yet heard that it has very often
flowred in our Country) is as follows. It bears fair broad leaves,
resembling the leaves of a Lilly, of a greenish color, and not very whitish:
the stalk bears thereon one flower, larger and more open then many other,
which is either wholly white, or of a deep red color, or else is variably
mixed, white with a fine reddish purple, the bottomes being yellow, with
purplish chiues tipped with blackish pendents: the root is small, and somewhat
like the dwarf yellow Tulipa, but somewhat bigger.

Tulipa Armeniaca. The Tulipa of Armenia.
This small Tulipa is much differing from all the former (except the small or
dwarf white Tulipas remembered by Lobel and Clusius, as is before set down) in
that it bears three or four small, long, and somewhat narrow green leaves,
altogether at one joint or place; the stalk being not high, and naked or
without leaves from them to the top, where it bears one small flower like
unto an ordinary red Tulipa, but somewhat more yellow, tending to an Orange
color with a black bottom: the root is not much bigger then the ordinary
yellow Bolonia Tulipa, before set down.

And these are the sorts of this first Classis of early Tulipas.

Tulipa media. The meaner or middle flowring Tulipa.
For any other, or further description of this kind of Tulipa, it shall not
need, having given it sufficiently in the former early Tulipa, the maine
difference consisting first in the time of flowring, which is about a month
after the early Tulipas, yet some more some less: for even in the Praecoces,
or early ones, some flower a little earlier, and later then others, and then in
the colors of the flowers; for we have observed many colors, and mixtures,
or varieties of colors in the Medias, which we could never see in the
Praecoces, and so also some in the Praecoces, which are not in the Medias: yet
there is far greater varieties of mixture of colors in these Medias, then
has been observed in all the Praecoces, (although Clusius says otherwise)
either by my self, or by any other that I have conuersed with about this
matter, and all this has happened by the sowing of the seed, as I said
before. I will therefore in this place not trouble you with any further
circumstance, then to distinguish them, as I have done in the former early
Tulipas, into their four primary colors, and under them, give you their
several varieties and names, for so much as has come to my knowledge, not
doubting, but that many that have traveled in the sowing of the seed of
Tulipas many years, may observe each of them to have some variety that others
have not: and therefore I think no one man can come to the knowledge of all
particular distinctions.

Tulipa media alba. The white mean flowring Tulipa. 1 Niuea, fundo albo vel
luteo. 1 A snow white, with a white or yellow bottom. 2 Argentea, quasi alba
cineracea fundo lutescente, purpureis staminibus. 2 A silver color, that is, a
very pale or whitish ash color, with a yellowish bottom and purple chiues. 3
Margarit^na alba, carneo dilutissima. 3 A Pearl color, that is, white, with a
wash or show of blush. 4 Alba, fundo caeruleo vel nigro. 4 A white, with a blew
or black bottom. 5 Albida. 5 A Cream color. 6 Alb^, oris rubris. Haec tria
genera in aliquibus constanter tenent oras, in a^ijs dispergunt. 6 A white,
with red edges. These three sorts do hold their edges constant in some, but
well spread in others. 7 Alba, purpureis oris. Haec tria genera in aliquibus
constanter tenent oras, in a^ijs dispergunt. 7 A white, with purple edges.
These three sorts do hold their edges constant in some, but well spread in
others. 8 Alba, oris coccineis. Haec tria genera in aliquibus constanter tenent
oras, in a^ijs dispergunt. 8 A white, with crimson edges. These three sorts do
hold their edges constant in some, but well spread in others. 9 Albida primum,
deinde albidior, oris purpureis, and venis intro respicientibus, dicta nobis
Hackquenay. 9 A pale or whitish yellow, which after a few days grows more
white, with purplish red edges, and some streakes running inward from the edge,
which we call an Hackney. 10 Alba, sanguineo color variata, fundo vel
albissimo, vel alio. 10 A white mixed with a blood red very variably, and with
a pure white, or other colored bottom. 11 Alba, radiatim disposita flammis,
and maculis coccineis. 11 A white, streamed with crimson flames, and spots
through the whole flower. 12 Alba, purpurea rubedine plumata, diuersarum
specierum, quae cum superiore, vel albo, vel luteo, vel paruo caeruleo constant
fundo, quae constanter tenent punctatos colores, and non dispergunt, sed post
trium aut quatuor dierum spatium pulchriores apparent. 12 A white, speckled
with a reddish purple, more or less, of diverse sorts, with white, yellow, or
blew bottomes, all which do hold their marks constant, and do not spread
their colors, but show fairer after they have stood blown three or four
days. 13 Panni argentei coloris, i.e. alba, plumata, punctata, striata, vel
diuersimode variata, rubedine dilutiore, vel saturatiore purpurea, interius vel
exterius, vel vtrinque, diuersarum specierum. 13 A cloth of silver of diverse
sorts, that is, a white spotted, striped, or otherwise marked with red or
purple, in some paler, in some deeper, either on the inside, or on the outside,
or on both. 14 Tunica morionis alba varia, i.e. ex albo and purpureo striata
diuersimode, fundo albo vel alio. 14 A white Fools coat of diverse sorts, that
is, purple or pale crimson, and white, as it were empaled together, either with
a white ground or other, whereof there is great variety. 15 Holias alba vel
albida, absque fundo, vel fundo purpureo caruleo, vel caeruleo albo circundato,
diverse signata, vel variata intus ad medietatem foliorum, sursum in orbem vt
plurimum, vel ad oras pertingens amplas and albas. Hae species tantopere
multiplicantur, vt vix sint explicabiles. 15 A white Holias, that is, a fair
white, or paler white, either without a bottom, or with a bluish purple
bottom, or blew and white circling the bottom, and from the middle upwards,
speckled and straked on the inside for the most part, with blood red or
purplish spots and lines unto the very edges, which abide large and white. Of
this kind there are found very great varieties, not to be expressed. Tanta est
buius varietas, vel multitudine, vel striarum paucitate and distinctione, vel
fundis variantibus, vt ad tadium esset perscribere. Of this sort there is so
much variety, some being larger or fairer marked then others, their bottomes
also varying, that it is almost impossible to express them.

Tulipa media purpurea. The mean flowring purple Tulipa. 1 Purpurea satura. 1
A fair deep purple. 2 Purpurea dilutior, diuersarum specierum, quarum Rosea
vna, Carnea sit altera. 2 A paler purple, of many sorts, whereof a Rose color
is one, a Blush another. 3 Persici coloris, duarum aut trium specierum. 3 A
Peach color of two or three sorts. 4 Chermesina, obscura, aut pallida. 4 A
Crimson, deep, or pale. 5 Stamela, intenfior aut remissior. 5 A Stamell, dark
or light. 6 Xerampelina. 6 A Murrey. 7 Purpurea, striata. 7 A purple, stripped
and spotted. 8 Persici saturi, vel diluti coloris, vndulata, vel radiata. 8 A
Peach color, higher or paler, waued or stripped. 9 Columbiua, oris and radijs
albis. 9 A Dove color, edged and straked with white. 10 Purpurea rubra, oris
albis, similis Praecoci, dicta Princeps. 10 A fair red purple, with white
edges, like unto the early Tulipa, called a Prince 11 Chermesina, vel Heluola,
lineis albis in medio, and versus oras, fundo caeruleo, vel albo, itemque albo
orb. 11 A fair Crimson, or Claret wine color, with white lines both in the
middle, and toward the edges, most have a blew bottom, yet some are white, or
circled with white. 12 Purpurea remissior, aut intensior, oris albis, paruis
aut magnis, vt in Principe praecoci, fundo vel caeruleo orb albo, vel albo
orb caruleo amplo. 12 A light or deep purple, with white edges, greater or
smaller, like the early Prince, the bottomes either blew circled with white, or
white circled with a large blew. 13 Holias Heluola, sanguineis guttis intus a
medio sursum in orbem, fundo caeruleo. 13 A purple Holias, the color of a pale
Claret wine, marked and spotted with blood red spots, round about the middle of
each leaf upward on the inside only, the bottom being blew. 14 Tunica
Morionis purpurea rubra satura, albido striata, quam in alba saturatior, fundo
ex caeruleo and albo. 14 A Crimson Fools Coat, a dark crimson, and pale
white empaled together, differing from the white Fools Coat, the bottom blew
and white. 15 Purpurea rubra satura vel diluta, albo vel albedine, punctata vel
striata diuer simode, dicta Cariophyllata. 15 A deeper or paler reddish purple,
spotted or striped with a paler or purer white, of diverse sorts, called the
Gilloflower Tulipa.

1 Tulipa rubra and lutea varia The Fools Coat red and yellow. 2 Tulipa
Holeas alba absque; fundo. The white Holeas without a bottom. 3 Tulipa
argentea, v^l punctata, etc. The cloth of silver, or other spotted Tulipa. 4
Tulipa alba flammis coccineis. The white Fools Coat. 5 Tulipa Holea^ alba,
etc. jundo purpureo, etc. A white Holeas, etc. with a purple bottom, etc. 6
Tulipa rubra and lutea flammea, etc. A red and yellow flamed Tulipa, etc. 7
Tulipa alba striata and punctata. A white striped and spotted Tulipa. 8 Tulipa
altera variata, etc. Another variable Tulipa.
depiction of flowers

Tulipa media rubra. The mean flowring red Tulipa. 1 Rubra communis, fundo
luteo, vel nigro. 1 A fair red which is ordinary, with a yellow or black
bottom. 2 Mali Aurantij coloris. 2 A deep Orange color. 3 Cinabaris coloris.
3 A Vermillion. 4 Lateritij coloris. 4 A pale red, or Brick color. 5 Rubra,
luteo aspersa. 5 A Gingeline color. 6 Rubra, oris luteis. 6 A red with small
yellow edges. 7 Testamentum Brancion rubra satura, oris pallidis, diuersarum
specierum, rubore variantium, and orarum amplitudine. 7 A Testament Brancion of
diverse sorts, differing both in the deepnesse of the red, and largeness of the
pale colored edges. 8 Cinabaris radiata, magis aut minus serotina. 8 A
Vermillion flamed, flowring later or earlier. 9 Rubra purpurasceus obsoleta,
exterioribus folijs, perfusa luteo intus, oris pallidis luteis. 9 A dead
purplish red without, and of a yellowish red within, with pale yellow edges. 10
Rubra purpurascens elegans extra, and intus lutescens, oris pallidis luteis,
fundo luteo vel viridi. 10 A bright Crimson red on the outside, more yellowish
on the inside, with pale yellow edges, and a bottom yellow or green. 11 Rubra
flambans coccinea, crebris maculis luteis absque fundo. 11 A red Flambant,
spotted thick with yellow spots without any bottom. 12 Flambans elegantior
rubra, i.e. radijs luteis intercursantibus ruborem 12 A more excellent red
Flambant, with flames of yellow running through the red. 13 Flambans remissior
vtroque color. 13 A pale colored Flambant. 14 Panni aurei coloris. 14 A cloth
of gold color. 15 Tunica Morionis verior, seu Palto du Sot. optima, tenijs
amplis amoenis and crebris, ex rubro and flauo separatim diuisis and
excurrentibus, flos constans. 15 A true Fools Coat, the best is a fair red
and a fair yellow, parted into guards every one apart, varied through every
leaf to the very edge, yet in most abiding constant. 16 Tunica Mori^nis
altera, tenijs minoribus and minus frequentibus, magis aut minus alia alijs
inconstans. 16 Another Fools Coat, not so fairly marked, nor so much, some
of these are more or less constant in their marks, and some more variable then
others. 17 Tunica Morionis pallida, i.e. tenijs vel strijs frequentioribus in
vtroque color pallidis, flos est constans and elegans. 17 A pale Fools Coat,
that is, with pale red, and pale yellow guardes or stripes very fair and
constant. 18 Pileus Morionis, radijs luteis, in medio foliorum latis, per
ruborem excurrentibus, fundo luteo, apicibus luteis, and tribus exterioribus
folijs luteis oris rubris, vel absque oris. 18 A Fools Cappe, that is, with
lists or stripes of yellow running through the middle of every leaf of the
red, broader at the bottom then above, the bottom being yellow, the three
outer leaves being yellow with red edges, or without.

1 Tulipa tricolor. A Tulipa of three colors. 2 Tulipa Macedonica, sieve de
Caffa varia. The Tulipa of Caffa purple, with pale white stripes. 3 Tulipa
Heluola charmefina versicolor. A pure Claret wine color variable. 4 Tulipa
Caryophyllata Wilmeri. Mr. Wilmers Gilloflower Tulipa. 5 Tulipa Chermesina
flammis albi^. A Crimson with white flames. 6 Tulipa Goliath. A kind of Zwisser
called Goliath. 7 Tulipa le Zwisse. A Tulipa called the Zwisser. 8 Tulipa alba
flammis coccineis Another white Flambant or Fools Coat. 9 Tulipa Cinnabarina
albo flammata. The Vermillion flamed. 10 Tulipa plumata rubra and lutea. The
feathered Tulipa red and yellow.
depiction of flowers

19 Le Suisse, tenijs radiata magnis ex rubore and pallore. 19 A Swisse, paned
with a fair red and pale white or straw color. 20 Altera dicta Goliath a
floris magnitudine, tenijs radiata simillima le Suisse, nisi ruber and albedo
sint elegantiores. 20 A Goliath, so called of the bigness of the flower, most
like to the Swisse in the marks and guardes, but that the red and white is more
lively. 21 Holias rubra, i.e. sanguinea argenteis radijs, and guttis in orbem
dispositis, praesertim interius, fundo viridi saturo. 21 A red Holias. A blood
red stripped with silver white veins and spots, with a dark green bottom. 22
Holias coccinea, rubra coccinea, albo radiata in orbem, circa medium foliorum
interius, fundo albo. 22 A Crimson red Holias, that is, a fair purplish red,
spotted with white circlewise about the middle of the inner leaves, and a white
bottom. 23 Aliae huic similis, fundo albo and caeruleo. 23 Another like
thereunto, with a blew and white bottom.

Tulipa media lutea. The mean flowring yellow Tulipa. 1 Lutea, sieve Aurea
vulgaris. 1 A fair gold yellow. 2 Straminea. 2 A Straw color. 3 Sulphurea. 3
A Brimstone color pale yellowish green. 4 Mali Aurantij pallidi coloris. 4 A
pale Orange color. 5 Lutea dilute purpurea striata, aurei panni pallidi
instar, 5 A pale cloth of gold color. 6 Pallide lutea fuscedine adumbrata. 6 A
Custard color a pale yellow shadowed over with a brown. 7 Flaua, oris rubris
magnis, aut paruis. 7 A gold yellow with red edges, greater or smaller. 8
Straminea oris rubris magnis intensis, vel paruis remissis. 8 A Straw color
with red edges, deeper or paler, greater or smaller. 9 Obscura and fuliginosa
lutea, instar Folij decidui, ideoque Folium mortuum appelatur. 9 A sullen or
smoakie yellow, like a dead leaf that is fallen, and therefore called, Fueille
mort. 10 Flaua, rubore perfusa, etiamque striata per totum, dorso coccineo,
oris pallidis. 10 A yellow shadowed with red, and striped also through all the
leaves, the backside of them being of a red crimson, and the edges pale. 11
Pallide lutea, perfusa and magis aut minus rubore striata, fundo vel luteo, vel
vi ridi. 11 A pale yellow, shadowed and striped with red, in some more in some
less, the bottomes being either yellow or green. 12 Testamentum Clusij, i.e.
lutea pallida fuligine obfusca, exterius and interius ad or as vsque pallidas,
per totum vero floris medium, maculis interius aspersa instar omnium aliarum
Holias, dorso obscuriore, fundo viridi. 12 A Testamentum Clusij, that is, a
shadowed pale yellow, both within and without, spotted round about the middle
on the inside, as all other Holias are, the back of the leaves being more
obscure or shadowed with pale yellow edges, and a green bottom. 13 Flambans
lutea, diuersimode intus magis aut minus striata, vel in alijs extra maculata
rubore, fundo vt plurimum nigro, vel in alijs luteo. 13 A yellow Flambant of
diverse sorts, that is, the whole flower more or less streamed or spotted on
the inside, and in some on the outside with red, the bottom in most being
black, yet in some yellow. 14 Flambans pallidior and elegantior. 14 A paler
yellow Flambant more beautiful. 15 Holias lutea intensior vel remissior
diuersimode, in orbem radiata interius, rubris maculis ad supremas vsque oras,
aliquoties crebre, alias parce, fundo viridi, vel tanetto obscuro. 15 A yellow
Holias, paler or deeper yellow very variable, spotted on the inside round about
the middle, with red sometimes plentifully, or else sparingly, with a green or
dark tawny bottom. 16 Holias straminea rubore striata and punctata, instar
alba Holias. 16 A straw colored Holias, spotted and streamed with red, as is
to be seen in the white Holias. 17 Tunica Morionis lutea, alijs dicta
Flammea, in qua color flavus magis and conspicuus rubore, diuersimode radiata.
17 A yellow Fools coat, of some called a flame color, wherein the yellow is
more then the red, diversely streamed. Huc reddenda esset viridium Tuliparum
classis, quae diuersarum etiam constat specierum. Vna viridis intensior, cuius
flos semper fere semiclausus manet staminibus fi^briatis. Altera remissior,
instar Psittaci pennarum viridium, luteo variata oris albis. Tertia adhuc
dilutiori viriditate oris purpureis. Quarta, cujus folia equaliter purpura
diluta, and viriditate diuisa sunt. Quinta, folijs longissimis stellaemodo
expansis, ex rubore and viriditate coacta. Unto these may be added the green
Tulipa, which is also of diverse sorts. One having a great flower of a deep
green color, seldom opening it self, but abiding always as it were half
shut up and closed, the chiues being as it were feathered. Another of a paler
or yellowish green, paned with yellow, and is called, The Parret, etc. with
white edges. A third of a more yellowish green, with red or purplish edges. A
fourth, has the leaves of the flower equally almost parted, with green and a
light purple color, which abiding a long time in flower, grows in time to be
fairer marked: for at the first it does not show it self so plainly divided.
Some call this a green Swisser. A fifth has the longest leaves standing like
a star, consisting of green and purple.

Tulipa Serotina. The late flowring Tulipa.
The late flowring Tulipa has had his description expressed in the precedent
discourse, so that I shall not need to make a repetition of what has already
been set down. The greatest matter of knowledge in this kind is this, That
it has no such plentiful variety of colors or mixtures in his flowers, as
are in the two former sorts, but is confined within these limits here
expressed, as far as has come to our knowledge.

Tulipa Serotina. The late flowring Tulipa. Rosea intensior, aut remissior. A
Rose color deeper or paler. Rubra vulgaris, aut saturatior, and quasi
nigricaus, fundo luteo vel nigro, vel nigro orb, aureo incluso, dicta Oculus
Solis. An ordinary red, or else a deeper red like black blood, with a black
or yellow bottom, or black circled with yellow, called the Suns eye. Lutea
communis. An ordinary yellow. Lutea oris rubris. A yellow with red edges. Lutea
guttis sanguineis, fundo nigro vel vario. A yellow with red spots and veins,
the bottom black or discolored.

There yet remain many observations, concerning these beautiful flowers, fit
to be known, which could not, without too much prolixity, be comprehended
within the body of the description of them; but are reserved to be entreated
of a part by themselves.

All sorts of Tulipas bear usually but one stalk, and that without any
branches: but sometimes nature is so plentiful in bearing, that it has two or
three stalks, and sometimes two, or more branches out of one stalk (every
stalk or branch bearing one flower at the top) but this is but seldom
seen; and when it does happen once, it is hardly seen again in the same
root, but is a great sign, that the root that does thus, being an old root,
will the same year part into diverse roots, whereof every one, being of a
reasonable greatness, will bear both his stalk and flower the next year,
agreeing with the mother plant in color, as all the of-sets of Tulipas do for
the most part: for although the young of-sets of some do vary from the maine
root, even while it grows with them, yet being separated, it will be of the
same color with the mother plant.

There grows oftentimes in the Medias, and sometimes also in the Praecoces,
but more seldom, a small bulbe or root, hard above the ground, at the bottom
of the stalk, and between it and the lower leaf, which when the stalk is
dry, and it ripe, being put into the ground, will bring forth in time a flower
like unto the mother plant, from whence it was taken.

The flowers also of Tulipas consist most commonly of six leaves, but
sometimes they are seen to have eight or ten, or more leaves; but usually,
those roots bear but their ordinary number of six leaves the next year: the
head for seed then, is for the most part four square, which at all other
times is but three square, or when the flower wants a leaf or two, as
sometimes also it does, it then is flat, having but two sides.

The form of the flower is also very variable; for the leaves of some Tulipas
are all sharp pointed, or all blunt and round pointed, and many have the three
outer leaves sharp pointed, and the three inner round or pointed, and some
contrariwise, the three outermost round pointed, and the three inner sharp
pointed. Again, some have all the leaves of the flowers long and narrow, and
some have them broader and shorter. Some Praecoces also have their flowers very
large and great, equal unto either the Media, or Serotina, which most commonly
are the largest, and others have them as small as the Bolonia Tulipa.

The bottomes of the leaves of the flowers are also variably diuersified, and
so are both the chiues or threeds that stand up about the head, and the tips or
pendents that are hanging loose on the tops of them; and by the difference of
the bottomes or chiues, many flowers are distinguished, which else are very
like in color, and alike also marked.

For the smell also there is some diversity; for that the flowers of some are
very sweet, of others nothing at all, and some between both, of a small sent,
but not offensive: and yet some I have observed have had a strong ill sent; but
how to show you to distinguish them, more then by your own sense, I cannot:
for the seeds of sweet smelling Tulipas do not follow their mother plant, no
more then they do in the color.

And lastly, take this, which is not the least observation, worth the noting,
that I have observed in many: When they have been of one entire color for
diverse years, yet in some year they have altered very much, as if it had not
been the same, viz. from a purple or stamell, it has been variably either
parted, or mixed, or striped with white, either in part, or through the whole
flower, and so in a red or yellow flower, that it has had either red or yellow
edges, or yellow or red spots, lines, veins, or flames, running through the
red or yellow color, and sometimes it has happened, that three leaves have
been equally parted in the middle with red and yellow, the other three abiding
of one color, and in some the red had some yellow in it, and the yellow some
red spots in it also; whereof I have observed, that all such flowers, not
having their original in that manner, (for some that have such or the like
marks from the beginning, that is, from the first and second years flowring,
are constant, and do not change) but as I said, were of one color at the
first, do show the weakness and decay of the root, and that this
extraordinary beauty in the flower, is but as the brightness of a light, upon
the very extinguishing thereof, and does plainly declare, that it can do his
Master no more service, and therefore with this iollity does bid him good
night. I know there is a common opinion among many (and very confidently
maintained) that a Tulipa with a white flower, has changed to bear a red or
yellow, and so of the red or yellow, and other colors, that they are likewise
inconstant, as though no flowers were certain: but I could never either see or
hear for certain any such alteration, nor any other variation, but what is
formerly expressed. Let not therefore any judicious be carried away with any
such idle conceit, but rather suspect some deceit in their Gardeners or others,
by taking up one, and putting in another in the place, or else their own
mistaking.

Now for the sowing, planting, transplanting, choice, and ordering of Tulipas,
which is not the least of regard, concerning this subject in hand, but (as I
think) would be willingly entertained; What I have by my best endeauours
learned, by mine own pains in almost forty years travel, or from others
informations, I am willing here to set down; not doubting, but that some may
add what has not come to my knowledge.

First, in the sowing of seeds of Tulipas, I have not observed (whatsoever
others have written) nor could of certainty learn of others, that there does
arise from the seeds of Praecoces any Medias or Serotine Tulipas, (or but very
seldom) nor am certainly assured of any: but that the seeds of all Praecoces
(so they be not doubtful, or of the last flowring sorts) will bring Praecoces:
And I am out of doubt, that I never saw, nor could learn, that ever the seed
of the Medias or Serotines have given Praecoces; but Medias or Serotines,
according to their natural kind. But if there should be any degeneration, I
rather incline to think, that it sooner comes to pass ( a meliore ad peius,
for facilis est descensus, that is) that Praecoces may give Medias, then that
Medias or Serotines should give Praecoces.

For the choice of your seed to sow. First, for the Praecoces, Clusius says,
that the Praecox Tulipa, that bears a white flower, is the best to give the
greatest variety of colors. Some among us have reported, that they have found
great variety rise from the seed of the red Praecox, which I can more hardly
believe: but Clusius his experience has the greater probability, but
especially if it have some mixture of red or purple in it. The purple I have
found to be the best, next thereunto is the purple with white edges, and so
likewise the red with yellow edges, each of them will bring most of their own
colors. Then the choice of the best Medias, is to take those colors that are
light, rather white then yellow, and purple then red; yea white, not yellow,
purple, not red: but these again to be spotted is the best, and the more the
better; but withal, or above all in these, respect the ground or bottom of
the flower, (which in the Praecox Tulipa cannot, because you shall seldom see
any other ground in them but yellow) for if the flower be white, or whitish,
spotted, or edged, and straked, and the bottom blew or purple (such as is
found in the Holias, and in the Cloth of silver, this is beyond all other the
most excellent, and out of question the choicest of an hundred, to have the
greatest and most pleasant variety and rarity. And so in degree, the meaner in
beauty you sow, the lesser shall your pleasure in rarities be. Bestow not
your time in sowing red or yellow Tulipa seed, or the diverse mixtures of them;
for they will (as I have found by experience) seldom be worth your pains. The
Serotina, or late flowring Tulipa, because it is seldom seen, with any
especial beautiful variety, you may easily your selves guess that it can
bring forth (even as I have also learned) no raritie, and little or no
diversity at all.

The time and manner to sow these seeds is next to be considered. You may not
sow them in the spring of the year, if you hope to have any good of them; but
in the Autumn, or presently after they be thorough ripe and dry: yet if you
sow them not until the end of October, they will come forward never the
worse, but rather the better; for it is often seen, that over early sowing
causes them to spring out of the ground over early, so that if a sharp spring
chance to follow, it may go near to spoil all, or the most of your seed.
We usually sow the same years seed, yet if you chance to keep of your
own, or have from others such seed, as is two years old, they will thrive and
do well enough, especially if they were ripe and well gathered: You must not
sow them too thick, for so doing has lost many a pecke of good seed, as I
can tell; for if the seed lie one upon another, that it has not room upon
the sprouting, to enter and take root in the earth, it perishes by and by.
Some use to tread down the ground, where they mean to sow their seed, and
having sown them thereon, do cover them over the thickness of a man's thumb
with fine sifted earth, and they think they do well, and have good reason for
it: for considering the nature of the young Tulipa roots, is to run down
deeper into the ground, every year more then other, they think to hinder
their quick descent by the fastness of the ground, that so they may increase
the better. This way may please some, but I do not use it, nor can find the
reason sufficient; for they do not consider, that the stiffenesse of the
earth, does cause the roots of the young Tulipas to be long before they grow
great, in that a stiff ground does more hinder the well thriuing of the
roots, then a loose does, and although the roots do run down deeper in a
loose earth, yet they may easily by transplanting be helped, and raised up high
enough. I have also seen some Tulipas not once removed from their sowing to
their flowring; but if you will not lose them, you must take them up while
their leaf or stalk is fresh, and not withered: for if you do not follow the
stalk down to the root, be it never so deep, you will leave them behind
you. The ground also must be respected; for the finer, softer, and richer the
mould is, wherein you sow your seed, the greater shall be your increase and
variety: Sift it therefore from all stones and rubbish, and let it be either
fat natural ground of it self, or being muckt, that it be thoroughly rotten:
but some I know, to mend their ground, do make such a mixture of grounds, that
they mar it in the making.

After the seed is thus sown, the first years springing brings forth
leaves, little bigger then the ordinary grass leaves; the second year bigger,
and so by degrees every year bigger then other. The leaves of the Praecoces
while they are young, may be discerned from the Medias by this note, which I
have observed. The leaves of them do wholly stand up above the ground, showing
the small footstalkes, whereby every leaf does stand, but the leaves of the
Medias or Serotines do never wholly appear out of the ground, but the lower
part which is broad, abides under the upper face of the earth. Those Tulipas
now growing to be three years old, (yet some at the second, if the ground and
air be correspondent) are to be taken up out of the ground, wherein ye shall
find they have run deep, and to be anew planted, after they have been a
little dried and cleansed, either in the same, or another ground again,
placing them reasonable near one unto another, according to their greatness,
which being planted and covered over with earth again, of about an inch or two
thickness, may be left untaken up again for two year longer, if you will, or
else removed every year after, as you please; and thus by transplanting them
in their due season (which is still in the end of July, or beginning of August,
or thereabouts) you shall according to your seed and soil, have some come to
bearing, in the fifth year after the flowring, (and some have had them in the
fourth, but that has been but few, and none of the best, or in a rich ground)
some in the sixth and seventh, and some peradventure, not until the eighth or
tenth year: but still remember, that as your roots grow greater, that in
re-planting you give them the more room to be distant one from another, or
else the one will hinder, if not rot the other.

The seed of the Praecoces, do not thrive and come forward so fast as the
Medias or Serotines, nor do give any of-sets in their running down as the
Medias do, which usually leave a small root at the head of the other that is
run down every year; and besides, are more tender, and require more care
and attendance then the Medias, and therefore they are the more respected.

This is a general and certain rule in all Tulipas, that all the while they
bear but one leaf, they will not bear flower, whether they be seedlings, or
the of-sets of elder roots, or the roots themselves, that have heretofore
borne flowers; but when they show a second leaf, breaking out of the first, it
is a certain sign, that it will then bear a flower, unless some casualty
hinder it, as frost or rain, to nip or spoil the bud, or other untimely
accident befall it.

To set or plant your best and bearing Tulipas somewhat deeper then other
roots, I hold it the best way; for if the ground be either cold, or lie too
open to the cold Northern air, they will be the better defended therein, and
not suffer the frosts or cold to pierce them so soon: for the deep frosts and
snowes do pinch the Praecoces chiefly, if they be too near the uppermost
crust of the earth; and therefore many, with good success, cover over their
ground before Winter, with either fresh or old rotten dung, and that will
maruellously preserve them. The like course you may hold with seedlings, to
cause them to come on the forwarder, so it be after the first years sowing,
and not till then.

To remove Tulipas after they have shot forth their fibers or small strings,
which grow under the great round roots, (that is, from September until they
be in flower) is very dangerous; for by removing them when they have taken
fast hold in the ground, you do both hinder them in the bearing out their
flower, and besides, put them in hazard to perish, at least to be put back
from bearing for a while after, as oftentimes I have proved by experience: But
when they are now risen to flower, and so for any time after, you may safely
take them up if you will, and remove them without danger, if you have any good
regard unto them, unless it be a young bearing root, which you shall in so
doing much hinder, because it is yet tender, by reason it now bears his first
flower. But all Tulipa roots when their stalk and leaves are dry, may most
safely then be taken up out of the ground, and be so kept (so that they lie in
a dry, and not in a moist place) for six months, without any great harm: yea
I have known them that have had them nine months out of the ground, and have
done reasonable well, but this you must understand withal, that they have not
been young but elder roots, and they have been orderly taken up and preserved.
The dryer you keep a Tulipa root the better, so as you let it not lie in the
sun or wind, which will pierce it and spoil it.

Thus Gentlewomen for your delights, (for these pleasures are the delights of
leisure, which has bred your love and liking to them, and although you are
herein predominant, yet cannot they be barred from your beloved, who I doubt
not, will share with you in the delight as much as is fit) have I taken this
pains, to set down, and bring to your knowledge such rules of art, as my
small skill has enabled me withal concerning this subject, which of all
other, seemed fittest in this manner to be enlarged, both for the variety of
matter, and excellency of beauty herein, and also that these rules set forth
together in one place, might save many repetitions in other places, so that for
the planting and ordering of all other bulbous roots, and the sowing the
seeds of them, you may have recourse unto these rules, (tanquam ad normam and
examen) which may serve in general for all other, little diversity of
particulars needing exception.

The Place.
The greater Tulipas have first been sent us from Constantinople, and other
parts of Turkey, where it is said they grow naturally wild in the Fields,
Woods, and Mountains; as Thracia, Macedonia, Pontus about the Euxine Sea,
Cappadocia, Bithynia, and about Tripolis and Aleppo in Syria also: the lesser
have come from other several places, as their names do descipher it out unto
us; as Armenia, Persia, Candye, Portugal, Spain, Italy, and France. They are
all now made Denizens in our Gardens, where they yield us more delight, and
more increase for their proportion, by reason of the culture, then they did
unto their own naturals.

The Time.
These do flower some earlier, some later, for three whole months together at
the least, therein adorning out a Garden most gloriously, in that being but one
kind of flower, it is so full of variety, as no other (except the Daffodils,
which yet are not comparable, in that they yield not that alluring pleasant
variety) do the like besides. Some of the Praecoces have been in flower with
us, (for I speak not of their own natural places, where the Winters are
milder, and the Spring earlier then ours) in the month of January, when the
Winter before has been mild, but many in February, and all the Praecoces,
from the beginning to the end of March, if the year be kindly: at what time
the Medias do begin, and abide all April, and part of May, when the Serotines
flower and fade; but this, as I said, if the year be kindly, or else each
kind will be a month later. The seed is ripe in June and July, according to
their early or late flowring.

The Names.
There have been diverse opinions among our modern Writers, by what name this
plant was known to the ancient Authors. Some would have it be Cosmosandalos,
of the Ancient. Dodonaeus refers it to (...) of Theophrastus, in his seventh
Book and thirteenth Chapter: but thereof he is so brief, that besides the
bare name, we cannot find him to make any further relation of form, or
quality. And Bauhinus, upon Matthiolus Commentaries of Dioscorides, and in his
Pinax also, follows his opinion. Camerarius in his Hortus Medicus is of
opinion, it may be referred to the Helychrysum of Crateua. Gesner, as I think,
first of all, and after him Lobel, Camerarius, Clusius and many others, refer
it to the Satyrium of Dioscorides: and surely this opinion is the most probable
for many reasons. First, for that this plant does grow very frequent in many
places of Greece, and the lesser Asia, which were no doubt sufficiently known
both to Theophrastus, and Dioscorides, and was accounted among bulbous roots,
although by sundry names. And secondly, as Dioscorides sets forth his
Satyrium, so this most commonly bears three leaves upon a stalk (although
sometimes with us it has four or five) like unto a Lilly, whereof some are
often seen to be both red, in the first springing, and also upon the decaying,
especially in a dry time, and in a dry ground: the flower likewise of some is
white, and like a Lilly; the root is round, and as white within as the white
of an egg, covered with a brown coat, having a sweetish, but not unpleasant
taste, as any man without danger many try. This description does so lively set
forth this plant, that I think we shall not need to be any longer in doubt,
where to find Dioscorides his Satyrium Triphyllum, seeing we have such plenty
growing with us. And thirdly, there is no doubt, but that it has the same
qualities, as you shall hereafter hear further. And lastly, that plant
likewise that bears a red flower, may very well agree with his Erythronium;
for the descriptions in Dioscorides are both alike, as are their qualities, the
greatest doubt may be in the seed, which yet may agree unto Lin or Flax as
fitly, or rather more then many other plants do, in many of his comparisons,
which yet we receive for current. For the seed of Tulipas are flat, hard, and
shining as the seed of Linum or Flax, although of another color, and bigger,
as Dioscorides himself sets it down. But if there should be a mistaking in
the writing of (...) for (...), in the Greek Text, as the slip is both easy
and likely, it were then out of all question the same: for the seed is very
like unto the seed of Lillies, as any man may easily discern that know them,
or will compare them. It is generally called by all the late Writers, Tulipa,
which is derived from the name Tulpan, whereby the Turks of Dalmatia do
entitle their head Tyres, or Caps; and this flower being blown, laid open,
and inuerted, does very well resemble them. We have received the early kind
from Constantinople, by the name of Cafa lale, and the other by the name of
Cauela lale. Lobel and others do call it Lilio-narcissus, because it does
resemble a Lilly in the leaf, flower, and seed, and a Daffodill in the root.
We call it in English the Turks Cap, but most usually Tulipa, as most other
Christian Countries that delight therein do. Daleschampius calls it Oulada.

The Virtues.
Dioscorides writes, that his first Satyrium is profitable for them that have
a convulsion in their neck, (which we call a cricke in the neck) if it be
drunk in harsh (which we call red) wine.

That the roots of Tulipas are nourishing, there is no doubt, the pleasant, or
at least the no unpleasant taste, may hereunto persuade; for diverse have had
them sent by their friends from beyond Sea, and mistaking them to be Onions,
have used them as Onions in their pottage or broth, and never found any cause
of mislike, or any sense of evil quality produced by them, but accounted them
sweet Onions.

Further, I have made trial of them my self in this manner. I have preserved
the roots of these Tulipas in Sugar, as I have done the roots of Eringus,
Orchis, or any other such like, and have found them to be almost as pleasant as
the Eringus roots, being firm and sound, fit to be presented to the curious;
but for force of Venereous quality, I cannot say, either from my self, not
having eaten many, or from any other, on whom I have bestowed them: but surely,
if there be any special property in the roots of Orchis, or some other
tending to that purpose, I think this may as well have it as they. It should
seem, that Dioscorides does attribute a great Venereous faculty to the seed,
whereof I know not any has made any especial experiment with us as yet.

CHAP. IX.
Narcissus. The Daffodill.
THere has been great confusion among many of our modern Writers of plants,
in not distinguishing the manifold varieties of Daffodils; for every one
almost, without consideration of kind or form, or other special note, gives
names so diversely one from another, that if any one shall receive from several
places the Catalogues of their names (as I have had many) as they set them
down, and compare the one Catalogue with the other, he shall scarce have three
names in a dozen to agree together, one calling that by one name, which another
calls by another, that very few can tell what they mean. And this their
confusion, in not distinguishing the name of Narcissus from Pseudonarcissus, is
of all other in this kind the greatest and grossest error. To avoid
therefore that gulf, whereof I complain that so many have bin endrenched;
and to reduce the Daffodils into such a methodicall order, that every one may
know, to what Classis or form any one does appertain, I will first divide
them into two principal or primary kinds: that is, into Narcissos, true
Daffodils, and Pseudonarcissos, bastard Daffodils: which distinction I hold to
be most necessary to be set down first of all that every one may be named
without confusion under his own primary kind, and then to let the other parts
of the subdiuision follow, as is proper to them, and fittest to express them.
Now to cause you to understand the difference between a true Daffodill and a
false, is this; it consists only in the flower, (when as in all other parts
they cannot be distinguished) and chiefly in the middle cup or chalice; for
that we do in a manner only account those to be Pseudonarcissos, bastard
Daffodils, whose middle cup is altogether as long, and sometime a little longer
then the outter leaves that do encompasse it, so that it seems rather like a
trunk or long nose, then a cup or chalice, such as almost all the Narcissi, or
true Daffodils have; I say almost, because I know that some of them have their
middle cup so small, that we rather call it a crown then a cup; and again,
some of them have them so long, that they may seem to be of the number of the
Pseudonarcissi, or bastard Daffodils: but yet may easily be known from them,
in that, although the cup of some of the true Daffodils be great, yet it is
wider open at the brim or edge, and not so long and narrow all alike as the
bastard kinds are, and this is the chief and only way to know how to sever
these kinds, which rule holds certain in all, except that kind which is
called Narccissus luncifolius reflexo flora, whose cup is narrow, and as long
as the leaves that turn up again.

Secondly, I will subdiuide each of these again apart by themselves, into four
sorts; and first the Narcissos, or true Daffodils into

Latifolios, broad leafed Daffodils.

Angustifolios, narrow leafed Daffodils.

Iuncifolios, Rushe Daffodils, and

Marinos, Sea Daffodils.

These sorts again do comprehend under them some other divisions, whereby
they may the better be distinguished, and yet still be referred to one of
those four former sorts: as

Monanthos, that is, Daffodils that bear but one flower, or two at the most
upon a stalk, and

Polyanthos, those that bear many flowers together upon a stalk: as also

Simplici flore, those that bear single flowers, and

Multiplici flore, or flore pleno, that is, have double flowers.

Vernales, those that flower in the Spring, and among them some that are
earlier; and therefore called

Praecoces, early flowring Daffodils, and

Autumnales, those that flower in Autumn only.

And lastly, with the Pseudonarcissos, or bastard Daffodils, I will keep the
same order, to distinguish them likewise into their four several sorts; and
as with the true Daffodils, so with these false, describe under every sort:
first, those that bear single flowers, whether one or many upon a stalk; and
then those that bear double flowers, one or many also. As for the distinctions
of mayor and minor, greater and lesser, and of maximus and minimus, greatest
and least, they do not only belong to these Daffodils; and therefore must be
used as occasion permits, but unto all other sort of plants. To begin
therefore, I think fittest with that stately Daffodill, which for his
excellency carries the name of None such.

1. Narcissus latifolius omnium maximus, amplo calice flauo, sieve Nompareille.
The great None such Daffodill, or Incomparable Daffodill.
This Narcissus Nompareille has three or four long and broad leaves, of a
grayish green color, among which rises up a stalk two foot high at the
least, at the top whereof, out of a thin skinnie husk, as all Daffodils
have, comes forth one large single flower, and no more usually, consisting of
six very pale yellow large leaves, almost round at the point, with a large
cup in the middle, somewhat yellower then the leaves, the bottom whereof
next unto the stalk is narrow and round, rising wider to the mouth, which is
very large and open, and unevenly cut in or indented about the edges. The cup
does very well resemble the chalice, that in former days with us, and beyond
the Seas is still used to hold the Sacramental Wine, that is with a narrower
bottom, and a wide mouth. After the flower is past, sometimes there comes
(for it does not often) a round green head, and black round seed therein,
like unto other Daffodils, but greater. The root is great, as other Daffodils
that bear large flowers, and is covered over with a brownish coat or skin.
The flower has little or no sent at all.

Flore geminato
This does sometimes bring forth a flower with ten or twelve leaves, and a cup
much larger, as if it would be two, even as the flower seems.

2. Narcissus omnium maximus flore and calice flauo. The great yellow
Incomparable Daffodill.
This other kind differs neither in form, nor bigness of leaf or flower
from the former, but in the color of the circling leaves of the flower, which
are of the same yellow color with the cup.

Flore geminato.
This does sometimes degenerate and grow luxurious also, bringing forth two
flowers upon a stalk, each distinct from other, and sometimes two flowers
thrust together, as if they were but one, although it be but seldom; for it is
not a peculiar kind that is constant, yearly abiding in the same form.

3. Narcissus maximus griseus calice flauo. The gray Peerlesse Daffodill.
This Peerlesse Daffodill well deserves his place among these kinds, for that
it does much resemble them, and peradventure is but a difference raised from
the seed of the former, it is so like in leaf and flower, but that the leaves
seem to be somewhat greater, and the six outer leaves of the flower to be of
a glistering whitish gray color, and the cup yellow, as the former, but larger.

4. Narcissus latifolius flauo flore amplo calice, sieve Mattenesse. The lesser
yellow Nompareille, or the Lady Mattenesses Daffodill.
The leaves of this Daffodill, are somewhat like unto the leaves of the first
kind, but not altogether so long or broad: the stalk likewise rises not up
fully so high, and bears one flower like the former, but lesser, and both the
cup and the leaves are of one color, that is, of a pale yellow, yet more
yellow then in the former: the cup of this also is lesser, and a little
differing; for it is neither fully so small in the bottom, nor so large at the
edges, nor so crumpled at the brimmes, so that all these differences do
plainly show it to be another kind, quite from the former.

The Place.
The places of none of these are certainly known to us where they grow
naturally, but we have them only in our Gardens, and have been sent, and
procured from diverse places.

The Time.
They flower sometimes in the end of March, but chiefly in April.

The Names.
The first and second have been sent us by the name of Narcisse Nompareille, as
it is called in French; and in Latin, Narcissus omnium maximus amplo calice
flauo, and Narcissus Incomparabilis, that is, the Incomparable Daffodill, or
the greatest Daffodill of all other, with a large yellow cup: but assuredly,
although this Daffodill does exceed many other, both in length and bigness,
yet the great Spanish bastard Daffodill, which shall be spoken of hereafter, is
in my persuasion oftentimes a far higher and larger flower; and therefore
this name was given but relatiuely, we may call it in English, The great None
such Daffodill, or the Incomparable Daffodill, or the great Peerlesse
Daffodill, or the Nompareille Daffodill, which you will: for they all do
answer either the French or the Latin name; and because this name Nomparcille
is grown current by c^stome, I know not well how to alter it. The third kind
may pass with the title given it, without control. The last is very well
known beyond the Seas, especially in the Low Countries, and those parts, by
the Lady Mattenesse Daffodill, because Clusius received it from her. We may
call it in English, for the correspondency with the former, The lesser yellow
Nompareille, or Peerlesse Daffodill, or the Lady Mattenesse Daffodill, which
you will.

Narcissus Indicus flore rubro, dictus Iacobaeus. The Indian Daffodill with a
red flower.
This Indian Daffodill is so differing, both in form, not having a cup, and
in color, being red, from the whole Family of the Daffodils (except the next
that follows, and the Autumn Daffodils) that some might justly question the
fitness of his place here. But because as all the plants, whether bulbous or
other, that come from the Indies, either East or West (although they differ
very notably, from those that grow in these parts of the world) must in a
general survey and muster be ranked every one, as near as the surueiours wit
will direct him, under some other growing with us, that is of nearest
likeness; Even so until some other can direct his place more fitly, I shall
require you to accept of him in this, with this description that follows,
which I must tell you also, is more by relation then knowledge, or sight of the
plant it self. This Daffodill has diverse broad leaves, somewhat like unto the
common or ordinary white Daffodill, of a grayish green color; from the sides
whereof, as also from the middle of them, rise up sometimes two stalks
together, but most usually one after another (for very often it flowreth twice
in a Summer) and often also but one stalk alone, which is of a faint reddish
color, about a foot high or more, at the top whereof, out of a deep red
skin or husk, comes forth one flower bending downwards, consisting of
six long leaves without any cup in the middle, of an excellent red color,
tending to a crimson; three of these leaves that turn upwards, are somewhat
larger then those three that hang downwards, having six threads or chiues in
the middle, tipped with yellow pendents, and a three forked style longer then the
rest, and turning up the end thereof again: the root is round and big, of a
brownish color on the outside, and white within. This is set forth by Aldinus,
Cardinal Farnesius his Physician, that at Rome it rose up with stalks of
flowers, before any leaves appeared.

The Place. Time, and Names.
This naturally grows in the West Indies, from whence it was brought into
Spain, where it bore both in June and July, and by the Indians in their tongue
named AZCAL XOCHITL, and has been sent from Spain, unto diverse lovers of
plants, into several parts of Christendom, but have not thriued long in these
transalpine colder Countries, so far as I can hear.

Narcissus Trapezunticus flore luteo praecocissimus. The early Daffodill of
Trebizond.
Because this Daffodill is so like in flower unto the former, although
differing in color, I thought it the fittest place to join it the next
thereunto. This early Daffodill has three or four short very green leaves,
so like unto the leaves of the Autumn Daffodill, that many may easily be
deceived in mistaking one for another, the difference consisting chiefly in
this, that the leaves of this are not so broad or so long, nor rise up in
Autumn: in the midst of these leaves rises up a short green stalk, an
handful high, or not much higher usually, (I speak of it as it has often
flowred with me, whether the cause be the coldness of the time wherein it
flowreth, or the nature of the plant, or of our climate, I am in some doubt;
but I do well remember, that the stalks of some plants, that have flowred
later with me then the first, have by the greater strength, and comfort of the
Sun, risen a good deal higher then the first) bearing at the top, out of a
whitish thin skin striped with green, one flower a little bending
downwards, consisting of six leaves, laid open almost in the same manner with
the former Indian Daffodill, whereof some do a little turn up their points
again, of a fair pale yellow color, having six white chiues within it, tipped
with yellow pendents, and a longer pointell: the root is not very great, but
blackish on the outside, so like unto the Autumn Daffodill, but that it is
yellow under the first or outermost coat, that one may easily mistake one for
another.

The Place.
It was sent us from Constantinople among other roots, but as we may guess
by the name, it should come thither from Trapezunte or Trebizond.

The Time.
It flowreth sometimes in December, if the former part of the Winter 1
Narcissus No^pareille. The incomparable Daffodill. 2 Narcissus Mattenese. The
lesser yellow Nomparelle Daffodill. 3 Narcissus Iacobaeus flore rubro. The red
Indian Daffodill. 4 Narcissus Trapezunticus. The early Daffodill of Trabesond.
5 Narcissus Montanus albus apophysious traeditus. The white winged Daffodill. 6
Narcissus Montanus, sieve Nompareille totus albus. The white Nompareille, or
Peerlesse Daffodill. 7 Narcissus albus oblongo calice. The white Daffodill with
a long cup.
depiction of flowers have been mild; but most usually about the end of
January, or else in February the beginning or the end.

The Names.
We do usually call it from the Turkish name, Narcissus Trapezunticus, and
some also call it Narcissus vernus praecox, as Clusius does, in English, The
early Daffodill of Trebizond.

Narcissus Montanus albus apophysibus praeditus. The white Mountain Daffodill
with ears, or The white winged Daffodill.
This Mountain Daffodill rises up with three or four broad leaves, somewhat
long, of a whitish green color, among which rises up a stalk a foot and a
half high, whereon stands one large flower, and sometimes two, consisting of
six white leaves a piece, not very broad, and without any show of yellowness
in them, three whereof have usually each of them on the back part, at the
bottom upon the one side of them, and not on both, a little small white piece
of a leaf like an ear, the other three having none at all: the cup is almost
as large, or not much less then the small Nompareille, small at the bottom,
and very large, open at the brimme, of a fair yellow color, and sometimes the
edges or brimmes of the cup will have a deeper yellow color about it, like as
if it were discolored with Saffron: the flower is very sweet, the root is
great and white, covered with a pale coat or skin, not very black, and is
not very apt to increase, seldom giving of-sets; neither have I ever gathered
seed thereof, because it passes away without bearing any with me.

Narcissus Montanus, sieve Nompareille totus albus ample calice. The white
Nompareille Daffodill.
This white Nompareille Daffodill, is in root and leaf very like unto the
former mountain or winged Daffodill, but that they are a little larger: the
stalk from among the leaves rises up not much higher then it, bearing at the
top one large flower, composed of six long white leaves, each whereof is as it
were folded half way together, in the middle whereof stands forth a large
white cup, broader at the mouth or brims then at the bottom, very like unto
the lesser Nompareille Daffodill before remembered, which has caused it to be
so entitled: the sent whereof is no less sweet then the former.

The Place.
The natural places of these Daffodils are not certainly known to us; but by
the names they carry, they should seem to be bred in the Mountains.

The Time.
These flower not so early as many other kinds do, but rather are to be
accounted among the late flowring Daffodils; for they show not their flowers
until the beginning of May, or the latter end of April, with the soonest.

The Names.
The names set down over the heads of either of them be such, whereby they are
known to us: yet some do call the first Narcissus auriculatus, that is to
say, The Daffodill with ears: and the other, Narcissus Nompareille totus
albus, that is to say, The white Nompareille, or Peerlesse Daffodill.

1. Narcissus albus oblongo calice luteo praecox minor. The small early white
Daffodill with a long cup.
The leaves of this early Daffodill are broad, very green, and not whitish as
others, three or four standing together, about a foot long or better, among
which rises up a green stalk, not full so high as the leaves, bearing one
flower at the top thereof of a reasonable bigness, but not so great as the
later kinds that follow are, consisting of six whitish leaves, but not perfect
white, having a show of a Cream color appearing in them; in the middle is a
long round yellow cup, about half an inch long or better. The smell of this
flower is reasonable sweet, the root is of a reasonable bigness, yet lesser
then the roots of the later kinds.

2. Narcissus pallidus oblongo calice flauo praecox. The early Straw colored
Daffodill with a long cup.
The leaves of this Daffodill are as green as the former, but much narrower;
and the leaves of the flower are more enclining to yellow, but yet very pale,
as if it were a light straw color, and seem to be a little more narrow and
pointed then the former: the cup of this, is as long and yellow as the
precedent. The smell whereof is very like the former, yet neither of them being
so sweet as those that follow.

3. Narcissus albus oblongo calice luteo serotinus mayor. The great late
flowring white Daffodill with a long cup.
This later flowring Daffodill has his leaves somewhat narrow and long, of a
grayish or whitish green color, among which the stalk rises up a foot and
a half high, bearing one flower at the top, made of six white leaves, having
the cup in the middle thereof as long as the former, and of a deep yellow: the
edges of this cup are sometimes plain, and sometimes a little crumpled; they
are often also circled at the brimmes with a Saffron color, and often also
without it, the smell whereof is very pleasant, and not heady: the root hereof
is reasonable big, and covered over rather with a pale then blackish skin.
This flower does sometimes alter his form into eight leaves, which being
narrow and long, seem like a white star, compassing a yellow trunk.

4. Narcissus totus pallidus oblongo calice serotinus minor. The late pale
colored Daffodill with a long cup.
There is another of this kind, whose flower is wholly of a pale white, or
yellowish color, differing neither in leaf nor root from the former.

5. Narcissus pallidus oblongo calice flauo serotinus. The Straw colored late
flowring Daffodill with a long yellow cup.
The chief difference of this Daffodill from the former, consists in the
color of the top of the flower, which is of a more yellow color, and a little
larger then the former, and the brimmes or edges of the cup of a deeper yellow,
or Saffron color. The smell of this is no less sweet then in the former.

6. Narcissus albus oblongo calice flauo serotinus, duobus floribus in caul.
The late white Daffodill with a long cup, and two flowers on a stalk.
This Daffodill is surely a kind of it self, although it be so like the
former, abiding constant in his form and manner of flowring, usually bearing
without missing two flowers upon a stalk, very like unto the former great
white kind, that one cannot know any greater matter of difference between
them, then that it bears two flowers on a stalk: the cups whereof are
seldom touched with any show of Saffron color on them at the brimmes or
edges, as some of the former have.

The Place.
All these Daffodils do grow on the Pyrenaean mountains, and have been sought
out, and brought into these parts, by those curious or covetous searchers of
these delights, that have made us partakers of them.

The Time.
The former kinds flower earlier by a fortnight then the later, the one in the
later end of March, and the other not until the middle of April.

The Names.
Their names are given to every one of them in their several titles, as fitly
as may best agree with their natures; and therefore I shall not need to speak
any further of them.

Narcissus medioluteus vulgaris. The common white Daffodill called Primrose
Peerlesse.
This Daffodill is so common in every Country Garden almost through England,
that I doubt I shall but spend my time in vain, to describe that which is so
well known, yet for their sakes that know it not, I will set down the
description of it in this manner. It has long limber and broad leaves, of a
grayish green color, among which rises up a stalk, bearing at the top out
of a skinnie husk sometimes but one flower, but most commonly two flowers, and
seldom three or more, but larger for the most part, then any that bear many
flowers upon a stalk, of a pale whitish Cream color, tending somewhat near
unto the color of a pale Primrose (which has caused our Country Gentlewomen,
I think, to entitle it Primrose Peerlesse) with a small round flat Crown,
rather then a cup in the middle, of a pale yellow color, with some pale chiues
standing therein, being of a sweet, but stuffing sent: the root is reasonable
great, and increasing more then a better plant.

Narcissus mediocroceus serotinus. The late flowring white Daffodill.
This Daffodill has much smaller leaves, and shorter then the last, the stalk
also rises not so high by much, and bears but one flower thereon, of a pure
white color, made of six small leaves, and somewhat narrow, standing severally
one from another, and not so close together as the former, but appearing like a
star: the cup is small and round, of a pale yellow color, but saffrony about
the brims, having six small pale chiues in the middle, the smell whereof is
much sweeter then in the former.

The Place.
The first is thought to grow naturally in England, but I could never hear of
his natural place. I am sure it is plentiful enough in all Country Gardens,
so that we scarce give it place in our more curious parkes. The second lives
only with them that delight in varieties.

The Time.
The first Daffodill flowreth in the middle time, being neither of the
earliest, nor of the latest; but about the middle, or end of April. The other
flowreth with the latest in May.

The Names.
I shall not need to trouble you with further repetitions of names, they
having been set down in their titles, which are proper to them.

1 Narcissus vulgaris medio luteus. The common white Daffodill, or Primrose
Peerlesse. 2 Narcissus medio purpureus maximus. The great white purple ringe^
Daffodill. 3 Narcissus medio purpurous praecox. The early purple ringed
Daffodill. 4 Narcissus medio purpureus stellarus. The starry purple ringed
Daffodill. 5 Narcissus Persicus. The Persian Daffodill. 6 Narcissus Autumnalis
minor. The lesser Winter Daffodill. 7 Narcissus Autumnalis mayor. The greater
Winter Daffodill.
depiction of flowers

1. Narcissus medio purpureus praecox. The early purple ringed Daffodill.
This early Daffodill has many long grayish green leaves, somewhat narrower
and stiffer then the former common white Daffodill, among which rises up a
long naked hollow stalk (as all other Daffodils have) bearing at the top one
flower, and seldom two, made of six long white leaves, standing close
together about the stalk; the cup is yellow, and so flat, that it might rather
be called a crown: for it stands very close to the middle, and very open at
the brimmes, circled with a reddish or purple colored ring, having certain
chiues in the middle of it also. The smell hereof is very sweet, exceeding
many other.

2. Narcissus medio purpureus serotinus. The late purple ringed Daffodill.
The leaves of this Daffodill are always broader then the former early one,
and some are very near twice as broad: the flower is very like the former,
being large, and his leaves standing close one to the side of another; the ring
likewise that compasses the yellow coronet, is sometimes of a paler reddish
purple, and sometimes as deep a red as the former: so that it differs not in
any other material point, then that it flowreth not until the other is past
and gone. The sent of this is like the former, the root hereof is greater, as
well as the leaf and flower.

3. Narcissus medio purpureus maximus. The great white purple ringed Daffodill.
There is another kind, whose flower (as well as leaves and roots) is larger
then any other of this kind, which only makes it a distinct sort from the
other: it flowreth also with the later sort of these purple ringed Daffodils.

4. Narcissus medio purpureus stellaris. The starry purple ringed Daffodill.
This Daffodill has his leaves a little narrower and greener then the former
sorts, the flower also of this has his six white leaves not so broad, but
narrower, and seeming longer then they, not closing together, but standing
apart one from another, making it seem like a white star: it has also a
yellow coronet in the middle, circled about with purple, like the former. This
does smell nothing so sweet as the first, but yet has a good sent.

The Place.
The first, third, and fourth of these Daffodils, have always been sent us
from Constantinople among other bulbous roots, so that we know no further of
their natural places.

The second grows in many places of Europe, both in Germany, France, and
Italy, as Clusius has noted.

The Time.
The first flowreth very early in March, even with the first Daffodils. The
second, third, and fourth, about a month after.

The Names.
The early and star Daffodils, have been sent us by the Turkish name of
Deuebohini, and Serincade. But their names, they have received since, to be
endenizond with us, are set down in their several titles.

Narcissus Persicus. The Persian Daffodill.
This Persian Daffodill differs from all other kinds of Daffodils in his
manner of growing, for it never has leaves and flowers at one time together,
wherein it is like unto a Colchicum, yet in root and leaf it is a Daffodill.
The root is a little blackish on the outside, somewhat like the root of the
Autumn Daffodill, from whence rises up a naked foot stalk, bearing one pale
yellow flower, breaking through a thin skin, which first enclosed it,
composed of six leaves, the three outermost being a little larger then the
rest, in the middle of the flower there are six small chiues, and a longer
pointell. The whole flower is of an unpleasant sent: After the flower is past,
come up the leaves, sometimes before Winter, but most usually after the deep
of Winter is past with us, in the beginning of the year, which are broad,
long, and of a pale green color, like the leaves of other Daffodils, but not
green as the Autumn Daffodill is, and besides they do a little twine
themselves, as some of the Pancratium, or bastard Sea Daffodils do.

Narcissus Autumnalis mayor. The greater Autumn or Winter Daffodill.
The greater Autumn Daffodill rises up with three or four fair broad and
short leaves at the first, but afterward grow longer, of a very deep or dark
green color, in the middle of which rises up a short, stiff, round
footestalke, bearing one fair yellow flower on the head thereof (enclosed at
the first in a thin skin, or husk) and consists of six leaves as the
former, with certain chiues in the middle, as all or most other Daffodils
have, which passes away without show of any seed, or head for seed, although
under the head there is a little green knot, which peradventure would bear
seed, if our sharp Winters did not hinder it. The root is great and round,
covered over with a blackish skin or coat.

Narcissus Autumnalis minor. The lesser Autumn or Winter Daffodill.
Clusius sets down, that the manner of the flowring of this lesser
Daffodill, is more like unto the Persian Daffodill, then unto the former
greater Autumn kind; but I do find that it does in the same sort, as the
greater kind, rise up with his leaves first, and the flowers a while after:
the flower of this is lesser, and a little paler then the flower of the greater
kind, but consisting in like sort of six leaves, narrow and sharp pointed;
the green leaves also are almost of as deep a green color, as the greater
kind, but smaller and narrower, and a little hollow in the middle. The root
is also alike, but lesser, and covered with a blackish skin as the former.
This has sometimes borne black round seed in three square heads.

The Place.
The Persian Daffodill has been sent sometimes, but very seldom, among other
roots from Constantinople, and it is probable by the name whereby it was sent,
that it should naturally grow in Persia.

The other two have likewise been sent from Constantinople, and as it is
thought, grow in Thracia, or thereabouts.

The Time.
They all do flower much about one time, that is, about the end of September,
and in October.

The Names.
The first has been sent by the name of Serincade Persiana, and thereupon is
called Narcissus Persicus, The Persian Daffodill.

The other two have been thought by diverse to be Colchica, and so have they
called them, upon no other ground, but that their flower is in form and time
somewhat like Colchicum, when as if they had marked them better, they might
plainly discern, that in all other things they did resemble Daffodils; but now
the names of C^lchicum luteum maius, and minus, is quite lost, time having
worn them out, and they are called by most Herbarists now adays, Narcissus
Autumnalis mayor and minor, The greater and the lesser Autumn Daffodill.

Thus far have I proceeded with those Daffodils, that having broad leaves,
bear but one single flower, or two at the most upon a stalk: And now to
proceed with the rest, that have broad leaves, and bear single flowers, but
many upon a stalk.

Narcissus Africanus aureus mayor. The great yellow Daffodill of Africa.
This brave and stately Daffodill has many very long and broad leaves, of a
better green color, then many others that are grayish, among which appears
a stalk, not rising to the height of the leaves, bearing at the top out of a
skinnie hose many fair, goodly, and large flowers, to the number of ten or
twelve, if the root be well grown, and stand in a warm place, every one
being larger then any of the French, Spanish, or Turkey Daffodils, that bear
many single flowers upon a stalk, and comes near unto the bigness of the
English Daffodill, called Primrose Peerlesse, before described, or that French
kind hereafter described, that bears the largest flowers, many upon a stalk
(which some would make to be a kind of that English Daffodill, but bearing
more flowers) and of a fair shining yellow color, having large, round, and
open cups or boules, yellower then the outer leaves; and is of so exceeding
sweet a sent, that it does rather offend the senses by the abundance thereof:
the root is great, and covered with a blackish brown coat or skin.

Narcissus Africanus aureus minor. The lesser Barbary Daffodill.
This lesser kind is very near the same with the former, but that it lacks
somewhat of his stateliness of height, largeness or flower and cup (being of
a paler yellow) and beauty of color, for it bears neither of these equal
unto the former, but is in them all inferior. And thus by this privative, you
may understand his positive, and that shall be sufficient at this time.

Narcissus Byzantinus totus luteus. The yellow Turkey Daffodill.
Whereas the last described, came short of the beauty of the former, so this
lacks of that beauty is in the last; for this, although it have very long
leaves, and a high stalk, yet the flowers are neither so many, as not being
above four or five, nor so large, being not much greater then the ordinary
French Daffodill hereafter described, nor the color so fair, but much paler,
and the cup also smaller; and herein consists the chiefest differences
between this, and both the other, but that the sent of this is also weaker.

The Place.
The first and the second grow in Barbary, about Argier, and Fez, as by the
relation of them, that have brought them into these parts, we have been
informed.

The last has been often brought from Constantinople among other varieties of
Daffodils, but from whence they received them, I could never learn.

The Time.
These Daffodils do flower very early, even with the first sort of Daffodils, I
mean after they have been accustomed unto our climate: for oftentimes upon
their first bringing over, they flower in January or February, especially if
they be preserved from the frosts, and kept in any warm place; for they are
very tender, and will soon perish, being left abroad.

The Names.
The first is called by diverse in French, Narcisse d'Algiers, and in many
places of the Low Countries, Narcissen van Heck, or Narcissus Heckius; by
diverse others Narcissus Africanus aureus mayor, we may call it in English, The
great African Daffodill, or the great Barbary Daffodill, or the great yellow
Daffodill of Argiers, which you please.

The second has no other variation of name, then a diminutiue of the former,
as is set down in the title.

The third is no doubt the same, that Clusius sets down in the twelfth
Chapter of his second Book of the History of more rare plants, and makes the
fourth sort, which came from Constantinople, and may also be the same, which he
makes his fifth, which (as he says) he received from Doctor Simor Touar of
Seuill in Spain. We call it, from the place from whence we received it,
Narcissus Byzantinus, with the addition of totus luteus, to put a difference
from other sorts that come from thence also: in English, The yellow single
Daffodill of Turkey.

Narcissus Sulphureus mayor. The greater Lemon colored Daffodill.
The greater of these Daffodils, bears three or four green and very long
leaves, a foot and a half long at the least, among which rises up a round,
yet crested stalk, not so high as the leaves, bearing five or six single
flowers thereon, every one of them being greater then the ordinary French or
Italian Daffodils, with many flowers upon a stalk; of a faint, but yet
pleasant yellow color at the first, which after they have been in flower a
fortnight or thereabouts, change into a deeper, or more sullen yellow color:
the cup in the middle is likewise larger, then in those formerly named, and of
a deeper yellow color then the outer leaves, having only three chiues within
it. The smell is very pleasant.

Narcissus Sulphureus minor. The lesser Lemon colored Daffodill.
This lesser Daffodill has broader and shorter leaves then the former, of the
color of other Daffodils, and not green like the former: the stalk of this
rises up higher then the leaves, bearing four or five flowers upon shorter
footestalkes, and no bigger then the French Daffodill, of a pale yellow, which
most do call a Brimstone color, the cup or rather crown in the middle, is
small, and broad open, of a little deeper yellow, having many chiues within it,
and is as it were sprinkled over with a kind of mealinesse. The smell of this
is not full so pleasant as the former.

The Place.
Both these have been gathered on the Pyrenaean Mountains, and both likewise
have been sent out of Italy.

The Time.
They both flower in the middle time of the Daffodils flowring, that is, in
April.

The Names.
They have their Latin names expressed in their titles, and so are their
English also, if you please so to let them pass; or else according to the
Latin, you may call them, The greater and the lesser Brimstone colored
Daffodils; some have called them Narcissus Italicus, but the Italians
themselves have sent them by the name of Narcisso Solfarigno.

Narcissus totus albus polyanthos. The milk white Daffodill many upon a stalk.
The leaves of this Daffodill are of a mean size, both for length and breadth,
yet somewhat greener then in the ordinary sorts, that have some whiteness in
them: the flowers are many upon the stalk, as small for the most part, as any
of these kinds that bear many together, being wholly of a milk, or rather
snow white color, both the cup, which is small, and the outer leaves that
compass it; after which come small heads, wherein is contained round black
seed, as all other Daffodils do, although some greater, and others lesser,
according to the proportion of the plants: the root is covered over with a
blackish skin or coat; the smell is very sweet.

There are two other sorts more of this kind, the differences whereof are,
that the one has his leaves somewhat broader, and the flowers greater then the
former: And the other smaller leaves and flowers also, whose cups being small,
are never seen fully open, but as it were half closed at the brimmes.

Narcissus latifolius totus albus, mediocri calice reflexus. The milk white
Daffodill with the great cup.
There is yet another sort of these milk white Daffodils, whose leaves are as
broad as any of the former, and whose cup in the middle of the flower, is
somewhat larger then in any of the lesser sorts, and lesser then in the greater
kind: but the leaves of the flowers do a little turn themselves upwards,
which makes a chief difference.

The Place.
These Daffodils grow in Spain, from whence I received many that flourished a
while, but perished by some fierce cold Winters: they likewise grow in France,
from whence many also have been brought unto us. They have likewise been sent
from Constantinople to us, among other kinds of Daffodils.

The Time.
They that come from Constantinople, for the most part do flower earlier then
the other, even after they are accustomed to our air. Some of them flower
notwithstanding in the end of March, the rest in April.

The Names.
They are usually called Narcissus totus albus polyanthos, adding thereunto the
differences of mayor, medius, and minor, that is, The milk white Daffodill,
the greater, the middle, and the lesser; for so some do distinguish them. The
last, for distinction, has his name in his title sufficient to express him.

1. Narcissus Narbonensis, sieve medio luteus praecox, The early French
Daffodill.
The leaves of this Daffodill, spring up out of the ground a month or two
sometimes before the other of this kind, that follow; being also shorter, and
narrower: the stalk likewise is not very high, bearing diverse flowers at the
top, breaking through a thin skin, as is usual with all the Daffodils,
every one whereof is small, consisting of six white leaves, and a small yellow
cup in the middle, which is of a pretty small sent, nothing so strong as many
others: the root is great and round, and seldom parts into of-sets, even as
all the other that follow, bearing many single flowers, do.

2. Narcissus Narbonensis vulgaris. The ordinary French Daffodill.
This Daffodill has long and broad green leaves, a little hollowish in the
middle, and edged on both sides; the stalk is a foot and a half high,
bearing at the top diverse flowers, somewhat larger then the former,
consisting of six white leaves, somewhat round; the cup is yellow in the
middle, small and round, like unto an Acorne cup, or a little fuller in the
middle: this is the form of that sort which was first 1 Narcissus Africanus
aureus mayor. The great yellow Daffodill of Africa. 2 Narcissus Africanus
luteus minor. The lesser yellow Daffodill of Africa. 3 Narcissus Narbonensis
medio luteus. The French Daffodill. 4 Narcissus Pisanus, vel totus albus. The
Italian Daffodill, or the all white Daffodill. 5 Narcissus Mussart. Mussart his
Daffodill. 6 Narcissus Anglicus polyanthos. The great English Daffodill.
depiction of flowers brought unto us: But since there is found out some, whose
cup is shorter, others flatter, some of a paler, others of a deeper yellow
color, and some that have their cup longer then the rest. The roots of them
all are covered with a blackish skin or coat.

3. Narcissus Narbonensis mayor amplo flore. The French Daffodill with great
flowers.
The leaves of this Daffodill are somewhat like unto the last, but not so
broad, yet full as long, and spring sooner out of the ground, yet not so early
as the first of these kinds: the stalk hereof is flatter, and rises higher,
bearing four or five flowers, much larger then any of this kind; for every
one of them does equal the English Daffodill, before described, but whiter
then it, and the yellow cup larger, and more open then in any of the rest. The
root of this is not so great, or round, as the former, but is more plentiful
in of-sets, then any other of these French, or Italian kinds.

4. Narcissus Pisaenus. The Italian Daffodill.
This Italian Daffodill has his leaves as large, or larger then the second
French Daffodill, and his stalk somewhat higher, bearing many white flowers,
very like unto the common French Daffodill, but somewhat larger also; and the
yellow cup in the middle likewise is larger, and rounder, then is usually seen
in any of the French kinds, except the last with the greatest flowers.

5. Narcissus mediocroceus polyanthos. The French Daffodill with Saffron
colored cups.
This French Daffodill has diverse leaves of a grayish green color, not so
broad or long as the last recited Daffodill, but coming nearer unto the second
French kind, the flowers likewise are white, and many upon a stalk, like
thereunto, but the yellow cup is somewhat large, and circled with a Saffron
like brimme or edge, which makes the chiefest difference.

6. Narcissus mediocroceus alter, dictus Mussart. Mussart his Daffodill.
The affinity between this and the last, (for it is not the same to be
expressed under one title) has made me join it next unto it, yet because it
has a notable difference, it deserves a place by himself. The leaves are
large and long, and the flowers, being white, are larger also then in any
other, except the greatest, but the cup hereof is small and short, rather
seeming a coronet then a cup, of a deep Saffron color all about the brimmes
or edges.

7. Narcissus Anglicus polyanthos. The great English Daffodill.
This Daffodill has his leaves not much broader or longer, then the French
kind with great flowers, before described, the stalk with flowers rises not
fully so high as it, bearing many flowers thereon, not altogether so white, yet
whiter then the former English Daffodill, called Primrose Peerlesse, but
nothing so large, and with short, broad, and almost round leaves, standing
close one unto another: the yellow cup in the middle is bowl fashion, being
somewhat deeper then in any of the former kinds, but not much greater: the
smell hereof is very sweet and pleasant.

8. Narcissus Narbonensis, sieve medio luteus serotinus mayor. The greater late
flowring French Daffodill.
The root as well as the leaves of this Daffodill, are greater, larger,
broader, and longer then in any other of the former French, or Italian kinds;
the stalk is as high as any of them, bearing at the top five or six white
flowers, standing open spread like a star, and not close together, every one
whereof is large, and round pointed, the cup is yellow, small and short, yet
not lying flat to the flower, but a little standing out with some threads in
the middle, as all the former Daffodils have. This is not so sweet as the
earlier kinds.

9. Narcissus medioluteus alter serotinus calice breui. The lesser late
flowring French Daffodill.
This Daffodill is of the same kind with the last described, the only
difference is, that it is lesser, and the yellow cup in the middle of the
flower, is somewhat shorter then the former, although the former be shorter
then many others, otherwise it differs not, no not in time; for it flowreth
late as the former does.

The Place.
These Daffodils have been brought us from diverse places: The first and second
grow naturally in many places of Spain, that are open to the Sea: they grow
likewise about Mompelier, and those parts in France. They have been likewise
sent among many other sorts of Daffodils from Constantinople, so that I may
think, they grow in some places near thereunto.

The fourth grows plentifully in Italy, about Pisa in Tuscane, from whence we
have had plants to furnish our Gardens.

The seventh is accounted beyond Sea to be natural of our Country, but I know
not any with us that have it, but they have had it from them.

The rest have been brought at diverse times, but we know no further of their
natural places.

The Time.
The first flowreth earlier then any of the rest by a month, even in the
beginning of March, or earlier, if the weather be mild. The other in April,
some a little before or after another. The late kinds flower not until May.

The Names.
There can be no more said of the names of any of them, then has been set out
in their titles; for they distinguish every sort as fitly as we can: only some
do call the first two sorts, by the name of Donax Narbonensis.

After all these Daffodils, that having broad leaves bear single flowers,
either one or many upon a stalk, I shall now go on to set forth those broad
leafed Daffodils, that carry double flowers, either one or many upon a stalk
together, in the same order that we have used before.

1. Narcissus albus multiplex. The double white Daffodill.
The leaves of this Daffodill are not very broad, but rather of a mean size,
being of the same largeness with the leaves of the purple ringed Daffodill,
the stalk rises up to be a foot and a half high, bearing out of a thin
white skin or hose, one flower and no more, consisting of many leaves, of a
fair white color, the flower is larger then any other double white Daffodill,
having every leaf, especially the outermost, as large almost as any leaf of
the single Daffodill with the yellow cup, or purple ring. Sometimes it
happens, that the flower is very little double, and almost single, but that
is either in a bad ground, or for that it has stood long in a place without
removing; for then it has such a great increase of roots about it, that it
draws away into many parts, the nourishment that should be for a few: but if
you do transplant it, taking away the of-sets, and set his roots single, it
will then thrive, and bear his flower as goodly and double, as I have before
described it: and is very sweet.

2. Narcissus mediopurpureus multiplex. The double purple ringed Daffodill.
There is little difference in the leaves of this kind, from the leaves of the
single purple ringed Daffodill; for it is probable it is of the same kind, but
by natures gift (and not by any humane art) made more plentiful, which abides
constant, and has not that dalliance, which oftentimes nature shows, to
recreate the senses of men for the present, and appears not again in the
same form: the chiefest difference is, that the flower (being but sometimes
one on a stalk, and sometimes two) consists of six white outer leaves, as
large as the leaves of the single kind, having many small yellow pieces, edged
with purple circles round about them, instead of a cup; and in the middle of
these pieces, stand other six white leaves, lesser then the former, and a
yellow cup edged with a purple circle likewise, parted into pieces, and they
comprehend a few other white leaves, smaller then any of the other, having
among them some broken pieces of the cup, with a few chiues also in the middle
of the flower. The flower is very sweet.

There is of this kind another, whose flower has not so plain a distinction,
of a triple row of leaves in it: but the whole flower is confusedly set
together, the outer leaves being not so large, and the inner leaves larger then
the former; the broken yellow cup, which is tipped with purple, running
diversely among the leaves; so that it shows a fairer, and more double flower
then the former, as it is indeed.

3. Narcissus medioluteus corona duplici. The Turkey Daffodill with a double
crown.
This Daffodill has three or four leaves, as large and long almost, as the
great double Daffodill of Constantinople next following has: the stalk
likewise is very near as great, but as high altogether, bearing at the top
four or five flowers, the leaves whereof are as large, as of the first or
second kind of French Daffodils, before described, but not altogether of so
pure a white color; and being six in number, stand like the former single
French Daffodils, but that the yellow cup in the middle of this is thick and
double, or as it were crumpled together, not standing very high to be
conspicuous, but abiding low and short, so that it is not presently marked,
unless one look upon it precisely; yet is exceeding sweet. The root is like
unto the root of the purple ringed Daffodill, or somewhat bigger.

4. Narcissus Chalcedonicus flore pleno albo polyanthos. The double white
Daffodill of Constantinople.
This beautiful and goodly Daffodill (wherewith all Florists greatly desire to
be acquainted, as well for the beauty of his double flowers, as also for his
superabounding sweet smell, one stalk with flowers being instead of a
nosegay) has many very broad, and very long leaves, somewhat greener then
gray, among which rises up a strong round stalk, being sometimes almost flat,
and ribbed, bearing four or five, or more white flowers at the top, every
one being very great, large, and double, the leaves being confusedly set
together, having little pieces of a yellow cup running among them, without any
show of that purple ring that is in the former, and fall away without bearing
seed, even as all, or most other double flowers do: the smell is so exceeding
sweet and strong, that it will soon offend the senses of any, that shall smell
much unto it: the root is great and thick, covered with a blackish coat.

5. Narcissus Chalcedonicus simbriatus multiplex polyanthos. The great double
purple ringed Daffodill of Constantinople.
This Daffodill differs very little or nothing in leaf from the former, the
only difference is in the flowers, which although they be double, and bear
many upon a stalk, like unto them, yet this has the pieces of the yellow
cups tipped with purple, as if they were shred or scattered among the white
leaves, whereas the other has only the yellow, without any show of purple tips
upon them: the smell of this is as strong as of the other.

1 Narcissus albus multiplex. The double white Daffodill. 2 Narcissus
medioluteus corona duplici. The Turkey Daffodill with a double crown. 3
Narcissus mediopurpureus multiplex. The double purple ringed Daffodill. 4
Narcissus Chalcedonicus flore pleno albo polyanthos. The double white Daffodill
of Constantinople.
depiction of flowers

6. Narcissus Cyprius flore pleno luteo polyanthos. The double yellow Daffodill
of Cyprus.
The leaves of this Daffodill are almost as broad and long as the former, the
stalk is a foot high and more, bearing four or five flowers on the top, every
one very double, and of a fine pale yellow color, of a strong heady sent. The
root of this is also like the former.

The Place.
The first of these Daffodils, was first brought into England by Mr. John de
Franqueuille the elder, who gathered it in his own Country of Cambray, where
it grows wild, from whose son, Mr. John de Franqueuille, now living, we
all have had it. The rest have come from Constantinople at several times; and
the last is thought to come from Cyprus. We have it credibly affirmed also,
that it grows in Barbary about Fez and Argiers. Some of the double white
kinds grow in Candy, and about Aleppo also.

The Time.
The Turkey kinds do for the most part all flower early, in the end of March,
or beginning of April at the furthest, and the first double, about the middle
or end of April.

The Names.
All these Daffodils, except the first, have had diverse Turkish names set upon
the packets, wherein they have been sent, but there is small regard of
certainty to be expected from them; for that the name Serincade, without any
more addition, which is a single Daffodill, has been imposed upon that
parcel of roots, that have borne most of them double flowers of diverse sorts;
and the name Serincade Catamer lale, which signifies a double flowred
Daffodill, has had many single white flowers, with yellow cups, and some whose
flowers have been wholly white, cup and all, and some purple ringed, and
double also among them. Their names, whereby they are known and called with
us, are, as fitly as may be, imposed in their titles: And this I hope shall
suffice, to have spoken of these sorts of Daffodils.

Having finished the discourse of the former sort of broad leafed Daffodils, it
is fit to proceed to the next, which are Angustifolios Narcissos, those
Daffodils that have narrow leaves, and first to set down those that bear
single flowers, whether one or many flowers upon a stalk, and then those that
bear double flowers in the same manner.

Narcissus Virgineus. The Virginia Daffodill.
This plant I thought fittest to place here in the beginning of this Classis,
not finding where better to shroud it. It has two or three long, and very
narrow leaves, as green as the leaves of the great Leucoium bulbosum, and
shining withal, which grow sometimes reddish, especially at the edges: the
stalk rises up a spanne high, bearing one flower and no more on the head
thereof, standing upright like a little Lilly or Tulipa, made of six leaves,
wholly white, both within and without, except that at the bottom next to the
stalk, and a little on the backside of the three outer leaves, it has a small
dash or show of a reddish purple color: it has in the middle a few chiues,
standing about a small head pointed; which head grows to be small and long,
containing small blackish flat seed: the root is small, long, and round, a
little blackish on the outside, and white on the inside.

The Place.
This bulbous plant was brought us from Virginia, where they grow abundantly;
but they hardly thrive and abide in our Gardens to bear flowers.

The Time.
It flowreth in May, and seldom before.

The Names.
The Indians in Virginia do call it Attamusco, some among us do call it
Lilionarcissus Virginianus, of the likeness of the flower to a Lilly, and the
leaves and root to a Daffodill. We for breuity do call it Narcissus
Virgineus, that is, The Daffodill of Virginia, or else you may call it
according to the former Latin name, The Lilly Daffodill of Virginia, which you
will; for both names may serve well to express the plant.

Narcissus angustifolius albidus praecox oblongo calice. The early white narrow
leafed Daffodill with a long cup.
This Daffodill has three or four narrow, long, and very green leaves, a
foot long for the most part: the stalk rises not up so high as the leaves,
whereon stands one flower, not altogether so great as the late flowring
Daffodill, with a long cup, described before among the broad leafed ones,
which consists of six pale colored leaves, not pure white, but having a wash
of light yellow among the white: the cup in the middle is round and long, yet
not so long as to be accounted a bastard Daffodill, within which is a middle
pointell, compassed with six chiues, having yellow mealy pendents.

The Place.
This Daffodill grows with the other sorts of broad leafed ones, on the
Pyrenaean Mountains, from whence they have been brought unto us, to furnish
our Gardens.

The Time.
It flowreth early, a month before the other sorts of the same fashion, that
is, in the beginning of March, if the time be mild, which the other before
spoken of do not.

The Names.
It has no other name that I know, then is expressed in the title.

2. Narcissus mediocroceus tenuifolius. The small Daffodill with a Saffron
crown.
This small Daffodill has four or five narrow leaves about a spanne long,
among which rises up a stalk some nine inches high, bearing at the top one
small white flower, made of six leaves, with a small yellow cup in the middle,
shadowed over at the brimmes with a Saffron color: the root is small, round,
and little long withal, covered with a blackish skin or coat.

3. Narcissus minimus mediopurpureus. The least purple ringed Daffodill.
This little Daffodill has small narrow leaves, shorter by much then any of
the purple ringed Daffodils, before described: the stalk and flower keep an
equal proportion to the rest of the plant, being in form and color of the
flower, like unto the Star Daffodill before recited, but unlike in the
greatness: this also is to be observed, that the purple color that circleth
the brimmes of the cup, is so small, that sometimes it is not well perceived.

4. Narcissus minimus Iuncifolij flore. The least Daffodill of all.
This least Daffodill has two or three whitish green leaves, narrower then
the two last recited Daffodils, and shorter by half, being not above two or
three inches long, the stalk likewise is not above three or four inches high,
bearing one single flower at the top, somewhat bigger then the smalnesse of
the plant should seem to bear, very like unto the least Rush Daffodill, and
of the same bigness, or rather somewhat bigger, being of a faint yellow
color, both leaves, and cup, or crown, (if you please so to call it); for the
middle part is spread very much, even to the middle of the leaves almost, and
lies flat open upon the flower: the root is small, even the smallest of any
Daffodill, and covered with a blackish skin or coat.

The Place.
The first of these Daffodils have been brought us from the Pyrenaean
Mountains, among a number of other rare plants, and the last by a French man,
called Francis le Veau, the honestest roote-gatherer that ever came over to us.
The second was sent to Mr. John de Franqueuille, before remembered, who imparted
it to me, as he has done many other good things; but his natural place we
know not.

The Time.
They all flower about the latter end of April.

The Names.
Being brought without names, we have given them their names according to
their face and fashion, as they are set down in their titles.

Narcissus Autumnalis minor albus. The little white Autumn Daffodill.
This little Autumn Daffodill rises with his flowers first out of the ground,
without any leaves at all. It springs up with one or two stalks about a
finger long, every one bearing out of a small husk one small white flower,
laid open abroad like unto the Star white Daffodill, before spoken of: in the
middle of the flower is a small yellow cup of a mean size, and after the
flower is past, there comes in the same place a small head, containing small,
round, black seed, like unto the Autumn Hyacinth: the leaves come up after
the seed is ripe and gone, being small and narrow, not much bigger then the
Autumn Hyacinth: the root is small and blackish on the outside.

The Place.
This Daffodill grows in Spain, where Clusius saw it, and brought it into
these parts.

The Time.
It flowreth in the beginning of Autumn, and his seed is ripe in the end of
October in those hot Countries, but in ours it will scarce abide to show a
flower.

The Names.
The Spaniards, as Clusius reports, call it T^nada, and he upon the sight 1
Narcissus Virgineus. The Virginian Daffodill. 2 Narcissus minimus Iuncifolij
flore. The least Daffodill of all. 3 Narcissus Autumnalis minor albus. The
little white Autumn Daffodill. 4 Narcissus albus Autumnalis medio obsoletus.
The white Autumn Daffodill with a sullen crown. 5 Narcissus Iuncifolius
maximus amplo calice. The great Iunquilia with the largest flower or cup. 6
Narcissus totus albus flore plano Virginianus. The double white Daffodill of
Virginia.
depiction of flowers thereof, Narcissus Autumnalis minor albus, and we in
English thereafter, The little white Autumn Daffodill.

Narcissus albus Autumnalis medio obsoletus. The white Autumn Daffodill with a
sullen crown.
This Autumn Daffodill has two or three leaves at the most, and very narrow,
so that some do reckon it among the Rush Daffodils, being somewhat broad at
the bottom, and more pointed at the top, between these leaves comes up
the stalk, bearing usually two flowers and no more at the top, made of six
white leaves a piece, pointed and not round: the cup is small and round, like
unto the cup or crown of the least Rush Daffodill, of a yellow color at the
bottom, but toward the edge of a dunne or sullen color.

Narcissus angustifolius luteus semper florens Caccini. The yellow Italian
Daffodill of Caccini.
This Daffodill bears a number of small, long, narrow, and very green
leaves, broader then the leaves of any Rush Daffodill, among which rise up
diverse stalks, bearing at the head two or three flowers a piece, each of them
being small and yellow, the cup or crown is small also, of a deeper yellow
then the flower. The Nobleman of Florence, who first sent this plant to
Christian Porret at Leyden, after the death of Carolus Clusius, writes that
every stalk does bear with him more store of flowers, then are formerly set
down, and that it never cease to bear flowers, but that after one or more
stalks have been in flower together, and are past, there succeed other in
their places.

The Place.
The first is natural of Spain, the natural place of the other is not known
to us.

The Time.
The times of the flowring, are set down both in the title and in the
descriptions; the one to be in Autumn, the other to be all the Summer long.

The Names.
The Latin names are imposed on them, as are fittest for them, and the last by
that honorable man that sent it, which is most fit to continue, and not to be
changed. But we, to let it be known by an English name to English people,
have entitled it, The yellow Italian Daffodill of Caccini: if any man can give
it a more proper name, I shall be therewith right well content.

Narcissus angustifolius, sieve Iuncifolius maximus amplo calice. The great
Iunquilia with the large flower or cup.
Although this Daffodill imports by his name, not to be of this family, but
of the next, considering it is so like unto them, but bigger; yet I have
thought good to place it in the end of these narrow leafed Daffodils, as being
indifferent, whether it should be referred to this or to that. For this
carries diverse long green leaves, like unto the other Rush Daffodils, but
thicker and broader, so that it may without any great error, be reckoned
among these narrow leafed Daffodils, bearing at the top two or three very
fair large flowers, with a large and more open cup, then in any other of the
Rush Daffodils, both of them of a fair yellow color, yet the cup a little
deeper then the flower, and a little crumpled about the edges, and has a
pretty sharp sent: the root is greater and longer then the other Rush
Daffodill, and covered likewise with a blackish coat.

The Place.
We have this in Gardens only, and have not heard of his natural place.

The Time.
It flowreth in April.

The Names.
I leave it indifferent, as I said, whether you will call it Narcissus
angustifolius, or Iuncifolius magno calice, or maximus, because it is the
greatest of all the rest of that kind.

Narcissus totus albus flore pleno Virginianus. The double white Daffodill of
Virginia.
The root of this Daffodill, is very like unto the former single Virginia
Daffodill, set forth in the first place of this rank of narrow leafed
Daffodils, but that it is a little bigger and rounder, being a little long
withal, and blackish also on the outside, as that is: from whence rises up
two leaves, somewhat broader then the former: but of a like greenness: the
stalk rises up between these two leaves, about a span high, or not much
higher, bearing one fair double snow white flower, very like in the fashion
unto the pale yellow double Daffodill, or bastard Daffodill of Robinus,
hereafter described: For it is in the like manner laid open flat, and composed
of six rows of leaves, every row lying in order just opposite, or one before
another, whereof those six leaves that make the first or outermost course, are
the greatest, and all the rest lying, as I said, one upon or before another,
are every row smaller then others from the middle of this flower, thrusts
forth a small long pointed forke or horn, white as the flower is.

The Place.
The place is named to be Virginia, but in what part it is not known to us.

The Time.
It flowreth in the end of April.

The Names.
It may be that this does grow among the former single kind, and called by the
same name Attamusco, for that the plant is not much differing, yet hereof I am
not certain: But we, from the form and countenance of the plant, do call it
Narcissus Virginianus, The Virginian Daffodill, and because it bears a double
flower, it has the title of double added unto it.

The third order of Daffodils, I said in the beginning, was of Iuncifolios,
Rush Daffodils, which are now next to be entreated of, I shall herein keep the
same order I used in the former; but because I find none of this order, that
bear but one flower upon a stalk, I must begin with those that bear many.

1. Narcissus Iuncifolius albus. The white Iunquilia.
This white Rush Daffodill has small long leaves, a little broader, and of a
whiter green color then the ordinary yellow Rush Daffodils: the stalk rises
up half a foot high or more, bearing two or three small white flowers upon a
stalk, yet somewhat bigger then the common yellow Rush Daffodill, having a
small round cup in the middle, white also as the leaves are. The feed is
small, black, and round, as other seeds of Daffodils are: the root is small
and round, covered with a blackish coat.

Narcissus Iuncifolius albus magno calice. The white Iunquilia with a great cup.
There is of this kind another sort, that has the cup in the middle of the
flower, a little larger then the other, but in all other things alike.

2. Narcissus Iuncifolius flore albo reflexo. The white turning Iunquilia, or
Rush Daffodill.
This turning white Daffodill has four or five long green leaves, yet
shorter and broader then the ordinary yellow Iunquilia, and fully as green
also, from among which rises up a slender green stalk, a foot high, bearing
out of a thin skinnie husk, three or four, or more snow white flowers,
standing upon long green footstalkes, every flower hanging down his head, and
turning up his six narrow and long leaves, even to the very foot-stalke again:
from the middle of the flower hangs down a long round cup, as white as the
leaves, within which are contained three small white chiues, tipped with yellow,
and a small long pointell, thrusting out beyond the brimmes of the cup: after
the flowers are past, there come up in their places small three square heads,
wherein is contained very small, round, and black shining seed: the root is
small, round, and a little long withal, covered with a blackish brown coat
or skin. The flower is quite without any good sent, or indeed rather none at
all.

3. Narcissus Iuncifolius flore luteoreflexo. The yellow turning Iunquilia, or
Rush Daffodill.
The leaves of this Rush Daffodill are greater and longer then the former, and
of a paler green color: the stalk rises somewhat higher, bearing two or
three flowers thereon wholly of a gold yellow color, both the cup and the
leaves that turn up again.

4. Narcissus Iuncifolius calice albo reflexis folijs luteis. The yellow
turning Iunquilia with a white cup.
This Daffodill has his long rush-like leaves standing upright as the former,
between which rises up a green stalk, about a foot high or more, bearing
two or three flowers thereon, whose turning leaves are of a fair pale yellow,
and the cup pale white, and not so pure a white as the former.

5. Narcissus Iuncifolius calice luteo reflexis folijs albidis. The white
turning Iunquilia with a yellow cup.
As the last had the leaves of the flower that turn up again yellow, and the
cup whitish, so this has contrariwise the turning leaves of a whitish
yellow, and the long cup yellower, else in his long green leaves, or any other
thing, there is small difference.

6. Narcissus Iuncifolius luteus magno calice. The Iunquilia, or Rush Daffodill
with a great cup.
This Rush Daffodill has bigger leaves, and longer then the ordinary yellow
Rush Daffodill, being a little flat on the oneside, and round on the other, but
of the same greenness with all the rest: the stalk rises up two foot high,
bearing two, and sometimes three flowers thereon, being of a fair yellow
color, with a large open cup in the middle, of a little deeper yellow color,
like unto the great Iunquilia with the large flower, before set down, whereof
this is a kind, no doubt; but that is larger and greater then this, both in
leaf, flower, cup, etc. and this only somewhat less in all parts then that.

1 Narcissus Iuncifolius albus. The white Iunquilia. 2 Narcissus Iuncifolius
flore albo reflex^. The white turning Iunquilia. 3 Narcissus Iuncifolius calice
luteo reflexis folijs albis. The yellow turning Iunquilia. 4 Narcissus
Iuncifolius luteus magno calice. The yellow Iunquilia with a great cup. 5
Narcissus Iuncifolius luteus mayor vulgaris. The ordinary yellow Iunquilia. 6
Narcissus Iuncifolius Autum^alis flore viridi. The green Autumn Iunquilia. 7
Narcissus angustifolius aureus multiplex. The golden double narrow leafed
Daffodill. 8 Narcissus Iuncifolius flore pleno. The double Iunquilie.
depiction of flowers

7. Narcissus Iuncifolius luteus vulgaris mayor. The ordinary Iunquilia, or
Rush Daffodill.
This ordinary Rush Daffodill has four or five long green round leaves, like
unto Rushes, whereof it took the name: among these leaves rises up the
stalk, round and green, a foot and a half high very often, bearing at the
top three or four flowers all yellow, but much smaller then the last, and so
is the cup also: the seed is small and black, enclosed in small cornered
heads; the root is blackish on the outside. The smell of the flower is very
sweet in all these sorts of Rush Daffodils.

8. Narcissus Iuncifolius luteus medius. The smaller Iunquilia, or Rush
Daffodill.
The leaves of this Daffodill are like unto the former, but smaller and
rounder, the stalk rises not up so high, nor are the flowers so great, but
the leaves of the flower are a little rounder, and not so pointed as in the
former, in all things else alike, saving lesser.

9. Narcissus Iuncifolius luteus minor. The least Iunquilia, or Rush Daffodill.
This least Daffodill has five or six small green leaves, a little broader,
and not so long as the last, among which rises up a stalk almost a foot
high, bearing one or two small flowers at the top, of a paler yellow color
then the former, with a yellow open cup, or crown rather in the middle,
bigger then in either of the last two: the root is very small and black, like
unto the last in roundnesse and color.

10. Narcissus Iuncifolius luteus albicantibus lineis distinctus. The yellow
Iunquilia, or Rush Daffodill with white lines.
This Rush Daffodill has round, green, and long leaves, like unto the
ordinary Rush Daffodill, with a stalk bearing two or three yellow flowers,
having leaves somewhat round at the point or end, with a line or struck of
white in the middle of every one of them, the cup is short, and crown
fashion, a little crumpled about the brims: the seed, root, or any thing else
differs not.

11. Narcissus Iuncifolius Autumnalis flore viridi. The Autumn Rush Daffodill
with a green flower.
This strange Rush Daffodill (I call it strange, not only because it differs
from all others of this kind, but also because there are but few in these
parts that have had it, and fewer that do still enjoy it, in that it is
perished withal that had it) has but one only leaf, very long, round, and
green, in all that ever I saw growing, which bears no flower while that
green leaf is fresh, and to be seen: but afterward the stalk rises up,
being like unto the former green leaf, round, naked, and green up to the
top, where two or three flowers break forth out of a small thin skin,
every one consisting of six small and narrow green leaves, very sharp pointed
at the end, and as it were ending in a small prick or thorn: in the middle
whereof is a small round cup, or rather crown, of the same color with the
leaves and stalk, which flower smells very sweet, somewhat like unto the
rest of the Rush Daffodils: this shows not his flower until October, and the
frosts quickly following after their flowring, cause them soon to perish.

12. Narcissus angustifolius aureus multiplex. The golden double narrow leafed
Daffodill.
The leaves of this Daffodill are very narrow, and of a whitish green color,
not above four or five inches long, from among which rises up a stalk about
a foot high, bearing at the top one flower, consisting of some outer leaves,
which are of a yellow color, and of many other leaves in the middle being
smaller, and set thick and round together of a more yellow gold color, but
with some whiter leaves among them, the middle part a little pointing forth:
the flower stands long before it does perfect his color, and abides long in
flower before the color decay: the root is in fashion almost like the
ordinary Iunquilia, or Rush Daffodill. I acknowledge this Daffodill has not
his proper place; but because the figure is set in this table, let it thus
pass at this time.

13. Narcissus Iuncifolius luteus flore pleno. The double Iunquilia, or Rush
Daffodill.
The double Rush Daffodill has his long green leaves round, like the leaves
of the common or ordinary Rush Daffodill, and of the same bigness, among which
rises up a long slender green stalk, bearing two or three, seldom more
small flowers, yellow and double, that is, with diverse rows of leaves, having
the yellow cup such as is in the single flower, broken into small shreads or
pieces, running among the leaves of the flower, which pieces in some flowers
are not so easily seen, being smaller then in others, this bears no button
or head under the flower for seed, his root is round and blackish, brown on
the outside, so like unto the common Rush Daffodill, that it is almost
impossible to know the one from the other.

There is another of this kind, whose flowers are smaller, and not so double,
one, Alter minori flore.
two, or three at the most upon a stalk, and of less beauty by much.

The Place.
All these Rush Daffodils, do for the most part grow in Spain and France, and
on the Pyrenaean Mountains, which are between Spain and France, which
Mountains are the Nourseries of many of the finest flowers, that do adorn the
Gardens of these lovers of natures pride, and gathered in part by industrious,
learned, generous men, inhabiting near thereunto, and in part by such as make
a gain of their labors, bestowed upon these things. Only that with the
green flower was gathered in Barbary, and imparted unto us from France.

The Time.
They flower in the Spring, that is, in March and April, except such whose
time is set down to be in Autumn.

The Names.
Their names are specified in their titles, and therefore I shall not need to
set down any further repetitions.

To conclude therefore this discourse of true Daffodils, there remains to
speak of the Sea Daffodils, which (as I said in the beginning) is but one,
that is frequent, and does abide with us. But there be some others found about
the Cape of good Hope, and in the West Indies, and brought into these parts
rather for ostentation, then continuance, where they have flowred only once
(if peradventure so often) so that being such strangers, of so remote
Countries, and of so diverse natures, I shall but show you some of them, rather
cursorily then curiously; and but only for your satisfaction, give you
knowledge of two or three of them, that there have been seen such in flower,
and that they are scarce to be seen again, except they be fetched a new
every year that they be seen.

Narcissus Marinus, sieve tertius Matthioli. The great white Sea Daffodill, or
Matthiolus his third Daffodill.
The root of this Daffodill by long continuance, standing in one place without
being removed, grows to be much greater and larger, then any other Daffodill
whatsoever, and as big as any mean Squilla or Sea Onion root, having many
long, thick, and white fibers, or long roots, diversely branched, and spread
under the upper part of the earth, beside some others that grow downward, and
perish not every year, as the fibers of all, or most of the other Daffodils
do; and therefore this plant will not thrive, and bear flowers, if it be
often transplanted, but rather desire to abide in one place without removing,
as I said, and that not to be ouershadowed, or covered with other herbs
standing too near it, which then will flourish, and bear abundantly: from
this root, which is covered with many blackish coats, arises six or seven,
or more leaves, twice so broad almost, as any of the former Daffodils, but not
so long by half as many of them, being but short, in comparison of the
breadth, and of a white green color; from the middle of which leaves, as also
from the sides sometimes, springs up one or two, or more stalks, roundish
and thick, and sometimes a little flat and cornered, a foot high or somewhat
more, bearing at the top, out of a skinnie husk, eight, ten, twelve, or more
very large flowers, consisting of six white leaves a piece, spread or laid
open, with a white short cup or crown in the middle, lying flat upon the
leaves, cut or divided into six corners (and not whole, as the cup or crown
of any other single Daffodill) from every of which edges, or corners of this
cup or crown, stands one white long thread, a little crooked or turning up
at the end, tipped with a yellow pendent, and some other white threads tipped with
yellow pendents, standing also in the middle: after the flower is past, there
come up great three square heads, wherein the seed is contained, which is
great, black, and round, like unto the seed of other Daffodils, but greater:
the flower has a reasonable good sent, but not very strong.

The Place.
It was first found by the Sea side, in the Isle of Sardinia, and on the high
Mountains also of the same Isle, where it has borne by report, thirty five
flowers upon a stalk: it grows likewise about Illyricum, and in diverse other
places.

The Time.
It springs later out of the ground then any other Daffodill, that is to say,
not until the later end of March, or beginning of April, and flowreth in the
end of May, or the beginning of June: the seed is ripe in the end of July, or
beginning of August.

The Names.
The first that has made mention of this Daffodill, was Matthiolus, who placed
it in the third place among his Daffodils, and is most usually now adays
called, Narcissus tertius Matthioli, Matthiolus his third Daffodill, the
rather, because Clusius upon a more mature deliberation, first referred it
thereunto, but called it at the first, Lilionarcissus Hemerocallidis facie,
and, as he says, Iacobus Plateau (who first sent him the figure hereof, with
the description) called it Lilionarcissus Orientalis, but Clusius upon certain
information, that it grew in the places aforesaid, misliked the name of
Orientalis, and added Hemerocallis, which yet is not fit, for that his
Hemerocallis Valentina, is a plain Pancration or Sea bastard Daffodill, whose
middle cup is longer then the cup of any true Daffodill, which (as I said in
the beginning of this Chapter) is the chiefest note of difference, between a
true and a bastard Daffodill. I received the seed of this Daffodill among many
other seeds of rare plants, from the liberality of Mr. Doctor Flud, one of the
Physicians of the College in London, who gathered them in the Vniuetsity
Garden at Pisa in Italy, and brought them with him, returning home from his
travails into those parts, by the name of Martagon rarissimum, (and having
sown them, expected fourteen years, before I saw them bear a flower, which
the first year that it did flower, bore four stalks of 1 Narcissus tertius
Matthioli. The great white Sea Daffodill. 2 Narcissus Indicus autumnalis. The
Indian Autumn Daffodill. 3 Narcissus marinus Africanus. The Sea Daffodill of
Africa. 4 Narcissus marinus exoticus. The strange Sea Daffodill.
depiction of flowers flowers, with every one of them eight or ten flowers on
them) which of all other names, does least answer the form or qualities of
this plant. It may most fitly be called Narcissus marinus maximus, in English,
The great Sea Daffodill, both because it is a true Daffodill, and the greatest
of all other, and also because it has not been found, but in Islands, or else
in other places near the Sea. Lobelius entituleth it Pancratium Indicum
alterum vernum, sieve Narcissus Indicus alter facie Pancratij Monspeliaci, but
all this is wide from the matter, as may easily be known, by that that has
been said before. It is generally (as I said before) called of all Narcissus
tertius Matthioli, Matthiolus his third Daffodill, which may either so pass
with us, or as I called it, The great Sea Daffodill, which you will, and so
Clusius does lastly entitle it.

1. Pancratium Indicum, aut Narcissus Indicus Autumnalis quorundam Lobelij. The
Indian Autumn Daffodill of Lobel.
This plant has in my opinion, a far nearer resemblance unto an Hyacinthus,
then unto any Daffodill: But because Lobel has so set it forth, I will so
publish it unto you, leaving it to judgment. The root is, as he says, a span
long, and of the thickness of a man's arm, covered with many white shells,
whereof the outermost are of a dark red or Chestnut color: the flowers rise up
in September, and October, being eight or ten in number, every one by it self
upon a small footstalke, made of six leaves a piece, somewhat long, narrow, and
pointed, like unto the flowers of the English Colchicum, or Medowe Saffron, of
a whitish yellow dunne color, with six long threads in the middle: the green
leaves are long and broad, and broad pointed.

2. Narcissus Marinus Africanus, sieve Exoticus Lobelij. The Sea Daffodill of
Africa.
The root of this strange plant (which of some likeness is called a
Daffodill) is very great, made as it were of many scaly cloves, from whence
rises up a small short stalk, bearing hard above the ground two fair broad
green pointed leaves, more long then broad, so compassing the stalk at the
bottom, that it seems to run through them: the stalk is spotted with diverse
discolored spots, and is bare or naked from these two leaves unto the top,
where it bears one fair double flower, like unto a double Auemone, of a
delayed reddish color, tending to a blush, with many threads set about the
middle head.

3. Narcissus Marinus Exoticus. The strange Sea Daffodill
This strange Sea Daffodill, has five or six large and long leaves of a
palegreene color, from among which rises up a strong and big stalk,
bearing at the top, out of a thin hose or skin, many very large flowers,
made of six long and pointed leaves a piece, of a bluish purple color, with a
large round open cup in the middle, of a sadder color then the leaves: the
root is very great, yet like unto other great Daffodils, the outer skins
whereof are of a dark brown color.

The Place.
The Indian Daffodils grew in the upper part of Hispaniola in the West Indies,
and brought hither, where they all soon perished.

The other grew near the Cape of good Hope, and was brought into the parts of
Holland and thereabouts, from whence we had it, and perished also.

The last is unknown where it was gathered.

The Time.
The first flowred in Autumn, as it is said.

The other in the first Summer of their bringing.

And so did the last, but the same roots will not flower with us again.

The Names.
So much has been said of their names in their titles, as has come to our
knowledge; and therefore let that suffice.

Thus having gone through the whole Family of the true Daffodils, (for so much
as has come to our knowledge) and set them down every one by his name, and in
his order; it is fit that we speak of their bastard brethren, and show you
them also, in the same order held with the former, as near as the plenty of
variety herein, which is not the like with the former, will give leave, that
when you know them both by face and name, you may the better know to place or
distinguish of others, that have not passed under this rod.

Pseudonarcissus aureus Hispanicus maximus. The great yellow Spanish bastard
Daffodill.
The root of this kind of Daffodill is reasonable great, and blackish on the
outside, desiring to be deep in the ground; and therefore will run down,
where it will then increase into many of-sets, from whence rise up many thick,
long, and stiff leaves, of a grayish green color, among which rises up a
round strong stalk, sometimes three foot high or better, bearing at the top
one only fair great yellow flower, standing forth right, and not pendulous,
consisting of six short and somewhat broad leaves, with a very great, large,
and long trunk, of an equal largeness, but open at the mouth, and turning up
the brimmes a little, which are somewhat crumpled: after the flower is past,
there comes in the place a three square head, containing round black seed,
like unto other Daffodils.

Pseudonarcissus Pyrenaeus Hispanico and Anglico similis. The Mountain bastard
Daffodill of diverse kinds.
There is much variety in this kind of bastard Daffodill: For one sort has
very broad and whitish green leaves, somewhat short in comparison of others,
that are of that breadth: the flower is wholly yellow, but a little paler then
the former Spanish kind, having the leaves of his flower long, and somewhat
narrow, standing like wings about the middle trunk, which is as long as the
leaves, and smaller then in many other of this kind, but a little yellower
then the wings. Another sort has narrower green leaves then this last, and
longer, the flower is all yellow, but the trunk is larger, wider, and more
open at the mouth then the former, and almost as large as the former Spanish,
but not so high as the last. A third has the wings of the flower of a Straw
color, but the trunk is long and narrow, of a fair yellow. A fourth has
such like flowers, but that it is shorter, both the wings and the trunk: Some
likewise have the wings of the flower longer, then the long trunk, and some
shorter. Some also are all yellow, and some have their wings only a little
more pale or white, like the English kind: Some again have their trunkes long
and narrow, others have them larger and wider open, and crumpled at the
brimmes; so that it is needless, to spend a great deal of time and labor
upon such smally respected flowers, but that in the beholding of them, we may
therein admire the work of the Creator, who can frame such diversity in one
thing: But this is beside the text, yet not impertinent.

Pseudonarcissus pallidus praecox. The early Straw colored bastard Daffodill.
The leaves of this Daffodill are of a mean size, between the broadest and
the narrower kinds, of a grayish green color, and not very long: the stalk
rises up a foot high or more, whereon stands one large great flower,
equalling the greatest Spanish bastard Daffodill, before described, in the
largeness of his trunk, and having the brimmes turned up a little, which
makes it seem the larger: the wings or outer leaves are in a manner as short,
as they are in the greatest Spanish kind, (and not long flagging down, like
unto the Mountain kinds) and stand straight outright: all the whole flower is
of one even color, that is, of a fine pale yellow, somewhat like unto the
color of a Lemon peele or rind, but somewhat whiter, which usually we call a
Straw color: the greatness of the flower, the earliness of the flowring,
and the difference of color from all the rest of this kind, has made me
entreat of it apart by it self, as being no less worthy.

Pseudonarcissus Hispaenicus flore albo mayor. The great white Spanish bastard
Daffodill.
This bastard Daffodill has diverse leaves rising up together, long and broad,
somewhat like unto the first Spanish kind, but a little broader, and of a
whiter green color, yet not so white, as in the lesser Spanish white kinds,
hereafter described: among these leaves rises up a round strong stalk, about
two foot high, bearing one white flower at the top, bending down the head,
as all these white kinds do, but is not of so pure a white, as the lesser
kinds that follow, yet whiter then the greatest white Spanish kind, next of
all to be described: the whole flower, as well trunk as wings, is much larger
then the lesser white kinds, and almost equalling the first Spanish yellow,
but a little longer and narrower, a little crumpled and turning up at the
brimmes: the head and seed are like the first; the root is greater and
thicker then the first Spanish, and does not increase so much, nor is covered
with a black, but rather with a whitish coat.

Pseudonarcissus Hispanicus maximus albidus. The greatest Spanish white bastard
Daffodill.
This kind of bastard Daffodill is very like the last mentioned Daffodill,
both in leaves and flowers, but larger in both: the flower of this is not full
so white, but has some show of palenesse therein, and more upon the first
opening of the flower then afterward, and is as great altogether, as the great
Spanish yellow, at the least with a longer, and somewhat narrower trunk: the
seed is like unto the former, and so is the root also, but greater, being
white on the outside, and not black.

Pseudonarcissus Hispanicus flore albo medius and minor. The two lesser white
Spanish bastard Daffodils.
There are two other of these kinds of white Spanish Daffodils, one greater or
lesser then the other, but neither of them so great as the former. The leaves
of both are of a whitish green color, one a little broader then the other:
the flowers of both are pure white, and bending down the heads, that they
almost touch the stalk again, the greater flower has the longer and narrower
trunk; and the lesser flower, the shorter and wider open, yet both a little
crumpled at the edges or brimmes: the roots of both are like one unto another,
but differ in the greatness. From the seed of these have sprung much variety,
few or none keeping either color or height with the mother plants.

Pseudonarcissus Anglicus vulgaris. Our common English wild bastard Daffodill.
This bastard Daffodill is so common in all England, both in Copses, Woods, and
Orchards, that I might well forbear the description thereof, and especially,
in that growing wild, it is of little respect in our Garden: but yet, left I
be challenged of ignorance in common plants, and in regard of some variety
therein worth the marking, I will set down his description and variety as
briefly as I may: It has three or four grayish green leaves, long and
somewhat narrow, among which rises up the stalk, about a span high or little
higher, bearing at the top, out of a skinnie husk, as all other Daffodils
have, one flower (although sometimes I have seen two together) somewhat large,
having the six leaves that stand like wings, of a pale yellow color, and the
long trunk in the middle of a fair yellow, with the edges or brimmes a little
crumpled or uneven: after the flower is past, it bears a round head, seeming
three square, containing round black seed; the root is somewhat blackish on
the outside.

1 Pseud^arcissus Hispanicus maximus ^urcus. The great yellow Spanish bastard
Daffodill. 2 Pseudonarcissus Pyr^naeus v^iformis. The Mountain bastard
Daffodill of diverse kinds. 3 Pseudonarcissus Hispanicus mayor albus The
greater white Spanish bastard Daffodill. 4 Pseudonarcissus Hispanicus minor
albus The lesser Spanish white bastard Daffodill. 5 Pseudonarcissus tub^
sexangulari. The six cornered bastard Daffodill. 6 Pseud^narcissus maximus
aureus, sieve Roseus Tradescanti. John Tradescants great Rose Daffodill. 7
Pseud^narcissus aureus Anglicus maximus. Master Wilmers great double Daffodill
8 Pseud^narcissus Hispanicus aureus flore pleno. The double Spanish Daffodill,
or Parkinsons double Daffodill. 9 Pseudonarcissus Gallicus mayor flore plen^.
The greater double French Daffodill. 10 Pseudon^rcissus Anglicus flore plen^.
The double English Daffodill, or Gerrards double Daffodill.
depiction of flowers

But there is another of this kind like unto the former, whose further
description you have here before; the wings of which flower are much more white
then the former, and in a manner of a milk white color, the trunk remaining
almost as yellow as the former, and not differing in any thing else.

Pseudonarcissus tubo sexangulari. The six cornered bastard Daffodill.
This kind of Daffodill has two or three long, and somewhat broader leaves
then the last, between which comes forth a stalk, bearing one flower
somewhat large, having the six outer leaves of a pale yellow color, and the
long trunk plaited or cornered all along unto the very edge into six parts, of
a little deeper yellow then the wings.

The Place.
The first great Spanish kind was brought out of Spain. The rest from the
Pyrenaean Mountains, only the last saving one is plentiful in our own
Country, but the white sort of that kind came with the rest from the same
Mountains.

The Time.
The pale or third kind, and the English be the most early, all the rest
flower in April, and the greatest yellow somewhat earlier, then the other
greater or lesser white.

The Names.
Their several names are expressed in their titles sufficient to distinguish
them, and therefore there needs no more to be said of them.

1. Pseudonarcissus aureus maximus flore pleno, sieve Roseus Tradescanti. The
greatest double yellow bastard Daffodill, or John Tradescant his great Rose
Daffodill.
This Prince of Daffodils (belongs primarily to John Tradescant, as the first
founder thereof, that we know, and may well be entitled the Glory of
Daffodils) has a great round root, like unto other Daffodils, covered with a
brownish outer skin or peeling, from whence rises up four or five somewhat
large and broad leaves, of a grayish green color, yet not fully so long and
large as the next following Daffodill: from the middle whereof rises up a
stalk almost as high and great as it, bearing at the top (out of a skinnie
husk) one fair large great flower (the budde, before it break open, being
shorter and thicker in the middle, and ending in a longer and sharper point
then any of the other Daffodils) very much spread open, consisting of smaller
and shorter leaves then the next, but more in number, and thicker and rounder
set together, making it seem as great and double as any Province Rose, and
intermixed with diverse yellow and pale leaves, as it were in rows one under
another. It abides long in flower, and spreads, by standing long, to be the
broadest in compass of any of the Daffodils, but falls away at the last
without giving any seed, as all double Daffodils do.

2. Pseudonarcissus aureus Anglicus maximus. Mr. Wilmers great double Daffodill.
The other great double Daffodill does so near resemble our ordinary English
double kind, that I do not find therein any greater difference, then the
largeness both of leaves and flowers, etc. and the stateliness of growth. It
bears three or four large, long, and broad leaves, somewhat longer and
broader then the former, and of a whitish green color: the stalk rises to
be two foot high, growing (in a fruitful and fat soil) strong, and somewhat
round, bearing at the top, out of a thin skin, one great and fair double
flower, each leaf whereof is twice as large and broad as the former, diversely
intermixed with a row of paler, and a row of deeper yellow leaves, wholly
dispersed throughout the flower, the pale color as well as the deeper yellow,
in this as in the other small English kind, growing deeper by standing:
sometimes the leaves hereof are scattered, and spread wholly, making it show a
fair, broad, open flower: and sometimes the outer leaves stand separate from
the middle trunk, which is whole and unbroken, and very thick of leaves: and
sometimes the middle trunk will be half broken, neither expressing a full
open double flower, nor a close double trunk, as it is likewise seen in the
small English kind, as shall be declared in his place: this bears no seed;
the root hereof is thick and great, and increases as well as any other
Daffodill.

3. Pseudonarcissus aureus Hispanicus flore pleno. The great double yellow
Spanish bastard Daffodill, or Parkinsons Daffodill.
This double Spanish Daffodill has diverse leaves rising from the root,
stiffer, narrower, and not of so whitish a green color as the former, but
more sullen or grayish, plainly resembling the leaves of the single great
kind, from whence this has risen: the stalk hereof likewise rises almost as
high as it, and near the height of the last recited double, bearing one double
flower at the top, always spread open, and never forming a double trunk
like the former, yet not so fair and large as it, the outermost leaves whereof
being of a greenish color at the first, and afterward more yellow, do a
little turn themselves back again to the stalk, the other leaves are some
of a pale yellow, and others of a more gold yellow color, those that stand in
the middle are smaller, and some of them show as if they were hollow trunked,
so that they seem to be greenish, whitish, yellow, and gold yellow, all mixed
one among another: the root is great, round, and whitish on the inside, covered
with dark colored skins or peelings. I think none ever had this kind
before my self, nor did I my self ever see it before the year 1618. for it
is of mine own raising and flowring first in my Garden.

4. Pseudonarcissus Gallicus mayor flore pleno. The greater double French
bastard Daffodill.
This greater double Daffodill, has his whitish green leaves longer and
broader then the smaller French kind, hereafter following, to be described,
and broader, longer, and more limber then the double English kind: the stalk
rises up not much higher, then the smaller French kind, but a little bigger,
bearing at the top one great double flower, which when it is fully and
perfectly blown open (which is but seldom; for that it is very tender, the
leaves being much thinner, and thereby continually subject, upon any little
distemperature of the time, to cleave so fast one unto another, that the flower
cannot blow open fair) is a fair and a goodly flower, larger by half then
the smaller kind, and fuller of leaves, of the same pale whitish yellow, or
Lemon color, with the lesser, or rather a little whiter, and not set in the
same order of rows as it is, but more confusedly together, and turning back
the ends of the outermost leaves to the stalk again, and having the bottom
of the flower on the backside somewhat green, neither of which is found in the
lesser kind: the root is very like unto the lesser kind, but a little bigger
and longer.

5. Pseudonarcissus Anglicus flore pleno. The double English bastard Daffodill,
or Gerrards double Daffodill.
The leaves of this double Daffodill are very like unto the single kind, being
of a whitish green color, and somewhat broad, a little shorter and narrower,
yet stiffer then the former French kind: the stalk rises up about a foot
high, bearing at the top one very double flower, the outermost leaves being
of the same pale color, that is to be seen in the wings of the single kind;
those that stand next them, are some as deep a yellow as the trunk of the
single, and others of the same pale color, with some green stripes on the
back of diverse of the leaves: thus is the whole flower variably intermixed with
pale and deep yellow, and some green stripes among them, when it is fully
open, and the leaves dispersed and broken. For sometimes the flower shows a
close and round yellow trunk in the middle, separate from the pale outer
wings, which trunk is very double, showing some pale leaves within it,
dispersed among the yellow: And sometimes the trunk is more open, or in part
broken, showing forth the same colors intermixed within it: the flower passes
away without giving any seed, as all other bulbous roots do that bear
double flowers: the root is small, very like unto the French double kinds,
especially the lesser, that it is very hard to know the one from the other.

The Place.
The first and greatest kind, we had first from John Tradescante (as I said
before) whether raised from seed, or gained from beyond Sea, I know not.

The second we first had from Vincent Sion, borne in Flanders, dwelling on the
Bank side, in his lives time, but now dead; an industrious and worthy lover of
fair flowers, who cherished it in his Garden for many years, without bearing
of any flowers until the year 1620. that having flowred with him, (and he
not knowing of whom he received it, nor having ever seen the like flower
before) he shows it to Mr. John de Franqueuille, of whom he supposed he had
received it, (for from beyond Sea he never received any) who finding it to be
a kind never seen or known to us before, caused him to respect it the more,
as it is well worthy. And Mr. George Wilmer of Stratford Bow Esquire, in his
lives time having likewise received it of him (as my self did also) would
needs appropriate it to himself, as if he were the first founder thereof, and
call it by his own name Wilmers double Daffodill, which since has so
continued.

The third is of mine own fostering or raising, as I said before; for
assuredly, it is risen from the seed of the great Spanish single kind, which
I sowed in mine own Garden, and cherished it, until it gave such a flower as
is described.

The fourth is not certainly known where his original should be: Some think
it to be of France, and others of Germany.

The last is assuredly first natural of our own Country, for Mr. Gerrard
first discovered it to the world, finding it in a poor woman's Garden in the
West parts of England, where it grew before the woman came to dwell there, and,
as I have heard since, is natural of the Isle of Wight.

The Time.
They do all flower much about one time, that is, from the middle or end of
March, as the year is forward, unto the middle of April.

The Names.
Upon the three first I have imposed the names in Latin, as they are expressed
in their titles: and for the English names, if you please, you may let them
pass likewise as they are expressed there also, that thereby every one may be
truly distinguished, and not confounded. The fourth, besides the name in the
title, is called of some Narcissus Germanicus, which whether it be of Germany,
or no, I know not; but that the name should import so much. The last does
usually carry Mr. Gerrards name, and called Gerrards double Daffodill.

1. Pseudonarcissus augustifolius flore flauescente tubo quasi abscisso. The
narrow leafed bastard Daffodill with the clipped trunk.
This kind of Daffodill has long and narrow grayish green leaves, bearing
one single flower at the top of his stalk, like unto the former single
bastard kinds, before specified, having his outer leaves of a pale yellow
color, and his trunk of a deeper yellow: the chief differences in this from
the former, is in the leaves, being narrow, and then in the trunk of the
flower, which is not crumpled or turned up, as most of the other are; and that
the brimmes or edges of the flower is as if it had been clipped off, or cut even.

2. Pseudonarcissus Hispanicus medius and minor luteus. The two lesser Spanish
yellow bastard Daffodils.
These two lesser kinds of Spanish Daffodils, do but differ in greatness the
one from the other, and not in any thing else; so that in declaring the one,
you may understand the other to be a little greater. The lesser then has
three or four narrow short whitish green leaves, from among which comes
forth a short stalk, not above an hand breadth, or half a foot high, bearing
one single flower, not fully standing outright, but a little bending down,
consisting of six small leaves, standing as wings about a small, but long
trunk, a little crumpled at the brimmes: the whole flower, as well leaves as
trunk, are of one deep yellow color, like unto the great Spanish kind: the
root is but small, and covered with a darkish coat. The other is in all parts
greater, and (as I said) differs not else.

3. Pseudonarcissus Hispanicus luteus minimus. The least Spanish yellow bastard
Daffodill.
The leaves of this small kind are smaller and shorter then the former,
seldom exceeding the length of three inches, and very narrow withal, but of
the same grayish green color with the former: every flower stands upon a
small and short footestalke, scarce rising above the ground; so that his nose,
for the most part, does lie or touch the ground, and is made after the same
fashion, and of the same color with the former, but much smaller, as his root
is so likewise.

4. Pseudonarcissus Gallicus minor flore pleno. The lesser French double
bastard Daffodill.
The roots of this lesser French kind (if I may lawfully call it, or the
greater kind before specified, a bastard Daffodill; for I somewhat doubt
thereof, in that the flower of either is not made after the fashion of any of
the other bastard Daffodils, but does more nearely resemble the form of the
double white Daffodill, expressed before among the true Daffodils) are like
unto the double English kind, as also to the former double greater French
kind, and the leaves are of the same whitish green color also, but narrower
and not longer: the stalk rises a little higher then the English, and not
fully so high as the greater French, bearing one fair double flower thereon,
of a pale yellow or Lemon color, consisting of six rows of leaves, every row
growing smaller then other unto the middle, and so set and placed, that every
leaf of the flower does stand directly almost in all, one upon or before
another unto the middle, where the leaves are smallest, the outermost being the
greatest, which makes the flower seem the more beautiful: this and the
greater kind has no trunk, or show of any other thing in the middle, as all
or most of the other former double bastard Daffodils have, but are flowers
wholly composed of leaves, standing double even to the middle.

The Place.
The first is undoubtedly a natural of the Pyrenaean Mountains.

The Spanish kinds grew in Spain, and

The French double kind about Orleance in France, where it is said to grow
plentifully.

The Time.
The first flowreth at the end of March.

The Spanish kinds are the most early, flowring betimes in March.

The French double does flower presently after.

The Names.
More cannot be said or added, concerning the names of any of these Daffodils,
then has been set down in their titles: only the French kind is most
usually called Robinus his Daffodill.

Pseudonarcissus Iuncifolius albus. The white bastard Rush Daffodill, or
Iunquilia.
This bastard Rush Daffodill has two or three long and very green leaves,
very like unto the small yellow Rush Daffodill, formerly described, but not
altogether so round, among which rises up a short stalk, seldom half a
foot high, bearing at the top, out of a small skinnie husk, one small white
flower, sometime declining to a pale color, having six small and short leaves,
standing about the middle of the trunk, which is long, and much wider open at
the mouth, then at the bottom: the small outer leaves or wings are a little
tending to green, and the trunk (as I said) is either white, or whitish,
having the brimmes a little uneven: the seed is small, black, and round, like
unto other Rush Daffodils, but smaller.

Pseudonarcissus Iuncifolius luteus mayor. The greater yellow Iunquilia, or
bastard Daffodill.
The leaves of this greater kind are longer, greater, and a little broader
then the former; the stalk also is higher, and the flower larger, more open at
the mouth and crumpled, then the white, but wholly of a yellow color: the
seed and the roots are bigger, according to the proportion of the plant.

Pseudonarcissus Iuncifolius luteus minor. The lesser yellow bastard Iunquilia.
This is so like unto the last in all things, that I shall not need to trouble
you with repetitions of the same things formerly spoken; the chiefest
difference is the smalnesse of the plant in all parts.

Pseudonarcissus Iuncifolius luteus serotinus. The late yellow bastard
Iunquilia.
There is likewise a third kind, as great as the greater yellow, and in all
his parts expressing and equalling it, but is accounted the fairer, and
flowreth somewhat later.

The Place.
The Pyrenaean Hills have afforded us all these varieties, and we preserve them
carefully; for they are all tender.

The Time.
All these flower in April, except the last, which is a month later.

The Names.
The French and Lowe-Countrey men call them Trompettes, that is, Trumpets, from
the form of the trunk; we sometimes call them also by that name, but more
usually bastard Iunquilia's.

Pseudonarcissus marinus albus, Pancratium vulgo. The white Sea bastard
Daffodill.
The Sea bastard Daffodill (to conclude this Chapter, and the discourse of
Daffodils) 1 Pseudonarcissus tubo ^uasi abscisso. The bastard Daffodill with
the clipped trunk. 2 Pseudonarcissus Hispanicus minor. The lesser Spanish
bastard Daffodill. 3 Pseudonarcissus Hispanicus minimus. The least Spanish
bastard Daffodill. 4 Pseudonarcissus Gallicus minor flore pleno. The lesser
double French bastard Daffodi^^ 5 P^^c^atium flore albo. The white Sea bastard
Daffodil. 6 Pseudonarcissus Iuncifolius luteus mayor. The greater yellow
bastard ^unquilia 7 Pseudonarcissus Iuncifolius luteus minor. The lesser yellow
bastard Iunquilia. 8 Pseudonarcissus Iuncifolius luteus serotinus. The late
yellow bastard Iunquitis ^ Leucoium bulbosum pracox maius. The great early
bulbous Violet. Leucoium bulbosum praecox minus. The lesser early bulbous
Violet. 10 Leucoium balbosum autumnale. The small Autumn bulbous Violet. 11
Leucoium bulbosum maius serotinum. The great late flowring bulbous Violet.
depiction of flowers has diverse broad whitish green leaves, but not very
long, among which rises up a stiff round stalk, at the top whereof breaks
out of a great round skinny husk, five or six flowers, every one made somewhat
of the fashion of the great bastard Rush Daffodill; but greater, and wholly
white; the six leaves, being larger and longer then in the Rush kind, and
extending beyond the trunk, are tipped with green at the point of each leaf,
and down the middle likewise on the backside. The trunk is longer, larger,
and wider open at the mouth, cut in or indented at the brims or edges, and
small at the bottom, with diverse white threeds in the middle, and is very
sweet: under the flower is a round green head, which grows very great,
having within it, when it is ripe, flat and black seed: the root is great
and white.

Flore luteo, and flore ^ubr^.
It is reported, that there are found other sorts; some that bear yellow
flowers, and others that beat red: but we have seen none such, and therefore
I can say no more of them.

The Place.
This kind grows near the Sea side, both in Spain, Italy, and France,
within the Straights, and for the most part, upon all the Leuant shore and
Islands also, but will seldom either flower, or abide with us in these colder
Countries, as I have both seen by those that I received from a friend, and
heard by others.

The Time.
It flowreth in the end of Summer, that is, in August and September.

The Name.
Diverse do call it Pancratium, as the learned of Mompeher, and others, with
the addition of flore Lilij, after they had left their old error, in taking it
to be Scylla, and using it for Scylla, in the Trochisces that go into
Andromachus Treakle. The learned of Valentia in Spain, as Clusius says, do
call it Hemerocallis, thinking it to be a Lilly; and Clusius does thereupon
call it, Hemerocallis Valentina: but in my opinion, all these are deceived in
this plant; for it is neither a Lilly, to have the name of Hemerocallis given
unto it, nor Scylla, nor Pancratium, as many do yet call it: for certainly
this is a kind of Daffodill; the form both of root, leaf, and flower, does
assure me that have seen it, and not Pancratium, which (as Dioscorides
testifies) is a kind of Scylla, and in his time called Scylla, with a red
root, and a leaf like a Lilly, but longer, and was used both with the same
preparation and quantity, and for the same diseases that Scylla was used, but
that his force was weaker: all which does plainly show the errors that many
learned men have been conversant in, and that all may see how necessary the
knowledge of Herbarisme is to the practice of Physic; And lest the root of
this Sea bastard Daffodill be used in the stead of an wholesome remedy, which
(as Clusius makes mention) was deadly to him that did but cut his meat with
that knife, which had immediately before cut this root, and done in malice by
him, that knew the force thereof, to kill his fellow, it working the more
forceably by the evil attracting quality of the iron.

The Virtues.of Daffodils in general.
Howsoever Dioscorides and others, do give unto some of them special
properties, both for inward and outward diseases, yet know I not any in these
days with us, that apply any of them as a remedy for any grief, whatsoever
Gerrard or others have written.

CHAP. X.
Leucoium bulbosum. The bulbous Violet.
Having thus set down the whole family, both of the true and bastard
Daffodils, I should next set in hand with the Hyacinths; but because Leucoium
bulbosum, The bulbous Violet is a plant that does challenge a place next unto
the Daffodils; as most nearly partaking with them, and a little with the
Hyacinthes, I must of necessity interpose them, and show their descriptions and
differences, whereof some are early, of the first Spring, others later, and
some of the Autumn.

Leucoium bulbosum praecox maius. The greater early bulbous Violet.
This bulbous Violet has three or four very green, broad, flat, and short
leaves, among which rises up a naked green stalk, bearing out of a small
skinny hose (as the former Daffodils do) one white flower, hanging down his
head by a very small foot-stalke, made of six leaves, of an equal length,
every one whereof is tipped at the end with a small greenish yellow spot: after
the flower is past, the head or seed-vessell grows to be reasonable great,
somewhat long and round, wherein is contained hard round seed, which being
dry, is clear, and of a whitish yellow color: the root is somewhat like a
Daffodill root, and covered with a blackish outside or skin.

Leucoium bulbosum praecox minus. The lesser early bulbous Violet.
This lesser kind rises up with two narrow grayish green leaves, between
which comes forth the stalk, five or six inches high, bearing one small
pendulous flower, consisting of three white leaves, which are small and
pointed, standing on the outside, and having three other shorter leaves, which
seem like a cup in the middle, being each of them round at the ends, and cut
in the middle, making the form of an heart, with a green tippe or spot at the
broad end or edge: the seed is whitish, enclosed in long and round heads, like
the former, but lesser: the root is like a small Daffodill, with a blackish
gray coat, and quickly divides into many of-sets.

There is another of this kind, Minus Byzantinum.
that came among other bulbous roots from Constantinople, and differs in
nothing from it, but that it is a little greater, both in root, leaf, and
flower.

The Place.
The two first are found in many places of Germany, and Hungary. The third, as
I said, was brought from Constantinople.

The Time.
The two lesser sorts do most commonly flower in February, if the weather be
any thing mild, or at the furthest in the beginning of March, but the first is
seldom in flower, before the other be well near past, or altogether.

The Names.
Lobel and Dodonaeus call the lesser kind Leucoium triphyllum, and
Leuconarcissolirion triphyllum, of the three leaves in the flower. Some do
call it Viola bulbosa alba. The first or greater kind is called by Lobel,
Leuconarcissolirion paucioribus floribus; and by Dodonaeus, Leucoium bulbosum
hexaphyllum. We do most usually call them, Leucoium bulbosum praecox maius,
and minus, The greater, or the lesser early bulbous Violet. In Dutch, Somer
Sottekens, and not Druiskens, which are Grape-flowers, as some have thought.

1. Leucoium bulbosum Vernum minimum. The small bulbous Violet of the Spring.
This small Leucoium sends forth his small and long green leaves, like
hairs in Autumn, and before Winter, which abide green until April, and
then wither away quite, and about May there arises up a naked slender stalk,
at the top whereof break forth two small white flowers, made of six leaves a
piece, hanging down their heads, the three inner leaves being a little larger
then the three outward, a little ^ed dish near the stalk, and very sweet: the
root is small and round, and co^ered with a dark coat.

2. Leucoium bulbosum Autumn^le. The small Autumn bulbous Violet.
As the former small Leucoium sprang up with his leaves without flowers in
Autumn, so this contrariwise, rises up with his slender brownish stalk of
flowers in Autumn, before any green leaves appear, whereon stand two or
three very small snow white pendulous flowers, consisting of six leaves a
piece, and a little reddish at the bottom of the flower next unto the stalk,
so like unto the former, that one would take them to be both one: after which,
there grow small brown heads, containing small, black, round seed; after the
flower is past, and the seed is ripening, and sometimes after the heads are
ripe, the leaves begin to spring up, which when they are full grown, are long,
green, and as small, or smaller then the leaves of the Autumn Hyacinth, which
abide all the Winter, and Spring following, and wither away in the beginning of
Summer: the root is small, long, and white.

3. Leucoium maius bulbosum serotinum. The great late flowring bulbous Violet.
The late bulbous Violet has three or four broad flat green leaves, very
like unto the first, but longer, among which rises up a flattish stalk, being
thicker in the middle then at both edges, on the top whereof stand three or
four flowers, hanging down their heads, consisting of six leaves a piece, all
of an equal length and bigness, wholly white, except that each leaf has a
green tippe at the end of them: the seed hereof is black and round; the
root is reasonable great and white.

The Place.
The two former small ones were first found in Spain, and Portugal, and sent
to me by Guillaume Boel; but the first was so tender, that scarce one of a
score sprang with me, or would abide. The greatest have been found wild in
Germany and Austria.

The Time.
The small ones have their times expressed in their titles and descriptions,
the last flowreth not until May.

The Names.
These names that are set down in their titles, do pass with all Herbarists
in these days.

The Virtues.
We have not known these plants used Physically, either inwardly or
outwardly, to any purposes in these days.

CHAP. XI.
Hyacinthus. The Hyacinth or Iacinth.
THe Iacinths are next to be entreated of, whereof there are many more kinds
found out in these later times, then formerly were known, which for order and
method sake, I will digest under several sorts, as near as I can, that
avoiding confusion, by enterlacing one among another, I may the better put
every sort under his own kind.

Hyacinthus Indicus mayor tuberosa radice. The greater Indian knobbed Iacinth.
I have thought fittest to begin with this Iacinth, both because it is the
greatest and highest, and also because the flowers hereof are in some likeness
near unto a Daffodill, although his root be tuberous, and not bulbous as all
the rest are. This Indian Iacinth has a thick knobbed root (yet formed into
several heads, somewhat like unto bulbous roots) with many thick fibers at
the bottom of them; from the diverse heads of this root arise diverse strong
and very tall stalks, beset with diverse fair, long, and broad leaves, joined
at the bottom close unto the stalk, where they are greatest, and grow smaller
to the very end, and those that grow higher to the top, being smaller and
smaller, which being broken, there appear many threeds like wool in them: the
tops of the stalks are garnished with many fair large white flowers, each
whereof is composed of six leaves, lying spread open, as the flowers of the
white Daffodill, with some short threeds in the middle, and of a very sweet
sent, or rather strong and headie.

Hyacinthus Indicus minor tuberosa radice. The smaller Indian knobbed Iacinth.
The root of this Iacinth is knobbed, like the root of Arum or Wake Robin,
from whence do spring many leaves, lying upon the ground, and compassing one
another at the bottom, being long and narrow, and hollow guttered to the end,
which is small and pointed, no less woolly, or full of threeds then the
former: from the middle of these leaves rises up the stalk, being very long
and slender, three or four foot long, so that without it be propped up, it
will bend down, and lie upon the ground, whereon are set at certain distances
many short leaves, being broad at the bottom, where they do almost compass
the stalk, and are smaller toward the end where it is sharp pointed: at the
top of the stalk stand many flowers, with a small piece of a green leaf at
the bottom of every foot-stalke, which seem to be like so many white
Oriental Iacinths, being composed of six leaves, which are much thicker then
the former, with six chiues or threeds in the middle, tipped with pale yellow
pendents.

The Place.
They both grow naturally in the West Indies, from whence being first brought
into Spain, have from thence been dispersed unto diverse lovers of plants.

The Time.
They flower not in these cold Countries until the middle of August, or not at
all, if they be not carefully preserved from the injury of our cold Winters;
and then if the precedent Summer be hot, it may be flower a month sooner.

The Names.
Clusius calls the lesser (for I think he never saw the first) Hyacinthus
Indicus tuberosa radice, that is in English, The Indian Iacinth with a tuberous
root: Some would call these Hyacinthus Eriophorus Indicus, that is, The Indian
woolly Iacinth, because they have much wool in them when they are broken; yet
some do doubt that they are not two plants several, as of greater and lesser,
but that the greatness is caused by the fertility of the soil wherein it grew.

1. Hyacinthus Botroides mayor Moschatus, sieve Muscari flore flauo. The great
yellow Musk Grape-flower, or yellow Muscari.
This Musk Iacinth or Grape-flower, has five or six leaves spread upon the
ground in two or three heads, which at the first budding or shooting forth out
of the ground, are of a reddish purple color, and after become long, thick,
hollow, or guttered on the vpperside, of a whitish green color, and round and
dark colored underneath: in the middle of these heads of leaves, rise up one
or two hollow weak brownish stalks, sometimes lying on the ground with the
weight of the flowers, (but especially of the seed) yet for the most part
standing upright, when they are laden toward the top, with many bottle-like
flowers, which at their first appearing, and until the flowers begin to blow
open, are of a brown red color, and when they are blown, of a fair yellow
color, flowring first below, and so upwards by degrees, every one of these
flowers is made like unto a little pitcher or bottle, being big in the belly,
and small at the mouth, which is round, and a little turned up, very sweet in
smell, like unto Musk, whereof it took the name Muscari; after the flowers
are past, there come three square thick heads, puffed up as if it were
bladders, made of a spongie substance, wherein are here and there placed black
round seed: the root is long, round, and very thick, and white on the
outside, with a little woollinesse on them, being broken, and full of a slimie
juice, whereunto are annexed thick, fat, and long fibers, which perish not as
most of the other Iacinths; and therefore desires not to be often removed, as
the other sorts may.

2. Hyacinthus Botroides mayor Moschatus, seu Muscari flore cineritio. The
Ashcoloured Musk Grape-flower, or Muscari.
This Muscari differs not in roots, or form of leaves or flowers from the
former, the chief differences are these: the leaves hereof do not appear so
red at the first budding out of the ground, nor are so dark when they are
fully grown; the stalk also most usually has more store of flowers thereon,
the color whereof at the first budding is a little duskie, and when they are
full blown, are of a bleake, yet bright ashcolour, with a little show of
purple in them, and by long standing change a little more gray; being as
sweet, or as some think, more sweet then the former: the root (as I said)
is like the former, yet yields more increase, and will better endure our cold
clymate, although it does more seldom give ripe seed.

3. Hyacinthus Botroides mayor Moschatus, sieve Muscari flore rubro. The red
Musk Grape-flower.
This kind (if there be any such, for I am in some doubt thereof) does chiefly
differ in the color of the flower from the first, in that this should bear
flowers when they are blown, of a red color tending to yellowness.

4. Hyacinthus Botroides mayor Moschatus, sieve Muscari flore albo. The white
Musk Grape-flower.
This also is said to have (if there be such an one) his leaves like unto the
second kind, but of a little whiter green, and the flowers pale, tending to a
white: the roots of these two last are said usually not to grow to be so great
as of the former two.

The Place.
The roots of the two first sorts, have been often sent from Constantinople, 1
Hyacinthus Indicus mayor tuberosa radice. The greater Indian knobbed Iacinth. 2
Hyacinthus Indicus minor tuberosa radice. The lesser Indian knobbed Iacinth. 3
Muscari flore flauo. The yellow Muscari. 4 Muscari flore cineritio. The
ashcoloured Muscari. 5 Hyacinthus Botroides caruleus ^nus. The sky colored
Grape-flower. 6. Hyacinthus Botroides flore albo. The white Grape flower. 7
Hyacinthus Botroides ramosus. The branched Grape-flower.
depiction of flowers among many other sorts of roots, and it may be come
thither from beyond the Bosphorus in Asia; we have them in our Gardens.

The other two sorts are sprung (it is probable, if they be in rerum natura)
from the seed of the two former; for we could never get such from
Constantinople, as if the Turks had never knowledge of any such.

The Time.
They flower in March or April, as the year is temperate, but the first is
soonest up out of the ground.

The Names.
The two former have been sent from Turkey by the name of Muschoromi and
Dipcadi. Matthiolus calls it Bulbus vomitorius, saying that no root does more
provoke vomit then it. Caspar Bauhinus does most properly call it Hyacinthus
Moschatus. It is most generally called Muscari, by all Herbarists and Florists,
yet because it does so nearly resemble the Grape-flower, I have named it
Hyacinthus Botroides mayor Muschatus, to put a difference from the lesser
Grape-flowers that follow; in English, The great Musk Grape-flower, or Muscari.

Hyacinthus Botroides minor caeruleus obscurus. The dark blew Grape-flower.
This Grape-flower has many small, fat, and weak leaves lying upon the
ground, which are somewhat brownish at their first coming up, and of a sad
green afterward, hollow on the vpperside, and round underneath, among which
rise up round, smooth, weak stalks, bearing at the top many small heavy
bottle-like flowers, in shape like the former Muscari, but very thick thrust
together, smaller, and of a very dark or blackish blew color, of a very
strong smell, like unto Starch when it is new made, and hot: the root is round,
and blackish without, being compassed with a number of small roots, or of-sets
round about it, so that it will quickly choke a ground, if it be suffered long
in it. For which cause, most men do cast it into some by corner, if they mean
to preserve it, or cast it out of the Garden quite.

Alter mayor.
There is another of this kind that is greater, both in leaf and flower, and
differs not in color or any thing else.

Hyacinthus Botroides caeruleus amoenus. The sky colored Grape-flower.
This Iacinth springs up with fewer leaves then the first, and not reddish,
but green at his first appearing; the leaves, when they are full grown, are
long and hollow, like the former, but greener, shorter, and broader, standing
upright, and not lying along upon the ground as they do: the flowers grow at
the top of the stalk, more sparsedly set thereon, and not so thick
together, but like a thin bunch of grapes, and bottle-like as the former, of
a perfect blew or skie-colour, every flower having some white spots about the
brimmes of them: this has a very sweet smell, nothing like the former: this
root is whiter, and does not so much increase as the former, yet plentiful
enough.

Hyacinthus Botroides ramosus. The branched Grape-flower.
Of this kind, there is another found to grow with many branches of flowers,
breaking out from the sides of the greater stalks or branches: the leaves as
all the rest of the plant is greater then the former.

Hyacinthus Botroides flore albo. The white Grape-flower.
The white Grape-flower has his green leaves a little whiter, then the blew
or sky colored Grape-flower, his flowers are very pure white, alike sparsedly
set on the stalks, but a little lower and smaller then it, in all other things
there is no difference.

Hyacinthus Botroides flore albo rubente. The blush Grape-flower.
The root of this Grape-flower grows greater, then either the sky colored,
or white Grape-flower, and seldom has any small roots or of-sets, as the
other have: his leaves also are larger, and somewhat broader; the flowers are
of a pale, or bleake blush color out of a white, and are a little larger, and
grow a little higher and fuller of flowers then the white.

The Place.
They naturally grow in many places both of Germany and Hungary; in Spain
likewise, and on Mount Baldus in Italy, and Narbone in France, about the
borders of the fields: we have them in our Gardens for delight.

The Time.
These flower from the beginning of March, or sooner sometimes, until the
beginning of May.

The Names.
They are most commonly called Botroides, but more truly Botryodes, of (...)
the Greek word, which signifies a bunch or cluster of grapes: Lobelius
calls the white one, Dipcadi flore albo, transferring the name Dipcadi,
whereby the Muscari is called to this Iacinth, as if they were both one. Their
several names, whereby they are known and called, are set down in their
titles. The Dutchmen call them Driuekens, as I said before. Some English
Gentlewomen call the white Grape-flower Pearls of Spain.

1. Hyacinthus Comosus albus. The white haired Iacinth.
This Iacinth does more nearly resemble the Grape-flowers, then the fair
haired Iacinths that follow, whereof it bears the name, in that it has no
hair or threeds at the top of the stalk or sides, as they: and therefore I
have placed it next unto them, and the other to follow it, as being of another
kind. The root hereof is blackish, a little long and round, from whence rise
up three or four leaves, being smooth and whitish, long, narrow, and hollow,
like a trough or gutter on the vpperside: among which the stalk rises up a
foot high or more, bearing at the top diverse small flowers, somewhat like
the former, but not so thick set together, being a little longer, and larger,
and wider at the mouth, and as it were divided into six edges, of a dark
whitish color, with some blacker spots about the brimmes on the inside: the
heads or seede-vessels are three square, and somewhat larger, then the heads of
any of the former lesser Grape-flowers, wherein is contained round black seed.

2. Hyacinthus Comosus Byzantinus. The Turkey fair haired Iacinth.
This other Iacinth which came from Constantinople, is somewhat like the
former, but that it is bigger, both in root, and leaf, and flower, and
bearing greater store of flowers on the head of the stalk: the lower flowers,
although they have short stalks at their first flowring, yet afterward the
stalks grow longer, and those that are lower, stand out further then those
that are highest, whose foot-stalkes are short, and almost close to the stem,
and of a more perfect purple then any below, which are of a duskie greenish
purple color: the whole stalk of flowers seem like a Pyramid, broad below,
and small above, or as other compare it, to a water sprinkle; yet neither of
both these Iacinths have any threeds at the tops of the stalks, as the other
following have.

3. Hyacinthus Comosus mayor purpureus. The great purple fair haired Iacinth.
This fair haired Iacinth has his leaves softer, longer, broader, and less
hollow then the former, lying for the most part upon the ground: the stalk
rises up in the midst of the leaves, being stronger, higher, and bearing a
greater and longer head of flowers also then they: the flowers of this stand
not upon such long foote-stalkes, but are shorter below, and close almost to
the stalk above, having many bright purplish blew threeds, growing highest
above the flowers, as it were in a bush together, every one of these threeds
having a little head at the end of them, somewhat like unto one of the flowers,
but much smaller: the rest of the flowers below this bush, are of a sadder or
deader purple, and not so bright a color, and the lowest worst of all, rather
enclining to a green, like unto the last Turkey kind: the whole stalk with
the flowers upon it, does somewhat resemble a long Purse tassell, and thereupon
diverse Gentlewomen have so named it: the heads and seed are like unto the
former, but greater: the root is great and white, with some redness on the
outside.

4. Hyacinthus Comosus ramosus purpureus. The fair haired branched Iacinth.
The leaves of this Iacinth are broader, shorter, and greener then of the last,
not lying so weakly on the ground, but standing somewhat more upright: the
stalk rises up as high as the former, but branched out on every side into
many tufts of threeds, with knappes, as it were heads of flowers, at the ends
of them, like unto the head of threeds at the top of the former Iacinth, but
of a little darker, and not so fair a bluish purple color: this Iacinth does
somewhat resemble the next Curld hair Iacinth, but that the branches are not
so fairly composed altogether of curled threeds, nor of so excellent a fair
purple or Dove color, but more duskie by much: the root is greater and
shorter then of the next, and increases faster.

5. Hyacinthus Pennatus, sieve Comosus ramosus elegantior. The fair Curld-haire
Iacinth.
This admirable Iacinth rises up with three or four leaves, somewhat like
unto the leaves of the Musk Grape-flower, but lesser; between which rises up
the stalk about a foot high, or somewhat more, bearing at the top a bush or
tuft of flowers, which at the first appearing, is like unto a Cone or
Pineapple, and afterward opening it self, spreads into many branches, yet
still retaining the form of a Pyramid, being broad spread below, and narrow up
above: each of these branches is again divided into many tufts of threeds or
strings, twisted or curled at the ends, and of an excellent purple or Dove
color, both stalks and hairs. This abides a great while in his beauty, but
afterward all these flowers (if you will so call them) do fall away without
any seed at all, spending it self as it should seem in the abundance of the
flowers: the root is not so great as the last, but white on the outside.

The Place.
The two first have been sent diverse times from Constantinople, the third is
found wild in many places of Europe, and as well in Germany, as in Italy. The
two last are only with us in Gardens, and their natural places are not known
unto us.

The Time.
The three former kinds do flower in April, the two last in May.

The Names.
The first and second have no other names then are expressed in their titles. 1
Hyacinthus Comosus albus. The white haired Iacinth. 2 Hyacinthus Comosus
Byzantinus. The Turkey fair haired Iacinth. 3 Hyacinthus Comosus mayor
purpureus. The purple fair haired Iacinth, or Purse tassels. 4 Hyacinthus
Comosus ramosus, sieve Calamistratus. The fair haired branched Iacinth. 5
Hyacinthus Pennatus, sieve Comosus elegantior. The fair curld hair Iacinth.
depiction of flowers The third is called of some only Hyacinthus mayor, and
of others Hyacinthus comosus mayor: We call it in English, The purple fair
haired Iacinth, because of his tuft of purple threeds, like hairs at the
top, and (as I said) of diverse Gentlewomen, purple tassels. The fourth is
called by some as it is in the title, Hyacinthus comosus ramosus, and of others
Hyacinthus Calamistratus. And the last or fifth is diversely called by diverse,
Fabius Columna in his Phytobasanos the second part, calls it Hyacinthus
Sannesius, because he first saw it in that Cardinals Garden at Rome. Robin of
Paris sent to us the former of the two last, by the name of Hyacinthus
Pennatus, and Hyacinthus Calamistratus, when as others sent the last by the
name Pennatus, and the other by the name of Calamistratus; but I think the
name Cincinnatus is more fit and proper for it, in that the curled threeds
which seem like hairs, are better expressed by the word Cincinnus, then
Calamistrum, this signifying but the bodkin or instrument wherewith they use to
frisle or curle the hair, and that the bush of hair it self being curled.
Some also have given to both these last the names of Hyacinthus Comosus
Parnassi, the one fairer then the other. Of all these names you may use which
you please; but for the last kind, the name Cincinnatus, as I said, is the
more proper, but Pennatus is the more common, and Calamistratus for the former
of the two last.

1. Hyacinthus Orientalis Brumalis, sieve praecox flore albo. The white Winter
Oriental Iacinth.
This early Iacinth rises up with his green leaves (which are in all respects
like to the ordinary Oriental Iacinths, but somewhat narrower) before Winter,
and sometimes it is in flower also before Winter, and is in form and color a
plain white Oriental Iacinth, but somewhat lesser, differing only in no
other thing, then the time of his flowring, which is always certain to be
long before the other sorts.

2. Hyacinthus Orientalis Brumalis, sieve praecox flore purpureo. The purple
Winter Oriental Iacinth.
The difference of color in this flower causes it to be distinguished, for
else it is of the kindred of the Oriental Iacinths, and is, as the former,
more early then the rest that follow: Understand then, that this is the same
with the former, but having fine bluish purple flowers.

3. Hyacinthus Orientalis mayor praecox, dictus Zumbul Indi. The greatest
Oriental Iacinth, or Zumbul Indi.
The root of this Oriental Iacinth, is usually greater then any other of his
kind, and most commonly white on the outside, from whence rise up one or two
great round stalks, spotted from within the ground, with the lower part of the
leaves also upward to the middle of the stalks, or rather higher, like unto
the stalks of Dragons, but darker; being set among a number of broad, long,
and somewhat hollow green leaves, almost as large as the leaves of the white
Lilly: at the top of the stalks stand more store of flowers, then in any
other of this kind, every flower being as great as the greatest sort of
Oriental Iacinths, ending in six leaves, which turn at the points, of a fair
bluish purple color, and all standing many times on one side of the stalks,
and many times on both sides.

4. Hyacinthus Orientalis vulgaris diuersorum colorum. The ordinary Oriental
Iacinth.
The common Oriental Iacinth (I call it common, because it is now so
plentiful in all Gardens, that it is almost not esteemed) has many green
leaves, long, somewhat broad and hollow, among which rises up a long green
round stalk, beset from the middle thereof almost, with diverse flowers,
standing on both sides of the stalks, one above another unto the top, each
whereof next unto the foote-stalke is long, hollow, round, and close, ending in
six small leaves laid open, and a little turning at the points, of a very
sweet smell: the colors of these flowers are diverse, for some are pure white,
without any show of other color in them: another is almost white, but having a
show of blewnesse, especially at the brims and bottomes of the flowers. Others
again are of a very faint blush, tending toward a white: Some are of as deep
a purple as a Violet; others of a purple tending to redness, and some of a
paler purple. Some again are of a fair blew, others more watchet, and some so
pale a blew, as if it were more white then blew: after the flowers are past,
there rise up great three square heads, bearing round black seed, great and
shining: the root is great, and white on the outside, and oftentimes purplish
also, flat at the bottom, and small at the head.

There is a kind of these Iacinths, Flore purpuro violaceo lineis albicantis
in dorso. Floribus antrorsum respicientibus. Serotinus erectis floribus
diuersorum colorum.
whose flowers are of a deep purplish Violet color, having whitish lines
down the back of every leaf of the flower, which turn themselves a little
backwards at the points.

There is another, whose flowers stand all opening one way, and not on all
sides, but are herein like the great Zumbul Indi, before set out.

There is again another kind which flowreth later then all the rest, and the
flowers are smaller, standing more upright, which are either white or blew, or
mixed with white and purple.

5. Hyacinthus Orientalis folioso caul. The bushy stalked Oriental Iacinth.
This strange Iacinth has his roots, leaves, and flowers, like unto the
former Oriental Iacinths: the only difference in this is, that his stalk is
not bare or naked, but has very narrow long leaves, growing dispersedly, and
without order, with the flowers thereon, which are blew, and having for the
most part one leaf, and sometimes two at the foot, or setting on of every
flower, yet sometimes it happens, some flowers to be without any leaf at the
bottom, as nature, that is very variable in this plant, lists to play: the
heads and seed are black and round, like the other also.

6. Hyacinthus Orientalis flore duplici. The bleake Oriental Iacinth once
double.
This double Iacinth has diverse long leaves, like unto the other Oriental
Iacinths, almost standing upright, among which rises up a stalk, brownish at
the first, but growing green afterward, bearing many flowers at the top,
made like the flowers of the former Iacinths, and ending in six leaves, green
at the first, and of a bluish white when they are open, yet retaining some
show of greenness in them, the brims of the leaves being white; from the
middle of each flower stands forth another small flower, consisting of three
leaves, of the same color with the other flower, but with a green line on the
back of each of these inner leaves: in the middle of this little flower, there
stand some threeds tipped with black: the smell of this flower is not so sweet
as of the form; the heads, seed, and roots are like the former.

7. Hyacinthus Orientalis flore pleno caeruleo, vel purpuro vi^laceo. The fair
double blew, or purple Oriental Iacinth.
The leaves of these Iacinths are smaller, then the leaves of most of the other
former sorts; the stalks are shorter, and smaller, bearing but three or four
flowers on the heads of them for the most part, which are not composed like the
last, but are more fair, full, and double of leaves, where they show out their
full beauties, and of a fair blew color in some, and purple in others,
smelling pretty sweet; but these do seldom bear out their flowers fair;
and besides, have diverse other flowers that will be either single, or very
little double upon the same stalk.

8. Hyacinthus Orientalis candidissimus flore pleno. The pure white double
Oriental Iacinth.
This double white Iacinth has his leaves like unto the single white Oriental
Iacinth; his stalk is likewise long, slender, and green, bearing at the top
two or three flowers at the most, very double and full of leaves, of a pure
white color, without any other mixture therein, hanging down their heads a
little, and are reasonable sweet. I have this but by relation, not by sight,
and therefore I can give no further assurance as yet.

The Place.
All these Oriental Iacinths, except the last, have been brought out of
Turkey, and from Constantinople: but where their true original place is, is
not as yet understood.

The Time.
The two first (as is said) flower the earliest, sometimes before Christmas,
but more usually after, and abide a great while in flower, in great beauty,
especially if the weather be mild, when as few or no other flowers at that
time are able to match them. The other greatest kind flowreth also earlier
then the rest that follow, for the most part. The ordinary kinds flower some
in March, and some in April, and some sooner also; and so do the double ones
likewise. The bushy stalked Iacinth flowreth much about the same time.

The Names.
The former two sorts are called Hyacinthus Orientalis Brumalis, and Hyacinthus
Orientalis praecox flore albo, or caeruleo. The third is called of many Zumbul
Indicum, or Zumbul Indi, and corruptly Simboline; of others, and that more
properly, Hyacinthus Orientalis mayor praecox. The Turks do call all Iacinths
Zumbul, and by adding the name of Indi, or Arabi, do show from what place they
are received. In English, The greatest Oriental Iacinth; yet some do call it
after the Turkish name Zumbul Indi, or Simboline, as is said before. The rest
have their names set down in their titles, which are most fit for them.

Hyacinthus Hispanicus minor Orientalis facie. The little Summer Oriental
Iacinth.
This little Iacinth has four or five long narrow green leaves, lying upon
the ground, among which rises up a slender smooth stalk, about a spanne high
or more, bearing at the top many slender bleake blew flowers, Flore caeruleo.
with some white stripes and edges to be seen in most of them, fashioned very
like unto the flowers of the Oriental Iacinth, but much smaller: the flower
has no sent at all; the seed is like the seed of the English Iacinth, or
Hares-bels: the root is small and white.

Flore albo.
There is another of this kind, differing in nothing but in the color of the
flower, which is pure white.

Flore rubente.
There is also another, whose flowers are of a fine delayed red color, with
some deeper colored veins, running along the three outer leaves of the
flower, differing in no other thing from the former.

The Place.
These plants have been gathered on the Pyrenaean Mountains, which are next
unto Spain, from whence, as is often said, many rare plants have likewise been
gathered.

The Time.
They flower very late, even after all or most of the Iacinths, in May for the
most part.

1 Hyacinthus Orientalis brumalis. The Winter Oriental Iacinth. 2 Zumbul Indi.
The greatest Oriental Iacinth. 3 Hyacinthus Orientalis vulgaris. The ordinary
Oriental Iacinth. 4 Hyacinthus Orientalis folioso caul. The bushy stalked
Oriental Iacinth. 5 Hyacinthus Orientalis flore dupli^j. The Oriental Iacinth
once double. 6 Hyacinthus Orientalis flore pleno caeruleo. The fair double
blew Oriental Iacinth.
depiction of flowers

The Names.
They are called either Hyacinthus Hispanicus minor Orientalis facie, as it is
in the title, or Hyacinthus Orientalis facie, that is to say, The lesser
Spanish Iacinth, like unto the Oriental: yet some have called them, Hyacinthus
Orientalis serotinus minor, The lesser late Oriental Iacinth, that thereby
they may be known from the rest.

Hyacinthus Hispanicus obsoletus. The Spanish dunne colored Iacinth.
This Spanish Iacinth springs very late out of the ground, bearing four or
five short, hollow, and soft whitish green leaves, with a white line in the
middle of every one of them, among which rise up one or more stalks, bearing
diverse flowers at the tops of them, all looking one way, or standing on the
one side, hanging down their heads, consisting of six leaves, three whereof
being the outermost, lay open their leaves, and turn back the ends a little
again: the other three which are innermost, do as it were close together in the
middle of the flower, without laying themselves open at all, being a little
whitish at the edges: the whole flower is of a purplish yellow color, with
some white and green as it were mixed among it, of no sent at all: it bears
black and flat seed in three square, great, and bunched out heads: the root
is reasonable great, and white on the outside, with many strong white fibers at
it, which perish not yearly, as the fibers of many other Iacinths do, and as
it springs late, so it holds his green leaves almost until Winter.

Mauritanicus.
There has been another hereof brought from about Fez and Marocco in Barbary,
which in all respects was greater, but else differed little.

Maximus Aethiopicus.
There was another also brought from the Cape of good Hope, whose leaves were
stronger and greener then the former, the stalk also thicker, bearing diverse
flowers, confusedly standing upon longer foote-stalkes, yet made after the same
fashion, but that the three inner leaves were whitish, and dented about the
edges, otherwise the flowers were yellow and greenish on the inside.

The Place.
These plants grow in Spain, Barbary, and Ethiopia, according as their names
and descriptions do declare.

The Time.
The first flowreth not until June; for, as I said, it is very late before it
springs up out of the ground, and holds his leaves as is said, until
September, in the mean time the seed thereof ripeneth.

The Names.
They have their names according to the place of their growing; for one is
called Hyacinthus Hispanicus obsoletioris coloris. The other is called also
Hyacinthus Mauritanicus. And the last, Hyacinthus Aethiopicus obsoletus. In
English, The Spanish, Barbary, or Ethiopian Iacinth, of a dunne or duskie
color.

Hyacinthus Anglicus Belgicus, vel Hispanicus. English Hares-bels, or Spanish
Iacinth.
Our English Iacinth or Hares-bels is so common every where, that it scarce
needs any description. It bears diverse long and narrow green leaves, not
standing upright, nor yet fully lying upon the ground; among which springs up
the stalk, bearing at the top many long and hollow flowers, hanging down
their heads all forwards for the most part, parted at the brimmes into six
parts, turning up their points a little again, of a sweetish, but heady sent,
somewhat like unto the Grape-flower: the heads for seed are long and square,
wherein is much black seed: the color of the flowers are in some of a deeper
blew, tending to a purple; in others of a paler blew, or of a bleake blew,
tending to an ash color: Some are pure white, and some are party colored,
blew and white; and some are of a fine delayed purplish red or blush color,
which some call a peach color. The roots of all sorts agree, and are alike,
being white and very slimie; some whereof will be great and round, others long
and slender, and those that lie near the top of the earth bare, will be
green.

Hyacinthus Hispanicus mayor flore campanulae instar. The greater Spanish
bell-flowred Iacinth.
This Spanish bell-flowred Iacinth, is very like the former English or Spanish
Iacinth, but greater in all parts, as well of leaves as flowers, many growing
together at the top of the stalk, with many short green leaves among them,
hanging down their heads, with larger, greater, and wider open mouths, like
unto bells, of a dark blew color, and no good sent.

The Place.
The first grows in many places of England, the Lowe-Countries, as we call
them, and Spain, but the last chiefly in Spain.

The Time.
They flower in April for the most part, and sometimes in May.

The Names.
Because the first is more frequent in England, then in Spain, or the
Lowe-Countries, it is called with us Hyacinthus Anglicus, The English Iacinth;
but it is also called as well Belgicus, as Hispanicus: yet Dodonaeus calls it
Hyacinthus non scriptus, because it was not written of by any Author before
himself. It is generally known in England by the name of Hare-bels. The other
Spanish Iacinth bears his name in his title.

Hyacinthus Eriophorus. The Woolly Iacinth.
This Woolly Iacinth has many broad, long, and fair green leaves, very like
unto some of the Iacinths, but stiffer, or standing more upright, which being
broken, do yield many threeds, as if a little fine cotton wool were drawn
out: among these leaves rises up a long green round stalk, a foot and a
half high or more, whereon is set a great long bush of flowers, which blowing
open by degrees, first below, and so upwards, are very long in flowring: the
top of the stalk, with the flowers, and their little footstalkes, are all
blew, every flower standing outright with his stalk, and spreading like a
star, divided into six leaves, having many small blew threeds, standing about
the middle head, which never gave ripe seed, as far as I can hear of: the
root is white, somewhat like the root of a Muscari, but as full of wool or
threeds, or rather more, then the leaves, or any other part of it.

The Place.
This has been sent diverse times out of Turkey into England, where it
continued a long time as well in my Garden as in others, but some hard frosty
Winters caused it to perish with me, and diverse others, yet I have had it
again from a friend, and does abide fresh and green every year in my Garden.

The Time.
This flowred in the Garden of Mr. Richard Barnesley at Lambeth, only once in
the month of May, in the year 1606. after he had there preserved it a long
time: but neither he, nor any else in England that I know, but those that saw
it at that time, ever saw it bear flower, either before or since.

The Names.
It is called by diverse Bulbus Eriophorus, or Laniferus, that is, Woolly
Bulbous; but because it is a Iacinth, both in root, leaf, and flower, and not
a Narcissus, or Daffodill, it is called Hyacinthus Eriophorus, or Laniferus,
The Woolly Iacinth. It is very likely, that Theophrastus in his seventh Book
and thirteenth Chapter, did mean this plant, where he declares, that
garments were made of the woolly substance of a bulbous root, that was taken
from between the core or heart of the root (which, as he says, was used to
be eaten) and the outermost shells or peelings; yet Clusius seems to fasten
this woolly bulbous of Theophrastus, upon the next Iacinth of Spain.

Hyacinthus Stellatus Baeticus mayor, vulgo Peruanus. The great Spanish Starry
Iacinth, or of Peru.
This Iacinth (the greatest of those, whose flowers are spread like a star,
except the two first Indians) has five or six, or more, very broad, and long
green leaves, spread upon the ground, round about the root, which being
broken are woolly, or full of threeds, like the former: in the middle of these
leaves rises up a round short stalk, in comparison of the greatness of the
plant (for the stalk of the Oriental Iacinth is sometimes twice so high,
whose root is not so great) bearing at the top a great head or bush of
flowers, fashioned in the beginning, before they be blown or separated, very
like to a Cone or Pineapple, and begin to flower below, and so upwards by
degrees, every flower standing upon a long blackish blew foote-stalke, which
when they are blown open, are of a perfect blew color, tending to a Violet,
and made of six small leaves, laid open like a star; the threeds likewise are
bluish, tipped with yellow pendents, standing about the middle head, which is of
a deeper blew, not having any good sent to be perceived in it, but commendable
only for the beauty of the flowers: after the flowers are past, there come
three square heads, containing round black seed: the root is great, and
somewhat yellowish on the outside, with a knobbe or bunch at the lower end of
the root, (which is called the seat of the root) like unto the Muscari,
Scylla, and many other bulbous roots, at which hang diverse white, thick, and
long fibers, whereby it is fastened in the ground, which perish not every
year, but abide continually, and therefore does not desire much removing.

Hyacinthus Stellatus Baticus, sieve Peruanus flore albo. The great white
Spanish starry Iacinth.
This other Spanish Iacinth is in most parts like unto the former, but that his
leaves are not so large, nor so deep a green: the stalks of flowers likewise
has not so thick a head, or bush on it, but fewer and thinner set: the
flowers themselves also are whitish, yet having a small dash of blush in them:
the threeds are whitish, tipped with yellow pendents: the seed and roots are
like unto the former, and herein consists the difference between this and
the other sorts.

Hyacinthus Stellatus Baticus, sieve Peruanus flore carneo. The great blush
colored Spanish Starry Iacinth.
This likewise differs little from the two former, but only in the color of
the 1 Hyacinthus Orientalis facie. The little Summer Oriental Iacinth. 2
Hyacinthus Mauritanicus. The Barbary Iacinth. 3 Hyacinthus obsoletus
Hispanicus. The Spanish duskie Iacinth. 4 Hyacinthus Hispanicus flore
campanulae. The greater Spanish bel-flowred Iacinth. 5 Hyacinthus Anglicus. The
English Iacinth or Harebels. 6 Hyacinthus Eriophorus. The Woolly Iacinth. 7
Hyacinthus Stellaris Baticus mayor, fine Peruanus. The great Spanish Starry
Iacinth, or of Peru.
depiction of flowers flowers; for this being found growing among both the
other, has his head of flowers as great and large as the first, but the buds
of his flowers, before they are open, are of a deep blush color, which being
open, are more delayed, and of a pleasant pale purple, or blush color,
standing upon purplish stalks: the heads in the middle are whitish, and so are
the threeds compassing it, tipped with yellow.

The Place.
These do naturally grow in Spain, in the Meadows a little off from the Sea,
as well in the Island Gades, usually called Cales, as likewise in other parts
along the Sea side, as one goes from thence to Porto Santa Maria, which when
they be in flower, growing so thick together, seem to cover the ground, like
unto a tapistry of diverse colors, as I have been credibly informed by
Guillaume Boel, a Freeze-lander borne, often before and hereafter remembered,
who being in search of rare plants in Spain, in the year of our Lord 1607.
after that most violent frosty Winter, which perished both the roots of this,
and many other fine plants with us, sent me over some of these roots for my
Garden, and affirmed this for a truth, which is here formerly set down, and
that himself gathered those he sent me, and many others in the places named,
with his own hands; but he says, that both that with the white, and with the
blush flowers, are far more rare then the other.

The Time.
They flower in May, the seed is ripe in July.

The Names.
This has been formerly named Eriophorus Peruanus, and Hyacinthus Stellatus
Peruanus, The Starry Iacinth of Peru, being thought to have grown in Peru, a
Province of the West Indies; but he that gave that name first unto it, either
knew not his natural place, or willingly imposed that name, to conceal it, or
to make it the better esteemed. It is most generally received by the name
Hyacinthus Peruanus, from the first imposer thereof, that is, the Iacinth of
Peru: but I had rather give the name agreeing most fitly unto it, and call it
as it is indeed Hyacinthus Stellatus Baeticus, The Spanish Starry Iacinth; and
because it is the greatest that I know has come from thence, I call it, The
great Starry Iacinth of Spain, or Spanish Iacinth.

Hyacinthus Stellatus vulgaris, sieve Bifolius Fuchsij. The common blew Starry
Iacinth.
This Starry Iacinth (being longest known, and therefore most common) rises
out of the ground, usually but with two brown leaves, yet sometimes with
three, enclosing within them the stalk of flowers, the buds appearing of a
dark whitish color, as soon as the leaves open themselves, which leaves
being grown, are long, and hollow, of a whitish green on the upper side, and
brown on the under side, and half round, the brown stalk rising up higher,
bears five or six small starre-like flowers thereon, consisting of six
leaves, of a fair deep blew, tending to a purple. The seed is yellowish, and
round, contained in round pointed heads, which by reason of their heaviness,
and the weakness of the stalk, lie upon the ground, and often perish with wet
and frosts, etc. The root is somewhat long, and covered with a yellowish coat.

Hyacinthus stellatus flore albo. The white Starry Iacinth.
The white Starry Iacinth has his leaves like the former, but green and
fresh, not brown, and a little narrower also: the buddes for flowers at the
first appear a little blush, which when they are blown, are white, but yet
retain in them a small show of that blush color.

We have another, whose flowers are pure white, and smaller then the other,
Flore niueo.
the leaves whereof are of a pale fresh green, and somewhat narrower.

Hyacinthus Stellatus flore rubente. The blush colored Starry Iacinth.
The difference in this from the former, is only in the flowers, which are of
a fair blush color, much more eminent then in the others, in all things else
alike.

Hyacinthus Stellatus Martius, sieve praecox caeruleus. The early blew Starry
Iacinth.
This Iacinth has his leaves a little broader, of a fresher green, and not
brown at all, as the first blew Iacinth of Fuchsius last remembered: the buds
of the flowers, while they are enclosed within the leaves, and after, when the
stalk is gown up, do remain more blew then the buds of the former: the
flowers, when they are blown open, are like the former, but somewhat larger,
and of a more lively blew color: the root also is a little whiter on the
outside. This does more seldom bear seed then the former.

Hyacinthus Stellatus praecox flore albo. The white early Starry Iacinth.
There is also one other of this kind, that bears pure white flowers, the
green leaf thereof being a little narrower then the former, and no other
difference.

Hyacinthus Stellatus praecox flore suaue rubente. The early blush colored
Starry Iacinth.
This blush colored Iacinth is very rare, but very pleasant, his flowers being
as large as the first of this last kind, and somewhat larger then the blush of
the other kind: the leaves and roots differ not from the last recited Iacinth.

The Place.
All these Iacinths have been found in the Woods and Mountains of Germany,
Bohemia, and Austria, as Fuchsius and Gesner do report, and in Naples, as
Imperatus and others do testify. We cherish them all with great care in our
Gardens, but especially the white and the blush of both kinds, for that they
are more tender, and often perish for want of due regard.

The Time.
The common kinds, which are first expressed, flower about the middle of
February, if the weather be mild, and the other kinds sometimes a fortnight
after, that is, in March, but ordinarily much about the same time with the
former.

The Names.
The first is called in Latin Hyacinthus Stellatus vulgaris, and Hyacinthus
Stellatus bifolius, and Hyacinthus Stellaris Fuchsij, and of some Hyacinthus
Stellatus Germanicus; we might very well call the other kind, Hyacinthus
Stellatus vulgaris alter, but diverse call it Praecox, and some Martius, as it
is in the title. In English they may be severally called: the first, The
common; and the other, The early Starry Iacinth (notwithstanding the first
flowreth before the other) for distinction sake.

The Hyacinthus seems to be called Vacinium of Virgil in his Eclogues; for
he always reckons it among the flowers that were used to deck Garlands,
and never among fruits, as some would have it. But in that he calls it
Vacinium nigrum, in several places, that does very fitly answer the common
received custom of those times, that called all deep blew colors, such as
are purples, and the like, black; for the Violet it self is likewise called
black in the same place, where he calls the Vacinium black; so that it
seems thereby, that he reckoned them to be both of one color, and we know
the color of the Violet is not black, as we do distinguish of black in
these days. But the color of this Starry Iacinth, being both of so deep a
purple sometimes, so near unto a violet color, and also more frequent, then
any other Iacinth with them, in those places where Virgil lived, persuades me
to think, that Virgil understood this Starry Iacinth by Vacinium: Let others
judge otherwise, if they can show greater probability.

1. Hyacinthus Stellatus Byzantinus nigra radice. The Starry Iacinth of Turkey
with the black root.
This Starry Iacinth of Constantinople has three or four fresh green,
thin, and long leaves, of the bigness of the English Iacinth, but not so
long, between which rises up a slender low stalk, bearing five or six small
flowers, dispersedly set thereon, spreading open like a star, of a pale or
bleake blew color: the leaves of the flowers are somewhat long, and stand as
it were somewhat loosly, one off from another, and not so compactly together,
as the flowers of other kinds: it seldom bears ripe seed with us, because
the heads are so heavy, that lying upon the ground, they rotte with the wet,
or are bitten with the frosts, or both, so that they seldom come to good: the
root is small in some, and reasonable big in others, round, and long, white
within, but covered with deep reddish or purplish peelings, next unto it, and
darker and blacker purple on the outside, with some long and thick white
fibers, like fingers hanging at the bottom of them, as is to be seen in many
other Iacinths: the root it self for the most part does run downwards,
somewhat deep into the ground.

2. Hyacinthus Stellatus Byzantinus mayor. The greater Starry Iacinth of
Constantinople.
This Iacinth may rightly be referred to the former Iacinth of Constantinople,
and called the greater, it is so like thereunto, that any one that knows
that, will soon say, that this is another of that sort, but greater as it is
in all his parts, bearing larger leaves by much, and more store, lying upon the
ground round about the root: it bears many low stalks of flowers, as
bleake, and standing as loosly as the former: only the root of this, is not
black on the outside, as the other, but three times bigger.

3. Hyacinthus Stellatus Byzantinus alter, si^e flore boraginis. The other
Starry Iacinth of Constantinople.
This other Iacinth has for the most part only four leaves, broader and
greener then the first, but not so large or long as the second: the stalk has
five or six flowers upon it, bigger and rounder set, like other starry
Iacinths, of a more perfect or deeper blew then either of the former, having a
whitish green head or vmbone in the middle, beset with six blew chiues or
threeds, tipped with black, so closly compassing the vmbone, that the threeds
seem so many pricks stuck into a clubbe or head; some therefore have likened
it to the flower of Borage, and so have called it: after the flowers are past,
come up round white heads, wherein is contained round and white seed: the
root is of a dark whitish color on the outside, and sometimes a little
reddish withal.

The Place.
The first and the last have been brought from Constantinople; the first among
many other roots, and the last by the Lord Zouch, as Lobel witnesses. The
second has been sent us out of the Lowe-Countries, but from whence they had
it, we do not certainly know. They grow with us in our Gardens sufficiently.

The Time.
These flower in April, but the first is the earliest of the rest, and is in
flower presently after the early Starry Iacinth, before described.

The Names.
The former have their names in their titles, and are not known unto us by any
other names that I know; but as I said before, the last is called by some,
Hyacinthus Boraginis flore. The first was sent out of Turkey, by the name of
Susam giul, by which name likewise diverse other things have been sent, so
barren and barbarous is the Turkish tongue.

Hyacinthus Stellatus Aestivus mayor. The greater Summer Starry Iacinth.
This late Iacinth has diverse narrow green leaves, lying upon the ground,
somewhat like the leaves of the English Iacinth, but stiffer and stronger;
among which rises up a round stiff stalk, bearing many flowers at the top
thereof, and at every foote-stalke of the flowers a small short leaf, of a
purplish color: the flowers are starre-like, of a fine delayed purplish
color, tending to a pale blew or ash color, striped on the back of every
leaf, and having a pointed vmbone in the middle, with some whitish purple
threeds about it, tipped with blew: the seed is black, round, and shining, like
unto the seed of the English Iacinth, but not so big: the root is round and
white, having some long thick roots under it, besides the fibers, as is
usual in many other Iacinths.

Hyacinthus Stellatus Aestivus minor. The lesser Summer Starry Iacinth.
This lesser Iacinth has diverse very long, narrow, and shining green leaves,
spread upon the ground round about the root, among which rises up a very
short round stalk, not above two inches high, carrying six or seven small
flowers thereon, on each side of the stalk, like both in form and color unto
the greater before described, but lesser by far: the seed is black,
contained in three square heads: the root is small and white, covered with a
brown coat, and having some such thick roots among the fibers, as are among
the other.

The Place.
Both these Iacinths grow naturally in Portugal, and from thence have been
brought, by such as seek out for rare plants, to make a gain and profit by
them.

The Time.
They both flower in May, and not before: and their seed is ripe in July.

The Names.
Some do call these Hyacinthus Lusitanicus, The Portugal Iacinth. Clusius,
who first set out the descriptions of them, called them as is expressed in
their titles; and therefore we have after the Latin name given their English,
according as is set down. Or if you please, you may call them, The greater and
the lesser Portugal Iacinth.

Hyacinthus Stellaris flore cinereo. The ash colored Starry Iacinth.
This ash colored Iacinth, has his leaves very like unto the leaves of the
English Iacinth, and spreading upon the ground in the same manner, among which
rise up one or two stalks, set at the top with a number of small starre-like
flowers, bushing bigger below then above, of a very pale or white blew, tending
to an ash color, and very sweet in smell: the seed is black and round, like
unto the seed of the English Iacinth, and so is the root, being great, round,
and white; so like, I say, that it is hard to know the one from the other.

The Place.
The certain original places of growing thereof, is not known to us.

The Time.
It flowreth in April.

The Names.
Some do call this Hyacinthus Someri, Summers Iacinth, because as Lobel says,
he brought it first into the Lowe-Countries, either from Constantinople, or out
of Italy.

Hyacinthus Stellatus Lilifolio and radice caeruleo. The blew Lilly leafed
Star Iacinth.
This Iacinth has six or seven broad green leaves, somewhat like unto Lilly
leaves, but shorter (whereof it took his name as well as from the root)
spread upon the ground, and lying close and round: before the stalk rises out
from the middle of these leaves, there does appear a deep hollow place, like
a hole, to be seen a good while, which at length is filled up with the
stalk, rising thence unto a foot or more high, bearing many starre-like
flowers at the top, of a perfect blew color, near unto a Violet, and
sometimes of paler or bleake blew color, having as it were a small cup in
the middle, divided into six pieces, without any threeds therein: the seed is
black and round, but not shining: the root is somewhat long, big below,
and small above, like unto the small root of a Lilly, and composed of yellow
scales, as a Lilly, but the scales are greater, and fewer in number.

Hyacinthus Stellatus Lilifolius albus. The white Lilly leafed Star Iacinth.
The likeness of this Iacinth with the former, causes me to be brief, and
not to repeat the same things again, that have already been expressed: You
may therefore understand, that except in the color of the flower, which in
this is white, there is no difference between them.

Flore ^arneo.
I hear of one that should bear blush colored flowers, but I have not yet
seen any such.

The Place.
These Iacinths have been gathered on the Pyrenaean Hills, in that part of
France that is called Aquitaine, and in some other places.

The Time.
These flower in April, and sometimes later.

The Names.
Because the root is so like unto a Lilly, as the leaf is also, it has most
properly been called Hyacinthus Stellatus Lilifolio and radice, or for breuity
Lilifolius, that is, The Starry Lilly leafed Iacinth. It is called Sarahug by
the Inhabitants where it grows, as Clusius makes the report from Venerius,
who further faith, that by experience they have found the cattle to swell and
dye, that have eaten of the leaves thereof.

1 Hyacinthus stellatus praecox caruleus. The early blew starry Iacinth. 2
Hyacinthus stellatus pracox albus. The early white starry Iacinth. 3 Hyacinthus
stellatus Byzantinus nigra radice. The Turkey starry Iacinth with a black
root. 4 Hyacinthus Byzantinus alter sieve flore Bor^ginis. The other starry
Iacinth of Constantinople. 5 Hyacinthus astibus mayor. The greater Summer
starry Iacinth. 6 Hyacinthus stellatus flore ^re^. The ash colored starry
Iacinth. 7 Hyacinthus stellatus Lilifolius. The Lilly leafed star Iacinth. 8
Hyacinthus Autumnalis. The Autumn Iacinth. 9 Scilla alba sieve Hyacinthus
marinus. The Sea Onion or Squill.
depiction of flowers

Hyacinthus Autumnalis mayor. The greater Autumn Iacinth.
The greater Autumn Iacinth has five or six very long and narrow green
leaves, lying upon the ground; the stalks are set at the top with many
starre-like flowers, of a pale bluish purple color, with some pale colored
threeds, tipped with blew, standing about the head in the middle, which in time
growing ripe, contains therein small black seed, and roundish: the root is
great and white on the outside.

Hyacinthus Autumnalis minor. The lesser Autumn Iacinth.
This lesser Iacinth has such like long and small leaves, but narrower then
the former: the stalk is not full so high, but bears as many flowers on it
as the other, which are of a pale or bleake purple color, very like unto it
also: the root and seed are like the former, but smaller. These both for the
most part, bear their flowers and seed before the green leaves rise up much
above the ground.

Flore albo.
There is a kind hereof found that bears white flowers, not differing in any
other thing from the smaller purple kind last mentioned.

The Place.
The first and last are only kept in Gardens, and not known to us where their
natural place of growing wild may be.

The second grows wild in many places of England. I gathered diverse roots
for my Garden, from the foot of a high bank by the Thames side, at the hither
end of Chelsey, before you come at the Kings Barge-house.

The Time.
The greatest flowreth in the end of July, and in August.

The other in August and September, you shall seldom see this plant with
flowers and green leaves at one time together.

The Names.
They have their names given them, as they are expressed in their titles, by
all former Writers, except Daleschampius, or he that set forth that great
work printed at Lions; for he contendeth with many words, that these plants
can be no Iacinths, because their flowers appear before their leaves in
Autumn, contrary to the true Iacinth, as he says: and therefore he would
feign have it referred to Theophrastus bulbus in libro primo cap. 12. and
calls it his Tiphyum mentioned in that place, as also Bulbus aestivus
Dalechampij. Howsoever these things may carry some probability in them, yet the
likeness both of roots, and flowers especially, has caused very learned
Writers to entitle them as is set down, and therefore I may not but let them
pass in the like manner.

The Virtues.
Both the roots and the leaves of the Iacinths are somewhat cold and drying,
but the seed much more. It stays the loosnesse of the belly. It is likewise
said to hinder young persons from growing ripe too soon, the root being
drunk in wine. It helps them also whose urine is stopped, and is available
for the yellow Iaundise; but as you hear some are deadly to cattle, I
therefore wish all to be well advised which of these they will use in any
inward physic.

Scilla alba. The Sea Onion or Squill.
As I ended the discourse of both the true and the bastard Daffodils, with the
Sea kinds of both sorts; so I think it not amiss, to finish this of the
Iacinths with the description of a Sea Iacinth, which (as you see) I take to be
the Scilla, or Sea Onion, all his parts so nearely resembling a Iacinth, that I
know not where to rank him better then in this place, or rather not any where
but here. You shall have the description thereof, and then let the judicious
pass their sentence, as they think meetest.

The Squill or Sea Onion (as many do call it) has diverse thick leaves,
broad, long, green and hollowish in the middle, and with an eminent or
swelling ribbe all along the back of the leaf, (I relate it as I have seen
it, having shot forth his leaves in the ship by the way, as the Mariners that
brought diverse roots from out of the Straights, did sell them to me and
others for our use) lying upon the ground, somewhat like unto the leaves of a
Lilly: these spring up after the flowers are past, and the seed ripe, they
abiding all the Winter, and the next Spring, until the heat of the Summer
has spent and consumed them, and then about the end of August, or beginning of
September the stalk with flowers arises out of the ground a foot and a half
high, bearing many starre-like flowers on the top, in a long spike one above
another, flowring by degrees, the lowest first, and so upwards, whereby it is
long in flowring, very like, as well in form as bigness, to the flowers of
the great Star of Bethlehem (these flowers I have likewise seen shooting out
of some of the roots, that have been brought in the like manner:) after the
flowers are past, there come up in their places thick and three square heads,
wherein is contained such like flat, black, and round seed, as the Spanish
duskie Iacinth before described did bear, but greater: the root is great and
white, covered with many peelings or couerings, as is plainly enough seen to
any that know them, and that sometimes we have had roots, that have been as
big as a pretty childs head, and sometimes two growing together, each
whereof was no less then is said of the other.

Scilla rubra sieve Pancratium verum. The red Sea Onion.
The root of this Squill, is greater oftentimes then of the former, the outer
coats or peelings being reddish, bearing greater, longer, stiffer, and more
hollow leaves, in a manner upright: this brings such a like stalk and
flowers, as the former does, as Fabianus Ilges, Apothecary to the Duke of
Briga, did signify by the figure thereof drawn and sent to Clusius.

The Place.
They grow always near the Sea, and never far off from it, but often on the
very baich of the Sea, where it washes over them all along the coasts of
Spain, Portugal, and Italy, and within the Straights in many places: it will
not abide in any Garden far from the Sea, no not in Italy, as it is related.

The Time.
The time wherein they flower, is expressed to be in August and September: the
seed to be ripe in October and November, and the green leaves to spring up in
November and December.

The Names.
These are certainly the true kinds of Scilla that should be used in
medicines, although (as Clusius reports) the Spaniards forbade him to taste
of the red Squill, as of a most strong and present poison. Pliny has made more
sorts then can be found out yet to this day with us: that Scilla that is called
Epimenidia, because it might be eaten, is thought to be the great Ornithogalum,
or Star of Bethlehem. Pancratium is, I know, and as I said before, referred
to that kind of bastard Sea Daffodill; which is set forth before in the end of
the history of the bastard Daffodils; and diverse also would make the Narcissus
tertius Matthioli, which I call the true Sea Daffodill, to be a Pancratium; but
seeing Dioscorides (and no other is against him) makes Pancratium to be a
kind of Squill with reddish roots, I dare not uphold their opinion against
such manifest truth.

The Virtues.
The Squill or Sea Onion is wholly used physically with us, because we can
receive no pleasure from the sight of the flowers. Pliny writes, that
Pithagoras wrote a volume or book of the properties thereof, for the singular
effects it wrought; which book is lost, yet the diverse virtues it has is
recorded by others, to be effectual for the spleen, lungs, stomach, liver,
head and heart; and for dropsies, old coughs, Iaundise, and the worms; that it
clears the sight, helps the toothache, cleanses the head of scurfe, and
running sores; and is an especial Antidote against poison: and therefore is
used as a principal ingredient into the Theriaca Andromachi, which we usually
call Venice Treakle. The Apothecaries prepare hereof, both Wine, Vinegar, and
Oxymel or Syrup, which is singular to extenuate and expectorate tough phlegm,
which is the cause of much disquiet in the body, and an hinderer of concoction,
or disgestion in the stomach, besides diverse other ways, wherein the scales of
the roots, being dried, are used. And Galen has sufficiently explained the
qualities and properties thereof, in his eight Book of Simples.

CHAP. XII.
Ornithogalum. Star of Bethlehem.
AFter the Family of the Iacinths, must needs follow the kinds of
Starre-flowers, or Stars of Bethlehem, as they are called, for that they do
so nearely resemble them, that diverse have named some of them Iacinths, and
referred them to that kindred: all of them, both in root, leaf, and flower,
come nearer unto the Iacinths, then unto any other plant. They shall therefore
be next described, every one in their order, the greatest first, and the rest
following.

Ornithogalum Arabicum. The great Starre-flower of Arabia.
This Arabian Starre-flower has many broad, and long green leaves, very like
unto the leaves of the Oriental Iacinth, but lying for the most part upon the
ground, among which rises up a round green stalk, almost two foot high,
bearing at the top diverse large flowers, standing upon long foote-stalkes,
and at the bottom of every one of them a small short pointed green leaf:
these flowers are made of six pure white leaves a piece, laid open as large as
an ordinary Daffodill, but of the form of a Star Iacinth, or Star of
Bethlehem, which close as they do every night, and open themselves in the day
time, especially in the Sun, the smell whereof is pretty sweet, but weak:
in the middle of the flower is a blackish head, composed with six white
threeds, tipped with yellow pendents: the seed has not been observed with us:
the root is great and white, with a flat bottom, very impatient of our cold
Winters, so that it seldom prospers or abides with us; for although
sometimes it do abide a Winter in the ground, yet it often lies without
springing blade, or any thing else a whole year, and then perishes: or if it
do spring, yet many do not bear, and most after their first bearing do
decay and perish. But if any be desirous, to know how to preserve the root of
this plant, or of many other bulbous roots that are tender, such as the great
double white Daffodill of Constantinople, and other fine Daffodils, that come
from hot Countries; let them keep this rule: Let either the root be planted
in a large pot, or tubbe of earth, and housed all the Winter, that so it may
be defended from the frosts; Or else (which is the easier way) keep the root
out of the ground every year, from September, after the leaves and stalks are
past, until February, in some dry, but not hot or windy place, and then plant
it in the ground under a South wall, or such like defended place, which will
spring, and no doubt prosper well there, in regard the greatest and deepest
frosts are past after February, so that seldom any great frosts come after, to
pierce so deep as the root is to be set, or thereby to do any great harm to
it in such a place.

The Place.
This has been often sent out of Turkey, and likewise out of Italy; I had
likewise two roots sent me out of Spain by Guillaume Boel before remembered,
which (as he said) he gathered there, but they prospered not with me, for
want of the knowledge of the former rule. It may be likely that Arabia is the
place, from whence they of Constantinople receive it.

The Time.
It flowreth in May, if it be of the first years bringing; or in June, if it
have been ordered after the manner before set down.

The Names.
It has been sent out of Italy by the name of Lilium Alexandrinum, The Lilly
of Alexandria, but it has no affinity with any Lilly. Others call it
Hyacinthus Arabicus; and the Italians, Iacintho del pater nostro: but it is no
Iacinth neither, although the flowers be like some of them. Some also would
refer it to a Narcissus or Daffodill, and it does as little agree with it, as
with a Lilly, although his flowers in largeness and whiteness resemble a
Daffodill. Clusius has most fitly referred it to the stock or kindred of
Ornithogala, or Stars of Bethlehem, as we call them in English, and from the
Turkish name, Zumbul Arabi, entitled it Ornithogalum Arabicum, although
Zumbul, as I have before declared, is with them, a Iacinth, we may call it in
English, The Arabian Starre-flower, or Star of Bethlehem, or the great
Starre-flower of Arabia.

1. Ornithogalum maximum album. The greatest white Starre-flower, or Star of
Bethlehem.
This great Starre-flower has many fair, broad, long, and very fresh green
leaves, rising up very early, and are greater, longer, and greener then the
leaves of any Oriental Iacinth, which do abide green, from the beginning or
middle of January, or before sometimes, until the end of May, at which time
they begin to fade, and the stalk with the head of flowers begins to rise,
so that it will have either few or no leaves at all, when the flowers are
blown: the stalk is strong, round, and firm, rising two foot high or more,
bearing at the top a great bush of flowers, seeming at the first to be a
great green ear of corn, for it is made spike-fashion, which when the
flowers are blown, does rise to be very high, slender or small at the head
above, and broad spread and bushing below, so that it is long in flowring; for
they flower below first, and so upwards by degrees: these flowers are snow
white, without any line on the backside, and is therein like unto the former,
as also in whiteness, but nothing so large, with a white vmbone or head in the
middle, beset with many white threeds, tipped with yellow: the seed is black
and round, contained in three square heads: the root is great, thick, and
short, and somewhat yellowish on the outside, with a flat bottom, both like
the former, and the next that follows.

2. Ornithogalum maius spicatum album. The great white spiked Starre-flower.
This spiked Starre-flower in his growing, is somewhat like unto the last
described, but springs not up so early, nor has his leaves so green, or
large, but has broad, long, whitish green hollow leaves, pointed at the end,
among which rises up the stalk, which is strong and high, as the former,
having a great bush of flowers at the top, standing spike-fashion, somewhat
like the former, flowring in the same manner by degrees, first below, and so
upwards; but it is not so thick set with flowers, nor so far spread at the
bottom as it, the flowers also are not so white, and each of the leaves of
them have a green line down the back, leaving the edges on both sides white:
after the flowers are past, the heads for seed grow three square, like the
other, bearing such like black seed therein: the root hereof is usually
bigger then the last, and whiter on the outside.

3. Ornithogalum Pannonicum. The Hungarian Starre-flower.
This Hungarian Starre-flower shoots out diverse narrow, long, whitish green
leaves, spread upon the ground before Winter, which are very like unto the
leaves of Gilloflowers, and so abide above ground, having a stalk rising in
the middle of them the next Spring, about half a foot high or thereabouts,
bearing many white flowers at the top, with green lines down the back of
them, very like unto the ordinary Stars of Bethlehem: the root is greater,
thicker, and longer then the ordinary Stars, and for the most part, two
joined together, somewhat grayish on the outside.

4. Ornithogalum vulgar. The Star of Bethlehem.
The ordinary Star of Bethlehem is so common, and well known in all
countries and places, that it is almost needless to describe it, having many
green leaves with white lines therein, and a few white flowers set about the
top of the stalk, with greenish lines down the back: the root is whitish,
and increases abundantly.

5. Asphodelus bulbosus Galeni, sieve Ornithogalum maius flore subuirescente.
The bulbous Asphodill, or green Starre-flower.
Diverse have referred this plant unto the Asphodils, because (as I think) the
flowers hereof are straked on the back, and the leaves long and narrow, like
unto the Asphodils; but the root of this being bulbous, I rather (as some
others do) join it with the Ornithogala, for they also have strakes on the
back of the flowers. It has many whitish green leaves, long and narrow,
spread upon the ground, which spring up in the beginning of the year, and
abide until May, and then they withering, the stalk springs up almost as
high as the first, having many pale yellowish green flowers, but smaller, and
growing more sparsedly about the stalk upon short foot-stalkes, but in a
reasonable long head spike-fashion: the seed is like unto the second kind,
but smaller: the root is somewhat yellowish, like the first great white kind.

The Place.
The first is only nursed in Gardens, his original being not well known, yet
some attribute it unto Pannonia or Hungary. The second has been found near
unto Barcinone, and Toledo in Spain. The third was found in Hungary by
Clusius. Our ordinary every where in the fields of Italy and France, and (as it
is said) in England also. And the last grows likewise by the corn fields in
the upper Hungary.

The Time.
They flower in April and May, and sometimes in June.

The Names.
The first is called by Clusius Ornithogalum maximum album, because it is 1
Ornithogalum Arabicum. The great starre-flower of Arabia. 2 Ornithogalum
maximum album The greatest white star flower. 3 Ornithogalum maius spicatum
album. The great white spiked star flower. 4 Ornithogalum Pannonicum album.
The Hungarian starre-flower. 5 Asphodalus bulbosus Galeni, sieve Ornithogalum
maius subuirescente flore. The bulbed Asphodill, or green star flower. 6
Ornithogalum Hispanicum minus. The little starre-flower of Spain. 7
Ornithogalum luteum. The yellow starre-flower of Bethlehem. 8 Ornithogalum
Neapolitanum. The starre-flower of Naples.
depiction of flowers greater then the next, which he took formerly for the
greatest: but it might more fitly, in my judgment, be called Asphodelus
bulbosus albus (if there be any Asphodelus bulbosus at all) because this does
so nearly resemble that, both in the early springing, and the decay of the
green leaves, when the stalks of flowers do rise up. Diverse also do call it
Ornithogalum Pannonicum maximum album.

The second has his name in his title, as most authors do set it down, yet
in the great Herball referred to Dalechampius, it is called Ornithogalum magnum
Myconi.

The third has his name from the place of his birth, and the other from his
popularity, yet Dodonaeus calls it Bulbus Leucanthemos.

The last is called by diverse Asphodelo-hyacinthinus, and Hyacintho-asphodelus
Galeni. Dodonaeus calls it Asphodelus faemina, and Asphodelus bulbosus. But
Lobel, and Gerrard from him, and Dodonaeus, do make this to have white
flowers, whereas all that I have seen, both in mine own, and in others
Gardens, bore greenish flowers, as Clusius sets it truly down* Lobel
seems in the description of this, to confound the Ornithogalum of Mompelier
with it, and calls it Asphodelus hyacinthinus forte Galeni, and says that
some would call it Pancratium Monspeliense, and Asphodelus Galeni. But as I
have showed, the Ornithogalum spicatum and this, do plainly differ the one
from the other, and are not both to be called by one name, nor to be reckoned
one, but two distinct plants.

Ornithogalum Aethiopicum. The Starre-flower of Aethiopia.
The leaves of this plant are a foot long, and at the least an inch broad,
which being broken, are no less woolly then the woolly Iacinth: the stalk is
a cubit high, strong and green; from the middle whereof unto the top, stand
large snow white flowers, upon long, green, thick foot-stalkes, and yellowish
at the bottom of the flower; in the middle whereof stand six white threeds,
tipped with yellow chiues, compassing the head, which is three square, and long
containing the seed: the root is thick and round, somewhat like the
Asphodelus Galeni.

The Place.
This plant was gathered by some Hollanders, on the West side of the Cape of
good Hope.

The Time.
It flowred about the end of August with those that had it.

The Names.
Because it came from that part of the continent beyond the line, which is
reckoned a part of Aethiopia, it is thereupon so called as it is set down.

Ornithogalum Neopolitanum. The Starre-flower of Naples.
This beautiful plant rises out of the ground very early, with four or five
hollow pointed leaves, standing round together, of a whitish green color,
with a white line down the middle of every leaf on the inside, somewhat
narrow, but long, (Fabius Columna says, three foot long in Italy, but it is
not so with us) in the middle of these leaves rises up the stalk, a foot and
a half high, bearing diverse flowers at the top, every one standing in a
little cup or husk, which is divided into three or four parts, hanging
down very long about the heads for seed: after the flower is past, these
flowers do all hang down their heads, and open one way, although their little
foot-stalkes come forth on all sides of the greater stalk, being large, and
composed of six long leaves, of a pure white on the inside, and of a bluish or
whitish green color on the outside, leaving the edges of every leaf white on
both sides: in the middle of these flowers stand other small flowers, each of
them also made of six small white leaves a piece, which meeting together, seem
to make the show of a cup, within which are contained six white threeds, tipped
with yellow, and a long white pointell in the middle of them, being without any
sent at all: after the flowers are past, come up great round heads, which are
too heavy for the stalk to bear; and therefore lie down upon the leaves or
ground, having certain lines or stripes on the outside, wherein is contained
round, black, rough seed: the root is great and white, and somewhat flat at
the bottom, as diverse of these kinds are, and do multiply as plentifully
into small bulbes as the common or any other.

The Place.
This Starre-flower grows in the Meadows in diverse places of Naples, as
Fabius Columna, and Ferrantes Imperatus do testify, from whence they have
been sent. And Matthiolus, who sets out the figure thereof among his
Daffodils, had (it should seem) seen it grow with him.

The Time.
It flowreth in May, although it begin to spring out of the ground oftentimes
in November, but most usually in January: the seed is ripe in July.

The Names.
Matthiolus reckons this (as is said) among the Daffodils, for no other
respect, as I conceive, then that he accounted the middle flower to be the
cup or trunk of a Daffodill, which it does somewhat resemble, and sets it
forth in the fourth place, whereupon many do call it Narcissus quartus
Matthioli, The fourth Daffodill of Matthiolus. Fabius Columna calls it
Hyacinthus aruorum Ornithogali flore. Clusius (to whom Imperatus sent it, in
stead of the Arabian which he desired) calls it of the place from whence he
received it, Ornithogalum Neopolitanum, and we thereafter call it in English,
The Starre-flower of Naples.

Ornithogalum Hispanicum minus. The little Starre-flower of Spain.
Clusius has set forth this plant among his Ornithogala or Starre-flowers, and
although it does in my mind come nearer to a Hyacinthus, then to Ornithogalum,
yet pardon it, and let it pass as he does. From a little round whitish root,
springs up in the beginning of the year, five or six small long green
leaves, without any white line in the middle of them, among which rise up one
or two small stalks, an hand length high or better, bearing seven or eight, or
more flowers, growing as it were in a tuft or vmbell, with small long leaves at
the foot of every stalk, the lower flowers being equal in length with the
uppermost, of a pale whitish blew or ash color, with a struck or line down
the back of every leaf of them, with some white threeds standing about a
bluish head in the middle: these flowers pass away quickly, and give no seed,
so that it is not known what seed it bears.

The Place.
This grows in Spain, and from thence has been brought to us.

The Time.
It flowreth in May.

The Names.
It has no other name then is set down in the title, being but lately found
out.

1. Ornithogalum album vnifolium. The white starre-flower with one blade.
This little starre-flower I bring into this place, as the fittest in my
opinion where to place it, until my mind change to alter it. It has a very
small round white root, from whence springs up one very long and round
green leaf, like unto a rush, but that for about two or three inches above
the ground, it is a little flat, and from thence springs forth a small stalk
not above three or four inches high, bearing at the top thereof three or four
small white flowers, consisting of six leaves a piece, within which are six
white chiues, tipped with yellow pendents, standing about a small three square
head, that has a white pointell sticking as it were in the midst thereof:
the flower is pretty and sweet, but not heady.

Ornithogalum luteum. The yellow Star of Bethlehem.
This yellow Starre-flower rises up at the first, with one long, round,
greenish leaf, which opens it self somewhat above the ground, and gives
out another small leaf, lesser and shorter then the first, and afterward the
stalk rises from thence also, being four or five inches high, bearing at the
top three or four small green leaves, and among them four or five small
yellow starre-like flowers, with a greenish line or streake down the back of
every leaf, and some small reddish yellow threeds in the middle: it seldom
gives seed: the root is round, whitish, and somewhat clear, very apt to
perish, if it be any little while kept dry out of the ground, as I have twice
tried to my loss.

The Place.
The first grew in Portugal, and Clusius first of all others desciphers it.

The other is found in many places both of Germany and Hungary, in the moister
grounds.

The Time.
The first flowreth in May: the other in April, and sometimes in March.

The Names.
Carolus Clusius calls the first Bulbus vnifolius, or Bolbine, but refers
it not to the stock or kindred of any plant; but (as you see) I have ranked it
with the small sorts of Ornithogalum, and give it the name accordingly.

The other is referred for likeness of form, and not for color, unto the
Ornithogala, or Stars of Bethlehem. It is called by Tragus and Fuchsius
Bulbus siluestris, because of the obuiousnesse. Cordus takes it to be
Sisyrinchium. Lacuna calls it Bulbus esculentus. Lobel and others in these
days generally, Ornithogalum luteum, and we thereafter in English, The yellow
Starre-flower, or Star of Bethlehem.

The Virtues.
The first kind being but lately found out, is not known to be used. The
roots of the common or vulgar, are (as Matthiolus says) much eaten by poor
people in Italy, either raw or roasted, being sweeter in taste then any
Chestnut, and serving as well for a necessary food as for delight. It is
doubtful whether any of the rest may be so used; for I know not any in our
Land has made any experience.

There are many other sorts of Starre-flowers, which are fitter for a general
then this History; and therefore I refer them thereunto.

CHAP. XIII.
Moly. Wild Garlic.
Unto the former Starre-flowers, must needs be joined another tribe or
kindred, which carry their straked flowers Starre-fashion, not spikewise, but
in a tuft or vmbell thick thrust or set together. And although diverse of them
smell not as the former, but most of their first Grandfathers house, yet all
do not so; for some of them are of an excellent sent. Of the whole Family,
there are a great many which I must leave, I will only select out a few for
this our Garden, whose flowers for their beauty of stateliness, form, or
color, are fit to be entertained, and take place therein, every one according
to his worth, and are accepted of with the lovers of these delights.

1. Moly Homericum, vel potius Theophrasti. The greatest Moly of Homer.
Homers Moly (for so it is most usually called with us) rises up most commonly
with two, and sometimes with three great, thick, long, and hollow guttured
leaves, of a whitish green color, very near the color of the Tulipa leaf,
having sometimes at the end of some of the leaves, and sometimes apart by it
self, a whitist round small button, like unto a small bulbe, the like whereof
also, but greater, does grow between the bottom of the leaves and the stalk
near the ground, which being planted when it is ripe, will grow into a root
of the same kind: among these leaves rises up a round, strong, and tall
stalk, a yard high or better, bare or naked unto the top, where it bears a
great tuft or vmbell of pale purplish flowers, all of them almost standing upon
equal foot-stalkes, or not one much higher then another, consisting of five
leaves a piece, striped down the back with a small pale line, having a round
head or vmbone with some threeds about it in the midst: These flowers do abide
a great while blown before they vade, which smell not very strong, like any
Onion or Garlic, but of a faint smell: and after they are past come the
seed, which is black, wrapped in white close husks: the root grows very
great, sometimes bigger then any man's closed fist, smelling strong like
Garlic, whitish on the outside, and green at the top, if it be but a while
bare from the earth about it.

2. Moly Indicum sieve Caucafon. The Indian Moly.
The Indian Moly has such like thick large leaves, as the Homers Moly has,
but shorter and broader, in the middle whereof rises up a short weak stalk,
almost flat, not having any flowers upon it, but a head or cluster of greenish
scaly bulbes, enclosed at the first in a large thin skin, which being open,
every bulbe shows it self, standing close one unto another upon his
foot-stalke, of the bigness of an Acorne, which being planted, will grow to
be a plant of his own kind: the root is white and great, covered with a
dark coat or skin, which increases but little under ground; but besides
that head, it bears small bulbes above the ground, at the bottom of the
leaves next unto the stalk, like unto the former.

The Place.
Both these do grow in diverse places of Spain, Italy, and Greece; for the
last has been sent out of Turkey among other roots. Ferrantes Imperatus a
learned Apothecary of Naples, sent it to diverse of his friends in these parts,
and has described it in his natural history among other plants, printed in
the Italian tongue. It grew also with John Tradescante at Canterbury, who sent
me the head of bulbes to see, and afterward a root, to plant it in my Garden.

The Time.
The first flowreth in the end of May, and abides unto the midst of July, and
sometimes longer. The other bears his head of bulbes in June and July.

The Names.
We have received them by their names expressed in their titles, yet the last
has also been sent by the name of Ornithogalum Italicum, but as all may easily
see, it is not of that kindred.

1. Moly montanum Pannonicum bulbiferum primum. The first bulbed Moly of
Hungary.
This first Hungarian Moly has three or four broad and long green leaves,
folded together at the first, which after open themselves, and are carried up
with the stalk, standing thereon one above another, which is a foot high; at
the top whereof do grow a few sad reddish bulbes, and between them long
footstalkes, bearing flowers of a pale purplish color; after which follows
black seed, enclosed in roundish heads: the root is not great, but white on
the outside, very like unto the root of Serpents Moly, hereafter described,
increasing much under ground, and smelling strong.

2. Moly montanum Pannonicum bulbiferum secundum. The second bulbed Moly of
Hungary.
The second Moly has narrower green leaves then the former: the stalk is
about the same height, and bears at the top a great cluster of small green
bulbes, which after turn of a darker color; from among which come forth long
footstalk, whereon stand purplish flowers: the root is covered with a
blackish purple coat or skin.

3. Moly Serpentinum. Serpents Moly.
This Moly must also be joined unto the bulbous Molyes, as of kindred with
them, yet of greater beauty and delight, because the bulbes on the heads of the
small stalks are redder, and more pleasant to behold: the stalk is lower, and
his grassie winding leaves, which turn themselves (whereof it took the name)
are smaller, and of a whiter green color: it bears among the bulbes
purplish flowers also, but more beautiful, the sent whereof is nothing so
strong: the root is small, round, and whitish, increasing into a number of
small roots, no bigger then pease round about the greater root.

4. Moly caul and folijs triangularibus. The three cornered Moly.
This three square Moly has four or five long, and somewhat broad pale green
leaves, flat on the upper side, and with a ridge down the back of the leaf,
which makes it seem three square: the stalk which rises up a foot and a
half high or better, is three square or three cornered also, bearing at the
top out of a skinnie husk diverse white flowers, somewhat large and long,
almost bell-fashion, with stripes of green down the middle of every leaf,
and a few chiues tipped with yellow in the middle about the head, wherein when it
is ripe, is enclosed small black seed: the root is white on the outside, and
very like the yellow Moly; both root, leaf, and flower has a smacke, but not
very strong of Garlic.

5. Moly Narcissinis folijs. Daffodill leafed Moly.
This Moly has many long, narrow, and flat green leaves, very like unto the
leaves of a Daffodill, from whence it took his name (or rather of the early
greater Leucoium 1 Moly Homericum vel potius Theophrasti. The greatest Moly of
Homer. 2 Moly Indicum sieve Caucafon. The Indian Moly. 3 Moly Pannonicum
bulbiserum. The bulbed Moly of Hungary. 4 Moly Serpentinum. Serpents Moly. 5
Moly purpureum Neapolitanum The purplish Moly of Naples. 6 Moly caul and
folijs triangularibus. The three cornered Moly. 7 Moly latifolium flore luteo.
The yellow Moly. 8 Moly Dioscorideum Hispanicum The Spanish Moly of
Dioscorides. 9 Moly Zibettinum vel Moschatinum. The sweet smelling Moly of
Mompelier. 10 Moly ser^tinum Coniferum. The late Pineapple Moly.
depiction of flowers bulbosum, or bulbed Violet before described, joined next
unto the Daffodils, because it is so like them) among which rises up two or
three stalks sometimes, each of a foot and a half high, bearing at the top,
enclosed in a skinny hose, as all the Molyes have, a number of small purplish
flowers, which do not long abide, but quickly fade: the seed is black as
others are; the root is sometimes knobbed, and more often bulbed, having in
the knobs some marks of the old stalks to be seen in them, and smells
somewhat like Garlic, whereby it may be known.

6. Moly montanum latifolium luteo flore. The yellow Moly.
The yellow Moly has but one long and broad leaf when it does not bear
flower, but when it will bear flower, it has two long and broad leaves, yet
one always longer and broader then the other, which are both of the same
color, and near the bigness of a reasonable Tulipa leaf: between these
leaves grows a slender stalk, bearing at the top a tuft or vmbell of
yellow flowers out of a skinnie hose, which parts three ways, made of six
leaves a piece, laid open like a Star, with a greenish back or outside, and
with some yellow threeds in the middle: the seed is black, like unto others:
the root is whitish, two for the most part joined together, which increases
quickly, and smells very strong of Garlic, as both flowers and leaves do
also.

7. Moly Pyrenaeum purpureum. The purple mountain Moly.
This purple Moly has two or three leaves, somewhat like the former yellow
Moly, but not so broad, nor so white: the stalk has not so many flowers
thereon, but more sparingly, and of an unpleasant purple color: the root is
whitish, smelling somewhat strongly of Garlic, but quickly perishes with the
extremity of our cold Winters, which it will not abide unless it be defended.

8. Moly montanum latifolium purpureum Hispanicum. The purple Spanish Moly.
This Moly has two broad and very long green leaves, like unto the yellow
Moly, in this, that they do compass one another at the bottom of them,
between which rises up a strong round stalk, two foot high or more, bearing
at the top, out of a thin husk, a number of fair large flowers upon long
foot-stalkes, consisting of six leaves a piece, spread open like a Star, of a
fine delayed purple or blush color, with diverse threeds of the same color,
tipped with yellow, standing about the middle head: between the stalk and the
bottom of the leaves it has some small bulbes growing, which being planted,
will soon spring and increase: the root also being small and round, with many
fibers thereat, has many small bulbes shooting from them; but neither root,
leaf, nor flower, has any ill sent of Garlic at all.

9. Moly purpureum Neapolitanum. The purple Moly of Naples.
The Neapolitan Moly has three or four small long green leaves set upon the
stalk after it is risen up, which bears a round head of very fine purple
flowers, made of six leaves a piece, but so closing together at the edge, that
they seem like unto small cups, never laying themselves open, as the other
do; this has some sent of his original, but the root more then any part
else, which is white and round, quickly increasing as most of the Molyes do.

10. Moly pyxidatum argenteum Hispanicum. The Spanish silver cupped Moly.
This Spanish Moly has two or three very long rush like leaves, which rise up
with the stalk, or rather vanish away when the stalk is risen up to be three
foot high or more, bearing a great head of flowers, standing close at the
first, but afterward spreading much one from another, every flower upon a long
foote-stalke, being of a white silver color, with stripes or lines on every
side, and fashioned small and hollow, like a cup or box: the seed I could
never observe, because it flowreth so late, that the Winter hinders it from
bearing seed with us: the root is small and round, white, and in a manner
transparent, at least so shining, as if it were so, and increases nothing so
much, as many of the other sorts: this has no ill sent at all, but rather a
pretty smell, not to be misliked.

11. Moly serotinum Coniferum. The late Pineapple Moly.
This late Moly that was sent me with the last described, and others also from
Spain, rises up with one long green leaf, hollow and round unto the end,
toward this end on the one side, breaks out a head of flowers, enclosed in a
thin skin, which after it has so stood a good while, (the leaf in the
mean time rising higher, and growing harder, becomes the stalk) breaks,
and shows a great bush or head of buds for flowers, thick thrust together,
fashioned very like unto the form of a Pineapple (from whence I gave it the
name) of the bigness of a Walnut: after this head has stood in this manner a
month or thereabouts, the flowers show themselves to be of a fine delayed or
whitish purple color, with diverse stripes in every of them, of the same
cup-fashion with the former, but not opening so plainly, so that they cannot
be discerned to be open, without good heed and observation. It flowreth so
late in Autumn, that the early frosts do quickly spoil the beauty of it, and
soon cause it to rotte: the root is small and round, and shining like the
last, very tender also, as not able to abide our sharp Winters, which has
caused it utterly to perish with me.

12. Moly Dioscorideum. Dioscorides his Moly.
The root of this small Moly is transparent within, but covered with a thick
yellowish skin, of the bigness of an Hasell Nut, or somewhat bigger, which
sends forth three or four narrow grassie leaves, long and hollow, and a
little bending downwards, of a whitish green color, among which rises up a
slender weak stalk, a foot and a half high, bearing at the top, out of a
thin skin, a tuft of milk white flowers, very like unto those of Ramsons,
which stand a pretty while in their beauty, and then pass away for the most
part without giving any seed: this has little or no sent of Garlic.

We have another of this sort that is lesser, and the flowers rounder pointed.

13. Moly Dioscorideum Hispanicum. The Spanish Moly of Dioscorides.
This Moly came unto me among other Molyes from Spain, and is in all things
like unto the last described, but fairer, larger, and of much more beauty, as
having his white flowers twice as great as the former; but (as it seems) very
impatient of our Winters, which it could not at any hand endure, but quickly
perished, as some others that came with it also.

14. Moly Moschatinum vel Zibettinum Monspeliense. The sweet smelling Moly of
Mompelier.
This sweet Moly, which I have kept for the last, to close up your senses, is
the smallest, and the finest of all the rest, having four or five small green
leaves, almost as fine as hairs, or like the leaves of the Feather-grasse: the
stalk is about a foot high, bearing five or six or more small white flowers,
laid open like Stars, made of six leaves a piece, of an excellent sweet
sent, resembling Musk or Ciuet; for diverse have diversely censured of it. It
flowreth late in the year, so that if the precedent Summer be either over
moist, or the Autumn over early cold, this will not have that sweet sent,
that it will have in a hot dry time, and besides must be carefully respected:
for it will hardly abide the extremity of our sharp Winters.

The Place.
The places of these Molyes, are for the most part expressed in their titles,
or in their descriptions.

The Time.
The time is set down, for the most part to be in June and July, the rest
later.

The Names.
To make further relation of names then are expressed in their tiles, were
needless; let these therefore suffice.

The Virtues.
All these sorts of Molyes are small kinds of wild Garlic, and are to be
used for the same purposes that the great Garden Garlic is, although much
weaker in their effects. For any other especial property is in any of these,
more than to furnish a Garden of variety, I have not heard at all.

And thus much may suffice of these kinds for our Garden, reserving many
others that might be spoken of, to a general work, or to my Garden of
Simples, which as God shall enable me, and time give leave, may show it self to
the world, to abide the judicious and critic censures of all.

CHAP. XIIII.
Asphodelus. The Asphodill.
THere remain some other flowers, like unto the last described, to be
specified, which although they have no bulbous roots, yet I think them
fittest to be here mentioned, that so I may join those of nearest similitude
together, until I have finished the rest that are to follow.

1. Asphodelus mayor albus ramosus. The great white branched Asphodill.
The great white Asphodill has many long, and narrow, hollow three square
leaves, sharp pointed, lying upon the ground round about the root: the stalk
is smooth, round, and naked without leaves, which rises from the midst of
them, divided at the top into diverse branches, if the plant be of any long
continuance, or else but into two or three small branches, from the sides of
the maine great one, whereon do stand many large flowers Starre-fashion, made
of six leaves a piece, whitish on the inside, and straked with a purplish line
down the backside of every leaf, having in the middle of the flowers some
small yellow threeds: the seed is black, and three square, greater then the
seed of Bucke wheat, contained in roundish heads, which open into three
parts: the root is composed of many tuberous long clogges, thickest in the
middle, and smaller at both ends, fastened together at the head, of a dark
grayish color on the outside, and yellow within.

2. Asphodelus albus non ramosus. The white vnbranched Aspodill.
The vnbranched Asphodill is like unto the former, both in leaves and flowers,
but that the flowers of this are whiter, and without any line or struck on the
back side, and the stalks are without branches: the roots likewise are
smaller, and fewer, but made after the same fashion.

3. Asphodelus mayor flore carneo. The blush colored Asphodill.
This Asphodill is like to the last in form of leaves and branches, and
differs in this, that his leaves are marked with some spots, and the flowers
are of a blush or flesh color, in all other things alike.

4. Asphodelus minimus albus. The least white Asphodill.
This least Asphodill has four or five very narrow long leaves, yet seeming
three square like the greatest, bearing a small stalk, of about a foot high
among them, without any branches, and at the top a few white flowers, straked
both within and without, with a purplish line in the middle of every leaf. The
roots are such like tuberous clogges as are in the former, but much lesser.

5. Asphodelus albus minor sieve Fistulosus. The little hollow white Aspnodill.
This little white Asphodill has a number of leaves growing thick together,
thicker and greener then those of the small yellow Asphodill, or Kings Spear
next following, among which rises up diverse round stalks, bearing flowers
from the middle to the top, Starre-fashion, with small green leaves among
them, which are white on the inside, and striped on the back with purple
lines, like unto the first described: the seed, and heads containing them, are
three square, like the seed of the little yellow Asphodill: the roots of this
kind are not glandulous, as the former, but stringie, long and white: the
whole plant is very impatient of our cold Winters, and quickly perishes, if it
be not carefully preserved, both from the cold, and much wet in the Winter, by
housing it; and then it will abide many years: for it is not an annual plant,
as many have thought.

6. Asphodelus luteus minor, sieve Hastula regia. The small yellow Asphodill, or
Kings spear.
This small yellow Asphodill, which is usually called the Kings spear, has
many long narrow edged leaves, which make them seem three square, of a bluish
or whitish green color: the stalk rises up three foot high oftentimes,
beset with small long leaves up unto the very flowers, which grow thick
together spike-fashion one above another, for a great length, and wholly
yellow, laid open like a Star, somewhat greater then the last white
Asphodill, and smaller then the first, which when they are past yield round
heads, containing black cornered seed, almost three square: the roots are
many long yellow strings, which spreading in the ground, do much increase.

The Place.
All these Asphodils do grow naturally in Spain and France, and from thence
were first brought unto us, to furnish our Gardens.

The Time.
All the glandulous rooted Asphodils do flower some in May, and some in June;
but the two last do flower, the yellow or last of them in July, and the former
white one in August and September, and until the cold and winter hinder it.

The Names.
Their several names are given them in their titles, as much as is fit for
this discourse. For to show you that the Greeks do call the stalk of the
great Asphodill (...), and the Latins Albucum, or what else belongs to them,
is fitter for another work, unto which I leave them.

The bastard Asphodils should follow next in place, if this work were fit for
them; but because I have tied my self to express only those flowers and
plants, that for their beauty, or sent, or both, do furnish a Garden of
Pleasure, and they have none, I leave them to a general History of plants, or
that Garden of Simples before spoken of, and will describe the Lilly Asphodils,
and the Phalangia or Spider-worts, which are remaining of those, that join in
name or fashion, and are to be here inserted, before I pass to the rest of the
bulbous roots.

1. Liliasphodelus phaeniceus. The gold red Day Lilly.
Because the roots of this and the next, do so nearely agree with the two
last recited Asphodils, I have set them in this place, although some do place
them next after the Lillies, because their flowers do come nearest in form
unto Lillies; but whether you will call them Asphodils with Lilly flowers, as I
think it fittest, or Lillies with Asphodill roots, or Lillies without bulbous
roots, as others do, I will not contend.

The red Day Lilly has diverse broad and long fresh green leaves, folded at
the first as it were double, which after open, and remain a little hollow in
the middle; among which rises up a naked stalk three foot high, bearing at
the top many flowers, one not much distant from another, and flowring one
after another, not having lightly above one flower blown open in a day, and
that but for a day, not lasting longer, but closing at night, and not opening
again; whereupon it had his English name, The Lilly for a day: these flowers
are almost as large as the flowers of the white Lilly, and made after the same
fashion, but of a fair gold red, or Orange tawny color. I could never observe
any seed to follow these flowers; for they seem the next day after they have
flowred, (except the time be fair and dry) to be so rotten, as if they had
lain in wet to rotte them, whereby I think no seed can follow: the roots are
many thick and long yellow knobbed strings, like unto the small yellow
Asphodill roots, but somewhat greater, running under ground in like sort, and
shooting young heads round about.

2. Liliashodelus luteus. The yellow Day Lilly.
I shall not need to make a repetition of the description of this Day Lilly,
having given you one so amply before, because this does agree thereunto so
nearely, as that it might seem the same; these differences only it has, the
leaves are not fully so large, nor the flower so great or spread open, and the
color thereof is of a fair yellow wholly, and very sweet, which abides
blown many days before it fade, and has given black round seed, growing in
round heads, like the heads of the small yellow Asphodill, but not so great.

Clusius has set down, that it was reported, that there should be another
Liliasphodill with a white flower, but we can hear of none such as yet; but I
rather think, that they that gave that report might be mistaken, in thinking
the Sauoye Spider-wort to be a white Liliasphodill, which indeed is so like,
that one not well experienced, or not well regarding it, may soon take one for
another.

The Place.
Their original is many moist places in Germany.

The Time.
They flower in May and June.

The Names.
They are called by some Liliago, and Lilium non bulbosum, and Liliasphodelus.
1 Asphodelus mayor albus ramosus. The great white branched Asphodill. 2
Asphodelus minor albus seu fiflulosus. The little hollow white Asphodill. 3
Asphodelus minor luteus, sieve Hastula regia. The small yellow Asphodill, or
Kings spear. 4 Liliasphodelus luteus. The yellow Day Lilly. 5 Liliasphodelus
phaeniceus. The gold red Day Lilly.
depiction of flowers In English we call them both Day Lillies, but the name
does not so well agree with the last, as with the first, for the causes above
specified.

The Virtues.
The roots of Asphodill has formerly been had in great account, but now is
utterly neglected; yet by reason of their sharpness they open and cleanse,
and therefore some have of late used them for the yellow Iaundise. The Day
Lillies have no physical use that I know, or have heard.

CHAP. XV.
Phalangium. Spider-wort.
THese plants do so nearely resemble those that are last set forth, that I
think none that knows them, will doubt, but that they must follow next unto
them, being so like unto them, and therefore of the fairest of this kind first.

1. Phalangium Allobrogicum. The Sauoye Spider-wort.
The Sauoye Spider-wort springs up with four or five green leaves, long and
narrow, yet broader at the bottom, narrower pointed at the end, and a little
hollow in the middle; among which rises up a round stiff stalk, a foot and
a half high, bearing at the top one above another, seven or eight, or more
flowers, every one as large almost as the yellow Day Lilly last described, but
much greater then in any other of the Spider-worts, of a pure white color,
with some threeds in the middle, tipped with yellow, and a small forked pointell:
after the flowers are past, the heads or seed vessels grow almost three
square, yet somewhat round, wherein is contained blackish seed: the roots are
many white, round, thick, brittle strings, joined together at the head, but
are nothing so long, as the roots of the other Phalangia or Spider-worts.

2. Phalangium maius Italicum. album. The great Italian Spider-wort.
This great Spider-wort has diverse long and narrow leaves spread upon the
ground, and not rising up as the former, and not so broad also as the former,
but somewhat larger then those that follow: the stalk is bigger, but seldom
rises up so as the next, whereof this is a larger kind, having a long
vnbranched stalk of white flower, laid open like stars as it has, but
somewhat greater: the roots are long and white, like the next, but somewhat
larger.

3. Phalangium non ramosum vulgar. Vnbranched Spider-wort.
The leaves of this Spider-wort do seem to be little bigger or longer then
the leaves of grass, but of a more grayish green color, rising immediately
from the head or tuft of roots; among which rise up one or two stalks,
sometimes two or three foot long, beset toward the top with many white
Starre-like flowers, which after they are past turn into small round heads,
containing black feed, like unto the seed of the little yellow Asphodill, but
lesser: the roots are long white strings, running under ground.

4. Phalangium ramosum. Branched Spider-wort.
The branched Spider-wort has his leaves somewhat broader then the former, and
of a more yellowish green color: the stalk hereof is diversely branched at
the top, bearing many white flowers, like unto the former, but smaller: the
seeds and roots are like the former in all things.

1 Phalangium Allobrogicum. The Sauoye Spider-wort. 2 Phalangium non ramosum.
Vnbranched Spider-wort. 3 Phalangium ramosum. Branched Spider-wort. 4
Phalangium Ephemerum Virginianum. John Tradescante's Spider-wort.
depiction of flowers

The Place.
The first grows on the Hills near unto Sauoye, from whence diverse, allured
with the beauty of the flower, have brought it into these parts.

The second came up in my Garden, from the seed received out of Italy. The
others grow in Spain, France, etc.

The Time.
The vnbranched Spider-wort most commonly flowreth before all the other, and
the branched a month after it: the other two about one time, that is, toward
the end of May, and not much after the vnbranched kind.

The Names.
The first (as I said before) has been taken to be a white Lilliasphodill,
and called Liliasphodelus flore albo; but Clusius has more properly entitled
it a Phalangium, and from the place of his original, gave him his other
denomination, and so is called of most, as is set down in the title.

The other have no other names then are expressed in their titles, but only
that Cordus calls them Liliago; and Dodonaeus, lib. 4. hist. plant. would
make the branched kind to be Moly alterum Plinij, but without any good ground.

The Virtues.
The names Phalangium and Phalangites were imposed on these plants, because
they were found effectual, to cure the poison of that kind of Spider, called
Phalangium, as also of Scorpions and other Serpents. We do not know, that any
Physician has used them to any such, or any other purpose in our days.

5. Phalangium Ephemerum Virginianum Ioannis Tradescant. The soon fading
Spider-wort of Virginia, or Tradescant his Spider-wort.
This Spider-wort is of late knowledge, and for it the Christian world is
indebted unto that painful industrious searcher, and lover of all natures
varieties, John Tradescant (sometimes belonging to the right Honorable Lord
Robert Earl of Salisbury, Lord Treasurer of England in his time, and then unto
the right Honorable the Lord Wotton at Canterbury in Kent, and lastly unto the
late Duke of Buckingham) who first received it of a friend, that brought it out
of Virginia, thinking it to be the Silk Grass that grows there, and has
imparted hereof, as of many other things, both to me and others; the
description whereof is as follows:

From a stringie root, creeping far under ground, and rising up again in
many places, springs up diverse heads of long folded leaves, of a grayish
ouer-worne green color, two or three for the most part together, and not
above, compassing one another at the bottom, and abiding green in many places
all the Winter; otherwhere perishing, and rising anew in the Spring, which
leaves rise up with the great round stalk, being set thereon at the joints,
usually but one at a joint, broad at the bottom where they compass the
stalk, and smaller and smaller to the end: at the upper joint, which is the
top of the stalk, there stand two or three such like leaves, but smaller,
from among which breaks out a dozen, sixteen, or twenty, or more round green
heads, hanging down their heads by little foot-stalkes, which when the flower
begins to blow open, grows longer, and stands upright, having three
small pale green leaves for a husk, and three other leaves within them for
the flower, which lay themselves open flat, of a deep blew purple color,
having an vmbone or small head in the middle, closely set about with six
reddish, hairy, or feathered threeds, tipped with yellow pendents: this flower
opens it self in the day, and shuts usually at night, and never opens
again, but perishes, and then hangs down his head again; the green husk
of three leaves, closing it self again into the form of a head, but greater,
as it was before, the middle vmbone growing to be the seed vessel, wherein
is contained small, blackish, long seed: Seldom shall any man see above one,
or two at the most of these flowers blown open at one time upon the stalk,
whereby it stands in flowring a long time, before all the heads have given
out their flowers.

The Place.
This plant grows in some parts of Virginia, and was delivered to John
Tradescant.

The Time.
It flowreth from the end of May until July, if it have had green leaves all
the Winter, or otherwise, until the Winter check his luxuriousness.

The Names.
Unto this plant I confess I first imposed the name, by considering duly all
the parts thereof, which until some can find a more proper, I desire may
still continue, and to call it Ephemerum Virginianum Tradescanti, John
Tradescante's Spider-wort of Virginia, or Phalangium Ephemerum Virginianum, The
soon fading or Day Spider-wort of Virginia.

The Virtues.
There has not been any trial made of the properties since we had it, nor
do we know whether the Indians have any use thereof.

CHAP. XVI.
Colchicum. Medowe Saffron.
TO return to the rest of the bulbous and tuberous rooted plants, that remain
to be entreated of, the Colchica or Medowe Saffrons are first to be handled,
whereof these later days have found out more varieties, then formerly were
known; some flowring in the Spring, but the most in Autumn, and some bearing
double, but the greatest part single flowers: whereof every one in their order,
and first of our own Country kinds.

1. Colchicum Anglicum album. The white English Medowe Saffron.
It is common to all the Medowe Saffrons, except that of the Spring, and one
other, to bear their flowers alone in Autumn or later, without any green
leaves with them, and afterward in February, their green leaves: So that I
shall not need to make many descriptions, but to show you the differences
that consist in the leaves, and colors of the flowers; and briefly to pass
(after I have given you a full description of the first) from one unto another,
touching only those things that are note worthy. The white English Medowe
Saffron then does bear in Autumn three or four flowers at the most, standing
severally upon weak foote-stalkes, a fingers length or more above the ground,
made of six white leaves, somewhat long and narrow, and not so large as most of
the other kinds, with some threeds or chiues in the middle, like unto the
Saffron flowers of the Spring, wherein there is no color of Saffron, or virtue
to that effect: after the flowers are past and gone, the leaves do not
presently follow, but the root remains in the ground without show of leaf
above ground, most part of the Winter, and then in February there spring up
three or four large and long green leaves, when they are fully grown up,
standing on the top of a round, weak, green, and short foote-stalke,
somewhat like the leaves of white Lillies, but not so large, and in the midst
of these leaves, after they have been up some time, appear two or three loose
skinny heads, standing in the middle of the leaves upon short, thick, green
stalks, and being ripe, contain in them round small brownish seed, that lie
as it were loose therein, and when the head is dry, may be heard to rattle
being shaken: the root is white within, but covered with a thick blackish
skin or coat, having one side thereof at the bottom longer then the other,
with an hollownesse also on the one side of that long eminence, where the
flowers rise from the bottom, and shooting down from thence a number of white
fibers, whereby it is fastened in the ground: the green leaves afterward
rising from the top or head of the root.

2. Colchicum Anglicum purpureum. The purple English Medowe Saffron.
There is no difference at all in this Medowe Saffron from the former, but only
in the color of the flowers, which as they were wholly white in the former, so
in this they are of a delayed purple color, with a small show of veins
therein.

3. Colchicum Pannonicum album. The white Hungary Medowe Saffron.
The greatest difference in this Colchicum from the former English white one,
is, that it is larger both in root, leaf, and flower, and besides, has more
store of flowers together, and continuing longer in beauty, without fading so
soon as the former, and are also somewhat of a fairer white color.

4. Colchicum Pannonicum purpureum. The purple Hungary Medowe Saffron.
This purple Medowe Saffron is somewhat like unto the white of this kind, but
that it bears not so plentifully as the white, nor does the root grow so
great; but the flowers are in a manner as large as they, and of the like pale
delayed purple color, or somewhat deeper, as is in the purple English, with
some veins or marks upon the flowers, making some show of a checker on the
out side, but not so conspicuous, as in the true checkerd kinds. We have a
kind hereof is party colored with white streakes and edges, which abide
constant, and has been raised from the seed of the former.

5. Colchicum Byzantinum. Medowe Saffron of Constantinople.
This Medowe Saffron of Constantinople has his leaves so broad and large, that
hardly could any that never saw it before, judge it to be a Colchicum; for they
are much larger then any Lilly leaves, and of a dark green color: the
flowers are correspondent to the leaves, larger and more in number then in any
of the former purple kinds, of the same color with the last purple kind, but
of a little deeper purple on the inside, with diverse marks running through the
flowers, like unto it, or unto checkers, but yet somewhat more apparently: the
root is in the middle greater and rounder then the others, with a longer
eminence, whereby it may easily be known from all other sorts.

6. Colchicum Lusitanicum Fritillaricum. The checkerd Medowe Saffron of
Portugal.
The flowers of this Medowe Saffron are larger and longer then the flowers of
either the English or Hungarian, and almost as large as the last before
mentioned, and of the same color, but a little deeper, the spots and marks
whereof are somewhat more easy to be seen even a far off, like unto the
flower of a Fritillaria, from whence it took his significatiue name: the
leaves of this Medowe Saffron do rise up sooner then in any other of the
Autumn kinds; for they are always up before Winter, and are four or five in
number, short rather then long, broad below, and pointed at the end, canaled
or hollow, and standing round above the ground, one encompassing another at the
bottom, like the great Spanish Star Iacinth, called the Iacinth of Peru, 1
Colchi um Pannonicum. The Hungarian Meadow Saffron. 2 Colchicum Byzantinum.
Medowe Saffron of Constantinople 3 Colchicum ^usitanicum Fritillaricum. The
checkerd Medowe Saffron of Portugal 4 Colchicum Neapolitanum Fritillaricum.
The checkerd Medowe Saffron of Naples. 5 Colchicum Fritillaricum Chiense. The
checkerd Medowe Saffron of Chio or Sio. 6 Colchicum He^modactylum. Physical
Medowe Saffron.
depiction of flowers but shorter, and of a pale or grayish green color,
differing from the color of all the other Medowe Saffrons: the root is like
the root of the English or Hungarian without any difference, but that it
grows somewhat greater. It is one of the first Medowe Saffrons that flower in
the Autumn.

7. Colchicum Neapolitanum Fritillaricum. The checkerd Medowe Saffron of Naples.
This checkerd Medowe Saffron of Naples, is very like unto the last recited
checkerd Saffron of Portugal, but that the flower is somewhat larger, yet
sometimes very little, or not at all: the greatest mark to distinguish them
is, that the flowers of this are of a deeper color, and so are the spots on
the flowers likewise, which are so conspicuous, that they are discerned a great
way off, more like unto the flowers of a deep Fritillaria, then the former,
and make a goodlier and a more glorious show: the leaves of this do rise up
early after the flowers, and are somewhat longer, of a darker green color,
yet bending to a grayish color as the other, not lying so neatly or round, but
stand up one by another, being as it were folded together: neither of both
these last named checkerd Medowe Saffrons have given any seed in this
Country, that ever I could learn or hear of, but are increased by the root,
which in this is like the former, but a little bigger.

8. Colchicum Fritillaricum Chiense. The checkerd Medowe Saffron of Chio or Sio.
This most beautiful Saffron flower rises up with his flowers in the Autumn,
as the others before specified do, although not of so large a size, yet far
more pleasant and delightful in the thick, deep blew, or purple colored
beautiful spots therein, which make it excel all others whatsoever: the
leaves rise up in the Spring, being smaller then the former, for the most part
three in number, and of a paler or fresher green color, lying close upon the
ground, broad at the bottom, a little pointed at the end, and twining or
folding themselves in and out at the edges, as if they were indented. I have
not seen any seed it has borne: the root is like unto the others of this
kind, but small and long, and not so great: it flowreth later for the most
part then any of the other, even not until November, and is very hard to be
preserved with us, in that for the most part the root waxes less and less
every year, our cold Country being so contrary unto his natural, that it will
scarce show his flower; yet when it flowreth any thing early, that it may have
any comfort of a warm Sun, it is the glory of all these kinds.

9. Colchicum versicolor. The party colored Medowe Saffron.
The flowers of this Medowe Saffron most usually do not appear, until most
of the other Autumn sorts are past, except the last, which are very low,
scarce rising with their stalks three fingers breadth above the ground, but
oftentimes half hid within the ground: the leaves whereof are smaller,
shorter, and rounder, then in any of the other before specified, some being
altogether white, and others wholly of a very pale purple, or flesh color; and
some again parted, the one half of a leaf white, and the other half of the
same purple, and sometimes striped purple and white, in diverse leaves of one
and the same flower: and again, some will be the most part of the leaf white,
and the bottom purple, thus varying as nature list, that many times from one
root may be seen to arise all these varieties before mentioned: these flowers
do stand long before they fade and pass away; for I have observed in my
Garden some that have kept their flower fair until the beginning of January,
until the extremity of the Winter frosts and snowes have made them hide their
heads: the leaves therefore accordingly do rise up after all other, and are of
a brownish or dark green color at their first springing up, which after grow
to be of a deep green color: the root is like the former English or
Hungarian kinds, but thicker and greater for the most part, and shorter also.

10. Colchicum variegatum alterum. Another party colored Medowe Saffron.
There is another, whose party colored flowers rise a little higher, diversely
striped and marked, with a deeper purple color, and a pale or whitish blush
throughout all the leaves of the flower.

11. Colchicum montanum Hispanicum minus. The little Spanish Medowe Saffron.
The flowers of this little Medowe Saffron are narrower and smaller then any of
the former, and of a deeper reddish purple color then either the English or
Hungarian kinds: the green leaves also are smaller then any other, lying on
the ground, of a deep or sad green color, rising up within a while after the
flowers are past, and do abide green all the Winter long: the root is small
and long, according to the rest of the plant, and like in form to the others.

12. Colchicum montanum minus versicolore flore. The small party colored
Medowe Saffron.
This little kind differs not from the Spanish kind last set forth, but in
the variety of the flower, which is as small as the former; the three inner
leaves being almost all white, and the three outer leaves some of them pale or
blush, and some party colored, with a little green on the back of some of
them.

13. Colchicum Hermodactilum. Physical Medowe Saffron.
This Physical Medowe Saffron springs up with his leaves in Autumn, before
his flowers appear beyond the nature of all the former kinds, yet the flower
does, after they are up, show it self in the middle of the green leaves,
consisting of six white leaves, with diverse chiues in the middle, and passes
away without giving any seed that ever I could observe; the green leaves
abide all the Winter and Spring following, decaying about May, and appear not
until September, when (as I said) the flowers show themselves presently after
the leaves are sprung up.

14. Colchicum atropurpureum. The dark purple Medowe Saffron.
The greatest difference in this kind consists in the flower, which at the
first appearing is as pale a purple, as the flower of the former Hungarian
kind: but after it has stood in flower two or three days, it begins to
change, and will after a while become to be of a very deep reddish purple
color, as also the little foote-stalke whereon it does stand: the flower is of
the bigness of the Hungarian purple, and so is the green leaf: the seed and
root is like the English purple kind.

15. Colchicum atropurpureum variegatum. The party colored dark purple Medowe
Saffron.
We have of late gained another sort of this kind, differing chiefly in the
flower, which is diversely striped thorough every leaf of the flower, with a
paler purple color, whereby the flower is of great beauty: this might seem to
be a degeneration from the former, yet it has abiden constant with me diverse
years, and gives seed as plentifully as the former.

16. Colchicum flore pleno. Double flowred Medowe Saffron.
The double Medowe Saffron is in root and leaf very like unto the English
kind: the flowers are of a fine pale or delayed purple color, consisting of
many leaves set thick together, which are somewhat smaller, as in the English
flower, being narrow and long, and as it were round at the points, which make a
very double flower, having some chiues with their yellow tips, dispersed as it
were among the leaves in the middle: it flowreth in September, a little after
the first show of the earlier Medowe Saffrons are past.

17. Colchicum variegatum pleno flore. The party colored double Medowe Saffron.
We have another of these double kinds (if it be not the very same with the
former, varying in the flower as nature pleases oftentimes; for I have this
flower in my garden, as I here set it forth, every year) whose flowers are
diuersified in the partition of the colors, as is to be seen in the single
party colored Medowe Saffron before described, having some leaves white, and
others pale purple, and some leaves half white and half purple, diversely set
or placed in the double flower, which does consist of as many leaves as the
former, yet sometime this party colored flower does not show it self double
like the former, but has two flowers, one rising out of another, making each
of them to be almost but single flowers, consisting of eight or ten leaves a
piece: but this diversity is not constant; for the same root that this year
appears in that manner, the next year will return to his former kind of
double flowers again.

18. Colchicum Vernum. Medowe Saffron of the Spring.
This Medowe Saffron rises up very early in the year, that is, in the end of
January sometimes, or beginning, or at the furthest the middle of February,
presently after the deep Frosts and Snowes are past, with his flowers enclosed
within three green leaves, which opening themselves as soon almost as they
are out of the ground, show their buds for flowers within them very white
oftentimes, before they open far, and sometimes also purplish at their first
appearing, which never show above two at the most upon one root, and never
rise above the leaves, nor the leaves much higher then they, while they last:
the flower consists of six leaves, long and narrow, every leaf being
divided, both at the bottom and top, each from other, and joined together
only in the middle, having also six chiues, tipped with yellow in the middle,
every chiue being joined to a leaf, of a pale red or deep blush color, when
it has stood a while blown, and is a smaller flower then any Medowe Saffron,
except the small Spanish kinds only, but continues in his beauty a good
while, if the extremity of sharp Frosts and Winds do not spoil it: the
leaves wherein these flowers are enclosed, at their first coming up, are of a
brownish green color, which so abide for a while, especially on the outside,
but on the inside they are hollow, and of a whitish or grayish green color,
which after the flowers are past, grow to be of the length of a man's longest
finger, and narrow withal: there rises up likewise in the middle of them the
head or seed vessel, which is smaller and shorter, and harder then any of the
former, wherein is contained small round brown seed: the root is small,
somewhat like unto the roots of the former, but shorter, and not having so
long an eminence on the one side of the bottom.

19. Colchicum Vernum atropurpureum. Purple Medowe Saffron of the Spring.
The flower of this Medowe Saffron, is in the rising up of his leaves and
flowers together, and in all things else, like unto the former, only the
flowers of this sort are at their first appearing of a deeper purple color,
and when they are blown also are much deeper then the former, divided in like
manner, both at the bottom and top as the other, so that they seem, like as
if six loose leaves were joined in the middle part, to make one flower, and
has his small chiues tipped with yellow, cleaning in like manner to every leaf.

The Place.
All these Medowe Saffrons, or the most part of them, have their places
expressed in their titles; for some grow in the fields and meadows of the
champion grounds, others on the mountains and hilly grounds. The English
kinds grow in the West parts, as about Bathe, Bristow, Warmister, 1 Colchicum
montamum Hispanicum. The little Spanish Medowe Saffron. 2 Colchicum montanum
minus versicolore flore. The small party colored Medowe Saffron. 3 Colchicum
versicolor. The party colored Medowe Saffron. 4 Colchicum variegatum alterum.
Another party colored Meadowe Saffron. 5 Colchicum atropurpureum. The dark
purple Medowe Saffron. 6 Colchicum atropurpureum variegatum. The variable dark
purple Meadowe Saffron. 7 Colchicum vernum, Medowe Saffron of the spring. 8
Colchicum flore pleno. Double Medowe Saffron.
depiction of flowers and other places also. The double kinds are thought to
come out of Germany.

The Time.
Their times likewise are declared in their several descriptions: those that
are earliest in Autumn, flower in August and September, the later in October,
and the latest in the end of October, and in November. The other are said to
be of the Spring, in regard they come after the deep of Winter (which is most
usually in December and January) is past.

The Names.
The general name to all these plants is Colchicum, whereunto some have added
Ephemerum, because it kills within one days space; and some Strangulatorium.
Some have called them also Bulbus agrestis, and Filius ante Patrem, The Son
before the Father, because (as they think) it gives seed before the flower:
but that is without due consideration; for the root of this (as of most other
bulbous plants) after the stalk of leaves and seed are dry, and past, may be
transplanted, and then it begins to spring and give flowers before leaves,
(and therein only it is differing from other plants) but the leaves and seed
follow successively after the flowers, before it may be removed again; so that
here is not seed before flowers, but contrarily flowers upon the first
planting or springing, and seed after, as in all other plants, though in a
diverse manner.

The Colchicum Hermodactilum may seem very likely to be the Colchicum
Orientale of Matthiolus, or the Colchicum Alexandrinum of Lobelius: And some
think it to be the true Hermodactilus, and so call it, but it is not so. We
do generally call them all in English Medowe Saffrons, or Colchicum, according
to the Latin, giving to every one his other adiunct to know it by.

The Virtues.
None of these are used for any Physical respect, being generally held to be
deadly, or dangerous at the least. Only the true Hermodactile (if it be of this
tribe, and not this which is here expressed) is of great use, for pains in the
joints, and of the hippes, as the Sciatica, and the like, to be taken inwardly.
Costaeus in his Book of the nature of plants, says, that the roots of our
common kinds are very bitter in the Spring of the year, and sweet in Autumn,
which Camerarius contradicts, saying, that he found them bitter in Autumn,
which were (as he says) given by some imposters to diverse, as an antidote
against the Plague.

CHAP. XVII.
Crocus. Saffron.
THere are diverse sorts of Saffrons, whereof many do ^ower in the Spring time,
and some in Autumn, among whom there is but one only kind, that is called
tame or of the Garden, which yields those blades or chiues that are used in
meats and medicines, and many ways profitable for other respects, none of the
rest, which are all wild kinds, giving any blade equal unto those of the
tame kind, or for any other use, then in regard of their beautiful flowers of
several varieties, and as they have been carefully sought out, and preserved
by diverse, to furnish a Garden of dainty curiosity. To entreat therefore of
these, I must, to observe an orderly declaration, divide them into two primary
families: the former shall be of those that yield their pleasant flowers in the
Spring of the year, and the other that send out their colors in the Autumn,
among whom that Rex pomarij (as I may so call it) the tame or manured kind,
properly called of the Garden, is to be comprehended, for that it gives his
pleasant flowers at that time among others. I shall again distribute those of
the Spring time into three chief colors, that is, into white, purple, and
yellow, and under every one of them, comprehend the several varieties that do
belong unto them; which course I will also hold with those of the Autumn, that
thus being rightly ranked, they may the more orderly be described.

1. Crocus Vernus albus purus minor. The smaller pure white Saffron flower of
the Spring.
This small Saffron flower springs up in the beginning of the year, with
three or four small green leaves, somewhat broader, but much shorter then the
true Saffron leaves, with a white line down the middle of every leaf:
between these leaves, out of a white skin, rises up one or two small
flowers, made of six leaves a piece, as all the rest in general are, of a pure
white color, without any mixture in it, which abide not in flower above a
week, or rather less, so suddenly is the pleasure of this, and the purple
lost: it flowreth not for the most part, until a month after the yellow
Crocus appears in flower, and the ordinary stripped Crocus is past: the seed
is small, round, and reddish, yet not so red as the seed of the yellow,
contained in three square heads, yet seldom bears, but increases by the
root plentifully enough, which is small, round, and flat at the bottom,
somewhat white on the outside, but whiter within, shooting out small sprouts on
every side of the root, which is the best note to know this kind and the
lesser purple, which are both alike, from all other roots of Saffron flowers.

2. Crocus albus mayor multiflorus. The great snow white Crocus.
This greater Saffron flower rises up usually with three or four green
leaves, larger then the former, with a white line in every one of them: the
flowers are greater, and more in number, rising together, but flowring one
after another, of a pure snow white color, and abiding but little longer in
flower then the former.

3. Crocus albus mayor alter dictus Masiacus. The great white Saffron flower or
Crocus of Mesia.
This great white Crocus of Mesia, rises up out of the ground, almost as early
as the first sort of the yellow, with four or five leaves, being very like
unto the leaves of the yellow Crocus, and as large, with white lines in them:
the flowers also are as large as the flowers of the yellow, and many also
rising one after another like unto it, but not of so pure a white color, as
the former or last described, but rather tending to a Milky or Cream color:
the root is not covered with any reddish, but rather pale skins or coats.

4. Crocus albus Maesiacus fundo violaceo. The great white Crocus of Mesia with
a blew bottom.
There is another of this kind, like unto the former in all things, saving
that the bottomes of the flowers of this kind, with some part of the stalk
next the flower, are of a pale shining purple color, and rising up a pretty
way into the flower; whereas another also of this kind, has a little show or
mark of blew, and not purple, at the bottom of the flower only, which makes
a difference.

5. Crocus albus fundo purpureo. The white Crocus with a purple bottom.
This Saffron flower is of the same kind with the first, both in root, leaf,
and flower, in none of them differing from it, but in that the bottom of this
flower, with that part of the short foote-stalke next unto it, is of a violet
or purple color, and sometimes having here and there some purple small lines,
or spots on the white leaves: it flowreth also with the first white, or
somewhat later.

6. Crocus vernus albus striatus. The white stripped Crocus.
This stripped Saffron flower is likewise near the same first kind, or first
white Crocus, having the like leaves and flowers, somewhat larger, but as soon
fading almost as it: but herein this flower differs, that it has pale
bluish lines and spots in all the leaves thereof, and more principally in the
three outer leaves: the root is also white on the outside, like the first
white, but greater, with young ones growing round about it.

7. Crocus vernus albus polyanthos versicolor. The greater party colored white
Crocus.
The greater party colored Saffron flower, has his green leaves like unto
the second great white Crocus before mentioned, having more flowers then any of
the former, except the first great white, the leaves whereof have greater
stripes then the last recited Crocus, but of a purple Violet color, making
each leaf seem oftentimes to have as much purple as white in them: the root
hereof is somewhat like the second white, but of a little more duskie color on
the outside, and not budding out on the sides at all, or very little.

8. Crocus vernus albus versicolor. The lesser party colored white Crocus.
The leaves and flowers of this other party colored Crocus, are for bigness
in a manner equal with the last, but has not so many flowers rising together
from the root: the flower is finely marked with blew strakes on the white
flower, but nothing so much as in the former: the root also is like the last.

9. Crocus Episcopalis. The Bishops Crocus.
This party colored or Bishops Saffron flower, is very like both in leaves and
roots unto the Neapolitane blew Crocus, but somewhat greater: the flowers do
abide not so long time blown, and has all the leaves either wholly white,
with blew stripes on both sides of them, or wholly of a fine delayed blew
Violet color, and the three innermost more blew and finely striped, both on
the inside and outside of them, and sometimes it has been seen to have three
leaves white, and three leaves of a pale blew.

10. Crocus vernus striatus vulgaris. The ordinary stripped Crocus.
There is another sort of stripped Saffron flower, which is most common and
plentiful in most Gardens, which I must needs bring under the rank of these
white kinds, although it differ very notably, both in root, leaf, and
flower, from all of them: the leaves of this rise up sooner then the yellow or
white Crocus, lying spread upon the ground for the most part, but narrower then
any of the former: among these leaves spring up diverse flowers, almost as large
as the former great white Crocus, of a very bleake or pale purple color,
tending to white on the inside, and in many almost white; with some small
whitish chiues tipped with yellow in the middle: the three outer leaves are of a
yellowish white color on the back side of them, stripped every one of them with
three broad stripes, of a dark murrey or purple color, and a little sprinkled
with some small purple lines, on both sides of those stripes; but on the
inside, of the same pale purple or white color with the rest: the seed hereof
is somewhat darker colored then of the white, and is more liberal in bearing:
the root is differing from all the former, being rounder and bigger then any
of them, except the kinds of Misia, yet somewhat flat withal, not having any
shootes from the sides, but setting off into roots plentifully, having a round
circle compassing the bottom of the root, which easily falls away, when it
is taken up out of the ground, and covered with a brown coat, somewhat near
the color of the yellow Crocus, but not altogether so bright: it flowreth
usually the first of all these sorts, or with the first of the early yellowes.

1 Crocus vernus albus minor. The small white Saffron flower of the spring. 2
Crocus vernus Masiacus albus. The great white Crocus of Misia. 3 Crocus vernus
albus striatur. The white stripped Crocus. 4 Crocus vernus albus polyanthos
versicolor. The party colored white Crocus. 5 Crocus albus fundo purpure^. The
white Crocus with a purple bottom. 6 Crocus vernus Neapolitanus. The great
blew Crocus of Naples. 7 Crocus vernus purpureus maximus. The great purple
Crocus. 8 Crocus vernus purpureus striatus. The purple stripped Crocus. 9 Crocus
vernus purpureus Capillarifolio. The purple Crocus with small leaves. 10 Crocus
vernus flavus striatus. The yellow stripped Crocus. 11 Crocus vernus luteus
versicolor. The cloth of gold Crocus.
depiction of flowers

11. Crocus vernus striatus Turcicus. The Turkey stripped Crocus.
There is another of this kind, whose flower is a little larger, and of a
deeper purple color, both on the inside and outside; the green leaf also is
bigger, and of a more whitish color.

12. Crocus vernus Capillarifolio albus. The white Crocus with small leaves.
This white Crocus is in all things like unto the purple of the same kind, but
that the flower of this is wholly white: the full description therefore hereof,
you shall have in that purple with small leaves, of this kind hereafter set
down, whereunto I refer you.

13. Crocus vernus purpureus minor. The smaller purple Crocus.
The smaller purple Saffron flower of the Spring, has his green leaves so
like unto the first white flowred Saffron, that they can hardly be
distinguished, only they seem to be a little narrower: the flower is also
much about the same bigness, or a little bigger, and seldom bears above one
flower from a root, even as the first does, of a deep purple Violet color,
the bottom of the flower, with the upper part of the stalk next thereunto,
being of a deeper or blacker purple; in the middle of the flower are some pale
chiues tipped with yellow pendents, and a longer pointell, divided or forked at
the top: the root of this is in all things so like unto the first white,
that it is impossible for the most cunning and conversant in them, to know the
one from the other. This bears seed very sparingly, as the white does, and
is reddish like unto it, but recompenseth that defect with a plentiful
increase by the root: it likewise flowreth at the very same time with the
white, and endures as small a time.

14. Crocus vernus purpureus maximus. The greatest purple Crocus.
This great purple Crocus is of the same kind with the next described, as well
in root as leaf, but greater; for the green leaves hereof are the greatest
and broadest of all other Crocus, with a large white line in the middle of
every one: it springs up much later then the former, and does not show his
flower until the other be past a good while: the flowers also are the largest
of all these Crocus of the Spring time, and equalling, if not surpassing that
purple kind that flowreth in Autumn, hereafter set forth, of a very fair and
deep Violet color, almost as deep as the former: the seed vessels are large
also and white, wherein is contained pale reddish seed, like unto the next
blew kind, but somewhat greater: the root is (as I said before) like unto the
next, that is, flat and round, with a duskie colored outside, whose head for
springing in it is as hardly discerned.

Alter Apicibus albidis.
We have one of this kind, the tops only of whose purple flower are whitish,
for the breadth of half the nail of a man's hand, which abides constant every
year in that manner, and therefore is a difference fit to be remembered.

15. Crocus vernus Neapolitanus sieve caeruleus mayor. The greater blew Crocus
of Naples.
This great blew Crocus rises up with diverse green leaves, broader then any
of the former (except the last) with a white line running down the inside of
every leaf, as in the former, among which rises up, out of diverse great long
white skins, diverse large flowers, but not fully so great as the former,
consisting of six leaves, of a paler blew or Violet color then in the former,
having in the middle of the flowers a few pale threeds, tipped with yellow, and a
longer pointell of a gold yellow color, forked or divided at the top,
smelling sweeter then in the former, and abiding a great while longer, being in
flower usually even with the stripped yellow Crocus, or before the former purple,
and yielding more plenty of seed: the root hereof is not very great, but a
little dark on the outside, being round and flat withal, that one can hardly
know which is the vpperside thereof.

This kind differs very little from the former, either in root, leaf, or
flower, Crocus Neapolitanus pracocior.
for the bigness or color, but that it seems to be a little bleaker or
paler blew, because it flowreth a little earlier.

16. Crocus vernus purpureus striatus. The stripped purple Crocus.
The leaves of this stripped purple Saffron flower, are as large and broad as the
last, of rather a little longer: the flowers also are as plentiful, and as
large, of a fine delayed purple color on the outside, with three broad strakes
or lines down the back of the three outer leaves, and of a little deeper
purple on the inside, as the other three leaves are also of a deeper purple
color, and are striped with the same deep purple about the ground, or bottom
of the leaves: this sometimes yield three square heads, containing in them
brownish seed: the root is like unto the last, and flowreth much about the
time of the former.

17. Crocus vernus purpureus versicolor. The silver stripped purple Crocus.
This stripped Saffron flower, is in leaves and flowers somewhat like unto the
last stripped purple, but a little smaller: the flowers are of a little deeper
purple through the whole leaves, striped with white lines, both on the leaves,
and toward the edges, which makes a peculiar difference from all the rest:
the root of this is not so flat, though like it, and covered with a dark ash
colored skin: it flowreth about the same time.

18. Crocus purpureus flammeus mayor. The greater purple flame colored Crocus.
The green leaves of this Crocus or Saffron flower, are of a reasonable
breadth and length, and of a pleasant fresh greenness, with a fair broad
white line down the middle of them, but rising not out of the ground so early
as the next described Crocus: the flowers are likewise of a mean bigness, of
a pale purple on the outside, somewhat whitish, especially the three outer
leaves; but on the inside of a deeper purple, and striped with great stripes
like flames, having some chiues in the middle, and a longer one also feathered
a little at the top: the root is white on the outside, somewhat flat and
round, but not so flat as the Neapolitane Crocus before described.

19. Crocus purpureus flammeus minor. The lesser purple flame colored Crocus.
This Crocus has almost as broad and long green leaves as the former, and of
the same verdure, which rise up earlier then it, and is in flower likewise
somewhat before it, being smaller for size by a little, but of as deep a
purple on the outside, as on the inside, flamed with fair broad stripes from
the middle of the leaves, or somewhat lower unto the edges: each of these give
seed that is of a pale reddish color: the root is very like unto the former,
but a little lesser.

20. Crocus vernus purpureus Capillarifolio. The purple Crocus with small
leaves.
This small kind of Saffron flower rises out of the ground, with two or three
long and small green leaves, very like unto the leaves of the fine
Fether-Grasse hereafter described, standing upright at the first, but
afterward lying upon the ground; among which come the flowers, sometimes
three, but most usually two upon one stalk, if the root be not young, which
then will bear but one on a stalk, which is very short, so that the flowers
scarce arise above the ground, yet laying themselves open in the day time, if
it be fair, and the Sun do shine, otherwise they keep close, and do not
open at all: and after one flower is past, which does not last above three or
four days at the most, the others follow, which are of a bleake bluish
purple in the middle of the flower, and of a deeper purple toward the ends or
points of the leaves, but of a more sullen or dark purple on the outside of
them, and yellowish at the bottom, with some yellow chiues in the middle: the
seed is small and darker colored then any of the former Crocus, contained
also in smaller heads, standing one by another upon the same short
foote-stalke, which then rises up a little higher, showing the manner of the
standing of the flowers, which in their flowring time could not so easily be
discerned: the root is very small and round, having one side at the bottom
lower then the other, very like the root of a Colchicum or Medowe Saffron, and
somewhat near resembling also the hoof of an horse foot, covered with a very
thick skin, of a dark or blackish brown color: this flowreth the last of
all the former sorts of Saffron flowers, even when they are all past.

21. Crocus vernus purpureus striatus Capillarifolio. The stripped purple Crocus
with small leaves.
This small stripped purple Saffron flower has such like leaves, as the last
described has, between which rises the flower upon as short a foote-stalke,
consisting of six leaves like the former, of a fair purple color on the
outside of the three outer leaves, with three lines or strakes down every
leaf, of a deeper purple color, and on the inside of a paler purple, as the
other three leaves are also, with some chiues tipped with yellow pendents, and a
forked pointell in the middle: the root of this is somewhat bigger then the
former, and rounder, but covered with as thick and as brown a skin: it
flowreth about the same time with the former.

22. Crocus vernus luteus sieve Maesiacus. The yellow Crocus.
The yellow Crocus or Saffron flower, rises up with three or four leaves out
of the ground, being somewhat near the breadth of the great purple kinds,
with a white line in them, as in most of the rest: the flowers stand in the
middle of these leaves, and are very large, of a gold yellow color, with some
chiues, and a forked point in the middle: the seed hereof is of a brighter
color then in any of the other: the root is great and round, as great or
greater then a Wall Nut sometimes, and covered with reddish skins or coats,
yielding more store of flowers then most of the former, and beginning to blow
with the first sorts, or presently after, but outlast many of them, and are of
a pleasant good sent.

Flore aureo.
Of this kind we have some, whose flowers are of a deeper gold yellow color
then others, so that they appear reddish withal.

Flore pallido.
And we have also another sort, whose flowers are very pale, between a white
and a yellow, not differing in any thing else.

Flore viridante luteo.
And another smaller, whose flower has a show of greenness in the yellow, and
more green at the bottom.

23. Crocus vernus flavus striatus. The yellow stripped Crocus.
This kind of yellow stripped Crocus or Saffron flower, rises up with more
store of narrower and greener leaves then the former, and after the leaves are
spread, there rise up many yellow flowers from among them, which are not of so
fair and bright a yellow color, but more dead and sullen, having on the
backside of each of the three outtermost leaves, three small stripes, of an
ouer-worne or dull purple color, with some chiues and a pointell in the
middle: the root of this kind, is very like the root of the former yellow,
but somewhat smaller and shorter, and covered with the like reddish skins,
but a little sadder: it flowreth not so early as the former yellow, but abides
almost as long as it.

24. Crocus vernus luteus versicolor primus. The best cloth of gold Crocus.
The fairest cloth of gold Crocus or Saffron flower, rises up very early, even
with the first, or the first of all other Crocus, with three or four very
narrow and short leaves, of a whiter color then any of the former, which by
and by after do show forth the flowers, rising from among them out of the same
white skin, which includes the leaves, but are not so plentiful as the
former yellow, being but two or three at the most, of a fair gold yellow
color, yet somewhat paler then the first, having on the back of every of the
three outer leaves, three fair and great stripes, of a fair deep purple
color, with some small lines at the sides or edges of those purple stripes; on
the inside of these flowers, there is no sign or show of any line or spot, but
wholly of a fair gold yellow, with chiues and a fethertopt pointell in the
middle: the seed hereof is like the former, but not so red: the root of this
kind is easily known from the root of any other Saffron flower, because the
outer peelings or shells being hard, are as it were netted on the outside,
having certain ribs, rising up higher then the rest of the skins, divided
in the form of a net-worke, of a dark brown color, and is smaller and
rounder then the former yellow, and not increasing so plentifully by the root.

25. Crocus vernus luteus versicolor alter. The second cloth of gold, or Duke
Crocus.
There is no difference either in root, leaf, or color of flower, or time of
flowring in this sort from the last before mentioned; for the flower of this is
of the same bigness and color, the only note of difference is in the marking
of the three outer leaves, which have not three stripes like the former, but
are wholly of the same deep purple color on the back of them, saving that
the edges of them are yellow, which is the form of a Duke Tulipa, and from
thence it took the name of a Duke Crocus.

26. Crocus vernus versicolor pallideluteus. The pale cloth of gold Crocus.
We have a third sort of this kind of cloth of gold Crocus, which has leaves
and flowers like the former, but differs in this, that the color of the
flower is of a paler yellow by much, but stripped in the same manner as the
first, but with a fainter purple color: the root also is netted like them, to
show that this is but a variation of the same kind.

27. Crocus vernus versicolor albidoluteus. The cloth of silver Crocus.
The chiefest note of difference in this Saffron flower is, that being as large
a flower as any of the former of this kind, it is of so pale a yellowish
white, that it is more white then yellow, which some do call a butter color:
the three outer leaves are striped on the back of them, with a paler purple
blew shining color, the bottom of the flower, and the upper part of the
stalk, being of the same purple blew color: the root of this is also netted
as the other, to show it is a variety of the same kind.

And thus much for those Saffron flowers that come in the Spring time; now to
those that flower in Autumn only: and first of the true Saffron.

1. Crocus verus sativus Autumnalis. The true Saffron.
The true Saffron that is used in meats and medicines, shoots out his narrow
long green leaves first, and after a while the flowers in the middle of them
appear about the end of August, in September and October, according to the
soil, and climate where they grow; these flowers are as large as any of the
other former or later sorts, composed of six leaves a piece, of a murrey or
reddish purple color, having a show of blew in them: in the middle of these
flowers there are some small yellow chiues standing upright, which are as
unprofitable, as the chiues in any other of the wild Saffrons, before or
hereafter specified; but besides these, each flower has two, three, or four
greater and longer chiues, hanging down upon or between the leaves, which are
of a fiery red color, and are the true blades of Saffron, which are used
physically or otherwise, and no other: All these blades being picked from the
several flowers, are laid and pressed together into cakes, and afterward
dried very warily on a Kill to preserve them; as they are to be seen in the
shops where they are sold. I never heard that ever it gave seed with any: the
root grows often to be as great, or greater then a green Wall Nut, with the
outer shell on it, covered with a grayish or ash-colored skin, which breaks
into long hairie threeds, otherwise then in any other root of Crocus.

2. Crocus Byzantinus argenteus. The silver colored Autumn Crocus.
This Saffron flower springs up in October, and seldom before, with three or
four short green leaves at the first, but growing longer afterward, and in
the midst of them, presently after they have appeared, one flower for the most
part, and seldom two, consisting of six leaves, the three outermost whereof
are somewhat larger then the other three within, and are of a pale bleake blew
color, almost white, which many call a silver color, the three innermost
being of a purer white, with some yellow chiues in the middle, and a longer
pointell ragged or fethered at the top: this very seldom bears seed, but
when the year falls out to be very mild; it is small, round, and of a
dark color: the root is pretty big, and rounder then any other Crocus,
without any flat bottom, and covered with a dark russet skin.

3. Crocus Pyrenaeus purpureus. The purple mountain Crocus.
This purple Saffron flower of the Autumn, rises up but with one flower
usually, yet sometimes with two one after another, without any leaves at all,
in September, or sometimes in August, standing upon a longer foote-stalke then
any kind of Saffron flower, either of the Spring or Autumn, and is as large
as the flower of the greatest purple Saffron flower of the Spring, of a very
deep Violet purple color, which decays after it has stood blown three or
four days, and becomes more pale, having in the middle some yellow chiues,
and a long fether topt pointell, branched, and rising sometimes above the edges
of the flowers: about a month after the flowers are past, and sometimes not
until the first of the Spring, there rises up three or four long and broad
green leaves, with a white line in every one of them, like unto the first
purple Vernall kinds, which abide until the end of May or June: the root is
small and white on the outside, so like unto the root of the lesser Vernall
purple or white Crocus, that it cannot be distinguished, until about the end
of August, when it does begin to shoot, and then by the early shooting up a
long white sprout for flower, it may be known. I never could observe it to
give any seed, the Winter (as I think) coming on it so quickly after the
flowring, being the cause to hinder it.

4. Crocus montanus Autumnalis. The Autumn mountain Crocus.
The mountain Saffron flower springs up later then any of the former, and
does not appear until the middle or end of October, when all the flowers of
the former are past, appearing first with three or four short green leaves,
like unto the Byzantine Crocus, and afterward the flowers between them, which
are of a pale or bleake blew tending to a purple, the foote-stalkes of them
bring so short, that they scarce appear above ground at the first, but after
two or three days they grow a little higher: the root is very great and flat
bottomed, covered with a grayish duskie coat or skin, and increases very
little or seldom.

The Place.
The several places of these Saffron flowers, are in part set down in their
titles; the others have been found out, some in one Country, and some in
another, as the small purple and white, and stripped white in Spain: the yellow
in Mesia about Belgrade, the great purple in Italy; and now by such friends
helps as have sent them, they prosper as well in our Gardens, as in their
natural places. Yet I must give you this to understand, that some of these
formerly expressed, have been raised up unto us by the sowing of their seed.

The Time.
Their several times are likewise expressed in their descriptions; for some
show forth their pleasant flowers in the Spring, wherein for the three first 1
Crocus vernus luteus vulgaris. The common yellow spring Crocus. 2 Crocus verus
sativus Autumnalis. The true Saffron. 3 Crocus Byzantinus argenteus. The silver
colored Autumn Crocus. 4 Crocus Pyrenaeus purpureus. The purple mountain
Crocus. 5 Crocus montanus Autumnalis. The Autumn mountain Crocus. 6
Sisyrinchium maius. The greater Spanish Nut.
depiction of flowers months, our Gardens are furnished with the variety of
one sort or another: the rest in Autumn, that so they might procure the more
delight, in yielding their beauty both early and late, when scarce any other
flowers are found to adorn them.

The Names.
I shall not need to trouble you with an idle tale of the name of Crocus,
which were to little purpose, nor to reiterate the former names imposed upon
them; let it suffice that the fittest names are given them, that may
distinguish them one from another; only this I must give you to understand,
that the gold yellow Crocus or Saffron flower, is the true Crocus Maesiacus, as
I showed before; and that neither the yellow stripped, or cloth of gold (which
we so call after the Dutch name Gaud Laken) is the true Maesiacus, as some
suppose; and that the great white Saffron flower, by reason of his likeness
unto the gold yellow, is called Crocus albus Maesiaci facie, or facie lutei,
that is, The white Saffron flower that is like the Maesiacus or yellow.

The Virtues.
The true Saffron (for the others are of no use) which we call English
Saffron, is of very great use both for inward and outward diseases, and is very
cordial, used to expel any hurtful or venomous vapors from the heart, both
in the small Pockes, Measels, Plague, Iaundise, and many other diseases, as
also to strengthen and comfort any cold or weak members.

CHAP. XVIII.
Sisyrinchium. The Spanish Nut.
I Can do no otherwise then make a peculiar Chapter of this plant, because it
is neither a Crocus, although in the root it come somewhat near unto that
kind that is netted; but in no other part agreeing with any the delineaments
of a Saffron flower, and therefore could not be thrust into the Chapter amongst
them: neither can I place it in the forefront of the Chapter of the Iris
bulbosa, or bulbous Flowerdeluces, because it does not belong to that Family:
and although the flower thereof does most resemble a Flowerdeluce, yet in that
no other parts thereof do fitly agree thereunto, I have rather chosen to seat
it by it self between them both, as partaking of both natures, and so may
serve in stead of a bridge, to pass from the one to the other, that is, from
the Crocus or Saffron flower, to the Iris bulbosa or bulbous rooted
Flowerdeluce, which shall follow in the next Chapter by themselves.

The Spanish Nut has two long and narrow, soft and smooth green leaves, lying
for the most part upon the ground, and sometimes standing up, yet bending
downwards; between these leaves rises up a small stalk, half a foot high,
having diverse smooth soft green leaves upon it, as if they were skins,
through which the stalk passes; at the top whereof stand diverse flowers,
rising one after another, and not all flowring at once: for seldom shall you
have above one flower blown at a time, each whereof does so quickly pass and
fade away, that one may well say, that it is but one days flower, or rather
the flower of a few hours: the flower it self has nine leaves, like unto a
Flowerdeluce, whereof the three that fall down, have in each of them a yellow
spot: the other three, which in the Flowerdeluces are hollow and ridged,
covering the other three that fall down, in this stand upright, and are parted
at the ends: the three that stand up in the middle are small and short; the
whole flower is smaller then any Flowerdeluce, but of sundry colors; for some
are of an excellent sky color blew, others of a Violet purple, others of a
darker purple color, and some white, and many others mixed, either pale blew
and deep purple, or white and blew mixed or striped together very variably,
quickly fading as I said before: the seed is enclosed in small cods, so thin
and transparent, that one may easily see, and tell the seeds as they lie, which
are of a brownish red color: the root is small, blackish and round, wrapped
in a thick skin or husk, made like unto a net, or somewhat like unto the
root of the cloth of gold Crocus: when the plant is in flower, it is found to
have two roots one above another, whereof the uppermost is firm and sound,
and the undermost loose and spongie, in like manner as is found in the roots
of diverse Orchides or Satyrions, Bee-flowers and the like, and without any good
taste, or sweetness at all, although Clusius says otherwise.

Sisyrinchium Mauritanicum. The Barbary Nut.
There is another of this kind, not differing from the former in any other
notable part, but in the flower, which in this is of a delayed purplish red
color, having in each of the three lower leaves a white spot, in stead of the
yellow in the former, but are as soon fading as they.

The Place.
The former do grow very plentifully in many parts both of Spain and
Portugal, where Guillaume Boel, a Dutch man heretofore remembered often in this
Book, found them; of the sundry colors specified, whereas Clusius makes
mention but of one color that he found.

The other was found in that part of Barbary, where Fez and Morocco do stand,
and brought first into the Lowe-Countries: but they are both very tender, and
will hardly abide the hard Winters of these colder regions.

The Time.
The first flowreth in May and June, the last not until August.

The Names.
The name Sisyrinchium is generally imposed upon this plant, by all authors
that have written thereof, thinking it to be the right Sisyrinchium of
Theophrastus: but concerning the Spanish name Nozelha, which Clusius says it
is called by in Spain, I have been credibly informed by the aforenamed Boel,
that this root is not so called in those parts; but that the small or common
stripped Crocus is called Nozelha, which is sweet in taste, and desired very
greedily by the Shepherds and Children, and that the root of this
Sisyrinchium or Spanish Nut, is without any taste, and is not eaten. And
again, that there is not two kinds, although it grow greater, and with more
flowers, in those places that are near the Sea, where both the washing of the
Sea water, and the moisture and air of the Sea, causes the ground to be more
fertile. This I thought good, from the true relation of a friend, to give the
world to understand, that truth might expel error.

The Virtues.
These have not been known to be used to any Physical purpose, but wholly
neglected, unless some may eat them, as Clusius reports.

CHAP. XIX.
Iris bulbosa. The bulbous Flowerdeluce.
THe Flowerdeluces that have bulbous roots are of two sorts, the one greater
then the other: the greater bearing larger and broader leaves and flowers, and
the lesser narrower. But before I give you the descriptions of the usual
greater kinds, I must needs place one or two in the forefront that have no
fellows; the one is called of Clusius, his broad leafed Flowerdeluce, and the
other a Persian, somewhat like unto it, which although they differ notably from
the rest, yet they have the nearest resemblance unto those greater kinds, that
come next after them.

Iris bulbosa prima latifolia Clusij. Clusius his first great bulbous
Flowerdeluce.
This Flowerdeluce has diverse long and broad leaves, not stiff, like all the
other, but soft and greenish on the vpperside, and whitish underneath; among
which rise up sometimes several small, short, slender stalks, and sometimes
but one, not above half a foot high, bearing at the top one flower a piece,
somewhat like unto a Flowerdeluce, consisting of nine leaves, whereof those
three that stand upright, are shorter and more closed together, then in other
sorts of Flowerdeluces; the other three that fall down, turn up their ends a
little, and those three, that in other Flowerdeluces do cover them at the
bottom, stand like the upright leaves of other Flowerdeluces, but are parted
into two ends, like unto two small ears: the whole flower is of a fair blew,
or pale sky color in most, with a long stripe in the middle of each of the
three falling leaves, and in some white, but more seldom: the root is
reasonable great, round and white, under the blackish coats wherewith it is
covered, having many long thick white roots in stead of fibers, which make
them seem to be Asphodill roots. The flower is very sweet.

Iris bulbosa Persica. The Persian bulbous Flowerdeluce.
This Persian Flowerdeluce is somewhat like unto the former, both in root and
in leaf, but that the leaves are shorter and narrower, and the flower being
much about the same fashion, is of a pale blew russetish color, each of the
three lower falling leaves are almost wholly of a brown purple color, with a
yellow spot in the middle of them: this as it is very rare, so it seldom
bears flowers with us.

The Place.
The first grows in many places of Spain and Portugal, from whence I and
others have often had it for our Gardens, but by reason of the tenderness
thereof, it does hardly endure the sharpness of our cold Winters, unless it
be carefully preserved.

The other is said to come from Persia, and therefore it is so entitled, and
is as tender to be kept as the other.

The Time.
The first flowreth most usually not until May with us, yet many times sooner:
but in January and February, as Clusius says, in the natural places thereof.

The other is as early oftentimes when it does flower with us.

The Names.
Because Clusius by good judgment refers the first to the greater kinds of
Flowerdeluces, and places it in the fore rank, calling it Iris bulbosa
latifolia prima, that is, The first broad leafed Flowerdeluce, and all others
do the like, I have (as you see) in the like manner put it before all the
other, and keep the same name. The Spaniards, as he says, called it Lirio
espadanal, and they of Corduba, Lirios azules.

The other has no other name then as it is in the title.

1. Iris bulbosa mayor sieve Anglica caerulea. The blew English bulbous
Flowerdeluce.
This bulbous Flowerdeluce rises up early, even in January oftentimes, with
five or six long and (narrow, in comparison of any great breadth, but in regard
of the other kind) broad whitish green leaves, crested or straked on the
backside, and half round, the inside being hollow like a trough or gutter,
white all along the inside of the leaf, and blunt at the end; among which
rises up a stiff round stalk, a cubit or two foot high, at the top
whereof, out of a skinnie husk, comes forth one or two flowers, consisting
of nine leaves a piece, three whereof that are turned downwards, are larger
and broader then the other, having in each of them a yellow spot, about the
middle of the leaf, other three are small, hollow, ridged or arched, covering
the lower part next the stalk of those falling leaves, turning up their ends,
which are divided into two parts, other three stand upright, and are very small
at the bottom of them, and broader toward the top: the whole flower is of a
fair blew color; after the flowers are past, come up three square heads,
somewhat long, and lanke, or loose, containing in them round yellowish seed,
which when it is ripe, will rattle by the shaking of the wind in the dry
husks: the root of this kind is greater and longer then any of the smaller
kinds with narrow leaves, covered with diverse brown skins, which seem to
be fraught with long threeds like hairs, especially at the small or upper end
of the root, which thing you shall not find in any of the smaller kinds.

2. Iris bulbosa mayor purpurea and purpur^ violacea. The paler or deeper
purple great bulbous Flowerdeluce.
These purple Flowerdeluces differ not from the last described, either in root
or leaf: the chiefest difference consists in the flowers, which in these are
somewhat larger then in the former, and in the one of a deep blew or Violet
purple color, and in the other of a deep purple color, in all other things
alike.

There is also another, in all other things like unto the former, but only in
the flower, Flore cinereo.
which is of a pale or bleake blew, which we call an ash color.

3. Iris bulbosa mayor purpurea variegata sieve striata. The great purple stripped
bulbous Flowerdeluce.
There is another of the purple kind, whose flower is purple, but with some
veins or stripes of a deeper Violet color, diversely running through the whole
leaves of the flower.

And another of that bleake blew or ash color, Flore cinereo striata purpureo.
Flore purpu^eo orb cinereo.
with lines and veins of purple in the leaves of the flowers, some more or
less then other.

And again another, whose flower is of a purple color like unto the second,
but that round about that yellow spot, in the middle of each of the three
falling leaves (as is usual in all the bulbous Flowerdeluces) there is a
circle of a pale blew or ash color, the rest of the leaf remaining purple, as
the other parts of the flower is.

4. Iris bulbosa mayor flore rubente. The great peach colored bulbous
Flowerdeluce.
There is another of these greater kinds, more rare then any of the former,
not differing in root, leaf, or flower, from the former, but only that the
flower in this is of a pale reddish purple color, coming somewhat near unto
the color of a peach blossom.

5. Iris bulbosa mayor sieve latifolia alba. The great white bulbous
Flowerdeluce.
The great white bulbous Flowerdeluce, rises not up so early out of the ground
as the blew or purple does, but about a month or more after, whose leaves are
somewhat larger, and broader then of the others: the stalk is thicker and
shorter, bearing usually two very large and great flowers, one flowring a
little before the other, yet oftentimes both in flower together in the end, of
a bleake bluish white color, which we call a silver color, while they are
in the budde, and before they be blown open, but then of a purer white, yet
with an eye or show of that silver color remaining in them, the three falling
leaves being very large, and having that yellow spot in the middle of each of
them: the seeds are likewise enclosed in heads, like unto the blew or purple
kinds, but larger, and are of a reddish yellow color like them: the root
likewise is not differing, but greater.

6. Iris bulbosa mayor alba variegata. The great white stripped bulbous
Flowerdeluce.
This white stripped Flowerdeluce, is in root, leaf, and flower, and in manner
of growing, like unto the former white Flowerdeluce; the only difference is in
the marking of the flower, being diverse from it: for this has in the white
flower great veins, stripes, or marks, of a Violet blew color, dispersed
through the leaves of the flower very variably, which adds a superexcellent
beauty to the flower.

7. Iris bulbosa mayor sieve latifolia versicolor. The great party colored
bulbous Flowerdeluce.
There is no difference in this from the former, but in the flower, which is of
a whitish color in the three falling leaves, having a circle of ash color
about the yellow spot, the three rigged leaves being likewise whitish, but
ridged and edged with that ash color, and the three upright leaves of a pale
bluish white color, with some veins therein of a bluish purple.

Varietas.
There has been brought unto us diverse roots of these kinds, with the dried
flowers remaining on them, wherein there has been seen more varieties, then
I can well remember to express, which variety it is very probable, has risen
by the sowing of the seeds, as is truly observed in the narrower leafed kind
of Flowerdeluce, in the Tulipa, and in some other plants.

Flore luteo.
We have heard of one of this kind of broad leafed Flowerdeluces, that should
bear a yellow flower, in the like manner as is to be seen in the narrow
leafed ones: but I have not seen any such, and therefore I dare report no
further of it, until time has discovered the truth or falsehood of the report.

The Place.
Lobelius is the first reporter, that the blew Flowerdeluce or first kind of
these broad leafed Flowerdeluces, grows naturally in the West parts of
England; but I am in some doubt of the truth of that report: for I rather
think, that some in their travels through Spain, or other parts where it
grows, being delighted with the beauty of the flower, did gather the roots,
and bring them over with them, and dwelling in some of the West parts of
England, planted them, and there increasing so plentifully as they do, they
were imparted to many, thereby in time growing common in all Country folks
Gardens thereabouts. They grow also, and all the other, and many more
varieties, about Toulouse, from whence Plantinianus Gassanus both sent and
brought us them, with many other bulbous roots, and rare plants gathered
thereabouts.

1 Iris bulbosa latifolia prima Clusii. Clusius his first great bulbous
Flowerdeluce. 2 Iris bulbosa mayor caerulea sieve Anglica. The great blew or
English bulbous Flowerdeluce. 3 Iris bulbosa mayor purpurea variegata. The
great purple stripped bulbous Flowerdeluce. 4 Iris bulbosa angustifolia mayor
alba. The greater white narrow leafed bulbous Flowerdeluce. 5 Iris bulbosa
angustifolia versicolor. The party colored narrow leafed bulbous Flowerdeluce.
6 Iris bulbosa angustifolia Africana. The purple African bulbous narrow leafed
Flowerdeluce
depiction of flowers

The Time.
These do flower usually in the end of May, or beginning of June, and their
seed is ripe in the end of July or August.

The Names.
Lobel calls the first English blew Flowerdeluce, Hyacinthus Poetarum flore
Iridis, and propter Hyacinthinum colorem, id est violaceum dictus: but I know
not any great good ground for it, more then the very color; for it is neither
of the form of a Lilly, neither has it those mourning marks imprinted in it,
which the Poet faineth to be in his Hyacinth. It is most truly called an
Iris, or Flowerdeluce (and there is great difference between a Lilly and a
Flowerdeluce, for the forms of their flowers) because it answers thereunto
very exactly, for the flower, and is therefore called usually by most, either
Iris bulbosa Anglica, or Iris bulbosa mayor sieve latifolia, for a difference
between it, and the lesser with narrow leaves: In English, either The great
English bulbous Flowerdeluce, or the great broad leafed bulbous Flowerdeluce,
which you will, adding the other name, according to the color.

And thus much for these broad leafed bulbous Flowerdeluces, so much as has
come to our knowledge. Now to the several varieties of the narrow leafed
bulbous Flowerdeluces, so much likewise as we have been acquainted with.

Iris bulbosa minor sieve angustifolia alba. The smaller white or narrow leafed
bulbous Flowerdeluce.
This first Flowerdeluce, which bears the smaller flower of the two white
ones, that are here to be described, springs out of the ground always
before Winter, which after breaks forth into four or five small and narrow
leaves, a foot long or more, of a whitish green on the inside, which is
hollow and chanalled, and of a bluish green color on the outside, and round
withal: the stalk of this kind is longer and slenderer then the former, with
some shorter leaves upon it, at the top whereof, out of short skinny leaves,
stand one or two flowers, smaller, shorter, and rounder then the flowers of the
former broad leafed Flowerdeluces, but made after the same proportion with nine
leaves, three falling downwards, with a yellow spot in the middle, other three
are made like a long arch, which cover the lower part next the stalk of those
falling leaves, and turn up at the ends of them, where they are divided into
two parts: the other three stand upright, between each of the three falling
leaves, being somewhat long and narrow: the flower is wholly (saving the yellow
spot) of a pure white color, yet in some having a show of some blew
throughout, and in others toward the bottom of the three upright leaves:
after the flowers are past, there rise up so many long cods or seed vessels,
as there were flowers, which are longer and smaller then in the former, and a
little bending like a Cornet, with three round squares, and round pointed also,
which dividing it self when the seed is ripe into three parts, do show six
several cells or places, wherein is contained such like round reddish yellow
seeds, but smaller then the former: the root is smaller and shorter then the
former, and without any hairs or threeds, covered with brown thin skins,
and more plentiful in giving increase.

Iris bulbosa anguistifolia alba flore maiore. The greater white narrow leafed
bulbous Flowerdeluce.
I shall not need to make a several description to every one of these
Flowerdeluces that follow, for that were but to make often repetition of one
thing, which being once done, as it is, may well serve to express all the
rest, and but only to add the especial differences, either in leaf or
flower, for bigness, color, or form, as is expedient to express and
distinguish them severally. This greater white bulbous Flowerdeluce is like
unto the last described in all parts, saving that it is a little larger and
higher, both in leaf, stalk, and flower, and much whiter then any of these
mixed sorts that follow, yet not so white as the former: the root hereof is
likewise a little bigger and rounder in the middle.

Albes^ens. Milk white.
There is another, whose falling leaves have a little show of yellowness in
them, and so are the middle ridges of the arched leaves, but the upright leaves
are more white, not differing in root or leaf from the first white.

Argentea. Silver color.
And another, whose falls are of a yellowish white, like the last, the arched
leaves are whiter, and the upright leaves of a bluish white, which we call a
silver color.

Albida. Whitish.
Another has the false yellowish, and sometimes with a little edge of white
about them, and sometimes without; the upright leaves are whitish, as the
arched leaves are, yet the ridge yellower.

Albida labris luteis. White with yellow falls. Albida angustior. The narrow
white.
Another has his false yellow, and the upright leaves white, all these flowers
are about the same bigness with the first.

But we have another, whose flower is smaller, and almost as white as the
second, the lower leaves are small, and do as it were stand outright, not
having almost any fall at all, so that the yellow spot seems to be the whole
leaf, the arched leaves are not half so large as in the former, and the
upright leaves bow themselves in the middle, so that the tops do as it were
meet together.

And another of the same, whose falling leaves are a little more eminent and
yellow, with a yellower spot.

Aurea sieve lutea Hispanica. The Spanish yellow.
We have another kind that is called the Spanish yellow, which rises not up so
high, as ordinarily most of the rest do, and is wholly of a gold yellow color.

Pallide lutea. Straw color.
There is another, that usually rises higher then the former yellow, and is
wholly of a pale yellow, but deeper as the spot.

Albida lutea. Pale Straw color. Mauritanica flaua serotina minor. The small
Barbary yellow. Versicolor Hispanica caerulea labris albis. The party colored
Spanish
There is also another like unto the pale yellow, but that the falling leaves
are whiter then all the rest of the flower.

There is a smaller or dwarf kind, brought from the back parts of Barbary,
near the Sea, like unto the yellow, but smaller and lower, and in stead of
upright leaves, has small short leaves like hairs: it flowreth very late,
after all others have almost given their seed.

We have another sort is called the party colored Spanish bulbous
Flowerdeluce, whose falling leaves are white, the arched leaves of a whitish
silver color, and the upright leaves of a fine bluish purple.

Yet sometimes this does vary; for the falling leaves will have either an edge
of blew, circling the white leaves, the arched leaves being a little blewer,
Diuersitas. The diversity or variation of this flower.
and the upright leaves more purple.

Or the false will be almost wholly blew, edged with a blewer color, the arched
leaves pale blew, and the upright leaves of a purplish blew Violet color.

Or the false white, the arched leaves pale white, as the upright leaves are.

Or not of so fair a bluish purple, as the first sort is.

Some of them also will have larger flowers then others, and be more liberal
in bearing flowers: for the first sort, which is the most ordinary, seldom
bears above one flower on a stalk, yet sometimes two. And of the others
there are some that will bear usually two and three flowers, yet some again
will bear but one. All these kinds smell sweeter then many of the other,
Caerulea sieve purpurea minor Lusitanica praecox. The small early purple
Portugal.
although the most part be without sent.

There is another kind, that is smaller in all the parts thereof then the
former, the stalk is slender, and not so high, bearing at the top one or two
small flowers, all wholly of a fair bluish purple, with a yellow spot in
every one of the three falling leaves, this usually flowreth early, even with
the first bulbous Flowerdeluces.

Purpurea mayor. The greater purple.
We have another purple, whose flower is larger, and stalk higher, and is of a
very reddish purple color, a little above the ground, at the foot or bottom
of the leaves and stalk: this flowreth with the later sort of Flowerdeluces.

Purpurea serotina The late purple.
There is another, whose flower is wholly purple, except the yellow spot, and
flowreth later then any of the other purples.

Purpura rubescens labris caeruleis. A reddish purple with blew falls. Purpura
rubescens labris albido caruleis. A reddish purple with whitish blew falls.
Purpurea labris luteis. Party colored purple and yellow Purpurea labris ex
albido caruleo and luteo mixtis. Party colored purple with stripped yellow falls.
Sub purpurea labris luteis. Pale purple with yellow falls. A paler purple.
Subcaerulea labris luteis. Party colored blew and yellow Cri^is coloris
el^gantioris. A fair hair color. Altera obsoletior. A dull hair color.
There is yet another purple, whose upright leaves are of a reddish purple, and
the falling leaves of a blew color.

And another of a reddish purple, whose falling leaves are of a whitish blew
color, in nothing else differing from the last.

Another has his falling leaves of a fair gold yellow, without any stripe,
yet in some there are veins running through the yellow leaves, and some have
an edge of a sullen dark color about them: the upright leaves in every of
these, are of a Violet purple.

Another is altogether like this last, but that the falling leaves are of a
pale blew and yellow, traversing one the other, and the arched leaves of a pale
purplish color.

Another has his upright leaves of a paler purple, and the falling leaves
yellow.

And another little differing from it, but that the arched leaves are whitish.

Another whose upright leaves are of a pale blew, and the falling leaves yellow.

And another of the same sort, but of a little paler blew.

We have another sort, whose upright leaves are of a fair brownish yellow
color, which some call a Fuille mort, and others an hair color; the falling
leaves yellow.

And another of the same color, but somewhat deader.

Iris bulbosa Africana serpentariae caul. The purple or muricy bulbous Barbary
Flowerdeluce.
This Flowerdeluce as it is more strange (that is, but lately known and
possessed by a few) so it is both more desired, and of more beauty then others.
It is in all respects, of root, leaf, and flower, for the form like unto the
middle sort of these Flowerdeluces, only the lowest part of the leaves and
stalk, for an inch or thereabouts, next unto the ground, are of a reddish
color, spotted with many spots, and the flower, being of a mean size, is of a
deep purplish red or murrey color the whole flower throughout, except the
yellow spot in the middle of the three lower or falling leaves, as is in all
others.

Purpura caerulea obsoleta labris fuscis. The duskie party colored purple.
And lastly, there is another sort, which is the greatest of all these narrow
leafed Flowerdeluces, in all the parts of it; for the root is greater then any
of the other, being thick and short: the leaves are broader and longer, but of
the same color: the stalk is stronger and higher then any of them, bearing
two or three flowers, larger also then any of the rest, whose falling leaves
are of a duskie yellow, and sometimes with veins and borders about the
brimmes, of another dunne color, yet having that yellow spot that is in all:
the arched leaves are of a sullen pale purplish yellow, and the upright leaves
of a dull or duskie bluish purple color: the heads or horns for seed are
likewise greater, and so is the seed also a little.

The Place.
These Flowerdeluces have had their original out of Spain and Portugal, as
it is thought, except those that have risen by the sowing, and those which are
named of Africa.

The Time.
These flower in June, and sometimes abide unto July, but usually not so early
as the former broad leafed kinds, and are soon spoiled with wet in their
flowring.

The Names.
The several names, both in Latin and English, are sufficient for them as
they are set down; for we know no better.

The Virtues.
There is not any thing extant or to be heard, that any of these kinds of
Flowerdeluces has been used to any Physical purposes, and serve only to
deck up the Gardens of the curious.

And thus much for these sorts of bulbous Flowerdeluces, and yet I doubt not,
but that there are many differences, which have risen by the sowing of the
seed, as many may observe from their own labors, for that every year does
show forth some variety that is not seen before. And now I will convert my
discourse a while likewise, to pass through the several ranks of the other
kinds of tuberous rooted Flowerdeluces, called Flagges.

CHAP. XX.
Iris latifolia tuberosa. The Flagge or Flowerdeluce.
THere are two principal kinds of tuberous or knobby rooted Flowerdeluces,
that is, the fall and the dwarf, or the greater and the lesser; the former
called Iris mayor or latifolia, and the other Iris minor, or rather Chamaeiris;
and each of these have their lesser or narrow leafed kinds to be comprehended
under them: Of all which in their order. And first of that Flowerdeluce, which
for his excellent beauty and raritie, deserves the first place.

Iris Chalcedonica sieve Susiana mayor. The great Turkey Flowerdeluce.
The great Turkey Flowerdeluce, has diverse heads of long and broad fresh
green leaves, yet not so broad as many other of those that follow, one folded
within another at the bottom, as all other of these Flowerdeluces are: from
the middle of some one of those heads (for every head of leaves bears not a
flower) rises up a round stiff stalk, two foot high, at the top whereof
stands one flower (for I never observed it to bear two) the largest almost,
but rarest of all the rest, consisting of nine leaves, like the others that
follow, but of the color almost of a Snakes skin, it is so diversely spotted;
for the three lower falling leaves are very large, of a deep or dark purple
color, almost black, full of grayish spots, strakes, and lines through the
whole leaves, with a black thrume or freeze in the middle of each of them: the
three arched leaves that cover them, are of the same dark purple color, yet a
little paler at the sides, the three upper leaves are very large also, and of
the same color with the lower leaves, but a little more lively and fresh,
being speckled and straked with whiter spots and lines; which leaves being laid
in water, will color the water into a Violet color, but if a little Allome be
put therein, and then wrung or pressed, and the juice of these leaves dried in
the shadow, will give a color almost as deep as Indico, and may serve for
shadows in limming excellent well: the flower has no sent that can be
perceived, but is only commendable for the beauty and rarity thereof: it
seldom bears seeds in these cold Countries, but when it does, it is
contained in great heads, being brownish and round, but not so flat as in other
sorts, the roots are more brown on the outside, and growing tuberous thick,
as all other that are kept in Gardens.

Iris Chalcedonica sieve Susiana minor. The lesser Turkey Flowerdeluce.
There is another hereof little differing, but that the leaf is of a more
yellowish green color, and the flower neither so large or fair, nor of so
perspicuous marks and spots, nor the color of that lively (though dark)
luster.

The Place.
These have been sent out of Turkey diverse times among other things, and it
should seem, that they have had their original from about Susis, a chief
City of Persia.

The Time.
They flower in May most usually, before any of the other kinds.

The Names.
They have been sent unto us, and unto diverse other in other parts, from
Constantinople under the name of Alaia Susiana, and thereupon it has been
called, both of them and us, either Iris Chalcedonica, or Susiana, and for
distinction mayor or minor: In English, The Turkey Flowerdeluce, or the Ginnie
Hen Flowerdeluce, the greater or the lesser.

Iris alba Florentina. The white Flowerdeluce.
The great white Flowerdeluce, has many heads of very broad and flat long
leaves, enclosing or folding one within another at the bottom, and after a
little divided one from another toward the top, thin edged, like a sword on
both sides, and thicker in the middle: from the middle of some of these heads
of leaves, rises up a round stiff stalk, two or three foot high, bearing at
the top one, two, or three large flowers, out of several husks or skins,
consisting of nine leaves, as all the other do, of a fair white color, having
in the middle of each of the three falling leaves, a small long yellow frize or
thrume, as is most usual in all the sorts of the following Flowerdeluces, both
of the greater and smaller kinds: after the flowers are past, come the seed,
enclosed in thick short pods, full fraught or stored with red roundish and
flat seed, lying close one upon another: the root is tuberous or knobby,
shooting out from every side such like tuberous heads, lying for the most part
upon or above the ground, and fastened within the ground with long white
strings or fibers, which hold them strongly, and increases fast. Flore pallido.
There is another like unto this last in all things, saving that the color of
the flower is of a more yellowish white, which we usually call a Straw color.

Iris alba mayor Versicolor. The white party colored Flowerdeluce.
This variable Flowerdeluce is like unto the former, but that the leaves are
not so large and broad, the flower hereof is as large almost, and as white as
the former, but it has a fair list or line of a bluish purple down the
back of every one of the three upright leaves, and likewise round about the
edges, both of the upper and lower leaves, and also a little more purplish upon
the ridge of the arched leaves, that cover the falling leaves: the root hereof
is not so great as of the former white, but a little slenderer and browner.

Iris Dalmatica mayor. The great Dalmatian Flowerdeluce.
This greater Flowerdeluce of Dalmatia, has his leaves as large and broad as
any of the Flowerdeluces whatsoever, his stalk and flower do equal his other
proportion, only the color of the flower is differing, being of a fair
watchet or bleake blew color wholly, with the yellow frize or thrum down the
middle of the lower or falling leaves, as before is said to be common to all
these sorts of Flowerdeluces; in all other parts it little differs, saving
only this is observed to have a small show of a purplish red about the bottom
of the green leaves.

Iris purpurea sieve vulgaris. The common purple Flowerdeluce.
This Flowerdeluce, which is most common in Gardens, differs nothing at all
from those that are formerly described, either in root, leaf, or flower for
the form of them, but only that the leaves of this are not so large as the
last, and the flower it self is of a deep purple or Violet color, and
sometimes a little declining to redness, especially in some places.

Sometimes this kind of Flowerdeluce will have flowers of a paler purple
color, Purpurea pallidior versicolor.
coming near unto a blew, and sometimes it will have veins or stripes of a
deeper blew, or purple, or ash color, running through all the upper and lower
leaves.

There is another like unto this, but more purple in the false, Caerulea labris
purpureis.
and more pale in the upright leaves.

Iris Asiatica caerulea. The blew Flowerdeluce of Asia.
This Flowerdeluce of Asia, is in largeness of leaves like unto the Dalmatian,
but bears more store of flowers on several branches, which are of a deeper
blew color, and the arched leaves whitish on the side, and purplish on the
ridges, but in other things like unto it.

There is another near unto this, but that his leaves are a little narrower,
Purpurea.
and his flowers a little more purple, especially the upper leaves.

Iris Damascena. The Flowerdeluce of Damasco.
This is likewise altogether like the Flowerdeluce of Asia, but that it has
some white veins in the upright leaves.

Iris Lusitanica biflora. The Portugal Flowerdeluce.
This Portugal Flowerdeluce is very like the common purple Flowerdeluce, but
that this is not so large in leaves, or flowers, and that it does often flower
twice in a year, that is, both in the Spring, and in the Autumn again, and
besides, the flowers have a better or sweeter sent, but of the like purple or
Violet color as it is, and coming forth out of purplish skins or husks.

Iris Camerarij sieve purpurea versicolor mayor. The greater variable colored
purple Flowerdeluce.
The greater of the variable purple Flowerdeluces, has very broad leaves, like
unto the leaves of the common purple Flowerdeluce, and so is the flower also,
but differing in color, for the three lower leaves are of a deep purple
color tending to redness, the three arched leaves are of the color with the
upper leaves, which are of a pale or bleake color tending to yellowness,
shadowed over with a smoakie purplish color, except the ridges of the arched
leaves, which are of a more lively purple color.

Iris purpurea versicolor minor. The lesser variable purple Flowerdeluce.
This Flowerdeluce differs not in any thing from the last, but only that it
has narrower green leaves, and smaller and narrower flowers, else if they be
both conferred together, the colors will not seem to vary the one from the
other any whit at all.

There is another somewhat near unto these two last kinds, Altera minus
fuliginea.
whose husks from whence the flowers do shoot forth, have purple veins in
them, and to have the falling purplish leaves, and the three upright leaves are
not so smoakie, yet of a dun purple color.

Iris caerulea versicolor. The blew party colored Flowerdeluce.
This party colored Flowerdeluce has his leaves of the same largeness, with
the lesser variable purple Flowerdeluce last described, and his flowers
diversely marked: for some have the false blew at the edges, and whitish at the
bottom, the arched leaves of a yellowish white, and the upright leaves of a
whitish blew, with yellowish edges. Some again are of a darker blew, with
brownish spots in them. And some are so pale a blew, that we may well call it
an ash color: And lastly, there is another of this sort, whose upright leaue^
are of a fair pale blew, with yellowish edges, and the falling leaves parted
into two colors, sometimes equally in the half, each side suitable to the
other in color: And sometimes having the one leaf in that manner: And
sometimes but with a diverse colored list in them; in the other parts both of
flower and leaf, like unto the other.

Iris lutea variegata. The yellow variable Flowerdeluce.
This yellow variable Flowerdeluce loses his leaves in Winter, contrary to all
the former Flowerdeluces, so that his root remains under ground without any
show of leaf upon it: but in the beginning of the Spring it shoots out fair
broad leaves, falling downwards at the points or ends, but shorter many times
then any of the former, and so is the stalk likewise, not rising much above a
foot high, whereon are set two or three large flowers, whose falling leaves
are of a reddish purple color, the three that stand upright of a smoakie
yellow, the arched leaves having their ridges of a bleake color tending to
purple, the sides being of the former smoakie yellow color, with some purplish
veins at the foot or bottom of all the leaves: the root grows somewhat
more slender and long under ground, and of a darker color then many of the
other.

Another sort has the upright leaves of a reasonable fair yellow, and stand
more upright, not bowing down as most of the other, and the purple falls have
pale edges. Some have their green lea^es party colored, Varietas.
white and green, more or less, and so are the husks of the flower, the
arched leaves yellow, as the upright leaves are, with purplish veins at the
bottom. And some have both the arched and upright leaves of so pale a yellow,
that we may almost call it a straw color, but yellower at the bottom, with
purple veins, and the falling leaves purple, with two purple spots in them.

And these are the sorts of the greater tuberous or Flagge Flowerdeluces that
have come to our knowledge: the next hereunto are the lesser or narrow leased
kinds to be described; and first of the greatest of them.

1. Iris angustifolia Tripolitana aurea. The yellow Flowerdeluce of Tripoly.
This Flowerdeluce I place in the forefront of the narrow leafed Flowerdeluces,
for the length of the leaves, compared with the breadth of them; it may fitly
be called a narrow leafed Flowerdeluce, although they be an inch broad, which
is broader then any of them that follow, or some of those are set down before,
but as I said, the length make them seem narrow, and therefore let it take up
his room in this place, with the description that follows. It bears leaves
a yard long, or not much less, and an inch broad, as is said before, or more,
of a sad green color, but not shining: the stalk rises up to be four or
Five foot high, being strong and round, but not very great, bearing at the
top two or three long and narrow gold yellow flowers, of the fashion of the
bulbous Flowerdeluces, as the next to be described is, without any mixture or
variation therein: the heads for seed are three square, containing within them
many flat cornered seeds: the root is long and blackish, like unto the rest
that follow, but greater and fuller.

1 Iris Chalcedonica sieve Susiana mayor. The great Turkey Flowerdeluce. 2 Iris
alba Florentina. The white Flowerdeluce. 3 Iris latifolia variegata. The
variable Flowerdeluce. 4 Chamaeiris latifolia maier. The greater dwarf
Flowerdeluce.
depiction of flowers

2. Iris angustifolia mayor caerulea. The greater blew Flowerdeluce with narrow
leaves.
This kind of Flowerdeluce has his leaves very long and narrow, of a whitish
green color, but neither so long or broad as the last, yet broader, thicker
and stiffer then any of the rest with narrow leaves that follow: the stalk
rises sometimes no higher then the leaves, and sometimes a little higher,
bearing diverse flowers at the top, successively flowring one after another, and
are like unto the flowers of the bulbous Flowerdeluces, but of a light blew
color, and sometimes deeper: after the flowers are past, rise up six cornered
heads, which open into three parts, wherein is contained brown seed, almost
round: the root is small, blackish and hard, spreading into many long heads,
and more closely growing or matting together.

3. Iris angustifolia purpurea marina. The purple narrow leafed Sea
Flowerdeluce.
This Sea Flowerdeluce has many narrow hard leaves as long as the former, and
of a dark green color, which do smell a little strong: the stalk bears
two or three flowers like the former, but somewhat less, and of a dark purple
or Violet color: in seed and root it is like the former.

4. Iris angustifolia purpurea versicolor. The variable purple narrow leafed
Flowerdeluce.
The leaves of this Flowerdeluce are very like the former Sea Flowerdeluce, and
do a little stink like them; the flowers are differing, in that the upper
leaves are wholly purple or violet, and the lower leaves have white veins, and
purple running one among another: the seed and roots differ not from the
former purple Sea kind.

5. Iris angustifolia minor Pannonica sieve versicolor Clusij. The small
variable Hungarian Flowerdeluce of Clusius.
This Hungarian Flowerdeluce (first found out by Clusius, by him described, and
of him took the name) rises up with diverse small tufts of leaves, very long,
narrow, and green, growing thick together, especially if it abide any time in
a place; among which rises up many long round stalks, higher then the leaves,
bearing two or three, or four small flowers, one above another, like the
former, but smaller and of greater beauty: for the lower leaves are variably
striped with white and purple, without any thrume or fringe at all; the upper
leaves are of a bluish fine purple or Violet color, and so are the arched
leaves, yet having the edges a little paler: the heads for seed are smaller,
and not so cornered as the other, containing seeds much like the former, but
smaller: the root is black and small, growing thicker and closer together
then any other, and strongly fastened in the ground, with a number of hard
stringie roots: the flowers are of a reasonable good sent.

6. Iris angustifolia mayor flore duplici. The greater double blew Flowerdeluce.
This Flowerdeluce, differs not either in root or leaf from the first great
blew Flowerdeluce of Clusius, but only in that the leaves grow thicker
together, and that the flowers of this kind are as it were double with many
leaves confusedly set together, without any distinct parts of a Flowerdeluce,
and of a fair blew color with many white veins and lines running in the
leaves; yet oftentimes the stalk of flowers has but two or three small
flowers distinctly set together, rising as it were out of one husk.

7. Iris angustifolia minor alba Clusij. The small white Flowerdeluce of
Hungary.
This likewise differs little from the former Hungarian Flowerdeluce of
Clusius, 1 Iris angustifolia Tripolitana. The yellow Flowerdeluce of Tripoli. 2
Iris angustifolia mayor carulea. The greater blew Flowerdeluce with narrow
leaves. 3 Iris angustifolia minor Pannonica sieve versicolor Clusti. The small
variable Hungarian Flowerdeluce o^ Clusi^s. 4 Iris angustifolia mayor flore
duplici The greater double blew Flowerdeluce. 5 Chamairis angustifolia minor.
The lesser Grass Flowerdeluce. 6 Iris tuberosa. The velvet Flowerdeluce.
depiction of flowers but that the leaf is of a little paler green color,
and the flower is of a fair whitish color, with some purple at the bottom of
the leaves.

Next after these narrow leafed Flowerdeluces, are the greater and smaller
sorts of dwarf kinds to follow; and lastly, the narrow or grass leafed
dwarf kinds, which will finish this Chapter of Flowerdeluces.

1. Chamaeiris latifolia mayor alba. The greater white dwarf Flowerdeluce.
This dwarf Flowerdeluce has his leaves as broad as some of the lesser kinds
last mentioned, but not shorter; the stalk is very short, not above half a
foot high or thereabouts, bearing most commonly but one flower, seldom two,
which are in some of a pure white, in others paler, or somewhat yellowish
through the whole flower, except the yellow frize or thrume in the middle of
every one of the falling leaves: after the flowers are past, come forth great
heads, containing within them round pale seed: the root is small, according to
the proportion of the plant above ground, but made after the fashion of the
greater kinds, with tuberous pieces spreading from the sides, and strong
fibers or strings, whereby they are fastened in the ground.

2. Chamaeiris latifolia mayor purpurea. The greater purple dwarf Flowerdeluce.
There is no difference either in root, leaf, or form of flower in this from
the former dwarf kind, but only in the color of the flower, which in some
is of a very deep or black Violet purple, both the tops and the false: in
others the Violet purple is more lively, and in some the upper leaves are blew,
and the lower leaves purple, yet all of them have that yellow frize or thrume
in the middle of the falling leaves, that the other kinds have.

Altera.
There is another that bears purple flowers, that might be reckoned, for the
smalnesse and shortness of his stalk, to the next kind, but that the flowers
and leaves of this are as large as any of the former kinds of the smaller
Flowerdeluces.

3. Chamaeiris latifolia minor alba. The lesser white dwarf Flowerdeluce.
There is also another sort of these Flowerdeluces, whose leaves and flowers
are less, and wherein there is much variety. The leaves of this kind, are all
for the most part somewhat smaller, narrower, and shorter then the former: the
stalk with the flower upon it scarce rises above the leaves, so that in most
of them it may be rather called a foote-stalke, such as the Saffron flowers
have, and are therefore called of many (...), without stalks; the flowers are
like unto the first described of the dwarf kinds, and of a whitish color,
with a few purplish lines at the bottom of the upper leaves, and a list of
green in the falling leaves.

Strami^^a.
Another has the flowers of a pale yellow, called a Straw color, with whitish
stripes and veins in the false, and purplish lines at the bottom of the upper
leaves.

4. Chamaeiris latifolia minor purpurea. The lesser purple dwarf Flowerdeluce.
The difference of this from the former, consists more in the color then
form of the flower, which is of a deep Violet purple, sometimes paler, and
sometimes so deep, that it almost seems black: And sometimes the false
purplish, and the upper leaves blew. Some of these have a sweet sent, and some
none.

Caerulea.
There is another of a fine pale or delayed blew color throughout the whole
flower.

5. Chamaeiris latifolia minor suaeuerubens. The lesser blush colored dwarf
Flowerdeluce.
This Flowerdeluce has the falling leaves of the flower of a reddish color,
and the thrumes blew: the upper and arched leaves of a fine pale red or flesh
color, called a blush color; in all other things it differs not, and
smells little or nothing at all.

6. Chamaeiris latifolia minor lutea versicolor. The lesser yellow variable
dwarf Flowerdeluce.
The falling leaves of this Flowerdeluce are yellowish, with purple lines from
the middle downwards, sometimes of a deeper, and sometimes of a paler color,
and white thrumes in the middle, the upper leaves are likewise of a yellowish
color, with purple lines in them: And sometimes the yellow color is paler,
and the lines both in the upper and lower leaves of a dull or dead purple
color.

3. Chamaeiris latifolia minor caerulea versicolor. The lesser blew variable
dwarf Flowerdeluce.
The upper leaves of this flower are of a bluish yellow color, spotted with
purple in the broad part, and at the bottom very narrow: the falling leaves
are spread over with pale purplish lines, and a small show of blew about the
brimmes: the thrume is yellow at the bottom, and bluish above: the arched
leaves are of a bluish white, being a little deeper on the ridge.

And sometimes the upper leaves are of a paler blew rather whitish, with the
yellow: both these have no sent at all.

8. Chamaeiris marina purpurea. The purple dwarf Sea Flowerdeluce.
This small Flowerdeluce is like unto the narrow leafed Sea Flowerdeluce before
described, both in root, leaf, and flower, having no other difference, but in
the smalnesse and lowness of the growing, being of the same purple color with
it.

9. Chamaeiris angustifolia mayor. The greater Grass Flowerdeluce.
This Grass Flowerdeluce has many long and narrow dark green leaves, not so
stiff as the former, but lither, and bending their ends down again, among
which rise up diverse stalks, bearing at the top two or three sweet flowers,
as small as any of them set down before, of a reddish purple color, with
whitish yellow and purple strakes down the middle of the falling leaves: the
arched leaves are of a horse flesh color all along the edges, and purple upon
the ridges and tips that turn up again: under these appear three brown
aglets, like unto birds tongues: the three upper leaves are small and narrow,
of a perfect purple or Violet color: the heads for seed have sharper and
harder cornered edges then the former: the seeds are somewhat grayish like the
former, and so are the roots, being small, black, and hard, growing thick
together, fastened in the ground with small blackish hard strings, which hardly
shoot again if the root be removed.

10. Chamaeiris angustifolia minor. The lesser Grass Flowerdeluce.
This Flowerdeluce is in leaves, flowers, and roots so like the last
described, that but only it is smaller and lower, it is not to be
distinguished from the other. And this may suffice for these sorts of
Flowerdeluces, that furnish the Gardens of the curious lovers of these
varieties of nature, so far forth as has passed under our knowledge. There
are some other that may be referred hereunto, but they belong to another
history; and therefore I make no mention of them in this place.

The Place.
The places of most of these are set down in their several titles; for some
are out of Turkey, others out of Hungaria, Dalmatia, Illyria, etc. as their
names do import. Those that grow by the Sea, are found in Spain and France.

The Time.
Some of these do flower in April, some in May, and some not until June.

The Names.
The names expressed are the fittest agreeing unto them, and therefore it is
needless again to repeat them. Many of the roots of the former or greater
kinds, being dried are sweet, yet some more then other, and some have no sent
at all: but above all the rest, that with the white flower, called of Florence,
is accounted of all to be the sweetest root, fit to be used to make sweet
powders, etc. calling it by the name of Orris roots.

Iris tuberosa. The Velvet Flowerdeluce.
Unto the Family of Flowerdeluces, I must needs join this peculiar kind,
because of the near resemblance of the flower, although it differ both in
root and leaf; lest therefore it should have no place, let it take up a room
here in the end of the Flowerdeluces, with this description following. It has
many small and four square leaves, two foot long and above sometimes, of a
grayish green color, stiff at the first, but afterward growing to their
full length, they are weak and bend down to the ground: out of the middle, as
it were of one of these leaves, breaks out the stalk, a foot high and
better, with some leaves thereon, at the top whereof, out of a husk rises
one flower, (I never saw more on a stalk) consisting of nine leaves, whereof
the three that fall down are of a yellowish green color round about the
edges, and in the middle of so deep a purple, that it seems to be black,
resembling black Velvet: the three arched leaves, that cover the lower leaves
to the half, are of the same greenish color that the edges and backside of
the lower leaves are: the three uppermost leaves, if they may be called leaves,
or rather short pieces like ears, are green also, but wherein a glimpse of
purple may be seen in them: after the flower is past, there follows a round
knob or whitish seed vessel, hanging down by a small foote-stalke, from
between the husk, which is divided as it were into two leaves, wherein is
contained round white seed. The root is bunched or knobbed out into long
round roots, like unto fingers, two or three from one piece, one distant from
another, and one longer then another, for the most part of a darkish gray
color, and reddish withal on the outside, and somewhat yellowish within.

The Place.
It has been sent out of Turkey oftentimes (as growing naturally thereabouts)
and not known to grow naturally any where else.

The Time.
It flowreth in April or May, sometimes earlier or later, as the Spring
falls out to be mild or sharp.

The Names.
Matthiolus contendeth to make it the true Hermodactylus, rather from the show
of the roots, which (as is said) are like unto fingers, then from any other
good reason: for the roots hereof either dry or green, do nothing resemble
the true Hermodactyli that are used in Physic, as any that knows them may
easily perceive, either in form or virtue. It is more truly referred to the
Flowerdeluces, and because of the tuberous roots, called Iris tuberosa,
although all the Flowerdeluces in this Chapter have tuberous roots, yet this
much differing from them all. In English it is usually called, The Velvet
Flowerdeluce, because the three falling leaves seem to be like smooth black
Velvet.

The Virtues.
Both the roots and the flowers of the great Flowerdeluces, are of great use
for the purging and cleansing of many inward, as well as outward diseases, as
all Authors in Physic do record. Some have used also the green roots to
cleanse the skin, but they had need to be careful that use them, lest they
take more harm then good by the use of them. The dried roots called Orris (as
is said) is of much use to make sweet powders, or other things to perfume
apparel or linen. The juice or decoction of the green roots does procure
both neezing to be snuft up into the nostrils, and vomiting very strongly being
taken inwardly.

CHAP. XXI.
Gladiolus. Corn Flagge.
NExt unto the Flagges or Flowerdeluces, come the Gladioli or Corn Flagges to
be entreated of, for some resemblance of the leaves with them. There are
hereof diverse sorts, some bigger and some lesser, but the chiefest difference
is in the color of the flowers, and one in the order of the flowers. Of them
all in their several orders.

Gladiolus Narbonensis. The French Corn Flagge.
The French Corn Flagge rises up with three or four broad, long, and stiff
green leaves, one as it were out of the side of another, being joined together
at the bottom, somewhat like unto the leaves of Flowerdeluces, but stiffer,
more full of ribs, and longer then many of them, and sharper pointed: the
stalk rises up from among the leaves, bearing them on it as it rises, having
at the top diverse husks, out of which come the flowers one above another,
all of them turning and opening themselves one way, which are long and gaping,
like unto the flowers of Foxegloue, a little arched or bunching up in the
middle, of a fair reddish purple color, with two white spots within the mouth
thereof, one on each side, made like unto a Lozenge that is square and long
pointed: after the flowers are past, come up round heads or seed vessels,
wherein is contained reddish flat seed, like unto the seed of the
Fritillaria, but thicker and fuller: the root is somewhat great, round, flat,
and hard, with a show as if it were netted, having another short spongie one
under it, which when it has done bearing, and the stalk dry, that the root
may be taken up, sticks close to the bottom, but may be easily taken away,
having usually a number of small roots increased about it, the least whereof
will quickly grow, so that if it be suffered any long time in a Garden, it will
rather choke and pester it, then be an ornament unto it.

Gladiolus Italicus binis floribus ordinibus. The Italian Corn Flagge.
The Italian Corn Flagge is like unto the French in root, leaf, and flower,
without any other difference, then that the root is smaller and browner, the
leaf and stalk of a darker color, and the flowers (being of a little darker
color like the former, and somewhat smaller) stand out on both sides of the
stalk.

Gladiolus Byzantinus. Corn Flagge of Constantinople.
This Corn Flagge that came first from Constantinople, is in all things like
unto the French Corn Flagge last described, but that it is larger, both in
roots, leaves, and flowers, and likewise that the Flowers of this, which stand
not on both sides, are of a deeper red color, and flower later, after all the
rest are past: the root hereof being netted as plainly as any of the former,
is as plentiful also to give increase, but is more tender and less able to
abide our sharp cold Winters.

Gladiolus flore rubente. Blush Corn Flagge.
This blush kind is like unto the French Corn Flagge in all respects, saving
only that the flowers are of a pale red color, tending to whiteness, which
we usually call a blush color.

Gladiolus flore albo. White Corn Flagge.
This white Corn Flagge also differs not from the last, but only that the
roots are whiter on the outside, the leaves are greener, without any
brownnesse or darkness as in the former, and the flowers are snow white.

Gladiolus purpureus minor. The small purple Corn Flagge.
This also differs not from any of the former, but only in the smalnesse
both of leaf, stalk, and flowers, which stand all on the one side, like unto
the French kind, and of the same color: the root of this kind is netted
more then any other.

The Place.
They grow in France and Italy, the least in Spain, and the Byzantine, as it
is thought, about Constantinople, being (as is said) first sent from thence.
John Tradescante assured me, that he saw many acres of ground in Barbary
spread over with them.

The Time.
They all flower in June and July, and the Byzantine latest, as is said before.

The Names.
It has diverse names; for the Latins call it Gladiolus, of the form of a
sword, which the leaf does resemble. The Romans Segetalis, because it grows
in the Corn fields. Some call it Victorialis rotunda, to put a difference
between it, and the longa, which is a kind of Garlic. Pliny says, that
Gladiolus is Cypirus, but to decide that controversy, and many others,
belongs to another discourse, this being intended only for pleasure. Gerrard
mistaketh the French kind for the Italian.

The Virtues.
The root being bruised, and applied with Frankinsense (and often of it self
without it) in the manner of a pultis or plaster, is held of diverse to be
singular good to draw out splinters, thorns, and broken bones out of the
flesh. Some take it to be effectual to stir up Venerie, but I somewhat doubt
thereof: For Galen in his eighth Book of Simples, gives unto it a drawing,
digesting, and drying faculty.

1 Gladiolus Narbonensis. The French Corn Flagge. 2 Gladiolus Italicus. The
Italian Corn Flagge. 3 Gladiolus Byzantinus. Corn Flagge of Constantinople. 4
Palma Christi was. The great male handed Satyrion. 5 Orchis Hermaphroditica
candida. The white Butterfly Orchis. 6 Orchis Melitias sieve apifera. The Be
flower or Be Orchis. 7 Deus Caninus flore purpurante. Dogs tooth Violet with
a pale purplish flower. 8 Deus Caninus flore albo. Dogs tooth Violet with a
white flower.
depiction of flowers

CHAP. XXII.
Orchis sieve Satyrium. Be flowers.
ALthough it is not my purpose in this place, to give a general history of all
the sorrs of Orchides, Satyrions, and the rest of that kind; yet because many
of them are very pleasant to behold, and, if they be planted in a convenient
place, will abide some time in Gardens, so that there is much pleasure taken in
them: I shall intrude some of them for curiosities sake, to make up the
prospect of natures beautiful variety, and only entreat of a few, leaving the
rest to a more ample declaration.

1. Satyrium Basilicum sieve Palma Christi mas. The greater male handed Satyrion.
This handed Satyrion has for the most part but three fair large green
leaves, near unto the ground, spotted with small blackish marks: from among
which rises up a stalk, with some smaller leaves thereon, bearing at the
top a bush or spike of flowers, thick set together, every one whereof is
made like a body, with the belly broader below then above, where it has small
pieces adjoined unto it: the flower is of a fair purple color, spotted with
deeper purple spots, and having small pieces like horns hanging at the backs
of the flowers, and a small leaf at the bottom of the foote-stalke of every
flower: the roots are not round, like the other Orchides, but somewhat long
and flat, like a hand, with small divisions below, hanging down like the
fingers of a hand, cut short off by the knockles, two always growing together,
with some small fibers or strings above the heads of these roots, at the
bottom of the stalk.

2. Satyrium Basilicum sieve Palma Christi faemina. The female handed Satyrion.
This female Satyrion has longer and narrower leaves then the former, and
spotted with more and greater spots, compassing the stalk at the bottom like
the other: this bears likewise a bush of flowers, like unto the other, but
that each of these have heads like hoods, whereas the former have none: in some
they are white with purple spots, and in others of a reddish purple, with deep
or dark colored spots: the roots are alike.

3. Orchis Hermaphroditica candida. The white Butterfly Orchis.
The roots of this kind take part with both the sorts of Orchis and Satyrium,
being neither altogether round, nor fully handed, and thereupon it took the
name, to signify both kinds: the leaves are two in number, seldom more,
being fair and broad, like unto the leaves of Lillies, without any spot at all
in them: at the top of the stalk stand many white flowers, not so thick set
as the first or second, every one being fashioned like unto a white Butterfly,
with the wings spread abroad.

4. Orchis Melitias sieve apifera. The Be flower or Be Orchis.
This is a small and low plant for the most part, with three or four small
narrow leaves at the bottom: the stalk is seldom above half a foot high,
with four or five flowers thereon one above another, having round bodies, and
somewhat flat, of a kind of yellowish color, with purple wings above them, so
like unto an honey Be, that it might soon deceive one that never had seen
such a flower before: the roots are two together, round and white, having a
certain muccilaginesse or clamminesse within them, without any taste almost at
all, as all or the most part of these kinds have.

5. Orchis Sphegodes. Gnats Satyrion.
The leaves of this Orchis are somewhat larger then of the Be flower, the
stalk also somewhat higher: the flowers are fewer on the top, but somewhat
larger then of the Be flowers, made to the resemblance of a Gnat or great long
Fly: the roots are two round bulbes, as the other are.

6. Orchis Myodes. Fly Orchis.
The Fly Orchis is like unto the last described, both in leaf and root, the
difference is in the flower, which is neither so long as the Gnat Satyrion, nor
so great as the Be Orchis, but the nether part of the Fly is black, with a
list of ash color crossing the back, with a show of legs hanging at it: the
natural Fly seems so to be in love with it, that you shall seldom come in
the heat of the day, but you shall find one sitting close thereon.

The Place.
These grow in many places of England, some in the Woods, as the Butterfly,
and the two former handed Satyrions: others on dry banks and barren balkes in
Kent, and many other places.

The Time.
They flower for the most part in the beginning or middle of May, or
thereabouts.

The Names.
Their several names are expressed in their titles, so much as may suffice for
this discourse.

The Virtues.
All the kinds of Orchis are accounted to procure bodily lust, as well the
flowers distilled, as the roots prepared.

The roots boiled in red Wine, and afterward dried, are held to be a
singular good remedy against the bloody Fire.

CHAP. XXIII.
Dens Caninus. Dogs tooth Violet.
Unto the kinds of Orchides, may fitly be joined another plant, which by many
is reckoned to be a Satyrium, both from the form of root and leaf, and from
the efficacy or virtue correspondent thereunto. And although it cannot be the
Satyrium Erythronium of Dioscorides, as some would entitle it, for that as I
have showed before, his Satyrium tryphillum is the Tulipa without all doubt;
yet because it differs very notably, and carries more beauty and respect in
his flower then they, I shall entreat thereof in a Chapter by it self, and
set it next unto them.

Dens Caninus flore albo. Dogs tooth Violet with a white flower.
The white Dogs tooth has for his root a white bulbe, long and small, yet
usually greater then either of the other that follow, bigger below then above,
with a small piece adjoining to the bottom of it, from whence rise up in the
beginning of the Spring, after the Winter frosts are past, two leaves for the
most part (when it will flower, or else but one, and never three together that
ever I saw) closed together when they first come up out of the ground, which
enclose the flower between them: the leaves when they are opened do lay
themselves flat on the ground, or not much above it, one opposite unto the
other, with the stalk and the flower on it standing between them, which
leaves are of a whitish green color, long and narrow, yet broader in the
middle then at both ends, growing less by degrees each way, spotted and
striped all over the leaves with white lines and spots: the stalk rises up
half a foot high or more, bearing at the top one flower and no more,
hanging down the head, larger then any of the other of this kind that follow,
made or consisting of six white long and narrow leaves, turning themselves up
again, after it has felt the comfort of the Sun, that they do almost touch
the stalk again, very like unto the flowers of Cyclamen or Sowebread: it has
in the middle of the flower six white chiues, tipped with dark purple pendents,
and a white three forked style in the middle of them: the flower has no sent
at all, but commendable only for the beauty and form thereof: after the
flower is past, comes in the place a round head seeming three square,
containing therein small and yellowish seed.

Dens Caninus flore purpurascente. Dogs tooth with a pale purple flower.
This other Dogs tooth is like unto the former, but lesser in all parts, the
leaf whereof is not so long, but broad and short, spotted with darker lines
and spots: the flower is like the other, but smaller, and of a delayed purple
color, very pale sometimes, and sometimes a little deeper, turning it self as
the other, with a circle round about the vmbone or middle, the chiues hereof
are not white, but declining to purple: the root is white, and like unto the
former, but lesser, as is said before.

Dens Caninus flore rubro. Dogs tooth with a red flower.
This is in all things like unto the last, both for form and bigness of
flower and leaf: the chief difference consists in this, that the leaves
hereof are of a yellowish mealy green color, spotted and streaked with redder
spots and stripes, and the flower of a deeper reddish purple color, and the
chiues also more purplish then the last, in all other things it is alike.

The Place.
The sorts of Dens Caninus do grow in diverse places; some in Italy on the
Euganean Hills, others on the Apenine, and some about Gratz, the chief City of
Stiria, and also about Bayonne, and in other places.

The Time.
They flower in March most usually, and many times in April, according to the
seasonablenesse of the year.

The Names.
Clusius did call it first Dentali, and Lobel, and from him some others
Satyrium, and Erythronium, but I have said enough hereof in the beginning of
the Chapter. It is most commonly called Dens Caninus, and we in English, either
Dogs tooth, or Dogs tooth Violet. Gesner called it Hermodactylus, and
Matthiolus Pseudohermodactylus.

The Virtues.
The root hereof is held to be of more efficacy for venereous effects, then
any of the Orchides and Satyrions.

They of Stiria use the roots for the falling sickness.

We have had from Virginia a root sent unto us, that we might well judge, by
the form and color thereof being dry, to be either the root of this, or of
an Orchis, which the natural people hold not only to be singular to procure
lust, but hold it as a secret, loath to reveal it.

CHAP. XXIIII.
Cyclamen. Sowebread.
THe likeness of the flowers, and the spotting of the leaves of the Dens
Caninus, with these of the Cyclamen or Sowebread, makes me join it next
thereunto: as also that after the bulbous rooted plants I might begin with the
tuberous that remain, and make this plant the beginning of them. Of this kind
there are diverse sorts, differing both in form of leaves and time of flowring:
for some do flower in the Spring of the year, others afterward in the
beginning of Summer: but the most number in the end of Summer, or beginning of
Autumn or Harvest, whereof some have round leaves, others cornered like unto
Iuie, longer or shorter, greater or smaller. Of them all in order, and first of
those that come in the Spring.

1. Cyclamen Vernum flore purpureo. Purple flowred Sowebread of the Spring.
This Sowebread has a smaller root then most of the others, yet round and
blackish on the outside, as all or most of the rest are (I speak of them that
I have seen; for Clusius and others do report to have had very great ones)
from whence rise up diverse round, yet pointed leaves, and somewhat cornered
withal, green above, and spotted with white spots circlewise about the leaf,
and reddish underneath, which at their first coming up are folded together;
among which come the flowers, of a reddish purple color and very sweet, every
one upon a small, long, and slender reddish foote-stalke, which hanging down
their heads, turn up their leaves again: after the flowers are past, the head
or seed vessel shrinketh down, winding his footestalke, and coyling it self
like a cable, which when it touches the ground, there abides hid among the
leaves, till it be grown great and ripe, wherein are contained a few small
round seeds, which being presently sown, will grow first into round roots,
and afterward from them shoot forth leaves.

2. Cyclamen Vernum flore albo. White flowred Sowebread of the Spring.
The white flowring Sowebread has his leaves like the former, but not fully so
much cornered, bearing small snow white flowers, as sweet as the other: and
herein consists the chiefest difference, in all other things it is alike.

3. Cylamen Vernum Creticum flore albo. White Candy Sowebread of the Spring.
This Sowebread is somewhat like the former white kind, but that the leaves
grow much larger and longer, with more corners at the edges, and more eminent
spots on them: the flowers also somewhat longer and larger, and herein
consists the whole difference.

4. Cyclamen Aestivum. Summer Sowebread.
Summer Sowebread has round leaves like unto the Roman Sowebread, but
somewhat cornered, yet with shorter corners then the Iuie leafed Sowebread,
full of white spots on the vpperside of the leaves, and very purple underneath,
sometimes they have fewer spots, and little or no purple underneath: the
flowers hereof are as small, as purple, and as sweet, as the purple Sowebread
of the Spring time: the root hereof is likewise small, black, and round.

5. Cyclamen Romanum rotundifolium. Roman Sowebread with round leaves.
The Roman Sowebread has round leaves, somewhat like unto the common
Sowebread, but not fully so round pointed at the ends, a little cornered
sometimes also, or as it were indented, with white spots round about the middle
of the leaves, and very conspicuous, which make it seem the more beautiful:
the flowers appear in Autumn, and are shorter, and of a deeper purplish red
color then the Iuie Sowebread, rising up before the leaves for the most part,
or at least with them, and little or nothing sweet: the root is round and
black, usually not so flat as it, but growing sometimes to be greater then
any other kind of Sowebread. There is sometimes some variety to be seen, both
in the leaves and flowers of this kind; for that sometime the leaves have more
corners, and either more or less spotted with white: the flowers likewise of
some are larger or lesser, Varietas.
longer or rounder, paler or deeper colored one then another. This happens
most likely from the sowing of the seed, causing the like variety as is seen
in the Iuie leafed Sowebread. It does also many times happen from the diversity
of soyles and countries where they grow: the seed of this, as of all the rest,
is small and round, contained in such like heads as the former, standing almost
like the head of a Snake that is twined or folded within the body thereof. This
and the other Autumnall kinds, presently after their sowing in Autumn, shoot
forth leaves, and so abide all the Winter, according to their kind.

6. Cyclamen folio hederae autumnale. Iuie leafed Sowebread.
The Iuie leafed Sowebread grows in the same manner that the former does,
that is, brings forth flowers with the leaves sometimes, or most commonly
before them, whose flowers are greater then the common round leafed Sowebread,
somewhat longer then the former Roman or Italian Sowebreads, and of a paler
purple color, almost blush, without that sweet sent as is in the first kind
of the Spring: the green leaves hereof are more long then round, pointed at
the ends, and having also one or two corners on each side, sometimes much
spotted on the vpperside with white spots and marks, and sometimes but a little
or not at all; and so likewise sometimes more or less purple underneath: all
the leaves and flowers do stand usually every one severally by themselves,
upon their own slender foote-stalkes, as most of all the other kinds do:
Varietas.
but sometimes it happens, that both leaves and flowers are found growing
from one and the same stalk, which I rather take to be accidental, then
natural so to continue: the seed hereof is like the former kinds, which
being sown produces variety, both in the form of the leaves, and color and
smell of the flowers: some being paler or deeper, and some more or less sweet
then others: the leaves also, some more or less cornered then others: the root
grows to be great, being round and flat, and of a blackish brown color on
the outside.

7. Cyclamen autumnale hederaefolio flore albo. Iuie leafed Sowebread with
white flowers.
There is one of this kind, whose leaves are rounder, and not so much cornered
as the former, flowring in Autumn as the last does, and whose flowers are
wholly white, not having any other notable difference therein.

8. Cyclamen autumnale angustifolium. Long leafed Sowebread.
This kind of Sowebread may easily be known from all the other kinds,
because his leaf is longer and narrower then others, fashioned at the bottom
thereof with points, somewhat like unto Arum or Wake Robin leaves: the flowers
are like the former sorts for form, but of a purple color. There is also
another of this kind in all things like the former, but that the flowers are
white.

9. Cyclamen Antiochenum Autumnale flore purpureo duplici. Double flowred
Sowebread of Antioch.
This Sowebread of Antioch with double flowers, has his leaves somewhat round,
like unto the leaves of the Summer Sowbread, but with less notches or corners,
and full of white spots on them: it bears flowers on stalks, like unto
others, and likewise some stalks that have two or three flowers on them, which
are very large, with ten or twelve 1 Cyclamen Vernum flore purpureo. Purple
flowred Sowebread of the Spring. 2 Cyclamen astivum. Summer Sowebread. 3 Folium
Cyclaminis Cretici ver^alis flore candido. A leaf of Candie Sowebread. 4
Cyclamen Romanum Autumnale. Roman Sowebread of the Autumn. 5 Cyclamen
hederafolio Autumnale. Iuie leafed Autumn Sowebread. 6 Folium Cyclaminis
Autumnalis flore albo. A leaf of the Autumn Sowebread with a white flower. 7
Folium Cyclaminis angustifolij Autumnalis. A leaf of the long leafed
Sowebread. 8 Cyclamen Antiochenum Autumnale flore amplo purpureo duplici The
double flowred Sowebread of Antioch. 9 Cyclamen vulgar folis r^^undo. The
common round leafed Sowebread.
depiction of flowers leaves a piece, of a fair Peach color, like unto the
flowers of purple Sowebread of the Spring, and deeper at the bottom.

There are of this kind some, whose flowers appear in the Spring, and are as
large and double as the former, but of a pure white color.

There are of these Sowebreads of Antioch, that have but single flowers, some
appearing in the Spring, and others in Autumn.

10. Cyclamen vulgar folio rotundo. The common Sowebread.
The common Sowebread (which is most used in the Apothecaries Shops) has many
leaves spread upon the ground, rising from certain small long heads, that are
on the greater round roots, as usually most of the former sorts do, being in
the like manner folded together, and after spread themselves into round green
leaves, somewhat like unto the leaves of Asarum, but not shining, without any
white spots on the vpperside for the most part, or but very seldom, and
reddish or purplish underneath, and very seldom greener: the flowers stand
upon small foot-stalkes, and show themselves open for the most part, before any
leaves do appear, being smaller and shorter then those with Iuie leaves, and
of a pale purple color, yet sometimes deeper, hanging down their heads, and
turning up their leaves again, as all others do, but more sweet then many
other of the Autumn flowers: after the flowers are past, come the heads
turning or winding themselves down in like manner as the other do, having such
like seed, but somewhat larger, and more uneven, or not so round at the least:
the root is round, and not flat, of a browner color, and not so black on the
outside as many of the others.

The Place.
The Sowebreads of the Spring do both grow on the Pyrenaean Mountains in
Italy, and in Candy, and about Mompelier in France; Antioch in Syria also has
yielded some both of the Spring and Autumn. Those with round and Iuie leaves
grow in diverse places both of France and Italy: and the common in Germany, and
the Lowe-Countries. But that Autumn Sowebread with white flowers, is reported
to grow in the Kingdom of Naples. I have very curiously enquired of many, if
ever they found them in any parts of England, near or farther off from the
places where they dwell: but they have all affirmed, that they never found, or
ever heard of any that have found of any of them. This only they have assured,
that there grows none in the places, where some have reported them to grow.

The Time.
Those of the Spring do flower about the end of April, or beginning of May.
The other of the Summer, about the end of June or in July. The rest some in
August, and September, others in October.

The Names.
The Common Sowebread is called by most Writers in Latin, Panis Poreinus, and
by that name it is known in the Apothecaries shops, as also by the name
Arthanita, according to which name, they have an ointment so called, which is
to be made with the juice hereof. It is also called by diverse other names, not
pertinent for this discourse. The most usual name, whereby it is known to
most Herbarists, is Cyclamen (which is the Greek word) or as some call it
Cyclaminus, adding thereunto their other several titles. In English, Sowebread.

The Virtues.
The leaves and roots are very effectual for the spleen, as the Ointment
before remembered plainly proves, being used for the same purpose, and that to
good effect. It is used also for women in long and hard travels, where there is
danger, to accelerate the birth, either the root or the leaf being applied.
But for any amorous effects, I hold it mere fabulous.

CHAP. XXV.
Anemone. Windeflower and his kinds.
THe next tuberous rooted plants that are to follow (of right in my opinion)
are the Anemones or Windeflowers, and although some tuberous rooted plants,
that is, the Asphodils, Spiderworts, and Flowerdeluces have been before
inserted, it was, both because they were in name or form of flowers suitable to
them whom they were joined unto, and also that they should not be severed and
entreated of in two several places: the rest are now to follow, at the least
so many of them as be beautiful flowers, fit to furnish a Florists Garden, for
natures delightsome varieties and excellencies. To distinguish the Family of
Anemones I may, that is, into the wild kinds, and into the tame or mannured,
as they are called, and both of them noursed up in Gardens; and of them into
those that have broader leaves, and into those that have thinner or more iagged
leaves: and of each of them, into those that bear single flowers, and those
that bear double flowers. But to describe the infinite (as I may so say)
variety of the colors of the flowers, and to give to each his true distinction
and denomination, Hic labor, hoc opus est, it far passes my ability I
confess, and I think would gravel the best experienced this day in Europe
(and the like I said concerning Tulipas, it being as contingent to this plant,
as is before said of the Tulipa, to be without end in yielding varieties:) for
who can see all the varieties that have sprung from the sowing of the seed in
all places, seeing the variety of colors risen from thence, is according to
the variety of airs and grounds wherein they are sown, skill also helping
nature in ordering them aright. For the seed of one and the same plant sown
in diverse airs and grounds, do produce that variety of colors that is much
differing one from another; who then can display all the mixtures of colors in
them, to set them down in so small a room as this Book? Yet as I have done
(in the former part of this Treatise) my good will, to express as many of each
kind have come to my knowledge, so if I endeavor the like in this, I hope the
courteous will accept it, and hold me excused for the rest: otherwise, if I were
or could be absolute, I should take from my self and others the hope of future
augmentation, or addition of any new, which never will be wanting. To begin
therefore with the wild kinds (as they are so accounted) I shall first
entreat of the Pulsatillas or Pasque flowers, which are certainly kinds of
wild Anemones, both in leaf and flower, as may well be discerned by them that
are judicious (although some learned men have not so thought, as appears by
their writings) the roots of them making one special note of difference, from
the other sorts of wild Anemones.

1. Pulsatilla Anglica purpurea. The purple Pasque flower.
The Pasque or Pass flower which is of our own Country, has many leaves
lying on the ground, somewhat rough or hairie, hard in feeling, and finely cut
into many small leaves, of a dark green color, almost like the leaves of
Carrets, but finer and smaller, from among which rise up naked stalks, rough
or hairie also, set about the middle thereof with some small divided leaves
compassing them, and rising above these leaves about a spanne, bearing every
one of them one pendulous flower, made of six leaves, of a fine Violet purple
color, but somewhat deep withal, in the middle whereof stand many yellow
threeds, set about a middle purple pointell: after the flower is past, there
comes up in the stead thereof a bushie head of long seeds, which are small
and hoarie, having at the end of every one a small hair, which is gray
likewise: the root is small and long, growing downwards into the ground, with
a tuft of hair at the head thereof, and not lying or running under the upper
crust thereof, as the other wild Anemones do.

2. Pulsatilla Danica. The Pass flower of Denmark.
There is another that was brought out of Denmark, very like unto the former,
but that it is larger both in root and leaf, and flower also, which is of a
fairer purple color, not so deep, and besides, will better abide to be
mannured then our English kind will, as my self have often proved.

Vtriusque flore albo and flore duplici.
Of both these sorts it is said, that some plants have bin found, that have
borne white flowers. And likewise one that bore double flowers, that is, with
two rows of leaves.

3. Pulsatilla flore rubro. The red Pass flower.
Lobel, as I take it, did first set forth this kind, being brought him from
Syria, the leaves whereof are finer cut, the flower smaller, and with longer
leaves, and of a red color.

4. Pulsatilla flore luteo. The yellow Pass flower.
The yellow Pass flower has his leaves cut and divided, very like unto the
leaves of the first kind, but somewhat more hairie, green on the vpperside,
and hairie underneath: the stalk is round and hoary, the middle whereof is
beser with some small leaves, as in the other, from among which rises up the
stalk of the flower, consisting of six leaves of a very fair yellow color on
the inside, and of a hoary pale yellow on the outside; after which follows
such an head of hairie thrummes as in the former: the root is of the bigness
of a man's finger.

5. Pulsatilla flore albo. The white Pass flower.
The white Pass flower (which Clusius makes a kind of Anemone, and yet as
he says himself, does more nearely resemble the Pulsatilla) has, from
amongst a tuft or head of hairs, which grow at the top of a long black
root, many leaves standing upon long stalks, which are divided as it were
into three wings or parts, and each part finely cut and divided, like unto the
Pass flower of Denmark, but somewhat harder in handling, greenish on the
vpperside, and somewhat gray underneath, and very hairie all over: among these
leaves rise up the stalks, beset at the middle of them with three leaves, as
finely cut and divided as those below, from above which stands the flower,
being smaller, and not so pendulous as the former, but in the like manner
consisting of six leaves, of a snow white color on the inside, and a little
browner on the outside, with many yellow thrums in the middle: after the flower
is past, rises up such a like hoary head, composed as it were of many hairs,
each whereof has a small seed fastened unto it, like as the former Pass
flowers have.

The Place.
The first is found in many places of England, upon dry banks that lie open to
the Sun.

The second was first brought, as I take it, by Doctor Lobel from Denmark, and
is one of the two kinds, that Clusius says are common in Germany, this
bearing a paler purple flower, and more early then the other, which is the same
with our English, whose flower is so dark, that it almost seems black.

The red kind, as Lobel says, came from Syria.

The yellow Pass flower, which Clusius makes his third wild Anemone, was
found very plentifully growing at the foot of St. Bernards Hill, near unto
the Cantons of the Switzers.

The white one grows on the Alps near Austria, in France likewise, and
other places.

1 Pulsatilla purpurea cum folio, semine, and radice. The purple Pasque flower
with leaf, seed, and root. 2 Pulsatilla luteo flore. The yellow Pasque flower.
3 Pulsatilla rubro Syriaca Lobelij Red Pasque flower of Lobel. 4 Pulsatilla
rubra Swertij Swertz his red Pasque flower. 5 Pulsatilla flore albo. White
Pasque flower. 6 Anemone siluestris alba Matthioli. The wild white broad
leafed Windflower. 7 Anemone siluestris tenuifolia alba. The wild single white
Windflower 8 Anemone siluestris tenuifolia lutea. The yellow wild thin leafed
Windflower. 9 Anemone siluestris trifolia Dodonaei. The three-leafed wild
Windflower. 10 Anemone siluestris flore pleno albo. The double white wild
Windflower. 11 Anemone siluestris flore pleno purpureo. The double purple wild
Windflower. * Semen separatim divulsum. The seed separated. Radix cum folio
inferiore. The root with a lower leaf.
depiction of flowers

The Time.
All of them do flower early in the year, that is, in the beginning of
April, about which time most commonly Easter does fall.

The Names.
Their proper names are given to each in their several titles, being all of
them kinds of wild Anemones, as I said in the beginning of the Chapter, and
so for the most part all Authors do acknowledge them. We call them in English,
because they flower about Easter, Pasque Flower, which is the French name for
Easter, or Euphoniae gratia, Pass Flower, which may pass current, without any
further descant on the name, or else Pulsatilla, if you will, being grown old
by custom.

The Virtues.
The sharp biting and exulcerating quality of this plant, causes it to be of
little use, notwithstanding Ioachimus Camerarius says in his Hortus Medicus,
that in Borussia, which is a place in Italy, as I take it, the distilled water
hereof is used with good success, to be given to them that are troubled with a
Tertian Ague; for he says that it is medicamentum (...), that is, a medicine
of force to help obstructions.

Anemone siluestris latifolia alba sieve tertia Matthioli. The white wild broad
leafed Windflower.
This Windflower has diverse broad green leaves, cut into divisions, and
dented about, very like unto a broad leafed Crowfoote, among which rises up a
stalk, having some such like cut leaves in the middle thereof, as grow below,
but smaller; on the top whereof stands one large white flower, consisting
of five leaves for the most part, with some yellow threads in the middle,
standing about such a green head as is in the tame or garden Anemones, which
growing greater after the flower is past, is composed of many small seeds,
wrapped in white wool, which as soon as they are ripe, raise themselves up
from the bottom of the head, and fly away with the wind, as the other tame
or garden kinds do: the root is made of a number of long black strings,
increasing very much by running underground, and shooting up in diverse places.

Anemone siluestris tenuifolia lutea. The yellow wild thin leafed Windflower.
The yellow wild Anemone rises up with one or two small round naked stalks,
bearing about the middle of them, small, soft, and tender iagged leaves, deeply
cut in and indented on the edges about, from above which does grow the stalk,
bearing small yellow flowers, standing upon weak foote-stalkes, like unto a
small Crowfoot, with some threads in the middle: the root is long and small,
somewhat like unto the root of Pollipodie, creeping under the upper crust of
the earth: this kind is lower, and springs somewhat earlier then the other
wild kinds that follow.

Anemone siluestris tenuifolia alba simplex. The single white thin leafed wild
Windflower.
This white wild Anemone rises up with diverse leaves upon several long
stalks; which are somewhat like unto the former, but that they are somewhat
harder, and not so long, nor the divisions of the leaves so finely snipt about
the edges, but a little broader, and deeper cut in on every side: the flowers
hereof are larger and broader then the former, white on the inside, and a
little purplish on the outside, especially at the bottom of the flower next
unto the stalk: the root of this is very like unto the last.

There is another of this kind, whose flowers are purple, Purpurea.
in all other things it is like unto the white.

And likewise another, with a blush or carnation colored flower. Coccinea sieve
suaue rubens.


There is one that is only nursed up with us in Gardens, that is somewhat like
unto these former wild Anemones in root and leaf, but that the flower of
this, being pure white within, and a little purplish without, Peregrina alba.
consisting of eight or nine small round pointed leaves, has sometimes some
leaves under the flower, party colored white and green: the flower has
likewise a green head, like a Strawberry, compassed about with white threads,
tipped with yellow pendents.

And another of the same kind with the last, Peregrina viridis.
whose flower consisting of eight o^ nine leaves, is of a greenish color,
except the four outermost leaves, which are a little purplish, and divided at
the points into three parts; the middle part is of a greenish white color,
with a green head in the middle as the other.

Anemone siluestris trifolia Dodonaei. The three leafed wild Windflower.
This wild Anemone has his roots very like unto the former kinds; the
leaves are always three set together at the top of slender stalks, being
small and indented about, very like unto a three leafed Grass, but smaller:
the flower consists of eight small leaves, somewhat like unto a Crowfoote,
but of a whitish purple or blush color, with some white threads, and a green
rough head in the middle.

Anemone siluestris flore pleno albo. The double white wild Windflower.
This double kind is very like unto the single white kind before described,
both in his long running roots, and thin leaves, but somewhat larger: the
flowers hereof are very thick and double, although they be small, and of a
faint sweet sent, very white after it is full blown for five or six days,
but afterward it becomes a little purplish on the inside, but more on the
outside: this never gives seed (although it have a small head in the middle)
like as many other double flowers do.

Anemone siluestris flore pleno purpureo. The double purple wild Windflower.
This double purple kind has such like iagged leaves as the last described
has, but more hoarie underneath: the flower is of a fine light purple toward
the points of the leaves, the bottomes being of a deeper purple, but as thick,
and full of leaves as the former, with a green head in the middle, like unto
the former: this kind has small green leaves on the stalks under the
flowers, cut and divided like the lower leaves.

The Place.
The first broad leafed Anemone grows in diverse places of Austria and
Hungary. The yellow in diverse woods in Germany, but not in this Country that
ever I could learn. The other single wild kinds, some of them are very
frequent throughout the most places of England, in Woods, Groves, and Orchards.
The double kinds were found, as Clusius says, in the Lowe-Countries, in a
Wood near Louaine.

The Time.
They flower from the end of March (that is the earliest) and the beginning of
April, until May, and the double kinds begin within a while after the single
kinds are past.

The Names.
They are called Ranunculi siluarum, and Ranunculi nemorum, and as Clusius
would have them, Leimonia of Theophrastus; they are generally called of most
Herbarists Anemones siluestres, Wild Anemones or Windflowers. The Italians
call them Gengeuo salnatico, that is, Wild Ginger, because the roots are,
besides the form, being somewhat like small Ginger, of a biting hot and sharp
taste.

Anemone Lusitanica sieve hortensis latifolia flore simplici luteo. The single
Garden yellow Windflower or Anemone.
This single yellow Anemone or Windflower has diverse broad round leaves,
somewhat divided and endented withal on the edges, brownish at the first
rising up out of the ground, and almost folded together, and after of a sad
green on the vpperside, and reddish underneath; among which rise up small
slender stalks, beset at the middle of them with two or three leaves, more cut
and divided then those below, with small yellow flowers at the top of them,
consisting of ten or twelve leaves a piece, having a few yellow threads in the
middle of them, standing about a small green head, which in time growing ripe
has small flat seed, enclosed within a soft wool or down, which is easily
blown away with the wind: the root grows downward into the ground,
diversely spread with branches here and there, of a brownish yellow on the
outside, and whitish within, so brittle, that it can hardly be touched without
breaking.

Anemone latifolia flore luteo duplici. The double yellow Anemone or Windflower.
This double yellow Anemone has such broad round leaves as the single kind
has, but somewhat larger or ranker: the stalks are beset with larger leaves,
more deeply cut in on the edges: the flowers are of a more pale yellow, with
some purplish veins on the outside, and a little round pointed; but they are
all on the inside of a fair yellow color, consisting of two rows of leaves,
whereof the innermost is the narrower, with a small green head in the middle,
compassed with yellow threads as in the former: the root is like the root of
the single; neither of these have any good sent, and this springs up and
flowreth later then the single kind.

Anemone latifolia purpurea stellata sieve papaveracea. The purple Star
Anemone or Windflower.
The first leaves of this purple Anemone, which always spring up before
Winter, (if the root be not kept too long out of the ground,) are somewhat
like the leaves of Sanicle or Selfe-heale, but the rest that follow are more
deeply cut in and iagged; among which rise up diverse round stalks, beset with
iagged leaves as all other Anemones are, above which leaves, the stalks rising
two or three inches high, bear one flower a piece, composed of twelve leaves
or more, narrow and pointed, of a bleake purple or whitish ash color, somewhat
shining on the outside, and of a fine purple color tending to a murrey on the
inside, with many blackish blew threads or thrummes in the middle of the
flower, set about a head, whereon grows the seed, which is small and black,
enclosed in soft wool or down, which flies away with the wind, carrying the
seed with it, if it be not carefully gathered: the root is blackish on the
outside, and white within, tuberous or knobby, with many fibers growing at it.

Anemone purpurea Stellata altera. Another purple Star Anemone.
There is so great diversity in the colors of the flowers of these broad
leafed kinds of Anemones or Windflowers, that they can very hardly be
expressed, although in their leaves there is but little or no difference. I
shall not need therefore to make several descriptions of every one that shall
be set down; but it will be sufficient, I think, to give you the distinctions
of the flowers: for as I said, therein is the greatest and chiefest difference.
This other Star Anemone differs not from the former in leaf or flower, but
only that this is of a more pale sullen color on the outside, and of a paler
purple color on the inside.

1 Anemone latifolia flore luteo simplici. The single yellow Anemone. 2 Anemone
latifolia flore luteo duplici. The double yellow Anemone. 3 Anemone latifolia
flore purpureo Stellaeto. The purple Star Anemone. 4 Anemone latifolia
purpurea dilutior. The pale purple Star Anemone. 5 Anemone latifolia flore
miniate dilut^. The pale red Anemone. 6 Anemone latifolia coccinea Cardinalis
dicta. The Cardinal Anemone. 7 Anemone latifolia incarnata Hispanica. The
Spanish incarnate Anemone. 8 Anemone latifolia Pa^o simplex dicta. The lesser
Orange tawney Anemone. 9 Anemone latifolia flore carneo. The carnation Anemone.
10 Anemone latifolia Arantiaca sieve Pauo mayor. The double Orange tawney
Anemone. 11 Anemone Superitica sieve Cyparissia. The double Anemone of Cyprus.
12 Anemone latifolia flore pleno albicante. The double pale blush Anemone. 13
Anemone Chalcedonica maxima. The great Spanish Marigold Anemone. 14 Anemone
Ca^umeni sieve Perfica. The double Persian Anemone. ^ Anemon^ latifolia ra^. The
root of a great Anemone.
depiction of flowers

Viola purpurea
There is another, whose flower has eight leaves, as many of them that follow
have (although diverse sorts have but six leaves in a flower) and is of a Violet
purple, and therefore is called, The Violet purple Anemone.

Varietas.
Of all these three sorts last described, there be other that differ only in
having white bottomes, some smaller and some larger.

Purpurea striata.
There is also another of the same Violet purple color with the former, but a
little paler, tending more to redness, whose flowers have many white lines and
stripes through the leaves, and is called, The purple stripped Anemone.

Carnea vivacissima simplex.
There is another, whose green leaves are somewhat larger, and so is the flower
likewise, consisting of eight leaves, and sometimes of more, of the color of
Carnation silk, sometimes pale and sometimes deeper, with a whitish circle
about the bottom of the leaves, which circle in some is larger, and more to be
seen then in others, when the flower lays it self open with the heat of
the Sun, having bluish threads in the middle. This may be called, the
Carnation Anemone,

Perficiviolacea.
We have another, whose flower is between a Peach color and a Violet, which is
usually called a Gredeline color.

Cochenille.
And another of a fine reddish Violet or purple, which we call, The Cochenille
Anemone.

Cardinalis.
And another of a rich crimson red color, and may be called, The Cardinal
Anemone.

Sanguinea.
Another of a deeper, but not so lively a red, called, The blood red Anemone.

Cramesina.
Another of an ordinary crimson color, called, The crimson Anemone.

Coccinea.
Another of a Stamell color, near unto a Scarlet.

Incarnata.
Another of a fine delayed red or flesh color, and may be called, The
Incarnadine Anemone.

Incarnata Hispanica.
Another whose flower is of a lively flesh color, shadowed with yellow, and may
be called, The Spanish Incarnate Anemone.

Rubescens.
Another of a fair whitish red, which we call, The Blush Anemone.

Moschutella.
Another whose flower consists of eight leaves, of a dark whitish color,
stripped all over with veins of a fine blush color, the bottomes being white,
this may be called, The Nutmegge Anemone.

Enfumata.
Another whose flower is of a pale whitish color, tending to a gray, such as
the Monks and Friars were wont to wear with us, and is called, A Monks gray.

Pauo mayor simplici flore.
There is another, whose leaf is somewhat broader then many or most of the
Anemones, coming near unto the leaf of the great double Orange colored
Anemone; the flower whereof is single, consisting of eight large or broad
leaves, very near unto the same Orange color, that is in the double flower
hereafter described, but somewhat deeper. This is usually called in Latin,
Pauo mayor simplici flore, and we in English, The great single Orange tawnie
Anemone.

Pauo minor.
There is likewise of this kind another, whose flower is lesser, and called,
The lesser Orange tawnie Anemone.

Varietas magna ex seminio.
There is besides these expressed, so great a variety of mixed colors in the
flowers of this kind of Anemone with broad leaves, arising every year from
the sowing of the seed of some of the choicest and fittest for that purpose,
that it is wonderful to observe, not only the variety of single colors, but
the mixture of two or three colors in one flower, besides the diversity of the
bottomes of the flowers, some having white or yellowish bottomes, and some
none, and yet both of the same color; and likewise in the thrums or threads in
the middle: But the greatest wonder of beauty is in variety of double flowers,
that arise from among the other single ones, some having two or three rows of
leaves in the flowers, and some so thick of leaves as a double Marigold, or
double Crowfoote, and of the same several colors that are in the single
flowers, that it is almost impossible to express them severally, and (as is
said before) some falling out to be double in one year, which will prove
single or less double in another, yet very many abiding constant double as at
the first; and therefore let this brief recital be sufficient in stead of a
particular of all the colors.

Anemone Chalcedonica maxima versicolor. The great double Windflower of
Constantinople.
This great Anemone of Constantinople has broader and greener leaves then any
of the former kinds, and not so much divided or cut in at the edges, among
which rise up one or two stalks, (seldom more from one root) having some
leaves about the middle of the stalk, as other Anemones have, and bearing at
the tops of the stalks one large flower a piece, very double, whose
outermost leaves being broadest, are greenish at the first, but afterward red,
having sometimes some green abiding still in the leaves, and the red striped
through it: the other leaves which are within these are smaller, and of a
perfect red color; the innermost being smallest, are of the same red color,
but turned somewhat inward, having no thrummes or threads in the middle, as the
former have, and bearing no seed: the root is blackish on the outside, and
white within, thick and tuberous as the other kinds, but thicker set and
close together, not shooting any long slender roots as others do. Some
Gentlewomen call this Anemone, The Spanish Marigold.

Anemone Chalcedonica altera sieve Pano mayor flore duplici. The great double
Orange tawney Anemone.
This other great Anemone of Constantinople has his large leaves so like unto
the last, that one can hardly distinguish them asunder; the stalk has also
such like leaves set upon it, bearing at the top a fair large flower,
consisting of many leaves set in two or three rows at the most, but not so
thick or double as the last, yet seeming to be but one thick row of many
small and long leaves, of an excellent red or crimson color, wherein some
yellow is mixed, which makes that color is called an Orange tawney; the
bottomes of the leaves are red, compassed with a whitish circle, the thrummie
head in the middle being beset with many dark blackish threads: the root is
like the former.

Anemone Superitica sieve Cyparissia. The double Anemone of Cyprus.
This Anemone (which the Dutchmen call Superitz, and as I have been informed,
came from the Isle of Cyprus) has leaves very like the last double Anemone,
but not altogether so large: the flower consists of smaller leaves, of color
very near unto the last double Orange colored Anemone, but more thick of
leaves, and as double as the first, although not so great a flower, without any
head in the middle, or thrums about it as is in the last, and differs not in
the root from either of them both.

Somewhat like unto this kind, or as it were between this and the first kind
of these great double Anemones, we have diverse other sorts, bearing flowers
very thick and double; some of them being white, or whitish, or purple, deeper
or paler, and some of a reddish color tending to Scarlet or a Carnation
color, and some also of a blush or flesh color, and diverse other colors, and
all of them continue constant in their colors.

Anemone Cacumeni Maringi sieve Persica. The double Persian Anemone.
This rare Anemone, which is said to come out of Persia to Constantinople, and
from thence to us, is in leaf and root very like unto the former double
Anemones before described; only the flower hereof is rather like unto the
second great double Orange colored Anemone, usually called Pauo mayor flore
pleno, being composed of three rows of leaves, the outtermost row consisting
of ten or twelve larger leaves, and those more inward lesser and more in
number, but all of them variably mixed with white, red, and yellow, having the
bottomes of the leaves white: but instead of a middle head with thrums about
it, as the other has, this has a few narrow leaves, of a deep yellow color
in the middle of the flower, standing upright.

Having thus far proceeded in the two parts of the kinds of Anemones or
Windflowers, it remains to entreat of the rest, which is those Anemones
which have thin cut leaves, whereof some have reckoned up thirty sorts with
single flowers, which I confess I have not seen; but so many as have come to
my knowledge, I shall here set down.

Anemone tenuifolia sieve Geranifolia caerulea. The Watchet Anemone or Storkes
bill leafed Windflower.
This first Windflower with thin cut leaves, rises not out of the ground until
the great Winter frost be past, that is, about the middle or end of February,
and are somewhat brownis^ ^t their first appearing, but afterward spread into
wings of green leaves, som^what broader then the rest that follow, divided
into three parts, and each part into ^ree leaves, every one cut in about the
edges, one standing against another upon a long slender foote-stalke, and the
end leaf by it self: among these rises up two or three green stalks,
garnished with such like thin leaves as are at the bottom, from above which
rise the flowers, but one upon a stalk, consisting of fourteen or fifteen
small pale blew or watchet leaves, lesser then any of the single kinds that
follow, compassing many whitish threads, and a small green head in the middle,
somewhat like the head of the wild Crowfoote, wherein is contained such like
seed: the root is blackish without, thrusting out into long tuberous pieces,
somewhat like unto some of the broad leafed Anemones.

Alba.
Of this kind there is another, whose leaves are not brown at their first
rising, but green, and the flowers are white, in other things not differing.

Anemone tenuifolia purpurea vulgaris. The ordinary purple Anemone with thin
leaves.
This purple Anemone which is most common, and therefore the less regarded,
has many winged leaves standing upon several stalks, cut and divided into
diverse leaves, much like unto the leaves of a Carrot; among which rise up
stalks with some leaves thereon (as is usual to the whole Family of Anemones,
both wild and tame, as is before said;) at the tops whereof stand the
flowers, made of six leaves most usually, but sometimes they will have seven or
eight, being very large, and of a perfect purple Violet color, very fair and
lively: the middle head has many blackish thrums or threads about it, which I
could never observe in my Gardens to bear seed: the root is smaller, and more
spreading every way into small long flat tuberous parts, then any other kinds
of single or double Anemones.

Carnea pallida.
There is another very like in leaf and root unto the former, but the flower
is nothing so large, and is whitish, tending to a blush color, and of a deeper
blush color toward the bottom of the flower, with blackish blew thrums in the
middle, and gives no seed that I could ever observe.

Carnea viuida vnguibus albis.
There is likewise another like unto the last in leaf and flower, but that the
flower is larger then it, and is of a lively blush color, the leaves having
white bottomes.

Alba venis purpureis.
And another, whose flower is white, with purple colored veins and stripes
through every leaf, and is a lesser flower then the other.

Anemone tenuifolia coccinea simplex. The single Scarlet Anemone with thin
leaves.
The leaves of this Scarlet Windflower are somewhat like unto the former, but a
little broader, and not so finely cut and divided: the flower consists of six
reasonable large leaves, of an excellent red color, which we call a Scarlet;
the bottomes of the leaves are large and white, and the thrums or threads in
the middle of a blackish purple color: the root is tuberous, but consisting
of thicker pieces, somewhat like unto the roots of the broad leafed Anemones,
but somewhat brown, and not so black, and most like unto the root of the
double Scarlet Anemone.

Coccinea absque vnguibus.
There is another of this kind, whose flower is near unto the same color, but
this has no white bottomes at all in his leaves.

F^o^^ h^losericeo.
We have another which has as large a flower as any single, and is of an Orient
deep red crimson Velvet color.

Sanguinea.
There is another of a deeper red color, and is called, The blood red single
Anemone.

Rubra fundo luteo. Coccinea dilutior.
And another, whose flower is red with the bottomes yellow.

Another of a perfect crimson color, whereof some have round pointed leaves,
and others sharp pointed, and some a little lighter or deeper then others.

Alba staminibus purpureis.
There is also one, whose flower is pure white with bluish purple thrums in the
middle.

Carnea Hispanica.
And another, whose flower is very great, of a kind of sullen blush color, but
yet pleasant, with bluish threads in the middle.

Alba carneis venis. Alba purpureis vnguibus.
And another with blush veins in every leaf of the white flower.

And another, the flower whereof is white, the bottomes of the leaves being
purple.

Purpurascens.
Another whose flower consists of many small narrow leaves, of a pale purple
or blush color on the outside, and somewhat deeper within.

Facie florum pomi simplex.
There is another like in leaf and root unto the first Scarlet Anemone, but
the flower hereof consists of seven large leaves without any bottomes, of a
white color, having edges, and some large stripes also of a carnation or flesh
color to be seen in them, marked somewhat like an Apple blossom, and
thereupon it is called in Latin, Anemone tenuifolia simplex alba instar florum
pomi, or facie florum pomi, that is to say in English, The single thin leafed
Anemone with Apple blossom flowers.

Multiplex.
I have heard that there is one of this kind with double flowers.

1. Anemone tenuifolia flore coccineo pleno vulgaris. The common double red or
Scarlet Anemone.
The leaves of this double Anemone are very like unto the leaves of the single
Scarlet Anemone, but not so thin cut and divided as that with the purple
flower: the flower hereof when it first opens it self, consists of six and
sometimes of seven or eight broad leaves, of a deep red, or excellent Scarlet
color, the middle head being thick closed, and of a greenish color, which
after the flower has stood blown some time, does gather color, and opens
it self into many small leaves, very thick, of a more pale red color, and
more Stamell like then the outer leaves: the root of this is thick and
tuberous, very like unto the root of the single Scarlet Anemone.

2. Anemone tenuifolia flore coccineo pleno variegata. The party colored
double Crimson Anemone.
We have a kind hereof, varying neither in root, leaf, or form of flower
from the former, but in the color, in that this will have sometimes the outer
broad leaves party colored, with whitish or blush colored great streakes in
the red leaves both inside and outside; as also diverse of the middle or inner
leaves striped in the same manner: the root hereof gives fairer flowers in
some years then in others, and sometimes give flowers all red again.

3. Anemone tenuifolia flore coccineo saturo pleno. The double crimson Velvet
Anemone.
We have another also, whose flower is of a deep Orange tawny crimson color,
near unto the color of the outer leaves, of the lesser French Marigold, and
not differing from the former in any thing else.

4. Anemone tenuifolia flore pleno suauerubente. The greater double blush
Anemone.
There is small difference to be discerned, either in the root or leaves of
this from the former double Scarlet Anemone, saving that the leaves hereof are
a little broader, and seem to be of a little fresher green color: the
flower of this is as large almost, and as double as the former, and the inner
leaves likewise almost as large as they, being of a whitish or flesh color at
the first opening of them, but afterward become of a most lively blush color;
the bottomes of the leaves abiding of a deeper blush, and with long standing,
the tops of the leaves will turn almost wholly white again.

5. Anemone tenuifolia flore albo pleno. The double white Anemone.
This double white Anemone differs little from the former blush Anemone, but
in that it is smaller in all the parts thereof, and also that the flower hereof
being wholly of a pure white color, without any show of blush therein, has
the middle thrummes much smaller and shorter then it, and not rising up so
high, but seem as if they were chipped off even at the tops.

6. Anemone tenuifolia flore pleno albicante. The lesser double blush Anemone.
This small double blush Anemone differs very little from the double white
last recited, but only in the color of the flower: for they are both much
about the bigness one of another, the middle thrums likewise being as small
and short, and as even above, only the flower at the first opening is almost
white, but afterward the outer leaves have a more show of blush in them, and
the middle part a little deeper then they.

7. Anemone tenuifolia flore pleno purpureo violaceo. The double purple Anemone.
This double purple Anemone is also of the same kindred with the first double
red or Scarlet Anemone for the form or doubleness of the flower, consisting
but of six or seven leaves at the most in this our Country, although in the
hotter it has ten or twelve, or more as large leaves for the outer border, and
as large small leaves for the inner middle also, and almost as double, but of a
deep purple tending toward a Violet color, the outer leaves being not so
deep as the inner: the root and leaf comes near unto the single purple
Anemone before described, but that the root spreads not so small and so much.

8. Anemone tenuifolia flore pleno purpureo caeruleo. The double blew Anemone.
This Anemone differs not in any thing from the former double purple, but
only that the flower is paler, and more tending to a blew color.

9. Anemone tenuifolia flore pleno roseo. The double Rose colored Anemone.
The double Rose colored Anemone differs also in nothing from the former
double purple, but only in the flower, which is somewhat smaller, and not so
thick and double, and that it is of a reddish color, near unto the color of
a pale red Rose, or of a deep colored Damask.

10. Anemone tenuifolia flore pleno carneo viuacissimo. The double Carnation
Anemone.
This Anemone, both in root, leaf, and flower, comes nearest unto the
former double white Anemone, for the largeness and doubleness of the flower,
and in the smalnesse of the middle thrums, and evenness at the tops of them,
being not so large and great a flower as the double purple, either in the inner
or outter leaves, but yet is very fair, thick and double, and of a most
lively Carnation silk color, very deep, both the outer leaves and middle
thrums also so bright, that it does as it were amaze, and yet delight the mind
of the beholder, but by long standing in the Sun, wax a little paler, and so
pass away as all the most beautiful flowers do.

1 Anemone tenuifolia fimplex purpurea. The single purple Anemone with thin cut
leaves. 2 Anemone tenuifolia simplex alba pura. The single pure white Anemone.
3 Anemone tenuifolia simplex chermesina. The single bright Crimson Anemone. 4
Anemone tenuifolia simplex sanguinea. The single blood red Anemone. 5 Anemone
tenuifolia simplex facie florum pomi. The single Apple bloome Anemone. 6
Anemone tenuifolia simplex purpurascens. The single purplish blush Anemone. 7
Anemone tenuifolia simplex alba vnguibus carneis. The single white Anemone with
blush bottomes 8 Anemone tenuifolia flore pleno coccineo. The double red or
ordinary Scarlet Anemone. 9. Anemone tenuifolia flore pleno rubr^fusca coma
Ama^antina. The double purple Velvet Anemone. 10 Anemone tenuifolia flore pleno
purpuro violaceo. The double bluish purple Anemone. 11 Anemone tenuifolia
flore pleno incarnedini coloris s^ricei vivacissimi. The double Carnation
Anemone, or of a lively Carnation silk color.
depiction of flowers

11. Anemone tenuifolia flore rubrofusco pleno coma Amarantina. The double
purple Velvet Anemone.
This double Velvet Anemone is in all things like the last described Carnation
Anemone, but somewhat larger, the difference consists in the color of the
flower, which in this is of a deep or sad crimson red color for the outer
leaves, and of a deep purple Velvet color in the middle thrums, resembling the
color of the lesser Amaranthus purpureus, or Purple flower gentle hereafter
described, whereof it took the name, which middle thrums are as fine and
small, and as even at the tops as the white or last Carnation Anemones.

12. Anemone tenuifolia flore pleno tricolor. The double purple Velvet Anemone
of three colors.
This double Anemone also is very like the last described Anemone, but that in
the middle of the purple thrums, there thrusts forth a tuft of threads or
leaves of a more light crimson color.

And thus much for the kinds of Anemones or Windflowers, so far forth as
have hitherto come to our knowledge; yet I doubt not, but that more varieties
have been elsewhere collected, and will be also in our Country daily and
yearly observed by diverse, that raise them up from sowing the seed, wherein
lies a pretty art, not yet familiarly known to our Nation, although it be
very frequent in the Lowe-Countries, where their industry has bred and
nourished up such diversities and varieties, that they have valued some
Anemones at such high rates, as most would wonder at, and none of our Nation
would purchase, as I think. And I doubt not, if we would be as curious as
they, but that both our air and soil would produce as great variety, as ever
has been seen in the Lowe-Countries; which to procure, if any of our Nation
will take so much pains in sowing the seeds of Anemones, as diverse have done
of Tulipas: I will set them down the best directions for that purpose that I
have learned, or could by much search and trial attain unto; yet I must let
them understand thus much also, that there is not so great variety of double
flowers raised from the seed of the thin leafed Anemones, as from the broad
leafed ones.

First therefore (as I said before) concerning Tulipas, there is some special
choice to be made of such flowers, whose seed is fittest to be taken. Of the
Latifolias, the double Orange tawney seed being sown, yields pretty
varieties, but the purples, and reds, or crimsons, either Latifolias or
Tenuifolias, yield small variety, but such as draw nearest to their original,
although some be a little deeper or lighter then others. But the light colors
be they which are the chief for choice, as white, ash color, blush or
carnation, light orange, simple or party colored, single or double, if they
bear seed, which must be carefully gathered, and that not before it be
thorough ripe, which you shall know by the head; for when the seed with the
wollinesse begins to rise a little of it self at the lower end, it must be
then quickly gathered, lest the wind carry it all away. After it is thus
carefully gathered, it must be laid to dry for a week or more, which then
being gently rubbed with a little dry sand or earth, will cause the seed to be
somewhat better separated, although not thoroughly from the woollinesse or
down that compasses it.

Within a month at the most after the seed is thus gathered and prepared, it
must be sown; for by that means you shall gain a year in the growing, over
that you should do if you sowed it in the next Spring.

If there remain any woollinesse in the seed, pull it in sunder as well as
you can, and then sow your seed reasonable thin, and not too thick, upon a
plain smooth bed of fine earth, or rather in pots or tubbes, and after the
sowing, sift or gently straw over them some fine good fresh mould, about one
fingers thickness at the most for the first time: And about a month after
their first springing up, sift or straw over them in like manner another
fingers thickness of fine earth, and in the mean time if the weather prove
dry, you must water them gently and often, but not to ouerglut them with
moisture; and thus doing, you shall have them spring up before Winter, and grow
pretty strong, able to abide the sharp Winter in their nonage, in using some
little care to cover them loosely with some fearne, or furse, or bean hame, or
straw, or any such, which yet must not lie close upon them, nor too far from
them neither.

The next Spring after the sowing, if you will, but it is better if you stay
until August, you may then remove them, and set them in order by rows, with
sufficient distance one from another, where they may abide, until you see what
manner of flower each plant will bear, which you may dispose of according to
your mind.

Many of them being thus ordered (if your mould be fine, loose, and fresh, not
stony, clayish, or from a middin) will bear flowers the second year after
the sowing, and most or all of them the third year, if the place where you
sow them, be not annoyed with the smoke of Brewers, Dyers, or Maultkils,
which if it be, then will they never thrive well.

Thus much have I thought good to set down, to incite some of our own Nation
to be industrious; and to help them forward, have given such rules of
directions, that I doubt not, but they will upon the trial and view of the
variety, proceed as well in the sowing of Anemones as of Tulipas.

I cannot (Gentlewomen) withhold one other secret from you, which is to inform
you how you may so order Anemones, that after all others ordinarily are past,
you may have them in flower for two or three months longer then are to be
seen with any other, that uses not this course I direct you.

The ordinary time to plant Anemones, is most commonly in August, which will
bear flower some peradventure before Winter, but most usually in February,
March, and April, few or none of them abiding until May; but if you will
keep some roots out of the ground unplanted, until February, March, and
April, and plant some at one time, and some at another, you shall have them
bear flower according to their planting, those that shall be planted in
February, will flower about the middle or end of May, and so the rest
accordingly after that manner: And thus may you have the pleasure of these
plants out of their natural seasons, which is not permitted to be enjoyed in
any other that I know, Nature being not so prone to be furthered by art in
other things as in this. Yet regard, that in keeping your Anemone roots out of
the ground for this purpose, you neither keep them too dry, nor yet too moist,
for sprouting or rotting; and in planting them, that you set them not in too
open a sunny place, but where they may be somewhat shadowed.

The Place.
I shall not need to spend much time in relating the several places of these
Anemones, but only to declare that the most of them that have not been raised
from seed, have come from Constantinople to us; yet the first broad leafed or
yellow Anemone, was first found in Portugal, and from thence brought into
these parts. And the first purple Star Anemone in Germany, yet was the same
sent among others from Constantinople also. And the first thin cut leafed
Anemone came first out of Italy, although many of that sort have come likewise
from Constantinople. And so have the double red or Scarlet Anemones, and the
great double blush, which I first had by the gift of Mr. Humfrey Packington of
Worcestershire Esquire, at Haruington.

The Time.
The times of their flowring are sufficiently expressed in the descriptions, or
in the rules for planting.

The Names.
The Turkish names whereby the great double broad leafed kinds have been sent
unto us, were Gial Catamer, and Giul Catamer lale; And Binizade, Binizante, and
Galipoli lale for the thin cut leafed Anemones. All Authors have called them
Anemones, and are the true Herba venti. We call them in English either
Anemones, after the Greek name, or Windflowers, after the Latin.

The Virtues.
There is little use of these in Physic in our days, either for inward or
outward diseases; only the leaves are used in the Ointment called Marciatum,
which is composed of many other hot herbs, and is used in cold griefs, to
warm and comfort the parts. The root, by reason of the sharpness, is apt to
draw down rheum, if it be tasted or chewed in the mouth.

CHAP. XXVI.
Aconitum. Wolfebane.
THere be diverse sorts of Wolfebanes which are not fit for this book, but are
reserved for a general History or Garden of Simples, yet among them there are
some, that notwithstanding their evil quality, may for the beauty of their
flowers take up a room in this Garden, of whom I mean to entreat in this
place: And first of the Winter Wolfesbane, which for the beauty, as well as the
earliness of his flowers, being the first of all other, that show themselves
after Christmas, deserves a prime place; and therefore for the likeness of
the roots unto the Anemones, I join it next unto them.

1. Aconitum Hyemale. The Winters Wolfesbane.
This little plant thrusts up diverse leaves out of the ground, in the deep
of Winter oftentimes, if there be any mild weather in Ianaury, but most
commonly after the deep frosts, bearing up many times the snow upon the heads
of the leaves, which like unto the Anemone, do every leaf rise from the root
upon several short footestalkes, not above four fingers high, some having
flowers in the middle of them, (which come up first most usually) and some
none, which leaves stand as it were round, the stalk rising up under the
middle of the leaf, deeply cut in and gashed to the middle stalk almost, of a
very fair deep green color, in the middle whereof, close unto the leaf,
stands a small yellow flower, made of six leaves, very like a Crowfoote, with
yellow threads in the middle: after the flower is fallen, there rise up diverse
small horns or cods set together, wherein are contained whitish yellow round
seed. The root is tuberous, so like both for shape and color unto the roots
of Anemones, that they will easily deceive one not well experienced, but that
it is browner and smoother without, and yellow within, if it be broken.

2. Aconitum flore albido, sieve Aconitum luteum Ponticum. The whitish yellow
Wolfesbane.
This Wolfesbane shoots not out of the ground until the Spring be well
begun, and then it sends forth great broad green leaves, deeply cut in about
the edges, not much unlike the leaves of the great wild Crowfoote, but much
greater; from among which leaves rises up a strong stiff stalk, three foot
high, having here and there leaves set upon it, like unto the lowest, but
smaller; the top of the stalk is divided into three or four branches,
whereon are set diverse pale yellow flowers, which turn at the last to be
almost white, in fashion like almost unto the flowers of the Helmet flower, but
much smaller, and not gaping so wide open: after the flowers are past come up
diverse short poddes, wherein is contained black seed: the root is made of a
number of dark brown strings, which spread and fasten themselves strongly in
the ground.

3. Napellus verus flore caeruleo. Blew Helmet flower or Monks hood.
The Helmet flower has diverse leaves of a fresh green color on the
vpperside, and grayish underneath, much spread abroad, and cut into many slits
and notches, more then any of the Wolfebanes; the stalk rises up two or three
foot high, beset to the top with the like leaves, but smaller: the top is
sometimes divided into two or three branches, but more usually without, whereon
stand many large flowers one above another, in form very like unto a Hood or
open Helmet, being composed of five leaves, the uppermost of which and the
greatest, is hollow, like unto an Helmet or Headpeece, two other small leaves
are at the sides of the Helmet, closing it like cheeks, and come somewhat
under, and two other which are the smallest hang down like labels, or as if a
close Helmet were opened, and some pieces hung by, of a perfect or fair blew
color, (but grow darker* having stood long) which causes it be so nourished
up in Gardens, that their flowers, as was usual in former times, and yet is in
many Country places, may be laid among green herbs in windows and rooms
for the Summer time: but although their beauty may be entertained for the uses
aforesaid, yet beware they come not near your tongue or lips, lest they tell
you to your cost, they are not so good as they seem to be: in the midst of
the flower, when it is open and gapeth wide, are seen certain small threads
like beards, standing about a middle head, which when the flower is past,
grows into three or four, or more small blackish pods, containing in them
black seed: the roots are brownish on the outside, and white within,
somewhat big and round above, and small downwards, somewhat like unto a
small short Carrot root, sometimes two being joined at the head together. But
the name Napellus anciently given unto it, does show they referred the form of
the root unto a small Turnep.

Anthora. The wholesome Helmet flower, or counterpoison Monks hood.
This wholesome plant I thought good to insert, not only for the form of the
flower, but also for the excellent properties thereof, as you shall have them
related hereafter. The roots hereof are small and tuberous, round and somewhat
long, ending for the most part in a long fiber, and with some other small
threads from the head downward: from the head whereof rises up diverse green
leaves, every one severally upon a stalk, very much divided, as finely almost
as the leaves of Larkes heels or spurs: among which rises up a hard round
stalk, a foot high and better, with some such leaves thereon as grow below,
at the top whereof stand many small yellowish flowers, formed very like unto
the former whitish Wolfesbane, bearing many black seeds in pods afterward in
the like manner.

Many more sorts of varieties of these kinds there are, but these only, as
the most specious, are noursed up in Florists Gardens for pleasure; the other
are kept by such as are Catholic obseruers of all natures store.

The Place.
All these grow naturally on Mountains, in many shadowie places of the Alps,
in Germany, and elsewhere.

The Time.
The first flowreth (as is said) in January, and February, and sometimes until
March be well spent, and the seed is soon ripe after.

The other three flower not until June and July.

The Names.
The first is usually called Aconitum hyemale Belgarum. Lobelius calls it
Bulbosus vnifolius Batrachoides, Aconitum Elleboraceum, and Ranunculus
Monophyllos, and some by other names. Most Herbarists call it Aconitum hyemale,
and we in English thereafter, Winters Wolfesbane; and of some, Yellow Aconite.

The second is called by most Writers, Aconitum luteum Ponticum: Some also
Lupicida, Luparia, and Canicida, of the effect in killing Wolves and Dogs: And
some, because the flower is more white then yellow, do call it Aconitum flore
albido, we call it in English, The whitish yellow Aconite, or Wolfesbane, but
some after the Latin name, The yellow Wolfesbane.

The third is called generally Napellus, and Verus, because it is the true
Napellus of the ancient Writers, which they so termed from the form of a
Turnep, called Napus in Latin.

The fourth is called Aconitum Salutiferum, Napellus Moysis, Antora and
Anthora, quasi Antithora, that is, the remedy against the poisonfull herb
Thora, in English according to the title, either wholesome Helmet flower, or
counterpoison Monks hood.

The Virtues.
Although the first three sorts of plants be very poisonfull and deadly, yet
there may be very good use made of them for sore eyes (being carefully
applied, yet not to all sorts of sore eyes neither without discretion) if the
distilled water be dropped therein.

The roots of the counterpoison Monks hood are effectual not only against
the poison of the poisonfull Helmet flower, and all others of that kind, but
also against the poison of all venomous beasts, the plague or pestilence, and
other infectious diseases, which raise spots, pockes, or marks in the outward
skin, by expelling the poison from within, and defending the heart as a most
sovereign Cordial. It is used also with good success against the worms of
the belly, and against the pains of the Wind colic.

CHAP. XXVII.
Ranunculus. The Crowfoote.
NExt unto the Aconites, of right are to follow the Ranunculi, or Crowfeete,
for the nearenesse both of form, of leaves, and nature of the plants, although
less hurtful, yet all of them for the most part being sharp and
exulcerating, and not without some danger, if any would be too bold with them.
The whole Family of the Ranunculi is of a very large extent, and I am
constrained within the limits of a Garden of Pleasure; I must therefore select
out only such as are fit for this purpose, and set them here down for your
knowledge, leaving the rest for that other general work, which time may
perfect and bring to light, if the covetous minds of some that should be most
affected toward it, do not hinder it: or if the help of generous spirits
would forward it.

1. Ranunculus montanus albus humilior. The low white mountain Crowfoot.
This low Crowfoote has three or four broad and thick leaves, almost round,
yet a little cut in and notched about the edges, of a fine green and shining
color on the vpperside, and not so green underneath, among which rises a
small short stalk, bearing one snow white flower on the top, made of five
round pointed leaves, with diverse yellow threads in the middle, standing about
a green head, which in time grows to be full of seed, in form like unto a
small green Strawberry: the root is composed of many white strings.

Duplici flore.
There is another of this low kind, whose leaves are somewhat more deeply cut
in on the edges, and the flower larger, and sometimes a little double, as it
were with two rows of leaves, in other things not differing from the former.

2. Ranunculus montanus albus mayor vel elatior. The great single white
mountain Crowfoote.
The leaves of this Crowfoote are large and green, cut into three, and
sometimes into five special divisions, and each of them besides cut or notched
about the edges, somewhat resembling the leaves of the Globe Crowfoote, but
larger: the stalk is two foot and a half high, having three small leaves set
at the joint of the stalk, where it brancheth out into flowers, which stand
four or five together upon long foote-stalkes, made of five white leaves a
piece, very sweet, and somewhat larger then the next white Crowfoote, with
some yellow threads in the middle compassing a green head, which brings
seed like unto other wild Crowfeete: the root has many long thick whitish
strings, coming from a thick head.

3. Ranunculus montanus albus minor. The lesser single white Crowfoote.
This Crowefoote has fair large spread leaves, cut into five divisions, and
somewhat notched about the edges, green on the vpperside, and paler
underneath, having many veins running through the leaves: the stalk of this
rises not so high as the former, although this be reasonable tall, as being
near two foot high, spread into many branches, bearing such like white
flowers, as in the former, but smaller: the seed of this is like the former,
and so are the roots likewise.

4. Ranunculus albus flore pleno. The double white Crowfoot.
The double white Crowfoote is of the same kind with the last single white
Crowfoote, having such like leaves in all respects: the only difference is in
the flowers, which in this are very thick and double. Some do make mention of
two sorts of double white Crowfeete, one somewhat lower then another, and the
lower likewise bearing more store of flowers, and more double then the higher:
but I confess, I have never seen but one sort of double, which is the same
here expressed, not growing very high, and reasonably well stored with flowers.

5. Ranunculus praecox Rutaefolio sieve Coriandrifolio. The early Coriander
leafed Crowfoote.
This Crowfoote has three or four very green leaves, cut and divided into
many small pieces, like unto the wing of leaves of Rue, or rather like the
lower leaves of the Coriander (for they well resemble either of them) every of
them standing upon a long purplish stalk, at the top whereof grows the
flower alone, being composed or made of twelve small white leaves, broad
pointed, and a little endented at the ends, somewhat purplish on the outside,
and white on the inside, sustained by diverse small green leaves, which are in
stead of a cup or husk: in the middle of the flower are many small white
threads, tipped with yellow pendents, standing about a small green head, which
after grows to be full of seeds like a Strawberry, which knobs give small
blackish seed: the root is white and fibrous.

6. Ranunculus Thalictrifolio mayor. The great colombine leafed Crowfoot.
The lower leaves of this Crowfoote have long stalks, and are very like unto
the smaller leaves of Colombines, or the great Spanish Thalictrum, which has
his leaves very like unto a Colombine, four or five rising from the root: the
stalk rises about a foot and a half high, somewhat reddish, beset here and
there with the like leaves, at the top whereof stand diverse small white
flowers, made of five leaves a piece, with some pale white threads in the
middle: the seed is round and reddish, contained in small husks or horns:
the root is made of a bush or tuft of white strings.

7. Ranunculus Thalictrifolio minor Asphodeli radice. The small white Colombine
leafed Crowfoote.
This small Crowfoote has three or four winged leaves spread upon the ground,
standing upon long stalks, and consisting of many small leaves set together,
spreading from the middle ribbe, every leaf somewhat resembling both in shape
and color the smallest and youngest leaves of Colombines: the flowers are
white, standing at the top of the stalks, made of five round leaves: the
root has three or four thick, short, and round yellowish clogs hanging at the
head, like unto the Asphodill root. The great Herball of Lions, that goes
under the name of Daleschampius, says, that Dr. Myconus found it in Spain,
and sent it under the name of Oenanthe; and therefore Ioannes Molineus who is
thought to have composed that book, set it among the vmbelliferous plants,
because the Oenanthes bear vmbels of flowers and seed, and have tuberous or
cloggy roots; but with what judgment, let others say, when they have compared
the vmbels of flowers and seed of the Oenanthes, with the flowers and seed of
this plant, and whether I have not more properly placed it among the Ranunculi
or Crowfeete, and given it a denomination agreeable to his form.

8. Ranunculus Globosus. The Globe Crowfoot.
This Crowfoote (which in the Northern countries of England where it grows
plentifully, is called Locker goulous) has many fair, broad, dark green
leaves next the ground, cut into five, six, or seven divisions, and iagged
besides at the edges; among which rises up a stalk, whereon are set such like
leaves as are below, but smaller, divided toward the top into some branches,
on the which stand several large yellow flowers, always folded inward, or as
a close flower never blowing open, as other flowers do, consisting of eleven
leaves for the most part, set or placed in three rows, with many yellow
threads in the middle, standing about a green rough head, which in time
grows to be small knops, wherein are contained black seed: the root is
composed of many blackish strings.

9. Ranunculus protensis flore multiplici. The double yellow field Crowfoot.
There is little or no difference in the leaves of this double Crowfoot, from
those of the single kinds that grow in every medowe, being large and divided
into four or five parts, and indented about the edges, but they are somewhat
smaller, and of a fresher green: the flowers stand on many branches, much
divided or separated, being not very great, but very thick and double: the
root runs and creeps under ground like as the single does.

10. Ranunculus Anglicus maximus multiplex. The Garden double yellow Crowfoot
or Batchelours buttons.
This great double Crowfoote, which is common in every Garden through England,
has many great blackish green leaves, iagged and cut into three divisions,
each to the middle ribbe: the stalks have some smaller leaves on them, and
those next under the branches long and narrow: the flowers are of a greenish
yellow color, very thick and double of leaves, in the middle whereof rises
up a small stalk, bearing another double flower, like to the other, but
smaller: the root is round, like unto a small white Turnep, with diverse other
fibers annexed unto it.

11. Ranunculus Gramineus. Grass leafed Crowfoot.
The leaves of this Crowfoote are long and narrow, somewhat like unto Grass,
or rather like the leaves of single Gilloflowers or Pinckes, being small and
sharp pointed, a little hollow, and of a whitish green color: among these
leaves rise up diverse slender stalks, bearing one small flower at the top of
each, consisting of five yellow 1 Aconitum Hyemale. Winter Wolfesbane. 2
Aconitum flore albido sieve luteum Ponticum. The whitish yellow Wolfesbane. 3
Napellus verus. Blew Helmets or Monks hood. 4 Anthora. The counterpoison
Monks hood. 5 Ranunculus humilis albus simplex. The single white low Crowfoot.
6 Ranunculus humilis albus duplici flore. The double low white Crowfoot. 7
Ranunculus Coriandrifolio The early Coriander leafed Crowfoot. 8 Ranunculus
montanus elatior albus. The great single white mountain Crowfoot. 9 Ranunculus
montanus albus flore pleno The double white mountain Crowfoot. 10 Ranunculus
Thalictrifolio minor. The lesser Colombine leafed Crowfoot. 11 Ranunculus
globosus. The globe Crowfoot.
depiction of flowers leaves, with some threads in the middle: the root is
composed of many thick, long, round white strings.

There is another of this kind that bears flowers with two rows of leaves,
as if it were double, differing in nothing else.

12. Ranunculus Lusitanicus Autumnalis. The Portugal Autumn Crowfoot.
This Autumn Crowfoote has diverse broad round leaves lying on the ground, set
upon short foote-stalkes, of a fair green color above, and grayish
underneath, snipt all about the edges, having many veins in them, and
sometimes swelling as with blisters or bladders on them; from among which rise
up two or three slender and hairy stalks, bearing but one small yellow flower
a piece, consisting of five and sometimes of six leaves, and sometimes of seven
or eight, having a few threads in the middle, set about a small green head,
like unto many of the former Crowfeete, which brings small black seed: the
root is made of many thick short white strings, which seem to be grumous or
kernelly roots, but that they are somewhat smaller, and longer then any other
of that kind.

13. Ranunculus Creticus latifolius. The broad leafed Candy Crowfoot.
This Crowfoote of Candy, has the greatest and broadest leaves of all the
sorts of Crowfeete, being almost round, and without any great divisions, but
only a few notches about the edges here and there, as large or larger
sometimes then the palm of a man's hand; among which rises up the stalk, not
very high when it does first flower, but afterward, as the other flowers do
open themselves, the stalk grows to be a foot and a half high, or
thereabouts, having some leaves on it, deeply cut in or divided, and bearing
many fair yellow flowers, consisting of five leaves a piece, being somewhat
whitish in the middle, when the flower has stood blown a little time: the
root is composed of a number of small kernelly knobs, or long grains, set
thick together. This flowreth very early, being usually in flower before the
end of March, and oftentimes about the middle thereof.

14. Ranunculus Creticus albus. The white Candy Crowfoote.
The leaves of this Crowfoote are very like unto the leaves of the red
Crowfoote of Tripoli or Asia, hereafter set down, being somewhat broad and
indented about the edges, some of the leaves being also cut in or gashed,
thereby making it as it were three divisions, of a pale green color, with
many white spots in them: the stalk rises up a foot high, with some leaves
on it, more divided then the lower, and divided at the top into two and
sometimes into three branches, each of them bearing a fair snow white flower,
somewhat large, included at the first in a brownish husk or cup of leaves,
which afterward stand under the flowers, consisting of five white large round
pointed leaves, in the middle whereof is set many blackish purple thrums,
compassing a small long green head, composed of many scales or chaffie whitish
husks, when they are ripe, which are the seed, but unprofitable in all that
ever I could observe: the roots are many small grains or kernels, set
together as in the former, and much about the same color, that is, of a dark
or duskie grayish color, but much smaller.

Alba purpureis ^ris and venis.
There is another of this kind, whose flowers have purple edges, and sometimes
some veins of the same purple in the leaves of the flowers, not differing in
any other thing from the former.

Alba ^ris rubris.
And another, whose edges of the flowers are of a bright red color.

15. Ranunculus Creticus flore argenteo. The Argentine, or cloth of silver
Crowfoot.
The green leaves of this Crowfoote are as small and thin, cut in or divided
on the edges, as the last two sorts; the stalk rises up somewhat higher, and
divided into some branches, bearing at the top of every of them one flower,
somewhat smaller then the former, composed of six, seven, and sometimes of
eight small round pointed 1 Ranunculus gramineus flore simpli^i and duplici.
The single and the double grass Crowfoot. 2 Ranunculus Lusitanicus Autumnalis.
The Portugal Autumn Crowfoot. 3 Ranunculus Creticus latifolius. The broad
leafed Candy Crowfoot. 4 Ranunculus Anglicus maximus multiplex. The double
English Crowfoot. 5 Ranunculus praetensis flore multiplici. The double yellow
field Crowfoot. 6 Ranunculus Creticus albus. The white Candy Crowfoot. 7
Ranunculus Asiaticus flore albo vel pallido vari^. The white or the straw
colored Crowfoot with red top^ ^r edges. 8 Ranunculus Tripolitanus flore rubro
simplici. The single red Crowfoot of Tripoli. 9 Ranunculus Asiaticus flore
rubro ampl^. The large single red Crowfoot of Asia. 10 Ranunculus Asiaticus
flore rubro pleno. The double red Crowfoot of Asia. 11 Caltha palustris flore
pleno. Double Marsh Marigold or Batchelours buttons.
depiction of flowers leaves, of a whitish yellow blush color on the inside
wholly, except sometimes a little stripped about the edges: but the outside of
every leaf is finely stripped with crimson stripes, very thick, somewhat like
unto a Gilloflower: in the middle rises up a small black head, compassed
about with blackish blew threads or thrums, which head is as unfruitful for
seed in our Country as the former. This flower has no such green leaves
under it, or to enclose it before it be blown open as the former: the roots
are in all things like the former.

16. Ranunculus Asiaticus sieve Tripolitanus flore rubro. The single red
Crowfoote of Asia or Tripoli.
The lower leaves of this red Crowfoote are always whole without divisions,
being only somewhat deeply indented about the edges, but the other that rise
after them are more cut in, sometimes into three, and sometimes into five
divisions, and notched also about the edges: the stalk rises higher then any
of the former, and has on it two or three smaller leaves, more cut in and
divided then those below: at the top whereof stands one large flower, made
of five leaves, every one being narrower at the bottom then at the top, and
not standing close and round one to another, but with a certain distance
between, of a duskie yellowish red color on the outside, and of a deep red
on the inside, the middle being set with many thrums of a dark purple color:
the head for seed is long, and scaly or chaffie, and idle in like manner as
the rest: the root is made of many grains or small kernels set together, and
closing at the head, but spreading it self, if it like the ground, under the
upper crust of the earth into many roots, increasing from long strings, that
run from the middle of the small head of grains, as well as at the head it
self.

17. Ranunculus Asiaticus flore amplo rubro. The large single red Crowfoot of
Asia.
There has come to us out of Turkey, together with the former, among many
other roots, under the same title, a differing sort of this Crowfoote, whose
leaves wear broader, and much jailer; the flower also larger, and the leaves
thereof broader, sometimes eight in a flower, standing round and close one to
another, which makes the fairer show: in all other things it is like the
former.

18. Ranunculus Asiaticus flore rubro vario simplici. The red stripped single
Crowfoote of Asia.
This party colored Crowfoote differs not either in root or leaf from the
former, the chiefest difference is in the flower, which being red, somewhat
like the former, has yet some yellow stripes or veins through every leaf,
sometimes but little, and sometimes so much, that it seems to be party
colored red and yellow: this sort is very tender; for we have twice had it,
and yet perished with us.

19. Ranunculus Asiaticus flore luteo vario simplici. The yellow stripped single
Crowfoote of Asia.
There is little difference in the root of this Crowfoote from the last
described, but the leaves are much different, being very much divided, and the
flower is large, of a fine pale greenish yellow color, consisting of six and
seven, and sometimes of eight or nine round leaves; the tops whereof have
reddish spots, and the edges sometimes also, with such purplish thrums in the
middle that the other have. None of these former Crowfeete with kernelly
roots, have ever been found to have given so good seed in England, as that
being sown, any of them would spring up; for hereof trial has been often
made, but all they have lost their labor, that have bestowed their pains
therein, as far as I know.

20. Ranunculus Asiaticus flore rubro pleno. The double red Crowfoote of Asia.
The double red Crowfoote has his roots and leaves so like unto the single
red kind, that none can perceive any difference, or know the one from the
other, until the budde of the flower do appear, which after it is any thing
forward, may be perceived to be greater and fuller then the budde of the single
kind. This kind bears most usually but one fair large double flower on the
top of the stalk, composed of many leaves, set close together in three or
four rows, of an excellent crimson color, declining to Scarlet, the outter
leaves being larger then the inner; and in stead of thrummes, has many small
leaves set together: it has likewise six small narrow green leaves on the
backside of the flower, where the stalk is fastened to the flower.

There is of this double kind another sort, Polifero flore.
whose flower is of the same color with the former, but out of the middle of
the flower arises another double flower, but smaller.

The Place.
These plants grow naturally in diverse Countries; some in France, and Germany,
and some in England, some in Spain, Portugal, and Italy, and some have been
sent out of Turkey from Constantinople, and some from other parts, their titles
for the most part descrying their Countries.

The Time.
Some of them flower early, as is set down in their descriptions, or titles.
The others in April and May. The white Candy Crowfoote, and the other single
and double sorts of Asia, about the same time, or somewhat later, and one in
Autumn, as it is set down.

The Names.
The names that are given severally to them may well serve this work, that
thereby they may be distinguished one from another: For to set down any
further controversy of names, how fitly or unfitly they have been called, and
how variably by diverse former Writers, is fitter for a general History, unto
which I leave what may be said, both concerning these and the rest: Only this
I would give you to understand, that the Turkey kinds have been sent to us
under the names of Terobolos for the single, and Terobolos Catamer lale for the
double, and yet oftentimes, those that have been sent for double, have proved
single, so little fidelity is to be found among them.

The Virtues.
All or most of these plants are very sharp and exulcerating, yet the care and
industry of diverse learned men have found many good effects in many of them.
For the roots and leaves both of the wild kinds, and of some of these of the
Garden, stamped and applied to the wrists, have driven away the fits in Fevers.
The root likewise of the double English kind is applied for pestilent sores,
to help to break them, by drawing the venom to the place. They help
likewise to take away scarres and marks in diverse places of the body.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Caltha palustris flore pleno. Double Marsh Marigold.
AS an appendix to the Crowfeete, I must needs add this plant, yet severally
by it self, because both it and his single kind are by most adjoined
thereunto, for the near resemblance both in shape and sharpness of quality.
The single kind I leave to the Ditch sides, and moist grounds about them, as
the fittest places for it, and only bring the double kind into my Garden, as
fittest for his goodly proportion and beauty to be entertained, and have place
therein.

The double Marsh Marigold has many broad and round green leaves, a little
endented about the edges, like unto the single kind, but not altogether so
large, especially in a Garden where it stands not very moist: the stalks are
weak, round, hollow, and green, divided into three or four branches at the
top, with leaves at the several joints, whereon stand very double flowers,
of a gold yellow color: the five outer leaves being larger then any of the
rest that are encompassed by them, which fall away after they have stood blown
a great while (for it endures in flower a month or more, especially if it
stand in a shadowie place) without bearing any seed: the roots are composed of
many thick, long, and round whitish strings, which run down deep into the
ground, and there are fastened very strongly.

The Place.
This plant grows naturally in diverse Marshes, and moist grounds in Germany,
yet in some more double then in others; it has long ago been cherished in
our Gardens.

The Time.
It flowreth in April or May, as the year proves earlier or later: all his
leaves do in a manner quite perish in Winter, and spring anew in the end of
February, or thereabouts.

The Names.
There is great controversy among the learned about the single kind, but
thereof I shall not need to speak in this place; if God permit I may in a
fitter. This is called generally in Latin, Caltha palustris multiplex, or
flore pleno. And we in English (after the Latin, which take Caltha to be that
which we usually call Calendula, a Marigold) The double Marsh Marigold.

The Virtues.
The root hereof is sharp, coming near unto the quality of the Crowfeete,
but for any special property, I have not heard or found any.

CHAP. XXIX.
Hepatica nobilis sieve trifolia. Noble Liuerwort.
NExt unto the Crowfeete are to follow the Hepaticas, because of the likeness
with them, seeming to be small Crowfeete in all their parts, but of another and
more wholesome kind. Their diversity among themselves consists chiefly in the
color of the flowers, all of them being single, except one which is very
thick and double.

1. Hepatica flore caeruleo simplici mayor. The great single blew Hepatica or
noble Liuerwort.
The flowers of this Hepatica do spring up, blow open, and sometimes shed and
fall away, before any leaves appear or spread open. The roots are composed of
a bush of blackish strings, from the several heads or buttons whereof, after
the flowers are risen and blown, arise many fresh green leaves, each
severally standing upon his foot-stalke, folded together, and somewhat brown
and hairy at their first coming, which after are broad, and divided at the
edges into three parts: the flowers likewise stand every one upon his own
several foote-stalke, of the same height with the leaves for the most part,
which is about four or five fingers breadth high, made of six leaves most
usually, but sometimes it will have seven or eight, of a fair blew color,
with many white chiues or threads in the middle, standing about a middle green
head or vmbone, which after the flower is fallen grows greater, and shows
many small grains or seed set close together (with three small green leaves
compassing them underneath, as they did the flower at the bottom) very like
the head of seed of many Crowfeete.

2. Hepatica minor flore pallido caeruleo. The small blew Hepatica.
The leaves of this Hepatica are smaller by the half then the former, and grow
more abundantly, or bushing thick together: the flowers (when it shows
them, for I have had the plant half a score years, and yet never saw it bear
flower above once or twice) are of a pale or bleake blew color, not so large
as the flowers of the former.

3. Hepatica flore purpureo. Purple Hepatica or noble Liuerwort.
This Hepatica is in all things like unto the first, but only the flowers are
of a deeper blew tending to a Violet purple: and therefore I shall not need to
reiterate the former description.

4. Hepatica flore albo minor. The lesser white Hepatica.
The flowers of this Hepatica are wholly white, of the bigness of the red or
purple, and the leaves somewhat smaller, and of a little whiter or paler green
color, else in all other things agreeing with the former.

5. Hepatica alba magno flore. The great white Hepatica.
There is no other difference herein from the last, but that the flower being
as white, is as large as the next.

6. Hepatica albida sieve argentea. Ash-colored or Argentine Hepatica.
Both the leaves and the flowers of this Hepatica are larger then any of the
former, except the last: the flowers hereof at the first opening seem to be a
of blush ash color, which do so abide three or four days, decaying still
until it turn almost white, having yet still a show of that blush ash color
in them, till the very last.

7. Hepatica alba straminibus rubris. White Hepatica with red threads.
There is no difference between this Hepatica and the first white one, saving
that the threads in the middle of the flower, being white, as in the former,
are tipped at the ends with a pale reddish color, which add a great beauty to
the flowers.

8. Hepatica flore rubro. Red Hepatica or noble Liuerwort.
The leaves of this Hepatica are of a little browner red color, both at their
first coming up, and afterward, especially in the middle of the leaf more
then any of the former: the flowers are in form like unto the rest, but of a
bright blush, or pale red color, very pleasant to behold, with white threads
or chiues in the middle of them.

9. Hepatica flore purpureo multiplici sieve pleno. The double purple Hepatica.
The double Hepatica is in all things like unto the single purple kind, saving
only that the leaves are larger, and stand upon longer foote-stalkes, and that
the flowers are small buttons, but very thick of leaves, and as double as a
flower can be, like unto the double white Crowfoote before described, but not
so big, of a deep blew or purple color, without any threads or head in the
middle, which fall away without giving any seed.

10. Hepatica flore caeruleo pleno. The double blew Hepatica.
In the color of this flower, consists the chiefest difference from the
last, except one may say it is a little less in the bigness of the flower,
but not in doubleness of leaves.

The Place.
All these plants with single flowers grow naturally in the Woods, and shadowie
Mountains of Germany in many places, and some of them in Italy also. The
double kind likewise has been sent from Alphonsus Pantius out of Italy, as
Clusius reports, and was also found in the Woods, near the Castle of
Starnbeg in Austria, the Lady Heusenstains possession, as the same Clusius
reports also.

The Time.
These plants do flower very early, and are of the first flowers that show
themselves presently after the deep frosts in January, so that next unto the
Winter Wolfesbane, these making their pride appear in Winter, are the more
welcome early guests. The double kind flowreth not altogether so early, but
shows his flower, and abides when the others are past.

The Names.
They have obtained diverse names; some calling them Hepatica, Hepatica nobilis,
Hepaticum trifolium, Trifolium nobile, Trifolium aureum, and some Trinitas, and
Herba Trinitatis. In English you may call them either Hepatica, after the
Latin name, as most do, or Noble Liuerwort, which you please.

The Virtues.
These are thought to cool and strengthen the liver, the name importing as
much; but I never saw any great use of them by any the Physicians of our London
College, or effect by them that have used them in Physic in our Country.

1 Hepatica flore albo amplo simplici. The large white Hepatica. 2 Hepatica
flore rubro simplici. The red Hepatica. 3 Hepatica flore purpureo pleno. The
double purple Hepatica. 4 Geranium tuberosum. Knobbed Cranes bill. 5 Geranium
Batrachoides flore albo vel caeruleo. The blew or white Crowfoote Cranes bill.
6 Geranium Hematodes. The red Rose Cranes bill. 7 Geranium Romanum striatum.
The variable stripped Cranes bill. 8 Geranium Creticum. Candy Cranes bill.
depiction of flowers

CHAP. XXX.
Geranium. Storkes bill or Cranes bill.
AS was said before concerning the Crowfeet, of their large extent and
restraint, the like may be said of the Storkes bills or Cranes bills; for even of
these as of them, I must for this work set forth the descriptions but of a
few, and leave the rest to a general work.

1. Geranium tuberosum vel bulbosum. Bulbous or knobbed Cranes bill.
The knobbed Cranes has three or four large leaves spread upon the ground, of
a grayish or rather dusty green color, every one of them being as it were of
a round form, but divided or cut into six or seven long parts or divisions,
even unto the middle, which makes it seem to be so many leaves, each of the
cuts or divisions being deeply notched or indented on both sides; among which
rises up a stalk a foot high or better, bearing thereon diverse pale but
bright purple flowers, made of five leaves a piece, after which come small
heads with long pointed beakes, resembling the long bill of a Storke or Crane,
or such like bird, which after it is ripe, parts at the bottom where it is
biggest, into four or five seeds, every one whereof has a piece of the beak
head fastened unto it, and falls away if it be not gathered: the root is
tuberous and round, like unto the root of the Cyclamen or ordinary Sowbread
almost, but smaller, and of a dark russet color on the outside, and white
within, which does increase under ground, by certain strings running from the
mother root into small round bulbes, like unto the roots of the earth Chestnut,
and will presently shoot leaves, and quickly grow to bear flowers, but will
not abide to be kept long dry out of the ground, without danger to be utterly
spoiled.

Geranium Batrachoides flore caeruleo. The blew Crowfoote Cranes bill.
This Crowfoote Cranes bill has many large leaves, cut into five or six parts
or divisions, even to the bottom, and iagged besides on the edges, set upon
very long slender foote-stalkes, very like the leaves of the wild Crowfoot;
from among which rise up diverse stalks with great joints, somewhat reddish,
set with leaves like the former: the tops of the stalks are spread into many
branches, whereon stand diverse flowers, made of five leaves a piece, as large
as any of the wild or field Crowfeete, round pointed, of a fair blew or
watchet color, which being past, there do arise such heads or bills, as other
of the Cranes bills have: the root is composed of many reddish strings,
spreading in the ground, from a head made of diverse red heads, which lie
oftentimes eminent above the ground.

Geranium Batrachoides flore albo. The white Crowfoote Cranes bill.
This Cranes bill is in leaf and flower altogether like the former, the only
difference between them consists in the color of the flower, which in this
is wholly white, and as large as the former: but the root of this has not
such red heads as the other has.

Geranium Batrachoides flore albo and caeruleo vario. The party colored
Crowfoote Cranes bill.
The flowers of this Cranes bill are variably striped and spotted, and
sometimes divided, the one half of every leaf being white, and the other
half blew, sometimes with lesser or greater spots of blew in the white leaf,
very variably, and more in some years then in others, that it is very hard to
express all the varieties that may be observed in the flowers, that blow at
one time. In all other parts of the plant, it is so like unto the former, that
until it be in flower, the one cannot be known from the other.

5. Geranium Batrachoides alterum flore purpureo. Purple Crowfoote Cranes bill.
This purple Cranes bill has many leaves rising from the root, set upon long
foot-stalkes, somewhat like unto the other, yet not so broad, but more divided
or cut, that is, into seven or more slits, even to the middle, each whereof is
likewise cut in on the edges more deeply then the former; the stalks are
somewhat knobbed at the joints, set with leaves like unto the lower, and
bearing a great tuft of buds at the tops of the branches, which break out
into fair large flowers, made of five purple leaves, which do somewhat
resemble the flower of a Mallow, before it be too full blown, each whereof
has a reddish pointell in the middle, and many small threads compassing it,
this vmbell or tuft of buds do flower by degrees, and not all at once, and
every flower abides open little more then one day, and then sheddeth, so that
every day yields fresh flowers, which because they are so many, are a long
while before they are all past or spent: after the flowers are past, there
arise small beak heads or bills, like unto the other Cranes bills, with small
turning seed: the root is composed of a great tuft of strings, fastened to a
knobby head.

6. Geranium Romanum versicolor sieve striatum. The variable stripped Cranes bill.
This beautiful Cranes bill has many broad yellowish green leaves arising
from the root, divided into five or six parts, but not unto the middle as the
first kinds are: each of these leaves has a blackish spot at the bottom
corners of the divisions, the whole leaf as well in form as color and spots,
is very like unto the leaf of the Geranium fuscum, or spotted Cranes bill,
next following to be described, but that the leaves of this are not so large as
the other: from among these leaves spring up sundry stalks a foot high and
better, ioynted and knobbed here and there, bearing at the tops two or three
small white flowers, consisting of five leaves a piece, so thickly and variably
striped with fine small reddish veins, that no green leaf that is of that
bigness can show so many veins in it, nor so thick running as every leaf of
this flower does: in the middle of the flower stands a small pointell, which
when the flower is past does grow to be the seed vessel, whereon is set diverse
small seeds, like unto the small seeds of other Cranes bills: the root is made
of many small yellow threads or strings.

7. Geranium fuscum sieve maculatum. Swart tawny or spotted Cranes bill.
The leaves of this Cranes bill are in all points like the last described, as
well in the form and divisions as color of the leaves, being of a yellowish
green color, but larger and stronger by much: the stalks of this rise much
higher, and are ioynted or knobbed with reddish knees or joints, on the tops
whereof stand not many although large flowers, consisting of five leaves a
piece, each whereof is round at the end, and a little snipt round about, and
do bend or turn themselves back to the stalkewards, making the middle to be
highest or most eminent; the color of the flower is of a dark or deep
blackish purple, the bottom of every leaf being whiter then the rest; it has
also a middle pointell standing out, which afterward bring forth seed like
unto others of his kind: the root consists of diverse great strings, joined
to a knobby head.

8. Geranium Hematodes. The red Rose Cranes bill.
This Cranes bill has diverse leaves spread upon the ground, very much cut in
or divided into many parts, and each of them again slit or cut into two or
three pieces, standing upon slender long foote-stalkes, of a fair green
color all the Spring and Summer, but reddish in Autumn: among these leaves
spring up slender and weak stalks, beset at every joint (which is somewhat
reddish) with two leaves for the most part, like unto the lower: the flowers
grow severally on the top of the stalks, and not many together in bunches or
branches, as in all other of the Cranes bills, every flower being as large as a
single Rose Campion flower, consisting of five large leaves, of a deeper red
color then in any other Cranes bill at the first opening, and will change more
bluish afterward: when the flower is past, there does arise such like beakes
as are in others of the same kind, but small: the root is hard, long, and
thick, with diverse branches spreading from it, of a reddish yellow color on
the outside, and whitish within, which abides and perishes not, but shoots
forth some new green leaves, which abide all the Winter, although those that
turn red do fall away.

Geranium Creticum. Candy Cranes bill.
Candy Cranes bill bears long and tender stalks, whereon grow diverse broad
and long leaves, cut in or iagged on the edges: the tops of the stalks are
branched into many flowers, made of five leaves of a reasonable bigness, and
of a fair blew or watchet color, with a purplish pointell in the middle,
which being past, there follow beak heads like other Cranes bills, but greater,
containing larger, greater, and sharper pointed seed, able to pierce the
skin, if one be not wary of it: the root is white and long, with some
fibers at it, and perishes when it has perfected his seed, and will spring
of it own sowing many times, if the Winter be not too sharp, otherwise (being
annual) it must be sown in the Spring of the year.

The Place.
Most of these Cranes bills are strangers unto us by nature, but endenizond in
our English Gardens. It has been reported unto me by some of good credit,
that the second or Crowfoot Cranes bill has been found naturally growing in
England, but yet I never saw it, although I have seen many sorts of wild
kinds in many places. Matthiolus says that the first grows in Dalmatia and
Illyria very plentifully. Camerarius, Clusius, and others, that most of the
rest grow in Germany, Bohemia, Austria, etc. The last has his place recorded
in his title.

The Time.
All these Cranes bills do for the most part flower in April, and May, and
until the middle of June. The variable or stripped Cranes bill is usually the
latest of all the rest.

The Names.
The first is usually called Geranium tuberosum, of some Geranium bulbosum, of
the likeness of the root unto a bulbe: It is without controversy Geranium
primum of Dioscorides. The second is called Geranium Gratia Dei, of others,
Geranium caeruleum. The blew Cranes bill Lobel calls it Batrachoides, because
both leaf and flower are like unto a Crowfoote; and the affinity with the
Cranes bills in the seed causes it rather to be referred to them then to the
Crowfeete. The stripped Cranes bill is called by some Geranium Romanum. The last
saving one is called Geranium Haematodes, or Sanguineum, of Lobel Geranium
Gruinal^ Haematodes supinum radice repent. In English it may be called after
the Greek and Latin, The bloody Cranes bill, but I rather call it, The Rose
Cranes bill, because the flowers are as large as single Roses, or as the Rose
Campion. Some of them are called in many places of England Bassinets.

The Virtues.
All the kinds of Cranes bills are accounted great wound herbs, and effectual
to stay bleedings, yet some more then others. The Emperickes of Germany, as
Camerarius says, extol it wonderfully, for a singular remedy against the
Stone, both in the reins and bladder.

CHAP. XXXI.
Sanicula guttata mayor. Spotted Sanicie.
Having long debated with my self, where to place this and the other plants
that follow in the two next Chapters, I have thought it not amiss for this
work to set them down here, both before the Bears ears, which are kinds of
Sanicle, as the best Authors do hold, and after the Cranes bills, both for some
qualities somewhat resembling them, and for some affinity of the flowers with
the former.

The spotted Sanicle has many small round leaves, bluntly endented about the
edges, somewhat like unto the leaves of our white Saxifrage, of a full green
color above, and whitish hairy, and somewhat reddish withal underneath: the
stalks are set here and there with the like leaves, rising a foot and a half
high or more, very much divided at the top into sundry small branches,
bearing many very small white flowers, consisting of five small leaves, wherein
are many small red spots to be seen, as small as pins points, of a pretty
sweet sent, almost like Hawthorne flowers, in the middle whereof are many
small threads compassing a head, which when it is ripe contains small black
seed: the root is scaly, or covered with a chaffie matter, having many small
white fibers underneath, whereby it is fastened in the ground.

There is another of this kind, like both in root, leaf, and flower to the
former, Minor non guttata.
the only difference is, that this is lesser then the former, and has no
spots in the flower, as the other has.

We have also another smaller kind then the last, both in leaf and flower,
Minus guttata.
the leaves whereof are smaller, but rounder, and more finely snipt or indented
about the edge, like the teeth of a fine saw: the stalk is little above a
span high, having many small white flowers spotted as the first, but with fewer
spots.

The Place.
These grow in the shadowie Woods of the Alps, in diverse places, and with us
they more delight in the shade then the sun.

The Time.
All these Sanicles do flower in May, and continue flowring until June, and
the seed soon ripeneth after: the roots abide all the Winter, with some
leaves on them, springing a fresh in the beginning of the year.

The Names.
The former two are called by Clusius Sanicula montana, and by others Sanicula
guttata: by Lobel Geum Alpinum. The third or last has been sent us under the
name of Sanicula montana altera minor.

The Virtues.
The name imposed on these plants do certainly assure us of their virtues,
from the first founders, that they are great healers, and from their taste,
that they are great binders.

CHAP. XXXII.
Cotyledon altera Matthioli. Spotted Nauelwort.
THis spotted Nauelwort, as many do call it, has many thick small leaves,
not so broad as long, of a whitish green color, lying on the ground in
circles, after the manner of the heads of Houseleeke, and dented about the
edges; from the middle whereof sometimes (for it does not flower every year in
many places) arises up a stalk, scarce a foot high, beset with such like
leaves as are below, but somewhat longer: from the middle of the stalk up to
the top it brancheth forth diversely, with a leaf at every joint, bearing three
or four flowers on every branch, consisting of five white leaves, spotted with
small red spots, like unto the spotted Sanicle, but with fewer and greater
spots, having a yellowish circle or eye in the bottom of every flower, and
many whitish threads with yellowish tips in it: the seed is small and black,
contained in small round heads: the root is small, long, and threadie,
shooting out such heads of leaves, which abide all the Winter, those that bear
flower perishing.

Cotyledon altera minor. Small dented Nauelwort.
There is another like unto that before described in most things, the
differences be these: It has shorter leaves then the former, and dented about
the edges in the like manner: the flowers hereof are white, but greater, made
of six leaves, and most usually without any spots at all in them, some are
seen to have spots also: the heads or seed vessels are more cornered then the
former.

Cotyledon altera flore rubro stellato. Small red flowred Nauelwort.
This has also many heads of leaves, but more open, which are longer, greener,
and sharper pointed then either of the former, somewhat reddish also, and not
dented about the edges, but yet a little rough in handling: the stalk arises
from among the leaves, being somewhat reddish, and the leaves thereon are
reddish pointed, divided at the top into many branches, with diverse flowers
thereon, made of twelve small long leaves, standing like a star, of a reddish
purple color, with many threads therein, set about the middle head, which is
divided at the top into many small ends, like pods or horns, containing
therein very small seed: the root is small like the former.

Sedum serratum flore rubente maculato. The Princes Feather.
This kind of Sengreene is composed of heads of larger, broader, and thinner
leaves then any of the former, of a sadder green color, somewhat unevenly
endented about the edges, and not so close set together, but spreading forth
into several heads like as the former sorts do, although not so plentifully;
from the middle of diverse of which heads rise up brownish or reddish stalks,
set with smaller leaves thereon to the middle thereof, and then brancheth forth
into several sprigs, set with diverse small reddish flowers consisting of five
leaves a piece, the innerside of which are of a pale red, somewhat whitish,
spotted with many small blood red spots, as small almost as pins points, with
some small threads in the middle, standing about a small green head, which
turns into the seed vessel, parted four ways at the head, wherein is
contained small blackish seed: the roots are small threads, which spread
under the ground, and shoot up several heads round about it.

The Place.
All these grow in Germany, Hungary, Austria, the Alps, and other such like
places, where they cleave to the rock it self, that has but a crust of earth
on it to nourish them. They will abide in Gardens reasonable well, if they be
planted in shadowie places, and not in the sun.

1 Sanicula guttata. Spotted Sanicle. 2 Cotyledon altera Matthioli. Spotted
Nauelwort. 3 Cotyledon altera minor. Small dented Nauelwort. 4 Cotyledon altera
flore rubro stellato. Small red flowred Nauelwort. 5 Sedum serratum flore
rubente maculato. The Princes Feather. 6 Soldanella Aspina. Blew Moonwort.
depiction of flowers

The Time.
They flower for the most part in the end of May, and sometimes sooner or
later, as the year falls out.

The Names.
The first is called by Matthiolus, Cotyledon altera Dioscoridis, and Vmbilicus
alter, but it is not the true Cotyledon altera of Dioscorides; for Sedum
vulgar maius, Our common Houseleeke, by the consent of the best modern
Writers, is the true Cotyledon altera of Dioscorides, or Vmbilicus Veneris
alter. I hold it rather to be a kind of small Houseleeke, as the other two
likewise are. The second is called by some Aizoum or Sedum minus serratum. The
third has his name in his title. We do call them Nauelworts in English
rather then Houseleekes, Euphoniae gratia. The last may be called dented
Sengreene with reddish spotted flowers, but some of our English Gentlewomen
have called it, The Princes Feather, which although it be but a by-name, may
well serve for this plant to distinguish it, and whereby to be known.

The Virtues.
They are all held to be cold and moist, like unto other Houseleekes.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Soldanella Alpina. Mountain Soldanella or blew Moonewort.
THis beautiful plant has many round and hard leaves, set upon long
footestalkes, a little unevenly cut about the edges, green on the vpperside,
and of a grayish green underneath, and sometime reddish like the leaves of
Sowbread, which because they do somewhat resemble the leaves of Soldanella
marina, which is the Sea Bindweede, took the name thereof: the stalks are
slender, small, round, and reddish, about a span high, bearing four or five
flowers at the top, every one hanging down their heads, like unto a Bell
flower, consisting but of one leaf (as most of the Bindweeds do) plated into
five folds, each of them ending in a long point, which makes the flower seem
to have five leaves, each whereof is deeply cut in on the edges, and having a
round green head in the middle, with a prick or pointell at the end thereof:
the flower is of a fair blew color, sometimes deeper or paler, or white, as
nature lists without any smell at all: the middle head, after the flower is
fallen, rises to be a long round pod, bearing that prick it had at the end
thereof, wherein is contained small greenish seed: the root has many fibers
shooting from a long round head or root.

The Place.
This grows on the Alps, which are covered with snow the greatest part of
the year, and will hardly abide transplanting.

The Time.
In the natural places it flowreth not until the Summer months, June, July,
and August, after the snow is melted from the Hills, but being brought into
Gardens, it flowreth in the beginning of April, or thereabouts.

The Names.
This plant, by reason of the likeness of leaves with Soldanella, as was
before said, is called by many Soldanella, but yet is no Bindweede; and
therefore I rather call it in English a Mountain Soldanella, then as Gerrard
does, Mountain Bindweede. It is likewise called by some, Lunaria minor
caerulea, The lesser blew Lunary or Moonwort, and so I would rather have it
called.

The Virtues.
They that imposed the name of Lunaria upon this plant, seem to refer it to
the wound or consolidating herbs, but because I have no further relation or
experience, I can say no more thereof until trial has taught it. Some also
from the name Soldanella, which is given it, because of the likeness of the
leaves, have used it to help the Dropsy, for which the Sea plant is thought to
be effectual.

CHAP. XXXIIII.
Auricula Vrsi. Bears ears.
THere are so many sundry and several sorts of Bears ears, the variety
consisting as well in the differing colors of the flowers, as the form and
color of the leaves, that I shall not comprehend and set down unto you all
the diversities by many, that are risen up to those that have been industrious
in the sowing of the seeds of the several sorts of them; yet if you accept of
these that I do here offer unto you, I shall give you the knowledge of others,
as time, occasion, and the view of them shall enable me. And because they are
without all question kinds of Cowslips, I have set them down before them in
the first place, as being of more beauty and greater respect, or at the least
of more rarity unto us. To dispose them therefore into order, I shall rank
them under three principal colors, that is to say, Red or Purple, White, and
Yellow, and show you the varieties of each of them (for so many as are come to
my knowledge) apart by themselves, and not promiscuously as many others have
done.

1. Auricula Vrsi flore purpureo. Purple Bears ear, or The Murrey Cowslip.
This purple Bears ear or Cowslip has many green leaves, somewhat long and
smooth, narrow from the bottom of the leaf to the middle, and broad from
thence to the end, being round pointed, and somewhat snipt or endented about
the edges; in the middle of these leaves, and sometimes at the sides also, do
spring round green stalks four or five fingers high, bearing at the top many
flowers, the buds whereof, before they are blown, are of a very deep purple
color, and being open, are of a bright, but deep purple, usually called a
Murrey color, consisting of five leaves a piece, cut in at the end as it were
into two, with a whitish ring or circle at the bottom of each flower, standing
in small green cups, wherein after the flowers are fallen, are contained very
small heads, not rising to the height of the cups, bearing a small prick or
pointell at the top of them, wherein is little blackish seed: the root has
many whitish strings fastened to the maine long root, which is very like unto
a Primrose or Cowslip root, as it is in all other parts besides.

2. Auricula Vrsi purpurea absque orb. The murrey Cowslip without eyes.
There is another of this kind, whose leaf is somewhat less, as the flower
is also, but of the same color, and sometimes somewhat redder, tending to a
Scarlet, without any circle at the bottom of the flower, in no other things
differing from it.

3. Auricula Vrsi minor flore tannetto. Tawney Bears ears.
The leaves of this kind have a greater show of mealinesse to be seen in
them, and not much smaller then the former, yet snipt or endented about the
ends like unto them: the flowers are many, of the same fashion with the former,
but smaller, each whereof is of as deep a murrey or tawnie color when it is
blown, as the buds of the former are before they are blown, having a white
circle at the bottom of the flower, and yellowish in the middle below the
circle.

4. Auricula Vrsi flore rubro saturo orb luteo. Deep or blood red Bears
ears with eyes.
This kind has small and long green leaves, nothing mealy, but snipt about
the edges, from the middle of the leaves forwards to the ends: the flowers
hereof are of a deep red color, tending to a blood red, with a deep yellow
circle, or rather bottom in the middle.

Auricula Vrsi flore rubro sature absque orb.
There is another of this kind, whose leaves are somewhat mealy, and smaller
then any (that I have seen) that have mealy leaves: the flowers are of the
same deep red color with the last described, yet has no circle or bottom of
any other color at all.

5. Auricula Vrsi flore purpuro caeruleo. The Violet colored Bears ear.
We have another, whose leaves are somewhat mealy and large; the flowers
whereof are of a paler purple then the first, somewhat tending to a blew.

6. Auricula Vrsi flore obsoleto magno. The Spaniards blush Bears ear.
This great Bears ear has as large leaves as any other of this kindred
whatsoever, and whitish or mealy withal, somewhat snipt about the edges, as
many other of them are: the flowers stand at the top of a strong and tall
stalk, larger then any of the other that I have seen, being of a duskie blush
color, resembling the blush of a Spaniard, whose tawney skin cannot declare
so pure a blush as the English can; and therefore I have called it the
Spaniards blush.

7. Auricula Vrsi flore rubello. Scarlet or light red Bears ears.
The leaves of this kind are very like the leaves of the first purple kind,
but that they are not so thick; of a little paler green color, and little or
nothing snipt about the edges: the flowers are of a bright, but pale reddish
color, not half so deep as the two last with white circles in the bottomes
of them, in other things this differs not from others.

8. Auricula Vrsi Roseo color. The Rose colored Bears ear.
We have another, whose leaf is a little mealy, almost as large as any of the
former, whose flowers are of a light red color, very near the color of an
ordinary Damask Rose, with a white eye at the bottom.

9. Auricula Vrsi flore caeruleo folio Boraginis. Blew Bears ears with Borage
leaves.
This plant is referred to the kindred or family of the Bears ears, only for
the form of the flower sake, which even therein it does not assimilate to the
half; but because it has passed others with that title, I am content to
insert it here, to give you 1 Auricula Vrsi flore purpureo. Purple Cowslips or
Bears ears. 2 Auricula Vrsi flore ^annetto. Tawney Bears ear. 3 Auricula
Vrsi flore and folio Boraginis. Blew Bears ears with Borage leaves. 4
Auricula Vrsi flore carneo Blush Bears ear. 5 Auricula Vrsi maxima lutea
flore eleganti. The greatest fair yellow Bears ears with eyes. 6 Auricula
Vrsi altera flore luteo. The yellow Bears ear. 7 Auricula Vrsi crinis coloris
sieve flore fusco. The hair colored Bears ear. 8 Cortusa Matthioli. Bears
ear Sanicle.
depiction of flowers the knowledge thereof, and rather to satisfy others then
my self with the place thereof: the description whereof is as follows: It
has diverse broad rough hairy leaves spread upon the ground, somewhat like unto
the leaves of Borage for the roughness, but not for the largeness; the leaves
hereof being somewhat rent in some places at the edges: from among these leaves
rise up one, or two, or more brownish, round, and hairy stalks, a span high or
thereabouts, bearing at the tops three or four flowers a piece, consisting
of five large pointed leaves, of a fair blew or light azur color, with some
small yellow threads in the middle, standing in small green cups: the root is
long and brownish, having many small fibers annexed unto it.

10. Auricula Vrsi mayor flore albo. The great white Bears ear.
This white Bears ear has many fair whitish green leaves, somewhat paler
then the leaves of any of the kinds of Bears ears, and a little snipt about
the ends, as many other are: among these leaves rise up stalks four or five
inches high, bearing at the top many flowers like unto the small yellow
Bears ear hereafter set down, of a pale whitish color, tending to yellow at
the first opening of the flower, which after two or three days change into a
fair white color, and so continue all the while it flowreth: the root is
like the purple kind, as all or most of the rest are, or very little differing.

11. Auricula Vrsi minor flore albo. The lesser white Bears ear.
The lesser Bears ear has smaller leaves, of a little darker green color:
the stalk and flowers are likewise lesser then the former, and have no show of
yellowness at all, either in budde or flower, but is pure white, differing not
in other things from the rest.

12. Auricula Vrsi maxima lutea flore eleganti. The greatest fair yellow
Bears ear with eyes.
This yellow Bears ear has many fair large thick leaves, somewhat mealy or
hoary upon the greenness, being larger then any other kind, except the sixth,
and the next yellow that follows, smooth about the edges, and without any
endenting at all: the stalk is great, round, and not higher then in other of
the former, but bearing many more flowers thereon then in any other kind, to
the number of thirty many times, standing so round and close together, that
they seem to be a Nosegay alone, of the same fashion with the former, but that
the leaves are shorter and rounder, yet with a notch in the middle like the
rest, of a fair yellow color, neither very pale nor deep, with a white eye
or circle in the bottom, about the middle of every flower, which gives it the
greater grace: the seed is of a blackish brown color, like unto others, but
contained in greater round heads then any other, with a small pointell sticking
in the middle: the root is greater and thicker then any other, with long
strings or fibers like unto the other sorts, but greater.

13. Auricula Vrsi mayor lutea folio in cauo. The greater yellow Bears ear.
This greater yellow Bears ear has his leaves larger, and more mealy or
hoarie then the last, or any other of these kinds: the flowers are not so
many, but longer, and not so thick thrusting together as the first, but of a
deeper yellow color, without any eye or circle in the middle.

14. Auricula Vrsi mayor flore pallido. The great Straw colored Bears ear.
This has almost as mealy leaves as the last, but nothing so large; the
flowers are of a fair straw color, with a white circle at the bottom of
them, these three last have no show or shadow of any other color in any part
of the edge, as some others that follow have.

15. Auricula Vrsi minor flore pallente. The lesser straw colored Bears ear.
We have another, whose leaf is less mealy, or rather pale green, and a
little mealy withal; the flowers whereof are of a paler yellow color then the
last, and bears almost as many upon a stalk as the first great yellow.

16. Auricula Vrsi minor lutea. The lesser yellow Bears ears.
The leaves of this Bears ear are nothing so large as either of the three
former yellow kinds, but rather of the bigness of the first white kind, but
yet a little larger, thicker, and longer then it, having under the greenness a
small show of mealinesse, and somewhat snipt about the edges: the flowers are
of a pale yellow color, with a little white bottom in them: the seed and
roots are like unto the other kinds.

17. Auricula Vrsi flore flauo. The deep yellow or Cowslip Bears ear.
This kind has somewhat larger leaves then the last, of a yellowish green
color, without any mealinesse on them, or endenting about the edges, but
smooth and whole: the flowers are not larger but longer, and not laid open so
fully as the former, but of as deep a yellow color as any Cowslip almost,
without any circle in the bottom: neither of these two last have any show of
other color then yellow in them, saving the white in the eye.

18. Auricula Vrsi versicolor prima sieve flore rubescente. The blush Bears
ear.
The blush Bears ear has his leaves as large, and as hoary or mealy as the
third greater yellow, or straw colored Bears ear; among which rises up a
stalk about four inches high, bearing from six to twelve, or more fair
flowers, somewhat larger then the smaller yellow Bears ear before described,
having the ground of the flower of a dark or dunne yellow color, shadowed
over a little with a show of light purple, which therefore we call a blush
color, the edges of the flower being ripped with a little deeper show of that
purple color, the bottom of the flower abiding wholly yellow, without any
circle, and is of very great beauty, which has caused me to place it in the
forefront of the variable colored Bears ears. And although some might think
it should be placed among the first rank of Bears ears, because it is of a
blush color, yet seeing it is assuredly gained from some of the yellow kinds
by sowing the seed, as many other sorts are, as may be seen plainly in the
ground of the flower, which is yellow, and but shadowed over with purple, yet
more then any of the rest that follow; I think I have given it his right
place: let others of skill and experience be judges herein.

19. Auricula Vrsi crinis coloris. Hair colored Bears ears.
The leaves of this kind are more mealy like then the last blush kind, but
somewhat longer and larger, and snipt about the edges in the same manner, from
the middle of the leaf forwards: the flower is usually of a fine light brown
yellow color, which we do usually call an Hair color, and sometimes
browner, the edges of the flower have a show or shadow of a light purple or
blush about them, but more on the outside then on the inside.

20. Auricula Vrsi versicolor lutea. The yellow variable Bears ear.
This variable Bears ear has his green leaves somewhat like unto the deep
yellow, or Cowslip Bears ear before described, but somewhat of a fresher
green, more shining and smaller, and snipt about the edges toward the ends,
as many of those before are: the flowers are of a fair yellow color, much
laid open when it is full blown, that it seems almost flat, dashed about the
edges only with purple, being more yellow in the bottom of the flower, then
in any other part.

21. Auricula Vrsi versicolor lutescente viridi flore. The variable green
Bears ear.
This kind of Bears ear has green leaves, very like unto the last
described, and snipt in the like manner about the edges, but in this it
differs, that his leaves do turn or fold themselves a little backwards: the
flowers are of a yellowish green color, more closed then the former, having
purplish edges, especially after they have stood blown some time, and have
little or none at the first opening: these have no circles at all in them.

Many other varieties are to be found, with those that are curious conseruers
of these delights of nature, either narurally growing on the mountains in
several places, from whence they (being searched out by diverse) have been
taken and brought, or else raised from the seed of some of them, as it is more
probable: for several varieties have been observed (and no doubt many of
these before specified) to be gotten by sowing of the seeds, every year
lightly showing a diversity, not observed before, either in the leaf, diverse
from that from whence it was taken, or in the flowers. I have only set down
those that have come under mine own view, and not any by relation, even as I
do with all or most of the things contained in this work.

The Place.
Many of these goodly plants grow naturally on mountains, especially the
Alps, in diverse places; for some kinds that grow in some places, do not in
others, but far distant one from the other. There has likewise some been
found on the Pyrenaean mountains, but that kind with the blew flower and
Borage leaf, has been gathered on the mountains in Spain, and on the
Pyrenaeans next unto Spain.

The Time.
They all flower in April and May, and the seed is ripe in the end of June,
or beginning of July, and sometimes they will flower again in the end of
Summer, or in Autumn, if the year prove temperate, moist, and rainie.

The Names.
It is very probable, that none of these plants were ever known unto the
ancient Writers, because we cannot be assured, that they may be truly referred
unto any plant that they name, unless we believe Fabius Columna, that it
should be Alisma of Dioscorides, for thereunto he does refer it. Diverse of
the later Writers have given unto them diverse names, every one according to his
own conceit. For Gesner calls it Lunaria arthritica, and Paralytica Alpina.
Matthiolus accounts it to be of the kindred of the Sanicles, and says, that
in his time it was called by diverse Herbarists, Auricula Vrsi, which name has
since bin received as most usual. We in English call them Bears ears,
according to the Latin, or as they are called by diverse women, French
Cowslips; they may be called Mountain Cowslips, if you will, for to
distinguish between them and other Cowslips, whereof these are several kinds.

Sanicula Alpina sieve Cortusa Matthioli. Bears ear Sanicle.
I cannot choose but insert this delicate plant in the end of the Bears ears,
for that it is of so near affinity, although it differ much in the form of
the leaves, the description whereof is in this manner: The leaves that spring
up first are much crumpled, and as it were folded together, which afterward
open themselves into fair, broad, and roundish leaves, somewhat rough or
hairy, not only cut into fine divisions, but somewhat notched also about the
edges, of a dark green color on the vpperside, and more whitish green
underneath; amongst these leaves rises up one or two naked round stalks, five
or six inches high, bearing at the tops diverse small flowers, somewhat
sweet, like unto the first purple Bears ear, hanging down their heads,
conssting of five small pointed leaves a piece, of a dark reddish purple
color, with a white circle or bottom in the middle, and some small threads
therein: after the flowers are past, there come small round heads, somewhat
longer then any of the Bears ears, standing upright upon their small
foot-stalkes, wherein is contained small round and blackish seed: the root
consists of a thick tuft of small whitish threads, rather then roots, much
enterlaced one among another: the leaves of this plant dye down every year,
and spring up a new in the beginning of the year, whereas all the Bears ears
do hold their leaves green all the Winter, especially the middlemost, which
stand like a close head, the outermost for the most part perishing after seed
time.

The Place.
This grows in many shadowie Woods both of Italy and Germany; for both
Clusius has described it, finding it in the Woods of Austria and Stiria; and
Matthiolus sets it down, having received it from Anthonius Cortusus, who
was President of the Garden at Padua, and found it in the woody mountains of
Vicenza, near unto Villestagna, whereon (as Matthiolus says) there is found
both with white flowers as well as with blew, but such with white flowers or
blew we never could see or hear further of.

The Time.
It flowreth much about the time of the Bears ears, or rather a little later,
and the seed is ripe with them.

The Names.
Clusius calls it Sanicula montana, and Sanicula, Alpina, and refers it to
the Auricula Vrsi, or Bears ear, which it does most nearly resemble: but
Matthiolus refers it to the Cariophyllata or Auens, making it to be of that
tribe or family, and calls it Cortusa of him that first sent it him. We may
call it either Cortusa, as for the most part all Herbarists do, or Bears ear
Sanicle as Gerrard does.

The Virtues.
All the sorts of Bears ears are Cephalicall, that is, conducing help for
the pains in the head, and for the giddiness thereof, which may happen,
either by the sight of steep places subject to danger, or otherwise. They are
accounted also to be helping for the Palsy, and shaking of the joints; and
also as a Sanicle or wound-herbe. The leaves of the Cortusa taste a little hot,
and if one of them be laid whole, without bruising, on the cheek of any
tender skind woman, it will raise an orient red color, as if some fucus had
been laid thereon, which will pass away without any manner of harm, or
mark where it lay: This is Cortusus his observation. Camerarius in his Hortus
Medicus says, that an oil is made thereof, that is admirable for to cure
wounds.

CHAP. XXXV.
Primula veris and Paralysis. Primroses and Cowslips.
WE have so great variety of Primroses and Cowslips of our own Country
breeding, that strangers being much delighted with them, have been often
furnished into diverse Countries, to their good content: And that I may set them
down in some methodicall manner, as I have done other things, I will first set
down all the sorts of those we call Primroses, both single and double, and
afterward the Cowslips with their diversities, in as ample manner as my
knowledge can direct me. And yet I know, that the name of Primula veris or
Primrose is indifferently conferred upon those that I distinguish for Paralyses
or Cowslips. I do therefore for your better understanding of my distinction
between Primroses and Cowslips, call those only Primroses that carry but one
flower upon a stalk, be they single or double, except that of Master Hesket,
and that with double flowers many upon a stalk, set out in Gerards Herball,
which is his only, not found (as I think) in rerum natura, I am sure, such a
one I could never hear of: And those Cowslips, that bear many flowers upon a
stalk together constantly, be they single or double also. I might otherwise
distinguish them also by the leaf; that all the Primroses bear their long and
large broad yellowish green leaves, without stalks most usually; and all the
Cowslips have small stalks under the leaves, which are smaller, and of a
darker green, as usually, but that this distinction is neither so certain and
general, nor so well known.

1. Primula veris flore albo. The single white Primrose.
The Primrose that grows under every bush or hedge, in all or most of the
Woods, Groves, and Orchards of this Kingdom, I may well leave to his wild
habitation, being not so fit for a Garden, and so well known, that I mean not
to give you any further relation thereof: But we have a kind hereof which is
somewhat smaller, and bears milk white flowers, without any show of
yellowness in them, and is more usually brought into Gardens for the rarity,
and differs not from the wild or ordinary kind, either in root or leaf,
or any thing else, yet having those yellow spots, but smaller, and not so
deep, as are in the other wild kind.

2. Primula veris flore viridi simplici. The single green Primrose.
The single green Primrose has his leaves very like unto the greater double
Primrose, but smaller, and of a sadder green color: the flowers stand
severally upon long foot-stalkes, as the first single kind does, but larger
then they, and more laid open, of the same, or very near the same yellowish
green color that the husk is of, so that at the first opening, the husk and
the flower seem to make one double green flower, which afterward separating
themselves, the single flower grows above the husk, and spreads it self
open much more then any other single Primrose does, growing in the end to be of
a paler green color.

3. Primula veris flore viridante and albo simplici. The single green and
white Primrose.
The leaves of this differ in a manner nothing from the former, neither does
the flower but only in this, that out of the large yellowish green husks,
which contain the flowers of the former, there comes forth out of the middle
of each of them either a small piece of a whitish flower, or else a larger,
sometimes making up a whole flower, like an ordinary Primrose.

4. Primula veris flore viridi duplici. The double green Primrose.
This double Primrose is in his leaves so like the former single green kinds,
that 1 Primula veris flore albo. The white Primrose. 2 Primula veris flore
viridi and albo simplici. The green and white Primrose. 3 Primula veris flore
virid^ duplies. The double green Primrose. 4 Primula veris Hesketi. Master
Heskets double Primrose. 5 Primula veris flore pleno vulgaris. The ordinary
double Primrose. 6 Paralysis veris flore viridante simplici. The single green
Cowslip. 7 Paralysis flore geminato odorato Double Cowslips or hose in hose. 8
Paralysis inodora flore geminato. Double Oxelips hose in hose. 9 Paralysis
flore and calice crispo. Curld Cowslips or Gaskins. 10 Paralysis minor
angustifolia flore rubro. Red Birds eyes. 11 Paralysis hortensis flore pleno
vulgaris. Double Paigles. 12 Paralysis satu^. The foolish Cowslip, or lack an
Apo^ on horse back. 13 Paralysis flore viridi roseo calamistrate. The double
green feathered Cowslip.
depiction of flowers the one cannot be known from the other until it come to
flower, and then it bears upon every stalk a double green flower, of a
little deeper green color then the flower of the former single kind
consisting but of two rows of short leaves most usually, and both of an equal
height above the husk, abiding a pretty time in flower, especially if it stand
in any shadowed place, or where the Sun may come but a while unto it.

5. Primula veris Hesketi flore multiplici separatim diuiso. Master Heskets
double Primrose.
Master Heskets double Primrose is very like unto the small double Primrose,
both in leaf, root, and height of growing, the stalk not rising much higher
then it, but bearing flowers in a far different manner; for this bears not
only single flowers upon several stalks, but sometimes two or three single
flowers upon one stalk, and also at the same time a bigger stalk, and somewhat
higher, having one green husk at the top thereof, sometimes broken on the
one side, and sometimes whole, in the middle whereof stands sometimes diverse
single flowers, thrust together, every flower to be seen in his proper form,
and sometimes there appear with some whole flowers others that are but parts
of flowers, as if the flowers were broken in pieces, and thrust into one husk,
the leaves of the flowers (being of a white or pale Primrose color, but a
little deeper) seldom rising above the height of the very husk it self; and
sometimes, as I have observed in this plant, it will have upon the same stalk,
that bears such flowers as I have here described unto you, a small flower or
two, making the stalk seem branched into many flowers, whereby you may
perceive, that it will vary into many forms, not abiding constant in any
year, as all the other sorts do.

6. Primula hortensis flore pleno vulgaris. The ordinary double Primrose.
The leaves of this Primrose are very large, and like unto the single kind, but
somewhat larger, because it grows in gardens: the flowers do stand every one
severally upon slender long footestalkes, as the single kind does, in greenish
husks of a pale yellow color, like unto the field Primrose, but very thick
and double, and of the same sweet sent with them.

7. Primula veris flore duplici. The small double Primrose.
This Primrose is both in leaf, root, and flower, altogether like unto the
last double Primrose, but that it is smaller in all things; for the flower
rises not above two or three fingers high, and but twice double, that is, with
two rows of leaves, yet of the very same Primrose color that the former is of.

8. Paralysis vulgaris pratensis flore flauo simplici odorato. The Common field
Cowslip.
The common field Cowslip I might well forbear to set down, being so
plentiful in the fields: but because many take delight in it, and plant it in
their gardens, I will give you the description of it here. It has diverse green
leaves, very like unto the wild Primrose, but shorter, rounder, stiffer,
rougher, more crumpled about the edges, and of a sadder green color, every
one standing upon his stalk, which is an inch or two long: among the leaves
rise up diverse round stalks, a foot or more high, bearing at the top many
fair yellow single flowers, with spots of a deeper yellow, at the buttome of
each leaf, smelling very sweet. The roots are like to the other Primroses,
having many fibers annexed to the great root.

9. Paralysis altera odorata flore pallido polyanthos. The Primrose Cowslip.
The leaves of this Cowslip are larger then the ordinary field Cowslip, and of
a dark yellowish green color: the flowers are many standing together, upon
the tops of the stalks, to the number of thirty sometimes upon one stalk,
as I have counted them in mine own Garden, and sometimes more, every one
having a longer foot stalk then the former, and of as pale a yellowish color
almost as the field Primrose, with yellow spots at the bottom of the leaves,
as the ordinary has, and of as sweet a sent.

10. Paralysis flore viridante simplici. The single green Cowslip.
There is little difference in leaf or root of this from the first Cowslip,
the chiefest variety in this kind is this, that the leaves are somewhat
greener, and the flowers being in all respects like in form unto the first
kind, but somewhat larger, are of the same color with the green husks, or
rather a little yellower, and of a very small sent; in all other things I find
no diversity, but that it stands much longer in flower before it fades,
especially if it stand out of the Sun.

11. Paralysis flore and calice crispo. Curled Cowslips or Gallegaskins.
There is another kind, whose flowers are folded or crumpled at the edges, and
the husks of the flowers bigger than any of the former, more swelling out in
the middle, as it were ribs, and crumpled on the sides of the husks, which
do somewhat resemble men's hose that they did wear, and took the name of
Gallegaskins from thence.

12. Paralysis flore geminato odorato. Double Cowslips one within another, or
Hose in Hose.
The only difference of this kind from the ordinary field Cowslip is, that it
bears one single flower out of another, which is as a green husk, of the
like sent that the first has, or somewhat weaker.

13. Paralysis flore flauo simplici inodoro absque calicibus. Single Ox lips.
This kind of Cowslip has leaves much like the ordinary kind, but somewhat
smaller: the flowers are yellow like the Cowslip, but smaller, standing many
upon a stalk, but bare or naked, that is, without any husk to contain them,
having but little or no sent at all; nor differing in any thing else from the
ordinary Cowslip.

14. Paralysis flore geminato inodora. Double Oxelips Hose in Hose.
As the former double Cowslip had his flowers one within another, in the very
like manner has this kind of Cowslip or Oxelippe, saving that this has no
husk to contain them, no more then the former single Oxelippe has, standing
bare or naked, of the very same bigness each of them, and of the same deep
yellow color with it, having as small a sent as the former likewise.

We have another of this kind, whose leaves are somewhat larger, Flore
pallidiore
and so are the flowers also, but of a paler yellow color.

15. Paralysis inodora calicibus dissectis. Oxelips with iagged husks.
This kind differs not from the first Oxelip in the smalnesse of the green
leaves, but in the flower, which standing many together on a reasonable high
stalk, and being very small and yellow, scarce opening themselves or laid
abroad as it, has a green husk under each flower, but divided into six
several small long pieces.

16. Paralysis flore fatuo. The Frantic, or Foolish Cowslip: Or Jack an apes
on horse back.
We have in our gardens another kind, not much differing in leaves from the
former Cowslip, and is called Fantastic or Foolish, because it bears at the
top of the stalk a bush or tuft of small long green leaves, with some
yellow leaves, as it were pieces of flowers broken, and standing among the
green leaves. And sometimes some stalks among those green leaves at the
top (which are a little larger then when it has but broken pieces of
flowers) do carry whole flowers in husks like the single kind.

17. Paralysis minor flore rubro. Red Birds eyes.
This little Cowslippe (which will hardly endure in our gardens, for all the
care and industry we can use to keep it) has all the Winter long, and until
the Spring begin to come on, his leaves so closed together, that it seems a
small white head of leaves, which afterward opening it self, spreads round
upon the ground, and has small long and narrow leaves, snipt about the edges,
of a pale green color on the vpperside, and very white or mealy underneath,
among these leaves rise up one or two stalks, small and hoary, half a foot
high, bearing at the top a bush or tuft of much smaller flowers, standing upon
short foot stalks, some what like unto Cowslips, but more like unto the Bears
ears, of a fine reddish purple color, in some deeper, in others paler, with a
yellowish circle in the bottomes of the flowers, like unto many of the Bears
ears, of a faint or small sent: the seed is smaller than in any of the former
kinds, and so are the roots likewise, being small, white and threddy.

18. Paralyis minor flore albo. White Birds eyes.
This kind differs very little or nothing from the former, saving that it
seems a little larger both in leaf and flower, and that the flowers hereof
are wholly white, without any great appearance of any circle in the bottom of
them, unless it be well observed, or at least being nothing so conspicuous, as
in the former.

Flore geminato.
These two kinds have sometimes, but very seldom, from among the middle of the
flowers on the stalk, sent out another small stalk, bearing flowers thereon
likewise.

19. Paralysis hortensis flore pleno. Double Paigles or Cowslips.
The double Paigle or Cowslip has smaller and darker green leaves then the
single kind has, and longer stalks also whereon the leaves do stand: it
bears diverse flowers upon a stalk, but not so many as the single kind,
every one whereof is of a deeper and fairer yellow color then any of the
former, standing not much above the brimmes of the husks that hold them,
consisting of two or three rows of leaves set round together, which makes it
show very thick and double, of a pretty small sent, but not heady.

20. Paralysis flore viridante pleno. Double green Cowslips.
This double green Cowslip is so like unto the single green kind formerly
expressed, that until they be near flowring, they can hardly be
distinguished: but when it is in flower, it has large double flowers, of the
same yellowish green color with the single, and more laid open then the
former double Paigle.

21. Paralysis flore viridante sieve calamistrato. The green Rose Cowslip, or
double green feathered Cowslip.
There is small difference in the leaves of this double kind from the last,
but that they are not of so dark a green: the chiefest difference consists
in the flowers, which are many, standing together at the tops of the stalks,
but far differing from all other of these kinds: for every flower standing
upon his own stalk, is composed of many very small and narrow leaves, without
any husk to contain them, but spreading open like a little Rose, of a pale
yellowish green color, and without any sent at all, abiding in flower,
especially if it stand in a shadowie place out of the sun, above two months,
almost in as perfect beauty, as in the first week.

The Place.
All these kinds as they have been found wild, growing in diverse places in
England, so they have been transplanted into Gardens, to be there nourished for
the delight of their lovers, where they all abide, and grow fairer then in
their natural places, except the small Birds eyes, which will (as I said)
hardly abide any culture, but grows plentifully in all the North Countries,
in their squally or wet grounds.

The Time.
These do all flower in the Spring of the year, some earlier and some later,
and some in the midst of Winter, as they are defended from the colds and
frosts, and the mildness of the time will permit: yet the Cowslips do always
flower later then the Primroses, and both the single and double green Cowslips
latest, as I said in their descriptions, and abide much after all the rest.

The Names.
All these plants are called most usually in Latin, Primulae veris, Primulae
pratenses, and Primulae siluarum, because they show by their flowring the new
Spring to be coming on, they being as it were the first Ambassadors thereof.
They have also diverse other names, as Herba Paralysis, Arthritica, Herba Sancti
Petri, Claues Sancti Petri, Verbasculum odoratum, Lunaria arthritica, Phlomis,
Alisma siluarum, and Alismatis alterum genus, as Fabius Columna calls them.
The Birds eyes are called of Lobel in Latin, Paralytica Alpina, Sanicula
angustifolia, making a greater and a lesser. Others call them Sanicula
angustifolia but generally they are called Primula veris minor. I have (as you
see) placed them with the Cowslips, putting a difference between Primroses and
Cowslips. And some have distinguished them, by calling the Cowslips, Primula
veris Elatior, that is, the Taller Primrose, and the other Humilis, Low or
Dwarf Primroses. In English they have in like manner diverse names, according
to several Countries, as Primroses, Cowslips, Oxelips, Palsiewort, and Petty
Mulleins. The first kinds, which are lower then the rest, are generally called
by the name of Primroses (as I think) throughout England. The other are
diversely named; for in some Countries they call them Paigles, or Palsieworts,
or Petty Mulleins, which are called Cowslips in others. Those are usually
called Oxelips, whose flowers are naked, or bare without husks to contain
them, being not so sweet as the Cowslip, yet have they some little sent,
although the Latin name does make them to have none. The Frantic,
Fantastic, or Foolish Cowslip, in some places is called by Country people,
Jack an Apes on horseback, which is an usual name with them, given to many
other plants, as Daisies, Marigolds, etc. if they be strange or fantastical,
differing in the form from the ordinary kind of the single ones. The smallest
are usually called through all the North Country, Birds eyes, because of the
small yellow circle in the bottomes of the flowers, resembling the eye of a
bird.

The Virtues.
Primroses and Cowslips are in a manner wholly used in Cephalicall diseases,
either among other herbs or flowers, or of themselves alone, to ease pains in
the head, and is accounted next unto Betony, the best for that purpose.
Experience likewise has showed, that they are profitable both for the Palsy,
and pains of the joints, even as the Bears ears are, which has caused the
names of Arthritica, Paralysis, and Paralytica, to be given them. The juice of
the flowers is commended to cleanse the spots or marks of the face, whereof
some Gentlewomen have found good experience.

CHAP. XXXVI.
Pulmonaria. Lungwort, or Cowslips of Jerusalem.
ALthough these plants are generally more used as Pot-herbes for the Kitchen,
then as flowers for delight, yet because they are both called Cowslips, and are
of like form, but of much less beauty, I have joined them next unto them, in
a distinct Chapter by themselves, and so may pass at this time.

1. Pulmonaria maculosa. Common spotted Cowslips of Jerusalem.
The Cowslip of Jerusalem has many rough, large, and round leaves, but pointed
at the ends, standing upon long foot stalks, spotted with many round white
spots on the vppersides of the sad green or brown leaves, and of a grayer
green underneath: among the leaves spring up diverse brown stalks, a foot
high, bearing many flowers at the top, very near resembling the flowers of
Cowslips, being of a purple or reddish color while they are buds, and of a
dark bluish color when they are blown, standing in brownish green husks,
and sometimes it has been found with white flowers: when the flowers are
past, there come up small round heads, containing black seed: the root is
composed of many long and thick black strings.

2. Pulmonaria altera non maculosa. Unspotted Cowslips of Jerusalem.
The leaves of this other kind are not much unlike the former, being rough as
they are, but smaller, of a fairer green color above, and of a whiter green
underneath, without any spots at all upon the leaves: the flowers also are like
the former, and of the same color, but a little more branched upon the stalks
then the former: the roots also are black like unto them.

3. Pulmonaria angustifolia. Narrow leafed Cowslips of Jerusalem.
The leaves hereof are somewhat longer, but not so broad, and spotted with
whitish spots also as the former: the stalk hereof is set with the like long
hairy leaves, but smaller, being a foot high or better, bearing at the top
many flowers, standing in husks like the first, being somewhat reddish in the
bud, and of a dark purplish blew color when they are blown open: the seed
is like the former, all of them do well resemble Buglosse and Comfrey in most
parts, except the root, which is not like them, but stringie, like unto
Cowslips, yet black.

The Place.
The Cowslips of Jerusalem grow naturally in the Woods of Germany, in diverse
places, and the first kind in England also, found out by John Goodier, a great
searcher and lover of plants, dwelling at Maple-durham in Hampshire.

The Time.
They flower for the most part very early, that is, in the beginning of April.

The Names.
They are generally called in Latin, Pulmonaria, and maculosa, or non
maculosa, is added for distinctions sake. Of some it is called Symphitum
maculosum, that is, spotted Comfrey. In English it is diversely called; as
spotted Cowslips of Jerusalem, Sage of Jerusalem, Sage of Bethlehem, Lungwort,
and spotted Comfrey, and it might be as fitly called spotted Buglosse,
whereunto it is as like as unto Comfrey, as I said before.

The Virtues.
It is much commended of some, to be singular good for vlcered lungs, that are
full of rotten matter. As also for them that spit blood, being boiled and
drunk. It is of greatest use for the pot, being generally held to be good,
both for the lungs and the heart.

CHAP. XXXVII.
1. Buglossum and Borrago. Buglosse and Borage.
ALthough Borage and Buglosse might as fitly have been placed, I confess, in
the Kitchen Garden, in regard they are wholly in a manner spent for Physical
properties, or for the Pot, yet because anciently they have been entertained
into Gardens of pleasure, their flowers having been in some respect, in that
they have always been enterposed among the flowers of women's needle-worke, I
am more willing to give them place here, then thrust them into obscurity, and
take such of their tribe with them also as may fit for this place, either for
beauty or rarity.

The Garden Buglosse and Borage are so well known unto all, that I shall (I
doubt) but spend time in waste to describe them; yet not using to pass over
any thing I name and appropriate to this Garden so slightly, they are thus to
be known: Buglosse has many long, narrow, hairy, or rough sad green leaves,
among which rise up two or three very high stalks, branched at the top, whereon
stand many blew flowers, consisting of five small round pointed leaves, with a
small pointell in the middle, which are very smooth, shining, and of a reddish
purple while they are buds, and not blown open, which being fallen, there
grows in the green husk, wherein the flower stood, three or four roundish
black seeds, having that thread or pointell standing still in the middle of
them: the root is black without, and whitish within, long, thick, and full
of slimie juice (as the leaves are also) and perishes not every year, as the
root of Borage does.

2. Borrago. Borage.
Borage has broader, shorter, greener, and rougher leaves then Buglosse, the
stalks hereof are not so high, but branched into many parts, whereon stand
larger flowers, and more pointed at the end then Buglosse, and of a paler blew
color for the most part (yet sometimes the flowers are reddish, and sometimes
pure white) each of the flowers consisting of five leaves, standing in a round
hairy whitish husk, divided into five parts, and have a small vmbone of five
blackish threads in the middle, standing out pointed at the end, and broad at
the bottom: the seed is like the other: the root is thicker and shorter then
the root of Buglosse, somewhat blackish without also, and whitish within, and
perishes after seed time, but rises of it own seed fallen, and springs
in the beginning of the year.

3. Borrago semper virens. Everliving Borage.
Everliving Borage has many broad green leaves, and somewhat rough, more
resembling Comfrey then Borage, yet not so large as either; the stalks are not
so high as Borage, and have many small blew flowers on them, very like to the
flowers of Buglosse for the form, and Borage for the color: the roots are
black, thicker then either of them, somewhat more spreading, and not
perishing, having green leaves all the Winter long, and thereupon took his
name.

4. Anchusa. Sea Buglosse or Alkanet.
The Sea Buglosse or Alkanet has many long, rough, narrow, and dark green
leaves, spread upon the ground (yet some that grow by the Sea side are rather
hoarie and whitish) among these leaves rises up a stalk, spread at the top
into many branches, whereon stand the flowers in tufts, like unto the Garden
Buglosse, or rather Comfrey, but lesser; in some plants of a reddish blew
color, and in others more red or purplish, and in others of a yellowish
color: after which come the seeds, very like unto Buglosse, but somewhat
longer and paler: the root of most of them being transplanted, are somewhat
blackish on the outside, until the later end of Summer, and then become more
red: for those that grow wild, will be then so red, that they will give a very
deep red color to those that handle them, which being dried keep that red
color, which is used to many purposes; the root within being white, and
having no red color at all.

5. Limonium Rauwolfij. Marsh Buglosse.
This Limonium (which I refer here to the kinds of Buglosse, as presuming it
is the fittest place where to insert it) has many long, narrow, and somewhat
rough leaves lying upon the ground, waued or cut in on both sides, like an
Indenture, somewhat like the leaves of Ceterach or Miltwast, among which rise
up two or three stalks, somewhat rough also, and with thin skins like wings,
indented on both sides thereof also, like the leaves, having three small, long,
rough, and three square leaves at every joint where it brancheth forth; at the
top whereof stand many flowers upon their foot stalks, in such a manner, as
is not seen in any other plant, that I know: for although that some of the
small winged foot stalks are shorter, and some longer, standing as it were
flatwise, or all on one side, and not round like an vmbell, yet are they even
at the top, and not one higher than another; each of which small foot
stalks do bear four or five greenish heads or husks, joined together, out
of each of which do arise other pale or bleake blew stiff husks, as if they
were flowers, made as it were of parchment, which hold their color after they
are dry a long time; and out of these husks likewise, do come (at several
times one after another, and not all at one time or together) white flowers,
consisting of five small round leaves, with some white threads in the middle:
after these flowers are past, there come in their places small long seed,
enclosed in many husks, many of those heads being idle, not yielding any good
seed, but chafe, especially in our Country, for the want of sufficient heat
of the Sun, as I take it: the root is small, long, and blackish on the
outside, and perishes at the first approach of Winter.

The Place.
Borage and Buglosse grow only in Gardens with us, and so does the Semper
virens, his original being unknown unto us. Alkanet or Sea Buglosse grows
near the Sea, in many places of France, and Spain, and some of the kinds
also in England. But the Limonium or Marshe Buglosse grows in Cales, and
Malacca in Spain, and is found also in Syria, as Rauwolfius relates: and in
other places also no doubt; for it has been sent us out of Italy, many
years before either Guillaume Boel found it in Cales, or Clusius in Malacca.

The Time.
Borage and Buglosse do flower in June, and July, and sometimes sooner, and so
does the everliving or never dying Borage, but not as Gerrard says, flowring
Winter and Summer, whereupon it should take his name, but leaves flowring in
Autumn, and abides green with his leaves all the Winter, 1 Pulmonaria
latifolia maculosa. Cowslips of Jerusalem. 2 Pulmonaria angustifolia. Narrow
leafed Cowslips of Jerusalem. 3 Borrago. Borage. 4 Borrago semper virens.
Everliving Borage. 5 Anchusa. Sea Buglosse or Alkanet. 6 Limonium Rauwolfij.
Marsh Buglosse.
depiction of flowers flowring the next Spring following. The other flower not
until July, and so continue, especially the Marshe Buglosse until September
be well spent, and then gives seed, if early frosts overtake it not; for it
seldom comes to be ripe.

The Names.
Our ordinary Borage by the consent of all the best modern Writers, is the
true Buglossum of Dioscorides, and that our Buglosse was unknown to the
ancients. The Borago semper virens, Lobel calls Buglossum semper virens, that
is, Everliving, or green Buglosse: but it more resembles Borage then
Buglosse; yet because Buglosse abides green, to avoid that there should not
be two Buglossa semper virentia, I had rather call it Borage then Buglosse.
Anchusa has diverse names, as Dioscorides sets down. And some do call it
Fucus herba, from the Greek word, because the root giving so deep a color,
was used to dye or paint the skin. Others call it Buglossum Hispanicum, in
English Alkanet, and of some Orchanet, after the French. Limonium was found by
Leonhartus Rauwolfius, near unto Ioppa, which he sets down in the second
Chapter of the third book of his trauayles, and from him first known to these
parts: I have, as you see, referred it to the kinds of Buglosse, for that the
flowers have some resemblance unto them, although I know that Limonium genuinum
is referred to the Beetes. Let it therefore here find a place of residence,
until you or I can find a fitter; and call it as you think best, either
Limonium as Rauwolfius does, or Marshe Buglosse as I do, or if you can add a
more proper name, I shall not be offended.

The Virtues.
Borage and Buglosse are held to be both temperate herbs, being used both in
the pot and in drinks that are cordial, especially the flowers, which of
Gentlewomen are candid for comfitts. The Alkanet is drying, and held to be good
for wounds, and if a piece of the root be put into a little oil of Peter or
Petroleum, it gives as deep a color to the oil, as the Hypericon does or
can to his oil, and accounted to be singular good for a cut or green wound.

The Limonium has no use that we know, more then for a Garden; yet as
Rauwolfius says, the Syrians use the leaves as sallats at the Table.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
Lychnis. Campions.
THere be diverse sorts of Campions, as well tame as wild, and although some
of them that I shall here entreat of, may peradventure be found wild in our
own Country, yet in regard of their beautiful flowers, they are to be
respected, and noursed up with the rest, to furnish a garden of pleasure; as
for the wild kinds, I will leave them for another discourse.

1. Lychnis Coronaria rubra simplex. The single red Rose Campion.
The single red Rose Campion has diverse thick, hoary, or woolly long green
leaves, abiding green all the winter, and in the end of the spring or
beginning of summer, shoots forth two or three hard round woolly stalks,
with some joints thereon, and at every joint two such like hoary green leaves
as those below, but smaller, diversely branched at the top, having one flower
upon each several long foot stalk, consisting of five leaves, somewhat broad
and round pointed, of a perfect red crimson color, standing out of a hard long
round husk, ridged or crested in four or five places; after the flowers are
fallen there come up round hard heads, wherein is contained small blackish
seed: the root is small, long and woody, with many fibers annexed unto it,
and shoots forth anew oftentimes, yet perishes often also.

2. Lychnis Coronaria alba simplex. The white Rose Campion.
The white Rose Campion is in all things like the red, but in the color of the
flower, which in this is of a pure white color.

3. Lichnis Coronaria albescens sieve incarnata maculata and non maculata. The
blush Rose Campion spotted and not spotted.
Like unto the former also are these other sorts, having no other difference to
distinguish them, but the flowers, which are of a pale or bleake whitish blush
color, especially about the brims, as if a very little red were mixed with a
great deal of white, the middle of the flower being more white; the one being
spotted all over the flower, with small spots and streakes, the other not
having any spot at all.

4. Lychnis Coronaria rubra multiplex. The double red Rose Campion.
The double red Rose Campion is in all respects like unto the single red kind,
but that this bears double flowers, consisting of two or three rows of
leaves at the most, which are not so large as the single, and the whole plant
is more tender, that is, more apt to perish, then any of the single kinds.

5. Lychnis Chalcedonica flore simplici miniato. Single Nonesuch, or Flower of
Bristow, or Constantinople.
This Campion of Constantinople has many broad and long green leaves, among
which rise up sundry stiff round hairy ioynted stalks three foot high, with
two leaves every joint: the flowers stand at the tops of them, very many
together, in a large tuft or vmbell, consisting of five small long leaves,
broad pointed, and notched-in in the middle, of a bright red orange color,
which being past, there come in their places small hard whitish heads or seed
vessels, containing black seed, like unto the seed of sweet Williams, and
having but a small sent; the root is very stringie, fastening it self very
strongly in the ground, whereby it is much increased.

Of the single kind there is also two or three other sorts, Flore albo.
differing chiefly in the color of the flowers. The one is pure white. Another
is of a blush color wholly, Et carneo.
without variation. And a third is very variable; for at the first it is of a
pale red, Versicolor.
and after a while grows paler, until in the end it become almost fully
white; and all these diversities of the flowers are sometimes to be seen on
one stalk at one and the same time.

6. Lychnis Chalcedonica flore miniato pleno. Double Flower of Bristow, or
Nonesuch.
This glorious flower being as rare as it is beautiful, is for roots being
stringie, for leaves and stalks being hairy and high, and for the flowers
growing in tufts, altogether like the first single kind: but herein consists
the chiefest difference, that this bears a larger vmbell or tuft of flowers
at the top of the stalk, every flower consisting of three or four rows of
leaves, of a deeper orange color then it, which adds the more grace unto it,
but passes away without bearing seed, as most other double flowers do, yet
recompenceth that defect with increase from the root.

7. Lychnis plumaria siluestris simplex and multiplex. The featherd wild
Campion single and double.
The leaves of this wild Campion are somewhat like the ordinary white wild
Campion, but not so large, or rather resembling the leaves of sweet Williams,
but that they grow not so close, nor so many together: the stalks have smaller
leaves at the joints then those below, and branched at the top, with many
pale, but bright red flowers, iagged or cut in on the edges, like the feathered
Pinke, whereof some have taken it to be a kind, and some for a kind of wild
William, but yet is but a wild Campion, as may be observed, both by his husk
that bears the flowers, and by the grayish roundish seed, being not of the
Family of Pinkes and Gillowers, but (as I said) of the Campions: the root is
full of strings or fibers.

Flore pleno.
The double kind is very like unto the single kind, but that it is lower and
smaller, and the flowers very double.

8. Lychnis siluestris flore pleno rubro. Red Batchelours buttons.
The double wild Campion (which of our Country Gentlewomen is called
Batchelours buttons) is very like both in roots, leaves, stalks, and flowers
unto the ordinary wild red Campion, but somewhat lesser, his flowers are not
iagged, but smooth, and very thick and double, so that most commonly it
breaks his short husk, wherein the flower stands on the one side, seldom
having a whole husk, and are of a reddish color.

9. Lychnis siluestris flore albo pleno. White Batchelours buttons.
As the leaves of the former double Campion was like unto the single kind that
had red flowers, so this has his leaves like unto the single white kind,
differing in no other thing from it, but in the doubleness of the flowers,
which by reason of the multiplicity of leaves in them thrusting forth together,
breaks his husks wherein the flowers do stand, as the other does, and has
scarce one flower in many that is whole.

10. Ocymoides arborea semper virens. Strange Bassil Campion.
This Strange Campion (for thereunto it must be referred) shoots forth many
round, whitish, woody, but brittle stalks, whereon stand diverse long, and
somewhat thick leaves, set by couples, narrow at the bottom, and broader
toward the point, of a very fair green and shining color, so that there is
more beauty in the green leaves, which do so always abide, then in the
flowers, which are of a pale red or blush color, consisting of five small long
broad pointed leaves, notched in the middle, which do not lie close, but
loosly as it were hanging over the husks: after the flowers are past, there
come heads that contain blackish seed: the root is small, hard, white, and
threadie.

11. Muscipula Lobelij sieve Ben rubrum Monspeliensium. Lobels Catch Fly.
I must needs insert this small plant, to finish this part of the Campions,
whereunto it belongs, being a pretty toye to furnish and deck out a Garden.
It springs up (if it have been once sown and suffered to shed) in the later
end of the year most commonly, or else in the Spring with five or six small
leaves, very like unto the leaves of Pinkes, and of the same grayish color,
but a little broader and shorter, and when it begins to shoot up for
flower, it bears smaller leaves on the clammy or viscous stalks (fit to hold
any small thing that lights on it) being broad at the bottom compassing
them, and standing two at a joint one against another: the tops of the
stalks are diversely branched into several parts, every branch having diverse
small red flowers, not notched, but smooth, standing out of small, long, round,
stripped husks, which after the flowers are past, contain small grayish seed:
the root is small, and perishes after it has given seed; but rises (as is
before said) of its own seed, if it be suffered to shed.

The Place.
The Rose Campions, Flowers of Bristow, or None such, the Bassil Campion, 1
Lychnis Coranoria simplex. Single Rose Campion. 2 Lychnis Coronaria rubra
multiplex. The double red Rose Campion. 3 Lychnis Chalcedonica simplex. Single
None such, or flower of Bristow. 4 Lychnis Chalcedonica flore pleno Double None
such, or flower of Bristow. 5 Lychnis plumaria multiplex. Pleasant in sight. 6
Lychnis siluestris flore pleno rubro. Red Batchelours Buttons. 7 Lychnis
siluestris flore pleno albo. White Batchelours Buttons. 8 Muscipula Lobelij.
Lobels Catch Fly.
depiction of flowers and the Catch Fly, have been sent us from beyond the
Seas, and are only noursed up in Gardens with us; the other Campions that are
double, have been naturally so found double wild (for no art or industry of
man, that ever I could be assured of to be true, be it by never so many
repetitions of transplantations, and planeticall observations (as I have said
in he beginning of this work) could bring any flower, single by nature, to
become double, notwithstanding many affirmations to that purpose, but
whatsoever has been found wild to be double, nature her self, and not art
has so produced it) and being brought into Gardens, are there increased by
slipping, and parting the root, because they give no seed.

The Time.
All of them do flower in the Summer, yet none before May.

The Names.
The first kinds are called Lychnides satiuae, and coronariae, in English
generally Rose Campions. The next is called Lychnis Chalcedonica, and
Byzantina; in English, of some Nonesuch, and of others Flower of Bristow, and
after the Latin, Flower of Constantinople, because it is thought the seed was
first brought from thence; but from whence the double of this kind came, we
cannot tell. The names of the others of this kind, both single and double, are
set down with their descriptions. The feathered Campions are called Armoraria
pratensis, and Flos Cuculi, and of Clusius and others thought to be Odontitis
Plinij. Some call them in English Crowflowers, and Cuckowe-Flowers; and some
call the double hereof, The fair Maid of France. The Bassil Campions were
sent over among many other seeds out of Italy, by the name of Ocimoides
arborea semper virens. Arborea, because the stalk is more woody and durable
then other Campions: And semper virens, because the leaves abide green Winter
and Summer. Clusius calls it Lychnis semper virens, because it is certainly a
Campion. The last is diversely called of Authors; Lobel calls it Muscipula:
Others Armoraria altera: Dodonaeus Armerius flos quartus. Clusius Lychnis
siluestris altera, in his Spanish observations, and prima in his History of
plants, and says, the learned of Salmantica in Spain called it, Ben rubrum,
as Lobel says, they of Mompelier do also: and by that name I received it
first out of Italy. It has the name of Catch Fly, of Muscipula the Latin
word, because the stalks in the hot Summer days have a certain viscous or
clammy humor upon them, whereby it easily holds (as I said before)
whatsoever small thing, as Flies, etc. lights upon it.

The Virtues.
We know none in these days, that puts any of these to any Physical use,
although some have in former times.

CHAP. XXXIX.
Keiri sieve Leucoium luteum. Wall-flowers, or Wall Gilloflowers.
THere are two sorts of Wall-flowers, the one single, the other double, and of
each of them there is likewise some differences, as shall be showed in their
descriptions.

1. Keiri sieve Leucoium luteum simplex vulgar. Common single Wall-flowers.
The common single Wall-flower which grows wild abroad, and yet is brought
into Gardens, has sundry small, narrow, long, and dark green leaves, set
without order upon small round whitish woody stalks, which bear at the tops
diverse single yellow flowers one above another, every one having four leaves a
piece, and of a very sweet sent: after which come long pods, containing
reddish seed: the root is white, hard and thready.

2. Keiri sieve Leucoium luteum simplex maius. The great single Wall-flower.
There is another sort of single Wall-flower, whose leaves as well as flowers
are much larger then the former: the leaves being of a darker and shining
green color, and the flowers of a very deep gold yellow color, and usually
broader then a twenty shilling piece of gold can cover: the spike or top of
flowers also much longer, and abiding longer in flower, and much sweeter
likewise in sent: the pods for seed are thicker and shorter, with a small
point at the end: this is slower to increase into branches, as also to be
increased by the branches, and more tender to be preserved; for the hard frosts
do cause it to perish, if it be not defended from them

3. Keiri simplex flore albo. White Wall-flower.
This Wall-flower has his leaves as green as the great kind, but nothing so
large: the flowers stand at the top, but not in so long a spike, and
consists of four leaves, of a very white color, not much larger then the
common kind, and of a faint or weaker sent: the pods are nothing so great as
the former great one: this is more easy to be propagated and increased also,
but yet will require some care in defending it from the colds of the Winter.

4. Keiri sieve Leucoium luteum vulgar flore pleno. Common double Wall-flowers.
This ordinary double Wall-flower is in leaves and stalk very like unto the
first single kind, but that the leaves hereof are not of so deep a green
color: the flowers stand at the top of the stalks one above another, as it
were a long spike, which flower by degrees, the lowest first, and so upwards,
by which it is a long time in flowring, and is very double, of a gold yellow
color, and very sweet.

5. Keiri sieve Leucoium luteum alterum flore pleno. Pale double Wall-flowers.
We have another sort of this kind of double Wall-flower, whose double
flowers stand not spike-fashion as the former, but more open spread, and do
all of them blow open at one time almost, and not by degrees as the other
does, and is of a paler yellow color, not differing in any thing else, except
that the green leaves hereof are of a little paler green then it.

6. Keiri sieve Leucoium luteum maius flore pleno ferrugineo. Double red
Wall-flowers.
We have also another sort of double Wall-flower, whose leaves are as green,
and almost as large as the great single yellow kind, or full as big as the
leaves of the white Wall-flower: the flowers hereof are not much larger then
the ordinary, but are of a darker yellow color then the great single kind,
and of a more brownish or red color on the vnderside of the leaves, and is as
it were striped.

7. Keiri sieve Leucoium maximum luteum flore pleno. The greatest double yellow
Wall-flower.
This great double Wall-flower is as yet a stranger in England, and therefore
what I here write is more upon relation (which yet I believe to be most true)
then upon sight and speculation. The leaves of this Wall-flower are as green
and as large, if not larger then the great single kind: the flowers also are
of the same deep gold yellow color with it, but much larger then any of the
former double kinds, and of as sweet a sent as any, which adds delight unto
beauty.

The Place.
The first single kind is often found growing upon old walls of Churches, and
other houses in many places of England, and also among rubbish and stones. The
single white and great yellow, as well as all the other double kinds, are
noursed up in Gardens only with us.

The Time.
All the single kinds do flower many times in the end of Autumn, and if the
Winter be mild all the Winter long, but especially in the months of February,
March, and April, and until the heat of the Spring do spend them: but the
other double kinds do not continue flowring in that manner the year
throughout, although very early sometimes, and very late also in some places.

The Names.
They are called by diverse names, as Viola lutea, Leucoium luteum, and Keiri,
or Cheiri, by which name it is chiefly known in our Apothecaries shops,
because there is an oil made thereof called Cheirinum: In English they are
usually called in these parts, Wall-flowers: Others do call them Bee-flowers;
others Wall-Gilloflowers, Winter-Gilloflowers, and yellow Srocke-Gilloflowers;
but we have a kind of Stocke-Gilloflower that more fitly deserves that name,
as shall be showed in the Chapter following

The Virtues.
The sweetness of the flowers causes them to be generally used in Nosegayes,
and to deck up houses; but physically they are used in diverse manners: As a
Conserve made of the flowers, is used for a remedy both for the Appoplexie and
Palsy. The distilled water helps well in the like manner. The oil made of
the flowers is heating and resolving, good to ease pains of strained and
pained sinews.

CHAP. XL.
Leucoium. Stocke-Gilloflower.
THere are very many sorts of Stocke-Gilloflowers both single and double, some
of the fields and mountains, others of the Sea marshes and meadows; and some
noursed up in Gardens, and there preserved by seed or slip, as each kind is
aptest to be ordered. But because some of these are fitter for a general
History then for this our Garden of Pleasure, both for that diverse have no good
sent, others little or no beauty, and to be entreated of only for the variety,
I shall spare so many of them as are not fit for this work, and only set
down the rest.

1. Leucoium simplex sativum diuersorum colorum. Garden Stocke-Gilloflowers
single of diverse colors.
These single Stocke-Gilloflowers, although they differ in the color of their
flowers, 1 Keiri sieve Leucoium luteum vulgar. Common Wall-flowers. 2 Keiri
sieve Leucoium luteum maius simplex. The great single Wall-flower. 3 Keiri sieve
Leucoium luteum flore pleno vulgar. Ordinary double Wall-flowers. 4 Keiri
maius flore pleno ferrugin^o The great double red Wall-flower. 5 Leucoium
sativum simplex. Single Stocke-Gilloflowers. 6 Leucoium sativum simplex flore
striato. Single stripped Stocke-Gilloflowers.
depiction of flowers yet are in leaf and manner of growing, one so like unto
another, that until they come to flower, the one cannot be well known that
bears red flowers, from another that bears purple; and therefore one
description of the plant shall serve, with a declaration of the sundry colors
of the flowers. It rises up with round whitish woody stalks, two, three, or
four foot high, whereon are set many long, and not very broad, sost, and
whitish or grayish green leaves, somewhat round pointed, and parted into
diverse branches, at the tops whereof grow many flowers, one above another,
smelling very sweet, consisting of four small, long, and round pointed leaves,
standing in small long husks, which turn into long and flat pods, sometimes
half a foot long, wherein is contained flat, round, reddish seeds, with
grayish ringes or circles about them, lying flat all along the middle rib of
the pod on both sides: the root is long, white, and woody, spreading diverse
ways. There is great variety in the colors of the flowers: for some are
wholly of a pure white color, others of a most excellent crimson red color,
others again of a fair red color, but not so bright or lively as the other,
some also of a purplish or violet color, without any spot, mark, or line in
them at all. There are again of all these colors, mixed very variably, as
white mixed with small or great spots, strakes or lines of pure or bright
red, or dark red, and white with purple spots and lines; and of either of them
whose flowers are almost half white, and half red, or half white, and half
purple. The red of both sorts, and the purple also, in the like manner spotted,
striped, and marked with white, differing neither in form, nor substance, in
any other point.

2. Leucoium satiuum albido luteum simplex. The single pale yellow
Stocke-Gilloflower.
There is very little difference in this kind from the former, for the manner
of growing, or form of leaves or flower. Only this has greener leaves, and
pale yellow almost white flowers, in all other things alike: this is of no
great regard, but only for rarity, and diversity from the rest.

3. Leucoium Melancholicum. The Melancholic Gentleman.
This wild kind of stock gilloflower has larger, longer and greener leaves
then any of the former kinds, unevenly gashed or sinuated on both edges lying
on the ground, and a little rough or hairy withal: from among which rise up
the stalks, a yard high or more, and hairy likewise, bearing thereon here and
there some such like leaves as are below, but smaller, and at the top a great
number of flowers, as large or larger then any of the former single kinds,
made of 4. large leaves a piece also, standing in such like long husks, but of
a dark or sullen yellowish color: after which come long roundish pods,
wherein lie somewhat long but rounder and greater seed then any stock
gilloflower, and nearer both in pod and seed unto the Hesperis or Dames
Violet: this perishes not usually after seed bearing, although sometimes it
does.

4. Leucoium marinum Syriacum. Leuant stock gilloflowers.
This kind of stock gilloflower rises up at the first with diverse long and
somewhat broad leaves, a little unevenly dented or waued on the edges, which so
continue the first year after the sowing: the stalk rises up the next year
to be two foot high or more, bearing all those leaves on it that it first had,
which then do grow less sinuated or waued then before: at the top whereof
stand many flowers, made of four leaves a piece, of a delayed purple color,
but of a small sent which turn into very long and narrow flat pods, wherein
are contained flat seed like the ordinary stock gilloflowers, but much larger
and of a dark or blackish brown color: the root is white, and grows deep,
spreading in the ground, but growing woody when it is in seed, and perishes
afterward.

5. Leucoij alterum genus, flore tam multiplici quam simplici ex seminio
oriundum. Another sort of Stock gilloflowers bearing as well double as single
flowers from seed.
This kind of Stock gilloflower differs neither in form of leaves,
stalks, nor flowers from the former, but that it oftentimes grows much
larger and taller; so that whosoever shall see both these growing together,
shall scarce discern the difference, only it bears flowers, either white,
red or purple, wholly or entire, that is, of one color, without mixture of
other color in them (for so much as ever I have observed, or could understand
by others) which are either single, like unto the former, or very thick and
double, like unto the next that follows; but larger, and growing with more
store of flowers on the long stalk. But this you must understand withal, that
those plants that bear double flowers, do bear no seed at all, and is very
seldom increased by slipping or cutting, as the next kind of double is: but
the only way to have double flowers any year, (for this kind dies every
winter, for the most part, after it has borne flowers, and seldom is
preserved) is to save the seeds of those plants of this kind that bear
single flowers, for from that seed will rise, some that will bear single, and
some double flowers, which cannot be distinguished one from another, I mean
which will be single and which double, until you see them in flower, or budde
at the least. And this is the only way to preserve this kind: but of the seed
of the former kind was never known any double flowers to arise, and therefore
you must be careful to mark this kind from the former.

6. Leucoium flore pleno diuersorum colorum. Double Stock Gillowflowers of
diverse colors.
This other kind of Stock gilloflower that bears only double flowers,
grows not so great, nor spreads his branches so far, nor are his leaves
so large, but is in all things smaller, and lower, and yet is woody, or
shrubby, like the former, bearing his flowers in the like manner, many upon a
long stalk, one above another, and very double, but not so large as the former
double, although it grow in fertile soil, which are either white, or red, or
purple wholly, without any mixture, or else mixed with spots and stripes, as
the single flowers of the first kind, but more variably, and not in all places
alike, never bearing seed, but must be increased, only by the cutting of the
young sproutes or branches, taken in a fit season: this kind perishes not, as
the former double kind does, so as it be defended in the winter from the
extreme frosts, but especially from the snow falling, or at the least
remaining upon it.

7. Leucoium satiuum luteum flore pleno. The double yellow Stock Gilloflower.
This double yellow Stock gilloflower is a stranger in England, as far as I can
learn, neither have I any further familiarity with him, then by relation from
Germany, where it is affirmed to grow only in some of their gardens, that are
curious lovers of these delights, bearing long leaves somewhat hoary or white,
(and not green like unto the Wallflower, whereunto else it might be thought to
be referred) like unto the Stock gilloflowers, as the stalks and branches also
are, and bearing fair double flowers, of a fair, but pale yellow color. The
whole plant is tender, as the double Stock gilloflowers are, and must be
carefully preserved in the winter from the coldes, or rather more then the last
double, lest it perish.

The Place.
The single kinds, especially some of them, grow in Italy, and some in
Greece, Candy, and the Isles adjacent, as may be gathered out of the verses in
Plutarches Book De Amore fraterno: Inter Echinopodas velut, asperam and inter
Ononim, Interdum crescunt mollia Leucoia.

Which shows, that the soft or gentle stock gilloflowers do sometimes grow
among rough or prickely Furse and Cammocke. The other sorts are only to be
found in gardens.

The Time.
They flower in a manner all the year throughout in some places, especially
some of the single kinds, if they stand warm, and defended from the winds
and cold: the double kinds flower sometimes in April, and more plentifully in
May, and June; but the double of seed, flowreth usually late, and keeps
flowring unto the winter, that the frostes and cold mistes do pull it down.

The Names.
It is called Leucoium, and Viola alba: but the name Leucoium (which is in
English the white Violet) is referred to diverse plants; we call it in English
generally, Stock gilloflower, (or as others do, Stock gillouer) to put a
difference between them, and the Gilloflowers and Carnations, which are quite
of another kindred, as shall be shown in place convenient.

The Virtues.
These have no great use in Physic that I know: only some have used the leaves
of the single white flowred kind with salt, to be laid to the wrests of them
that have agues, but with what good success I cannot say, if it happen well I
think in one (as many such things else will) it will fail in a number.

CHAP. XLI.
1. Hesperis, sieve Viola Matronalis. Dames Violets, or Queens Gilloflowers.
THe ordinary Dames Violets, or Queen Gilloflowers, has his leaves broader,
greener, and sharper pointed, then the Stock gilloflowers, and a little
endented about the edges: the stalks grow two foot high, bearing many green
leaves upon them, smaller then those at the bottom, and branched at the top,
bearing many flowers, in fashion much like the flowers of stock gilloflowers,
consisting of four leaves in like manner, but not so large, of a faint
purplish color in some, and in others white, and of a pretty sweet sent,
especially toward night, but in the day time little or none at all: after the
flowers are past, there do come small long and round pods, wherein is
contained, in two rows, small and long black seed: the root is wholly
composed of stringes or fibers, which abide many years, and springs fresh
stalks every year, the leaves abiding all the Winter.

2. Hesperis Pannonica. Dames Violets of Hungary.
The leaves of this Violet are very like the former, but smoother and thicker,
and not at all indented, or cut in on the edges: the flowers are like the
former, but of a sullen pale color, turning themselves, and seldom lying
plain open, having many purple veins, and streakes running through the leaves
of the flowers, of little or no sent in the day time, but of a very sweet sent
in the evening and morning; the seeds are alike also, but a little browner.

1 Leucoium Melancholicum. Sullen Stocke-Gilloflowers. 2 Leucoium sativum flore
pleno. Double Stocke-Gilloflowers. 3 Leucoium sativum flore pleno vario. Party
colored Stocke-Gilloflowers. 4 Leucoium marinum Syriacum. Leuant
Stocke-Gilloflowers. 5 Hesperis vulgaris. Dames Violets or Winter Gilloflowers.
6 Lysimachia lutea siliquosa Virginiana. The tree Primrose of Virginia. 7 Viola
Lunaris sieve Bolbonach. The white Satin flower.
depiction of flowers

3. Lysimachia lutea siliquosa Virgiana. The tree Primrose of Virginia.
Unto what tribe or kindred I might refer this plant, I have stood long in
suspense, in regard I make no mention of any other Lysimachia in this work:
lest therefore it should lose all place, let me rank it here next unto the
Dames Violets, although I confess it has little affinity with them. The first
year of the sowing the seed it abides without any stalk or flowers lying
upon the ground, with diverse long and narrow pale green leaves, spread
oftentimes round almost like a Rose, the largest leaves being outermost, and
very small in the middle: about May the next year the stalk rises, which
will be in Summer of the height of a man, and of a strong big size almost to
a man's thumb, round from the bottom to the middle, where it grows crested
up to the top, into as many parts as there are branches of flowers, every one
having a small leaf at the foot thereof: the flowers stand in order one above
another, round about the tops of the stalks, every one upon a short
foot-stalke, consisting of four pale yellow leaves, smelling somewhat like
unto a Primrose, as the color is also (which has caused the name) and
standing in a green husk, which parts it self at the top into four
parts or leaves, and turn themselves downwards, lying close to the stalk:
the flower has some chiues in the middle, which being past, there come in
their places long and cornered pods, sharp pointed at the upper end, and round
below, opening at the top when it is ripe into five parts, wherein is
contained small brownish seed: the root is somewhat great at the head, and
woody, and branched forth diversely, which perishes after it has borne seed.

The Place.
The two first grow for the most part on Hills and in Woods, but with us in
Gardens only.

The last, as may be well understood by the title, came out of Virginia.

The Time.
They flower in May, June, and July.

The Names.
The name of Hesperis is imposed by most Herbarists upon the two first plants,
although it is not certainly known to be the same that Theophrastus does make
mention of, in his sixth Book and twenty five Chapter de causis plantarum: but
because this has the like effects to smell best in the evening, it is (as I
said) imposed upon it. It is also called Viola Marina Matronalis, Hyemalis,
Damascena and Muschatella: In English, Dames Violets, Queens Gilloflowers, and
Winter Gilloflowers.

The last has his Latin name in the title as is best agreeing with it, and
for the English, although it be too foolish I confess, yet it may pass for
this time till a fitter be given, unless you please to follow the Latin, and
call it Virginia Loose-strife.

The Virtues.
I never knew any among us to use these kinds of Violets in Physic, although
by reason of the sharp biting taste, Dodonaeus accounts the ordinary sort to
be a kind of Rocket, and says it provoke sweating, and urine: and others
affirm it to cut, digest, and cleanse tough phlegm. The Virginian has not
been used by any that I know, either inwardly or outwardly.

CHAP. XLII.
Viola Lunaris sieve Bolbonach. The Satin flower.
Unto the kinds of Stocke-Gilloflowers I think fittest to adioyne these
kinds of Sattin-flowers, whereof there are two sorts, one frequent enough in
all our Country, the other is not so common.

1. Viola Lunaris vulgaris. The common white Satin flower.
The first of those Satin flowers, which is the most common, has his leaves
broad below, and pointed at the end, snipt about the edges, and of a dark
green color: the stalks are round and hard, two foot high, or higher,
divided into many branches, set with the like leaves, but smaller: the tops of
the branches are beset with many purplish flowers, like unto Dames Violets, or
Stocke-Gilloflowers, but larger, being of little sent: after the flowers are
past, there come in their places round flat thin cods, of a dark color on the
outside, but having a thin middle skin, that is white and clear shining,
like unto very pure white Satin it self, whereon lie flat and round brownish
seed, somewhat thick and great: the roots perish when they have given their
seed, and are somewhat round, long, and thick, resembling the roots of
Lilium non bulbosum, or Day Lilly, which are eaten (as diverse other roots are)
for Sallets, both in our own Country, and in many places beside.

2. Viola Lunaris altera seu peregrina. Long living Satin flower.
This second kind has broader and longer leaves then the former, the stalks
also are greener and higher, branching into flowers, of a paler purple color,
almost white, consisting of four leaves in like manner, and smelling pretty
sweet, bearing such like pods, but longer and slenderer then they: the roots
are composed of many long strings, which dye not as the former, but abide, and
shoot out new stalks every year.

The Place.
The first is (as is said) frequent enough in Gardens, and is found wild in
some places of our own Country, as Master Gerard reports, whereof I never
could be certainly assured, but I have had it often sent me among other seeds
from Italy, and other places. The other is not so common in Gardens, but found
about Watford, as he says also.

The Time.
They flower in April or May, and sometimes more early.

The Names.
It has diverse names, as well in English as in Latin; for it is called most
usually Bolbonach, and Viola Lunaris: Of some Viola latifolia, and of others
Viola Peregrina, and Lunaria Graeca, Lunaria mayor, and Lunaria odorata, and is
thought to be Thlaspi Crateuae: In English, White Satin, or Satin flower: Of
some it is called Honesty, and Penny-flower.

The Virtues.
Some do use to eat the young roots hereof, before they run up to flower,
as Rampions are eaten with Vinegar and Oil; but we know no Physical use they
have.

CHAP. XLIII.
Linum siluestre and Linaria. Wild Flax and Tode Flax.
ALthough neither the manured Line or Flax is a plant fit for our Garden, nor
many of the wild sorts, yet there are some, whose pleasant and delightful
aspect does entertain the beholders eyes with good content, and those I will
set down here for variety, and adioyne unto them some of the Linarias, or
Tode Flax, for the near affinity with them.

1. Linum siluestre flore albo. Wild Flax with a white flower.
This kind of wild Flax rises up with diverse slender branches, a foot high
or better, full of leaves, standing without order, being broader and longer
then the manured Flax: the tops of the branches have diverse fair white
flowers on them, composed of five large leaves a piece, with many purple lines
or strikes in them: the seed vessel as well as the seed, is like unto the
heads and seed of the manured Flax: the roots are white strings, and abide
diverse years, springing fresh branches and leaves every year, but not until
the Spring of the year.

2. Linum siluestre luteum. Wild Flax with a yellow flower.
This wild Flax does so well resemble a kind of St. John's wort, that it will
soon deceive one that does not advisedly regard it: For it has many reddish
stalks, and small leaves on them, broader then the former wild Flax, but not
so long, which are well stored with yellow flowers, as large as the former,
made of five leaves a piece, which being past, there come small flattish heads,
containing blackish seed, but not shining like the former: the roots hereof
dye not every year, as many other of the wild kinds do, but abide and
shoot out every year.

3. Linaria purpurea. Purple Tode Flax.
This purple Tode Flax has diverse thick, small, long, and somewhat narrowish
leaves, snipt about the edges, of a whitish green color, from among which
rise up diverse stalks, replenished at the tops with many small flowers,
standing together one above another spike-fashion, which are small and somewhat
sweet, while they are fresh, fashioned somewhat like the common Tode flax
that grows wild abroad almost every where, but much smaller, with a gaping
mouth, but without any crooked spur behind, like unto them, sometimes of a
sad purple near unto a Violet, and sometimes of a paler blew color, having a
yellow spot in the middle or gaping place: after the flowers are past, there
come small, hard, round heads, wherein are contained small, flat, and grayish
seed: the root is small, and perishes for the most part every year, and
will spring again of it own sowing, if it be suffered to shed it self, yet
some hard Winters have killed the seed it should seem, in that sometimes it
fails to spring again, and therefore had need to be sown anew in the
Spring.

4. Linaria purpurea odorata. Sweet purple Tode Flax.
The lower leaves of this purple Tode Flax are nothing like any of the rest,
but are long and broad, endented about the edges, somewhat resembling the
leaves of the greater wild white Daisie: the stalk is set at the bottom with
such like leaves, but a little more divided and cut in, and still smaller and
smaller upward, so that the uppermost leaves are very like the common Tode
Flax, the top whereof is branched, having diverse small flowers growing along
upon them, in fashion and color almost like the last described Tode Flax, but
not altogether so deep a purple: the heads and seeds are very like the
former, but that the seed of this is reddish: the flowers 1 Linum siluestre
flore albo. Wild Flax with a white flower. 2 Linaria purpurea sieve caerulea.
Purple Tode Flax. 3 Linaria pupurea odorata. Sweet purple Tode Flax. 4
Scoparia sieve Beluidere Italorum Broom Tode Flax. 5 Antirrhinum maius. The
greater Snapdragon. 6 Chamaenerium flore delphinij. The willowe flower.
depiction of flowers in their natural hot Countries have a fine sent, but in
these colder, little or none at all: the roots are small and threadie, and
perish after they have flowred and seeded.

5. Linaria Valentina. Tode Flax of Valentia.
This Spanish Tode Flax has three or four thicker and bigger stalks then
the former, bearing small broad leaves, like unto the small Centory, two or
three together at a joint, round about the lower end of the stalks, but
without any order upwards, at the tops whereof stand many flowers, in fashion
like unto the common kind, and almost as large, of a fair yellow color, but
the gaping mouth is downie, and the spur behind of a purplish color.

6. Scoparia sieve Beluidere Italorum. Broom Tode Flax.
Although this plant have no beautiful flowers, yet because the green plant
full of leaves is so delightful to behold, being in Italy and other places
planted not only in their Gardens, but set likewise in pots to furnish their
Windows, and even with us also has grown to be so dainty a green bush, that
I have thought it worthy to be among the delights of my Garden; the description
whereof is as follows: This pleasant Broom Flax rises up most usually with
one straight upright square stalk, three foot and a half high or better in
our Gardens, branching it self out diverse ways, bearing thereon many long
narrow leaves, like the Garden Line or Flax, very thick set together, like
unto a bush, or rather like unto a fair green Cypress tree, growing broad
below, and spire-fashion upwards, of a very fair green color: at the
several joints of the branches, toward the tops, and among the leaves, there
come forth small reddish flowers, not easily seen nor much regarded, being of
no beauty, which turn into small round blackish gray seed: the roots are a
number of blackish strings set together, and the whole plant perishes every
year at the first approach of any cold air, as if it never had been so fair
a green bush.

The Place.
These kinds of wild Flax do grow naturally in diverse places, some in
Germany, some in Spain, and some in Italy. Those that delight in the beauty of
natures variety, do preserve them, to furnish up the number of pleasant
aspects.

The Time.
They all flower in the Summer months, and soon after perfect their seed.

The Names.
Their names are sufficiently expressed in their titles, yet I must give you to
understand, that the last is called of some Linaria magna, and of others Osyris.

The Virtues.
The wild Flax has no medecinable virtue appropriate unto it that is known.
The Tode Flax is accounted to be good, to cause one to make water.

CHAP. XLIIII.
Antirrhinum. Snapdragon.
THere is some diversity in the Snapdragons, some being of a larger, and others
of a lesser stature and bigness; and of the larger, some of one, and some of
another color, but because the small kinds are of no beauty, I shall at this
time only entreat of the greater sorts.

1. Antirrhinum album. White Snapdragon.
The leaves of these Snapdragons (for I do under one description comprehend
the rest) are broader, longer, and greener then the leaves of the Garden Flax,
or of the wild Flax set confusedly upon the tender green branches, which are
spread on all sides, from the very bottom, bearing at the tops many flowers,
somewhat resembling the former Tode Flax, but much larger, and without any
heel or spur, of a fair white color, with a yellow spot in the mouth or
gaping place: after the flowers are past, there come up in their places hard
round seed vessels, fashioned somewhat like unto a Calves head, the snout
being cut off, wherein is contained small black seed: the roots are many
white strings, which perish in most places after they have given seed,
notwithstanding any care or pains taken with them to preserve them alive, and
yet they will abide in some places where they are defended in the Winter.

2. Antirrhinum purpureum sieve roseum. Purple Snapdragon.
The purple Snapdragon is in stalks, leaves, and flowers altogether like the
former, and as large and great in every part, or greater; the only difference
is, that this bears pale Stammell or Rose colored flowers, with a yellow
spot in the mouth, and sometimes of a paler color, almost blush.

3. Antirrhinum variegatum. Variable Snapdragon.
This variable kind is somewhat less, and tenderer then the last described,
having also a reddish or blush colored flower, lesser then the former, but
much bigger then the middle kind of Snapdragon (which is not set down in this
work) the yellow spot in the mouth of it has some white about it, and
extending to both sides of the spot: the heads and seed are like the former:
the roots are smaller, but never will abide after they have given flowers and
seed.

4. Antirrhinum luteum. Yellow Snapdragon.
There is likewise another of these kinds, that bears leaves as large as any
of the former, and very fair yellow flowers, as large likewise as they, not
differing in any thing else from the first; let not any therefore imagine this
to be a Linaria or Tode Flax: for all parts are answerable unto the
Snapdragons.

The Place.
All these are nourished with us in our Gardens, although in Spain and Italy
they are found growing wild.

The Time.
They flower for the most part the second year after the sowing, from April
until July, and the seed is quickly ripe after.

The Names.
The name Antirrhinum is usually given to this plant, although it fully agrees
not either with the description of Dioscorides, or Theophrastus: It has also
diverse other names in Latin, as Orontium, Canis cerebrum Os Leonis, Leo herba,
etc. In English Calves snout, from the form of the seed vessels, and
Snapdragon, or Lions mouth, from the form of the flowers.

The Virtues.
They are seldom or never used in Physic by any in our days.

CHAP. XLV.
Chamaenerium flore delphinij. The Willowe flower.
THis plant rises up with many strong, woddy, round, brownish great stalks,
three or four foot high, beset here and there without order, with one broad
and long whitish green leaf at a joint, somewhat like unto a Lysimachia, or
Willow herb, as also unto a Peach leaf, but larger and longer: at the top
of the branches stand many flowers one above another, of a pale reddish purple
color, consisting of five leaves, spread open with an heel or spur behind
them, with many yellow threads in the middle, much larger then any flower of
the Larkes spurs, and smelling somewhat sweet withal; it bears a show of
long pods with seed, but I could never observe the seed: the roots are like
the roots of Lysimachia, or the ordinary yellow Loose-strife, or Willowe
herb, but greater: running and spreading under ground, and shooting up in many
places, whereby it fills a ground that it likes quickly: the stalks dye
down every year, and spring again in many places far asunder.

The Place.
We have not known where this Willowe flower grows naturally, but we have
it standing in an out corner of our Gardens, to fill up the number of
delightful flowers.

The Time.
It flowreth not until May, and abides a long while flowring.

The Names.
It may seem to diverse, that this is that plant that Dodonaeus called
Pseudolysimachium purpureum minus, and Lobel seems by the name of Delphinium
buccinum to aim at this plant, but withal calls it Chamaenerium G^sneri,
and gives the same figure that Dodonaeus has for his Pseudolysimachium: But
that is one kind of plant (which has smaller and shorter stalks, and very
narrow long leaves, whose flowers stand upon long slender cods, full of down,
with reddish seed, like unto the Lysimachia siliquosa siluestris, and roots
that abide many years, but creep not) and this is another, much greater,
whose true figure is not extant in any Author that I know. It is usually called
Chamaenerium flore delphinij; but the name of Delphinium buccinum in my mind
may not so conveniently be applied unto it. It is called in English, The
Willowe flower, for the likeness of the leaves, and the beauty and respect of
the flowers.

The Virtues.
There is no use hereof in Physic that ever I could learn, but is only
cherished among other sorts of flowers, that serve to deck and set forth a
Garden of varieties.

CHAP. XLVI.
Aquilegia. Colombines.
THere are many sorts of Colombines, as well differing in form as color of
the flowers, and of them both single and double carefully noursed up in our
Gardens, for the delight both of their form and colors.

1. Aquilegia vulgaris flore simplici. Single Colombines.
Because the whole difference of these Colombines stands in the varieties of
the form, and color of the flowers, and little in the leaves, I shall not
need to make any repetitions of the description of them, seeing one only
shall suffice for each peculiar kind. The Colombine has diverse large spread
leaves, standing on long stalks: every one divided in several partitions, and
roundly endented about the edges, in color somewhat like the leaves of
Celondine, that is, of a dark bluish green color: the stalks rise up
sometimes two or three foot high, divided usually into many branches, bearing
one long divided leaf at the lower joint, above which the flowers grow, every
one standing on a long stalk, consisting of five hollow leaves, crooked or
horned at the ends, turning backward, the open flower showing almost like unto
a Cinquefoile, but more hollow: after the flowers are past, there arise small
long cods, four or five together, wherein are contained black shining seed:
the roots are thick and round, for a little space within the ground, and then
divided into branches, ending in many small fibers, abiding many years, and
shooting a fresh every Spring from the round heads, that abide all the Winter.
The variety of the colors of these flowers are very much, for some are wholly
white, some of a blew or violet color, others of a blush or flesh color, or
deep or pale red, or of a dead purple, or dead murrey color, as nature
lists to show it self.

2. Aquilegia vulgaris flore pleno. Double Colombines.
The double Colombines differ not in leaf or manner of growing from the
single, so that until they come to flower, they cannot be discerned one from
another; the only difference is, it bears very thick and double flowers,
that is, many horned or crooked hollow leaves set together, and are not so
large as the leaves of the single flowers. The variety of colors in this
double kind is as plentiful, or rather more then in the single; for of these
there is party colored, blew and white, and spotted very variably, which are
not in the single kind, and also a very deep red, very thick and double, but
a smaller flower, and less plentiful in bearing then many of the other double
sorts. These double kinds do give as good seed as the single kinds do,
which is not observed in many other plants.

3. Aquilegia inuersis corniculis. Double inuerted Colombines.
These Colombines are not to be distinguished either in root, leaves, or seed
from the former, the flowers only make the difference, which are as double as
the former, but that the heels or horns of these are turned inward, and stand
out in the middle of the flowers together: there is not that plentiful variety
of colors in this kind, as there is in the former: for I never saw above
three or four several colors in this kind, that is, white, purplish,
reddish, and a dun or dark ouerworne purplish color. These double flowers do
likewise turn into pods, bearing seed, continuing his kind, and not varying
into the former.

4. Aquilegia Rosea. Rose Colombines.
The leaves and other parts of this kind of Colombine, differ little or
nothing from the former, the diversity consists likewise in the flowers,
which although they stand in the same manner severally upon their small
stalks, somewhat more sparingly then the former do, yet they have no heels
or horns, either inward or outward, or very seldom, but stand sometimes but
with eight or ten smooth small plain leaves, set in order one by one in a
compass, in a double row, and sometimes with four or five rows of them,
every one directly before the other, like unto a small thick double Rose laid
open, or a spread Marigold: yet sometimes it happens, that some of these
flowers will have two or three of the first rows of leaves without any heel,
and the rest that are inward with each of them a piece of a small horn at
them, as the former have: the colors of these flowers are almost as variable,
and as variably mixed as the former double kinds. This likewise gives seed,
preserving his own kind for the most part.

5. Aquilegia degener. Degenerate Colombines.
This kind of Colombine might seem to some, to be but a casual
degeneration, and no true natural kind, happening by some cause of
transplanting, or otherwise by the art of man: but I have not so found it, in
that it keeps, and holds his own proper form, which is like unto the
double Rose Colombine, but that the outermost row of leaves are larger then any
of the rest inwardes, and is of a greenish, or else of a purplish green
color, and is not altogether so apt to give good seed like the former.

The Place.
The single kinds have been often found in some of the woody mountains of
Germany, as Clusius says, but the double kinds are chiefly cherished in
gardens.

The Time.
They flower not until May, and abide not for the most part when June is past,
and in the mean time perfecteth their seed.

The Names.
Costaeus does call this plant Pothos of Theophrastus, which Gaza translateth
Desiderium. Dalechampius upon Athenaeus, calls it Diosanthos, or Iouis flos
of Theophrastus, who in his sixth Book and seventh Chapter reckons them
both, that is, Diosanthos and Pathos, to be Summer flowers, but severally.
Dodonaeus Leoherba, and Gesner Leontostomium. Fabius Columna in his
Phytobasanos, unto whom Clusius gives the greatest approbation, refers it
to the Isopyrum of Dioscorides. All later Writers do generally call it, either
Aquileia, Aquilina, or Aquilegia; and we in English, generally (I think)
through the whole Country, Colombines. Some do call the Aquilegia rosea,
Aquilegia stellata, The star Colombine; because the leaves of the flowers do
stand so directly one by another, besides the doubleness, that they somewhat
represent either a Rose or a Star, and thereupon they give it the name either
of a Star or Rose.

The Virtues.
Some in Spain, as Camerarius says, use to eat a piece of the root hereof 1
Aquilegia simplex. The single Colombine. 2 Aquilegia flore multiplici. The
double Colombine. 3 Aquilegia versicolor. The party colored Colombine. 4
Aquilegia inuersis corniculis. The double inuerted Colombine. 5 Aquilegia Rosea
sieve Stellata. The Rose or the Star Colombine. 6 Thalictrum Hispanicum album.
White Spanish tufts.
depiction of flowers fasting, many days together, to help them that are
troubled with the stone in the kidneyes. Others use the decoction, of both
herb and root in wine, with a little Ambargrise, against those kinds of
swounings, which the Greeks call (...). The seed is used for the iaundise,
and other obctructions of the liver. Clusius writes from the experience of
Franciscus Rapard, a chief Physician of Bruges in Flanders, that the seed
beaten and drunk is effectual to women in travel of child, to procure a
speedy delivery, and advises a second draught thereof should be taken if the
first succeed not sufficiently.

CHAP. XLVII.
Thalictrum Hispanicum. Spanish Tufts, or Tufted Colombines.
FRom among the diversities of this plant, I have selected out two sorts for
this my garden, as having more beauty then all the rest; leaving the other to
be entreated of, where all in general may be included. I have in this place
inserted them, for the likeness of the leaves only, being in no other part
correspondent, and in a Chapter by themselves, as it is most fit.

Thalictrum Hispanicum album. White Spanish tufted Colombines.
These plants have both one form, in root, leaf and flower, and therefore
need but one description. The leaves are both for color and form so like
unto Colombines leaves (although lesser and darker, yet more spread, and on
larger stalks) that they may easily deceive one, that does not mark them
advisedly; for the leaves are much more divided, and in smaller parts, and not
so round at the ends: the stalks are round, strong, and three foot high at
the least, branching out into two or three parts, with leaves at the several
joints of them, at the tops whereof stand many flowers, which are nothing but
a number of threads, made like unto a small round tuft, breaking out of a white
skin, or leaf, which incloseth them, and being vnblowne, show like unto
little buttons: the color of these threads or tufts in this are whitish with
yellow tips on them, and somewhat purplish at the bottom, having a strong but
no good sent, and abiding in their beauty (especially if they grow in the
shade, and not too hot in the sun) a great while, and then fall away, like
short down or threads: the seed vessels are three square, containing small,
long, and round seed; the roots are many long yellow stringes, which endure
and increase much.

Thalictrum Montanum purpureum. Purple tufted Colombines.
This purple tufted Colombine differs only from the former, in that it is
not so high nor so large, and that the color of the flower or tuft is of a
bluish purple color with yellow tips, and is much more rare then the other.

The Place.
These grow both in Spain and Italy.

The Time.
They flower in the end of May, or in June, and sometime later.

The Names.
Some do call them Thalietrum, and some Thalictrum. Others Ruta pa^ustris, and
Ruta pratensis, and some Rhabarbarum Monachorum, or Pseudo-rhabarbarum, by
reason that the roots being yellow, have an opening quality, and drying as
Rubarbe. In English what other fit Names to give these then I have expressed in
the titles, I know not.

The Virtues.
The are a little hot and drying withal, good for old Ulcers, as Dioscorides
says, to bring them to cicatrising: in Italy they are used against the Plague,
and in Saxonye against the Iaundise, as Camerarius says.

CHAP. XLVIII.
Radix caua. Hollow root.
THe likeness of the leaves likewise of this plant with Colombines, has
caused me to insert it next the other, and although some of this kind be of
small respect, being accounted but foolish, yet let it fill up a waste corner,
that so no place be unfurnished.

1. Radix Caua mayor flore albo. The white Hollow root.
The leaves of this hollow root break not out of the ground, until the end
of March, or seldom before, and are both for proportion and color somewhat
like unto the leaves of Colombines, divided into five parts, indented about the
edges, standing on small long footestalkes of a whitish green color, among
which rise up the stalks, without any leaves from the bottom to the middle,
where the flowers shoot forth one above another, with every one a small short
leaf at the foot thereof, which are long and hollow, with a spur behind
it, somewhat like unto the flowers of Larckes spurs, but having their bellies
somewhat bigger, and the mouth not so open, being all of a pure white color:
after the flowers are past, arise small long and round cods, wherein are
contained round blackish seed: the root is round and great, of a yellowish
brown color on the outside, and more yellow within, and hollow underneath, so
that it seems but a shell: yet being broken, every part will grow: it abides
green above ground but a small time.

2. Radix Caua mayor flore carneo. Blush colored Hollow root.
The blush Hollow root is in all things like unto the former, but only that
the flowers hereof are of a delayed red or purple color, which we call blush:
and sometimes of a very deep red or purple color; but very rare to meet with.

3. Radix Caua minor, seu Capuos fabacea radice. Small hollow root.
This small kind has his leaves of a bluish green color, yet greener and
smaller then the former, growing more thick together: the flowers are like in
proportion unto the former in all respects, but lesser, having purplish backs,
and white bellyes: standing closer and thicker together upon the short stalks:
the root is solid or firm, round and a little long withal, two being usually
joined together, yellowish both within and without: but I have seen the dry
roots that came from beyond Sea hither, that have been as small as hasell
nuts, and somewhat flat with the roundnesse, differing from those that grow
with us, whether the nature thereof is to alter by manuring, I know not.

The Place.
The greater kinds Clusius reports he found in many places of Hungary, and
the other parts near thereunto: the lesser in the lower Germany, or Low
Countries, as we call them.

The Time.
These are most truly to be reckoned Vernall plants, for that they rise not
out of the ground until the Spring be come in, and are gone likewise before
it be past, remaining under ground all the rest of the year, yet the lesser
abides longer above ground then the greater.

The Names.
Concerning the former of these, there is a controversy among diverse, whether
it should be Thesium of Theophrastus, or Eriphium of Galen, but here is no fit
place to trauerse those opinions. Some would have it to be Corydalis, and some
refer it to Pliny his Capuos Cheledonia, for the likeness it has both with
Fumeterie and Celandine. It is generally called of all modern Writers, Radix
Caua, and we in English thereafter, Hollow root. The lesser for the firmness
of his round root, is usually called, Capuos fabacea radice, and the Dutch men
thereafter, Boonkens Hollwortell: we of the likeness with the former, do call
it the less Hollow root.

The Virtues.
Some by the bitterness do conjecture (for little proof has been had
thereof, but in outward cases) that it cleanses, purges, and dries withal.

CHAP. XLIX.
Delphinium. Larkes heels.
OF Larkes heels there are two principal kinds, the wild kind, and the
tame or garden; the wild kind is of two sorts, one which is with us noursed
up chiefly in gardens, and is the greatest; the other which is smaller and
lower, often found in our plowed lands, and elsewhere: of the former of these
wild sorts, there are double as well as single: and of the tame or more
upright, double also and single: and of each of diverse colors, as shall be set
down.

1. Delphinium maius sieve vulgar. The ordinary Larkes heels.
The common Larkes heel spreads with many branches much more ground then the
other, rather leaning or bending down to the ground, then standing upright,
whereon are set many small long green leaves, finely cut, almost like Fennel
leaves: the branches end in a long spike of hollow flowers, with a long spur
behind them, very like unto the flowers of the Hollow root last described,
and are of diverse several colors, as of a bluish purple color, or white, or
ash color or red, paler or deeper, Varietas.
as also party colored of two colors in a flower: after the flowers are past,
(which in this kind abide longer then in the other) there come long round
cods, containing very black seed: the root is hard after it grows up to
seed, spreading both abroad and deep, and perishes every year, usually
raising it self from it own sowing, as well as from the seed sown in the
spring time.

2. Delphinium vulgar flore pleno. Double common Larkes heels.
Of this vulgar kind there is some difference in the flower, although in
nothing else: the flowers stand many upon a stalk like the former, but every
one of them are as if three or four small flowers were joined together, with
every one his spur behind, the greatest flower being outermost, and as it
were containing the rest, which are of a pale red, or deep blush color:
Another of this kind will bear his flowers with three or four rows of
leaves in the middle, making a double flower with one spur behind only: and
of this kind there is both with purple, blew, blush, and white flowers, and
party colored also; these do all bear seed like the single, whereby it is
increased every year.

3. Delphinium aruense. Wild Larkes spurs.
This wild Larkes spur has smaller and shorter leaves, smaller and lower
branches, and more thinly or sparsedly growing upon them, then any of the
former: the flowers likewise are neither so large as any of the former, nor so
many growing together, the cods likewise have smaller seed, and is harder to
grow in gardens then any of the former; the most usual color hereof is a pale
reddish or blush color, yet sometimes they are found both white and blew, and
sometimes mixed of blew and blush, variably disposed, as nature can when she
lists; but are much more rare.

4. Diphinium elatius flore simplici diuersorum colorum. Single upright bearing
Larkes heels of many colors.
The difference between this and the last is, that the leaves of this are not
fully so green, nor so large; the stalks grow upright, to the height of a
man, and sometimes higher, having some branches thereon, but fewer then the
former, and standing likewise upright, and not leaning down as the former: the
tops of the stalks are better stored with flowers then the other, being
sometimes two foot long and above, of the same fashion, but not altogether so
large, but of more diverse and several colors, as white, pale, blush, read
deeper or paler, ashcoloured, purple or violet, and of an ouerworne bluish
purple, or iron color: for of all these we have simple, without any mixture or
spot: but we have other sorts, among the simple colors, that rise from the
same seed, and will have flowers that will be half white, and half blush or
purple, or one leaf white, and another blush or purple, or else variably mixed
and spotted: the seed and seed vessels are like the former but larger and
harder.

5. Delphinium elatius flore pleno diuersorum colorum. Double upright Larkes
heels of many colors.
These double Larkes heels cannot be known from the single of the same
kind, until they come toward flowring; for there appear many flowers upon
the stalks, in the same manner, and of as many colors almost as of the
single, except the party colored, which stand like little double Roses, laid
or spread broad open, as the Rose Colombine without any heels behind them,
very delightful to behold; consisting of many small leaves growing together,
and after they are fallen there come up in their places three or four small
cods set together, wherein is contained here and there (for all are not full of
seed, as the single kinds) black seed, like unto all the rest, but smaller,
which being sown will bring plants that will bear both single and double
flowers again, and it often happens, that it variably alters in colors
from it own sowing: for none of them hold constantly his own color, (so
far as ever I could observe) but fall into others as nature pleases.

6. Delphinium Hispanicum paruum. Spanish wild Larkes spurs.
This small Larkes spur of Spain, has diverse long and broad leaves next the
ground, cut-in on both sides, somewhat like unto the leaf of a Scabious, or
rather that kind of Stoebe, which Lobel calls Crupina, for it does somewhat
nearly resemble the same, but that this is smooth on the edges, and not
indented besides the cuts, as the Crupina is, being of a whitish green color,
and somewhat smooth and soft in handling: among the leaves rises up a whitish
green stalk, having many smaller leaves upon it that grow below, but not
divided, branching out into many small stalks, bearing flowers like unto the
wild Larkes heels, but smaller, and of a bl^^ke bluish color, which being
past, there come up two or three small cods joined together, wherein is black
seed, smaller and rounder then any of the former: the root is small and
thready, quickly perishing with the first cold that ouertaketh the plant.

The Place.
The greatest or first wild kinds grow among corn in many countries beyond
the Seas, and where corn has been sown, and for his beauty brought and
nourished in our Gardens: the lesser wild kind in some fields of our own
Country. The Spanish kind likewise in the like places, which I had among many
seeds that Guillaume Boel brought me out of Spain. The first double and
single have been common for many years in all countries of this Land, but the
tall or upright single kinds have been entertained but of late years. The
double kinds are more rare.

The Time.
These flower in the Summer only, but the Spanish wild kind flowreth very
late, so that oftentimes in our Country, the Winter takes it before it can
give ripe seed: the double kinds, as well the upright as the ordinary or
wild, are very choice and dainty many times, not yielding good seed.

The Names.
They are called diversely by diverse Writers, as Consolida regulis, C^lcaris
flos; Flos regius, Buccinum Romanorum, and of Matthiolus, Cuminum siluestre
alterum Dioscoridis: but the most usual name with us is Delphinium: but
whether it be the true Delphinium of Dioscorides, or the Poets Hyacinth, or the
flower of Ajax, another place is fitter to discuss then this. We call them in
English Larkes heels, Larkes spurs, Larkes toes or claws, and Monks hoods.
The last or Spanish kind came to me under the name of Delphinium latifolium
trigonum, so styled either from the division of the leaves, or from the pods,
which come usually three together. Bauhinus upon Matthiolus calls it,
Consolida regalis peregrina paruo flore.

The Virtues.
There is no use of any of these in Physic in these days that I know, but
are wholly spent for their flowers sake.

CHAP. L.
Balsamina foemina. The Female Balsam Apple.
I Have set this plant in this place, for some likeness of the flower, rather
then for any other comparison, even as I must also with the next that
follows. This plant rises up with a thick round reddish stalk, with great
and bunched joints, being tender and full of juice, much like to the stalk of
Purslane, but much greater, which brancheth it self forth from the very
ground, into many stalks, bearing thereon many long green leaves, snipt
about the edges, very like unto the Almond or Peach tree leaves; among which
from the middle of the stalks upwards round about them, come forth upon
several small short foot-stalkes many fair purplish flowers, of two or three
colors in them, fashioned somewhat like the former Larkes heels, or Monks
hoods, but that they are larger open at the mouth, and the spurs behind
crook or bend downwards: after the flowers are past, there come in their
places round rough 1 Radix Caua mayor flore albo. The white flowred Hollow
root. 2 Capn^s fabacearadice. The small Hollow root. 3 Delphinium flore
simplici. Single Larkes spurs. 4 Delphinium vulgar flore medio duplici. Larkes
spurs double in the middle. 5 Delphinium vulgar flore pleno. Common Larks
spurs double. 6 Delphinium elatius flore pleno. Double upright Larkes spurs. 7
Delphinium Hispanicum parvu^. Small Spanish Larkes spurs. 8 Balsamina f^^mina.
The Female Balsam apple. 9 Nast^^tium Indicum. Indian Cresses, or yellow Larkes
spurs.
depiction of flowers heads, pointed at the end, green at the first, and a
little yellower when they be ripe, containing within them small round blackish
seed, which will soon skippe out of the heads, if they be but a little hardly
pressed between the fingers: the roots spread themselves under ground very
much from the top, with a number of small fibers annexed thereunto: this is a
very tender plant, dying every year, and must be sown carefully in a pot of
earth, and tended and watered in the heat of Summer, and all little enough to
bring it to perfection.

The Place.
We have always had the seed of this plant sent us out of Italy, not knowing
his original place.

The Time.
It flowreth from the middle of July, to the end of August: the seed does
seldom ripen with us, especially if the Summer be backward, so that we are
oftentimes to seek for new and good seed from our friends again.

The Names.
Some use to call it Charantia foemina, Balsamina foemina, Balsamella, and
Anguillara, Herba Sanctae Katharinae. We have no other English name to call it
by, then the Female Balsame Apple, or Balsamina.

The Virtues.
Some by reason of the name, would attribute the property of Balm unto this
plant, but it is not sufficiently known to have any such; yet I am well
persuaded, there may be some extradinary quality in so beautiful a plant,
which yet lies hid from us.

CHAP. LI.
Nasturtium Indicum. Indian Cresses, or yellow Larkes heels.
THe likeness (as I said before) of this flower likewise, having spurs or
heels makes me join it with the rest, which is of so great beauty and
sweetness withal, that my Garden of delight cannot be unfurnished of it.
This fair plant spreads it self into very many long trayling branches,
enterlaced one within another very confusedly (yet does it not wind it self
with any claspers about either pole or any other thing, but if you will have it
abide close thereunto, you must tie it, or else it will lie upon the ground)
four or five foot in length at the least, whereby it takes up a great deal of
ground: the leaves are smooth, green, and as round as the Penniwort that
grows on the ground, without any cut or incisure therein at all in any part,
the stalks whereof stand in the middle of each leaf, and stand at every joint
of the stalk, where they are a little reddish, and knobbed or bunched out: the
flowers are of an excellent gold yellow color, and grow all along these
stalks, almost at every joint with the leaves, upon pretty long foote-stalkes,
which are composed of five leaves, not hollow or gaping, but standing open each
leaf apart by it self, two of them, that be larger and longer then the other,
stand above, and the other two that are lesser below, which are a little
iagged or bearded on both sides, and the fifth lowest: in the middle of each of
the three lower leaves (yet sometimes it is but in two of them) there is a
little long spot or streake, of an excellent crimson color, with a long heel
or spur behind hanging down: the whole flower has a fine small sent, very
pleasing, which being placed in the middle of some Carnations or Gilloflowers
(for they are in flower at the same time) make a delicate Tussimussie, as they
call it, or Nosegay, both for sight and sent: After the flower is past, come
the seed, which are rough or uneven, round, greenish yellow heads, sometimes
but one, and sometimes two or three standing together upon one stalk, bare or
naked of themselves, without any husk, containing a white pulpy kernel: the
roots are small, and spreading under ground, which perish with the first
frosts, and must be sown a new every year; yet there needs no bed of
horse-dung for the matter: the natural ground will be sufficient, so as you
defend it a little from those frosts, that may spoil it when it is newly
sprung up, or being yet tender.

The Place.
This goodly plant was first found in the West Indies, and from thence sent
into Sp^ine unto Monardus and others, from whence all other parts have received
it. It is now very familiar in most Gardens of any curiosity, where it yearly
gives ripe seed, except the year be very unkindly.

The Time.
It flowreth sometimes in June, but usually in July (if it be well defended and
in any good ground) and so continues flowring, until the cold frosts and
mistes in the middle or end of October, do check the luxurious nature
thereof, and in the mean time the seed is ripe, which will quickly fall down
on the ground, where for the most part the best is gathered.

The Names.
Some do reckon this plant among the Clematides or Convolvuli, the Clamberers
or Bind weeds; but (as I said) it has no claspers, neither does it wind it
self: but by reason of the number of his branches, that run one within
another, it may seem to climb up by a pole or stick, which yet does but
only close it, as having something whereon to lean or rest his branches.
Monardus and others call it Flos sanguineus, of the red spots in the flowers,
as also Mastnerzo de las Indias, which is Nasturtium Indicum, by which name it
is now generally known and called, and we thereafter in English, Indian
Cresses, yet it may be called from the form of the flowers only, Yellow
Larkes heels.

The Virtues.
The Spaniards and others use the leaves hereof in stead of ordinary Cresses,
because the taste is somewhat sharp agreeing thereunto, but other Physical
properties I have heard of none attributed to it.

CHAP. LII.
Viola. Violets.
THe Garden Violets (for the Wild I leave to their own place) are so well
known unto all, that either keep a Garden, or has but once come into it,
that I shall (I think) but lose labor and time to describe that which is so
common. Yet because it is not only a choice flower of delight, notwithstanding
the popularity, and that I let not pass any thing without his particular
description, I must also do so by this. And hereunto I must add that kind of
Violet, which, although it want that smell of the other, goes beyond it in
variety of dainty colors, called Viola tricolor and flammea, or Hearts eases.

1. Viola simplex Martia. Single March Violets.
The single Garden Violet has many round green leaves, finely snipt or dented
about the edges, standing upon several small stalks, set at diverse places of
the many creeping branches, which as they run, do here and there take root
in the ground, bearing thereon many flowers severally at the joints of the
leaves, which consist of five small leaves, with a short round tail or spur
behind, of a perfect blew purple color, and of a very sweet sent, it
brings forth round seed vessels, standing likewise upon their several small
stalks, wherein is contained round white seed: but these heads rise not from
where the flowers grew, as in all other plants that I know, but apart by
themselves, and being sown, will produce others like unto it self, whereby
there may be made a more speedy increase to plant a Garden (as I have done) or
any other place, then by slipping, as is the usual manner: the roots spread
both deep and wide, taking strong hold in the ground.

Flore albo.
Of this kind there is another that bears white flowers, not differing in
smell or any thing else from the former.

Flore obsoleto.
And also another, that bears flowers of a dead or sad reddish color, in all
other things alike, saving that this has not altogether so good a sent as the
other.

2. Viola Martia flore multiplici. Double March Violets.
There is no difference between this Violet and the former, in any other thing
then in the doubleness of the flowers, which have so many leaves set and
thrust together, that they are like unto hard buttons. There is of this double
kind both white and purple, as in the single; but the white sort is seldom so
thick and double as the purple: but of the red color to be double I never
heard.

3. Viola flammea sieve tricolor. Hearts eases or Pansies.
The Hearts ease has his leaves longer, and more endented or cut in on the
edges then the Violet has, and somewhat round withal: the stalks are
upright, yet weak, and ready to fall down, and lie upon the ground, set here
and there with the like leaves, from whence come forth the flowers, of little
or no sent at all, made like unto a Violet, yet more open, and with larger
leaves; but so variably mixed with blew or purple, white and yellow, that it is
hard to set down all the varieties: For some flowers will be more white, and
but some spots of purple or blew in the two upper leaves, and the lower leaves
with some stripes of yellow in the middle: others will have more purple in them
then any other color, both in the upper and lower leaves, the side leaves
blew, and the middle yellow, and others white and blew with yellow stripes, as
nature lists to distribute their colors: the seed is small, whitish, and
round, contained in small round heads: the root perishes every year, and
raises it self up plentifully by it own sowing, if it be suffered.

4. Viola tricolor flore duplici. Double Hearts ease.
We have in our Gardens another sort, that bears flowers with more leaves
then the former, making it seem to be twice double, and that only in Autumn;
for the first flowers are single that come in Summer: This is of that sort that
bears purple flowers: And it is to be observed, that the seed of this kind
will not all bring double flowers, but only some, if the ground be fit and
liking, so that if you have once had of this double kind, you shall seldom
miss to have double flowers again every year of it own growing or sowing.

5. Viola flammea luteae maxima. The great yellow Pansie.
There is one other kind of Hearts ease, that decketh up our Gardens not to be
forgotten, whose leaves and flowers are like the former, but more plentiful in
stalks and branches, and better abides our Winters: the flowers are larger
then any of the former, of a fair pale yellow color, with some yellower
stripes now and then about the middle; for it is sometimes without any stripes,
and also of a little deeper yellow color: this is to be increased by slips,
which will soon comprehend in a moist or moistened ground, for that I never
could observe that it bore seed.

The Place.
These plants were first wild, and by manuring brought to be both fairer in
color, and peradventure of a better sent then when they grew wild.

The Time.
The Violets flower in March, and sometimes earlier, and if the year be
temperate and mild, in Autumn again. The double Violets, as they are later
before they flower then the single, so they hold their flowers longer. The
Hearts ease flowreth seldom until May; but then some will abide to flower
until the end of Autumn almost, especially if the frosts be not early.

The Names.
The Violet is called Viola nigra, purpurea, and Martia: In English, Violets,
March Violets, and purple Violets. The Hearts ease is called Viola flammea,
Viola tricolor, Viola multicolor, and of some, Iacea, Flos trinitatis, and
Herba clauellata: In English, Hearts ease, and Pansies, of the French name
Pensees. Some give it foolish names, as Love in idleness, Cull me to you, and
Three faces in a hood. The great yellow Hearts ease is so called, because it is
like in form, and is the greatest of all other, although it have not that
diversity of colors in it that the other have.

The Virtues.
The properties of Violets are sufficiently known to all, to cool and
moisten: I shall forbear to recite the many virtues that may be set down, and
only let you know, that they have in them an opening or purging quality, being
taken either fresh and green, or dried, and made into powder, especially the
flowers; the dried leaves will do the like, but in greater quantity. Costaeus
in his book of the nature of all plants says, that the distilled water of
Hearts ease, is commended in the French disease, to be profitable, being taken
for nine days or more, and sweating upon it, which how true it is, I know not,
and wish some better experience were made of it, before we put any great
confidence in that assertion.

CHAP. LIII.
Epimedium. Barrenwort.
THis pretty plant rises up out of the ground with upright, hard, round, small
stalks, a foot and a half high, or not two foot high at the highest,
divided into three branches for the most part, each branch whereof is again
divided for the most part into three other branches, and each of them bear
three leaves (seldom either more or less) set together, yet each upon his
own foote-stalke, each leaf being broad, round, and pointed at the end,
somewhat hard or dry in feeling, hayrie, or as it were prickly about the edges,
but very tenderly, without harm, of a light green color on the vpperside,
and a little whiter underneath: from the middle of the stem or stalk of
leaves does likewise come forth another long stalk, not much higher then those
with the leaves on them, divided into other branches, each whereof has
likewise three flowers, each upon his own footestalke, consisting of eight
small leaves a piece, yet seeming to be but of four leaus spread or laid open
flat, for that the four uppermost, which are the smaller and being yellow, do
lie so close on the four undermost, which are a little broader and red, that
they show as if they were yellow flowers with red edges, having yellow
thredstipt with green, standing in the middle of the flowers: the vnderside of
the lower leaves are of a pale yellowish red, striped with white lines: after
the flowers are past, there come small long pods, wherein are contained flat
reddish seed: the roots are small, reddish and hard, spreading, branching and
enterlacing themselves very much, and is fit to be placed on some shady side of
a garden: the whole plant is rather of a strong then any good sent, yet is
cherished for the pleasant variety of the flowers.

The Place.
Caesalpinus says it grows on the mountains of Liguria, that is nigh unto
Ligorne, in the Florentine Dominion. Cametarius says, nigh unto Vicenzo in
Italy. Bauhinus on the Euganian hills, nigh unto Padoa, and in Romania in
shadowie wet grounds.

The Time.
It flowreth from June until the end of July, and to the middle of August, if
it stand, as I said it is fittest, in a shadowie place.

The Names.
It is of most Writers accepted for the true Epimedium of Dioscorides, though
he says it is without flower or seed, being therein either mistaken, or
misinformed, as he was also in Dictamnus of Candy, and diverse other plants.
From the triple triplicitie of the standing of the stalks and leaves, and
quadriplicitie of the flowers, it might receive another name in English then is
already imposed upon it: but lest I might be thought to be singular or full of
novelty, let it pass with the name Barrenwort, as it is in the title.

The Virtues.
It is thought of diverse to agree in the property of causing barrenness, as
the ancients do record of Epimedium.

CHAP. LIIII.
Papauer satiuum. Garden Poppies.
OF Poppies there are a great many sorts, both wild and tame, but because our
Garden does entertain none, but those of beauty and respect, I will only give
you here a few double ones, and leave the rest to a general survey.

1. Papauer multiplex album. Double white Poppies.
The double white Poppy has diverse broad, and long whitish green leaves,
giving milk (as all the rest of the plant above ground does, wheresoever it is
broken) very much rent or torn in on the sides, and notched or indented
besides, compassing at the bottom of them a hard round brittle whitish green
stalk, branched toward the top, bearing one fair large great flower on the
head of every branch, which before it breaks out, is contained within a thin
skin, and being blown open is very thick of leaves, and double, somewhat
iagged at the ends, and of a white color; in the 1 Viola Martia simplex.
Single March Violets. 2 Viola Martia multiplex. Double March Violets. 3 Viola
flammea sieve tricolor. Ordinary garden Pansies or Hearts ease. 4 Viola flammea
lutea magna. Great yellow Pansies. 5 Viola tri^olor d^ple^ Double Pan^ies or
Hearts eases. 6 Epimedium. Barrenwort. 7 Papauer sativum flore pl^no. Double
garden Poppies. 8 Papauer sativum flore ple^^ laciv^^^^ (...) feathere^
Poppie^. 9 Nigella Hispanica flore amplo. Spanish Nigella or Fenell flower. 10
Nigella multiplex caerulea Double blew Nigella or Fenell flower. 11 Nigella
duplex flore albo. Double white Nigella. 12 Ptarmica flore pleno. Double wild
Pelletory.
depiction of flowers middle whereof stands a round head or bowl, with a
striped crown on the head of it, very like a star, compassed about with
some threads, wherein when it is ripe, is contained small, round, white seed.
disposed into several cells: the root is hard, woody, and long, perishing
every year, and must be new sown every Spring, if they do not spring of
their own sowing, which if it do, the flowers are seldom so fair and double
as they that are sown in the Spring: the whole plant is of a strong heady
smell.

2. Papauer multiplex rubescens. Double red or blush Poppies.
This other kind of double Poppy differs not in any other thing from the
former, but only in the color of the flowers, which are of a bright red,
tending to a blush color, parted, paned or striped in many places with white,
and exceedingly more iagged then the former, almost like a feather at the ends,
the bottomes of all the leaves being white: the seed hereof is white as the
former, which is not so in any other Poppie, that bears not a full white
flower.

3. Papauer multiplex nigrum sieve purpureum. Double purple or murry Poppies.
This kind varyeth both in flowers and seed, although neither in leaves or
any other thing from the first: the flowers are thick and double, and somewhat
iagged at the ends, in some more, in some less, either red or blush, or
purplish red, more or less, or of a sad murrey or tawney, with brown, or
black, or tawny bottomes: the seed is either of a grayish blew color, or in
others more blackish.

4. Papauer Rhaas flore multiplici. The double red field Poppie.
This double Poppie is like the wild or field Poppie, which is well known to
all to have longer, narrower, and more iagged green leaves then the former,
the stalks more hairy, and the flower of a deep yellowish red color, known
to all. Now this differs in nothing from it, but in the doubleness of the
flower, which is very thick and double, but not so large as the former. This
rises of seed in the like manner as they do, and so to be preserved.

The Place.
From what place they have been first gathered naturally I cannot assure you,
but we have had them often and long time in our gardens, being sent from Italy
and other places. The double wild kinds came from Constantinople, which
whether it grows near unto it or further off, we cannot tell as yet.

The Time.
They flower in the beginning or middle of June at the furthest, the seed is
ripe within a small while after.

The Names.
The general known name to all, is Papauer, Poppie: the several distinctions
are according to their colors. Yet our English Gentlewomen in some places,
call it by a by-name, Ione silver pin: subauditur, Fair without and foul
within.

The Virtues.
It is not unknown, I suppose to any, that Poppie procures sleep, for which
cause it is wholly and only used, as I think: but the water of the wild
Poppies, besides that it is of great use in Pleuresies, and Rheumatick-or
thinner Distillations, is found by daily experience, to be a sovereign remedy
against surfeits; yet some do attribute this property to the water of the
wild Poppies.

CHAP. LV.
Nigella. The Fenell flower, or Nigella.
AMong the many sorts of Nigella, both wild and tame, both single and double,
I will only set down three sorts, to be noursed up in this garden, referring
the rest to a Physic garden, or a general History, which may comprehend all.

1. Nigella Hispanica flore simplici. The great Spanish Nigella.
Spanish Nigella rises up with diverse green leaves, so finely cut, and into
so many parts, that they are finer then Fenell, and divided somewhat like the
leaves of Larkes heels, among which rise up stalks, with many such like
leaves upon them, branched into three or four parts, at the top of each
whereof stands one fair large flower, like unto other single Nigella's,
consisting of five or six leaves sometimes, of a bleake blew, or of a purplish
blew color, with a green head in the middle, compassed about with seven or
eight small bluish green flowers, or pieces of flowers rather, made like
gaping hoodes, with every of them a yellowish line thwart or cross the middle
of them, with some threads also standing by them: after the flower is past the
head grows greater, having six, seven or eight horns as it were at the
top, greater and longer, and standing closer together then any other Nigella,
spreading very like a star, or the crown of the Poppy head, but larger and
longer, each whereof being folded together, opens a little when the head is
ripe, which is greater above, and smaller below, and not so round as the others
are, containing within them small yellowish green seed, or not so black as
the other sorts: the roots are small and yellow, perishing every year as the
others likewise do.

2. Nigella Damascena flore multiplici. Double blew Nigella, or The Fenell
flower.
The double Nigella is in leaves, stalks and roots, very like unto the former
Nigella, so that the one can very hardly be discerned from the other before
this rise up to flower, except it be that the leaves hereof are not fully so
large as they: the flower consists of three or four rows of leaves, laid
one upon another, of a pale blew color, with a green round head compassed
with diverse short threads in the middle, and having five or six such small
green Fenell-like leaves under the flower, to bear it up (as it were) below,
which add a greater grace to the flowers, which at the first shows sometimes
white, but changes quickly after: the horned heads hereof are like unto the
heads of the other wild kind, which are somewhat rounder and greater, having
within them black uneven seeds, but without any sent.

3. Nigella Catrina flore albo multiplici. Double white Nigella.
This double white Nigella has such like leaves as the last has, but somewhat
larger, of a yellower green color, and not so finely cut and iagged: the
flowers are somewhat less, and lesser double then the former, and in color
white, having no green leaves under the flower, as the former has, the head
whereof in the middle is very like the head of the last double kind, but not
so great, wherein is contained black seed for the most part, and sweet like
the Roman Nigella, which only is sweet besides this: yet sometimes it is not
so black, but rather a little more white or yellowish: the root is yellow,
and perishes as the others every year.

The Place.
All these, and the rest be found wild in diverse Countries, as France,
Spain, Italy, etc. but we only cherish them in our Gardens for our delight.

The Time.
They flower in the end of June, and in July, or thereabouts.

The Names.
They are called Melanthium, Gith, and Nigella, and of some Flos Diuae
Catherinae. We may either call them Nigella according to the Latin name, or
the Fenell flower, as some do, because the double blew Nigella has small
Fenell-like leaves bearing up the flower, as I showed before in the description.

The Virtues.
These Nigella's are nothing so hot in quality as the single Roman kind is,
as may well be known by the smell of the seed thereof, and therefore are not
fit to be used in the steed of it, as many ignorant persons use to do: for the
single Roman seed is used to help pains, and cold distillations in the
head, and to dry up the rheum. Pena says, that the pressed oil of the seed
as well taken inwardly as used outwardly is an excellent remedy for the
hardness and swelling of the spleen.

CHAP. LVI.
Ptarmica siluestris flore pleno. Double wild Pelletory.
THe double wild Pelletorie has straight and slender stalks, beset with long
and narrow leaves, snipt round about the edges, in all points like unto the
single wild kind, that grows common with us almost every where: on the
tops of the stalks stand four or five, or more white flowers, one above
another, with a green leaf at the bottom of the footestalke of every one of
them, being small, thick, and very double, with a little yellowishnesse in
the middle of every flower, like both for form and color unto the flower of
the double Featherfew, but smaller: the roots are many long strings, running
here and there in the ground: this has no smell at all, but is delightsome
only for the double white flowers.

The Place.
It is only cherished in some few Gardens, for it is very rare.

The Time.
It flowreth in the end of June or thereabouts.

The Names.
It is called of most Ptarmica, or Sternutamenteria, of his quality to provoke
neesing; and of some Pyrethrum, of the hot biting taste. We usually call it
Double wild Pelletorie, and some Sneesewort, but Elleborus albus is usually so
called, and I would not two things should be called by one name, for the
mistaking and mis-using of them.

The Virtues.
The properties hereof, no doubt, may well be referred to the single kind,
being of the same quality, yet as I take it, a little more mild and
temperate.

CHAP. LVII.
Parthenium flore pleno. Double Featherfew.
FEatherfew that bears double flowers is so like unto the single kind, that
the one cannot be discerned from the other, until it come to flower, bearing
broad, pale or fresh green leaves, much cut in on the sides: the stalks have
such like leaves on them as grow below, from the tops whereof come forth many
double white flowers, like unto the flowers of the former wild Pelletory, but
larger, and like also unto the flowers of the double Camomill: the sent whereof
is as strong as of the single.

The Place.
We have this kind only in Gardens, and as it is thought by others, is
peculiar only to our own Country.

The Time.
It flowreth in the end of May, and in June and July.

The Names.
It is called diversely by diverse: Some think it to be Parthenium of
Dioscorides, but not of Galen; for his Parthenium is a sweet herb, and is
thought to be Amaracus, that is Marierome: others call it Matricaria; and some
Amarella. Gaza translateth it Muraleum, Theoph. lib. 7. cap. 7. It is generally
in these parts of our Country called Double Feaverfew, or Featherfew.

The Virtues.
It is answerable to all the properties of the single kind which is used for
women's diseases, to procure their monthly courses chiefly. It is held to be a
special remedy to help those that have taken Opium too liberally. In Italy
some use to eat the single kind among other green herbs, as Camerarius
says, but especially fried with eggs, and so it wholly loses his strong and
bitter taste.

CHAP. LVIII.
Chamaemaelum. Camomill.
Our ordinary Camomill is well known to all, to have many small trayling
branches, set with very fine small leaves, bushing and spreading thick over the
ground, taking root still as it spreads: the tops of the branches have
white flowers, with yellow thrummes in the middle, very like unto the
Featherfew, before described, but somewhat greater, not so hard, but more soft
and gentle in handling, and the whole herb to be of a very sweet sent.

1. Chamaemaelum nudum. Naked Camomill.
We have another sort of Camomill in some Gardens, but very rare, like unto the
former, but that it is whiter, finer, and smaller, and raises, it self up a
little higher, and bears naked flowers; that is, without that border of white
leaves that is in the former, and consists only of a yellow round thrummie
head, smelling almost as sweet as the former.

2. Chamaemaelum flore pleno. Double flowred Camomill.
The double Camomill grows with his leaves upon the ground, as the other
single kind does, but of a little fresher green color, and larger withal:
the stalks with the flowers on them, do raise themselves up a little higher
then the ordinary, and bearing one or two flowers upon a stalk, which are
composed of many white leaves set together in diverse rows, which make a fine
double flower, with a little yellow spot in the middle for the most part of
every one, and are much larger then any single kind, smelling better, and more
pleasing then the ordinary: this does creep upon the ground as the other, but
is more tender to be kept in the Winter. Yet if you save the flowers hereof
(and so will the double Featherfew also) when they have stood long, and ready
to fade, and keep them dry until the Spring, and then breaking them or
pulling them to pieces, sow them, there will spring up from them Camomill, and
also Featherfew, that will again bear double flowers.

The Place.
Our ordinary Camomill grows wild in many places of our Country, and as well
near London as in other places. The others are only found in our Gardens,
where they are cherished. Bauhinus says, that the double flowred Camomill is
found wild about Orleance in France.

The Time.
The double kind is usually in flower in June, before the ordinary kind, and
most commonly past before it flowreth, which is not until July or August. The
naked Camomill flowreth between them both, or later.

The Names.
Camomill is called Anthemis, Leucanthemis, and Leucanthemum, of the whiteness
of the flowers; and Chamaemaelum of the corrupted Italian name Camomilla. Some
call the naked Camomill, Chrysanthemum odoratum. The double Camomill is called
by some Chamaemaelum Romanum flore multiplici.

The Virtues.
Camomill is put to diverse and sundry uses, both for pleasure and profit, both
for inward and outward diseases, both for the sick and the sound, in bathings
to comfort and strengthen the sound, and to ease pains in the diseased, as
also in many other forms applied outwardly. The flowers boiled in Posset
drink provoke sweat, and helps to expel colds, aches, and other griefs.
A Syrup made of the juice of the double Camomill, with the flowers and white
wine, as Bauhinus says, is used by some against the Iaundise and Dropsy,
caused by the evil disposition of the spleen.

1 Parthenium flore pleno. Double Featherfew. 2. Chamaemaelum nudum. Naked
Camomill. 3 Chamaemaelum flore pleno. Double Camomill. 4 Pyrethrum officinarum
Pelletory of Spain. 5 Flos Adonis flore rubro and flore luteo. Adonis flower
both red and yellow. 6 H^lle^orus niger feru^aceus sieve Buphthalmum. The great
Ox eye or the great yellow Anemone. 7 Buphthalmum vulgar. The common yellow
Ox eye.
depiction of flowers

CHAP. LIX.
Pyrethrum officinarum. Pelletory of Spain.
I Must needs adioyne unto the Camomils this fine and tender plant, for some
near resemblance it has with them in face, though not in quality. It is a
small and low plant, bearing many fine green leaves upon his slender
branches, which lean or lie down upon the ground, divided into many parts, yet
somewhat larger and broader then Camomill, the stalks whereof are bigger, and
more iuicie then it: the flowers that stand at the tops of the stalks are
single, but much larger then any Camomill flower, having a pale or border of
many leaves, white on the vpperside, and reddish underneath, set about the
yellow middle thrumme; but not standing so close together joining at the
bottom, as the Camomill flowers do, but more severed one from another: it
bears small whitish seed, which is hardly found and discerned from the
chafe: the root is long, and growing down right, of the bigness of a man's
finger or thumb in our Country, but not half so great where it grows
naturally, with some fibers and branches from the sides thereof, of a very hot,
sharp, and biting taste, drawing much water into the mouth, after it has been
chewed a while: the plant with us is very tender, and will hardly or not at all
endure the hardness and extremities of our Winters, unless it be very
carefully preserved.

The Place.
It grows in Spain wild in many places, and in other hot Countries, where
it may feel no frosts to cause it perish.

The Time.
It flowreth so late with us, that it is not until August, that oftentimes we
cannot gather ripe seeds from it, before it perish.

The Names.
The name Pyrethrum (taken from (...), that is, ignis, fire) is given to this
plant, because of the heat thereof, and that the root is somewhat like in
show, but specially in property unto the true Pyrethrum of Dioscorides, which
is an vmbelliferous plant, whose roots are greater, and more fervent a great
deal, and have a hayrie bush or top as Meum, and many other vmbelliferous
plants have. It is also called in Latin, Saliuaris, of the effect in drawing
much moisture into the mouth, to be spit out. We do usually call it Pelletory
of Spain.

The Virtues.
It is in a manner wholly spent to draw rheum from the teeth, by chewing it in
the mouth, thereby to ease the toothache, and likewise from the head, in the
pains thereof.

CHAP. LX.
Flos Adonis flore rubro. Red Adonis flower.
ADonis flower may well be accounted a kind of Camomill, although it has some
especial differences, having many long branches of leaves lying upon the
ground, and some rising up with the stalk, so finely cut and iagged, that they
much resemble the leaves of Mayweed, or of the former Nigella: at the top of
the stalks, which rise a foot high or better, stand small red flowers,
consisting of six or eight round leaves, having a green head in the middle,
set about with many blackish threads, without any smell at all: after the
flowers are past, there grow up heads with many roundish white seeds at the
tops of them, set close together, very like unto the heads of seed of the
great Ox eye, set down in the next Chapter, but smaller: the roots are small
and thready, perishing every year, but rising of his own seed again, many
times before Winter, which will abide until the next year.

Yellow Adonis flower is like unto the red, but that the flower is somewhat
larger, Flore luteo.
and of a fair yellow color.

The Place.
The first grows wild in the corn fields in many places of our own country,
as well as in others, and is brought into Gardens for the beauties sake of the
flower. The yellow is a stranger, but noursed in our Gardens with other
rarities.

The Time.
They flower in May or June, as the year falls out to be early or late: the
seed is soon ripe after, and will quickly fall away, if it be not gathered.

The Names.
Some have taken the red kind to be a kind of Anemone; other to be Eranthemum
of Dioscorides: the most usual name now with us is Flos Adonis, and Flos
Adonidis: In English, where it grows wild, they call it red Maythes, as they
call the Mayweede, white Maythes; and some of our English Gentlewomen call it
Rosarubie: we usually call it Adonis flower.

The Virtues.
It has been certainly tried by experience, that the seed of red Adonis flower
drunk in wine, is good to ease the pains of the Collicke and Stone.

CHAP. LXI.
Buphthalmum. Ox eye.
Under the name Buphthalmum, or Ox eye, are comprehended two or three several
plants, each differing from other, both in face and property, yet because they
all bear one general name, I think fittest to comprise them all in one
Chapter, and first of that which in leaf and seed comes nearest to the
Adonis flower.

1. Buphthalmum maius sieve Helleborus niger ferulac^us. Great Ox eye, or ^he
yellow Anemone.
This great Ox eye is a beautiful plant, having many branches of green
leaves leaning or lying upon the ground for the most part, yet some standing
upright, which are as fine, but shorter then Fenell; some of them ending in a
small tuft of green leaves, and some having at the tops of them one large
flower apeece, somewhat reddish or brownish on the outside, while they are in
bud, and a while after, and being open, show themselves to consist of twelve or
fourteen long leaves, of a fair shining yellow color, set in order round
about a green head, with yellow thrums in the middle, laying themselves open
in the sun, or a fair day, but else remaining close: after the flower is
past, the head growing greater, shows it self compact of many round whitish
seed, very like unto the head of seed of the Adonis flower last described,
but much greater: the roots are many long blackish fibers or strings, set
together at the head, very like unto the roots of the lesser black Hellebor
or Bearefoote, but somewhat harder, stiffer, or more brittle, and seeming
without moisture in them, which abide and increase every year.

2. Buphthalmum minus, seu Anthemis flore luteo. Small Ox eye.
This plant might seem to be referred to the Camomils, but that it is not
sweet, or to the Corne-Marigolds, but that the stalks and leaves are not
edible: it is therefore put under the Ox eyes, and so we will describe it;
having many weak branches lying upon the ground, beset with winged leaves,
very finely cut and iagged, somewhat like unto Mayweede, but a little larger:
the flowers are like unto the Corn Marigold, and larger then any Camomill,
being wholly yellow, as well the pale or border of leaves, as the middle
thrummes: the roots are somewhat tough and long.

3. Buphthalmum vulgar. Common Ox eye.
This Ox eye rises up with hard round stalks, a foot and a half high,
having many winged leaves upon them, made of diverse long and something broad
leaves, snipt about the edges, set together somewhat like unto Tansie, but
smaller, and not so much winged: the flowers stand at the tops of the
stalks, of a full yellow color, both the outer leaves and the middle thrum,
and not altogether so large as the last: the roots of this kind perish every
year, and require a new sowing again.

The Place.
The first grows in diverse places of Austria, Bohemia, and those parts, it
has been likewise brought out of Spain. The second in Prouence, a country in
France. The last in diverse places, as well of Austria as Morauia, and about
Mentz and Norimberg, as Clusius sets down. We have them in our Gardens, but
the first is of the greatest respect and beauty.

The Time.
The first flowreth betimes, oftentimes in March, or at the furthest in Apill;
the seed is ripe in May, and must be quickly gathered, lest it be lost. The
other two flower not until June.

The Names.
The first is called Buphthalmum of Dodonaeus, Pseudohelleborus of Matthiolus,
Helleborus niger ferulaceus Theophrasti by Lobel, of some others Elleborus
niger verus, using it for the true black Ellebor, but it is much differing, as
well in face as properties. Of others Sesamoides minus. Some have thought it to
be a yellow Anemone, that have looked on it without further judgment, and by
that name is most usually known to most of our English Gentlewomen that know
it. But it may most fitly be called a Buphthalmum, as Dodonaeus does, and
Hispanicum or Austriacum, for distinctions sake. We do most usually call it
Helleborus niger ferulaceus, as Lobel does: Bauhinus calls it Helleborus
niger tenuifolius Buphthalmi flore. The second is called Buphthalmum
Narbonense: In English, The French, or lesser Ox eye, as the first is called,
The Great Ox eye. The last, The common Ox eye.

The Virtues.
The first has been used in diverse places for the true black Ellebor, but now
is sufficiently known to have been an error; but what Physical property it
has, other then Matthiolus has expressed, to be used as Setterwort for
cattle, when they rowell them, to put or draw the roots hereof through the
hole they make in the dew lap, or other places, for their coughes or other
diseases, I know not, or have heard or read of any. The others likewise have
little or no use in Physic now a days that I know.

CHAP. LXII.
Chrysanthemum. Corn Marigold.
ALthough the sorts of Corn Marigolds, which are many, are fitter for another
then this work, and for a Catholic Garden of Simples, then this of Pleasure
and Delight for fair Flowers: yet give me leave to bring in a couple: the one
for a corner or by-place, the other for your choicest, or under a defenced
wall, in regard of his stateliness.

1. Chrysanthemum Creticum. Corn Marigold of Candy.
This fair Corn Marigold has for the most part one upright stalk, two foot
high, whereon are set many winged leaves, at every joint one, divided and cut
into diverse parts, and they again parted into several pieces or leaves: the
flowers grow at the tops of the stalks, rising out of a scaly head,
composed of ten or twelve large leaves, of a fair, but pale yellow color, and
more pale almost white at the bottom of the leaves, round about the yellow
thrumme in the middle, being both larger and sweeter then any of the other
Corn Marigolds: the seed is whitish and chaffie: the root perishes every
year.

2. Chrysanthemum Peruuianum, sieve Flos Solis. The golden flower of Peru, or
the Flower of the Sun.
This goodly and stately plant, wherewith every one is now adays familiar,
being of many sorts, both higher and lower (with one stalk, without branches,
or with many branches, with a black, or with a white seed, yet differing not
in form of leaves or flowers one from another, but in the greatness or
smalnesse) rises up at the first like unto a Pompion with two leaves, and
after two, or four more leaves are come forth, it rises up into a great
stalk, bearing the leaves on it at several distances on all sides thereof,
one above another unto the very top, being sometimes, and in some places,
seven, eight, or ten foot high, which leaves standing out from the stem or
stalk upon their several great ribbed foote-stalkes, are very large, broad
below, and pointed at the end, round, hard, rough, of a sad green color, and
bending downwards: at the topped of the stalk stands one great, large, and
broad flower, bowing down the head unto the Sun, and breaking forth from a
great head, made of scaly green leaves, like unto a great single Marigold,
having a border of many long yellow leaves, set about a great round yellow
thrumme, as it were in the middle, which are very like unto short heads of
flowers, under every one whereof there is a seed, larger then any seed of the
Thistles, yet somewhat like, and lesser, and rounder then any Gourd seed, set
in so close and curious a manner, that when the seed is taken out, the head
with the hollow places or cells thereof, seems very like unto an honey comb;
which seed is in some plants very black, in the hotter countries, or very
white, and great, or large, but with us is neither so large, black, or white;
but sometimes blackish or grayish. Some sort rises not up half the height
that others do, and some again bear but one stem or stalk, with a flower
at the top thereof; and others two or three, or more small branches, with
every one his flower at the end; and some so full of branches from the very
ground almost, that I have accounted threescore branches round about the middle
stalk of one plant, the lowest near two yards long, others above them a yard
and a half, or a yard long, with every one his flower thereon; but all smaller
then those that bear but one or two flowers, and lesser also for the most part
then the flower on the middle stalk it self. The whole plant, and every part
thereof above ground has a strong resinous sent of Turpentine, and the heads
and middle parts of the flowers do oftentimes (and sometimes the joints of the
stalk where the leaves stand) sweat out a most fine thin and clear Rossin or
Turpentine, but in small quantity, and as it were in drops, in the heat and
dry time of the year, so like both in color, smell, and taste unto clear
Venice Turpentine, that it cannot be known from it: the root is strongly
fastened in the ground by some greater roots branching out, and a number of
small strings, which grow not deep, but keep under the upper crust of the
earth, and desires much moisture, yet dies every year with the first frosts,
and must be new sown in the beginning of the Spring.

The Place.
Their places are set down in their titles, the one to come out of Candy, the
other out of Peru, a Province in the West Indies.

The Time.
The first flowreth in June, the other later, as not until August, and
sometimes so late, that the early frosts taking it, never suffer it to come to
ripeness.

The Names.
The first has his name in his title. The second, besides the names set down,
is called of some Planta maxima, Flos Maximus, Sol Indianus, but the most
usual with us is, Flos Solis: In English, The Sun Flower, or Flower of the
Sun.

The Virtues.
There is no use of either in Physic with us, but that sometimes the heads of
the Sun Flower are dressed, and eaten as Hartichokes are, and are accounted
of some to be good meat, but they are too strong for my taste.

CHAP. LXIII.
Calendula. Marigolds.
SOme have reckoned up many sorts of Marigolds, I had rather make but two, the
single and the double; for doubtless, those that be most double, rise from the
best seed, which are the middlemost of the great double, and some will be
less double, whose seed is greater then the rest, according to the ground
where it grows; as also those that be of a paler color, do come of the seed
of the yellower sort.

1. Calendula maxima. The great Garden Marigold.
The Garden Marigold has round green stalks, branching out from the ground
into many parts, whereon are set long flat green leaves, broader and rounder
at the 1 Chrysanthemum Creticum. Corn Marigolds of Candy. 2 Flos Solis. The
Flower of the Sun. 3 Calendula. Marigolds. 4 After Atticus sieve Italorum. The
purple Marigold. 5 Pilos^lla mayor. Golden Mouse-eare. 6 Scorsonera Hispanica.
Spanish Vipers grass. 7 Tragopogon. Goats beard, or go to bed at noone.
depiction of flowers point then any where else, and smaller also at the
setting to of the stalk, where it compasses it about: the flowers are
sometimes very thick and double (breaking out of a scaly clammy green head)
composed of many rows of leaves, set so close together one within another,
that no middle thrume can be seen, and sometimes less double, having a small
brown spot of a thrume in the middle: and sometimes but of two or three rows
of leaves, with a large brown thrume in the middle; every one whereof is
somewhat broader at the point, and nicked into two or three corners, of an
excellent fair deep gold yellow color in some, and paler in others, and of a
pretty strong and resinous sweet sent: after the flowers are past, there
succeed heads of crooked seed, turning inward, the outermost biggest, and the
innermost least: the root is white, and spreads in the ground, and in some
places will abide after the seeding, but for the most part perishes, and
rises again of his own feed. Sometimes this Marigold does degenerate, and
bears many small flowers upon short stalks, compassing the middle flower:
but this happens but seldom, and therefore accounted but lusus naturae, a
play of nature, which she works in diverse other plants besides.

2. Calendula simplex. The single Marigold.
There is no difference between this and the former, but that the flowers are
single, consisting of one row of leaves, of the same color; either paler or
deeper yellow, standing about a great brown thrumme in the middle: the seed
likewise is alike, but for the most part greater then in the double kinds.

The Place.
Our Gardens are the chief places for the double flowers to grow in; for we
know not of any other natural place: but the single kind has been found
wild in Spain, from whence I received seed, gathered by Guillaume Boel, in
his time a very curious, and cunning searcher of simples.

The Time.
They flower all the summer long, and sometimes even in winter, if it be mild,
and chiefly at the beginning of those months, as it is thought.

The Names.
They are called Caltha of diverse, and taken to be that Caltha, whereof both
Virgil and Columella have written. Others do call them Calendula, of the
Kalendes, that is the first day of the months, wherein they are thought
chiefly to flower; and thereupon the Italians call them, Fiori di ogni mese,
that is, The Flowers of every month: We call them in English generally, either
Golds, or Marigolds.

The Virtues.
The herb and flowers are of great use with us among other pot-herbes; and the
flowers either green or dried, are often used in possets, broths, and drinks,
as a comforter of the heart and spirits, and to expel any malignant or
pestilential quality, gathered near thereunto. The Syrup and Conserve made of
the fresh flowers, are used for the same purposes to good effect.

CHAP. LXIIII.
Aster. Starre-wort.
DIoscorides and other of the ancient Writers, have set forth but one kind of
Starre-wort, which they call Aster Atticus, of the place no doubt, where the
greatest plenty was found, which was the Country of Athens: the later Writers
have found out many other plants which they refer to this kind, calling them
by the same name. It is not my purpose to entreat of them all, neither does
this garden fitly agree with them: I shall therefore select out one or two from
the rest, and give you the knowledge of them, leaving the rest to their proper
place.

1. Aster Atticus flore luteo. Yellow Starre-wort.
This Starre-wort rises up with two or three rough hairy stalks, a foot and
a half high, with long, rough or hairie, brownish, dark green leaves on
them, divided into two or three branches: at the top of every one whereof
stands a flat scaly head, compassed underneath with five or six long,
brown, rough green leaves, standing like a Star, the flower it self
standing in the middle thereof, made as a border of narrow, long, pale yellow
leaves, set with a brownish yellow thrume: the root dies every year, having
given his flower.

2. Aster Atticus Italorum flore purpureo. Purple Italian Starre-wort.
This Italian Starre-wort has many woody, round brittle stalks, rising from
the root, somewhat higher then the former, sometimes standing upright, and
otherwhiles leaning downwards, whereon are set many somewhat hard, and rough
long leaves, round pointed, without order up to the top, where it is divided
into several branches, whereon stand the flowers, made like unto a single
Marigold, with a border of bluish purple leaves, set about a brown middle
thrume, the heads sustaining the flowers, are composed of diverse scaly green
leaves, as is to be seen in the Knapweedes or Matfelons, which after the
flowers are past yield a certain down, wherein lie small black and flat
seeds, somewhat like unto Lettice seed, which are carried away with the
wind: the root is composed of many white strings, which perishes not as the
former, but abides, and springs afresh every year.

The Place.
The first is found in Spain, as Clusius, and in France, as Lobel say. The
other has been found in many places in Germany, and Austria: in Italy also,
and other places; we have it plentifully in our Gardens.

The Time.
The first flowreth in Summer. And the other not until August or September.

The Names.
The first is called Aster Atticus flore luteo, Buhonium, and Inguinalis, and
of many is taken to be the true Aster Atticus of Dioscorides: yet Matthiolus
thinks not so, for diverse good reasons, which he sets down in the
Chapter of Aster Atticus, as any man may understand, if they will but read the
place, which is too long to be inserted here. The other is thought by
Matthiolus, to be the truer Aster Atticus, (unto whom I must also consent) and
constantly also affirmed to be the Amellus Virgilij, as may be seen in the
same place: but it is usually called at this day, Aster Italorum flore caeruleo
or purpureo. Their English names are sufficiently expressed in their titles,
yet some call the last, The purple Marigold, because it is so like unto one in
form.

The Virtues.
They are held, if they be the right, to be good for the biting of a mad
dog, the green herb being beaten with old hogs grease, and applied; as also
for swollen throats: It is likewise used for botches that happen in the groine,
as the name does import.

CHAP. LXV.
Pilosella mayor. Golden Mouse-eare.
SOme resemblance that the flowers of this plant has with the former Golds,
makes me to insert it in this place, although I know it agrees not in any
other part, yet for the pleasant aspect thereof, it must be in this my garden,
whose description is as follows: It has many broad green leaves spread
upon the ground, spotted with pale spots, yet more conspicuous at sometimes
then at other; somewhat hairy both on the upper and vnderside, in the middle of
these leaves rise up one, two or more blackish hairy stalks, two foot high at
the least, bare or naked up to the top, where it bears an vmbell, or short
tuft of flowers, set close together upon short stalks, of the form or fashion
of the Haukeweedes, or common Mouse-eare, but somewhat smaller, of a deep gold
yellow, or orange tawney color, with some yellow threads in the middle, of
little or no sent at all: after the flowers are past, the heads carry small,
short, black seed, with a light downie matter on them, ready to be carried
away with the wind, as many other plants are, when they be ripe: the roots
spread under ground, and shoot up in diverse other places, whereby it much
increases, especially if it be set in any moist or shadowie place.

The Place.
It grows in the shadowie woods of France, by Lions, and Mompelier, as Lobell
testifies: we keep it in our gardens, and rather in a shadowie then sunnie
place.

The Time.
It flowreth in Somer, and sometimes again in September.

The Names.
It is called by Lobell, Pulmonaria Gallorum Hieratij facie: and the Herbarists
of France take it to be the true Pulmonaria of Tragus. Others call it Hieratium
flore aureo. Pelleterius Hieratium Indicum. Some Pilosella, or Auricula muris
mayor flore aureo. And some Chondrilla flore aureo. Dalechamptus would have it
to be Corchorus, but far unfitly. The fittest English name we can give it,
is Golden Mouse-eare, which may endure until a fitter be imposed on it: for
the name of Grim the Collier, whereby it is called of many is both idle and
foolish.

The Virtues.
The French according to the name use it for the defects of the lunges, but
with what good success I know not.

CHAP. LXVI.
Scorsonera. Vipers grass.
ALthough there be four or five sorts of Scorsonera, yet I shall here desire
you to be con^^^t with the knowledge only of a couple.

1. Scorsonera Hispanica mayor. The greater Spanish Vipers grass.
This Spanish Vipers grass has diverse long, and somewhat broad leaves, hard
and crumpled on the edges, and sometimes unevenly cut in or indented also, of a
bluish green color: among which rises up one stalk, and no more for the
most part, two foot high or thereabouts, having here and there some narrower
long leaves thereon then those below: the top of the stalk brancheth it
self forth into other parts, every one bearing a long scaly head, from out of
the top whereof rises a fair large double flower, of a pale yellow color,
much like unto the flower of yellow Goats beard, but a little lesser, which
being past, the seed succeeds, being long, whitish and rough, enclosed with
much down, and among them many other long smooth seeds, which are limber and
idle, and are carried away at the will of the wind: the root is long, thick
and round, brittle and black, with a certain roughness on the outside: but
very white within, yielding a milkie liquor being broken, as every other part
of the plant does besides, yet the root more then any other part, and abides
many years without perishing.

2. Scorsonera Pannonica purpurea. Purple flowred Vipers grass.
This purple flowred Vipers grass has long and narrow leaves, of the same
bluish green color with the former: the stalk rises up a foot and a half
high, with a few such like leaves, but shorter thereon, breaking at the top
into two or three parts, bearing on each of them one flower, fashioned like the
former, and standing in the like scaly knoppe or head, but of a bluish purple
color, not fully so large, of the sweetest sent of any of this kind, coming
nearest unto the smell of a delicate perfume.

The Place.
The first is of Spain. The other of Hungary and Austrich: which now furnish
our gardens.

The Time.
They flower in the beginning of May: the seed is soon ripe after, and then
perishing down to the root for that year, springs afresh before Winter
again.

The Names.
They are called after the Spanish name Scorsonera, which is in Latin
Viperaria, of some Viperina, and Serpentina: We call them in English Vipers
grass, or Scorsonera.

The Virtues.
Manardus as I think first wrote hereof, and says that it has been found to
cure them that are bitten of a Viper, or other such like venomous Creature. The
roots hereof being preserved with sugar, as I have done often, do eat almost
as delicate as the Eringus root, and no doubt is good to comforr and
strengthen the heart, and vital spirits. Some that have used the preserved
root have found it effectual to expelling wind out of the stomach, and to
help swounings and faintness of the heart.

CHAP. LXVII.
Tragopogon. Goats beard.
I Must in this place set down but two sorts of Goats beards; the one blew or
ash color, the other red or purple, and leave the other kinds: some to be
spoken of in the Kitchen Garden, and others in a Physical Garden.

1. Tragopogon flore caeruleo. Blew Goats beard.
All the Goats beards have long, narrow, and somewhat hollow whitish green
leaves, with a white line down the middle of every one on the vpperside: the
stalk rises up greater and stronger then the Vipers grass, bearing at the
top a great long head or husk, composed of nine or ten long narrow leaves,
the sharp points or ends whereof rise up above the flower in the middle, which
is thick and double, somewhat broad and large spread, of a bluish ash color,
with some whitish threads among them, shutting or closing it self within the
green husk every day, that it abides blowing, until about noone, and
opening not it self again until the next morning: the head or husk, after
the flower is past, and the seed near ripe, opens it self; the long leaves
thereof, which closed not before now, falling down round about the stalk, and
showing the seed, standing at the first close together, and the down at the
top of them: but after they have stood a while, it spreads it self round,
and is ready to be carried away with the wind, if it be not gathered: the
seed it self is long, round, and rough, like the seed of the Vipers grass,
but greater and blacker: the root is long, and not very great, but perishes
as soon as it has borne seed, and springs of the fallen seed, that year
remaining green all Winter, and flowring the next year following: the whole
yields milk as the former, but somewhat more bitter and binding.

2. Tragopogon purpureum. Purple Goats beard.
There is little difference in this kind from the former, but that it is a
little larger, both in the leaf, and head that bears the seed: the flowers
also are a little larger, and spread more, of a dark reddish purple color,
with some yellow dust as it were cast upon it, especially about the ends: the
root perishes in the like manner as the other.

The Place.
Both these have been sent us from the parts beyond the Seas, I have had them
from Italy, where no doubt they grow naturally wild, as the yellow does with
us: they are kept in our Gardens for their pleasant flowers.

The Time.
They flower in May and June: the seed is ripe in July.

The Names.
Their general name is after the Greek word Tragopogon, which is in Latin,
Barbahirti: In English, Goats beard; the head of seed when it is ready to
be carried away with the wind, causing that name for the resemblance: and
because the flower does every day close it self at noone (as I said before)
and opens not again until the next Sun, some have fitly called it, Go to
bed at noone.

The Virtues.
The roots of these kinds are a little more bitter and more binding also then
the yellow kind expressed in the Kitchen Garden; and therefore fitter for
medicine then for meat, but yet is used as the yellow kind is, which is more
fit for meat then medicine. The distilled water is good to wash old sores and
wounds.

CHAP. LXVIII.
Flos Africanus. The French Marigold.
OF the French or African Marigolds there are three kinds as principal, and
of each of them both with single and double flowers: of these, some diversity
is observed in the color of the flowers, as well as in the form or
largeness, so that as you may here see, I have expressed eight differences,
and Fabius Columna nine or ten, in regard he makes a diversity of the paler
and deeper yellow color: and although the lesser kind, because of its evil
sent, is held dangerous, yet for the beauty of the flower it finds room in
Gardens.

1. Flos Africanus mayor sieve maximus multiplex. The great double French
Marigold.
This goodly double flower, which is the grace and glory of a Garden in the
time of his beauty, rises up with a straight and hard round green stalk,
having some crests or edges all along the stalk, beset with long winged
leaves, every one whereof is like unto the leaf of an Ash, being composed of
many long and narrow leaves, snipt about the edges, standing by couples one
against another, with an odd one at the end, of a dark or full green color:
the stalk rises to be three or four foot high, and divides it self from
the middle thereof into many branches, set with such like leaves to the tops
of them, every one bearing one great double flower, of a gold yellow color
above, and paler underneath, yet some are of a pale yellow, and some between
both and all these rising from one and the same seed: the flower, before it be
blown open, has all the leaves hollow; but when it is full blown open, it
spreads it self larger then any Province Rose, or equal unto it at the
least, if it be in good earth, and rises out of a long green husk, striped
or furrowed, wherein after the flower is past, (which stands in his full
beauty a month, and oftentimes more, and being gathered, may be preserved in
his full beauty for two months after, if it be set in water) stands the
seed, set thick and close together upright, which is black, somewhat flat
and long: the root is full of small strings, whereby it strongly comprehends
in the ground: the flower of this, as well as the single, is of the very smell
of new wax, or of an honey comb, and not of that poisonfull sent of the
smaller kinds.

2. Flos Africanus mayor simplex. The great single French Marigold.
This single Marigold is in all things so like unto the former, that it is hard
to discern it from the double, but by the flowers, only the stalk will be
browner then the double; and to my best observation, has and does every year
rise from the seed of the double flower: so that when they are in flower, you
may see the difference (or not much before, when they are in bud) this single
flower ever appearing with thrums in the middle, and the leaves, which are the
border or pale standing about them, showing hollow or fistulous, which after
lay themselves flat and open (and the double flower appearing with all his
leaves folded close together, without any thrum at all) and are of a deeper or
paler color, as in the double.

3. Flos Africanus fistuloso flore simplex and multiplex. Single and double
French Marigolds with hollow leafed flowers.
As the former two greatest sorts have risen from the seed of one and the same
(I mean the pod of double flowers) so do these also, not differing from it in
any thing, but that they are lower, and have smaller green leaves, and that
the flower also being smaller, has every leaf abiding hollow, like unto an
hollow pipe, broad open at the mouth, and is of as deep a yellow color for
the most part as the deepest of the former, yet sometimes pale also.

4. Flos Africanus minor multiplex. The lesser double French Marigold.
The lesser double French Marigold has his leaves in all things like unto the
former, but somewhat lesser, which are set upon round brown stalks, not so
stiff or upright, but bowing and bending diverse ways, and sometimes leaning
or lying upon the ground: the stalks are branched out diversely, whereon are
set very fair double flowers like the former, and in the like green husks,
but smaller, and in some the outermost leaves will be larger then any of the
rest, and of a deeper Orange color, almost crimson, the innermost being of a
deep gold yellow color, tending to crimson: the whole flower is smaller, and
of a stronger and more unpleasant savor, so that but for the beautiful
color, and doubleness of the flower, pleasant to the eye, and not to any
other sense, this kind would find room in few Gardens: the roots and seeds
are like the former, but lesser.

5. Flos Africanus minor simplex. The small single French Marigold.
This single kind does follow after the last in all manner of proportion, both
of stalks, leaves, seeds, and roots: the flowers only of this are single,
having five or six broad leaves, of a deep yellow crimson color, with deep
yellow thrummes in the middle, and of as strong a stinking sent, or more then
the last.

The Place.
They grow naturally in Africa, and especially in the parts about Tunis, and
where old Carthage stood, from whence long ago they were brought into Europe,
where they are only kept in Gardens, being sown for the most part every
year, unless in some mild Winters. The last single and double kinds (as
being more hardy) have sometimes endured: but that kind with hollow leafed
flowers, as Fabius Columna sets it down, is accounted to come from Mexico
in America.

The Time.
They flower not until the end of Summer, especially the greater kinds: but
the lesser, if they abide all the Winter, do flower more early.

The Names.
They have been diversely named by diverse men: Some calling them Caryophyllus
Indicus, that is, Indian Gilloflowers, and Tanacetum Peruvianum, Tansie of
Peru, as if it grew in Peru, a Province of America; and Flos Indicus, as a
flower of the Indies; but it has not been known to have been brought from
thence. Others would have it to be Othonna of Pliny, and others; some to be
Lycopersicum of Galen. It is called, and that more truly, Flos Tunetensis,
Flos Africanus, and Caltha Africana, that is, the flower of Tunis, the flower
of Africa, the Marigold of Africa, and peradventure Pedna Paenorum. We in
English most usually call them, French Marigolds, with their several
distinctions of greater or smaller, double or single. To that with hollow
leafed flowers, Fabius Columna gives the name of Fistiluso flore, and I so
continue it.

1 Flos Africanus maximus multiplex. The greatest double French Marigold. 2
Flos Africanus mayor multiplex. The greater double French Marigold 3 Flos
Africanus maximus simplex The greatest single French Marigold. 4 Flos Africanus
multiplex fistulosus. The doule hollow French Marigold. 5 Flos Africanus
simplex fistulosus. The single hollow French Marigold. 6 Flos Africanus minor
multiplex. The smaller double French Marigold. 7 Flos Africanus minor multiplex
alter. Another sort of the le^^er double French Marigold. 8 Flos Africanus
minor simplex. The lesser single French Marigold*
depiction of flowers

The Virtues.
We know no use they have in Physic, but are cherished in Gardens for their
beautiful flowers sake.

CHAP. LXIX.
Caryophyllus hortensis. Carnations and Gilloflowers.
TO avoid confusion, I must divide Gilloflowers from Pinkes, and entreat of
them in several Chapters. Of those that are called Carnations or Gilloflowers,
as of the greater kind, in this Chapter; and of Pinkes, as well double as
single, in the next. But the number of them is so great, that to give several
descriptions to them all were endless, at the least needless: I will
therefore set down only the descriptions of three (for unto these three may
be referred all the other sorts) for their fashion and manner of growing, and
give you the several names (as they are usually called with us) of the rest,
with their variety and mixture of colors in the flowers, wherein consists a
chief difference. I account those that are called Carnations to be the
greatest, both for leaf and flower, and Gilloflowers for the most part to be
lesser in both; and therefore will give you each description apart, and the
Orange tawnie or yellow Gilloflower likewise by it self, as differing very
notably from all the rest.

1. Caryophyllus maximus Harwicensis sieve Anglicus. The great Harwich or old
English Carnation.
I take this goodly great old English Carnation, as a president for the
description of all the rest of the greatest sorts, which for his beauty and
stateliness is worthy of a prime place, having been always very hardly
preserved in the Winter; and therefore not so frequent as the other Carnations
or Gilloflowers. It rises up with a great thick round stalk, divided into
several branches, somewhat thickly set with joints, and at every joint two
long green rather then whitish leaves, somewhat broader then Gilloflower
leaves, turning or winding two or three times round (in some other sorts of
Carnations they are plain, but bending the points downwards, and in some also
of a dark reddish green color, and in others not so dark, but rather of a
whitish green color:) the flowers stand at the tops of the stalks in long,
great, and round green husks, which are divided into five points, out of
which rise many long and broad pointed leaves, deeply iagged at the ends, set
in order round and comely, making a gallant great double flower, of a deep
Carnation color, almost red, spotted with many blush spots and strakes, some
greater and some lesser, of an excellent soft sweet sent, neither too quick
as many others of these kinds are, nor yet too dull, and with two whitish
crooked threads like horns in the middle: this kind never bears many
flowers, but as it is slow in growing, so in bearing, not to be often handled,
which shows a kind of stateliness, fit to preserve the opinion of
magnificence: the root is branched into diverse great, long, woody roots,
with many small fibers annexed unto them.

2. Caryophyllus hortensis flore pleno rubro. The red or Cloue Gilloflower.
The red Cloue Gilloflower, which I take as a president for the second sort,
which are Gilloflowers, grow like unto the Carnations, but not so thick set
with joints and leaves: the stalks are more, the leaves are narrower and
whiter for the most part, and in some do as well a little turn: the flowers
are smaller, yet very thick and double in most, and the green husks wherein
they stand are smaller likewise then the former: the ends of the leaves in this
flower, as in all the rest, are dented or iagged, yet in some more then in
others; some also having two small white threads, crooked at the ends like
horns, in the middle of the flower, when as diverse other have none. These 1
Caryophyllus maximus rubro varius. The great old Carnation or gray Hulo. 2
Caryophyllus mayor rubro and albo varius. The white Carnation. 3 Caryophyllus
albo rubeus. The Cambersi^^ or the Poole flower. 4 Caryophyllus C^^tij
striatus. The fair made of Kent. 5 Caryophyllus Saba^dicus carn^^^. The blush
Sauadge. 6 Caryophyllus Xera^pelinus. The Gredeline Carnation. 7 Caryophyllus
dictus Grimelo. The Grimelo or Prince. 8 Caryophyllus albus mayor. The great
white Gilloflower. 6 Elegans H^roina Bradshawij. Master Bradsh^wes dainty Lady.
depiction of flowers kinds, and especially this that has a deep red crimson
colored flower, do endure the cold of our winters, and with less care is
preserved: these sorts as well as the former do very seldom give any seed,
as far as I could ever observe or learn.

3. Caryophyllus Silesiacus flore pleno miniato. The yellow or Orange tawny
Gilloflower.
This Gilloflower has his stalks next unto the ground, thicker set, and with
smaller or narrower leaves then the former for the most part: the flowers are
like unto the Cloue Gilloflowers, and about the same bigness and doubleness
most usually, yet in some much greater then in others; but of a pale yellowish
Carnation color, tending to an Orange, with two small white threads, crooked at
the ends in the middle, yet some have none, of a weaker sent then the Cloue
Gilloflower: this kind is more apt to bear seed then any other, which is
small, black, flat, and long, and being sown, yield wonderful varieties both
of single and double flowers: some being of a lighter or deeper color then the
mother plants: some with stripes in most of the leaves: Others are striped or
spotted, like a speckled Carnation or Gilloflower, in diverse sorts, both single
and double: Some again are wholly of the same color, like the mother plant,
and are either more or less double then it, or else are single with one row of
leaves, like unto a Pinck; and some of these likewise either wholly of a
crimson red, deeper or lighter, or variably spotted, double or single as a
Pinck, or blush either single or double, and but very seldom white: yet all of
them in their green leaves little or nothing varying or differing.

Cariophylli maximi. CARNATIONS.
Caryophyllus maximus dictus Hulo rubro-varius. THe gray Hulo has as large
leaves as the former old Carnation, and as deeply iagged on the edges: it has
a great high stalk, whereon stand the flowers, of a deep red color, striped
and speckled very close together with a darkish white color. Caryophyllus
maximus dictus Hulo ruber non variatus. The red Hulo is also a fair great
flower, of a stamell color, deeply iagged as the former, and grows very
comely without any spot at all in it, so that it seems to be but a stamell
Gilloflower, save that it is much greater. Caryophyllus maximus dictus Hulo
caeruleo purpureus. The blew Hulo is a goodly fair flower, being of a fair
purplish murrey color, curiously marbled with white, but so smally to be
discerned, that it seems only purple, it has so much the Mastrie in it; it
resembles the Brassill, but that it is much bigger. Caryophyllus maximus
dictus Grimelo sieve Princeps. The Grimelo or Prince is a fair flower also, as
large as any Crystal or larger, being of a fair crimson color, equally for
the most part striped with white, or rather more white then red, thorough every
leaf from the bottom, and stands comely. Caryophyllus maximus Incarnadinus
albus. The white Carnation or Delicate, is a goodly delightful fair flower in
his pride and perfection, that is, when it is both marbled and flaked, or
striped and speckled with white upon an incarnate crimson color, being a very
comely flower, but abides not constant, changing oftentimes to have no flakes
or strakes of white, but marbled or speckled wholly. Caryophyllus maximus
Incarnadinus Gallicus. The French Carnation is very like unto the white
Carnation, but that it has more specks, and fewer stripes or flakes of white
in the red, which has the mastrie of the white. Caryophyllus maximus
Incarnadinus grandi^. The ground Carnation (if it be not the same with the
graund or great old Carnation first set down, as the alteration but of one
letter gives the conjecture) is a thick flower, but spreads not his leaves
abroad as others do, having the middle standing higher then the outer leaves,
and turning up their brimmes or edges; it is a sad flower, with few stripes or
spots in it: it is very subject to break the pod, that the flower seldom
comes fair and right; the green leaves are as great as the Hulo or Lombard
red. Caryophyllus maximus Chrystallinus. The Crystal or Chrystalline (for
they are both one, howsoever some would make them differ) is a very delicate
flower when it is well marked, but it is inconstant in the marks, being
sometimes more striped with white and crimson red, and sometimes less or
little or nothing at all, and changing also sometimes to be wholly red, or
wholly blush. Caryophyllus maximus flore rubro. The red Crystal, which is the
red hereof changed, is the most orient flower of all other red Gilloflowers,
because it is both the greatest, as coming from the Crystal, as also that
the red hereof is a most excellent crimson. Caryophyllus maximus dictus
Fragrans. The Fragrant is a fair flower, and thought to come from the
Crystal, being as large, but of a blush red color, spotted with small
speckes, no bigger then pinnes points, but not so thick as in the Pageant.
Caryophyllus maximus Sabaudicus varius. The stripped Sauadge is for form and
bigness equal with the Crystal or White Carnation, but as inconstant as
either of them, changing into red or blush; so that few branches with flowers
contain their true mixtures, which are a whitish blush, fairly striped with a
crimson red color, thick and short, with some spots also among. Caryophyllus
maximus Sabaudicus carneus. The blush Sauadge is the same with the former, the
same root of the stripped Sauadge, as I said before, yielding one side or part
whose flowers will be either wholly blush, or having some small spots, or
sometimes few or none in them. Caryophyllus maximus Sabaudicus ruber. The red
Sauadge is as the blush, when the color of the flower is wholly red without
any stripes or spots in them, and so abides long; yet it is sometimes seen,
that the same side, or part, or root being separate from the first or mother
plant, will give striped and well marked flowers again. Caryophyllus maximus
Oxoniensis. The Oxeford Carnation is very like unto the French Carnation, both
for form, largeness and color: but that this is of a sadder red color, so
finely marbled with white thereon, that the red having the maistry, shows a
very sad flower, not having any flakes or stripes at all in it. Caryophyllus
maximus Regius, sieve Bristoliensis mayor. The Kings Carnation or ordinary
Bristow, is a reasonable great flower, deeply iagged, of a sad red, very
smally striped and speckled with white: some of the leaves of the flower on the
one side will turn up their brimmes or edges: the green leaf is very large.
Caryophyllus maximus Granatensis. The greatest Granado is a very fair large
flower, bigger then the Crystal, and almost as big as the blew Hulo: it is
almost equally divided and stripped with purple and white, but the purple is
sadder then in the ordinary Granado Gilloflower, else it might be said it were
the same, but greater. Diverse have taken this flower to be the Gran Pere, but
you shall have the difference showed you in the next ensuing flower.
Caryophyllus maximus Gran Pere dictus. The Gran Pere is a fair great flower,
and comely for the form, but of no great beauty for color, because although
it be stripped red and white like the Queens Gilloflower, yet the red is so sad
that it takes away all the delight to the flower. Caryophyllus maximus
Cambersine dictus. The Cambersine is a great flower and a fair, being a red
flower, well marked or striped with white, somewhat like unto a Sauadge, say
some, but that the red is not crimson as the Sauadge; others say the Dainty,
but not so comely: the leaves of the flowers are many, and thrust together,
without any due form of spreading. Caryophyllus maximus Longobardicus ruber.
The great Lombard red is a great sad red flower, so double and thick of leaves,
that it most usually breaks the pod, and seldom shows one flower among
twenty perfect: the blades or green leaves are as large as the Hulo.
Caryophylli majores. GILLOFLOWERS.
Caryophyllus mayor Westminsteriensis. THe lusty Gallant or Westminster (some
make them to be one flower, and others to be two, one bigger then the other)
at the first blowing open of the flower shows to be of a reasonable size and
comeliness, but after it has stood blown some time it shows smaller and
thinner: it is of a bright red color, much striped and speckled with white.
Caryophyllus mayor Bristoliensis purpureus. The Bristow blew has green
leaves, so large, that it would seem to bring a greater flower then it does,
yet the flower is of a reasonable size, and very like unto the ordinary Granado
Gilloflower, striped and flaked in the same manner, but that the white of this
is purer then that, and the purple is more light, and tending to a blew: this
does not abide constant, but changes into purple or blush. Caryophyllus mayor
Bristoliensis carneus. The Bristow blush is very like the last both in leaf
and flower, the color only shows the difference, which seldom varyeth to be
spotted, or change color. Caryophyllus mayor Doroborniensis ruber. The red
Dover is a reasonable great Gilloflower and constant, being of a fair red
thick poudered with white spots, and seems somewhat like unto the ground
Carnation. Caryophyllus mayor Doroborniensis dil^tus sieve albus. The light or
white Dover is for form and all other things more comely then the former, the
color of the flower is blush, thick spotted with very small spots, that it
seems all gray, and is very delightful. Caryophyllus mayor Cantii. The fair
maid of Kent, or Ruffling Robin is a very beautiful flower, and as large as
the white Carnation almost: the flower is white, thick poudered with purple,
wherein the white has the mastrie by much, which makes it the more pleasant.
Caryophyllus mayor Regineus. The Queens Gilloflower is a reasonable fair
Gilloflower although very common, striped red and white, some great and some
small with long stripes. Caryophyllus mayor elegans. The Dainty is a comely
fine flower, although it be not great, and for the smallness and thinness of
the flower being red so finely marked, striped and speckled, that for the
liveliness of the colors it is much desired, being inferior to very few
Gilloflowers. Caryophyllus mayor Brasiliensis. The Brassill Gilloflower is but
of a mean size, being of a sad purple color, thick poudered and speckled
with white, the purple herein has the mastrie, which makes it show the
sadder, it is unconstant, varying much and often to be all purple: the green
leaves lie matting on the ground. Caryophyllus mayor Gran^tensis. The Granado
Gilloflower is purple and white, flaked and striped very much: this is also
much subject to change purple. There is a greater and a lesser of this kind,
besides the greatest that is formerly described. Caryophyllus Turcicus. The
Turkey Gilloflower is but a small flower, but of great delight, by reason of
the well marking of the flower, being most usually equally striped with red and
white. Caryophyllus Cambrensis Poole. The Poole flower, growing naturally upon
the rocks near Cogshot Castle in the Isle of Wight, is a small flower, but
very pleasant to the eye, by reason of the comely proportion thereof; it is of
a bright pale red, thick speckled, and very small with white, that it seems
to be but one color, the leaves of the flower are but smally iagged about: it
is constant. Caryophyllus Pegma dilutior. The light or pale Pageant is a flower
of a middle size, very pleasant to behold, and is both constant and comely, and
but that it is so common, would be of much more respect then it is: the flower
is of a pale bright purple, thick poudered, and very euenly with white, which
has the mastery, and makes it the more graceful. Caryophyllus
Pegmasaturatior. The sad Pageant is the same with the former in form and
bigness, the difference in color is, that the purple has the mastery, which
makes it so sad, that it does resemble the Brassill for color, but is not so
big by half. Caryophyllus Heroina dictus elegans Magistri Bradshawij. Master
Bradshawe his dainty Lady may be well reckoned among these sorts of
Gilloflowers, and compare for neatenesse with most of them: the flower is very
neat, though small, with a fine small iagge, and of a fine white color on the
vnderside of all the leaves, as also all the whole iagge for a pretty compass,
and the bottom or middle part of the flower on the vpperside also: but each
leaf is of a fine bright pale red color on the vpperside, from the edge to
the middle, which mixture is of wonderful great delight. Caryophyllus albus
optimus mayor Londinensis and alius. The best white Gilloflower grows
upright, and very double, the blades grow upright also, and crawle not on the
ground. The London white is greater and whiter then the other ordinary white,
being wholly of one color. Caryophyllus mayor rubens and minor. The stamell
Gilloflower is well known to all, not to differ from the ordinary red or cloue
Gilloflower, but only in being of a brighter or light red color: there is both
a greater and a lesser of this kind. Caryophyllus purpureus mayor and minor.
The purple Gilloflower a greater and a less: the stalk is so slender, and the
leaves upon them so many and thick, that they lie and traile on the ground:
the greatest is almost as big as a Crystal, but not so double: the less
has a smaller flower. Caryophyllus Persico violaceus. The Gredeline
Gilloflower is a very neat and handsome flower, of the bigness of the Cloue
red Gilloflower, of a fine pale reddish purple or peach color, enclining to a
blew or violet, which is that color is usually called a gredeline color: it
has no affinity with either Purple, Granado, or Pageant. Caryophyllus purpuro
caeruleus. The blew Gilloflower is neither very double nor great, yet round and
handsome, with a deep iagge at the edge, and is of an exceeding deep purple
color, tending to a tawnie: this differs from all other sorts, in that the
leaf is as green as grass, and the stalks many times red or purple: by the
green leaves it may be known in the Winter, as well as in the Summer.
Caryophyllus carneus. The blush Gilloflower differs not from the red or
stamell, but only in the color of the flower, which is blush. Caryophyllus
Silesiacus maximus Witty. John Witty his great tawny Gilloflower is for form
of growing, in leaf and flower altogether like unto the ordinary tawny, the
flower only, because it is the fairest and greatest that any other has
noursed up, makes the difference, as also that it is of a fair deep scarlet
color.
There are also diverse other Tawnies, either lighter or sadder, either less or
more double, that they cannot be numbered, and all rising (as I said before)
from sowing the seed of some of them: besides the diversities of other colors
both simple and mixed, every year and place yielding some variety was not seen
with them before: I shall need but only to give you the names of some of them
we have abiding with us, I mean such as have received names, and leave the
rest to every ones particular denomination.

Of Blushes there are many sorts, as the deep blush, the pale blush, the
Infanta blush, a blush enclining to a red, a great blush, the fairest and most
double of all the other blushes, and many others both single and double.

Of Reds likewise there are some varieties, but not so many as of the other
colors; for they are most dead or deep reds, and few of a bright red or
stamell color; and they are single like Pinkes, either striped or speckled, or
more double striped and speckled variably, or else

There are neither purple nor white that rise from this seed that I have
observed, except one white in one place.

Caryophyllus Silesiacus striatus. The striped Tawny are either greater or
lesser, deeper or lighter flowers twenty sorts and above, and all striped with
smaller or larger stripes, or equally divided, of a deeper or lighter color:
and some also for the very shape or form will be more neat, close, and
round; others more loose, unequal, and sparsed. Caryophyllus Silesiacus
^^rinor-amulus. The marbled Tawny has not so many varieties as the striped,
but is of as great beauty and delight as it, or more: the flowers are greater
or smaller, deeper or lighter colored one then another, and the veins or
marks more conspicuous, or more frequent in some then in others: but the most
beautiful that ever I did see was with Master Ralph Truggie, which I must
needs therefore call Heroina Rodolphi florum Imperatoris. Master Tuggies
Princess, which is the greatest and fairest of all these sorts of variable
tawnies, or seed flowers, being as large fully as the Prince or Crystal, or
something greater, standing comely and round, not loose or shaken, or breaking
the pod as some other sorts will; the marking of the flower is in this manner:
It i^^yf a stamell color, striped and marbled with white stripes and veins
quite through every leaf, which are as deeply iagged as the Hulo: sometimes it
has more red then white, and sometimes more white then red, and sometimes so
equally marked, that you cannot discern which has the mastery; yet which of
these has the predominance, still the flower is very beautiful, and exceeding
delightsome. Caryophyllus Silesiacus assulosus The Flaked Tawny is another
diversity of these variable or mixed colored flowers, being of a pale reddish
color, flaked with white, not always downeright, but often thwart the leaves,
some more or less then others; the marking of them is much like unto the
Crystal: these also as well as others will be greater or smaller, and of
greater or less beauty then others. Caryophyllus Silesiacus plumatus. The
Feathered Tawny is more rare to meet with then many of the other; for most
usually it is a fair large flower and double, equalling the Lumbard red in his
perfection: the color hereof is usually a scarlet, little deeper or paler,
most curiously feathered and streamed with white through the whole leaf.
Caryophyllus Silesiacus punctatus. The Speckled Tawny is of diverse sorts, some
bigger, some 1 Heroina Radolphi florum Imperatoris Princessa dictus Master
Tuggie his Princess. 2 Caryophyllus Oxoniensis. The French or Oxford
Carnation. 3 Caryophyllus Westmonasteri^nsis. The Gallant or Westminster
Gilloflower. 4 Caryophyllus Bristoliensis. The Bristow. 5 Caryophyllus
Chrystallinus. The Chr^stall or Chrystalline. 6 Caryophyllus Saba^di^^^
striat^^. The stripped Sauadg^. 7 Caryophyllus Granatensis maximus. The Granpere
or greatest Granado. 8 Caryophyllus paramanus. The Dainty. 9 Caryophyllus
Siles^acus maximus (...) Ioan^^^ John Witty his great tawny Gilloflower. 10
Caryophyllus Silesiacus striatus. The stripped Tawny. 11 Caryophyllus (...)
aemulus. The marbled Tawny. 12 Caryophyllus roseus rotundus magistri Tuggie.
Master Tuggie his Rose Gilloflower.
depiction of flowers less, some more, and some less spotted then others:
Usually it is a deep scarlet, speckled or spotted with white, having also some
stripes among the leaves. Caryophyllus roseus rotundus Magistri Tuggie. Master
Tuggie his Rose Gilloflower is of the kindred of these Tawnies, being raised
from the seed of some of them, and only possessed by him that is the most
industrious preserver of all natures beauties, being a different sort from all
other, in that it has round leaves, without any iagge at all on the edges, of
a fine stamell full color, without any spot or struck therein, very like unto a
small Rose, or rather much like unto the red Rose Campion, both for form,
color, and roundnesse, but larger for size.
The Place.
All these are nourished with us in Gardens, none of their natural places
being known, except one before recited, and the yellow which is Silesia; many
of them being hardly preserved and increased.

The Time.
They flower not until the heat of the year, which is in July (unless it be
an extraordinary occasion) and continue flowring, until the colds of the
Autumn check them, or until they have wholly out spent themselves, and are
usually increased by the slips.

The Names.
Most of our later Writers do call them by one general name, Caryophyllus
sativus, and flos Caryophylleus, adding thereunto maximus, when we mean
Carnations, and mayor when we would express Gilloflowers, which name is taken
from Cloves, in that the sent of the ordinary red Gilloflower especially does
resemble them. Diverse other several names have been formerly given them, as
Vetonica, or Betonica altera, or Vetonica altilis, and coronaria. Herba Tunica,
Viola Damascena, Ocellus Damascenus, and Barbaricus. Of some Cantabrica Plinij.
Some think they were unknown to the Ancients, and some would have them to be
Iphium of Theophrastus, whereof he makes mention in his sixth and seventh
Chapters of his sixth book, among Garland and Summer flowers; others to be his
Dios anthos, or Io^^^ flos, mentioned in the former, and in other places. We
call them in English (as I said before) the greatest kinds, Carnations, and
the others Gilloflowers ( quasi July flowers) as they are severally expressed.

The Virtues.
The red or Cloue Gilloflower is most used in Physic in our Apothecaries
shops, none of the other being accepted of or used (and yet I doubt not, but
all of them might serve, and to good purpose, although not to give so gallant a
tincture to a Syrup as the ordinary red will do) and is accounted to be very
Cordial.

CHAP. LXX.
Caryophylli siluestres. Pinkes.
THere remain diverse sorts of wild or small Gilloflowers (which we usually
call Pinkes) to be entreated of, some bearing single, and some double flowers,
some smooth, almost without any deep dents on the edges, and some iagged, or
as it were feathered. Some growing upright like unto Gilloflowers, others
creeping 1 Caryophyllus siluestris simplex. The usual single Pinke. 2
Caryophyllus multiplex siluestris. Double Pinkes. 3 Cariophyllus siluestris
plumamarius. Feathered or iagged Pinkes. 4 Caryophyllus Stellatus. Star
Pinkes. 5 Caryophyllus re^ens. Matted Pinkes. 6 Caryophyllus mediterraneus. The
great Thistle or Sea Gilloflower. 7 Caryophyllus m^rinus. The ordinary Thistle
or Sea Cushion.
depiction of flowers or spreading under the top or crust of the ground, some
of one color, some of another, and many of diverse colors: As I have formerly
done with the Gilloflowers, so must I do with these that are entertained in
our Gardens, only give you the descriptions of some three or four of them,
according to their variety, and the names of the rest, with their distinctions.

1. Caryophyllus minor siluestris multiplex and simplex. Double and single
Pinkes.
The single and double Pinkes are for form and manner of growing, in all parts
like unto the Gilloflowers before described, saving only that their leaves are
smaller and shorter, in some more or less then in others, and so are the
flowers also: the single kinds consisting of five leaves usually (seldom six)
round pointed, and a little snipt for the most part about the edges, with some
threads in the middle, either crooked or straight: the double kinds being
lesser, and less double then the Gilloflowers, having their leaves a little
snipt or endented about the edges, and of diverse several colors as shall
hereafter be set down, and of as fragrant a sent, especially some of them as
they: the roots are long and spreading, somewhat hard and woody.

2. Caryophyllus plumarius. Feathered or iagged Pinkes.
The iagged Pinkes have such like stalks and l^^ues as the former have, but
somewhat shorter and smaller, or grasse-like, and of a whitish or grayish
green color likewise: the flowers stand in the like manner at the tops of
the stalks, in long, round, slender, green husks, consisting of five leaves,
very much cut in on the edges, and iagged almost like a feather, of a light
red, or bright purple color, with two white threads standing in the middle,
crooked like a horn at the end, and are of a very good sent. Some of these
have not those two crooked threads or horns in the middle, but have in their
stead many small threads, not crooked at all: the seeds of them all are like
unto the seeds of Gilloflowers, or the other Pinkes, that is, small, black,
long, and flat: the roots are small and woody likewise.

3. Caryophyllus plumarius albus orb rubro sieve Stellatus. Star Pinkes.
Of this kind there is another sort, bearing flowers almost as deeply cut or
iagged as the former, of a fair white color, having a ring or circle of red
about the bottom or lower part of the leaves, and are as sweet as the former:
this being sown of seed does not give the star of so bright a red color,
but becomes more dunne.

4. Caryophyllus plumarius Austriacus sieve Superba Austriaca. The feathered
Pinke of Austria.
This kind of Pinke has his first or lower leaves, somewhat broader and
greener then any of the former Pinkes, being both for breadth and greenness
more like unto the Sweet John's, which shall be described in the next Chapter:
the leaves on the stalks are smaller, standing by couples at every joint, at
the tops whereof stand such like iagged flowers as the last described, and as
large, but more deeply cut in or iagged round about, some of them of a purplish
color, but the most ordinary with us are pure white, and of a most fragrant
sent, comforting the spirits and senses a far off: the seeds and roots are
like unto the former. Some have mistaken a kind of wild Campion, growing in
our Woods, and by the paths sides in Hornsie Park, and other places, to be
this feathered Pinke: but the flowers declare the difference sufficiently.

5. Caryophyllus minor repens simplex and multiplex. Single and double matted
Pinkes.
The matted Pinke is the smallest, both for leaf and flower of all other
Pinkes that are nourished in Gardens, having many short and small grassie
green leaves upon the stalks, which as they grow and lie upon the ground (and
not standing so upright as the former) do take root again, whereby it
quickly spreads, and covers a great deal of ground in a little space: the
flowers are small and round, a little snipt about the edges, whereof some are
white, and some red, and some are white spotted with red, and some red ^Potted
with white, all of them being single flowers. But there is another of this
kind, not differing in leaf, but in flower: for that the first flowers are
but once double, or of two rows of leaves, of a fine reddish color, spotted
with silver spots: but those that follow, are so thick and double, that they
oftentimes do break the pod or husk; being not altogether of so deep a red
color, but more pale.

6. Caryophyllus Meditterraneus sieve Marinus mayor. Great Sea Gilloflower or
Great Thrift.
Unto these kinds of Pinkes I must needs add, not only your ordinary Thrift
(which is more frequent in gardens, to empale or border a knot, because it
abides green Winter and Summer, and that by cutting, it may grow thick, and
be kept in what form one list, rather then for any beauty of the flowers) but
another greater kind, which is of as great beauty and delight almost as any
of the former Pinkes, as well for that the leaves are like unto Gilloflowers,
being longer and larger then any Pinkes, and of a whitish green color like
unto th^^, not growing long or by couples upon the stalks as Pinkes and
Gilloflowers do, but tufting close upon the ground, like unto the common
Thrift: as also that the stalks, rising from among the leaves (being sometimes
two foot high (as I have observed in my garden) are yet so slender and weak,
that they are scarce able to bear the heads of flowers, naked or bare, both of
leaves and joints, saving only in one place, where at the joint each stalk
has two small and very short leaves, not rising upwards as in all other
Gilloflowers, Pinkes, and other herbs, but growing downwards) and do bear
each of them a tuft or vmbell of small purplish, or blush colored flowers, at
the tops them standing somewhat like unto sweet Williams, but more roundly
together, each flower consisting of five small, round, stiff or hardish
leaves, as if they were made of paper, the bottom or middle being hollow, not
blowing all at once as the ordinary Thrift, but for the most part one after
another, not showing usually above four or five flowers open at one time (so
far as I could observe in the plants that I kept) so that it was long before
the whole tuft of flowers were past; but yet the hoter and dryer the times was,
the sooner it would be gone: the seed I have not perfectly observed, but as I
remember, it was somewhat like unto the seed of Scabious; I am sure nothing
like unto Gilloflowers or Pinkes: the root is somewhat great, long and hard,
and not so much spreading in the ground as Gilloflowers or Pinkes.

Caryophyllus Marinus. Thrift, or Sea Cushion.
Our common Thrift is well known unto all, to have many short and hard green
leaves, smaller then many of the grasses, growing thick together, and
spreading upon the ground: the stalks are naked of leaves a spanne high,
bearing a small tuft of light purple, or blush colored flowers, standing round
and close thrusting together.

Double Pinkes.
THe double white Pinke is only with more leaves in it then the single, which
makes the difference. The double red Pinke is in the same manner double,
differing from the single of the same color. The double purple Pinke differs
not from the single purple for color, but only in the doubleness of the
flower. The Granado Pinke differs not from the Gilloflower of the same name,
but in the smalnesse both of leaves and flower. The double Matted Pinke is
before described. The double blush Pinke is almost as great as the ordinary
blush Gilloflower, and some have taken it for one, but the green leaves are
almost as small as Pinks, and therefore I refer it to them.
Single Pinkes.
THe single white ordinary Pinke has a single white flower of five leaves,
finely iagged about the edges. The single red Pink is like the white, but that
the leaves are not so much iagged, and the flower is of a pale purplish red
color. The single purple Pinke is of a fair purple color, like almost unto
the purple Gilloflower. The great blush Pinke has broader and larger leaves in
the flower then any other Pinke, and of a fair blush color. The white
Feathered Pinke has the edges of the flower more finely and deeply cut in then
the former. The red or light purple feathered Pinke is like the former
feathered Pinke, but only differs in color. The Star Pinke is a fair
flower, finely iagged on the edges, with a fair red circle at the lower end of
the leaves on the inside. The white featherd Pinke of Austria is described
before. The purple featherd Pinke of Austria is so likewise. The single matted
Pinke is before described. The speckled Pinke is a small flower having small
spots of red here and there dispersed over the white flower. Those single
flowers being like unto Pinkes that rise from the sowing of the orange tawney,
I bring not into this classis, having already spoken of them in the precedent
Chapter.
The Place.
These are all like as the former, nourished in Gardens with us, although many
of them are found wild in many places of Austria, Hungary, and Germany, on
the mountains, and in many other places, as Clusius records. The ordinary
Thrift grows in the salt Marshes at Chattam by Rochester, and in many other
places in England: but the great kind was gathered in Spain, by Guillaume
Boel that painful searcher of simples, and the seed thereof imparted to me,
from whence I had diverse plants, but one year after another they all perished,

The Time.
Many of these Pinkes both single and double, do flower before any
Gilloflower, and so continue until August, and some, most of the Summer and
Autumn.

The Names.
The several titles that are given to these Pinkes, may suffice for their
particular names: and for their general they have been expressed in the
former Chapter, being of the same kindred, but that they are smaller, and more
frequently found wild. The two sorts of Thrift are called Caryophyllus
Marinus. The greater, Mayor and Mediterraneus; In English, The greater or
Leuant Thrift, or Sea Gilloflower. The lesser Minimus, and is accounted of some
to be a grass, and therefore called Gramen Marinum and Polyanthemum; In
English, Thrift, Sea grass, and our Ladies Cushion, or Sea Cushion.

The Virtues.
It is thought by diverse, that their virtues are answerable to the
Gilloflowers, yet as they are of little use with us, so I think of as small
effect.

CHAP. LXXI.
Armerius. Sweet John's, and sweet Williams.
THese kinds of flowers as they come nearest unto Pinkes and Gilloflowers,
though manifestly differing, so it is fittest to place them next unto them in a
peculiar Chapter.

1. Armerius angustifolius rubens simplex. Single red sweet John's.
The sweet John has his leaves broader, shorter and greener then any of the
former Gilloflowers, but narrower then sweet Williams, set by couples, at the
joints of the stalks, which are shorter then most of the former, and not above
a foot and a half high, at the tops whereof stand many small flowers, like
unto small Pinkes, but standing closer together, and in shorter husks, made of
five leaves, smaller then most of them, and more deeply iagged then the
Williams, of a red color in the middle, and white at the edges, but of a small
or soft sent, and not all flowring at once, but by degrees: the seed is
black, somewhat like unto the seed of Pinkes, the root is dispersed
diversely, with many small fibers annexed unto it.

2. Armerius angustifolius albus simplex. Single white sweet John's.
This white John differs not in any thing from the former, but only that the
leaf does never change brownish, and that the flower is of a fair white
color, without any mixture.

3. Armerius angustifolius duplex. Double sweet John's.
There is of both those former kinds, some whose flowers are once double, that
is, consisting of two or three rows of leaves, and the edges not so deeply
iagged; not differing in any thing else.

4. Armerius latifolius simplex flore rubro. Single red sweet Williams.
The sweet Williams do all of them spread into many very long trayling
branches, with leaves lying on the ground, in the very like manner that the
sweet John's do: the chief differences between them are, that these have
broader, and darker green leaves, somewhat brownish, especially toward the
points, and that the flowers stand thicker and closer, and more in number
together, in the head or tuft, having many small pointed leaves among them, but
harmless, as all men know; the color of the flower is of a deep red, without
any mixture or spot at all.

5. Armerius latifolius flore rubro multiplici. Double red sweet Williams.
The double kind differs not from the single kind of the same color, but
only in the doubleness of the flowers, which are with two rows of leaves in
every flower.

6. Armerius latifolius variegatus sieve versicolor. Speckled sweet Williams,
or London pride.
These spotted Williams are very like the first red Williams, in the form or
manner of growing, having leaves as broad, and brown sometimes as they, the
flowers stand as thick or thicker, clustring together, but of very variable
colors: for some flowers will be of a fine delayed red, with few marks or
spots upon them, and others will be full peckled or sprinkled with white or
silver spots, circlewise about the middle of the flowers, and some will have
many specks or spots upon them dispersed: all these flowers are not blown at
one time, but some are flowring, when others are decaying, so that abiding long
in their pride, they become of the more respect: The seed is black, as all
the rest, and not to be distinguished one from another: the roots are some
long, and some small and threddy, running under the upper crust of the earth.

7. Armerius latifolius flore rubro saturoholoserice^. Sweet Williams of a
deep red or murrey color.
The leaves of this kind seem to be a little larger, and the ioints a little
redder then the former, but in the flower consists the chiefest difference,
which is of a deep red, or murrey purple color, like unto velvet of that
color, without any spots, but smooth, and as it were soft in handling, having
an eye or circle in the middle, at the bottom of the leaves.

8. Armerius latifolius simplex flore albo. Single white sweet Williams.
The white kind differs not in form, but in color from the former, the
leaves are not brown at all, but of a fresh green color, and the flowers are
wholly white, or else they are all one.

The Place.
These for the most part grow wild in Italy, and other places: we have them
in our Gardens, where they are cherished for their beautiful variety.

The Time.
They all generally do flower before the Gilloflowers or Pinkes, or with the
first of them: their seed is ripe in June and July, and do all well abide the
extremity of our coldest winters.

The Names.
They all generally are called Armerius, or Armeria, as some do write, and
distinguished as they are in their titles: Yet some have called them Vetonica
agrestis, and others Herba Tunica, Scarlatea, and Caryophyllus siluestris: We
do in English in most places, call the first or narrower leafed kinds, Sweet
John's, and all the rest Sweet Williams; yet in some places they call the
broader leafed kinds that are not spotted, Tolmeiners, and London tufts: but
the speckled kind is termed by our English Gentlewomen, for the most part,
London pride.

The Virtues.
We have not known any of these used in Physic.

CHAP. LXXII.
Bellis. Daisie.
THere be diverse sorts of Daisies, both great and small, both single and
double, both wild growing abroad in the fields, and elsewhere, and manured
growing only in Gardens: of all which I intend not to entreat, but of those
that are of most beauty and respect, and leave the rest to their proper place.

1 Armerius angustifolius simplex. Single sweet Io^ns* 2 Armerius
angustifolius multiplex Double sweet John's. 3 Armerius latifolius simplex
Single sweet Willi^ms. 4 Armerius latifolius versicolo^. Sp^tted sweet
Williams or pride of London. 5 Armerius latifolius multiplex Double sweet
Willia^s 6 B^llis ho^tensis minor mu^tiplex Double Garden Daisies. 7 Bell^^
minor ho^tensis flore vario. Double red Daisies (...) 8 Bellis minor hortensis
prolifera. Double fruitful Daisies or lack an Apes on horseback. 9 Bellis
caru^ea sieve Globularia. Double blew Daisies or blew Globeflower. 10 Bellis
lutea montana sieve Globularia lutea monta^^. Double yellow Da^sies or yellow
Globeflower.
depiction of flowers

1. Bellis mayor flore albo pleno. The great double white Daisie.
The great Daisie with the double white flower, is in all things so like unto
the great single kind, that grows by the high ways, and in diverse meadows
and fields, that there is no difference but in the flower, which is double. It
has many long, and somewhat broad leaves lying upon the ground, deeply cut in
on both sides, somewhat like unto an oaken leaf; but those that are on the
stalks are shorter, narrower, and not so deeply cut in, but only notched on
the edges: the flowers at the top are (as I said) white and double,
consisting of diverse rows of leaves, being greater in compass then any of the
double Daisies that follow, but nothing so double of leaves.

2. Bellis minor flore rubro simplici. Single red Daisies.
This single Daisie (like as all the rest of the small Daisies) has many
smooth, green, round pointed leaves lying on the ground, a little snipt about
the edges; from among which rise many slender round foote-stalkes, rather then
stalks or stems, about an hand breadth high at the most, and oftentimes not
half so high, bearing one flower a piece, consisting of many small leaves, as
a pale or border set about a middle thrumme: the leaves of this kind are
almost wholly red, whereas in the wild they are white or whitish, enclining to
red on the edges, the middle being yellow in both sorts: the roots are many
small white threads or strings.

3. Bellis minor hortensis flore pleno variorum colorum. Double Garden Daisies
of diverse colors.
The leaves of all the double Daisies are in form like unto the single ones,
but that they are smaller, and little or nothing snipt or notched about the
edges: the small stalks likewise are smaller and lower, but bearing as double
flowers as any that grow on the ground, being composed of many small leaves,
thick thrust together, of diverse colors; for some are wholly of a pure white,
others have a little red, either dispersed upon the white leaves, or on the
edges, and sometimes on the backs of the leaves: some again seem to be of a
whitish red, or more red then white, when as indeed they are white leaves
dispersed among the red; others of a deep or dark red color, and some are
speckled or striped with white and red through the whole flower: and some the
leaves will be red on the vpperside, and white underneath; and some also (but
those are very rare) are of a greenish color.

4. Bellis minor hortensis prolifera. Double double Daisies or childing Daisies.
There is no difference either in leaf or root in this kind from the former
double Daisies: the chiefest variety consists in this, that it bears many
small double flowers, standing upon very short stalks round about the middle
flower, which is usually as great and double as any of the other double kinds,
and is either wholly of a deep red color, or speckled white and red as in
some of the former kinds, or else greenish, all the small flowers about it
being of the same color with the middlemost.

5. Bellis caerulea sieve Globularia. Blew Daisies.
The likeness and affinity that this plant has with the former, both in the
form of leaf and flower, as also in the name, has caused me to insert it,
and another rare plant of the same kind, in this place, although they be very
rare to be met with in our English Gardens. This bears many narrower,
shorter, and blacker green leaves then the former, lying round about upon the
ground; among which rise up slender, but stiff and hard stalks, half a foot
high or more, set here and there with small leaves, and at the top a small
round head, composed of many small blew leaves, somewhat like unto the head of
a Scabious: It has bin found likewise with a white head of flowers: the root
is hard and stringie: the whole plant is of a bitter taste.

6. Globularia lutea montana. Yellow Daisies.
This mountain yellow Daisie or Globe-flower has many thick, smooth, round
pointed leaves, spread upon the ground like the former; among which spring
diverse small round rushie stalks, a foot high, bearing about the middle of
them two small leaves at the joints, and at the tops round heads of flowers
thrust thick together, standing in purplish husks, every of which flowers do
blow or spread into five leaves, starre-fashion, and of a fair yellow color,
smelling like unto broom flowers, with many small threads in the middle
compassing a flat pointell, horned or bended two ways: after the flowers are
past rise up the seed vessels, which are round, swelling out in the middle,
and divided into four parts at the tops, containing within them round, flat,
black seed, with a small cut or notch in them: the root is a finger long,
round and hard, with a thick bark, and a woddy pith in the middle, of a
sharp drying taste and strong sent: the leaves are also sharp, but bitter.

The Place.
The small Daisies are all planted, and found only in Gardens, and will
require to be replanted often, lest they degenerate into single flowers, or at
least into less double. The blew Daisie is natural of Mompelier in France,
and on the mountains in many places of Italy, as also the yellow kind in the
Kingdom of Naples.

The Time.
The Daisies flower betimes in the Spring, and last until May, but the last
two flower not until August or September.

The Names.
They are usually called in Latin Bellides, and in English Daisies. Some call
them Herba Margarita, and Primula veris, as it is likely after the Italian
names, of Marguerite, and Fior di prima vera gentile. The French call them
Pasquettes, and Marguerites, and the Fruitful sort, or those that bear small
flowers about the middle one, Margueritons: our English women call them Jack
an Apes on horseback, as they do Marigolds before recited, or childing
Daisies: but the Physicians and Apothecaries do in general call them,
especially the single or Field kinds, Consolida minor. The blew Daisie is
called Bellis caerulea, and Globularia, of some Scabiosae pumilum genus. The
Italians call it Botanaria, because the heads are found like buttons. The
yellow, Globularia montana, is only described by Fabius Columna, in his last
part of Phytobasanos, and by him referred unto the former Globularia, althougb
it differ in some notable points from it.

The Virtues.
The properties of Daisies are certainly to bind, and the root especially
being dried, they are used in medicines to that purpose. They are also of
special account among those herbs, that are used for wounds in the head.

CHAP. LXXIII.
Scabiosa. Scabious.
THe sorts of Scabious being many, yield not flowers of beauty or respect, fit
to be cherished in this our Garden of delight; and therefore I leave them to
the Fields and Woods, there to abide. I have only two or three strangers to
bring to your acquaintance, which are worthy this place.

1. Scabiosa flore albo. White flowred Scabious.
This white Scabious has many long leaves, very much iagged or gasht in on
both sides, of a mean bigness, being neither so large as many of the field,
nor so small as any of the small kinds: the stalks rise about a foot and a
half high, or somewhat higher, at the tops whereof grow round heads, thick
set with flowers, like in all points unto the field Scabious, but of a milk
white color.

2. Scabiosa rubra Austriaca. Red Scabious of Austria.
This red Scabious has many leaves lying upon the ground, very like unto
Devils bit, but not so large, being shorter and snipt, not gashed about the
edges, of a light green color; yet (there is another of a darker green
color, whose flower is of a deeper red) the stalks have diverse such leaves on
them, set by couples at the joints as grow below, and at the tops small heads
of flowers, each consisting of five leaves, the biggest flowers standing round
about in the outer compass, as is usual almost in all the kinds of Scabious*
or a fine light purple or red color: after the flowers are past, come the
seed, which is somewhat long and round, set with certain hairs at the head
thereof, like unto a Star: the root is composed of a number of slender
strings, fastened at the head.

3. Scabiosa rubra Indica. Red flowred Indian Scabious.
This (reputed Indian) Scabious has many large fair green leaves lying on
the ground, iagged or cut in on both sides to the middle ribbe, every piece
whereof is narrower then that at the end, which is the broadest: among these
leaves rise up sundry slender and weak stalks, yet standing upright for the
most part, set with smaller and more iagged leaves at certain distances, two
or three at every joint, branching forth at the top into other smaller
branches, bearing every one head of flowers, like in form unto other
Scabiouses, but of an excellent deep red crimson color (and sometimes more
pale or delayed) of no sent at all: after which do come small roundish seed,
like unto the field Scabious: the root is long and round, compassed with a
great many small strings, and perishes usually as soon as it has borne out
his flowers and seed: otherwise if it do not flower the first year of the
sowing, if it be carefully defended from the extremity of Winter, it will
flower the sooner the next year, as I my self have often found by experience.

The Place.
The first is sometimes found wild in our own Country, but it is very
geason, and has been sent among other rare seeds from Italy.

The second was first found and written of by Clusius, in Pannonia and Austria,
where it is very plentiful.

The third has been sent both from Spain and Italy, and is verily thought to
grow naturally in both those parts.

1 Scabiosa flore albo. White flowred Scabious. 2 Scabiosa rubra Austriaca. Red
Scabious of Austria. 3 Scabiosa rubra Indica. Red flowred Indian Scabious. 4
Cyanus vulgaris minor. Corn-flower of diverse colors. 5 Cyanus ^^ticus, Spanish
Corn-flower. 6 Cyanus floridus Turcicus. The brave Sultans flower. 7 Carthamus
sativus. Spanish Saffron.
depiction of flowers

The Time.
The first and second flower earlier then the last, for that it flowreth not
until September or October, (unless it be not apt to bear the first year as
I before said) so that many times (if none be more forward) it perishes
without bearing ripe seed, whereby we are oftentimes to seek new seed from
our friends in other parts.

The Names.
They have all one general name of Scabious, distinguished either by their
flower, or place of growing, as in their titles: yet the last is called of
diverse Scabiosa exotica, because they think the name Indica, is not truly
imposed upon it.

The Virtues.
Whether these kinds have any of the virtues of the other wild kinds, I know
none have made any experience, and therefore I can say no more of them.

CHAP. LXXIIII.
Cyanus. Corn flower, or blew Bottles.
Under the name of Cyanus are comprehended, not only those plants which from
the excellent blew color of their flower^ (furnishing or rather pestering the
Corn fields) have peculiarly obtained that name, and which does much vary
also, in the color of the flowers, as shall be showed; but some other plants
also for their near resemblance, but with several distinctions. The Cyanus
mayor, Ptarmica Austriaca, Ptarmica Imperati, and many others which may be
adjoined unto them, do more fitly belong to the Garden of Simples, whereunto I
leave them, and will here only entreat of those that may most please the
delight of our Gentle Florists, in that I labor and strive, to furnish this
our garden, with the chiefest choice of natures beauties and delights.

1. Cyanus vulgaris diuersorum colorum. Corn flower of diverse colors.
All these sorts of Corn flowers are for the most part alike, both in leaves
and flowers one unto another for the form: the difference between them
consists in the varying color of the flowers: For the leaves are long, and
of a whitish green color, deeply cut in on the edges in some places, somewhat
like unto the leaves of a Scabious: the stalks are two foot high or better,
beset with such like leaves but smaller, and little or nothing slit on the
edges: the tops are branched, bearing many small green scaly heads, out of
which rise flowers, consisting of five or six, or more long and hollow leaves,
small at the bottom, and opening wider and greater at the brims, notched or
cut in on the edges, and standing round about many small threads in the middle:
the colors of these flowers are diverse, and very variable; for some are wholly
blew, or white, or blush, or of a sad, or light purple, or of a light or dead
red, or of an ouerworne purple color, or else mixed of these colors, as some,
the edges white, and the rest blew or purple, or the edges blew or purple, and
the rest of the flower white, or striped, spotted, or halfed, the one part of
one color, and the other of another, the threads likewise in the middle varying
in many of them; for some will have the middle thrume of a deeper purple then
the outer leaves, and some have white or blush leaves, the middle thrume being
reddish, deeper or paler: After the flowers are past, there come small, hard,
white and shining seed in those heads, wrapped or set among a deal of flockie
matter, as is most usual, in all plants that bear scaly heads: the roots are
long and hard, perishing every year when it has given seed.

2. Cyanus floridus Turcicus. The Sultans flower.
As a kind of these Corn flowers, I must needs adioyne another stranger, of
much beauty, and but lately obtained from Constantinople, where, because (as
it is said) the great Turk, as we call him, saw it abroad, liked it, and wore
it himself; all his vassals have had it in great regard, and has been
obtained from them, by some that have sent it into these parts. The leaves
whereof are greener, and not only gashed, but finely snipt on the edges: the
stalks are three foot high, garnished with the like leaves as are below, and
branched as the former, bearing large scaly heads, and such like flowers but
larger, having eight or nine of those hollow gaping leaves in every flower,
standing about the middle threads (if it be planted in good and fertile ground
and be well watered, for it soon starueth and perishes with drought) the
circling leaves are of a fine delayed purple or blush color, very beautiful
to behold; the seed of this is smaller and blacker, and not enclosed in so
much dounie substance, as the former (yet in our Country the seed is not so
black, as it came unto us, but more gray) the root perishes likewise every
year.

3. Cyanus Baeticus supinus. The Spanish Corne-flower.
This Spanish kind has many square low bending or creeping stalks, not
standing so upright as the former, but branching out more diversely; so that one
plant will take up a great deal of ground: the leaves are broader then any of
the rest, softer also, of a pale or whitish green color, and not much gashed
on the edges: the flowers stand in bigger heads, with four or five leaves
under every head, and are of a light pale purple or blush color; after which
come seed, but not so plentifully, yet wrapped in a great deal of flockie
matter, more then any: the root grows down deep into the ground, but
perishes every year as they do.

The Place.
The first or former kinds, grow many times in the Corn fields of our own
Country, as well as of others, especially that sort with a blew flower: but
the other sorts or colors are not so frequent, but are nourished in gardens,
where they will vary wonderfully.

The second as is before set down, grows in Turkey: and the last in Spain,
found out and first sent to us by that industrious searcher of simples,
Guillaume Boel before remembered.

The Time.
The first do flower in the end of June, and in July, and sometimes sooner. The
other two later, and not until August most commonly, and the seed is soon
ripe after.

The Names.
The first is generally called Cyanus, and some following the Ditch name, call
it Flos frumenti. The old Writers gave it the name of Bapti saecuba, which is
almost worn out. We do call them in English, Blew Bottles, and in some
places, Corn flowers, after the Ditch names. The second has been sent by the
name of Ambreboi, which whether it be a Turkey or Arabian name, I know not. I
have called it from the place, from whence we had it, Turcicus, and for his
beauty, Floridus. The Turks themselves as I understand, do call it The
Sultans flower, and I have done so likewise, that it may be distinguished from
all the other kinds, or else you may call it, The Turkey blush Corn flower,
which you please. The l^st was sent by the name of Iacea Baetica, but I had
rather to refer it to the Cyanus, or Corn flowers, because the flowers are
like unto the Corn flowers, and not unto the Iaceas or Knapweedes.

The Virtues.
These had no use in Physic in Galen and Dioscorides time, in that (as it is
thought) they have made no mention of them: We in these days do chiefly use
the first kinds (as also the greater sort) as a cooling Cordial, and
commended by some to be a remedy, not only against the plague and
pestilentiall diseases, but against the poison of Scorpions and Spiders.

CHAP. LXXV.
Iacea Marina Baetica. Spanish Sea Knapweede.
THere are a great many sorts of Knapweedes, yet none of them all fit for this
our Garden, but this only stranger, which I have been bold to thrust in here,
for that it has such like gaping or open flowers, as the former Corn flowers
have, but notably differing, and therefore deserves a peculiar Chapter, as
partaking both with Cyanus and Iacea. It has many long and narrow leaves
unevenly dented or waued on both edges (and not notched, gashed or indented, as
many other herbs are) being thick, fleshie and brittle, a little hairy, and
of an ouerworne dark green color, among which rise low weak stalks, with
such like leaves as grow at the bottom, but smaller, bearing but here and
there a flower, of a bright reddish purple color, like in form unto the Corn
flowers, but much larger, with many threads or thrumes in the middle of the same
color, standing up higher then any of the former: this flower rises out of a
large scaly head, all set over with small sharp (but harmless) white
prickles: the seeds are blackish, like unto the Knapweedes, and larger then
any of the former Corn flowers: the root is great and thick, growing deep
into the ground, fleshie and full of a slimie or clammy juice, and easy to be
broken, blackish on the outside, and whitish within, enduring many years, like
as the other Knapweedes, or Matfelons do, growing in time to be very thick
and great.

The Place.
It grows naturally by the Sea side in Spain, from whence I received the
seeds of Guillaume Boel, and did abide well in my garden a long time, but is
now perished.

The Time.
It flowreth in the beginning of July, or thereabouts, and continues not long
in flower: but the head abides a great while, and is of some beauty after the
flower is past; yet seldom gives good seed with us.

The Names.
It has no other name then is set down in the title, being altogether a
Nouelist, and not now to be seen with any saving my self.

The Virtues.
We have not yet known any use hereof in Physic.

CHAP. LXXVI.
Cnicus siuc Carthamus sativus. Bastard or Spanish Saffron.
THere are two or three sorts of Cnicus or bastard Saffrons which I pass over,
as not fit for this Garden, and only set down this kind, whose flowers are
of a fairer and more lively color in our Country, then any has come over from
Spain, where they manure it for the profit they make thereof, serving for the
dying of Silk especially, and transporting great quantities to diverse
Countries. It has large broad leaves, without any pricks at all upon them in
our Country, growing upon the stalk, which is strong, hard, and round, with
shorter leaves thereon up to the top, where they are a little sharp pointed,
and prickly about the edges sometimes, which stalk rises three or four foot
high, and brancheth it self toward the top, bearing at the end of every
branch one great open scaly head, out of which thrusts out many gold yellow
threads, of a most orient shining color, which being gathered in a dry time,
and kept dry, will abide in the same delicate color that it bare when it was
fresh, for a very long time after: when the flowers past, the seed when it is
come to maturity, which is very seldom with us, is white and hard, somewhat
long, round, and a little cornered: the root is long, great, and woody, and
perishes quickly with the first frosts.

The Place.
It grows in Spain, and other hot Countries, but not wild, for that it is
accounted of the old Writers, Theophrastus and Dioscorides, to be a manured
plant.

The Time.
It flowreth with us not until August, or September sometimes, so that it
hardly gives ripe seed (as I said) neither is it of that force to purge,
which grows in these colder Countries, as that which comes from Spain, and
other places.

The Names.
The name Cnicus is derived from the Greeks, and Carthamus from the Arabians,
yet still sativus is added unto it, to show it is no wild, but a manured
plant, and sown every where that we know. Of some it is called Crocus
hortensis, and Sarasenicus, from the Italians which so call it. We call it in
English Bastard Saffron, Spanish Saffron, and Catalonia Saffron.

The Virtues.
The flowers are used in coloring meats, where it grows beyond Sea, and
also for the dying of Silks: the kernels of the seed are only used in
Physic with us, and serves well to purge melancholicke humors.

CHAP. LXXVII.
Carduus. Thistles.
YOu may somewhat marvel, to see me curious to plant Thistles in my Garden,
when as you might well say, they are rather plagues then pleasures, and more
trouble to weed them out, then to cherish them up, if I made therein no
distinction or choice; but when you have viewed them well which I bring in, I
will then abide your censure, if they be not worthy of some place, although it
be but a corner of the Garden, where something must needs be to fill up room.
Some of them are smooth, and without pricks at all, some at the heads only,
and some all over; but yet not without some especial note or mark worthy of
respect: Out of this discourse I leave the Artichoke, with all his kinds, and
reserve them for our Kitchen Garden, because (as all know) they are for the
pleasure of the taste, and not of the smell or sight.

1. Acanthus sativus. Garden Bears breech.
The leaves of this kind of smooth thistle (as it is accounted) are almost as
large as the leaves of the Artichoke, but not so sharp pointed, very deeply cut
in and gashed on both edges, of a sad green and shining color on the
vpperside, and of a yellowish green underneath, with a great thick rib in the
middle, which spread themselves about the root, taking up a great deal of
ground. After this plant has stood long in one place, and well defended from
the injury of the cold, it sends forth from among the leaves one or more
great and strong stalks, three or four foot high, without any branch at all,
bearing from the middle to the top many flowers one above another,
spike-fashion round about the stalk, with smaller but not divided green
leaves at every flower, which is white, and fashioned somewhat like unto a
gaping mouth; after which come broad, flat, thick, round, brownish yellow
seed (as I have well observed by them have been sent me out of Spain, and
which have sprung up, and do grow with me; for in our Country I could never
observe any seed to have grown ripe) the roots are composed of many great
and thick long strings, which spread far in and under the ground, somewhat
darkish on the outside, and whitish within, full of a clammy moisture (whereby
it shows to have much life) and do endure our Winters, if they be not too
much exposed to the sharp violence thereof, which then it will not endure, as
I have often found by experience.

2. Acanthus siluestris. Wild or prickly Bears breech.
This prickly Thistle has diverse long greenish leaves lying on the ground,
much narrower then the former, but cut in on both sides, thick set with many
white pricks and thorns on the edges: the stalk rises not up so high,
bearing diverse such like thornie leaves on them, with such a like head of
flowers on it as the former has: but the seed hereof (as it has come to us
from Italy and other places, for I never saw it bear seed here in this
Country) is black and round, of the bigness of a small pease: the root
abides reasonable well, if it be defended somewhat from the extremity of our
Winters, or else it will perish.

3. Eringium Pannonicum sieve Montanum. Hungary Sea Holly.
The lower leaves of this Thistle that lie on the ground, are somewhat large,
round, and broad, hard in handling, and a little snipt about the edges, every
one standing upon a long foote-stalke: but those that grow upon the stalk,
which is stiff, two or three foot high, have no foote-stalke, but encompasse
it, two being set at every joint, the top whereof is divided into diverse
branches, bearing small round rough heads, with smaller and more prickly leaves
under them, and more cut in on the sides then those below: out of these heads
rise many blew flowers, the foote-stalkes of the flowers, together with the
tops of the branches, are likewise blew and transparent, or shining.

Flore albo.
We have another of this kind, the whole tops of the stalks, with the heads
and branches, are more white then blew: the seed contained in these heads are
white, flat, and as it were chaffie: the root is great and whitish, spreading
far into many branches, and somewhat sweet in taste, like the ordinary Sea
Holly roots.

4. Carduus mollis. The gentle Thistle.
The leaves of this soft and gentle Thistle that are next unto the ground, are
green 1 ^canthus sativus. Garden Bears breech. 2 Acanthus siluestris. Wild
Bears breech. 3 Eringium Pann^nicum Mountain Sea Holly. 4 Carlina humilis.
The low Carline Thistle. 5 Carduus sphaerocephalus mayor. The greater
Globe-Thistle. 6 Carduus sphaerocephalus minor. The lesser Globe-Thistle. 7
Carduus Eriocaphalus. The Friars crown. 8 Fraxinella. Bastard Dittanie.
depiction of flowers on the vpperside, and hoary underneath, broad at the
bottom, somewhat long pointed, and unevenly notched about the edges, with some
soft hairie prickles, not hurting the handler, every one standing upon a short
foote-stalke; those that grow about the middle stalk are like the former, but
smaller and narrower, and those next the top smallest, where it divides it
self into small branches, bearing long and scaly heads, out of which break
many reddish purple threads: the seed is whitish and hard, almost as great as
the seed of the greater Centory: the root is blackish, spreading under the
ground, with many small fibers fastened unto it, and abides a great while.

5. Carlina humilis. The low Carline Thistle.
This low Thistle has many iagged leaves, of a whitish green color, armed
with small sharp white prickles round about the edges, lying round about the
root upon the ground, in the middle whereof rises up a large head, without any
stalk under it, compassed about with many small and long prickly leaves, from
among which the flower shows it self, composed of many thin, long, whitish,
hard shining leaves, standing about the middle, which is flat and yellow, made
of many thrums or threads like small flowers, wherein lie small long seed, of
a whitish or silver color: the root is somewhat aromaticall, blackish on the
outside, small and long, growing downwards into the ground. There is another
of this kind that bears a higher stalk, and a redder flower, but there is a
manifest difference between them.

6. Carduus Sphaerocephalus sieve Globosus mayor. The greater Globe Thistle.
The greatest of these beautiful Thistles, has at the first many large and
long leaves lying on the ground, very much cut in and divided in many places,
even to the middle ribbe, set with small sharp (but not very strong) thorns
or prickles at every corner of the edges, green on the vpperside, and whitish
underneath: from the middle of these leaves rises up a round stiff stalk,
three foot and a half high, or more, set without order with such like leaves,
bearing at the top of every branch a round hard great head, consisting of a
number of sharp bearded husks, compact or set close together, of a bluish
green color, out of every one of which husks start small whitish blew
flowers, with white threads in the middle of them, and rising above them, so
that the heads when they are in full flower, make a fine show, much delighting
the spectators: after the flowers are past, the seed increases in every one,
or the most part of the bearded husks, which do still hold their round form,
until that being ripe it opens it self, and the husks easily fall away one
from another, containing within them a long whitish kernel: the root is great
and long, blackish on the outside, and dies every year when it has borne
seed.

7. Carduus Globosus minor. The lesser Globe Thistle.
The lesser kind has long narrow leaves, whiter then the former, but cut in
and gashed on the edges very much with some small pricks on them; the stalk
is not half so long, nor the heads half so great, but as round, and with as
blew flowers as the greater: this seldom gives ripe seed, but recompenseth
that fault, in that the root perishes not as the former, but abides many
years.

8. Carduus Eriocephalus sieve Tomentosus. The Friars Crown.
This woolly Thistle has many large and long leaves lying on the ground, cut
in on both sides into many divisions, which are likewise somewhat unequally cut
in or divided again, having sharp white prickles at every corner of the
divisions, of a dead or sad green color on the vpperside, and somewhat woolly
withal, and grayish underneath: the stalk is strong and tall, four or five
foot high at the least, branching out into diverse parts, every where beset
with such like leaves as grow below; at the top of every branch there
breaks out a great whitish round prickly head, flattish at the top, so
thick set with wool, that the prickles seem but small spots or hairs, and
does so well resemble the bald crown of a Friar, not only before it be in
flower, but especially after it has done flowring, that thereupon it
deservedly received the name of the Friars Crown Thistle: out of these heads
rises forth a purple thrumme, such as is to be seen in many other wild
Thistles, which when they are ripe, are full of a flockie or woolly substance,
which break at the top shedding it, and the seed which is blackish, flat,
and smooth: the root is great and thick, enduring for some years, yet
sometimes perishing, if it be too much exposed to the violence of the frosts in
Winter.

The Place.
The first grows naturally in Spain, Italy, and France, and in many other
hot Countries, and grow only in Gardens in these colder climates, and there
cherished for the beautiful aspect both of the green plants, and of the
stalks when they are in flower. The Carline Thistle is found both in Germany
and Italy in many places, and as it is reported, in some places of the West
parts in England. The others are found some in France, some in Hungary, and on
the Alps, and the last in Spain.

The Time.
They do all flower in the Summer months, some a little earlier or later then
others.

The Names.
The first is called Acanthus sativus (because the other that is prickly, is
called siluestris or spinosus) and Branea vrsina; In English, Branck vrfine,
and Bears breech. The third is called Eringium montanum, Alpinum, and
Pannonicum latifolium: In English, Mountain or Hungary Sea Holly. The fourth
is called Carduus mollis, The gentle Thistle, because it has no harmfull
prickles, although it seem at the first show to be a Thistle. The fifth is
called of diverse Chamaeleo albus, and Carlina, as if they were both but one
plant; but Fabius Columna has in my judgment very learnedly descided that
controversy, making Carlina to be Ixine of Theophrastus, and Chamaeleo another
differing Thistle, which Gaza translateth Vernilago. We call it in English, The
Carline Thistle. The other have their names in their titles, as much as is
convenient for this discourse.

The Virtues.
The first has always been used Physically, as a mollifying herb among
others of the like slimie matter in Glisters, to open the body; yet Lob^l
seems to make no difference in the use of them both (that is, the prickly as
well as the smooth.) The Carline Thistle is thought to be good against poisons
and infection. The rest are not used by any that I know.

CHAP. LXXVIII.
Fraxinella. Bastard Dittany.
Having finished those pleasing Thistles, I come to other plants of more gentle
handling, and first bring to your consideration this bastard Dittany, whereof
there are found out two especial kinds, the one with a reddish, the other
with a whitish flower, and each of these has his diversity, as shall be
presently declared.

1. Fraxinella flore rubente. Bastard Dittany with a reddish flower.
This goodly plant rises up with diverse round, hard, brownish stalks, near
two foot high, the lower parts whereof are furnished with many winged leaves,
somewhat like unto Liquerice, or a small young Ash tree, consisting of seven,
nine, or eleven leaves set together, which are somewhat large and long, hard
and rough in handling, of a darkish green color, and of an unpleasant strong
resinous sent: the upper parts of the stalks are furnished with many flowers,
growing spike fashion, at certain distances one above another, consisting of
five long leaves a piece, whereof four that stand on the two sides, are
somewhat bending upwards, and the fifth hanging down, but turning up the end of
the leaf a little again, of a faint or pale red color, striped through every
leaf with a deeper red color, and having in the middle a tassell of five or
six long purplish threads, that bow down with the lower leaf, and turn up
also the ends again, with a little freese or thrume at the ends of every one:
after the flowers are past, arise hard, stiff, rough, clammy husks, horned or
pointed at the end, four or five standing together, somewhat like the seed
vessels of the Wolfes-banes, or Colombines, but greater, thicker and harder,
wherein is contained round shining black seed, greater then any Colombine
seed by much, and smaller then Peony seed: the root is white, large, and
spreading many ways under ground, if it stand long: the whole plant, as well
roots as leaves and flowers, are of a strong sent, not so pleasing for the
smell, as the flowers are beautiful to the sight.

2. Fraxinella flore rubro. Bastard Dittaine with a red flower.
This differs not from the former either in root, leaf or flower for the
form, but that the stalks and leaves are of a darker green color, and that
the flowers are of a deeper red color, (and growing in a little longer spike)
wherein the difference chiefly consists, which is sufficient to distinguish
them.

3. Fraxinella flore albo. Bastard Dittanie with a white flower.
The white flowred Fraxinella has his leaves and stalks of a fresher green
color then any of the former; and the flowers are of a pure white color, in
form differing nothing at all from the other.

4. Fraxinella flore albo caeruleo. Bastard Dittanie with an ash colored
flower.
The color of the flower of this Fraxinella only puts the difference
between this, and the last recited with a white flower: for this bears very
pale, or whitish blew flower, tending to an ash color.

The Place.
All these kinds are found growing naturally, in many places both of Germany,
and Italy: and that with the white flower, about Franckford, which being sent
me, perished by the way by long and evil carriage.

The Time.
They flower in June and July, and the seed is ripe in August.

The Names.
The name Fraxinella is most generally imposed on those plants, because of the
resemblance of them unto young Ashes, in their winged leaves. Yet some do call
them Dictamus albus, or Dictamnus albus, and Diptamus albus, as a difference
from the Dictamnus Creticus, which is a far differing plant. Some would have
it to be Tragium of Dioscorides, but beside other things wherein this differs
from Tragium, this yields no milkie juice, as Dioscorides says Tragium does:
We in English do either call it Fraxinella, or after the other corrupted name
of Dictamus, Bastard Dittanie.

The Virtues.
It is held to be profitable against the stingings of Serpents, against
contagious and pestilent diseases, to bring down the feminine courses, for the
pains of the belly and the stone, and in Epilepticall diseases, and other cold
pains of the brains: the root is the most effectual for all these, yet the
seed is sometimes used.

CHAP. LXXIX.
Legumina. Pulse.
IF I should describe unto you all the kinds of Pulse, I should unfold a
little world of varieties therein, more known and found out in these days,
then at any time before, but that must be a part of a greater work, which
will abide a longer time before it see the light. I shall only select those
that are fit for this garden, and set them down for your consideration. All
sorts of Pulse may be reduced under two general heads, that is, of Beans and
Pease, of each whereof there is both tame and wild: Of Beans, besides the
tame or usual garden Bean, and the French or Kidney Bean, (whereof I mean
to entreat in my Kitchen garden, as pertinent thereto) there is the Lupine or
flat Bean, whereof I mean to entreat here, and the black Bean and others
which must be reserved for the Physic Garden. And of the kinds of Pease
some are fit for this Garden; (whereunto I will adioyne two or three other
plants as nearest of affinity, the flowers of some, and the fruit of others
being delightful to many, and therefore fit for this garden) some for the
Kitchen, the rest for the Physic garden. And first of Lupines or flat Beans,
accepted as delightful to many, and therefore fit for this garden.

1. Lupinus sativus albus. The white garden Lupine.
The garden Lupine rises up with a great round stalk, hollow and somewhat
woolly, with diverse branches, whereon grow upon long footestalkes many broad
leaves, divided into seven or nine parts, or smaller leaves, equally standing
round about, as it were in a circle, of a whitish green color on the
vpperside, and more wholly underneath: the flowers stand many together at
several joints, both of the greater stalk, and the branches, like unto
beans, and of a white color in some places, and in others of a very bleake
blew tending to white: after the flowers are past, there come in their places,
long, broad, and flat rough cods, wherein are contained round and flat seed,
yellowish on the inside, and covered with a tough white skin, and very bitter
in taste: the roots are not very great, but full of small fibers, whereby it
fasteneth it self strongly in the ground, yet perishes every year, as all
the rest of these kinds do.

2. Lupinus caeruleus maximus. The greater blew Lupine.
The Stem or stalk of this Lupine is greater then the last before recited,
as also the leaves more soft and woolly, and the flowers are of a most perfect
blew color, with some white spots in the middle: the long rough greenish cods
are very great and large, wherein are contained hard, flat and round seed, not
so white on the outside as the former, but somewhat yellower, greater also, and
more rough or hard in handling.

3. Lupinus caeruleus minor. The lesser blew Lupine.
This kind of wild Lupine differs not in the form of leaf or flower from
the former, but only that it is much smaller, the leaves are greener, and have
fewer divisions in them: the flower is of as deep a blew color as the last;
the cods likewise are small and long, containing small round seed, not so flat
as the former, but more discolored or spotted on the outside, Minimus.
then the greater kind is. There is a lesser kind then this, not differing in
any thing from this, but that it is lesser.

4. Lupinus flore luteo. The yellow Lupine.
The yellow Lupine grows not usually so high, but with larger leaves then the
small blew Lupine; the flowers grow in two or three rundles or tufts, round
about the stalk and the branches at the joints, of a delicate fine yellow
color, like in fashion unto the other kinds, being larger then the last, but
nothing so large as the greater kinds, and of a fine small sent: the seed is
round, and not flat, but much about the form and bigness of the small blew,
or somewhat bigger, of a whitish color on the outside, spotted with many spots.

The Place.
The first grows in many places of Greece, and the Eastern Countries beyond
it, where it has been anciently cherished for their food, being often
watered to take away the bitterness. It grows also in these Western parts,
but still where it is planted. The great blew Lupine is thought to come from
beyond the parts of Persia, in Caramania. The lesser blew is found very
plentifully wild, in many places both of Spain and Italy. The last has been
brought us likewise out of Spain, whereas it is thought it grows naturally.
They all grow now in the gardens of those, that are curious lovers of these
delights.

The Time.
They flower in Summer, and their seed is ^ipe quickly after.

The Names.
They are generally called Lupini. Plautus in his time says, they were used in
Comedies in stead of money, when in any Scene thereof there was any show of
payment, and therefore he calls them Aurum Comicum. And Horace has this
Verse, Nec tamen ignorant, quid distent era Lupinis, to show that counterfeit
money (such as counters are with us, or as these Lupines were used in those
times) was easily known from true and current coin. In English we usually
call them after the Latin name, Lupines; and some after the Dutch name,
Figge-beanes, because they are flat and round as a Fig that is pressed; and
some Flat-beanes for the same reason. Some have called the yellow Lupine,
Spanish Violets: but other foolish names have been given it, as Virginia
Roses, and the like, by knauish Gardiners and others, to deceive men, and make
them believe they were the finders out, or great preseruers of rarities, of no
other purpose, but to cheat men of their money: as you would therefore avoid
knaves and deceivers, beware of these manner of people, whereof the skirts of
our town are too pitifully pestered.

The Virtues.
The first or ordinary Lupine does scour and cleanse the skin from spots,
morphew, blew marks, and other discolorings thereof, being used either in a
decoction or pont^er. We seldom use it in inward medicines, not that it is
dangerous, but of neglect, for formerly it has been much used for the worms,
etc.

1 Lupinus mayor. The great Lupine. 2 Lupinus lut^us. The yellow Lupine. 3
Lathyrus laetifolius seu Pisum pere^^^. Pease everlasting 4 Pisu^ quadratum.
The crimson blossomd or square Pease. 5 Medica cochleatae vulgaris Snailes or
Barbary buttons. 6 Medica spinosae. Prickly Snailes. 7 Medica spinosa altera.
Another sort o^ prickly Snailes. 8 Medica folliculo lato. Broad buttons o^
Snailes. 9 Medica Lunata. Half Moons. 10 Ho^^^^ clypeatum. The red Satin
flower, or French Honysuckle. 11 Scorpioides minus. The lesser Caterpiller. 12
Scorpioides maius. The greater Caterpiller. 13 Orobus Venetus. Blew upright
Pease everlasting.
depiction of flowers

1. Lathyrus latifolius, sieve Pisum perenne. Pease everlasting.
This kind of wild Pease that abides long, and grows every year greater
then other, springs up with many broad trayling branches, winged as it were
on both the sides, diversely divided into other smaller branches, at the
several joints whereof stand two hard, not broad, but somewhat long green
leaves, and diverse twining claspers, in sundry places with the leaves, from
between the branches and the leaves, at the joints toward the tops, come
forth diverse purplish pease like blossoms, standing on a long stem or
stalk, very beautiful to behold, and of a pretty sent or smell: after which
come small, long, thin, flat, hard skind cods, containing small round blackish
seed: the root is great and thick, growing down deep into the ground, of
the thickness sometimes of a man's arm, blackish on the outside, and whitish
within, with some branches and a few fibers annexed thereunto.

2. Orobus Venetus. Blew upright everlasting Pease.
This pretty kind of Pease blossom bears diverse slender, but upright green
branches somewhat cornered, two foot high or thereabouts, having at several
distances on both sides of them certain winged leaves, set together upon long
footestalkes one against another, consisting of six or eight leaves, somewhat
broad and pointed, and without any odd one at the end: at the joints toward
the tops, between the leaves and the stalks, come forth many flowers set
together at the end of a pretty long footestalke, of the fashion of the former
Pease blossom, but somewhat smaller, and of a purplish violet color: after
which come slender and long pointed pods rounder then they, wherein is
contained small round grayish pease: the root is black, hard or woody,
abiding after seed bearing as the former does, and shooting afresh every year.

3. Lathyrus annuus siliquis orobi. Party colored Cichelings.
This small Pulse or wild Pease, has two or three long slender winged
branches, with smaller leaves thereon then the former, and without any claspers
at all on them: the flowers stand single, every one by it self, or two at the
most together, the middle leaves whereof that close together are white, and the
upper leaves of a reddish purple color: after which come long round flattish
cods, bunched out in the several places where the seeds lie, like unto the
cods of Orobus or the bitter Vetch, but greater: the root is small and dies
every year.

4. Pisum quadratum. The crimson blossomd or square codded Pease.
This pretty kind of Pulse might very well for the form of the leaves, be
referred to the kinds of Lotus or Trefoiles: but because I have none of that
kindred to entreat of in this Work, I have thought fittest to place it here
before the Medica's, because both pods and seeds are like also. It has three
or four small weak stalks, divided into many branches, having two stalks of
leaves at every joint, and three small soft leaves standing on a very small
stalk, coming from the joints: the flowers stand for the most part two
together, of a perfect red or crimson color, like in form almost unto a Pease
blossom; after which come long thick and round cods, with two skins or
filmes, running all along the cod at the back or vpperside, and two other such
like filmes, all along the belly or under side, which make it seem four
square, wherein there lie round discolored Pease, somewhat smaller and harder
then ordinary Pease: the root is small and perishes every year.

5. Medica Cochleata vulgaris. Snailes or Barbary buttons.
The plant that bears these pretty toys for Gentlewomen, is somewhat like
unto a Three leafed grass or Trefoile, having many long trayling branches
lying upon the ground, whereon at diverse places are three small green leaves,
set together at the end of a little footestalke, each of them a little snipt
about the edges: at several distances, from the middle of these branches to
the ends of them, come forth the flowers, two for the most part standing
together upon a little footstalke, which are of a pale yellow color, very
small, and of the form of a Pease blossom: after which come smooth heads,
which are turned or writhen round, almost like a Snaile, hard and green at the
first, somewhat like a green button (from the forms of both which came their
names) but afterward growing whiter, more soft and open, wherein lies
yellowish round and flat seed, somewhat like unto the Kidney bean: the root
is small and stringie, dying down every year, and must be new sown in the
spring, if you desire to have it.

6. Medica spinosa mayor. Prickly or thorny Snailes, or Buttons.
This kind of Medica is in all things very like unto the former, both in the
long trayling branches, and three leaves always growing together, but a little
greater pale yellow flowers, and crooked or winding heads: but herein chiefly
consists the difference, that this kind has his heads or buttons harder, a
little greater, more closed together, and set with short and somewhat hard
prickles, all the head over, which being pulled open, have those prickles
standing on each side of the filme or skin, whereof the head consists,
somewhat like unto a fish bone, and in this kind goes all one way; in which
are contained such like seeds for the form, as are in the former, but great
and black, and shining withal.

7. Medica spinosa altera. Small thorney Buttons, or Snailes.
This other kind is also like unto the last described in all other things,
except in the heads or buttons, which are a little smaller, but set with longer
and softer pricks upon the filmes, and may easily be discerned to go both
forwards and backewards, one enterlacing within another, wherein are contained
such like flat and black shining seed, made after the fashion of a kidney, as
are in the former, but somewhat smaller: the root perishes in like manner
every year.

8. Medica lata. Broad Buttons.
This kind differs not from the first in leaf or flower, the fruit only
hereof is broad and flat, and not so much twined as it.

9. Medica Lunata. Half Moons.
This is also a kind of these Medicke fodders, having a trefoyle leaf and
yellow flowers like the former sorts, but both somewhat larger, the chiefest
different consists in the head or fruit, which is broad and flat, and not
twined like the rest, but abides half closed, resembling a half Moon (and
thereupon has assumed both the Latin and English name) wherein is contained
flat seed, kidney fashion like the former.

10. Hedysarum clypeatum. The red Satin flower.
This red flowred Fitchling, has many stalks of winged fair green leaves,
that is, of many set on both sides a middle ribbe, whereof that at the end is
the greatest of the rest: from the joints where the leaves stand, come forth
pretty long small stalks, bearing on them very many flowers, up to the top
one above another, of an excellent shining red or crimson color, very like
unto Satin of that color, and sometimes of a white color, (as Master William
Coys, a Gentleman of good respect in Essex, a great and ancient lover and
cherisher of these delights, and of all other rare plants, in his life time
assured me, he had growing in his garden at Stubbers by North Okenden) which
are somewhat large, and more closed together, almost flat and not open, as in
most of the other sorts: after the flowers are past, there come rough, flat,
round husks, somewhat like unto the old fashioned round bucklers without
pikes, three or four standing one upon or above another, wherein are contained
small brownish seed: the root perishes the same year it bears seed, for
oftentimes it flowreth not the first year it is sown.

11. Scorpioides maius and minus. Great and small Caterpillars.
Under one description I comprehend both these sorts of Scorpions grass, or
Caterpillars, or Worms, as they are called by many, whereof the greater has
been known but of late years; and join them to these pulses, not having a
fitter place where to insert them. It is but a small low plant, with branches
lying upon the ground, and somewhat long, broad, and hard leaves thereon, among
which come forth small stalks, bearing at the end for the most part, two small
pale yellowish flowers, like unto Tares or Vetches, but smaller, which turn
into writhed or crooked tough cods; in the greater sort they are much thicker,
rounder and whiter, and lesser wound or turned together then in the smaller,
which are slenderer, more winding, yet not closing like unto the Snailes, and
blacker more like unto a Caterpiller then the other, wherein are contained
brownish yellow seed, much like unto a Medica: the roots of both are small
and fibrous, perishing every year.

The Place.
These are found severally in diverse and several places, but we sow and plant
them usually to furnish our gardens.

The Time.
They do all flower about the months of June and July, and their seed is
ripe soon after: but the second is earlier then the rest.

The Names.
The first is called Clymenum of Matthiolus, and Lathyris of Lobel and others:
but Lathyris in Greek is Cataputia in Latin, which is our Spurge, far
differing from this Pulse; and therefore Lathyrus is more proper to distinguish
them asunder, that two plants so far unlike should not be called by one
name: this is also called Lathyrus latifolius, because there is another called
augustifolius, that differs from it also: It is most usually called with us,
Pisum perenne, and in English Pease blossom, or Pease everlasting. The second
is called by Clusius, Orobus venetus, because it was sent him from Venice, with
another of the same kind that bore white flowers; yet differs but little or
nothing from that kind he found in Hungary, that I think the several places
of their growing only cause them to bear several names, and to be the same in
deed. Although I yield unto Clusius the Latin name which does not
sufficiently content me; yet I have thought good to give it a differing
English name, according as it is in the title. The third, because I first
received it among other seeds from Spain, I have given it the name, as it is
entitled. The fourth is called of some Sand^lida Cretica, and Lotus siliquosus
flore rubello, Lotus tetragonolobus, Pisum rubrum, and Pisum quadratum: We
usually call it in English, Crimson Pease, or square Pease. The Medica
Cochleata is called of Dodonaeus Trifolium Cochleatum, but not judged to be the
true Medica. We call it in English, Medick fodder, Snailes Clauer, or as it is
in the title, and so the rest of the Medica's accordingly. The Hedysarum
clypeatum or Securidaca is called of Dodonaeus Onobrichis altera, and we in
English for the likeness, The red Satin flower, although some foolishly call
it, the red or French Honysuckle. The last is called by Lobel, Scorpioides
bupleurifolio, I have called it minus, because the greatest sort which came to
me out of Spain was not known unto him: in English they are generally called
Caterpillars.

The Virtues.
The Medica's are generally thought to feed cattle fat much more then the
Meadow Trefoile, or Clauer grass, and therefore I have known diverse Gentlemen
that have plowed up some of their pasture grounds, and sown them with the
seeds of some Medica's to make the experience. All the other sorts are
pleasures to delight the curious, and not any way profitable in Physic that I
know.

CHAP. LXXX.
Paeonia. Peonie.
THere are two principal kinds of Peonie, that is to say, the Male and the
Female. Of the male kind, I have only known one sort, but of the Female a
great many; which are thus to be distinguished. The Male his leaf is whole,
without any particular division, notch or dent on the edge, and his roots long
and round, divided into many branches, somewhat like to the roots of Gentian
or Elecampane, and not tuberous at all. The Female of all sorts has the leaves
divided or cut in on the edges, more or less, and has always tuberous
roots, that is, like clogs or Asphodill roots, with many great thick round
pieces hanging, or growing at the end of smaller strings, and all joined to the
top of the maine root.

1. Paeonia mas. The Male Peonie.
The Male Peonie rises up with many brownish stalks, whereon do grow winged
leaves, that is, many fair green, and sometimes reddish leaves, one set
against another upon a stalk, without any particular division in the leaf at
all: the flowers stand at the tops of the stalks, consisting of five or six
broad leaves, of a fair purplish red color, with many yellow threads in the
middle, standing about the head, which after rises to be the seed vessels,
divided into two, three or four rough crooked pods like horns, which when
they are full ripe, open and turn themselves down one edge to another backward,
showing within them diverse round black shining seed, which are the true seed,
being full and good, and having also many red or crimson grains, which are
lancke and idle, intermixed among the black, as if they are good seed,
whereby it makes a very pretty show: the roots are great, thick and long,
spreading in the ground, and running down reasonable deep.

2. Paeonia faemina vulgaris flore simplici. The ordinary single Female Peonie.
This ordinary Female Peonie has many stalks, with more store of leaves on
them then the Male kind has, the leaves also are not so large, but divided or
nicked diversely on the edges, some with great and deep, and others with
smaller cuts or divisions, and of a dark or dead green color: the flowers
are of a strong heady sent, most usually smaller then the male, and of a more
purple tending to a murrey color, with yellow thrumes about the head in the
middle, as the male kind has: the heads or horns with seed are like also but
smaller, the seed also is black, but less shining: the roots consist, as I
said, of many thick and short tuberous clogs, fastened at the ends of long
strings, and all from the head of the root, which is thick and short, and
tuberous also, of the same or the like sent with the male.

3. Paeonia faemina vulgaris flore pleno rubro. The double red Peonie.
This double Peonie as well as the former single, is so frequent in every
Garden of note, through every Country, that it is almost labor in vain to
describe it: but yet because I use not to pass over any plant so slightly, I
will set down the description briefly, in regard it is so common. It is very
like unto the former single female Peony, both in stalks and leaves, but that
it grows somewhat higher, and the leaves are of a fresher green color: the
flowers at the tops of the stalks are very large, thick, and double (no
flower that I know so fair, great, and double; but not abiding blown above
eight or ten days) of a more reddish purple color then the former female
kind, and of a sweeter sent: after these flowers are past, sometimes come good
seed, which being sown, bring forth some single flowers, and some double: the
roots are tuberous, like unto the former female.

4. Paeonia faemina flore carneo simplici. The single blush Peony.
The single blush Peony has his stalks higher, and his leaves of a paler or
whiter green color then the double blush, and more white underneath (so that
it is very probable it is of another kind, and not risen from the seed of the
double blush, as some might think) with many veins, that are somewhat
discolored from the color of the leaf running through them: the flowers are
very large and single, consisting of five leaves for the most part, of a pale
flesh or blush color, with an eye of yellow dispersed or mixed therewith,
having many whitish threads, tipped with yellow pendents standing about the
middle head: the roots are like the other female Peonies.

5. Paeonia faemina flore pleno albicante. The double blush Peony.
The double blush Peony has not his stalks so high as the double red, but
somewhat lower and stiffer, bearing such like winged leaves, cut in or divided
here and there in the edges, as all these female kinds are, but not so large
as the last: the flowers are smaller, and less double by a good deal then the
former double red, of a faint shining crimson color at the first opening, but
decaying or waxing paler every day: so that after it has stood long (for this
flower sheddeth not his leaves in a great while) it will change somewhat
whitish; and therefore diverse have ignorantly called it, the double white
Peony: the seeds, which sometimes it bears, and roots, are like unto the
former female kinds, but somewhat longer, and of a brighter color on the
outside.

6. Paeonia faemina Byzantina. The single red Peony of Constantinople.
This red Peony of Constantinople is very like in all things unto the double
red Peonie, but that the flowers hereof are single, and as large as the last,
and that is larger then either the single female, or the male kind, consisting
of eight leaves, of a deeper red color then either the single or double
Peonies, and not purplish at all, but rather of the color of an ordinary red
Tulipa, standing close and round together: the roots of this kind have longer
clogs, and not so short as of the ordinary female kind, and of a paler color
on the outside.

The Place.
All these Peonies have been sent or brought from diverse parts beyond the
Seas; they are endenized in our Gardens, where we cherish them for the beauty
and delight of their goodly flowers, as well as for their Physical virtues.

The Time.
They all flower in May, but some (as I said) abide a small time, and others
many weeks.

The Names.
The name Paeonia is of all the later Writers generally given to these plants,
although they have had diverse other names given by the elder Writers, as Rosae
fatuina, Idaeus dactylus, Aglaophotis, and others, whereof to set 1 Paeonia man
cum semine. The male Peony and the seed. 2 Paeonia faemina Byzantina. The
female red Peony of Constantinople. 3 Paeonia faemina flore pleno vulgaris. The
ordinary double Peony. 4 Paeonia flore pleno albicante. The double white Peony:
5 Helleborus vernus atrorubente flore. The early ^^ite Ellebor with a dark red
flower. 6 Helleborus niger verus. The Christmas flower. 7 Calceolus Mariae. Our
Ladies Slipper.
depiction of flowers down the causes, reasons, and errors, were to spend
more time then I intend for this work. We call them in English, Peonie, and
distinguish them according to their titles.

The Virtues.
The male Peony root is far above all the rest a most singular approved
remedy for all Epilepticall diseases, in English, The falling sickness (and
more especially the green root then the dry) if the disease be not too
inueterate, to be boiled and drunk, as also to hang about the necks of the
younger sort that are troubled herewith, as I have found it sufficiently
experimented on many by diverse. The seed likewise is of especial use for
women, for the rising of the mother. The seed of the female kind, as well as
the roots, are most usually sold, and may in want of the other be (and so are
generally) used.

CHAP. LXXXI.
Helleborus niger. Bears foot.
THere are three sorts of black Hellebor or Bears foot, one that is the true
and right kind, whose flowers have the most beautiful aspect, and the time of
his flowring most rare, that is, in the deep of Winter about Christmas, when
no other can be seen upon the ground: and two other that are wild or bastard
kinds, brought into many Gardens for their Physical properties; but I will
only join one of them with the true kind in this work, and leave the other
for another.

1. Helleborus niger verus. The true black Hellebor, or Christmas flower.
The true black Hellebor (or Bear foot as some would call it, but that name
does more fitly agree with the other two bastard kinds) has many fair green
leaves rising from the root, each of them standing on a thick round fleshly
stiff green stalk, about an hand breadth high from the ground, divided into
seven, eight, or nine parts or leaves, and each of them nicked or dented, from
the middle of the leaf to the pointward on both sides, abiding all the Winter,
at which time the flowers rise up on such short thick stalks as the leaves
stand on, every one by it self, without any leaf thereon for the most part,
or very seldom having one small short leaf not much under the flower, and
very little higher then the leaves themselves, consisting of five broad white
leaves, like unto a great white single Rose (which sometimes change to be
either less or more purple about the edges, as the weather or time of
continuance does effect) with many pale yellow thrummes in the middle, standing
about a green head, which after grows to have diverse cods set together,
pointed at the ends like horns, somewhat like the seed vessels of the
Aconitum hyemale, but greater and thicker, wherein is contained long, round,
and blackish seed, like the seed of the bastard kinds: the roots are a
number of brownish strings running down deep into the ground, and fastened to
a thick head, of the bigness of a finger at the top many times, and
smaller still downwards.

2. Helleboraster minor. The lesser bastard black Hellebor, or Bear foot.
The smaller Bear foot is in most things like unto the former true black
Hellebor; for it bears also many leaves upon short stalks, divided into many
leaves also, but each of them are long and narrow, of a blacker green color,
snipt or dented on both edges, which feel somewhat hard or sharp like
pricks, and perish every year, but rise again the next Spring: the flowers
hereof stand on higher stalks, with some leaves on them also, although but
very few, and are of a pale green color, like in form unto the flowers of
the former, but smaller, having also many greenish yellow threads or thrums in
the middle, and such like heads or seed vessels, and blackish seed: the roots
are stringie and blackish like the former.

The Place.
The first grows only in the Gardens of those that are curious, and delight
in all sorts of beautiful flowers in our Country, but wild in many places of
Germany, Italy, Greece, etc.

The other grows wild in many places of England, as well as the other
greater sort, which is not here described; for besides diverse places within
eight or ten miles from London, I have seen it in the Woods of
Northamptonshire, and in other places.

The Time.
The first of these plants does flower in the end of December, and beginning of
January most usually, and the other a month or two after, and sometime more.

The Names.
The first is called Helleborus, or Elleborus niger verus, and is the fame that
both Theophrastus and Dioscorides have written of, and which was called
Melampodion, of Melampus the Goateheard, that purged and cured the mad or
melancholicke daughters of Praetus with the roots thereof. Dodonaeus calls
it Veratrum nigrum primum, and the other secundum: We call it in English, The
true black Hellebor, or the Christmas flower, because (as I said) it is most
commonly in flower at or before Christmas. The second is a bastard or wild
kind thereof, it so nearely resembles the true, and is called of most of the
later Writers, Pseudoelleborus niger minor, or Helleboraster minor, for a
distinction between it and the greater, which is not here described: and is
called in English, The smaller or lesser Bear foot, and most used in
Physic, because it is more plentiful, yet is more churlish and strong in
operation then the true or former kind.

The Virtues.
The roots of both these kinds are safe medecines, being rightly prepared, to
be used for all Melancholicke diseases, whatsoever others may fear or write,
and may be without danger applied, so as care and skill, and not temerary
rashness do order and dispose of them.

The powder of the dried leaves, especially of the bastard kind, is a sure
remedy to kill the worms in children, moderately taken.

CHAP. LXXXII.
Elleborus albus. White Ellebor or Neesewort.
THere are two sorts of great white Ellebors or Neeseworts, whereas there was
but one kind known to the Ancients; the other being found out of later days:
And although neither of both these have any beauty in their flowers, yet
because their leaves, being fair and large, have a goodly prospect, I have
inserted them in this place, that this Garden should not be unfurnished of
them, and you not unacquainted with them.

1. Elleborus albus vulgaris. White Ellebor or Neesing root.
The first great white Ellebor rises at the first out of the ground, with a
whitish green great round head, which growing up, opens it self into many
goodly fair large green leaves, plaited or ribbed with eminent ribs all
along the leaves, compassing one another at the bottom, in the middle whereof
rises up a stalk three foot high or better, with diverse such like leaves
thereon, but smaller to the middle thereof; from whence to the top it is
divided into many branches, having many small yellowish, or whitish green
starre-like flowers all along upon them, which after turn into small, long,
three square whitish seed, standing naked, without any husk to contain them,
although some have written otherwise: the root is thick and reasonable great
at the head, having a number of great white strings running down deep into
the ground, whereby it is strongly fastened.

2. Elleborus albus praecox sieve atrorubente flore. The early white Ellebor
with reddish flowers.
This other Ellebor is very like the former, but that it springs up a month
at the least before it, and that the leaves are not fully so thick or so much
plaited, but as large or larger, and do sooner perish and fall away from the
plant: the stalk hereof is as high as the former, bearing such like starry
flowers, but of a dark or blackish red color: the seed is like the other:
the root has no such head as the other (so far as I have observed, both by
mine own and others plants) but has many long white strings fastened to the
top, which is as it were a long bulbous scaly head, out of which spring the
leaves.

The Place.
The first grows in many places of Germany, as also in some parts of Russia,
in that abundance, by the relation of that worthy, curious, and diligent
searcher and preserver of all natures rarities and varieties, my very good
friend, John Tradescante, often heretofore remembered, that, as he said, a good
ship might be laden with the roots hereof, which he saw in an Island there.

The other likewise grows in the vpland woody grounds of Germany, and other
the parts thereabouts.

The Time.
The first springs up in the end or middle of March, and flowreth in June.
The second springs in February, but flowreth not until June.

The Names.
The first is called Elleborus albus, or Helleborus albus, the letter H, as all
Scholars know, being but aspirationis nota: and Veratrum album flore
viridante, of some Sanguis Herculis. The other is called Elleborus albus
praecox, and flore atrorubente, or atropurpurante. We call the first in
English, White Ellebor, Neesewort, or Neesing root, because the powder of the
root is used to procure neesing; and I call it the greater, in regard of those
in the next Chapter. The other has his name according to the Latin title,
most proper for it.

The Virtues.
The force of purging is far greater in the root of this Ellebor, then in
the former; and therefore is not carelessly to be used, without extreme
danger; yet in contumatious and stubborn diseases it may be used with good
caution and advice. There is a Syrup or Oxymel made hereof in the Apothecaries
shops, which as it is dangerous for gentle and tender bodies, so it may be very
effectual in stronger constitutions. Pausanias in Phocicis, records a
notable stratagem that Solon used in besieging the City of Cirrheus, viz. That
having cut off the river Plistus from running into the City, he caused a great
many of these roots to be put into a quantity thereof, which after they had
steeped long enough therein, and was sufficiently infected therewith, he let
pass into the City again: whereof when they had greedily drunk, they grew
so weak and feeble by the superpurgation thereof, that they were forced to
leave their walls vnmand, and not guarded, whereby the Amphyctions their enemies
became masters of their City. The like stratagems are set down by diverse
others Authors, performed by the help of other herbs.

CHAP. LXXXIII.
Elleborine. Small or wild white Ellebor.
THe likeness of the leaves of these plants, rather then any other faculty
with the former white Ellebor, has caused them to be called Elleborine, as if
they were smaller white Ellebors. And I for the same cause have joined them
next, whereof there are found many sorts: One which is the greater kind, is of
greatest beauty; the other which are lesser differ not much one from another,
more then in the color of the flowers, whereof I will only take three, being
of the most beauty, and leave the rest to another work.

1. Helleborine vel Elleborine mayor, sieve Calceolus Mariae. Our Ladies Slipper.
This most beautiful plant of all these kinds, rises up with diverse stalks,
a foot and a half high at the most, bearing on each side of them broad green
leaves, somewhat like in form unto the leaves of the white Ellebor, but
smaller and not so ribbed, compassing the stalk at the lower end; at the tops
of the stalks come forth one, or two, or three flowers at the most, one above
another, upon small short foote-stalkes, with a small leaf at the foot of
every stalk: each of these flowers are of a long ouall form, that is, more
long then round, and hollow withal, especially at the upper part, the lower
being round and swelling like a belly: at the hollow part there are two small
pieces like ears or flippers, that at the first do cover the hollow part, and
after stand apart one from another, all which are of a fine pale yellow color,
in all that I have seen (yet it is said there are some found, that are more
brown or tending to purple) there are likewise four long, narrow, dark
colored leaves the setting on of the flower unto the stalk, wherein as it
were the flower at the first stands: the whole flower is of a pretty small
sent: the seed is very small, very like unto the seed of the Orchides or
Satyrions, and contained in such like long pods, but bigger: the roots are
composed of a number of strings enterlacing themselves one within another,
lying within the upper crust of the earth, and not spreading deep, of a dark
brownish color.

2. Elleborine minor flore albo. The small or wild white Ellebor with a white
flower.
This smaller wild white Ellebor rises up in the like manner unto the former,
and not much lower, bearing such like leaves, but smaller, and of a whiter
green color, almost of the color and fashion of the leaves of Lilly
Conually; the top of the stalk has many more flowers, but lesser, growing
together, spike-fashion, with small short leaves at the stalk of every flower,
which consists of five small white leaves, with a small close hood in the
middle, without any sent at all: the seed and seed vessels are like unto the
former, but smaller: the roots are many small strings, dispersing themselves
in the ground.

3. Elleborine minor flore purpurante. The small or wild white Ellebor with
blush flowers.
The leaves of this kind are like unto the last described, but somewhat
narrower: the stalks and flowers are alike, but smaller also, and of a pale
purplish or blush color, which causes the difference.

The Place.
The first grows in very many places of Germany, and in other Countries also.
It grows likewise in Lancashire, near upon the border of Yorkshire, in a
wood or place called the Helkes, which is three miles from Ingleborough, the
highest Hill in England, and not far from Ingleton, as I am informed by a
courteous Gentlewoman, a great lover of these delights, called Mistress Thomasin
Tunstall, who dwells at Bull-banke, near Hornby Castle in those parts, and
who has often sent me up the roots to London, which have borne fair flowers
in my Garden. The second grows in many places of England, and with the same
Gentlewoman also before remembered, who sent me one plant of this kind with the
other. The last I have not yet known to grow in England; but no doubt many
things do lie hid, and not observed, which in time may be discovered, if our
Country Gentlemen and women, and others, in their several places where they
dwell, would be more careful and diligent, and be advertised either by
themselves, or by others capable and fit to be employed, as occasion and time
might serve, to find out such plants as grow in any the circuits or limits of
their habitations, or in their travels, as their pleasures or affairs lead
them. And because ignorance is the chief cause of neglect of many rare things,
which happen to their view at sometimes, which are not to be seen again
peradventure, or not in many years after, I would heartily advise all men of
means, to be stirred up to bend their minds, and spend a little more time and
travel in these delights of herbs and flowers, then they have formerly done,
which are not only harmless, but pleasurable in their time, and profitable in
their use. And if any would be better informed, and certified of such things
they know not, I would be willing and ready to my best skill to advertise them,
that shall send any thing up to me where I dwell in London. Thus far I have
digressed from the matter in hand, and yet not without some good use I hope,
that others may make of it.

The Time.
The two first flower earlier then the last, and both the first about one time,
that is, in the end of April, or beginning of May. The last in the end of May,
or in June.

The Names.
The first is called Elleborine recentiorum mayor, and Calceolus Mariae: Of
some thought to be Cosmosandalos, because it is Sandali forma. In English* we
call it our Ladies Slipper, after the Dutch name. The other two lesser kin^^
have their names in their titles: I have thought it fit to add the title of
small white Ellebors unto these, for the form sake, as is before said.

The Virtues.
There is no use of these in Physic in our days that I know.

CHAP. LXXXIIII.
Lilium Conuallium. Lilly Conually.
THe remembrance of the Conuall Lilly, spoken of in the precedent Chapter, has
caused me to insert these plants among the rest, although differing both in
face and properties; but lest it should lose all place, let it keep this. It
is of two sorts, differing chiefly in the color of the flowers, the one being
white, and the other reddish, as shall be showed in their descriptions
following.

1. Lilium Conuall^um flore albo. The white Lilly Conually.
The white Conuall or May Lilly, has three or four leaves rising together
from the root, one enclosed within another, each whereof when it is open is
long and broad, of a grayish shining green color, somewhat resembling the
leaves of the former wild Neesewort, at the side whereof, and sometime from
the middle of them, rises up a small short naked foote-stalke, an hand breadth
high or somewhat more, bearing at the top one above another many small white
flowers, like little hollow bottles with open mouths, nicked or cut into five
or six notches, turning all downwards one way, or on one side of the stalk,
of a very strong sweet sent, and comfortable for the memory and senses, which
turn into small red berries, like unto Asparagus, wherein is contained hard
white seed: the roots run under ground, creeping every way, consisting of
many small white strings.

2. Lilium Conuallium flore rubente. May Lillies with red flowers.
This other May Lilly differs neither in root, leaf, nor form of flower
from that before, but only in the color of the flower, which is of a fine
pale red color, being in my judgment not altogether so sweet as the former.

The Place.
The first grows abundantly in many places of England. The other is a
stranger, and grows only in the Gardens of those that are curious lovers of
rarities.

The Time.
They both flower in May, and the berries are ripe in August.

The Names.
The Latins have no other name for this plant but Lilium Conuallium, although
some would have it to be Lilium vernum of Theophrastus, and others Oenanthe of
the same Author. Gesner thinks it to be Callionymus. Lonicerus to be Cacalia,
and Fuchsius to be Ephemerum non lethale: but they are all for the most part
mistaken. We call it in English Lilly Conually, May Lilly, and of some
Liriconfancie.

The Virtues.
The flowers of the white kind are often used with those things that help to
strengthen the memory, and to procure ease to Apoplecticke persons. Camerarius
sets down the manner of making an oil of the flowers hereof, which he
says is very effectual to ease the pains of the Gout, and such like
diseases, to be used outwardly, which is thus: Having filled a glass with the
flowers, and being well stopped, set it for a months space in an Ants hill,
and after being drayned clear, set it by to use.

CHAP. LXXXV.
Gentiana. Gentian or Fell-wort.
THere are diverse sorts of Gentians or Fell-wortes, some greater, others
lesser, and some very small; many of them have very beautiful flowers, but
because some are very suddenly past, before one would think they were blown
open, and others will abide no culture and manuring, I will only set forth
unto you two of the greater sorts, and three of the lesser kinds, as fittest,
and more familiarly furnishing our gardens, leaving the rest to their wild
habitations, and to be comprehended in a general Work.

1. Gentiana mayor flore flauo. The great Gentian.
The great Gentian rises up at the first, with a long, round and pointed head
of leaves, closing one another, which after opening themselves, lie upon the
ground, and are fair, long and broad, somewhat plaited or ribbed like unto the
leaves of white Ellebor or Neeseworte, but not so fairly or eminently plaited,
neither so stiff, but rather resembling the leaves of a great Plantane: from
among which rises up a stiff round stalk, three foot high or better, full
of joints, having two such leaves, but narrower and smaller at every joint, so
compassing about the stalk at the lower end of them, that they will almost
hold water that falls into them: from the middle of the stalk to the top,
it is garnished with many coronets or rundles of flowers, with two such green
leaves likewise at every joint, and wherein the flowers do stand, which are
yellow, laid open like stars, and rising out of small greenish husks, with
some threads in the middle of them, but of no sent at all, yet stately to
behold, both for the order, height and proportion of the plant: the seed is
brown and flat, contained in round heads, somewhat like unto the seed of the
Fritillaria, or checkerd Daffodill, but browner: the roots are great, thick
and long, yellow, and exceeding bitter.

2. Gentiana mayor folio Asclepiadis. Swallow-wort Gentian.
This kind of Gentian has many stalks rising from the root, near two foot
high, whereon grow many fair pale green leaves, set by couples, with three
ribs in every one of them, and do somewhat resemble the leaves of Asclepias or
Swallow-wort, that is, broad at the bottom, and sharp at the point: the
flowers grow at the several joints of the stalks, from the middle upwards,
two or three together, which are long and hollow, like unto a bell flower,
ending in five corners, or pointed leaves, and folded before they are open, as
the flowers of the Bindeweedes are, of a fair blew color, sometimes deeper,
and sometimes paler: the heads or seed vessels have two points or horns at
the tops, and contain within them flat grayish seed, like unto the former,
but less: the roots hereof are nothing so great as the former, but are
yellow, small and long, of the bigness of a man's thumb.

3. Gentiana minor Cruciata. Crosse-wort Gentian.
This small Gentian has many branches lying upon the ground, scarce lifting
themselves upright, and full of joints, whereat grow usually four leaves, one
op^^^^ unto another, in manner of a Cross, from whence it took his name, in
shape v^ (...) unto Saponaria or Sopewort, but shorter, and of a darker green
color: at the tops of the stalks stand many flowers, thick thrusting
together, and likewise at the next joint underneath, every one of them standing
in a dark bluish green husk, and consisting of five small leaves, the
points or ends whereof only appear above the husks wherein they stand, and
are hardly to be seen, but that they are of a fine pale blew color, and that
many grow together: the seed is small and brown, hard, and somewhat 1 Lilium
Conuallium. Liriconfancy or Lilly Conually. 2 Gentiana mayor. The great
Gentian. 3 Gentian^lla verna. Small Gentian of the Spring. 4 Gentiana Cruciata.
Crossewort Gentian. 5 Pneumonanthe seu Gentiana Autumnalis^ Autumn Gentian. 6
Sapanaria flore duplici. Double flowred Sopewort. 7 Plantago Rosea. Rose
Platane.
depiction of flowers like unto the seed of the Marian Violets, or Couentry
bells: the roots are small and whitish, dispersing themselves diversely in the
ground, of as bitter a taste almost as the rest.

4. Gentianella Verna. Small Gentian of the Spring.
The small Gentian of the Spring has diverse small hard green leaves, lying
upon the ground, as it were in heads or tufts, somewhat broad below, and
pointed at the end, with five ribs or veins therein, as conspicuous as in the
former Gentians, among which rises up a small short stalk, with some smaller
leaves thereon, at the top whereof stands one fair, large, hollow flower,
made bell fashion, with wide open brimmes, ending in five corners or divisions,
of the most excellent deep blew color that can be seen in any flower, with
some what spots in the bottom on the inside: after the flower is past, there
appear long and round pods, wherein are contained small blackish seed: the
roots are small, long, pale yellow strings, which shoot forth here and there
diverse heads of leaves, and thereby increase reasonable well, if it find a fit
place, and ground to grow, or else will not be noursed up, with all the care
and diligence can be used: the whole plant is bitter, but not so strong as the
former.

5. Gentiana Autumnalis sieve Pneumonanthe. Calathian Violet or Autumn Gentian.
This Gentian that flowreth in Autumn, has in some places higher stalks then
in others, with many leaves thereon, set by couples as in other Gentians, but
long and narrow, yet showing the three ribs or veins that are in each of
them: the tops of the stalks are furnished every one with a flower or two,
of an excellent (...) ^urple color, ending in five corners, and standing in
long husks: the roots are somewhat great at the top, and spreading into many
small yellow strings, bitter as the rest are.

6. Saponaria flore duplici. Double flowred Sopeworte.
Unto these kinds of Gentians, I must needs add these following plants, for
that the former is of some near resemblance in leaf with some of the former.
And because the ordinary Sopeworte or Bruiseworte with single flowers is often
planted in Gardens, and the flowers serve to deck both the garden and the
house; I may under the one describe them both: for this with double flowers is
far more rare, and of greater beauty. It has many long and slender round
stalks, scarce able to sustain themselves, and stand upright, being full of
joints and ribbed leaves at them, every one somewhat like a small Gentian or
Plantane leaf: at the tops of the stalks stand many flowers, consisting of
two or three rows of leaves, of a whitish or pale purple color, and of a
strong sweet sent, somewhat like the smell of Iasmin flowers, standing in long
and thick pale green husks, which fall away without giving any seed, as
most other double flowers do that increase by the root, which spreads
within the ground, and rises up in sundry distant places like the single.

7 Plantago Rosea. Rose Plantane.
This other plant is in all things like unto the ordinary Plantane or Ribworte,
that grows wild abroad in many places, whose leaves are very large: but in
stead of the long slender spike, or ear that the ordinary has, this has
either a thick long spike of small green leaves upon short stalks, or els^ a
number of such small g^ (...) leaves laid round-wise like unto a Rose, and
sometime^ both these may be seen^ (...) one and the same root, at one and the
same time, which abide a great while fres^ (...) the root, and sometims also
gives seed, especially from the more long and slender spikes.

The Place.
Some of these Gentians grow on the tops of hills, and some on the sides and
foot of them in Germany and other Countries: some of them also upon barren
heaths in those places, as also in our own Country, especially the Autumn
Gentian, and as it is reported, the Vernall likewise. The single or ordinary
Sopeworte is found wild in many places with us, but the double came to us from
beyond the Sea, and ^s scarce known or heard of in England. The Rose Plantaine
has been long in England, but whether natural thereof or no, I am not
assured.

The Time.
They flower for the most part in June and July, but the small Gentian of the
Spring flowreth somewhat earlier, and that of the Autumn in August and
September.

The Names.
Gentiana is the general name given to the Gentians. We call them in English
Gentian, Fellworte, Bitterwort, and Baldmoney. Saponarta takes his name from
the scouring quality it has: We call it in English Sopewort, and in some
places Bruisewort. Some have thought it to be Struthium of Dioscorides, or at
least have used it for the same causes, but therein they are greatly d^ceiued,
as Matthiolus has very well observed thereon, and so is Dodonaeus, that
thought it to be Alisma. The Rose Plantaine is so called of the double spikes
it carries.

The Virtues.
The wonderful wholsomnesse of Gentian cannot be easily known to us, by
reason our dainty tastes refuse to take thereof, for the bitterness sake: but
otherwise it would undoubtedly work admirable cures, both for the liver,
stomach and lunges. It is also a special counterpoison against any infection,
as also against the violence of a mad dogs tooth: wild Sopewort is used in
many places, to scour the country women's treen, and pewter vessels, and
physically some make great boast to perform admirable cures in Hydropicall
diseases, because it is diureticall, and in Lue Veneria, when other Mercuriall
medicines have failed. The Rose Plantaine no doubt has the same qualities that
the ordinary has.

CHAP. LXXXVI.
Campanula. Bell-flowers.
Under the title of Bell-flowers are to be comprehended in this Chapter, not
only those that are ordinarily called Campanula, but Viola Mariana, and
Trachelium also, whereof the one is called Couentry, the other Canterbury Bells.

1. Campanula Persicifolio alba, vel caerulea. Peach-leafed Bell-flowers white
or blew.
The Peach-leafed Bell-flower has many tufts, or branches of leaves lying upon
the g^^^^d, which are long and narrow, somewhat like unto the leaf of an
Almond or P^^ch tree, being finely nicked about the edges, and of a sad green
color, from among which rise up diverse stalks, two foot high or more, set
with leaves to the middle, and from thence upwards, with many flowers standing
on several small footestalkes, one above another, with a small leaf at the
foot of every one: the flowers stand in small green husks, being small and
round at the bottom, but wider open at the brimme, and ending in five corners,
with a three forked clapper in the middle, set about with some small threads
tipped with yellow, which flowers in some plants are pure white, and in others of
a pale blew or watchet color, having little or no sent at all: the seed is
small, and contained in round flat heads, or seed vessels: the root is very
small, white and threddy, creeping under the upper crust of the ground, so that
oftentimes the heat and drought of the Summer will go near to parch and wither
it utterly: it requires therefore to be planted in some shadowie place.

2. Campanula mayor, sieve Pyramidalis. The great or steeple Bell-flower.
This great Bell-flower has diverse stalks, three foot high or better,
whereon grow diverse smooth, dark, green leaves, broad at the bottom, and
small at the point, somewhat unevenly notched about the edges, and standing
upon longer footestalkes below then those above: the flowers are blew, and in
some white, not so great or large as the former, but near of the ^ame fashion,
growing thicker and more plentifully together, with smaller leaves among them,
bushing thick below, and rising smaller and thinner up to the top, in
fashion of a Pyramid or speere Steeple: the root is thick and whitish,
yielding more store of milk being broken (as the leaves and stalks also do)
then any other of the Bell-flowers, every one whereof do yield milk, some
more and some less.

3. Viola Mariana flore albido vel purpureo. Couentry Bells white or purple.
The leaves of Couentry Bells are of a pale or fresh green color, long, and
narrow next unto the bottom, and broader from the middle to the end, and
somewhat round pointed, a little hairy all over, and snipt about the edges: the
stalks rise up the year after the sowing, being somewhat hairy also, and
branching forth from the root, into diverse parts, whereon stand diverse leaves,
smaller then the former, and of a darker green color: at the end of every
branch stand the flowers, in green husks, from whence come large, round,
hollow Bells, swelling out in the middle, and rising somewhat above it, like the
neck of a pot, and then ending in five corners, which are either of a fair or
faint white, or of a pale blew purplish color, and sometimes of a deeper
purple or violet: after the flowers are past, there rise up great square, or
cornered seed vessels, wherein is contained in diverse divisions, small, hard,
shining, brown, flat seeds: the root is white, and being young as in the
first years sowing, is tender, and often eaten as other Rampions are; but the
next year, when it runs up to seed, it grows hard, and perishes: so
that it is to be continued by every other years sowing.

4. Trachelium maius flore albo vel purpureo. Great Canterbury Bells white or
purple.
The greater Canterbury Bells, or Throateworte, has many large rough leaves,
somewhat like unto Nettle leaves, being broad and round at the bottom, and
pointed at the end, notched or dented on the edges, and every one standing on a
long footstalk: among these leaves rise up diverse square rough stalks, divided
at the top into diverse branches, whereon grow the like leaves as grow below,
but lesser; toward the ends of the branches stand the flowers, mixed with some
longer leaves, every one in his several husk, which are hollow, long and
round, like a bell or cup, wide open at the mouth, and cut at the brimme into
five corners, or divisions, somewhat lesser then the Couentry Bells, in some of
a pure white, and others of a fair deep purple violet col^^^ and sometimes
paler: after the flowers are past, come smaller and rounder he^^^ then in the
former, containing flat seed, but blacker, and not so red as the la^^: the
root is hard and white, dispersing it self into many branches under ground,
not perishing every year as the former (although it loses all the leaves in
winter) but abiding many years, and increasing into diverse heads or knobs,
from whence spring new leaves and branches.

1 Campanula persicifolia. Peach leafed Bell-flower. 2 Trachelium maius
simplex. Canterbury Bells. * Trachelium flore duplici. Double Canterbury Bells. 3
Viola Mariana. Couentry Bells. 4 Trachelium Giganteum. Giants Throatewort. 5
Trachelium minus. The lesser Throatewort. 6 Trachel^um Americanum sieve
Cardinalis planta. The rich crimson Cardinals flower.
depiction of flowers

5. Trachelium maius flore duplici albo and caeruleo. Canterbury Bells with
double flowers both white and blew.
Of this kind of Throateworte or Canterbury Bells, there is another sort, not
differing in any thing from the former, but in the doubleness of the flower:
For there is of both the kinds, one that bears double white flowers, and the
other blew: Of each whereof I received plants from friends beyond the Sea,
which grow well with me.

6. Trachelium Giganteum flore purpurante. Pale purple Giants Throateworte.
This Bell-flower, although it has a Gigantine name, yet did I never perceive
it in my Garden, to rise up h gher then the former, the epithet being in my
persuasion, only given for difference sake: the leaves whereof are not so
rough, but as large, and dented about the edges, somewhat larger pointed, and
of a fresher green color: the stalks bear such like leaves on them, but
more thinly or dispersedly set, having a flower at the setting on of every one
of the leaves, from the middle upwards, and are somewhat like the great
Throateworte in form* but of a pale or bleake reddish purple color, turning
the brims or corners a little backwards, with a forked clapper in the middle,
sufficient eminent and yellow: the seed hereof is white, and plentiful in the
heads, which will abide all the winter upon the stalks, until all the seed
being shed, the heads remaining seem like torn rags, or like thin pieces of
skin, eaten with worms: the root is great, thick and white, abiding long
without perishing.

Flore albo.
There is another which differs not any thing but in the flower, which is
white.

7. Trachelium minus flore albo and purpureo. Small Throateworte or Canterbury
Bells both white and purple.
The lesser Throateworte has smaller leaves, nothing so broad or hard as the
former great kind, but long, and little or nothing dented about the edges: the
stalks are square and brownish, if it bear purple flowers, and green if it
bear white flowers, which in form are alike, and grow in a bush or tuft,
thick set together, more then any of the former, and smaller also, being not
much bigger then the flowers of the field, or garden Rampions: the root is
lasting, and shoots afresh every year.

8. Trachelium Americarum flore ruberrimo, sieve Planta Cardinalis. The rich
crimson Cardinals flower.
This brave plant, from a white root spreading diverse ways under ground,
sends forth many green leaves, spread round about the head thereof, each
whereof is somewhat broad and long, and pointed at the end, finely also snipt
about the edges: from the middle whereof arises up a round hollow stalk, two
foot high at the least, beset with diverse such leaves as grow below, but
longer below then above, and branching out at the top abundantly, every
branch bearing diverse green leaves on them, and one at the foot of every of
them also, the tops whereof do end in a great large tuft of flowers, with a
small green leaf at the foot of the stalk of every flower, each footestalke
being about an inch long, bearing a round green husk, divided into five long
leaves or points turned downwards, and in the midst of every of them a most
rich crimson colored flower, ending in five long narrow leaves, standing all
of t^^m foreright, but three of them falling down, with a long vmbone set as
it were at the back of them, bigger below, and smaller above, and at the top
a small head, being of a little paler color then the flower, but of no sent or
smell at all, commendable only for the great bush of so orient red crimson
flowers: after the flowers are past, the seed comes in small heads, closed
within those green husks that held the flowers, which is very like unto the
seed vessels of the Viola Mariana, or Couentry Bells, and is small and brownish.

The Place.
All these Bell-flowers do grow in our Gardens, where they are cherished for
the beauty of their flowers. The Couentry Bells do not grow wild in any of
the parts about Couentry, as I am credibly informed by a faithful Apothecary
dwelling there, called Master Brian Ball, but are noursed in Gardens with them,
as they are in other places. The last grows near the river of Canada, where
the French plantation in America is seated.

The Time.
They flower from May until the end of July or August, and in the mean time
the seed is ripe: But the Peache-leafed Bell-flowers, for the most part, flower
earlier then the other.

The Names.
The first is generally called Campanula Persicifolia, in English Peach-leafed
Bell-flower. The second is called Campanula mayor, Campanula lactescens
Pyramidalis, and Pyramidalis Lutetiana of Lobel, in English, Great or Steeple
Bell-flower. The third is usually called Viola Mariana, and of some Viola
Marina. Lobel puts a doubt whether it be not Medium of Dioscorides, as
Matthiolus and others do think; but in my opinion the thickness of the
root, as the text has it, contradicts all the rest. We call it generally in
English Couentry Bells. Some call it Marian, and some Mercuries Violets. The
fourth and fifth are called Trachelium or Ceruicaria, of some Vvularia, because
many have used it to good purpose, for the pains of the Uvula, or Throat: Yet
there is another plant, called also by some Vvularia, which is Hippoglossum,
Horse tongue, or Double tongue. The sixth has his title to descipher it out
sufficiently, as is declared. The seventh is called Trachelium minus, and
Ceruiaria minor, of some Saponaria altera; in English, Small Throateworte, or
Small Canterbury Bells. The last has his name in the title, as it is called in
France, from whence I received plants for my Garden with the Latin name: but I
have given it in English.

The Virtues.
The Peach-Bels as well as the others may safely be used in gargles and
lotions for the mouth, throat, or other parts, as occasion serves. The roots
of many of them, while they are young, are often eaten in sallets by diverse
beyond the Seas.

CHAP. LXXXVII.
Campana Caerulea sieve Convolvulus Caeruleus. Blew Bell flowers, or blew
Bindeweede.
THere are two other kinds of Bell-flowers, much differing from the Tribe or
Family of the former, because of their climbing or winding quality, which I
must needs place next them, for the likeness of the flowers, although
otherwise they might have been placed with the other clamberers that follow.
Of these there is a greater, and a lesser, and of each likewise some
difference, as shall be declared.

1. Convolvulus caeruleus mayor rotundifolius. The greater blew Bindweede, or
Bell-flower with round leaves.
This goodly plant rises up with many long and winding branches, whereby it
climbeth and windeth upon any poles, herbs, or trees, that stand near it
within a great compass, always winding it self contrary to the course of the
Sun: on these branches do grow many fair great round leaves, and pointed
at the end, like unto a Violet leaf in shape, but much greater, of a sad
green color: at the joints of the branches, where the leaves are set, come
forth flowers on pretty long stalks, two or three together at a place, which
are long, and pointed almost like a finger, while they are buds, and not blown
open, and of a pale whitish blew color, but being blown open, are great and
large bells, with broad open mouths or brims ending in five corners, and small
at the bottom, standing in small green husks of fine leaves: these flowers
are of a very deep azure or blew color, tending to a purple, very glorious to
behold, opening for the most part in the evening, abiding so all the night and
the next morning, until the Sun begin to grow somewhat hot upon them, and
then do close, never opening more: the plant carries so many flowers, if it
stand in a warm place, that it will be replenished plentifully, until the
cold airs and euenings stay the luxury thereof: after the flowers are past,
the stalks whereon the flowers did stand, bend downwards, and bear within the
husks three or four black seeds, of the bigness of a Tare or thereabouts:
the roots are stringy, and perish every year.

2. Convolvulus trifolius sieve hederaceus purpureus. The greater purple
Bindeweede, or Bell-flower with cornered leaves.
The growing and form of this Bindeweede or Bell-flower, is all one with the
former, the chiefest differences consisting in the form of the leaf, which in
this is three cornered, like unto an Iuie leaf with corners; and in the
flower, which is of a deeper blew, tending more to a deep purple Violet, and
somewhat more reddish in the five plaites of each flower, as also in the
bottomes of the flowers.

3. Convolvulus tenuifolius Americanus. The red Bell-flower of America.
Although this rare plant (because we seldom have it, and can as hardly keep
it) be scarce known in these cold Countries, yet I could not but make mention
of it, to incite those that have conueniencie to keep it, to be furnished of
it. It springs up at the first from the seed with two leaves, with two long
forked ends, which abide a long time before they perish, between which rises
up the stalk or stem, branching forth diverse ways, being of a brownish
color, which windeth it self as the former great Bell-flower does, whereon
are set at several joints diverse winged leaves, that is to say, many small
narrow and long leaves set on both sides of the middle ribbe, and one at the
end: from these joints arise long stalks, at the ends whereof stand two or
three small, long, hollow flowers, fashioned very like unto the flowers of a
Bindeweede, or the flowers of Tobacco, and ending in the like manner in five
points, but not so much laid open, being of a bright red color, plaited as
the Bindeweedes or Bell-flowers before they be open; with some few threads in
the middle, which turn into long pointed cods, wherein is contained long and
black seed, tasting hot like Pepper: the root is small and stringy,
perishing every year, and with us will seldom come to flower, because our
cold nights and frosts come so soon, before it cannot have comfort enough of
the Sun to ripen it.

4. Convolvulus caeruleus minor Hispanicus. The Spanish small blew Bindeweede.
This small Bindeweede has small long leaves, somewhat broader then the next
that follows, and not so broad as the common small Bindeweede (that grows
every where wild on the banks of fields abroad) set upon the small trayling
branches, which grow above two or three foot high: from the middle of these
branches, and so unto the tops of them, come forth the flowers at the joints
with the leaves, folded together at the first into five plaites, which open
into so many corners, of a most excellent fair sky colored blew (so pleasant
to behold, that often it amazeth the spectator) with white bottomes, and
yellowish in the middle, which turn into small round white heads, wherein are
contained small blackish cornered seed, somewhat like the former, but smaller:
the root is small and threddy, perishing as the former every year: this never
windeth it self about any thing, but leans by reason of the weakness of the
branches, and dies every year after seed time, and not to be sown again
until the next Spring.

5. Convolvulus purpureus Spicaefolius. Lauander leafed Bindeweede.
This small purple Bindeweede, where it naturally grows, is rather a plague
then a pleasure, to whatsoever grows with it in the fields; yet the beauty of
the flower has caused it to be received into Gardens, bearing longer and
smaller leaves then the last, and such like small Bell-flowers, but of a sad
purple color: the root is li^^ng, as the common kinds are, and springs
again where it has been once sown, without fear of perishing.

The Place.
The first two greater kinds have been sent us out of Italy, but whether they
had them from the East Indies, or from some of the Eastern Countries on this
side, we know not: but they thrive reasonable well in our Country, if the
year be any thing kindly. The next came out of America, as his name
testifies. The lesser blew kind grows naturally in many places both of
Spain and Portugal (from whence I first received seeds from Guillaume Boel,
heretofore remembered.) The last grows wild in the fields, about Dunmowe in
Essex, and in many other places of our own Country likewise.

The Time.
The three first greater kinds flower not until the end of August, or
thereabouts, and the seed ripeneth in September, if the colds and frosts come
not on too speedily. The lesser kinds flower in June and July.

The Names.
The first is called of some Campana Lazura, as the Italians do call it, or
Campana caerulea, of others Convolvulus caeruleas mayor, sieve Indicus, and Flos
noctis. Of some Nil Auicennae. The second is called Convolvulus trifolius, or
haederaceus, for the distinction of the leaves. In English we call them either
Great blew Bell-flowers, or more usually, Great blew Bindeweedes. That of
America is diversely called by diverse. It is called Quamoclit of the Indians,
and by that name it was sent to Ioachinus Camerarius out of Italy, where it is
so called still, as Fabius Columna sets it down, and as my self also can
witness it, from thence being so sent unto me: but Andraeas Caesalpinus
calls it, Iasminum folio Millefolij, supposing it to be a Iasmine. Camerarius
says, it may not unfitly be called Convolvulus tenuifolius, accounting it a
kind of Bindeweede. Columna entituleth it Convolvulus pennatus exoticus
rarior, and says it cannot be referred to any other kind of plant then to
the Bindeweedes. He that published the Curae posteriores of Clusius, gives it
the name of Iasminum Americanum, which I would do also, if I thought it might
belong to that Family; but seeing the face and form of the plant better
agreeing with the Bindeweedes or Bell-flowers, I have (as you see) inserted it
among them, and given it that name may be most fit for it, especially because
it is but an annual plant. The lesser kinds have their names sufficiently
expressed in their titles.

The Virtues.
We know of no use these have in Physic with us, although if the first be Nil
of Auicen, both he and Serapio say it purges strongly.

CHAP. LXXXVIII.
Stramonium. Thorne-Apple.
Unto the Bell-flowers, I must adioyne three other plants, in the three
several Chapters following, for some affinity of the flowers: and first of the
Thorne-Apples, whereof there are two especial kinds, that is, a greater and a
lesser, and of each some diversity, as shall be set down.

1. Stramonium maius album. The great white flowred Thorne-Apple.
The greater Thorne-Apple has a great, strong, round green stalk, as high as
any man, if it be planted in good ground, and of the bigness of a man's wrest
almost at the bottom, spreading out at the top into many branches, whereon
stand many very large and broad dark green leaves, cut in very deeply on the
edges, and having many points or corners therein: the flowers come forth at
the joints, between two branches toward the top of them, being very large,
long, and wide open, ending in five points or corners, longer and larger then
any other Bell-flowers whatsoever: after the flowers are past, come the fruit,
which are thorny long heads, more prickly and green then the lesser kinds,
which being ripe opens it self into three or four parts, having a number of
flat blackish seed within them: the root is abundant in fibers, whereby it
strongly takes hold in the ground, but perishes with the first frosts; yet
the seed that is shed when the fruit is ripe, comes up the next year.

2. Stramonium maius purpureum. The great purple flowred Thorne-Apple.
This purple Thorne-Apple is in largeness of leaves, thickness and height of
stalk, greatness and form of flowers and fruit, every way equal and
correspondent unto the former, the chief differences be these: the stalk is
of a dark purple color; the leaves are of a darker green, somewhat purplish,
and the flowers are of light purple or pale Dove color, enclining to white,
and whiter at the bottom.

3. Stramonium minus seu Nux Metel flore albo. The smaller Thorne-Apple with a
white flower.
The smaller Thorne-Apple rises up with one round stalk, of the bigness of a
man's finger, and never much above two foot high with us, bearing a few large,
broad, smooth leaves thereon, without any branches at all, which are unevenly
rent or (...) about the edges, with many ribs, and smaller veins running
through them, yet lesser by much then the greater kind: at the joints where
the leaves stand, come forth long and large white flowers, with broad or wide
open brims, folded together before their opening, as the other former
Bell-flowers or Bindeweedes, but having their five corners more pointed or
horned then either they, or the former Thorne-Apples: after the flowers are
past, succeed small fruit, rounder and harder, set with harder, but blunt
pricks then the former, wherein is contained brownish yellow flat seed, 1
Convolvulus mayor caeruleus. The greater blew Bindweed or Bell flower. 2
Convolv^lus trifolius seu hederaceus. The great purple Bindeweed. 3 Convolvulus
minor caerul^^^ Hispanicus. The Spanish small blew Bindweed. 4 Stramonium maius
seu pomum spinos^^^. The great Thorn Apple. 5 Datura seu Stramonium minus. The
small Thorne-Apple. 6 Stramonium flore duplici. The double flowred
Thorne-Apple. 7 Stramonium f^ore gemi^^to. Double Thorne-Apple one out of
another 8 Tobacco latifolium. Broad leafed Tobacco. 9 Mirabilia Pe^^^na. The
Merua^^e of the world.
depiction of flowers sticking to the inward pulpe: the root is not very
great, but full of strings, and quickly perishes with the first frosts.

4. Stramonium minus flore geminato purpurante. The small double flowred purple
Thorne-Apple.
In the flower of this plant, consists the chiefest difference from the
former, which is as large as the last, pointed into more horns or corners, and
bears two flowers, standing in one husk, one of them rising out from the
middle of the other, like unto those kinds of Cowslips and Oxelips, called
double, or Hose in hose, before described, which are of a pale purplish color
on the outside, and almost white within: the fruit is round like the last, and
bears such like seed, so that until it be in flower, their difference can
hardly be discerned: this is more tender then the last, although even it is so
tender, that it seldom bears ripe seed with us.

Flore duplici.
Sometimes (for I think it is not another kind) the flower will have as it were
double rows of leaves, close set together, and not consisting of two, rising
so distinctly one above another.

The Place.
All these kinds have been brought or sent us out of Turkey and Egypt; but
Garcias, and Christopherus Acosta, with others, affirm that they grow in the
East Indies. The lesser kinds are very rare with us, because they seldom come
to maturity; and therefore we are still to seek of new seed to sow. The
greater kinds are plentiful enough in our Gardens, and will well abide, and
give ripe fruit.

The Time.
The smaller kinds flower later then the greater; and therefore their fruit
are the sooner spoiled with the cold airs, dewes, and frosts, that come at the
latter end of the year: but the greater kinds never miss lightly to ripen.

The Names.
Both the greater and smaller kinds are generally called Stramonium,
Stramonia, Pomum spinosum, and Datura. Bauhinus upon Matthiolus his Comentaries
on Dioscorides, calls it Solanum faetidum spinosum. Some learned men have
referred it to Nux Metel, of the Arabian Authors. We call them generally in
English, Thorne-Apples, and distinguish them by their titles of greater and
lesser, single and double.

The Virtues.
The East Indian lascivious women perform strange acts with the seed (of the
smaller kind, as I suppose, or it may be of either) giving it their husbands
to drink. The whole plant, but especially the seed, is of a very cold and
soporiferous quality, procuring sleep and distraction of senses. A few of the
seeds steeped and given in drink, will cause them that take it to seem stark
drunk or dead drunk, which fit will within a few hours we are away, and they
recover their senses again, as a drunken man raised after sleep from his wine.
It may therefore (in my opinion) be of safe and good use to one, that is to
have a leg or an arm cut off, or to be cut for the stone, or some other such
like cure to be performed, to take away the sense of pain for the time of
doing it; otherwise I hold it not fit to be used without great caution. But the
green leaves of the greater kinds (as also of the lesser, but that with us
they are not so plentiful) are by tried experience, found to be excellent good
for any scalded or burned part, as also to take away any hot inflammations,
being made up into a salve or ointment with suet, wax, and rossin, etc. or
with Axungia, that is, Hogs larde.

CHAP. LXXXIX.
Tobacco. Indian Henbane, or Tobacco.
THere has been formerly but three kinds of Tobacco known unto us, two of
them called Indian, and the third English Tobacco. In these later years, we
have had in our gardens about London (before the suppressing of the planting)
three or four other sorts at the least, and all of the Indian kind, having
some especial difference, either in leaf, or flower, or both: And in regard
the flowers of some of these carry a pretty show, I shall only entreat of
them, and not of the English kind.

Tobacco latifolium. Broad leafed Tobacco.
The great Indian Tobacco has many very large, long, thick, fat and fair
green leaves, standing foreright for the most part, and compassing the stalks
at the bottom of them, being somewhat pointed at the end: the stalk is green
and round, six or seven foot high at sometimes, and in some places, in others
not past three or four foot high, divided toward the top into many
branches, with leaves at every joint, and at the tops of the branches many
flowers, the bottomes hereof are long and hollow, and the tops plaited or
folded before they are open, but being open, are divided sometimes into four,
or more usually into five corners, somewhat like unto other of the
Bell-flowers, but lying a little flatter open, of a light carnation color. The
seed is very small and brown, contained in round heads, that are clammy while
they are green, and pointed at the end: the root is great, whitish, and woody
at the head, dispersing many long branches, and small fibers under the ground,
whereby it is strongly fastened, but perishes with our violent frosts in the
winter, if it be left abroad in the garden, but if it be housed, or safely
provided for against the frostes, the roots will live, and spring afresh the
next year.

There is of this kind another sort, whose leaves are as large and long as the
former, but thicker, and of a more dead green color, hanging down to the
ground-ward, and scarce any standing forth-right, as the former, unless they
be very young: the flowers of this kind are almost whole, without any great
show of corners at the brims or edges, in all other things there is no
difference.

There is another, whose large and thick flat leaves do compass the stalk
at the bottom, and are as it were folded together one side unto another: the
flowers are of a deeper blush, or carnation color, and with longer points and
corners then in any of the former; and in these two things consists the
difference from the others, and is called Verines Tobacco.

Another has his leaves not so large and long as the first, and these have
short footestalkes, whereon they stand, and do not compass the stalk as the
other do: the flower hereof is like the first, but smaller, and of a little
paler color.

Tobacco angustifolium. Narrow leafed Tobacco.
This kind of Tobacco has somewhat lower, and smaller stalks, then any of
the former: the leaves hereof are smaller and narrower, and not altogether so
thick, but more pointed, and every one standing upon a footstalke, an inch and
a half long at the least: the flowers hereof stand thicker together, upon the
small branches, somewhat larger, of a deeper blush color, and more eminent
corners then in any the former: the seed and roots are alike, and perish in
like manner, unless it be brought into a cellar, or other such covert, to
defend it from the extremity of the Winter.

The Place.
America or the West Indies is the place where all these kinds do grow
naturally, some in one place, and some in another, as in Peru, Trinidado,
Hispaniola, and almost in every Island and Country of the continent thereof:
with us they are cherished in gardens, as well for the medicinable qualities,
as for the beauty of the flowers.

The Time.
It flowreth in August, seldom before, and the seed is ripe quickly after. If
it once sow it self in a Garden, it will give next year after young plants:
but for the most part they will spring up late, and therefore they that would
have them more early, have sown the seed upon a bed of dung, and transplanted
them afterward.

The Names.
This plant has gotten many names. The Indians call it in some places Petum,
in others Picielt, and Perebecenu^, as Ouiedus and others do relate. The
Spaniards in the Indies first called it Tobacco, of an Island where plenty of it
grew. It has in Christendom received diverse other names, as Nicotiana, of one
Nicot a French man, who seeing it in Portugal, sent it to the French Queen,
from whom it received the name of Herba Regina. Lobel calls it Sancta herba,
and Sana sancta Indorum. Some have adjudged it to be an Hioscyamus, and
therefore call it Peruvianus. The most usual name whereby we call it in
English, is Tobacco.

The Virtues.
The herb is, out of question, an excellent help and remedy for diverse
diseases, if it were rightly ordered and applied, but the continual abuse
thereof in so many, does almost abolish all good use in any. Notwithstanding if
men would apply their wits to the finding out of the virtues, I make no doubt
but many strange cures would be performed by it, both inward and outward. For
outward application, a Salve made hereof (as is before recited of the Thorn
apple leaves) cures ulcers, and wounds of hard curation: And for inward
helps, a Syrup made of the juice and sugar, or honey, procures a gentle
vomit (but the dried leaf infused in wine much more) and is effectual in
astmaticall diseases, if it be carefully given. And likewise cleanses cankers
and fistulaes admirably, as has been found by late experience. The ashes of
Tobacco is often used, and with good success, for cuts in the hands, or other
places, and for other small green wounds.

CHAP. XC.
Mirabilia Peruviana. The Marvel of Peru.
THis plant yields in our Gardens five or six several varieties of
beautiful flowers, as pure white, pure yellow, pure red, white and red
spotted, and red and yellow spotted. But besides these, I have had some other
sorts, among which was one, of a pale purple or peach color: all which,
coming unto me out of Spain with many other, seeds in an unkindly year (an
early winter following a cold summer) perished with me; yet I plainly might
discern by their leaves, and manner of growing, to be diverse from them that we
now have and keep. I shall need therefore (because the chiefest difference
consists almost in the flowers) to give only one description of the plant,
and therein show the varieties as is before declared.

Admirabilis. The Marvel of the World.
The stalk of this meruellous plant is great and thick, bigger then any man's
thumb, bunched out or swelling at every joint, in some the stalks will be of
a fair green color, and those will bring white, or white and red flowers: in
others they will be reddish, and more at the joints, and those give red
flowers; and in some of a darker green color, which give yellow flowers; the
stalks and joints of those that will give red and yellow flowers spotted, are
somewhat brownish, but not so red as those that give wholly red flowers: upon
these stalks that spread into many branches, do grow at the joints upon
several footestalkes, fair green leaves; broad at the stalk, and pointed at
the end: at the joints likewise toward the upper part of the branches, at the
foot of the leaves, come forth several flowers upon short footestalkes, every
one being small, long and hollow from the bottom to the brimme, which is
broad spread open, and round, and consist but of one leaf without division,
like unto a Bell flower, but not cornered at all: which flowers, as I said, are
of diverse colors, and diversely marked and spotted, some being wholly white,
without any spot in them for the most part, through all the flowers of the
plant; so likewise some being yellow, and some wholly red; some plants again
being mixed and spotted, so variably either white and red, or purple, (except
here and there some may chance to be wholly white, or red or purple among the
rest) or red and yellow through the whole plant, (except as before some may
chance in this kind to be either wholly red, or wholly yellow) that you shall
hardly find two or three flowers in a hundred, that will be alike spotted and
marked, without some diversity, and so likewise every day, as long as they
blow, which is until the winters, or rather autumnes cold blastes do stay
their willing pronenesse to flower: And I have often also observed, that one
side of a plant will give fairer varieties then another, which is most commonly
the Eastern, as the more temperate and shadowie side. All these flowers do
open for the most part, in the evening, or in the night time, and so stand
blown open, until the next mornings sun begin to grow warm upon them,
which then close themselves together, all the brims of the flowers shrinking
into the middle of the long neck, much like unto the blew Bindeweede, which in
a manner does so close up at the suns warm heat: or else if the day be
temperate and mild, without any sun shining upon them, the flowers will not
close up for the most part of that day, or until toward night: after the
flowers are past, come several seeds, that is, but one at a place as the
flowers stood before, of the bigness (sometimes) of small pease, but not so
round, standing within the green husks, wherein the flowers stood before,
being a little flat at the top, like a crown or head, and round where it is
fastened in the cup, of a black color when it is ripe, but else green all
the while it grows on the stalk, and being ripe is soon shaken down with
the wind, or any other light shaking: the root is long and round, greater at
the head, and smaller downwards to the end, like unto a Reddish, spreading into
two or three, or more branches, blackish on the outside and whitish within.
These roots I have often preserved by art a winter, two or three (for they
will perish if they be left out in the garden, unless it be under a house
side) because many times, the year not falling out kindly, the plants give
not ripe seed, and so we should be to seek both of seed to sow, and of
roots to set, if this or the like art to keep them, were not used; which is in
this manner: Within a while after the first frosts have taken the plants, that
the leaves wither and fall, dig up the roots whole, and lay them in a dry
place for three or four days, that the superfluous moisture on the outside,
may be spent and dried, which done, wrap them up severally in two or three
brown papers, and lay them by in a box, chest or tub, in some convenient
place of the house all the winter time, where no wind or moist air may come
unto them; and thus you shall have these roots to spring a fresh the next
year, if you plant them in the beginning of March, as I have sufficiently
tried. But some have tried to put them up into a barrel or firkin of sand, or
ashes, which is also good if the sand and ashes be thorough dry, but if it be
any thing moist, or if they give again in the winter, as it is usual, they
have found the moisture of the roots, or of the sand, or both, to putrefie the
roots, that they have been nothing worth, when they have taken them forth.
Take this note also for the sowing of your seed, that if you would have
variable flowers, and not all of one color, you must choose out such flowers
as be variable while they grow, that you may have the seed of them: for if the
flowers be of one entire color, you shall have for the most part from those
seeds, plants that will bring flowers all of that color, whether it be white,
red or yellow.

The Place.
These plants grow naturally in the West Indies, where there is a perpetual
summer, or at the least no cold frosty winters, from whence the seed has been
sent into these parts of Europe, and are dispersed into every garden almost of
note.

The Time.
These plants flower from the end of July sometimes, or August, until the
frosts, and cold airs of the euenings in October, pull them down, and in the
mean time the seed is ripe.

The Names.
We have not received the seeds of this plant under any other name, then
Mirabilia Peruviana, or Admirabilis planta. In English we call them, The
marvel of Peru, or the marvel of the world: yet some Authors have called it
Gelseminum, or Iasminum rubrum, and Indicum: and Bauhinus Solanum Mexiocanum
flore magno.

The Virtues.
We have not known any use hereof in Physic.

CHAP. XCI.
Malua. Mallows.
OF the kindred of Mallows there are a great number, some of the gardens,
others wild, some with single flowers, others with double, some with whole
leaves, others with cut or divided: to entreat of them all is not my purpose,
nor the scope of this work, but only of such whose flowers, having beauty
and respect, are fit to furnish this garden, as ornaments thereunto. And first
of those single kinds, whose flowers come nearest unto the fashion of the
former Bell-flowers, and after to the double ones, which for their bravery, are
entertained every where into every Country woman's garden.

1. Malua Hispanica flore carneo amplo. The Spanish blush Mallow.
The Spanish Mallow is in form and manner of growing, very like unto our
common field Mallow, having upright stalks two or three foot high, spread
into diverse branches, and from the bottom to the top, beset with round
leaves, like unto our Mallows, but somewhat smaller, rounder, and less
divided, yet larger below then above: the flowers are plentifully growing upon
the small branches, folding or writhing their leaves one about another before
they be blown, and being open consist of five leaves, with a long forked
clapper therein, of the same color with the flower: the chiefest difference
from the common consists in this, that the leaves of these flowers are
longer, and more wide open at the brimmes (almost like a Bell-flower) and of a
fair blush or light carnation color, closing at night, and opening all the
day: after the flowers are past, there come such like round heads, with small
black seed, like unto the common kind, but somewhat smaller: the root is
small and long, and perishes every year.

2. Alcea vulgaris flore carneo. Vervaine Mallow with blush flowers.
There is a Mallow that has long stalks, and flowers like unto the common
wild 1 Malua Hispanica flore carneo amplo. The Spanish Mallow. 2 Alcea Veneta.
The Venice Mallow. 3 Alcea Americana. Thorney Mallow. 4 Alcea Aeg^ptiae. The
Mallow of Egypt. 5 Althaea ^rutex. The shrubbe Mallow. 6 Malua hortensis
simplex. Single Hollihockes. 7 Malua rosea multiplex. Double Hollihockes.
depiction of flowers Mallow, and of the same deep color with it, so that you
can hardly know it from the ordinary kind, which is found growing wild
together with it, but only by the leaf, which is as round and as large as the
former, but cut into many fine divisions, even to the stalk that vpholdeth it,
that it seems to consist only of rags, or pieces of leaves: Of this kind
I take a plant for this garden, growing in all respects like unto it, but
differing only in the color of the flowers, which are of the same blush or
light carnation color, or not much differing from the former Spanish kind,
with some veins therein of a deeper color: the root hereof lives, as the
root of the common wild kind does.

3. Alcea peregrina sieve vesicaria. Venice Mallow, or Good night at noone.
The Venice Mallow has long and weak stalks, most usually lying or leaning
upon the ground, having here and there upon them long leaves and somewhat
broad, cut in or gashed very deeply on both edges, that it seems as if they
were diverse leaves set together, every one standing on a long footestalke: at
the joints of these stalks, where the leaves are set, come forth several
flowers, standing upon long footstalkes, which are somewhat larger then any of
the former flowers, consisting of five leaves, small at the bottom, and wide
at the brimmes, of a whitish color tending to a blush, and sometimes all
white, with spots at the bottomes of the leaves on the inside, of a very deep
purple or murrey color, which adds a great grace to the flower, and having
also a long pestle or clapper in the middle, as yellow as gold: these flowers
are so quickly faded and gone, that you shall hardly see any of them blown
open, unless it be betimes in the morning before the Sun do grow warm
upon them, for as soon as it feels the Suns warm heat, it closes up and
never opens again, so that you shall very seldom see a flower blown open
in the day time, after nine a clock in the morning: after these flowers are
past, there rise up in their places thin, round, shining or transparent
bladders, pointed at the top, and ribbed down all along, wherein are
contained small, round, blackish seed: the root is long and small, and
perishes every year.

4. Alcea fruticosa pentaphyllea. Cinquefoile Mallow.
The stalks of this Mallow are very long, hard or woody, more then of any of
the other Mallows: at the lower part whereof, and up to the middle, stand
diverse leaves upon long footestalkes, parted or divided into five parts or
leaves, and dented about the edges; but upwards from the middle to the top,
the leaves have but three divisions: among these leaves stand large wide open
flowers, of the color of the common Mallow: the seed is smaller then in any
other Mallow, but the roots are great and long, spreading in the ground like
unto the roots of Marsh Mallows, springing up afresh every year from the
root.

5. Sabdarifa seu Alcea Americana. Thorney Mallowe.
This Thorney Mallowe has green leaves next unto the ground, that are almost
round, but pointed at the end, and dented very much about the edges; the other
leaves that grow upon the stalk are divided into three parts, like unto a
trefoile, and some of them into five divisions, all of them dented about the
edges: the stalk is reddish, with some harmless prickles in sundry places
thereon, and rises up three or four foot high in a good ground, a fit place,
and a kindly year, bearing plenty of flowers upon the stalks, one at the
foot of every leaf, the top it self ending in a long spike, as it were of
buddes and leaves together: the flowers are of a very pale yellow, tending to a
white color, spotted in the bottom of each of the five leaves, with a deep
purple spot, broad at the lower part, and ending in a point about the middle of
the leaf, which are quickly fading, and not abiding above one day, with a long
pestle in the middle divided at the top: after the flower is past, comes up
a short prickly podde, set within a small green husk or cup that bore the
flower, wherein is contained whitish, or rather brownish yellow seed, flat and
somewhat round, like unto the seeds of Hollyhocke: the root is stringie, and
quickly perishes; for it will hardly endure in our cold Country to give
flowers, much less seed, unless (as I said before) it happen in a kindly
year, and be well planted and tended.

6. Bamia seu Alcea Aegyptia. The Mallow of Egypt.
This Mallow is also as tender to nourse up as the last, having the lower
leaves broad like a Marsh Mallow, and of a fresh green color; but those that
grow upon the stalk, and up to the top, are divided into five parts or
points, but are not cut in to the middle ribbe, like the former Thorney Mallow,
yet dented about the edges like unto them: the flowers grow at the setting to
of the leaves, like unto a Mallow for form, but of a whitish color; after
which come long five square pointed pods, with hard shells, wherein are
contained round blackish gray seed, as big as a Vetch or bigger: the root
perishes quickly with us, even with the first frosts.

7. Althaea frutex flore albo vel purpureo. Shrubbe Mallow with a white or
purple flower.
There are diverse sorts of shrubbe Mallows, whereof some that have their
stemmes or stalks less woody, dye down to the ground every year, and
others that abide always, are more woody: Of the former sorts I intend not to
speak, referring them to a fitter place; and of the other, I will only give
you the knowledge of one or two in this place, although I do acknowledge their
fittest place had been to be among the shrubbes; but because they are Mallows,
I pray let them pass with the rest of their kindred, and their descriptions in
this manner: These woody kinds of shrub Mallows have somewhat large, long,
and divided leaves, of a whitish green color, soft also, and as it were
woolly in handling, set dispersedly on the whitish hard or woody stalks:
their flowers are large, like unto a single Rose or Hollyhocke, in the one
being white with purple spots in the bottom; in the other either of a deep
red color, or else of a paler purple, with a deeper bottom, and with veins
running in every leaf: they are somewhat tender, and would not be suffered to
be uncovered in the Winter time, or yet abroad in the Garden, but kept in a
large pot or tubbe, in the house or in a warm cellar, if you would have them
to thrive.

8. Malua hortensis rosea simplex and multiplex diuersorum colorum. Hollihockes
single and double of several colors.
I shall not need to make many descriptions of Hollihockes, in regard the
greatest difference consists in the flowers, which are in some single, in
some double, in some of one color, and in others of other colors: for the
lowest leaves of Hollihockes are all round, and somewhat large, with many
corners, but not cut in or divided, soft in handling; but those that grow up
higher are much more divided into many corners: the stalks sometimes grow
like a tree, at the least higher then any man, with diverse such divided leaves
on them, and flowers from the middle to the top, where they stand as it were
a long spike of leaves and buds for flowers together: the flowers are of diverse
colors, both single and double, as pure white, and pale blush, almost like a
white, and more blush, fresh and lively, of a Rose color, Scarlet, and a
deeper red like a crimson, and of a dark red like black blood; these are the
most especial colors both of single and double flowers that I have seen: the
single flowers consist of five broad and round leaves, standing round like unto
single Roses, with a middle long style, and some chiues above them: the double
flowers are like unto double Roses, very thick, so that no style or vmbone is
seen in the middle, and the outermost row of leaves in the flowers are
largest, the innermost being smaller and thick set together: after the flowers
are past, there come up as well in the double as single, flat round heads, like
flat cakes, round about the bottomes whereof grow flat whitish seed: the
root is long and great at the head, white and tough, like the root of the
common Mallows, but greater, and will reasonably well abide the Winter.

The Place.
The first grows wild in Spain. The second in our own Country. The third
is thought to grow in Italy and Venice; but Lobel denies it, saying, that it
is there only in Gardens, and is more plentiful in these parts then with
them. The fourth Clusius says he found in many places of Germany. The fifth is
supposed to be first brought out of the West Indies, but an Arabicke name being
given it, makes me somewhat doubtful how to believe it. The sixth grows in
Egypt, where it is of great use, as Prosper Alpinus has set down in his Book
of Egyptian plants. The seventh grows in some parts both of Spain and
France. The last is not found but in Gardens every where.

The Time.
The first, second, third, fourth, and last, do flower from June until the
end of July and August. The rest flower very late, many times not until
September or October.

The Names.
The first and second have their names sufficiently expressed in their titles.
The third is diversely called, as Malua horaria, Alcea vesicaria, Alcea Veneta,
Alcea Peregrina, and of Matthiolus, Hypecoum. The most usual English name is
Venice Mallow. The fourth is called Alcea fruticosa pentaphyllea, and
Cannabinifolio, or Pentaphyllifolio: In English, Cinquefoile Mallow. The fifth
has been sent under the name of Sabdarifa, and Sabdariffa, and (as I said) is
thought to be brought from America, and therefore it bears the name of that
Country. The sixth is called in Egypt, Bamia, or Bammia, and by that name sent
with the addition del Cayro unto it: In English, Egyptian Mallow, or Mallow of
Egypt. The seventh is called Althaea frutex, and of some Althaea arborea: In
English, Shrubbe Mallow, because his stem is wooddie, and abides as shrubbes
and trees do. The eight and last is called Malua hortensis, Malua Rosea, and
of some Rosa vltra marina: In English, of some Hockes, and usually Hollihockes.

The Virtues.
All sorts of Mallows, by reason of their viscous or slimie quality, do help
to make the body soluble, being used inwardly, and thereby help also to ease
the pains of the stone and gravel, causing them to be the more easily voided:
being outwardly applied, they mollify hard tumors, and help to ease pains in
diverse parts of the body; yet those that are of most use, are most common. The
rest are but taken upon credit.

CHAP. XCII.
Amaranthus. Flower-gentle.
WE have four or five sorts of Flower-gentle to trim up this our Garden
withal, which do differ very notably one from another, as shall be declared
in their several descriptions; some of which are very tender, and must be
carefully regarded, and all little enough to cause them bear seed with us, or
else we shall be to seek every year: others are hardy enough, and will
hardly be lost out of the Garden.

1. Amaranthus purpureus minor. The small purple Flower-gentle.
This gallant purple Velvet flower, or Flower-gentle, has a crested stalk two
foot high or more, purplish at the bottom, but green to the top, whereout
grows many small branches, the leaves on the stalks and branches are
somewhat broad at the bottom, and sharp pointed, of a full green color, and
often somewhat reddish withal, like in form unto the leaves of Blites
(whereof this and the rest are accounted species, or sorts) or small Beetes:
the flowers are long, spikie, soft, and gentle tufts of hairs, many as it were
growing together, broad at the bottom, and small up at the top, pyramid or
steeple-fashion, of so excellent a shining deep purple color, tending to a
murrey, that in the most excellent colored Velvet, cannot be seen a more
orient color, (and I think from this respect, the French call it Pass
velours, that is to say, passing Velvet in color) without any smell at all,
which being bruised gives the same excellent purple color on paper, and being
gathered in his full strength and beauty, will abide a great time (if it be
kept out of the wind and sun in a dry place) in the same grace and color:
among these tufts lie the seed scattered, which is small, very black, and
shining: the roots are a few threddy strings, which quickly perish, as the
whole plant does, at the first approach of Winter weather.

2. Amaranthus Coccineus. Scarlet Flower-gentle.
The leaves of this Flower-gentle are longer, and somewhat narrower then the
former; the stalk grows somewhat higher, bearing his long tufts at several
leaves, as also at the top of the stalks, many being set together, but
separate one from another, and each bowing or bending down his head, like unto
a Feather, such as is worn in our Gallants and Gentlewomens heads, of an
excellent bloody Scarlet color: the seed is black, like unto the former: the
root perishes quicklier, because it is more tender.

3. Amaranthus tricolor. Spotted or variable Flower-gentle.
The chiefest beauty of this plant consists in the leaves, and not in the
flowers; for they are small tufts growing all along the stalk, which is
nothing so high as the former, especially with us, and at the joints with the
leaves: the leaves hereof are of the same fashion that the former are, and
pointed also; but every leaf is to be seen parted into green, red, and
yellow, very orient and fresh (especially if it come to his full perfection,
which is in hot and dry weather) divided not all alike, but in some leaves,
where the red or yellow is, there will be green, and so varying, that it is
very pleasant to behold: the seed hereof is black and shining, not to be
known from the former.

4. Amaranthus Carnea spica. Carnation Flower-gentle.
There is another more rare then all the rest, whose leaves are somewhat
longer, and narrower then the first, and like unto the second kind: the spikes
are short, many set together, like branches full of heads or ears of corn,
every one whereof has some long hairs sticking out from them, of a deep
blush, tending to a carnation color.

5. Amaranthus purpureus mayor panniculis sparsis. Great Floramour, or purple
Flower-gentle.
The great Floramour has one thick, tall, crested, brown red stalk, five or
six foot high, from whence spring many great broad leaves, like unto the
former for the form, but much larger and redder for the most part, especially
the lowest, which brancheth forth into diverse parts, and from between these
leaves, and the stalks or branches, as also at the tops of them, stand long,
spikie, round, and somewhat flat tufts, of a more reddish purple color then
the first, and divided also into several parts, wherein when they are full
ripe, are to be seen an innumerable company of white seed, standing out among
the short thrums, and do then easily fall away with a little touching; every
one of the^e white seed has as it were an hole half bored through therein: the
root is a great bush of strings, spreading in the ground, whereby it is
strongly fastened, yet perishes every year, after it has given his seed.

The Place.
All these plants grow in the Eastern Countries, as Persia, Syria, Arabia,
etc. except the greatest, which has been brought out of the West Indies, where
it is much used, especially the seed: they are all, except it, noursed up with
much care in our Gardens, and yet in a backward or cold year they will not
thrive, for that they desire much heat: but the greatest does always give
ripe seed every year.

The Time.
They bear their gallant tufts or spikes for the most part in August, and some
not until September.

The Names.
The name Amaranthus is given to all these plants, taken from the Greek word
(...), non marcescens, or non senescens, that is, never waxing old, and is
often also imposed on other plants, who have the same property, that is, that
their flowers being gathered in a fit season, will retain their native color
a long time, as shall be showed in the Chapter following. Diverse do think the
first to be Phlox, or Flamma of Theophrastus. The third is called Gelosia, or
Celosia of Tragus. Spigelius in his Isagoges says, it is generally taken to be
Sophonia, whereof Pliny makes mention; and Lobel, to be the Persians
Theombroton of Pliny. The Italians, from whom I had it (by the means of Mr.
Doctor John More, as I have had many other rare simples) call it, Blito di tree
colori, A three colored Blite. The fifth, which is the greatest, has been
sent from the West Indies by the name of Quinua, as Clusius reports. The name
Flower-gentle in English, and Floramour, which is the French, of Flos amoris,
and Pass velours, as is before said, or Velvet flower, according to the
Italian, Fior veluto, are equally given to all these plants, with their
several distinctions, as they are expressed in their titles.

The Virtues.
Diverse suppose the flowers of these plants do help to stay the flux of
blood in man or woman, because that other things that are red or purple do
perform the same. But Galen disproueth that opinion very notably, in lib. 2.
and 4. de simpl. medicament. facultatibus.

CHAP. XCIII.
Helichrysum, sieve Amaranthus luteus. Golden Flower-gentle, Goldilockes, or
Gold-flower.
THe propinquity of property (as I before said) has caused the affinity in
name, and so in neighborhood in these plants, wherein there are some
diversity; and although they differ from them before in many notable points,
yet they all agree with themselves in the golden, or silver heads or tufts they
bear; and therefore I 1 Amaranthus purpureus mayor. The great purple
Flower-gentle. 2 Amaranthus purpureus minor. The lesser purple Flower-gentle. 3
Amaranthu^ tricolor. Variable Flower-gentle. 4 Amaranthus Coccineus. Scarlet
Flower gentle. 5 Amaranthus carnea spica. Carnation Flower-gentle. 6
Chrys^come. Golden Cassidonie. 7 Heliochrysum Creticum. Candy Goldilockes. 8
Gnaphal^um Americanum. Liuelong or Life everlasting. 9 Gnaphalium mo^tanu^^.
Cats foot. 10 Gnaphalium ros^um. The Cotton Rose.
depiction of flowers have comprised them in one Chapter, and will begin with
that which comes nearest unto the Helichrysum of Dioscorides, or Aurelia (as
Gaza translateth it) of Theophrastus.

1. Heliochrysum. The Golden flower of life.
This first Golden tuft rises up with many hard, round, white stalks, a foot
and a half high, whereon at certain distances stand many fine cut leaves, or
rather one leaf cut into many small fine parts, almost as small as Fenell, but
grayish, like unto the Cud-weedes or Cotton-weedes (whereof certainly these are
special kinds) at the tops of the stalks stand many round flowers, of a
pale gold color, in an vmbell close together, yet every flower upon his own
stalk, and all of an even height, which will keep the color, being gathered,
and kept dry for a long time after, and are of a hot and quick sent: the root
is small and woody, spreading under the upper crust of the earth, and lives
long in his own natural place, but very hardly endures the cold of our
Winters, unless they be mild, or it be well defended.

2. Helichrysum Creticum. Candy Goldilockes.
Candy Goldilockes has two or three small slender white branches, set here and
there very scatteringly, with small, long, and narrow hoary leaves, having
yellow heads of flowers at the tops made into vmbels or tufts, not so round and
even as the former, but longwise one above another, the heads being made as it
were of scales, loosly, and not so closely set together, as in the next
following, which when they are full ripe, do pass into down, and are blown
away with the wind, having a small reddish seed at the end; but will abide a
long time, as the other in his beauty, being gathered in time, as the rest will
do.

3. Helichrysum Orientale sieve Amaranthus luteus. Golden Flower-gentle.
This most beautiful plant is very like unto the former Candy Goldilockes last
described, but growing up higher, with many more branches, and more hoary,
white, and woolly, having also long and narrow white leaves, but somewhat
broader, and thicker set on the branches: the tufts of flowers or vmbels
likewise do consist of longer and larger heads, more scaly, and closer compact
together, of an excellent pale gold yellow color, and shining, with some
yellow threads or thrummes in the middle: the root dies not every year, but
lives long, especially in the South and East Countries, where no colds or
frosts are felt; but will require extraordinary care and keeping, and yet
scarce sufficient to preserve it in these cold Countries.

4. Chrysocome sieve Staechas Citrina. Golden tufts or Golden Cassidony.
This Golden flower is somewhat like the former of these two last described,
having hoary stalks and leaves, standing confusedly on them, being long, and
narrower then any of the former: the tops of the stalks are divided into many
parts, each bearing a small long yellow head or flower at the top, with some
yellow thrummes in them, which heads being many, are diffusedly set together,
like a loose or sparsed vmbell, keeping their color long before they wither,
and when they are ripe, have thin small reddish seed, like Mariorome seed,
but smaller; the root is small and black: the whole plant, as well leaves and
flowers, as roots, are of a strong sharp sent, yet pleasant.

5. Argyrocome sieve Gnaphalium Americanum. Live long or Life everlasting.
This silver tuft or Indian Cotton weed, has many white heads of leafes at
their first springing out of the ground, covered with a hoary woollinesse like
cotton, which rising into hard, thick round stalks, contain still the same
hoarinesse upon them, as also upon the long and narrow leaves which are set
thereon, especially on the under side, for the upper sides are of a dark
shining green color: the stalks are divided at the top into many small
branches, each whereof have many scaly tufted heads set together, covered over
with cotton before their opening, and then disseuering one from another,
abiding very white on the outside, when they are fully grown, but with a small
yellow thrume in the midde of every flower, which in time turn into yellow
down, apt to be blown away with every wind: the roots are long and black on
the outside, creeping under ground very much.

6. Gnaphalium montanum flore albo and flore purpureo. White and purple
Catsfoote.
This small Cudweede or Cottonweede, has many small white woolly leaves
growing from the root, which is composed of a few small blackish threads, and
lying upon the ground somewhat like unto the leaves of a small Mouse ear, but
smaller; from among which rises up a small stalk of half a foot high or
thereabouts, beset here and there with some few leaves, at the top whereof
comes forth a tuft of small flowers, set close together, in some of a pure
white, in others of a purple or reddish color, in some of a pale red or blush,
and in others of a white and purple mixed together which for the beauty is much
commended and desired, but will hardly abide to be kept in Gardens, so
unwilling they are to leave their natural abiding.

7. Gnaphalium Roseum. The Cotton Rose.
This little rose Cotton weed has many such like woolly leaves, growing as
the former from the root upon small short branches, not full an hand breadth
high, in fashion somewhat like unto Daysie leaves, but lesser, and round
pointed: at the top of every stalk or branch, stands one flower, composed
of two rows of small white leaves, laid open like a Star or a Rose, as it
bears the name, having a round head in the middle made of many yellow threads
or thrumes, which falling away, there rises up a small round head, full of
small seeds: the root is small, long and threddy.

The Place.
The four first plants do grow naturally in many of the hot Countries of
Europe, as Spain, Italy, and Province in France; as also in Candy, Barbary,
and other places, and must be carefully kept with us in the winter time. The
Live long was brought out of the West Indies, and grows plentifully in our
gardens. The two last do grow as well in the colder Countries of Germany, as
in France and other places.

The Time.
They all flower in the end of September, if they will show out their beauty at
all with us, for sometimes it is so late, that they have no fair color at
all, especially the four first sorts.

The Names.
Variable and many are the names that several Writers do call these four
first sorts of plants, as Helichrysum, Heliochrysum, or Elichrylum.
Eliochrysum, Chrysocome, Coma aurea, Amaranthus luteus, Stoechas Citrina, and
Aurelia, with others, needless here to be recited: it is sufficient for this
work, to give you knowledge that their names are sufficient as they are
expressed in their titles: The fifth is called Gnaphalium by Carolus Clusius,
from the likeness of the vmbels or tufts of heads, though greater and white:
for as I said before, the Cotton weeds are of kindred with the golden tufts:
It has been called by our English Gentlewomen, Live long, and Life
everlasting, because of the durabilitie of the flowers in their beauty. The
two last are called Gnaphalium, according to their titles; and in English they
may pass under those names are set down with them.

The Virtues.
The four first are accounted to be hot and dry, and the three last to be
cold and dry: yet all of them may to some good purpose be applied to
rheumaticke heads. The former four are likewise used to cause urine, and in
baths to comfort and heat cold parts. They are also laid in chests and
wardrobes, to keep garments from moths; and are worn in the heads and arms
of Gentiles and others, for their beautiful aspect.

CHAP. XCIIII.
Canna Indica. The Indian flowring Reed.
THere are two kinds or sorts of this beautiful plant, the one with a red
flower, the other with a yellow, spotted with reddish spots, both which in some
kindly years have borne their brave flowers, but never any ripe seed, and
does not abide the extremities of our winters, either abroad or under covert,
unless it meet with a stoue or hot-house, such as are used in Germany, or
such other like place: For neither house nor cellar will preserve it, for want
of heat.

Canna Indica flore rubro. Red flowred Indian Reed.
This beautiful plant rises up with fair green, large, broad leaves, every
one rising out of the middle of the other, and are folded together, or writhed
like unto a paper Coffin (as they call it) such as Comfitmakers and Grocers
use, to put in their Comfits and Spices, and being spread open, another rises
from the bottom thereof, folded in the same manner, which are set at the
joints of the stalk when it is risen up, like unto our water Reed, and
growing (if it run up for flower) to be three or four foot high, as I have
observed in mine own garden: the flowers grow at the top of the stalk one
above another, which before their opening are long, small, round, and pointed
at the end, very like unto the claw of a Crauise or Sea-Crab, and of the same
red or crimson color, but being open, are very like unto the flower of
Gladiolus or Corne-flagge, but of a more orient color then at the first, and
standing in a rough husk, wherein afterward stands a three square head,
containing therein round black seed, of the bigness of a pease: the root is
white and tuberous, growing into many knobs, from whence arise such other
leaves and stalks, whereby it increases very much, if it be righrly kept and
defended.

Canna Indica flore flauo punctato. Yellow spotted Indian Reed.
This Reed grows up with leaves and flowers, in all points so like unto the
former, that it cannot be known from it, until it come to flower, which is
of a yellow color, spotted with reddish spots, without any other difference.

The Place.
These plants grow naturally in the West Indies, from whence they were first
sent into Spain, and Portugal, where Clusius says he saw them planted by the
houses sides, flowring in winter, which might be in those warm Countries. We
preserve them with great care in our gardens, for the beautiful aspect of
their flowers.

The Time.
They flower not with us until the end, or middle of August, at the soonest.

The Names.
They are called of some Canna Indica, and Arundo Indica, of others Cannacorus,
and of some Flos Cancri, because the color of the flowers, as well as the
form of the buds, are so like unto a Sea-Crabs cle, or claw.

The Virtues.
There is not any use of these in Physic that I know.

CHAP. XCV.
Mandragoras. Mandrake.
THe Mandrake is distinguished into two kinds, the male and the female; the
male has two sorts, the one differing from the other, as shall be showed; but
of the female I know but one: The male is frequent in many gardens, but the
female, in that it is more tender and rare, is noursed up but in a few.

Manadrgoras mas. The male Mandrake.
The male Mandrake thrusts up many leaves together out of the ground, which
being full grown, are fair, large and green, lying round about the root,
and are larger and longer then the greatest leaves of any Lettice, whereunto it
is likened by Dioscorides and others: from the middle, among these leaves, rise
up many flowers, every one upon a long slender stalk, standing in a whitish
green husk, consisting of five pretty large round pointed leaves, of a
greenish white color, which turn into small round apples, green at the
first, and of a pale red color when they are ripe, very smooth and shining on
the outside, and of a heady or strong stuffing smell, wherein is contained
round whitish flat seed: the root is long and thick, blackish on the
outside, and white within, consisting many times but of one long root, and
sometimes divided into two branches a little below the head, and sometimes into
three or more, as nature lists to bestow upon it, as my self have often
seen, by the transplanting of many, as also by breaking and cutting off of
many parts of the roots, but never found harm by so doing, as many idle tales
have been set down in writing, and delivered also by report, of much danger
to happen to such, as should dig them up or break them; neither have I ever
seen any form of man like or woman like parts, in the roots of any: but as I
said, it has oftentimes two maine roots running downright into the ground,
and sometimes three, and sometimes but one, as it likewise often happens to
Parsneps, Carrots, or the like. But many cunning counterfeit roots have bin
shaped to such forms, and publicly exposed to the view of all that would see
them, and have been tolerated by the chief Magistrates of the City,
notwithstanding that they have been informed that such practices were ^eer^
deceit, and insufferable; whether this happened through their over ^re^^litie
of the thing, or of the persons, or through an opinion that the information o^
the truth rose upon envy, I know not, I leave that to the searcher of all
hearts. But this you may be bold to rest upon, and assure your selves, that
such forms as have bin publicly exposed to ^e seen, were never so formed by
nature, but only by the art and cunning of knaves and deceivers* and let this
be your Gale^^^^ against all such vain, idle and ridiculous toys of men's
inventions.

There is likewise another sort of these male Mandrakes, which I first saw at
Canterbury, with my very loving and kind friend John Tradescante, in the
garden of the Lord Wotton, whose gardener he was at that time; the leaves
whereof were of a more grayish green color, and somewhat folded together,
when as the former kind that grew hard by it, was of the same form that is
before described, and ordinary in all others: but whether the apples were
differing from the other, I know not, nor did they remember that ever it had
borne any.

Mandragoras faemina. The female Mandrake.
The female Mandrake does likewise put up many leaves together, from the head
of the root, but they are nothing so large, and are of a darker green color,
narrower also and shining, more crumpled, and of a stronger sent: the flowers
are many, rising up in the middle of the leaves, upon slender stalks, as in
the male kind, but of a bluish purple color, which turn into small round
fruit or apples, and not long like a pear (as Clusius reports that saw them
naturally growing in Spain) green at the first, and of a pale yellowish
color, when they arc full ripe; of a more pleasing, or if you will, of a less
heady sent then the apples of the male, wherein is contained such like seed,
but smaller and blacker: the roots are like the former, black without and
white within, and divided in the same manner as the male is, sometimes with
more, and sometimes with fewer parts or branches.

The Place.
They grow in many places of Italy, as Matthiolus reports, but especially on
Mount Garganus in Apulia. Clusius says he found the female in many wet
grounds of Spain, as also in the borders of those meadows that lie near unto
rivers and water courses. The male is cherished in many Gardens, for pleasure
as well as for use: but the female as is said, is both very rare, and far
more tender.

The Time.
The Male flowreth in March, and the fruit is ripe in July. The Female, if it
be well preserved, flowreth not until August, or September; so that without
extraordinary care, we never see the fruit thereof in our gardens.

The Names.
Mandragoras mas is called albus, as the Faemina is called niger, which titles
of black and white, are referred unto the color of the leaves: the female is
called also Thridacias, from the likeness of Lettice, whereunto they say in
form it does carry some similitude. Dioscorides says, that in his time the
male was called M^rion, and both of them Antimelum, and Circaea. We call them
in English, The male, and the female Mandrake.

The Virtues.
The leaves have a cooling and drying quality, fit for the ointment Pop^leo^,
wherein it is put. But the Apples have a soporiferous property, as Leuinus
Lemnius makes mention in his Herball to the Bible, of an experiment of his
own. Besides, as Dioscorides first, and then Serapio, Auicen, Paulus Aegineta,
and others also do declare, they conduce much to the cooling and cleansing of
an hot matrix. And it is probable, that Rachel knowing that they might be
profitable for her hot and dry body, was the more earnest with Lea^ for her
Son Rubens Apples, as it is set down Genesis 30. verse 14. The strong sent
of these apples is remembered also, Cant. 7.13. although some would divert the
signification of the Hebrew word, (...), unto Violets, or some other sweet
flowers, in the former place of Genesis, and the fruit of Musa, or Adams Apples
in this place of the Canticles. Hamilcar the Carthaginian Captain is said to
have infected the wine of the Lybians (his enemies against whom he fought) with
the apples of Mandrake, whereby they being made exceeding drowsy, he obtained
a famous victory over them.

CHAP. XCVI.
Pomum Amoris. Love Apples.
ALthough the beauty of this plant consists not in the flower, but fruit,
yet give m^ ^eaue to insert it here, lest otherwise it have no place: whereof
there are two especial sorts, which we comprehend in one Chapter, and
distinguish them by maius and minus, greater and smaller: yet of the greater
kind, we have noursed up in our Gardens two sorts, that differ only in the
color of the fruit, and in nothing else.

Pomum Amoris maius fructu rubro. Great Apple of Love the ordinary red sort.
This greater kind of Love Apples, which has been most frequently cherished
with us, has diverse long and trayling branches, leaning or spreading upon the
ground, not able to sustain themselves, whereon do grow many long winged
leaves, that is, many leaves set on both sides, and all along a middle ribbe,
some being greater, and others less, iagged also and dented about the edges,
of a grayish over worm green color, somewhat rough or hairy in handling,
from among the leaves and the branches come forth long stalks, with diverse
flowers set thereon, upon several short footstalks, consisting of six, and
sometimes of eight small long yellow leaves, with a middle prick or vmbone,
which after the flowers are fallen, rises to be the fruit, which are of the
bigness of a small or mean Pippin, unevenly bunched out in diverse places, and
scarce any full round without bunches, of a fair pale reddish color, or
somewhat deeper, like unto an Orange, full of a slimie juice and watery pulpe,
wherein the seed lies, which is white, flat and somewhat rough: the root
shoots with many small strings and bigger branches underground, but perishes
at the first feeling of our winter weather. The fruit hereof by often sowing
it in our Land, is become much smaller then I have here described it: but was
at the first, and so for two or three years after, as big as I have related
it.

Pomum Amoris maius fructu lute^. Yellow Amorous Apples.
Of the same kind is this other sort of Amorous Apples, differing in nothing
but the color of the fruit, which is of a pale yellow color, having bunches
or lobes in the same manner, and seed also like the former.

Pomum Amoris minus, sieve Mala Ethiopica parua. Small Love Apples.
The small Apples of Love in the very like manner, have long weak trayling
branches, beset with such like lea^es as the greater kind has, but smaller in
every part: the flowers also stand many together on a long stalk, and yellow
as the former, but much smaller: the fruit are small, round, yellowish red
berries, not much bigger then great grapes, wherein are contained white flat
seed, like the other, but smaller: the root perishes in like manner every
year, and therefore must be new sown every spring, if you will have the
pleasure of their sight in the garden; yet some years I have known them rise
of their own sowing in my garden.

The Place.
They grow naturally in the hot Countries of Barbary, and Ethiopia; yet some
report them to be first brought from Peru, a Province of the West Indies. We
only have them for curiosity in our Gardens, and for the amorous aspect or
beauty of the fruit.

The Time.
They flower in July and August, and their fruit is ripe in the middle or end
of September for the most part.

The Names.
The first is named diversely by diverse Authors; for Lobel, Camerarius, and
others, call them Poma amoris. Dodonaeus Aurea Mala. Gesnerus first, and
Bauhinus after him, make it to be a kind of Solanum Pomiferum. Anguillara
takes it to be Lycopersicum of Galen. Others think it to be Glaucium of
Dioscorides. The last is called Mala Aethiopica parua, and by that title was
first sent unto us, as if the former were of the same kind and country. We
call them in English, Apples of Love, Loue-Apples, Golden Apples, or Amorous
Apples, and all as much to one purpose as another, more then for their
beautiful aspect.

The Virtues.
In the hot Countries where they naturally grow, they are much eaten of the
people, to cool and quench the heat and thirst of their hot stomaches. The
Apples also boiled, or infused in oil in the sun, is thought to be good to
cure the itch, assuredly it will allay the heat thereof.

CHAP. XCVII.
Digitalis. Foxegloue.
THere are three principal sorts of Foxegloues; a greater, a middle or mean
sort, and a lesser, and of them, three especial colors, that is, purple,
white, and yellow; the common purple kind that grows abroad in the fields, I
leave to his wild habitation: and of the rest as follows.

1. Digitalis maxima ferruginea. Dun colored Foxegloues.
The leaves of this Foxegloue are long and large, of a grayish green color,
finely cut or dented about the edges, like the teeth of a fine saw; among
which comes up a strong tall stalk, which when it was full grown, and with
ripe seed thereon, I have measured to be seven foot high at the least, whereon
grow an innumerable company (as I may so say, in respect of the abundance) of
flowers, nothing so large as the common purple kind, that grows wild every
wherein our own Country, and of a kind of brown or yellowish dunne color,
with a long lip at every flower; after them come seed, like the common
kind, but in smaller heads: the roots are stringie like the ordinary, but do
usually perish, or seldom abide after it has given seed.

2. Digitalis mayor flore caruco. Blush colored Foxegloues.
This kind of Foxegloues has reasonable large leaves, yet not altogether so
large 1 Ca^na Indica. The Indian Red. 2 Mandragoras mas. The male Mandrake. 3
Pomum amoris maius. Great Apples of love. 4 Digitalis mai^r flore luteo amplo.
The great yellow Foxegloue. 5. Digitalis media flore luteo rubente. Orange
tawny Foxegloues. 6 Digitalis maxima ferr^ginea. Dun colored Foxegloues.
depiction of flowers as the common field kind: the flowers are also smaller
then the common sort, but of a blush color.

3. Digitalis media flore luteo rubente. Orange tawnie Foxegloue.
As this Foxegloue is none of the greatest, so also is it none of the smallest;
but a sort between both, having leaves in some proportion correspondent to the
lesser yellow Foxegloue, but not so large as the lesser white: the flowers are
long and narrow, almost as large as the last white, but nothing so large as the
first white, of a fair yellowish brown color, as if the yellow were
ouershadowed with a reddish color, and is that color we usually call an
Orange tawnie color: the seed is like the former: the roots perish every
year that they bear seed, which is usually the second year of the springing.

4. Digitalis mayor alba. The greater white Foxegloue.
This white Foxegloue is in all things so like unto the purple wild kind,
that it can hardly be distinguished from it, unless it be in the fresher
greenness and largeness of the leaves: the flowers are as great in a manner
as the purple, but wholly white, without any spot in them: the seed and other
things agree in all points.

5. Digitalis alba altera seu minor. The lesser white Foxegloue.
We have in our Gardens another sort of white Foxegloue, whose leaves are like
unto the last described, but not altogether so long or large, and of a darker
green color: the stalk grows not so high, as not full three foot: the
flowers are pure white, fashioned like unto the former, but not so great or
large, in all other things alike: the roots hereof did abide sometime in our
Gardens, but since perished, and the seed also, since when we never could
obtain from any our friends of that kind again.

6. Digitalis mayor lutea flore amplo. The great yellow Foxegloue.
The leaves of this greater yellow Foxegloue, are in form somewhat like unto
the common purple kind, but not altogether so large: the stalk grows to be
three or four foot high, whereon stand many long hollow pendulous flowers, in
shape like the ordinary purple* but somewhat shorter, and more large and open
at the brimmes, of a fair yellow color, wherein are long threads, like as in
the others: the root hereof is greater at the head, and more woody then any
of the rest, with many smaller fibers, spreading themselves in the ground, and
abides almost as well as our common purple kind.

7. Digitalis minor lutea sieve pallida. The small pale yellow Foxegloue.
This small pale yellow Foxegloue has somewhat short, broad, smooth and dark
green leaves, snipt or dented about the edges very finely: the stalk is two
foot high, beset with such like leaves, but lesser: the flowers are more in
number then in any of the rest, except the first and greatest, and grow along
the upper part of the stalk, being long and hollow, like the other, but very
small, and of a pale yellow color almost white: the seed vessels are small
like the former, wherein are contained seed like the rest, but smaller: the
roots are stringy, but durable, and seldom perish with any injury of the
extremest frosts.

The Place.
The great white kind has been often, and in many places found wild in our
own Country, among or hard by the common purple kind. All the rest are
strangers, but cherished in our Gardens.

The Time.
They flower in June and July, and some in August, their seed becoming ripe
quickly after.

The Names.
Only the name Digitalis, is of all Writers given unto these plants; for it is
not known to be remembered of any of the old Authors. We call them generally
in English, Foxegloue; but some (as thinking it to be too foolish a name) do
call them Finger-flowers, because they are like unto the fingers of a glove,
the ends cut off.

The Virtues.
Foxegloues are not used in Physic by any judicious man that I know; yet some
Italians of Bononia, as Camerarius says, in his time used it as a wound herb.

CHAP. XCVIII.
Verbascum. Mullein.
THere be diverse kinds of Mullein, as white Mullein, black Mullein, woody
Mullein, base Mullein, Moth Mullein, and Ethiopian Mullein, all which to
distinguish or to describe, is neither my purpose, nor the intent of this
work, which is to store a Garden with flowers of delight, and sequester others
not worthy of that honor. Those that are fit to be brought to your
consideration in this place, are first, the Blattarias, or Moth Mulleins, and
then the woody Mullein, which otherwise is called French Sage, and lastly, the
Ethiopian Mullein, whose beauty consists not in the flower, but in the whole
plant; yet if it please you not, take it according to his Country for a Moore,
an Infidel, a Slave, and so use it.

1. Blattaria lutea odorata. Sweet yellow Moth Mullein.
The yellow Moth Mullein whose flower is sweet, has many hard grayish green
leaves lying on the ground, somewhat long and broad, and pointed at the end:
the stalks are two or three foot high, with some leaves on them, and branching
out from the middle upwards into many long branches, stored with many small
pale yellow flowers, of a pretty sweet sent, somewhat stronger then in the
other sorts, which seldom gives seed, but abides in the root, living many
years, which few or none of the others do.

2. Blattaria lutea mayor sieve Hispanica. The great yellow Moth Mullein.
This Spanish kind has larger and greener leaves then the former, and rounder
and larger then the next that follows: the stalk is higher then in any of
the Moth Mulleins, being for the most part four or five foot high, whereon
toward the top grow many goodly yellow flowers, consisting of five leaves,
as all the rest do, not so thick set as the former, but much larger, with
some small purplish threads in the middle: the ends whereof are fashioned
somewhat like as if a Fly were creeping up the flower, which turn into round
heads, sometimes two or three or more standing together, but usually one,
wherein lie small duskie seed: the root is not great nor full of threads, and
does perish most usually having given seed, except the Winter be very mild.

3. Blattaria lutea altera vulgatior. The ordinary yellow Moth Mullein.
This yellow Moth Mullein (which is the most frequent in our Gardens) has
longer, and narrower leaves then any of the former, and roundly notched or
dented on the edges, of a dark green color: the stalk is sometimes
branched, but most usually single, whereon stand many gold yellow flowers, not
fully so large as the Spanish kind, but with the like purple threads in the
middle: the seed is small, and contained in the like round heads, but always
every one single by it self: the root perishes every year that it bears
seed.

4. Blattaria flore luteo purpurascente. Cloth of gold Moth Mullein.
The greatest point of difference between this and the last described,
consists chiefly in the color of the flower, which in this is of the color
of cloth of gold, that is, the ground yellow, and ouershadowed with a bright
crimson color, which is a fine color of much delight: the threads in the
middle are not so purple red as in the former, but much about the color of the
flower: this is not so willing to give seed, and will as hardly abide in the
root, and has out of question risen from the seed of the former.

5. Blattaria flore albo. White Moth Mullein.
The leaves of the white Moth Mullein are somewhat like unto the yellow, yet
not altogether so much roundly notched about the edges, but rather a little
dented, with sharper notches: the stalk rises as high as the yellow, and has
now and then some branches about it: the flowers hereof are pure white, as
large and great as the ordinary yellow, or somewhat larger, with the like
purple threads in the middle, as are in the yellow: the seed is like the other;
the root perishes in like manner, and will not endure.

6. Blattaria flore purpureo. Purple Moth Mullein.
The Purple Moth Mullein has his leaves lying on the ground, broader and
shorter then any of the other, of a more grayish green color, and without any
denting for the most part about the edges, sharp pointed also at the end of
the leaf; among the leaves rises up the stalk, not so high as either the
white or the yellow, and many times branched, bearing many flowers thereon, of
the same fashion, and no whit smaller, of a fair deep bluish color tending
to redness, the threads in the middle of the flowers being yellow: the seed
vessels hereof are somewhat smaller then any of the former, except the first
sweet yellow kind: the root hereof is long, thick, and blackish on the
outside, abiding very well from year to year, and rises well also from the
sowing of the seed.

7. Blattaria flore caeruleo. Blew Moth Mullein.
This blew Moth Mullein is in all respects like unto the former purple kind,
saving only in the color of the flower, which is of a bluish violet color,
and is not much inferior either in greatness of the plant, or in the
largeness of the flower, unto the former purple kind, and endures many
years in the like manner. And these be all the sorts of this kind of Moth
Mullein, that I have seen and noursed up for this my Garden, without
interposing any unknown, not seen, or unworthy.

8. Verbascum siluestre sieve quartum Matthioli. Woody Mullein or French Sage.
Woody Mullein or French Sage, has diverse woody branches two or three foot
high, very hoary or white, whereon at several joints stand diverse thick
leaves, white also and hoary, long, somewhat broad, round pointed, and rough,
somewhat resembling the leaves of Sage in the form and roughness, but not in
the sent, whereof our people gave it the name of Sage, calling it French Sage
(when as it is as great a stranger in France as in England, yet they do with
this as with many other things, calling them French, which come from beyond the
Seas; as for example, all or most of our bulbous flowers, they call French
flowers, etc.) at the tops of the stalks and branches, at certain
distances, are placed round about them many gaping flowers, like unto the
flowers of Sage, but yellow: after which now and then come seed, somewhat
bigger then the Moth Mulleins, and less then the next Mullein of Ethiopia: the
root is woody at the top, with diverse blackish strings growing from it, and
endures as well above ground with his leaves, as under it with his roots.

9. Aethiopis. Ethiopian Mullein.
This Mullein of Ethiopia has many great, broad, and large leaves lying on the
ground, rent or torn in diverse of them very much on the sides, of so hoary a
white green color, that it far passes any of the white Mulleins, that
grow wild abroad in our own Country; for they are of a yellowish white
hoarinesse, nothing so pleasant to look on as this: in the middle of these
leaves rises up a square strong stalk, four or five foot high, set full of
such like leaves as grow below, but much lesser, and lesser still up to the
top, all hoary and woolly, as the rest, and divided into many branches,
spreading far, and taking up a great compass of ground, more then any one
root of Garden Clary, or other such like plant: at each of the stalks and
branches are set two small leaves, and with them, round about the stalks,
stand many small gaping flowers, of a pale bleake blew color: the seed is
almost as large as Garden Clary seed, and of the same form and color: the
root is woody, and perishes as soon as it has borne seed, which is
usually the second year after the sowing; for the first year it seldom
runs up to flower.

10. Lamium Pannonicum sieve Galeopsis Pannonica. Hungary dead Nettle or the
Dragon flower.
Let me thrust this plant into this place, rather then make a peculiar
Chapter, because I have no other of the same stock or kindred to be joined
with it, and is a pretty ornament in a Garden. The leaves whereof are very
large, round, and great, rough or full of veins, which make it seem crumpled,
dented or deeply notched about the edges, and of a very dark green color,
and sometimes brownish, or of a dark reddish color withal, every one
standing on a long foote-stalke, very like in form unto the great white
Arch-Angell leaves, but far larger and blacker: the stalks are great and
four square, having leaves and flowers standing round about them at the joints
like coronets, which flowers are very great, long, and wide gaping open, of a
dark red or purple color, with some whiteness or spots in the jaws, and
some hairinesse also on the sides, which stand in full flower two or three
months most usually, and sometimes longer, after which come brownish seed:
the root is a great tuft or bush of long whitish strings, and increases every
year, not fearing the greatest injuries of our coldest and extremest Winters.

The Place.
All these plants are strangers in our Country, and only preserved in
Gardens, to furnish them with variety; but (as I said) the cloth of gold Moth
Mullein has been raised from seed in our own Country.

The Time.
The last flowreth first, before all the rest, beginning in April. The Moth
Mulleins in May and June. The French Sage in July.

The Names.
All the sorts of Blattaria may be comprehended under the kinds of Verbascum
nigrum, as any one but meanly exercised in the knowledge of plants, may
discern. And although Pliny says, that Moths do most frequently haunt where
Blattaria either grows, or is laid, yet it is not observed sufficiently in
our Country so to do, notwithstanding the name of Moth Mullein is generally
given them. The last is generally called with us Lamium Pannonicum, but
certainly it is the Galeosis maxima Pannonica of Clusius.

The Virtues.
Other qualities I have not found has been allotted unto the Blattaria or Moth
Mullein, then those of Pliny, to engender Moths. We use none of these plants
in Physic in these days.

CHAP. XCIX.
Valeriana. Valerian.
THe many sorts of Valerian (or Set-wall as many do call them) are fitter for
a general work, or a general Physical Garden of Simples, then this of
delightful flowers. I will therefore select out a few, worthy of the place,
and offer them to your considerations.

1. Valeriana rubra Dodonaei. Red Valerian.
This Valerian has diverse hard, but brittle whitish green stalks, rising
from the root, full of tuberous or swelling joints, whereat stand two leaves,
on each side one, and now and then some small leaves from between them, which
are somewhat long and narrow, broadest in the middle, and small at both ends,
without either division or incisure on the edges, of a pale green color: the
stalks are branched at the top into diverse parts, at the ends whereof stand
many flowers together, as it were in an vmbell or tuft, somewhat like unto the
flowers of our ordinary Valerian, but with longer necks, and of a fine red
color, very pleasant to behold, but of no sent of any Valerian: after these
flowers have stood blown a very great while, they suddenly fall away, and the
seed is ripe very quickly after, which is whitish, standing upon the branches
naked, as the Valerians do, and very like unto them, with a little white down
at the end of every one of them, whereby they are soon carried away with the
wind: the root is great, thick, and white, continuing long, and shooting out
new branches every year, and smelling somewhat like a Valerian.

2. Nardus Montana tuberosa. Knobbed Mountain Valerian.
This kind of Valerian or Spiknard, if you will so call it, has his first
leaves lying on the ground, without any division in them at all, being smooth,
and of a dark green color, which so abide all the winter; but those that
spring up after, and when it runs up to flower, are cut in on the edges,
very like unto the iagged leaves of the great garden Valerian, and so the elder
they grow, the more cut and iagged they are: the stalk and flowers are very
like the stalk with flowers of the garden Valerian, but of a dark or deep
red color, and more store of them thrust together, by double the number
almost: the seed is like the seed of the great Valerian: the root is
tuberous, or knobbed in many parts, round about, above and below also, with
some fibers shooting from them, whereby it is increased, and smells very like
the root of the garden Setwall, or not altogether so strong.

1 Blattaria flore albo. Moth Mullein with a white flower. 2 Blattaria flore
purpureo* Moth Mullein with a purple flower. 3 Verbascum ^uertum Matthioli.
French Sage. 4 Aethiopis. Ethiopian Mullein. 5 Valeriana rubra Dodonaei. Red
Valerian. 6 Valeriana Graeca. Greek Valerian. 7 Lamium Pannoni^^m. Hungary dead
Nettle. 8 Cardamine flore pleno. Double Cuckowe flower or Ladies smocks.
depiction of flowers

3. Valeriana Graeca. Greek Valerian.
The Greek Valerian has many winged leaves lying upon the ground, that is,
many small leaves set on both sides of a middle ribbe, very like unto the wild
Valerian, that grows by the ditch sides, but much smaller and tenderer, among
which rise up one or two round brittle stalks, two foot high or thereabouts,
whereon are set at the joints, such like leaves as grow below, but smaller: the
tops of the stalks are divided into many small branches, thick set
together, full with flowers, consisting of five small round leaves a piece,
laid open like unto the Cinquefoile flower, with some white threads in the
middle, tipped with yellow pendents: the color of these flowers in some plants,
is of a fair bleake blew color, and in others pure white: And I do hear of
one beyond the Seas (if the report be true, for I have not seen such a one)
which should bear red flowers: after the flowers are past, there come up in
their places small hard husks or heads, containing small blackish seeds: the
root is composed of a number of small long blackish threads, fastened together
at the head, without any sent at all of a Valerian, either in root or leaf;
and why it should be called a Valerian I see no great reason, for it agrees
with none of them, in flower or seed, and but only with the wild Valerian in
leaf, as I said before: but as it is, we so give it you, and for the flowers
sake is received into our gardens, to help to fill up the number of natures
rarities and varieties.

The Place.
All these Valerians are strangers, but endenizond for their beauties sake in
our Gardens. The Mountain Valerian I had of the liberality of my loving
friend John Tradescante, who in his travail, and search of natures varieties,
met with it, and imparted thereof unto me.

The Time.
They flower in the Summer months, and seed quickly after.

The Names.
The first is generally called of most, Valeriana rubra Dodonaei, who says
also that some would have it to be Behen rubrum. Some call it Valerianthon,
others make it a kind of Ocimastrum, and some Saponaria altera, with other
names, which are to no great purpose to set down in this place, it being
fitter for a general work to discuss of names, wherein both reading,
knowledge and judgment must be shown, to correct errors, and set down the
truth, that one may rest thereon. The others have their names in their titles
sufficient to distinguish them.

The Virtues.
The Mountain Valerian is of all the the rest here set down of most use in
Physic, the rest having little or none that I know, although it be much
weaker then the great garden kind, or the Indian Nardus, in whose steed
anciently it was used, in oils, ointments, etc.

CHAP. C.
Cardamine. Cuckoo flowers, or Ladies smockes.
OF the common sorts of Cuckoo flowers that grow by ditch-sides, or in moist
meadows, and wet grounds, it is not my purpose here to write, but of one or two
other, the most specious or fair of all the tribe, that do best befit this
garden.

1. Cardamine flore pleno. Double Cuckoo flowers.
The double Cardamine has a few winged leaves, weak and tender, lying on the
ground, very like unto the single meadow kind; from among which rises up a
round green stalk, set here and there, with the like leaves that grow below,
the top whereof has a few branches, whereon stand diverse flowers, every one
upon a small footestalk, consisting of many small whitish round leaves, a
little dashed over with a show of blush, set round together, which make a double
flower: the root creeps under ground, sending forth small white fibers, and
shoots up in diverse places.

2. Cardamine trifolia. Trefoile Ladies smockes.
This small plant has diverse hard, dark round green leaves, somewhat uneven
about the edges, always three set together on a blackish small footstalke,
among which rise up small round blackish stalks, half a foot high, with
three small leaves at the joints, where they branch forth; at the tops
whereof stand many flowers, consisting of four leaves a piece, of a whitish or
blush color very pale: after which come up small, thick and long pods,
wherein is contained small round seed: the root is composed of many white
threads, from the heads whereof run out small strings, of a dark purple
color, whereby it increases.

The Place.
The first with the double flower is found in diverse places of our own
Country, as near Micham about eight miles from London; also in Lancashire,
from whence I received a plant, which perished, but was found by the industry
of a worthy Gentlewoman, dwelling in those parts heretofore remembered, called
Mistress Thomasin Tunstall, a great lover of these delights. The other was
sent me by my especial good friend John Tradescante, who brought it among other
dainty plants from beyond the Seas, and imparted thereof a root to me.

The Time.
The last most usually flowreth before the former, yet not much differing, that
is, in the end of April or in May.

The Names.
The first is a double kind of that plant, that growing wild abroad, is
usually called Cardamine altera, and Sisymbrium alterum of Dioscorides, and of
some Flos cuculi, but not fitly; for that name is more usually given unto the
wild featherd Campions, both single and double, as is before expressed: yet
for want of a fitter name, we may call it in English, either Cuckowe flower,
or Ladies smockes, which you will. The second has been sent under the name of
Sanicula trifolia, but the most frequent name now received, is Cardamine
trifolia, and in English Trefoile Ladies spockes.

The Virtues.
The double Ladies smockes are of the same quality with the single, and is
thought to be as effectual as Watercresses. The property of the other I
think is not much known, although some would make it a wound herb.

CHAP. CI.
Thlaspi Creticum. Candy Tufts.
OF the many sorts of Thlaspi it is not the scope of this work to relate, I
will select but only two or three, which for their beauty are fit to be
inserted into this garden.

Thlaspi Creticum vmbellatum flore albo and purpureo. Candy Tufts white and
purple.
This small plant rises seldom above a foot and a half high, having small,
narrow, long and whitish green leaves, notched or dented with three or four
notches on each side, from the middle to the point-wards; from among which rise
up the stalks, branched from the bottom almost into diverse small branches, at
the tops whereof stand many small flowers, thick thrust together in an vmbell
or tuft, making them seem to be small, round, double flowers of many leaves,
when as every flower is single, and stands a part by it self, of a fair
white color in some plants, without any spot, and in others with a purplish
spot in the center or middle, as if some of the middle leaves were purple, in
others again the whole flower is purplish all over, which make a pretty show
in a garden: the seed is contained in many small and flat seed vessels, which
stand together in an vmbell, as the flowers did, in which are contained
somewhat reddish seed, like unto some other sorts of Thlaspi, called Treakle
Mustards: the root is small and hard, and perishes every year having given
seed.

Thlaspi Marinum Baticum.
We have another sort, whose leaves before it sends forth any stalk, are a
little toothed, or finely dented about the edges, and brancheth not so much
out, but carries an vmbell of purplish flowers like unto the former, and paler
yellow seed.

The Place.
These do grow in Spain and Candie, not far from the Sea side.

The Time.
These Thlaspi give not their flowers until the end of June, or beginning of
July, and the seed is ripe soon after.

The Names.
The first is named by some, Draba, or Arabis, as Dodonaeus, but Draba is
another plant differing much from this. We call one sort, Thlaspi Creticum,
and the other Thlaspi Baticum marinum, because the one came from Spain, and
the other from Candy; we give it in English, the name of Tufts, because it does
fit the form of the flowers best, although ordinarily all the Thlaspi are
Englished Wild Mustardes.

The Virtues.
Candy, or Spanish Tufts, is not so sharp biting in taste, as some other of
the Thlaspies are, and therefore is not to be used in medicines, where Thlaspi
should be in the stead thereof.

CHAP. CII.
Clematis. Clamberers, or Creepers.
Having showed you all my store of herbs bearing fine flowers, let me now
bring to your consideration the rest of those plants, be they Shrubs or Trees,
that are cherished in our garden, for the beauty of their flowers chiefly, or
for some other beautiful respect: and first I will begin with such as creep
on the ground, without climing, and then such as clime up by poles, or other
things, that are set or grow near them, fit to make Bowers, and Arbours, or
else are like them in form, in name, or some other such quality or property.

1. Clematis Daphnoides, sieve Vinca peruinca simplex minor diuersorum colorum.
Single Perwinkle of diverse colors.
The smaller Perwinkle which not only grows wild in many places, but is
most usual in our Gardens, has diverse creeping branches, trayling or running
upon the ground, shooting out small fibers at the joints, as it creeps,
taking thereby hold in the ground, and rooteth in diverse places: at the joints
of these branches stand two small dark green shining leaves, somewhat like
unto small Baye leaves, but smaller, and at the joints likewise with the
leaves, come forth the flowers, one at a joint, standing upon a tender
footestalke, being somewhat long and hollow, parted at the brims, sometimes
into four leaves, and sometimes into five, the most ordinary sort is of a pale
or bleake blew color, but some are pure white, and some of a dark reddish
purple color: the root is in the body of it, little bigger then a rush,
bushing in the ground, and creeping with his branches far about, taking root
in many places, whereby it quickly possesses a great compass; and is
therefore most usually, planted under hedges, or where it may have room to
run.

2. Vinca peruinca flore duplici purpureo. Double purple Perwinkle.
The double Perwinkle is like unto the former single kind, in all things
except in the flower, which is of that dark reddish purple color that is in
one of the single kinds; but this has another row of leaves within the
flower, so that the two rows of leaves causes it to be called double, but the
leaves of these are lesser then the single. I have heard of one with a double
white flower, but I have not yet seen it.

3. Clematis Daphnoides sieve Peruinca mayor. The greater Perwinkle.
This greater Perwinkle is somewhat like the former, but greater, yet his
branches creep not in that manner, but stand more upright, or less creeping
at the least: the leaves also hereof stand by couples at the joints, but they
are broader and larger by the half: the flowers are larger, consisting of five
leaves that are blew, a little deeper then the former blew: this plant is far
tenderer to keep then the other, and therefore would stand warm, as well as
in a moist shadowie place.

4. Clematis altera sieve vrens flore albo. Burning Clamberer, or Virgins Bower.
This Causticke or burning Climer, has very long and climing tender branches,
yet somewhat woody below, which wind about those things that stand near it,
covered with a brownish green bark, from the joints whereof shoot forth many
winged leaves, consisting for the most part of five single leaves, that is, two
and two together, and one at the end, which are a little cut in or notched on
the edges here and there, but every part of them is lesser then the leaves of
the next following Climer, without any clasping tendrels to wind about any
thing at all: toward the upper part of the branches, with the said leaves,
come forth long stalks, whereon stand many white flowers clustering together,
opening the brims into six or eight small leaves, spreading like a star,
very sweet of smell, or rather of a strong heady sent, which after turn into
flattish and blackish seed, plumed at the head, which plume or feather flies
away with the wind after it has stood long, and leaves the seed naked or
bare: the root is white and thick, fleshie and tender, or easy to be broken,
as my self can well testify, in that desiring to take a sucker from the
root, I could not handle it so tenderly, but that it broke notwithstanding all
my care. Master Gerard in his Herball makes mention of one of this kind with
double white flowers, which he says he recovered from the seed was sent him
from Argentine, that is Strasborough, whereof he sets forth the figure with
double flowers: but I never saw any such with him, neither did I ever hear of
any of this kind with double flowers. Clusius indeed says, that he received
from a friend some seed under the name of Clematis flore albo pleno: but he
doubts whether there be any such: the plants that sprang with him from that
seed, were like unto the upright kind called Flammila Matthioli, or Iouis
cresta, as he there says: but assuredly I have been informed from some of my
especial friends beyond Sea, that they have a double white Clematis, and have
promised to send it; but whether it will be of the climing or upright sort, I
cannot tell until I see it: but surely I do much doubt whether the double
will give any good seed.

5. Clematis altera sieve peregrina flore rubro. Red Ladies Bower.
This Climer has many limber and weak climing branches like the former,
covered with a brown thin outer bark, and green underneath: the leaves stand
at the joints, consisting but of three leaves or parts, whereof some are
notched on one side, and some on both, without any clasping tendrels also, but
winding with his branches about any thing stands next unto it: the flowers in
like manner come from the same joints with the leaves, but not so many together
as the former upon long footstalkes, consisting of four leaves a piece,
standing like a cross, of a dark red color; the seed is flat and round, and
pointed at the end, three or four or more standing close together upon one
stalk, without any down upon them at all, as in the former: the roots are a
bundell of brownish yellow strong strings, running down deep into the ground,
from a big head above.

6. Clematis peregrina flore purpureo simplici. Single purple Ladies Bower.
This Ladies Bower differs in nothing from the last described, but only in
the color of the flower, which is of a sad bluish purple color; so that the
one is not possible to be known from the other, until they be in flower.

7. Clematis peregrina flore purpureo pleno. Double flowred purple Ladies Bower.
This double Clematis has branches and leaves so near resembling the single
kinds, that there can be known no difference, unless it be, that this grows
more goal and great, and yields both more store of branches from the ground,
and more spreading above: the chiefest mark to distinguish it is the flower,
which in this is very thick and double, consisting of a number of smaller
leaves, set close together in order in the middle, the four outermost leaves
that encompasse them, being much broader and larger then any of the inward, but
all of a dull or sad bluish purple color, the points or ends of the leaves
seeming a little darker then the middle of them: this bears no seed that
ever I could see, hear of, or learn by any of credit, that have noursed it a
great while; and therefore the tales of false deceitful gardiners, and others,
that diliuer such for truth, to deceive persons ignorant thereof, must not be
credulously entertained.

In the great book of the Garden of the Bishop of Eystot (which place is near
unto Noremberg) in Germany, I read of a Clematis of this former kind,
Clematis peregrina flore carnec caeru^eo.
whose figure is thereto also annexed, with double flowers of an incarnate, or
pale purple tending to a blush color, whereof I have not heard from any other
place.

8. Flammula Iouis erecta. Upright Virgins Bower.
This kind of Clematis has diverse more upright stalks then any of the four
last described, sometimes four or five foot high, or more; yet leaning or
bending a little, so that it had some need of sustaining, covered with a
brownish bark; from whence come forth on all sides diverse winged leaves,
consisting of five or seven leaves, set on both sides of a middle ribbe,
whereof one is at the end: the tops of the stalks are divided into many
branches, bearing many white sweet smelling flowers on them, like in fashion
unto the white Virgins Bower; after which come such like feather topt seed,
which remain and show themselves, being flat like the other, when the plumes
are blown abroad: the root spreads in the ground from a thick head, into
many long strings, and fasteneth it self strongly in the earth; but all the
stalks dye down every year, and spring afresh in the beginning of the next.

9. Clematis caerulea Pannonica. The Hungarian Climer.
The stalks of this plant stand upright, and are four square, bearing at every
joint two leaves, which at the first are closed together, and after they are
open, are somewhat like unto the leaves of Asclepias, or Swallow-wort: from the
tops of the stalks, and sometimes also from the sides by the leaves comes
forth one flower, bending the head downward, consisting of four leaves,
somewhat long and narrow, standing like a cross, and turning up their ends a
little again, of a fair blew or sky color, with a thick pale yellow short
thrumme, made like a head in the middle: after the flower is past, the head
turns into such a like round feather topt ball, as is to be seen in the
Travelers joy, or Viorna (as it is called) that grows plentifully in Kent,
and in other places by the way sides, and in the hedges, wherein is included
such like flat seed. These stalks (like as the last) dye down to the ground
every year, and rise again in the Spring following, shooting out new
branches, and thereby increases in the root.

10. Maracoc sieve Clematis Virginiana. The Virginia Climer.
Because this brave and too much desired plant does in some things resemble the
former Climers, so that unto what other family or kindred I might better
conioyne it I know not; let me I pray insert it in the end of their Chapter,
with this description. It rises out of the ground (very late in the year,
about the beginning of May, if it be a plant has risen from the seed of our
own sowing, and if it be an old one, such as has been brought to us from
Virginia, not till the end thereof) with a round stalk, not above a yard and a
half high (in any that I have seen) but in hotter Countries, as some Authors
have set it down, much higher, bearing one leaf at every joint, which from
the ground to the middle thereof has no claspers, but from thence upwards has
at the same joint with the leaf both a small twining clasper, like unto a
Vine, and a flower also: every leaf is broad at the stalk thereof, and
divided about the middle on both sides, making it somewhat resemble a Fig
leaf, ending in three points, whereof the middlemost is longest: the bud of
the flower, before it do open, is very like unto the head or seed vessel of
the ordinary single Nigella, having at the head or top five small crooked
horns, which when this bud opens, are the ends or points of five leaves,
that are white on the inside, and lay themselves flat, like unto an Anemone,
and are a little hollow like a scoope at the end, with five other smaller
leaves, and whiter then they lying between them, which were hid in the bud
before it opened, so that this flower being full blown open, consists of ten
white leaves, laid in order round one by another: from the bottom of these
leaves on the inside, rise diverse twined threads, which spread and lay
themselves all over these white leaves, reaching beyond the points of them a
little, and are of a reddish peach color: toward the bottomes likewise of
these white leaves there are two red circles, about the breadth of an Oten
straw, one distant from another (and in some flowers there is but one circle
seen) which add a great grace unto the flower; for the white leaves show their
color through the peach colored threads, and these red circles or rings upon
them being also perspicuous, make a tripartite show The Jesuits Figure of the
Maracoc.

GRANADILLVS FRVTEX INDICVS CHRISTI PASSIONIS IMAGO.

depiction of flowers of colors most delightful: the middle part of this
flower is hollow, and yellowish; in the bottom whereof rises up an vmbone, or
round style, somewhat big, of a whitish green color, spotted with reddish
spots like the stalks of Dragons, with five round threads or chiues, spotted
in the like manner, and tipped at the ends with yellow pendents, standing about
the middle part of the said vmbone, and from thence rising higher, ends in
three long crooked horns most usually (but sometimes in four, as has been
observed in Rome by Dr. Aldine, that set forth some principal things of
Cardinal Farnesius his Garden) spotted like the rest, having three round
green buttons at their ends: these flowers are of a comfortable sweet sent,
very acceptable, which perish without yielding fruit with us, because it
flowreth so late: but in the natural place, and in hot Countries, it bears a
small round whitish fruit, with a crown at the top thereof, wherein is
contained (while it is fresh, and before it be over dried) a sweet liquor, but
when it is dry, the seed within it, which is small, flat, somewhat rough and
black, will make a rattling noise: the roots are composed of a number of
exceeding long and round yellowish brown strings, spreading far abroad under
the ground (I have seen some roots that have been brought over, that were as
long as any roots of Sarsa parilla, and a great deal bigger, which to be
handsomely laid into the ground, were feign to be coyled like a cable) and
shooting up in several places a good distance one from another, whereby it may
be well increased.

The Place.
The first blew Perwinkle grows in many Woods and Orchards, by the hedge
sides in England, and so does the white here and there, but the other single
and double purple are in our Gardens only. The great Perwinkle grows in
Prouence of France, in Spain, and Italy, and other hot Countries, where also
grow all the twining Clamberers, as well single as double: but both the
upright ones do grow in Hungary and thereabouts. The surpassing delight of
all flowers came from Virginia. We preserve them all in our Gardens.

The Time.
The Perwinkles do flower in March and April. The Climers not until the end
of June, or in July, and sometimes in August. The Virginian somewhat later in
August; yet sometimes I have known the flower to show it self in July.

The Names.
The first is out of question the first Clematis of Dioscorides, and called of
1 Thalspi Creticum. Candy tufts. 2 Vinca peruinca flore simplici. Single
Perwinkle. 3 Vinca peruinca flore duplici. Double Perwinkle. 4 Flammula
Matthioli. Upright Virgins Bower. 5 Clematis peregrina flore simplici. The
single Ladies Bower. 6 Clematis peregrina flore pleno purpureo. Double flowred
Ladies Bower. 7 Maracoc sieve Clematis Virginiana. The Virginian Climer.
depiction of flowers many Clematis Daphnoides (but not that plant that is
simply called Daphnoides, for that is Laureola) and is usually called Vinca
pervinca: but it is not Chamaedaphne, for that is another plant, as shall be
showed in his place; some call it Centunculus: In English we call it
Perwinkle. The other is Clematis altera of Dioscorides, and is called also
Clematis peregrina, whose distinctions are set down in their titles: In
English, Ladies Bower, or Virgins Bower, because they are fit to grow by
Arbours, to cover them. The first upright Clamberer is called, and that rightly
of some, Clematis erecta, or surrecta. Of others, Flammula frutex, and Flammula
Iouis, or surrecta: In English, Upright Virgins Bower. The next is called by
Clusius, Clematis Pannonica caerulea, who thought it to be Climeni species, by
the relation of others, at the first, but after entitled it, Clematis: In
English, the Hungarian Climer. The last may be called in Latin, Clematis
Virginiana: In English, The Virgin or Virginian Climer; of the Virginians,
Maracoc: of the Spaniards in the West Indies Granadillo, because the fruit (as
is before said) is in some fashion like a small Pomegranate on the outside; yet
the seed within is flattish, round, and blackish. Some superstitious Iesu-ite
would feign make men believe, that in the flower of this plant are to be seen
all the marks of our Saviors Passion; and therefore call it Flos Passionis:
and to that end have caused figures to be drawn, and printed, with all the
parts proportioned out, as thorns, nails, spear, whippe, pillar, etc. in it,
and all as true as the Sea burns, which you may well perceive by the true
figure, taken to the life of the plant, compared with the figures set forth by
the Jesuits, which I have placed here likewise for every one to see: but these
be their aduantagious lies (which with them are tolerable, or rather pious and
meritorious) wherewith they use to instruct their people; but I dare say, God
never willed his Priests to instruct his people with lies: for they come from
the Devil, the author of them. But you may say I am beside my Text, and I am
in doubt you will think, I am in this besides my self, and so nothing to be
believed herein that I say. For, for the most part, it is an inherent error in
all of that side, to believe nothing, be it never so true, that any of our side
shall affirm, that contrarieth the assertions of any of their Fathers, as they
call them: but I must refer them to God, and he knows the truth, and will
reform or deforme them in his time. In regard whereof I could not but speak
(the occasion being thus offered) against such an erroneous opinion (which even
Dr. Aldine at Rome, before remembered, disproued, and contraried both the said
figures and name) and seek to disprove it, as does (I say not almost, but I am
afraid altogether) lead many to adore the very picture of such things, as are
but the fictions of superstitious brains: for the flower it self is far
differing from their figure, as both Aldine in the aforesaid book, and Robinus
at Paris in his Theatrum Florae, do set forth; the flowers and leaves being
drawn to the life, and there exhibited, which I hope may satisfy all men,
that will not be perpetually obstinate and contentious.

The Virtues.
Costaeus says he has often seen, that the leaves of Perwinkle held in the
mouth, has stayed the bleeding at the nose. The French do use it to stay the
menstruall fluxes. The other are causticke plants, that is, fiery hot, and
blistering the skin; and therefore (as Dioscorides says) is profitable to
take away the scurse, leprye, or such like deformities of the skin. What
property that of Virginia has, is not known to any with us I think, more
then that the liquor in the green fruit is pleasant in taste; but assuredly it
cannot be without some special properties, if they were known.

CHAP. CIII.
Chamaelaea. Dwarf Spurge Olive, or Dwarf Baye.
I Have three sorts of Chamaelaea to bring to your consideration, every one
differing notably from other; two of them of great beauty in their flowers, as
well as in the whole plant: the third abiding with green leaves, although it
have no beauty in the flower, yet worthy of the place it holds. And unto these
I must adioyne another plant, as coming nearest unto them in the bravery of
the flowers.

1. Chamaelaea Germanica sieve Mezereon floribus dilutioris coloris and
saturatioris. Dwarf Baye, or flowring Spurge Olive.
We have two sorts of this Spurge Olive or Dwafe Baye, differing only in the
color of the flowers. They both rise up with a thick woody stem, five or
six foot high sometimes, or more, and of the thickness (if they be very old)
of a man's wrest at the ground, spreading into many flexible long branches,
covered with a tough grayish bark, beset with small long leaves, somewhat like
unto Priuet leaves, but smaller and paler, and in a manner round pointed: the
flowers are small, consisting of four leaves, many growing together sometimes,
and breaking out of the branches by themselves: in the one sort of a pale red
at the first blowing, and more white afterward; the other of a deeper red in
the blossom, and continuing of a deeper red color all the time of the
flowring, both of them very sweet in smell: after the flowers are past, come
the berries, which are green at the first, and very red afterward, turning
blackish red, if they stand too long upon the branches: the roots spread into
many tough long branches, covered with a yellowish bark.

2. Chamaelaea Alpina. Mountain Spurge Olive.
This Mountain Laurel rises up with a small woody stem, three or four
foot high, or more, branching forth toward the upper parts into many slender
and tough branches, covered with a rough hoary green bark, beset at the ends
thereof with flatter, fuller, and smaller round pointed leaves then the former,
of a grayish green color on the vpperside, and hoary underneath, which abide
on the branches in Winter, and fall not away as the former: the flowers are
many set together at the ends of the branches, greater then the former, and
consisting of four leaves a piece, of a light blush color, standing in small
grayish husks, of little or no sent at all: the fruit follows, which are
small long grains or berries, of an excellent red color, which afterward
turn black: the root is long, and spreads about under the upper part of
the earth.

3. Chamaelaea tricoccos. Widow Wayle.
This three berried Spurge Olive has no great stem at all, but the whole
plant spreads from the ground into many flexible tough green branches,
whereon are set diverse narrow, long, dark green leaves all along the
branches, which abide green all the Winter: the flowers are very small, scarce
to be seen, and come forth between the leaves and the stalk, of a pale yellow
color, made of three leaves; after which come small blackish berries, three
usually set together: the root spreads it self in the ground not very
far, being hard and woody, and often dies, if it be not well defended from
the extremity of our sharp Winters.

4. Cneorum Matthioli. Small Rock Roses.
I was long in doubt in what place I should dispose of this plant, whether
among the Campions, as Bauhinus, or among these, as Clusius does; but lest my
Gorden should want it wholly, let it take up room for this time here. This
gallant plant has diverse long, weak, slender, but yet tough branches lying
upon the ground, divided usually into other smaller branches, whereon grow
many, small, long, and somewhat thick leaves, somewhat like unto the leaves of
the former Mezereon, set without any order to the very tops, from whence do
come forth a tuft of many small flowers together, made or consisting of four
leaves a piece, of a bright red or carnation color, and very sweet withal,
which turn into small round whitish berries, wherein is contained small round
seed, covered with a grayish coat or skin: the root is long and yellowish,
spreading diverse ways under the ground, and abides many years shooting forth
new branches.

Flore albo.
It has been observed in some of these plants, to bring forth white flowers,
not differing in any thing else.

The Place.
The first sorts grow plentifully in many places of Germany. The second in the
mountains by Sauoye. The third in Prouence and Spain. The last in diverse
parts of Germany, Bohemia, and Austria, and about Franckford.

The Time.
The two first sorts are most usually in flower about Christmas, or in January,
if the weather be not violent, and sometimes not until February. The second
flowreth not until April. The third in May. The berries of them ripen some in
June and July; some in August and September, as their flowring is earlier or
later. The last flowreth as well in the Spring as in Autumn, so apt and
plentiful it is in bearing, and the seed at both times does ripen soon after.

The Names.
The first is called of some Chamaelaea, with this addition Germanica, that it
may differ from the third, which is the true Chamaelaea of Dioscorides, as all
the best Authors do agree, and is also called Piper montanum of the Italians.
It is generally called Mezereon, and is indeed the true Mezereon of the
Arabians, and so used in our Apothecaries shops, wheresoever the Arabians
Mezereon is appointed, although the Arabians are so intricate and uncertain in
the descriptions of their plants, confounding Chamaelaea and Thymaelaea
together. Matthiolus makes it to be Daphnoides of Dioscorides; but in my
opinion he is therein mistaken: for all our best modern Writers do account
our Laureola, which has black berries, to be the true Daphnoides: the error
of his Country might peradventure draw him thereunto; but if he had better
considered the text of Dioscorides, that gives black berries to Daphnoides,
and red to Chamaedaphne, he would not so have written; and truly, I should
think (as Lobel does) with better reason, that this Chamaelaea were
Dioscorides Chamaedaphne, then he to say it were Daphnoides: for the
description of Chamaedaphne, may in all parts be very fitly applied to this
Chamaelaea: and even these words, Semen annexum folijs, wherein may be the
greatest doubt in the description, may not unfitly be construed, that as is
seen in the plant, the berries grow at the foot of the leaves, about the
branches: the faculties indeed that Dioscorides gives to Chamaedaphne, are
(if any repugnancie be) the greatest let or hinderance, that this Chamaelaea
should not be it: but I leave the discussing of these and others of the like
nature, to our learned Physicians; for I deal not so much with virtues as with
descriptions. The second is called of Lobel Chamaelaea Alpina incana, of
Clusius Chamaelaea secunda, and says he had it out of Italy. We may call it
in English, Mountain Spurge Olive, as it is in the description, or Mountain
Laurel, which you will. The last has the name of Cneorum, first given it by
Matthiolus, which since is continued by all others. Bauhinus (as I said)
refers it to the Mountain Campions, but Clusius 1 Chamaelaea Germanica seu
Mezereon. Mezereon or Dwarf Bay. 2 Chamaelaea Alpina. Mountain Spurge Olive. 3
Cneorum Matthioli. Small Rock Roles. 4 Laurus Tinus sieve siluestris. The wild
Bay tree. 5 Oleander sieve Laurus Rosea. The Rose Bay tree. 6 Laurocerasus. The
Bay Cherrie tree.
depiction of flowers (as I do) to the kinds of Chamaelaea or Thymaelaea. For
want of an English name I have (as you see, and that is according to the name
the Germane women, as Clusius says, do call it) entitled it the Small Rock
Rose; which may abide until a fitter may be conferred upon it.

The Virtues.
All these plants except the last, as well leaves as berries, are violent
purgers, and therefore great caution is to be had in the use of them. The last
has not been applied for any disease that I know.

CHAP. CIII.
Laurus. The Bay Tree.
MY meaning is not to make any description of our ordinary Bays in this place
(for as all may very well know, they may be for an Orchard or Courtyard, and
not for this Garden) but of two or three other kinds, whose beautiful aspect
have caused them to be worthy of a place therein: the one is called Laurus
Tinus, The wild Baye: the other Laurus Rosea or Oleander, The Rose Bay: and a
third is Laurocerasus, The Cherry Bay; which may have not only some respect
for his long bush of sweet smelling flowers, but especially for the comely
stateliness of his gallant ever fresh green leaves; and the rather, because
with us in most places, it does but frutescere, use to be Shrub high, not
arborescere, Tree high, which is the more fit for this Garden.

1. Laurus Tinus sieve siluestris. The wild Bay tree.
This wild Baye grows seldom to be a tree of any height, but abides for
the most part low, shooting forth diverse slender branches, whereon at every
joint stand two leaves, long, smooth, and of a dark green color, somewhat
like unto the leaves of the Female Cornell tree, or between that and Baye
leaves: at the tops of the branches stand many small white sweet smelling
flowers, thrusting together, as it were in an vmbell or tuft, consisting of
five leaves a piece, the edges whereof have a show of a wash purple, or light
blush in them, which for the most part fall away without bearing any perfect
ripe fruit in our Country: Yet sometimes it has small black berries, as if
they were good, but are not. In his natural place it bears small, round,
hard and pointed berries, of a shining black color, for such have come often
to my hands (yet Clusius writes they are blew); but I could never see any
spring that I put into the ground. This that I here describe, seems to me to
be neither of both those that Clusius saw growing in Spain and Potugall, but
that other, that (as he says) sprang in the low Countries of Italian seed.

2. Laurus Rosea sieve Oleander. The Rose Bay.
Of the Rose Bay there are two sorts, one bearing crimson colored flowers,
which is more frequent, and the other white, which is more rare. They are so
like in all other things, that they need but one description for both. The
stem or trunk is many times with us as big at the bottom as a good man's
thumb, but growing up smaller, it divides it self into branches, three for
the most part coming from one joint or place, and those branches again do
likewise divide themselves into three other, and so by degrees from three to
three, as long as it grows: the lowest of these are bare of leaves, having
shed or lost them by the cold of winters, keeping only leaves on the uppermost
branches, which are long, and somewhat narrow, like in form unto Peach leaves,
but thicker, harder, and of a dark green color on the vpperside, and
yellowish green underneath: at the tops of the young branches come forth the
flowers, which in the one sort before they are open, are of an excellent bright
crimson color, and being blown, consist of four long and narrow leaves,
round pointed, somewhat twining themselves, of a paler red color, almost
tending to blush, and in the other are white, the green leaves also being of a
little fresher color: after the flowers are past, in the hot countries, but
never in ours, there come up long bending or crooked flat pods, whose outward
shell is hard, almost woody, and of a brown color, wherein is contained small
flat brownish seed, wrapped in a great deal of a brownish yellow down, as
fine almost as silk, somewhat like unto the husks of Asclepias, or Periploca,
but larger, flatter and harder; as my self can testify, who had some of the
pods of this Rose bay, brought me out of Spain, by Master Doctor John More,
the seeds whereof I sowed, and had diverse plants that I raised up unto a
reasonable height, but they require, as well old as young, to be defended from
the cold of our winters.

3. Laurocerasus. The Bay Cherry.
This beautiful Bay in his natural place of growing, grows to be a tree of
a reasonable bigness and height, and oftentimes with us also if it be pruined
from the lower branches; but more usually in these colder Countries, it grows
as a shrub or hedge bush, shooting forth many branches, whereof the greater and
lower are covered with a dark grayish green bark, but the young ones are
very green, whereon are set many goodly, fair, large, thick and long leaves,
a little dented about the edges, of a more excellent fresh shining green
color, and far larger then any Bay leaf, and compared by many to the leaves
of the Pomeritron tree (which because we have none in our Country, cannot be
so well known) both for color and largeness, which yield a most graceful
aspect: it bears long stalks of whitish flowers, at the joints of the leaves
both along the branches and toward the ends of them also, like unto the Birds
Cherry or Padus Theophrasti, which the French men call Putier and Cerisier
blanc, but larger and greater, consisting of five leaves with many threads in
the middle: after which comes the fruit or berries, as large or great as
Flanders Cherries, many growing together one by another on a long stalk, as
the flowers did, which are very black and shining on the outside, with a
little point at the end, and reasonable sweet in taste, wherein is contained a
hard round stone, very like unto a Cherry stone, as I have observed as well by
those I received out of Italy, as by them I had of Master James Cole a
Merchant of London lately deceased, which grew at his house in Highgate, where
there is a fair tree which he defended from the bitterness of the weather in
winter by casting a blanket over the top thereof every year, thereby the
better to preserve it.

The Place.
The first is not certainly known from whence it came, and is communicated by
the suckers it yields. The second grows in Spain, Italy, Greece, and many
other places: that with white flowers is recorded by Bellonius, to grow in
Candy. The last, as Matthiolus, and after him Clusius report, came first from
Constantinople: I had a plant hereof by the friendly gift of Master James Cole,
the Merchant before remembered, a great lover of all rarities, who had it
growing with him at his country house in Highgate aforesaid, where it has
flowred diverse times, and borne ripe fruit also.

The Time.
The first flowreth many times in the end of the year before Christmas, and
often also in January, but the most kindly time is in March and April, when
the flowers are sweetest. The second flowreth not until July. The last in May,
and the fruit is ripe in August and September.

The Names.
The first is called Laurus siluestris, and Laurus Tinus: in English Wild Bay,
or Sweet flowring Bay. The second is called Laurus Rosea, Oleander, Nerium,
and Rhododendros: in English The Rose Bay, and Oleander. The last was sent by
the name of Trebezon Curmasi, that is to say, Dactylus Trapezuntina, but not
having any affinity with any kind of Date, Bellonius as I think first named
it Laurocerasus, and Cerasus Trapezuntina. Dalechampius thinks it to be
Lotus Aphricana, but Clusius refuteth it. Those stones or kernels that were
sent me out of Italy, came by the name of Laurus Regia, The Kings Bay. We may
most properly call it according to the Latin name in the title, The Cherry
bay, or Bay Cherry, because his leaves are like unto Bay-leaues, and both
flowers and fruit like unto the Birds Cherry or Cluster Cherry, for the manner
of the growing; and therefore I might more fitly I confess have placed it in my
Orchard among the sorts of Cherries: but the beautifulness of the plant caused
me rather to insert it here.

The Virtues.
The wild Bay has no property allotted unto it in Physic, for that it is
not to be endured, the berries being chewed declare it to be so violent hot and
choking. The Rose Bay is said by Dioscorides, to be death to all four footed
beasts, but contrariwise to man it is a remedy against the poison of Serpents,
but especially if Rue be added unto it. The Cherry Bay is not known with us
to what physic use it may be applied.

CHAP. CIIII.
Cerasus flore multiplici. The Rose or double blossomd Cherry. Malus flore
multiplici. The double blossomd Apple tree. And Malus Persica flore multiplici.
The double blossomd Peach tree.
THe beautiful show of these three sorts of flowers, has made me to insert
them into this garden, in that for their worthiness I am unwilling to be
without them, although the rest of their kinds I have transferred into the
Orchard, where among other fruit trees, they shall be remembered: for all these
here set down, seldom or never bear any fruit, and therefore more fit for a
Garden of flowers, then an Orchard of fruit.

Cerasus flore pleno vel multiplici. The Rose Cherry, or double blossomd Cherry.
The double blossomed Cherry tree is of two sorts for the flower, but not
differing in any other part, from the ordinary English or Flanders Cherry tree,
growing in the very like manner: the difference consists in this, that the
one of these two sorts has white flowers less double, that is, of two rows
or more of leaves, and the other more double, or with more rows of leaves, and
besides I have observed in this greater double blossomd Cherry, that some
years most of the flowers have had another smaller and double flower, rising
up out of the middle of the other, like as is to be seen in the double
English Crow-foote, and double read Ranunculus or Crowfoote, before described:
this I say does not happen every year, but sometimes. Sometimes also these
trees will give a few berries, here and there scattered, and that with less
double flowers more often, which are like unto our English Cherries both for
taste and bigness. These be very fit to be set by Arbours.

1 Cerasus flore pleno. The double blossomd Cherry tree. 2 Malus flore
multiplici The double blossomd Apple tree. 3 Malus Persica flore pleno. The
double blossomd Peach tree. 4 Periclymenum perfoliatum. Double Honisuckle. 5
Periclymenum rectum. Upright Honisuckle.
depiction of flowers

Malus flore multiplici. The double blossomd Apple tree.
This double blossomd Apple tree is altogether like unto our ordinary Pippin
tree in body, branch and lease, the only difference is in the flower, which is
altogether whitish, saving that the inner leaves toward the middle are more
reddish, but as double and thick as our double Damask Roses, which fall away
without bearing fruit.

Malus Persica flore multiplici. The double blossomd Peach tree.
This Peach tree for the manner of growing, is so like unto an ordinary Peach
tree, that until you see it in blossom you can perceive no difference: the
flower is of the same color with the blossoms of the Peach, but consisting of
three or four, or more rows of leaves, which fall often away likewise without
bearing any fruit; but after it has abiden some years in a place does form
into fruit, especially being planted against a wall.

The Place.
Both the Cherry trees are frequent in many places of England, noursed for
their pleasant flowers. The Apple is as yet a stranger. And the Peach has not
been seen or known, long before the writing hereof.

The Time.
They all flower in April and May, which are the times of their other kinds.

The Names.
Their names are also sufficiently expressed to know them by.

The Virtues.
Cherries, Peaches and Apples, are recorded in our Orchard, and there you shall
find the properties of their fruit: for in that these bear none or very few,
their blossoms are of most use to grace and deck the persons of those that
will wear or bear them.

CHAP. CV.
Periclymenum. Honysuckles.
THe Honisuckle that grows wild in every hedge, although it be very sweet,
yet do I not bring into my garden, but let it rest in his own place, to serve
their senses that travel by it, or have no garden. I have three other that
furnish my Garden, one that is called double, whose branches spread far, and
being very fit for an arbor will soon cover it: the other two stand upright,
and spread not any way far, yet their flowers declaring them to be
Honisuckles, but of less delight, I consort them with the other.

Periclymenum perfoliatum sieve Italicum. The double Honisuckle.
The truncke or body of the double Honisuckle, is oftentimes of the bigness of
a good staff, running out into many long spreading branches, covered with a
whitish bark, which had need of some thing to sustain them, or else they
will fall down to the ground (and therefore it is usually planted at an arbor,
that it may run thereon, or against a house wall, and fastened thereto in
diverse places with nails) from whence spring forth at several distances, and
at the joints, two leaves, being like in form unto the wild Honisuckles, and
round pointed for the most part; these branches dividing themselves diverse
ways, have at the roppes of them many flowers, set at certain distances one
above another, with two green leaves at every place, where the flowers do
stand, joined so close at the bottom, and so round and hollow in the middle,
that it seems like a hollow cup or sawcer of flowers: the flowers stand
round about the middle of these cups or sawcers, being long, hollow, and of a
whitish yellow color, with open mouths dashed over with a light show of
purple, and some threads within them, very sweet in smell, like both in form
and color unto the common Honisuckles, but that these cups with the flowers
in them are two or three standing one above another (which make a far better
show then the common, which come forth all at the head of the branches,
without any green leaves or cups under them) and therefore these were called
double Honisuckles.

Periclymenum rectum fructu rubro. Red Honisuckles.
This upright Woodbinde has a straight woody stem, divided into several
branches, about three or four foot high, covered with a very thin whitish
bark, whereon stand two leaves together at the joints, being lesser then the
former, smooth and plain, and a little pointed: the flowers come forth upon
slender long footstalks at the joints where the leaves stand, always two set
together, and never more, but seldom one alone, which are much smaller then
the former, but of the same fashion, with a little button at the foot of the
flower; the buds of the flowers before they are open are very reddish, but
being open are not so red, but tending to a kind of yellowish blush color:
after which come in their places two small red berries, the one withered for
the most part, or at least smaller then the other, but (as Clusius says) in
their natural places they are both full and of one bigness.

Periclymenum rectum fructu caeruleo. Blew berried Honisuckles.
This other upright Woodbinde grows up as high as the former, or rather
somewhat higher, covered with a blackish rugged bark, chapping in diverse
places, the younger branches whereof are somewhat reddish, and covered with an
hoary down: the leaves stand two together at the ioints, somewhat larger then
the former, and more whitish underneath: the flowers are likewise two standing
together, at the end of a slender footestalke, of a pale yellowish color when
they are blown, but more reddish in the bud: the berries stand two together as
the former, of a dark bluish color when they are fully ripe, and full of a
red liquour or juice, of a pleasant taste, which does not only dye the hands of
them that gather them, but serves for a dying color to the inhabitants where
they grow plentifully, wherein are contained many flat seed: The root is
woody as the former is.

The Place.
The firw grows in Italy, Spain, and Prouence of France, but not in the
colder countries, unless it be there planted, as is most frequent in our
country. The others grow in Austria, and Stiria, as Clufius says, and are
entertained into their gardens only that are curious.

The Time.
The first flowreth usually in April, the rest in May.

The Names.
The first is called Periclymenum, Caprifolium perfoliatum, and Italicum, as a
difference from the common kind: In English Double Woodbinde, or double
Honisuckles. The others, as they are rare, and little known, so are their
names also: yet according to their Latin, I have given them English names.

The Virtues.
The double Honisuckle is as effectual in all things, as the single wild
kind, and besides, is an especial good wound herb for the head or other
parts. I have not known the upright kinds used in Physic.

CHAP. CVI.
Iasminum sieve Gelseminum. Iasmine or Gesmine.
WE have but one sort of true Iasmine ordinarily in our Gardens throughout the
whole Land; but there is another greater sort, which is far more tender,
brought out of Spain, and will hardly endure any long time with us, unless it
be very carefully preserved. We have a third kind called a yellow Iasmine,
but differs much from their tribe in many notable points: but because the
flowers have some likeness with the flowers of the true Iasmine, it has been
usually called a Iasmine; and therefore I am content for this Garden to
conioyne them in one Chapter.

1. Iasminum album. The white Iasmine.
The white Iasmine has many twiggy flexible green branches, coming forth of
the sundry bigger boughs or stems, that rise from the root, which are covered
with a grayish dark colored bark, having a white pith within it like the
Elder, but not so much: the winged leaves stand always two together at the
joints, being made of many small and pointed leaves, set on each side of a
middle ribbe, six most usually on both sides, with one at the end, which is
larger, more pointed then any of the rest, and of a dark green color: at the
tops of the young branches stand diverse flowers together, as it were in an
vmbell or ruft, each whereof stands on a long green stalk, coming out of a
small husk, being small, long, and hollow below, opening into five white
small, pointed leaves, of a very strong sweet smell, which fall away without
bearing any fruit at all, that ever I could learn in our Country; but in the
hot Countries where it is natural, it is said to bear flat fruit, like
Lupines: the roots spread far and deep, and are long and hard to grow,
until they have taken strong hold in the ground.

2. Iasminum Catalonicum. The Spanish Iasmine.
This Catalonia Iasmine grows lower then the former, never rising half so
high, and has slender long green branches, rising from the top of the
woody stem, with such like leaves set on them as the former, but somewhat
shorter and larger: the flowers also are like unto the former, and stand in the
same manner at the end of the branches, but are much larger, being of a blush
color before they are blown, and white with blush edges when they are open,
exceeding sweet of smell, more strong then the former.

3. Iasminum luteum, sieve Trifolium fruticans alijs Polemonium. The yellow
Iasmine.
This that is called the yellow Iasmine, has many long slender twiggy branches
rising from the root, green at the first, and covered with a dark grayish
bark afterward, whereon are set at certain distances, three small dark
green leaves together, the end leaf being always the biggest: at the joints
where the leaves come forth, stand long stalks, bearing long hollow flowers,
ending in five, and some in six leaves, very like unto the flowers of the first
Iasmine, but yellow, whereupon it is usually called the Yellow Iasmine: after
the flowers are past, there come in their places round black shining berries,
of the bigness of a great Pease, or bigger, full of a purplish juice, which
will dye ones fingers that bruise them but a little: the root is tough, and
white, creeping far about under the ground, shooting forth plentifully,
whereby it greatly increases.

The Place.
The first is verily thought to have been first brought to Spain out of Syria,
or thereabouts, and from Spain to us, and is to be seen very often, and in
many of our Country Gardens. The second has his breeding in Spain also, but
whether it be his original place we know not, and is scarce yet made well
acquainted with our English air. The third grows plentifully about
Mompelier, and will well abide in our London Gardens, and any where else.

The Time.
The first flowreth not until the end of July. The second somewhat earlier.
The third in July also.

The Names.
The first is generally called Iasminum album, and Gelseminum album: In
English, The white Iasmine. The second has his name in his title, as much as
may be said of it. The third has been taken of some to be a Cytisus, others
judge it to be Polemonium, but the truest name is Trifolium fruticans, although
many call it Iasminum luteum: In English most usually, The yellow Iasmine, for
the reasons aforesaid; or else after the Latin name, Shrubbie Trefoile, or
Makebate.

The Virtues.
The white Iasmines have been in all times accepted into outward medicines,
either for the pleasure of the sweet sent, or profit of the warming
properties. And is in these days only used as an ornament in Gardens, or for
sent of the flowers in the house, etc. The yellow Iasmine, although some have
adjudged it to be the Polemonium of Dioscorides, yet it is not used to those
purposes by any that I know.

CHAP. CVII.
Syringa. The Pipe tree.
Under the name of Syringa, is contained two special kinds of Shrubs or Trees,
differing one from another; namely, the Lilac of Matthiolus, which is called
Syringa caerulea, and is of two or three sorts: And the Syringa alba, which
also is of two sorts, as shall be declared.

1. Lilac sieve Syringa caerulea. The blew Pipe tree.
The blew Pipe tree rises sometimes to be a great tree, as high and big in
the body as a reasonable Apple tree (as I have in some places seen and
observed) but most usually grows lower, with many twigs or branches rising
from the root, having as much pith in the middle of them as the Elder has,
covered with a grayish green bark, but darker in the elder branches, with
joints set at a good distance one from another, and two leaves at every joint,
which are large, broad, and pointed at the ends, many of them turning or
folding both the sides inward, and standing on long foote-stalkes: at the
tops of the branches come forth many flowers, growing spike-fashion, that is,
a long branch of flowers upon a stalk, each of these flowers are small, long,
and hollow below, ending above in a pale bluish flower, consisting of four
small leaves, of a pretty small sent: after the flowers are past, there come
sometimes (but it is not often in our Country, unless the tree have stood
long, and is grown great, the suckers being continually taken away, that it may
grow the better) long and flat cods, consisting as it were of two sides, a
thin skin being in the midst, wherein are contained two long flattish red
seed: the roots are strong, and grow deep in the ground.

2. Syringa flore lacteo sieve argenteo. The silver colored Pipe tree.
This Pipe tree differs not from the former blew Pipe tree, either in stem
or branches, either in leaves or flowers, or manner of growing, but only in
the color of the flower, which in this is of a milk, or silver color, which
is a kind of white, wherein there is a thin wash, or light show of blew shed
therein, coming somewhat near unto an ash color.

3. Lilac lacimatis folijs. The blew Pipe tree with cut leaves.
This Pipe tree should not differ from the first in any other thing then in the
leaves, which are said to be cut in on the edges into several parts, as the
relation is given a viris fide dignis; for as yet I never saw any such; but I
here am bold to set it down, to induce and provoke some lover of plants to
obtain it for his pleasure, and others also.

4. Syringa flore albo simplici. The single white Pipe tree.
The single white Pipe tree or bush, never comes to that height of the
former, but abides always like a hedge tree or bush, full of shootes or
suckers from the root, much more then the former: the young shootes hereof are
reddish on the outside, and afterward reddish at the joints, and grayish all
the rest over: the young as well as the old branches, have some pith in the
middle of them, like as the Elder has: the leaves stand two at a joint,
somewhat like the former, but more rugged or crumpled, as also a little
pointed, and dented about the edges: the flowers grow at the tops of the
branches, diverse standing together, consisting of four white leaves, like unto
small Musk Roses, and of the same cream color, as I may call it, with many
small yellowish threads in the middle, and are of a strong, full, or heady
sent, not pleasing to a great many, by reason of the strange quickness of the
sent: the fruit follows, being flat at the head, with many leafie shells or
scales compassing it, wherein is enclosed small long seed: the roots run
not deep, but spread under the ground, with many fibers annexed unto them.

5. Syringa Arabica flore albo duplici. The double white Pipe tree.
This Pipe tree has diverse long and slender branches, whereon grow large
leaves, somewhat like unto the leaves of the former single white kind, but not
so rough or hard, and not at all dented about the edges, two always standing
one against another at every joint of the stalk, but set or disposed on
contrary sides, and not all upon one side; at the ends whereof come forth
diverse flowers, every one standing on his own foote-stalke, the hose or husk
being long and hollow, like unto the white Iasmine, and the flowers therein
consisting of a double row of white and round pointed leaves, five or six in a
row, with some yellowness in the middle, which is hollow, of a very strong
and heady sweet sent, and abiding a long time flowring, especially in the
hotter Countries, but is very tender, and not able to abide any the least cold
weather with us; 1 I^^minum album vulgar. ^he ordinary white Iasmin^. 2
Iasminum Americanum sieve Convolvulus Americanus. The Iasmine or Bindweed of
America. 3 Iesminum luto^^ vulgar^ ^he yellow Iasmine. 4 Lilac seu Syringa
carulea. The blew Pipe tree. 5 Syringa alba vulgaris. The single white Syringa
or Pipe tree. 6 Syringa flore albo duplici. The double white Syringa. 7
Sambucus rosea. The Elder or Gelder Role.
depiction of flowers for the cold winds will (as I understand) greatly molest
it: and therefore must as charily be kept as Orange trees with us, if we will
have it to abide.

The Place.
The first grows in Arabia (as Matthiolus thinks, that had it from
Constantinople.) We have it plentifully in our Gardens. The second and third
are strangers with us as yet. The fourth is as frequent as the first, or rather
more, but his original is not known. The last has his original from Arabia,
as his name imports.

The Time.
The first, second, and third flower in April, the other two not until May.

The Names.
The first is called of Matthiolus Lilac, and by that name is most usually
called in all parts. It is also called Syringa caerulea, because it comes
nearest unto those woods, which for their pithy substance, were made hollow
into pipes. It is called of all in English, The blew Pipe tree. It seems
likely, that Petrus Bellonius in his third Book and fiftieth Chapter of his
observations (making mention of a shrubbe that the Turks have, with Iuie
leaves always green, bearing blew or violet colored flowers on a long
stalk, of the bigness and fashion of a Fox tail, and thereupon called in
their language a Fox tail) does understand this plant here expressed. The
certainty whereof might easily be known, if any of our Merchants there
residing, would but call for such a shrubbe, by the name of a Fox tail in the
Turkish tongue, and take care to send a young root, in a small tubbe or basket
with earth by Sea, unto us here at London, which would be performed with a very
little pains and cost. The second and third, as kinds thereof, have their
names in their titles. The fourth is called by Clusius and others, Frutex
Coronarius; some do call it Lilac flore albo, but that name is not proper, in
that it does confound both kinds together. Lobel calls it Syringa Italica.
It is now generally called of all Syringa alba, that is in English, The white
Pipe tree. Some would have it to be Ostrys of Theophrastus, but Clusius has
sufficiently cleared that doubt. Of others Ligustrum Orientale, which it cannot
be neither; for the Cyprus of Pliny is Dioscorides his Ligustrum, which may be
called Orientale, in that it is most proper to the Eastern Countries, and is
very sweet, whose seed is like unto Coriander seed. The last is called by
diverse Syringa Arabica flore albo duplici, as most fitly agreeing thereunto. Of
Basilius Beslerus that set forth the great book of the Bishop of Eystot in
Germany his Garden, Syringa Italica flore albo pleno, because, as it is likely,
he had it from Italy. It is very likely, that Prosper Alpinus in his book of
Egyptian plants, does mean this plant, which he there calls Sambach, sieve
Iasminum Arabicum. Matthaeus Caccini of Florence in his letter to Clusius
entituleth it Syringa Arabica, sieve Iasminum Arabicum, sieve Iasminum ex Gine,
whereby he declares that it may not unfitly be referred to either of them
both. We may call it in English as it is in the title, The double white Pipe
tree.

The Virtues.
We have no use of these in Physic that I know, although Prosper Alpinus
says, the double white Pipe tree is much used in Egypt, to help women in their
travails of childbirth.

CHAP. CVIII.
Sambucus Rosea. The Elder or Gelder Rose.
ALthough there be diverse kinds of Elders, yet there is but one kind of Elder
Rose, whereof I mean to entreat in this Chapter, being of near affinity in
some things unto the former Pipe trees, and which for the beauty of it
deserves to be remembered among the delights of a Garden.

Sambucus Rosea. The Gelder Rose.
The Gelder Rose (as it is called) grows to a reasonable height, standing
like a tree, with a trunk as big as any man's arm, covered with a dark
grayish bark, somewhat rugged and very knotty: the younger branches are smooth
and white, with a pithy substance in the middle, as the Elders have, to show
that it is a kind thereof, whereon are set broad leaves, divided into three
parts or divisions, somewhat like unto a Vine leaf, but smaller, and more
rugged or crumpled, iagged or cut also about the edges: at the tops of every
one of the young branches, most usually comes forth a great tuft, or ball as
it were, of many white flowers, set so close together, that there can be no
distinction of any several flower seen, nor does it seem like the double
flower of any other plant, that has many rows of leaves set together, but is
a cluster of white leaued flowers set together upon the stalk that vpholdeth
them, of a small sent, which fall away without bearing any fruit in our
Country, that ever I could observe or learn: The root spreads neither far
nor deep, but shoots many small roots and fibers, whereby it is fastened in
the ground, and draws nourishment to it, and sometimes yields suckers from
it.

The Place.
It should seem, that the natural place of this Elder is wet and moist
grounds, because it is so like unto the Marsh Elder, which is the single kind
hereof. It is only noursed up in Gardens in all our Country.

The Time.
It flowreth in May, much about the time of the double Peony flower, both which
being set together, make a pleasant variety, to deck up the windows of a
house.

The Names.
It is generally called Sambucus Rosea: In English, The Elder Rose, and more
commonly after the Dutch name, the Gelder Rose. Dalechampius seems to make it
Thraupalus of Theophrastus, or rather the single Marsh Elder; for I think this
double kind was not known in Theophrastus his time.

The Virtues.
It is not applied to any Physical use that I know.

CHAP. CIX.
Rosa. The Rose tree or bush.
THe great variety of Roses is much to be admired, being more then is to be
seen in any other shrubby plant that I know, both for color, form and smell.
I have to furnish this garden thirty sorts at the least, every one notably
differing from the other, and all fit to be here entertained: for there are
some other, that being wild and of no beauty or smell, we forbear, and leave
to their wild habitations. To distinguish them by their colors, as white,
red, incarnate, and yellow, were a way that many might take, but I hold it not
so convenient for diverse respects: for so I should confound those of diverse
sorts one among another, and I should not keep that method which to me
seems most convenient, which is, to place and rank every kind, whether
single or double, one next unto the other, that so you may the better
understand their varieties and differences: I will therefore begin with the
most ancient, and known Roses to our Country, whether natural or no I know
not, but assumed by our precedent Kings of all others, to be cognisances of
their dignity, the white Rose and the red, whom shall follow the damask, of
the finest sent, and most use of all the other sorts, and the rest in their
order.

1. Rosa Anglica alba. The English white Rose.
The white Rose is of two kinds, the one more thick and double then the
other: The one rises up in some shadowie places, unto eight or ten foot high,
with a stock of a great bigness for a Rose. The other growing seldom higher
then a Damask Rose. Some do judge both these to be but one kind, the
diversity happening by the air, or ground, or both. Both these Roses have
somewhat smaller and whiter green leaves then in many other Roses, five most
usually set on a stalk, and more white underneath, as also a whiter green
bark, armed with sharp thorns or prickles, whereby they are soon known from
other Roses, although the one not so easily from the other: the flowers in the
one are whitish, with an eye or show of a blush, especially toward the ground
or bottom of the flower, very thick double, and close set together, and for
the most part not opening it self so largely and fully as either the Red or
Damask Rose. The other more white, less thick and double, and opening it
self more, and some so little double as but of two or three rows, that they
might be held to be single, yet all of little or no smell at all. To describe
you all the several parts of the Rose, as the bud, the beards, the threads etc.
were needless, they are so conversant in every ones hand, that I shall not
need but to touch the most special parts of the varieties of them, and leave
a more exact relation of all things incident unto them, unto a general work.

2. Rosa Incarnata. The Carnation Rose.
The Carnation Rose is in most things like unto the lesser white rose, both for
the growing of the stock, and bigness of the flower, but that it is more
spread abroad when it is blown then the white is, and is of a pale blush
color all the flower thoroughout, of as small a sent as the white one is
almost.

Rosa Belgica sieve Vitrea.
This kind of Rose is not very great, but very thick and double, and is very
variable in the flowers, in that they will be so different one from another:
some being paler then others, and some as it were blasted, which comes not
casually, but naturally to this rose: but the best flowers (whereof there will
be still some) will be of a bright pale murrey color, near unto the Velvet
rose, but nothing so dark a color.

3. Rosa Anglica rubra. The English red Rose.
The red Rose (which I call English, not only for the reason before expressed,
but because (as I take it) this Rose is more frequent and used in England, then
in other places) never grows so high as the damask Rose bush, but most
usually abides low, and shoots forth many branches from the root (and is
but seldom suffered to grow up as the damask Rose into standards) with a
green bark, thinner set with prickles, and larger and greener leaves on the
vpperside then in the white, yet with an eye of white upon them, five likewise
most usually set upon a stalk, and grayish or whitish underneath. The Roses or
Flowers do very much vary, according to their site and abiding; for some are
of an orient, red or deep crimson color, and very double (although never so
double as the white) which when it is full blown has the largest leaves of
any other Rose; some of them again are paler, tending somewhat to a damask;
and some are of so pale a red, as that it is rather of the color of the canker
Rose, yet all for the most part with larger leaves then the damask, and with
many more yellow threads in the middle: the sent hereof is much better then in
the white, but not comparable to the excellency of the damask Rose, yet this
Rose being well dried and well kept, will hold both color and sent longer then
the damask, be it never so well kept.

4. Rosa Damascena. The Damask Rose.
The Damask Rose bush is more usually noursed up to a competent height to
stand alone, (which we call Standards) then any other Rose: the bark both of
the stock and branches, is not fully so green as the red or white Rose: the
leaves are green with an eye of white upon them, so like unto the red Rose,
that there is no great difference between them, but that the leaves of the red
Rose seem to be of a darker green. The flowers are of a fine deep blush
color, as all know, with some pale yellow threads in the middle, and are not so
thick and double as the white, nor being blown, with so large and great
leaves as the red, but of the most excellent sweet pleasant sent, far
surpassing all other Roses or Flowers, being neither heady nor too strong, nor
stuffing or unpleasant sweet, as many other flowers.

5. Rosa Prouincialis sieve Hollandica Damascena. The great double Damask
Province or Holland Rose.
This Rose (that some call Centifolia Batauica incarnata) has his bark of a
reddish or brown color, whereby it is soon discerned from other Roses. The
leaves are likewise more reddish then in others, and somewhat larger, it
usually grows very like the Damask rose, and much to the same height: the
flowers or roses are of the same deep blush color that the damask roses are,
or rather somewhat deeper, but much thicker, broader, and more double, or
fuller of leaves by three parts almost, the outer leaves turning themselves
back, when the flower has stood long blown, the middle part it self (which
in all other roses almost have some yellow threads in them to be seen) being
folded hard with small leaves, without any yellow almost at all to be seen,
the sent whereof comes nearest unto the damask rose, but yet is short of it
by much, howsoever many do think it as good as the damask, and to that end I
have known some Gentlewomen have caused all their damask stocks to be
grafted with province Roses, hoping to have as good water, and more store of
them then of damask Roses; but in my opinion it is not of half so good a sent
as the water of damask Roses: let every one follow their own fancy.

6. Rosa Prouincialis rubra. The red Province Rose.
As the former was called incarnata, so this is called Batauica centifolia
rubra, the difference being not very great: the stem or stock, and the
branches also in this, seeming not to be so great but greener, the bark being
not so red; the leaves of the same largeness with the former damask Province.
The flowers are not altogether so large, thick and double, and of a little
deeper damask or blush color, turning to a red Rose, but not coming near
the full color of the best red Rose, of a sent not so sweet as the damask
Province, but coming somewhat near the sent of the ordinary red rose, yet
exceeding it. This rose is not so plentiful in bearing as the damask Province.

7. Rosa Prouincialis alba. The white Province Rose.
It is said of diverse, that there is a white Province Rose, whereof I am not
ocuiatus testis, and therefore I dare not give it you for a certainty, and
indeed I have some doubt, that it is the greater and more double white rose,
whereof I gave you the knowledge in the beginning: when I am my self better
satisfied, I shall be ready to satisfy others.

8. Rosa versicolor. The party colored Rose, of some York and Lancaster.
This Rose in the form and order of the growing, is nearest unto the ordinary
damask rose, both for stem, branch, leaf and flower: the difference
consisting in this, that the flower (being of the same largeness and
doubleness as the damask rose) has the one half of it, sometimes of a pale
whitish color, and the other half, of a paler damask color then the
ordinary; this happens so many times, and sometimes also the flower has
diverse stripes, and marks in it, as one leaf white, or striped with white,
and the other half blush, or striped with blush, sometimes also all striped,
or spotted over, and other times little or no stripes or marks at all, as
nature lists to play with varieties, in this as in other flowers: yet this I
have observed, that the longer it abides blown open in the sun, the paler and
the fewer stripes, marks or spots will be seen in it: the smell whereof is of
a weak damask rose sent.

9. Rosea Chrystallina. The Crystal Rose.
This Rose is very like unto the last described, both for stock, branch and
leaf: the flower hereof is not much different from it, being no great large or
double Rose, but of a mean size, striped and marked with a deeper blush or
red, upon the pale colored leaf, that it seems in the marking and beauty
thereof, to be of as much delight as the Crystal Gilloflower: this, even
like the former, soon fades and passes away, not yielding any great store of
flowers any year.

10. Rosa rubra humilis sieve pumilio. The dwarf red Rose, or Gilloflower Rose.
This Rose grows always low and small, otherwise in most respects like unto
the ordinary red Rose, and with few or no thorns upon it: the Flowers or
Roses are double, thick, small and close, not so much spread open as the
ordinary red, but somewhat like unto the first double white Rose before
expressed; yet in some places I have seen them more laid open then these, as
they grew in my garden, being so even at the tops of the leaves, as if they
had been clipped off with a pair of sheeres, and are not fully of so red a
color as the red Province Rose, and of as small or weak sent as the ordinary
red Rose, or not so much.

11. Rosa Francafurtensis. The Franckford Rose.
The young shootes of this Rose are covered with a pale purplish bark, set
with a number of small pricks like hairs, and the elder have but very few
thorns: the flower or rose it self has a very great bud or button under it,
more then in any other rose, and is thick and double as a red rose, but so
strongly swelling in the bud, that many of them break before they can be full
blown, and then they are of a pale red rose color, that is, between a red
and a damask, with a very thick broad and hard vmbone of short yellow threads
or thrumes in the middle, the husk of the flower having long ends, which are
called the beards of the rose, which in all other are iagged in some of them,
in this has no iagge at all: the smell is nearest unto a red Rose.

^ Rosa Damascena. The Damask Rose. 2 Rosa Prouincialis sieve Hollandica. The
great Province Rose. 3 Rose Francafurtensis. The Franckford Rose. 4 Rosa rubra
humilis. The dwarfered Rose. 5 Rosa Hungarica. The Hungarian Rose. 6 Rosa lutea
multiplex. The great double yellow Rose.
depiction of flowers

12. Rosa Hungarica. The Hungarian Rose.
The Hungarian Rose has green shootes slenderly set with pricks, and seldom
grows higher then ordinarily the red Rose does; the stem or stock being
much about that bigness: the flower or rose is as great, thick and double, as
the ordinary red Rose, and of the same fashion, of a paler red color, and
being nearly looked upon is finely spotted with faint spots, as it were
spread over the red; the smell whereof is somewhat better then the smell of the
ordinary red Rose of the best kind.

13. Rosa Holoserica simplex and multiplex. The Velvet Rose single and double.
The old stem or stock of the velvet Rose is covered with a dark colored
bark, and the young shootes of a sad green with very few or no thorns at all
upon them: the leaves are of a sadder green color then in most sorts of
Roses, and very often seven on a stalk, many of the rest having but five: the
Rose is either single or double: the single is a broad spread flower,
consisting of five or six broad leaves with many yellow threads in the middle:
the double has two rows of leaves, the one large, which are outermost, the
other smaller within, of a very deep red crimson color like unto crimson
velvet, with many yellow threads also in the middle; and yet for all the double
row of leaves, these Roses stand but like single flowers: but there is another
double kind that is more double then this last, consisting oftentimes of
sixteen leaves or more in a flower, and most of them of an equal bigness, of
the color of the first single rose of this kind, or somewhat fresher; but all
of them of a smaller sent then the ordinary red Rose.

14. Rosa sine spinis simplex and multiplex. The Rose without thorns single
and double.
The Rose without thorns has diverse green smooth shootes, rising from the
root, without any prick or thorn at all upon them, either young or old: the
leaves are not fully so large as of the red rose: the flowers or roses are not
much bigger then those of the double Cinnamon Rose, thick set together and
short, of a pale red Rose color, with diverse pale colored ve^^es through
every leaf of the flower, which has caused some to call it The marbled Rose,
and is of a small sent, not fully equal to the red Rose. The single of this
kind differs not in any other thing from the former, then in the doubleness
or singleness of the flowers, which in this are not half so double, nor yet
fully single, and are of a paler red color.

Rosa sine spina flore albo.
I have heard likewise of a white Rose of this kind, but I have seen none such
as yet, and therefore I can say no more thereof.

15. Rosa Cinamomea simplex and multiplex. The Cinnamon Rose single and double.
The single Cinnamon Rose has his shootes somewhat red, yet not so red as the
double kind, armed with great thorns, like almost unto the Eglantine bush,
thereby showing, as well by the multiplicitie of his shootes, as the quickness
and height of his shooting, his wild nature: On the stem and branches stand
winged leaves, sometimes seven or more together, which are small and green,
yet like unto other Roses. The Roses are single, of five leaves a piece,
somewhat large, and of a pale red color, like unto the double kind, which is
in shootes redder, and in all other things like unto the single, but bearing
small, short, thick and double Roses, somewhat like unto the Rose without
thorns, but a little lesser, of a paler red color at the end of the leaves,
and somewhat redder and brighter toward the middle of them, with many yellow
short thrumes; the small sent of Cinnamon that is found in the flowers has
caused it to bear the name.

16. Rosalutea simplex. The single yellow Rose.
This single yellow Rose is planted rather for variety then any other good use.
It often grows to a good height, his stem being great and woody, with few
or no pricks upon the old wood, but with a number of small pricks like
hairs, thick set, upon the younger branches, of a dark color somewhat
reddish, the bark of the young shootes being of a sad green reddish color:
the leaves of this Rose bush are smaller, rounder pointed, of a paler green
color, yet finely snipt about the edges, and more in number, that is, seven or
nine on a stalk or ribbe, then in any other Garden kind, except the double of
the same kind that follows next: the flower is a small single Rose,
consisting of five leaves, not so large as the single Spanish Musk Rose, but
somewhat bigger then the Eglantine or sweet Briar Rose, of a fine pale yellow
color, without any great sent at all while it is fresh, but a little more, yet
small and weak when it is dried.

17. Rosa lutea multiplex sieve flore pleno. The double yellow Rose.
The double yellow Rose is of great account, both for the rarity, and
doubleness of the flower, and had it sent to the rest, would of all other be
of highest esteem. The stem or stock, the young shoots or branches, the
small hairy pricks, and the small winged leaves, are in all parts like unto
the former single kind; the chiefest difference consists in the doubleness
of the flower or Rose, which is so thick and double, that very often it
breaks out on one side or another, and but a few of them abiding whole and
fair in our Country, the cause whereof we do imagine to be the much
moisture of our Country, and the time of flowring being subject to much rain
and showers; many therefore do either plant it against a wall, or other ways
defend it by covering: again, it is so plentiful in young shootes or
branches, as also in flowers at the top of every branch, which are small and
weak for the most part, that they are not able to bring all the flowers to
ripeness; and therefore most of them fall or wither away without coming to
perfection (the remedy that many do use for this inconvenience last recited
is, that they nippe away most of the buds, leaving but some few upon it, that
so the vigor of the plant may be collected into a few flowers, whereby they
may the better come to perfection, and yet even thus it is hardly effected)
which are of a yellowish green color in the bud, and before they be blown
open, but then are of a fair yellow color, very full of leaves, with many
short hairs rather then leaves in the middle, and having short, round, green,
smooth buttons, almost flat under them: the flower being fair blown open,
does scarce give place for largeness, thickness, and doubleness, unto the
great Prouence or Holland Rose. This Rose bush or plant is very tender with us
here about London, and will require some more care and keeping then the single
of this kind, which is hardy enough; for I have lost many my self, and I know
but a few about this town that can nourse it up kindly, to bear or scarce to
abide without perishing; but abides well in every free air of all or the most
parts of this Kingdom: but (as I hear) not so well in the North.

18. Rosa Moschata simplex and multiplex. The Musk Rose single and double.
The Musk Rose both single and double, rise up oftentimes to a very great
height, that it ouergroweth any arbor in a Garden, or being set by an house
side, to be ten or twelve foot high, or more, but more especially the single
kind, with many green far spread branches, armed with a few sharp great
thorns, as the wilder sorts of Roses are, whereof these are accounted to be
kinds, having small dark green leaves on them, not much bigger then the
leaves of Eglantine: the flowers come forth at the tops of the branches, many
together as it were in an vmbell or tuft, which for the most part do flower
all at a time, or not long one after another, every one standing on a pretty
long stalk, and are of a pale whitish or cream color, both the single and
the double; the single being small flowers, consisting of five leaves, with
many yellow threads in the middle: and the double bearing more double flowers,
as if they were once or twice more double then the single, with yellow thrummes
also in the middle, both of them of a very sweet and pleasing smell,
resembling Musk: some there be that have avouched, that the chiefest sent of
those Roses consists not in the leaves, but in the threads of the flowers.

19. Rosa Moschata multiplex altera: alijs Damascena alba, vel verisimilior
Cinamomea flore pleno albo. The double white Damask Musk Rose.
This other kind of Musk Rose (which with some is called the white Damask
Musk, but more truly the double white Cinnamon Rose) has his stem and
branches also shorter then the former, but as green: the leaves are somewhat
larger, and of a whiter green color; the flowers also are somewhat larger
then the former double kind, but standing in vmbels after the same manner, or
somewhat thicker, and of the same whitish color, or a little whiter, and
somewhat, although but a little, near the smell of the other, but nothing so
strong. This flowreth at the time of other Roses, or somewhat later, yet much
before the former two sorts of Musk Roses, which flower not until the end of
Summer, and in Autumn; both which things, that is, the time of the flowring,
and the sent being both different, show plainly it cannot be of the tribe of
Musk Roses.

20. Rosa Hispanica Moschata simplex. The Spanish Musk Rose.
This Spanish Rose rises to the height of the Eglantine, and sometimes higher,
with diverse great green branches, the leaves whereof are larger and greener
then of the former kinds: the flowers are single Roses, consisting of five
whiter leaves then in any of the former Musk Roses, and much larger, having
sometimes an eye of a blush in the white, of a very sweet smell, coming
nearest unto the last recited Musk Rose, as also for the time of the flowring.

21. Rosa Pomifera mayor. The great Apple Rose.
The stem or stock of this Rose is great, covered with a dark grayish
bark, but the younger branches are somewhat reddish, armed here and there with
great and sharp thorns, but nothing so great or plentiful as in the
Eglantine, although it be a wild kind: the leaves are of a whitish green
color, almost like unto the first white Rose, and five always set together,
but seldom seven: the flowers are small and single, consisting of five leaves,
without any sent, or very little, and little bigger then those of the Eglantine
bush, and of the very same deep blush color, every one standing upon a rough
or prickly button, bearded in the manner of other Roses, which when the flowers
are fallen grow great, somewhat long and round, peare-fashion, bearing the
beards on the tops of them; and being full ripe are very red, keeping the small
prickles still on them, wherein are many white, hard, and roundish seeds, very
like unto the seed of the Heppes or Eglantine berries, lying in a soft pulpe,
like unto the Hawthorne berries or Hawes: the whole beauty of this plant
consists more in the graceful aspect of the red apples or fruit hanging upon
the bushes, then in the flowers, or any other thing. It seems to be the same
that Clusius calls Rosa Pumila, but that with me it grows much higher and
greater then he says his does.

22. Rosa siluestris odora sieve Eglenteria simplex. The single Eglantine or
sweet Briar bush.
The sweet Briar or Eglantine Rose is so well known, being not only planted
in Gardens, for the sweetness of the leaves, but growing wild in many woods
and hedges, that I think it lost time to describe it; for that all know it
has exceeding long green shootes, armed with the cruellest sharp and strong
thorns, and thicker set 1 ^osa sine spinis multiplex. The double Rose without
thorns. 2 Rosa Cinamomea flore pleno. The double Cinnamon Rose. 3 Rosa
Holoserica simplex. The single Velvet Rose. 4 Rosa Holoserica duplex. The
double Velvet Rose. 5 Rosa M^schata multiplex. The double Musk Rose. 6 Rosa
Moschata Hispanica simplex. The single Spanish Musk Rose. 7 Rosa Pomiferae
mayor. The great Apple Rose. 8 Rosa siluestris sieve Eglanteria duplex. The
double Eglantine Rose.
depiction of flowers then is in any Rose either wild or tame: the leaves are
smaller then in most of those that are noursed up in Gardens, seven or nine
most usually set together on a ^ibbe or stalk, very green and sweet in
smell, above the leaves of any other kind of Rose: the flowers are small
single blush Roses, of little or no sent at all, which turn into reddish
berries, stuffed within with a dounie or flocky matter or substance, wherein
does lie white hard seed.

23. Rosa siluestris odora sieve Eglenteria flore duplici. The double Eglantine.
The double Eglantine is in all the places that I have seen it a grafted Rose,
(but I doubt not, but that his original was natural, and that it may be made
natural again, as diverse other Roses are.) It grows and spreads very
well, and with a great head of branches, whereon stand such like leaves as are
in the single kind, but a little larger, not smelling fully so sweet as it:
the flowers are somewhat bigger then the single, but not much, having but one
other row of leaves only more then the former, which are smaller, and the
outer leaves larger, but of the same pale reddish purple color, and smells
somewhat better then the single.

24. Rosa semper virens. The ever green Rose bush.
This Rose or bush is very like unto a wild single Eglantine bush in many
respects, having many very long green branches, but more slender and weak, so
that many times they bead down again, not able to sustain themselves without
some help, and armed with hooked thorns as other Roses be; the winged leaves
consist of seven for the most part, whereof those two that are lowest and
opposite, are smallest, the next two bigger then they, the third couple bigger
then any of the rest below, and the end leaf biggest of all: this proportion
generally it holds in every winged leaf through the whole plant, which at
the first coming forth are somewhat reddish, with the young branch that
shoots out with them, but being full grown, are of a deep green color,
and somewhat shining, dented about the edges, and fall not away from the
branches as other Roses do, but abide thereon for the most part all the
Winter: the flowers stand four or five together at the tops of the branches,
being single Roses, made of five leaves a piece, of a pure white color, much
larger then the ordinary Musk Rose, and of a fine sent, coming nearest
thereunto, with many yellow chiues or threads in the middle.

The Place.
Some of these Roses had their original, as is thought in England, as the
first and second; for these dried red Roses that come over to us from beyond
the Seas, are not of the kind of our red Rose, as may well be perceived by
them that will compare our English dried leaves with those. Some in Germany,
Spain, and Italy. Some again in Turkey, as the double yellow Rose, which
first was procured to be brought into England, by Master Nicholas Let, a
worthy Merchant of London, and a great lover of flowers, from Constantinople,
which (as we hear) was first brought thither from Syria; but perished quickly
both with him, and with all other to whom he imparted it: yet afterward it
was sent to Master John de Franqueuille, a Merchant also of London, and a great
lover of all rare plants, as well as flowers, from which is sprung the greatest
store, that is now flourishing in this Kingdom.

The Time.
The Cinnamon Rose is the earliest for the most part, which flowreth with us
about the middle of May, and sometimes in the beginning. The ordinary Musk
Roses both single and double flower latest, as is said. All the other flower
much about one time, in the beginning of June, or there abouts, and continue
flowring all that month, and the next throughout for the most part, and the
red until August be half past.

The Names.
The several names, whereby they are most commonly known unto us in this
Country, are expressed in their titles; but they are much differing from what
they are called in other Countries near unto us, which to compare, confer,
and agree together, were a work of more pains then use: But to proportion
them unto the names set down by Theophrastus, Pliny, and the rest of the
ancient Authors, were a work, wherein I might be sure not to escape without
falling into error, as I verily believe many others have done, that have
undertaken to do it: I will therefore for this work desire that you will rest
contented, with so much as has already been delivered, and expect an exact
definition and complete satisfaction by such a methodicall course as a general
History will require, to be performed by them that shall publish it.

The Virtues.
The Rose is of exceeding great use with us; for the Damask Rose (besides the
superexcellent sweet water it yields being distilled, or the perfume of the
leaves being dried, serving to fill sweet bags) serves to cause solublenesse
of the body, made into a Syrup, or preserved with Sugar moist or dry candid.
The Damask Province Rose, is not only for sent nearest of all other Roses
unto the Damask, but in the operation of solubility also. The red Rose has
many Physical uses much more then any other, serving for many sorts of
compositions, both cordial and cooling, both binding and loosing. The white
Rose is much used for the cooling of heat in the eyes: diverse do make an
excellent yellow color of the juice of white Roses, wherein some Allome is
dissolved, to paint or color flowers or pictures, or any other such things.
There is little use of any other sort of Roses; yet some affirm, that the
Musk Roses are as strong in operation to open or loosen the belly as the
Damask Rose or Province.

CHAP. CXI.
Cistus. The Holly Rose or Sage Rose.
THere are three principal kinds of Cistus, the male, the female, and the
gum or sweet smelling Cistus bearing Ladanum, called Ledon. Of each of these
three there are also diverse sorts: Of them all to entreat in this work is not
my mind, I will only select out of the multitude some few that are fit for
this our Garden, and leave the rest to a greater.

1. Cistus mas. The male Holly Rose or Sage Rose.
The male Cistus that is most familiar unto our Country, I mean that will
best abide, is a small shrubby plant, growing seldom above three or four
foot high with us, having many slender brittle woody branches, covered with a
whitish bark, whereon are set many whitish green leaves, long and somewhat
narrow, crumpled or wrinckled as it were with veins, and somewhat hard in
handling, especially the old ones; for the young ones are softer, somewhat like
unto Sage leaves for the form and color, but much smaller, two always set
together at a joint: the flowers stand at the top of the branches, three or
four together upon several slender footstalkes, consisting of five small
round leaves a piece, somewhat like unto a small single Rose, of a fine reddish
purple color, with many yellow threads in the middle, without any sent at all,
and quickly fading or falling away, abiding seldom one whole day blown at the
most: after the flowers are past, there come up round hard hairie heads in
their places, containing small brownish seed: the root is woody, and will
abide some years with us, if there be some care had to keep it from the
extremity of our Winters frostes, which both this, and many of the other sorts
and kinds, will not abide do what we can.

2. Cistus faemina. The female Holly Rose.
The female Holly Rose grows lower, and smaller then the former male kind,
having blackish branches, less woody, but not less brittle then it: the
leaves are somewhat rounder and greener, but a little hard or rough withal,
growing in the same manner upon the branches by couples: the flowers grow at
the tops of the branches, like unto the former, consisting of five leaves,
but somewhat lesser, and wholly white, with yellow threads in the middle, as
quickly fading, and of as little sent as the former: the heads and seed are
somewhat bigger then in the former.

3. Chamaecistus Frisicus. The dwarf Holly Rose of Friseland.
This dwarf Cistus is a small low plant, having diverse shootes from the
roots, full of leaves that are long and narrow, very like unto the leaves of
the French Spikenard or Spica Celtica; from among which leaves shoot forth
short stalks, not above a span high, with a few smaller leaves thereon; and at
the tops diverse small flowers one above another, consisting of six small
round leaves, of a yellow color, having two circles of reddish spots round
about the bottom of the leaves, a little distant one from another, which add
much grace to the flower: after the flowers are past, there come in their
places small round heads, being two forked at the end, containing within them
small brownish chaffie seed: the root is small and slender, with many fibers
thereat creeping under ground, and shooting forth in diverse places, whereby it
much increases: the whole plant, and every part of it, smells strong without
any pleasant sent.

4. Cistus annuus. The Holly Rose of a year.
This small Cistus that endures but a year (and will require to be sown every
year, if ye will have it) rises up with straight, but slender hard stalks,
set here and there confusedly with long and narrow greenish leaves, very like
unto the leaves of the Gum Cistus or Ledon, being a little clammy withal: at
the top of the stalks, and at the joints with the leaves, stand two or three
pale yellow flowers, consisting of five leaves a piece, with a reddish spot
near the bottom of every leaf of the flower, as quickly fading as any of
the former: after which follow small three square heads, containing small
seed, like unto the first female kind, but somewhat paler or yellower: the
root is small and woody, and perishes as soon as it has borne seed.

5. Cistus Ledon. The Gum Cistus, or Sweet Holly Rose.
This sweet Holly Rose or Gum Cistus, rises higher, and spreads larger then
the former male kind does, with many blackish woody branches, whereon are set
diverse long and narrow dark green leaves, but whitish underneath, two always
standing together at a joint, both stalks and leaves bedeawed as it were
continually with a clammy sweet moisture (which in the hot Countries is both
more plentiful, and more sweet then in ours) almost transparent, and which
being gathered by the inhabitants, with certain instruments for that purpose
(which in some places are leather thongs, drawn over the bushes, and after
scraped off from the thongs again, and put together) is that kind of black
sweet gum, which is called Ladanum in the Apothecaries shops: at the tops of
the branches stand single white flowers, like unto single Roses, being larger
then in any of the former kinds, consisting of five leaves, whereof every one
has at the bottom a dark purplish spot, broad below, and small pointed
upwards, with some yellow threads in the middle: after which are past, there
arise cornered 1 Cistus mas The male Holly Rose. 2 Chamaecistus Frisucus. The
dwarf Holly Rose of Frisia. 3 Cistus Ledon. The sweet Holly Rose or gum
Cistus. 4 Ledum Alpinum. The mountain Holly Rose. 5 Ledum Silesiacum. The
sweet Mary Rose of Silesia. 6 Rosmarinum aureum. Gilded Rosemary.
depiction of flowers heads, containing such small brownish seed as is in the
former male kind: the root is woody, and spreads under ground, abiding some
years, if it be placed under a wall, where it may be defended from the winds
that often break it, and from the extremity of our winters, and especially
the snow, if it lie upon it, which quickly causes it to perish.

6. Ledum Alpinum seu Rosa Alpina. The Mountain sweet Holly Rose.
The fragrant smell with properties correspondent of two other plants, causes
me to insert them in this Chapter, and to bring them to your knowledge, as well
worthy a fit place in our Garden. The first of them has diverse flender woody
branches, two foot high or thereabouts, covered with a grayish colored bark,
and many times leaning down to the ground, whereby it takes root again:
upon these branches grow many thick, short, hard green leaves, thick set
together, confusedly without order, sometimes whitish underneath, and sometimes
yellowish: the tops of the branches are laden with many flowers, which cause
them to bend downwards, being long, hollow and reddish, opening into five
corners, spotted on the outside with many white spots, and of a paler red
color on the inside, of a fine sweet sent: after the flowers are past, there
follow small heads, containing small brownish seed: the root is long, hard and
woody, abiding better if it comprehend in the ground, then some of the former,
because his original is out of a colder country.

7. Ledum Silesiacum. The sweet Mary Rose, or Rosemary of Silesia.
This other sweet plant rises up with woody ash-colored branches two foot
high or more, which shoot forth other branches, of a reddish or purplish
color, covered with a brownish yellow hoarinesse, on which are set many narrow
long green leaves, like unto Rosemary leaves, but covered with the like
hoarinesse as the stalks are (especially in the natural places, but not so
much being transplanted) and folding the sides of the leaves so close together,
that they seem nothing but ribs, or stalks, of an excellent sweet and
pleasant sent; at the ends of the branches there grow certain brownish scaly
heads, made of many small leaves set thick together, out of which break forth
many flowers, standing in a tuft together, yet severally every one upon his
own footstalke, consisting of five white leaves, with certain white threads in
the middle, smelling very sweet: after which rise small green heads, spotted
with brownish spots, wherein is contained very small, long, yellowish seed:
the root is hard and woodie.

The Place.
The first, second, fourth and fifth, grow in the hot Countries, as Italy,
Spain, etc. The third, and the two last in the colder Countries, as Friseland,
Germany, Bohemia.

The Time.
They do all flower in the Summer months of June, July and August, and their
seed is ripe quickly after.

The Names.
The first, second, fourth and fifth, have their names sufficiently expressed in
their descriptions. The third was sent unto Clusius, under the name of Herculus
Frisicus, because of the strong sent: but he refers it to the kinds of
Chamaecistus, that is, dwarf or low Cistus, both for the low growth, and for
the flowers and seed sake. The sixth is diversely called; for Clusius calls it
Ledum Alpinum: others, Nerium Alpinum, making it to be a Rose Bay. Gesner
according to the Country peoples name, Rosa Alpina, and Rosa Montana. Lobel
calls it Balsamum Alpinum, of the fragrant smell it has, and
Chamaerbododendros Chamaelaeae folio. And some have called it Euonymus, without
all manner of judgment. In English we may call it, The Mountain Rose, until
a fitter name be given it. The last is called of Matthiolus, Rosmarinum
siluestre, but of Clusius Ledum, referring it to their kindred; and Silesiacum,
because he found it in that Country; or for distinction sake, as he says, it
may be called, Ledum folijs Rosmarini, or Ledum Bohemicum. Cordus, as it
seems in his History of Plants, calls it Chamaepeuce, as though he did
account it a kind of low Pine, or Pitch tree.

The Virtues.
The first, second, and fifth, are very astringent, effectual for all sorts of
fluxes of humors. The sweet Gum called Ladanum, made artificially into oil,
is of singular use for Alopecia, or falling of the hair. The seed of the
fourth is much commended against the stone of the Kidneyes. The sweet Rosemary
of Silesia is used of the inhabitants, where it naturally grows, against the
shrinking of sinews, crampes, or other such like diseases, whereof their daily
experience makes it familiar, being used in bathing or otherwise.

CHAP. CXII.
Rosmarinum. Rosemary.
THere has been usually known but one sort of Rosemary, which is frequent
through all this Country: but there are some other sorts not so well known; the
one is called Gilded Rosemary; the other broadeleafed Rosemary; a third I will
adioyne, as more rare then all the other, called Double flowred Rosmary,
because few have heard thereof, much less seen it, and my self am not well
acquainted with it, but am bold to deliver it upon credit.

1. Libanotis Coronaria sieve Rosmarinum vulgar. Our Common Rosmary.
This common Rosemary is so well known through all our Land, being in every
woman's garden, that it were sufficient but to name it as an ornament among
other sweet herbs and flowers in our Garden, seeing every one can describe
it: but that I may say something of it, It is well observed, as well in this
our Land (where it has been planted in Noblemens, and great men's gardens
against brick walls, and there continued long) as beyond the Seas, in the
natural places where it grows, that it rises up in time unto a very great
height, with a great and woody stem (of that compass, that (being cloven out
into thin boards) it has served to make lutes, or such like instruments, and
here with us Carpenters rules, and to diverse other purposes) branching out into
diverse and sundry arms that extend a great way, and from them again into many
other smaller branches, whereon are set at several distances, at the joints,
many very narrow long leaves, green above, and whitish underneath; among which
come forth toward the tops of the stalks, diverse sweet gaping flowers, of a
pale or bleake bluish color, many set together, standing in whitish husks;
the seed is small and red, but thereof seldom does any plants arise that will
abide without extraordinary care; for although it will spring of the seed
reasonable well, yet it is so small and tender the first year, that a sharp
winter kills it quickly, unless it be very well defended: the whole plant as
well leaves as flowers, smells exceeding sweet.

2. Rosmarinum striatum, sieve aureum. Gilded Rosemary.
This Rosemary differs not from the former, in form or manner of growing,
nor in the form or color of the flower, but only in the leaves, which are
edged, or striped, or pointed with a fair gold yellow color, which so
continues all the year throughout, yet fresher and fairer in Summer then in
Winter; for then it will look of a deader color, yet so, that it may be
discerned to be of two colors, green and yellow.

3. Rosmarinum latifolium. Broad leafed Rosemary.
This broad leafed Rosemary grows in the same manner that the former does,
but that we have not seen it in our Country since we had it to grow so great,
or with such woody stemmes: the leaves stand together upon the long branches
after the same fashion, but larger, broader and greener then the other, and
little or nothing whitish underneath: the flowers likewise are of the same
form and color with the ordinary but larger, and herein consists the
difference.

4. Rosmarinum flore duplici. Double flowred Rosmary.
The double flowred Rosmary thus far differs from the former, that it has
stronger stalks, not so easy to break, fairer, bigger and larger leaves, of
a fair green color, and the flowers are double, as the Larkes heel or
spur: This I have only by relation, which I pray you accept, until I may by
sight better inform you.

The Place.
Our ordinary Rosmary grows in Spain, and Prouence of France, and in others
of those hot Countries, near the Sea side. It will not abide (unless kept in
stoues) in many places of Germany, Denmark, and those colder Countries. And in
some extreme hard winters, it has well near perished here in England with
us, at the least in many places: but by slipping it is usually, and yearly
increased, to replenish any garden.

The Time.
It flowreth oftentimes twice in the year; in the Spring first, from April
until the end of May or June, and in August and September after, if the year
before have been temperate.

The Names.
Rosmary is called of the ancient Writers, Libanotis, but with this
distinction, Stephanomatica, that is, Coronaria, because there were other
plants called Libanotis, that were for other uses, as this for garlands, where
flowers and sweet herbs were put together. The Latins call it Rosmarinum.
Some would make it to be Cneorum nigrum of Theophrastus, as they would make
Lauander to be his Cneorum album, but Matthiolus has sufficiently confuted
that error.

The Virtues.
Rosmary is almost of as great use as Bays, or any other herb both for inward
and outward remedies, and as well for civil as physical purposes. Inwardly
for the head and heart; outwardly for the sinews and joints: for civil uses,
as all do know, at weddings, funerals, etc. to bestow among friends: and the
physical are so many, that you might be as well tired in the reading, as I in
the writing, if I should set down all that might be said of it. I will
therefore only give you a taste of some, desiring you will be content
therewith. There is an excellent oil drawn from the flowers alone by the
heat of the Sun, available for many diseases both inward and outward, and
accounted a sovereign Balsame: it is also good to help dimnesse of sight, and
to take away spots, marks and scarres from the skin; and is made in this
manner. Take a quantity of the flowers of Rosemary, according to your own
will either more or less, put them into a strong glass close stopped, set
them in hot horse dung to digest for fourteen days, which then being taken
forth of the dung, and unstopped, tie a fine linen cloth over the mouth, and
turn down the mouth thereof into the mouth of another strong glass, which
being set in the hot Sun, an oil will distill down into the lower glass;
which preserve as precious for the uses before recited, and many more, as
experience by practice may inform diverse.

There is another oil Chymically drawn, available in the like manner for
many the same inward and outward diseases, viz. for the heart, rheumaticke
brains, and to strengthen the memory, outwardly to warm and comfort cold
benumbed sinews, whereof many of good judgment have had much experience.

CHAP. CXIII.
Myrtus. The Myrtle tree or bush.
IN the hot Countries, there have been many sorts of Mirtles found out,
naturally growing there, which will not fructify in this of ours, nor yet
abide without extraordinary care, and conueniencie withal, to preserve them
from the sharpness of our winters. I shall only bring you to view three sorts
in this my Garden, the one with a greater, the other two with lesser leaves, as
the remainder of others which we have had, and which are preserved from time
to time, not without much pain and trouble.

1. Myrtus latifolia. The greater leafed Myrtle.
The broader leafed Myrtle rises up to the height of four or five foot at
the most with us, full of branches and leaves growing like a small bush, the
stem and elder branches whereof are covered with a dark colored bark, but
the young with a green, and some with a red, especially upon the first shooting
forth, whereon are set many fresh green leaves, very sweet in smell, and very
pleasant to behold, so near resembling the leaves of the Pomegranate tree that
grows with us, that they soon deceive many that are not expert therein,
being somewhat broad and long, and pointed at the ends, abiding always green:
at the joints of the branches where the leaves stand, come forth the flowers
upon small footestalkes, every one by it self consisting of five small white
leaves, with white threads in the middle, smelling also very sweet: after the
flowers are past, there do arise in the hot Countries, where they are
natural, round black berries, when they are ripe, wherein are contained many
hard white crooked seeds, but never in this Country, as I said before: the
root disperseth it self into many branches, with many fibers annexed thereto.

2. Myrtus minor, seu minore folio. The smaller leafed Myrtle.
The smaller leafed Myrtle is a low shrub or bush, like unto the former, but
scarce rising so high, with branches spreading about the stem, much thicker
set with leaves then the former, smaller also, and pointed at the ends, of a
little deeper green color, abiding green also winter and summer, and very
sweet likewise: the flowers are white like unto the former, and as sweet, but
show not themselves so plentiful on the branches: the fruit is black in his
natural places, with seeds therein as the former.

3. Myrtus minor rotundiore folio. Box Myrtle.
We have another sort of this small kind of Myrtle, so like unto the former
both for smalnesse, deep green color of the leaves, and thick growing of
the branches, that it will be thought of most, without good heed, and
comparing the one with the other, to be the very same with the former: but if
it be well viewed, it will show, by the roundnesse at the ends of the leaves
very like unto the small Box leaves, to be another differing kind, although
in nothing else. We nourse them with great care, for the beautiful aspect,
sweet sent and raritie, as delights and ornaments for a garden of pleasure,
wherein nothing should be wanting that art, care and cost might produce and
preserve: as also to set among other ever green plants to sort with them.

The Place.
These, and many other sorts of Mirtles grow in Spain, Portugal, Italy, and
other hot Countries in great abundance, where they make their hedges of them:
we (as I said) keep them in this Country, with very great care and diligence.

The Time.
The Mirtles do flower very late with us, not until August at the soonest,
which is the cause of their not fructifying.

The Names.
They are called in Latin Myrtus, and in English Myrtle tree, without any
other diversity of names, for the general title. Yet the several kinds have
had several denominations, in Plinies time, and others, as Romana, Coningala,
Terentina, Egyptia, alba, nigra, etc. which have noted the differences, even
then well observed.

The Virtues.
The Myrtle is of an astringent quality, and wholly used for such purposes.

CHAP. CXIIII.
Malus Punica sieve Granata. The Pomegranet tree.
THere are two kinds of Pomegranet trees, The one tame or manured, bearing
fruit, which is distinguished of some into two sorts, of others into three,
that is, into sower, and sweet, and into sower sweet. The other wild, which
bears no fruit, because it bears double flowers, like as the Cherry,
Apple, and Peach tree with double blossoms, before described, and is also
distinguished into two sorts, the one bearing larger, the other lesser flowers.
Of the manured kind we have only one sort (so far as we know) for it never
bears ripe fruit in this our Country) which for the beautiful aspect, both
of the green verdure of the leaves, and fair proportion and color of the
flowers, as also for the raritie, are noursed in some few of their gardens that
delight in such rarities: for in regard of the tenderness, there is need of
diligent care, that is, to plant it against a brick wall, and defend it
conveniently from the sharpness of our winters, to give his Master some
pleasure in seeing it bear flowers: And of the double kind we have as yet
obtained but one sort, although I shall give you the knowledge and description
of another.

1. Malus Punica satina. The tame Pomegranet tree.
This Pomegranet tree grows not very high in his natural places, and with us
sometimes it shoots forth from the root many brownish twigges or branches, or
if it be pruned from them, and suffered to grow up, it rises to be seven or
eight foot high, 1 Myrus latifoli^ maier. The b^oad leafed Myrtle. 2 Myrtu^
augustifolia minor. The small leafed Myrtle. 3 Myrtus bu^ifo^ia minor. The Box
leafed Myrtle. 4 Malus Granatus simplici flore. The ordinary Pomegranet tree. 5
Balanstium Romamum seu minus. The lesser double flowred Pomegranet tree. 6
Balaustium maius sieve Cyprium. The greater double flowred Pomegranet. 7
Pseudocapsicum seu Amonium Plinij. The Winter Cherry tree. 8 Ficus Indica cum
suo fractu. The Indian Figgetree and his fruit.
depiction of flowers spreading into many small and slender branches, here and
there set with thorns, and with many very fair green shining leaves, like
inform and bigness unto the leaves of the larger Myrtle before described,
every one having a small reddish foote-stalke upon these branches: among the
leaves come forth here and there, long, hard, and hollow reddish cups, divided
at the brimmes, wherein do stand large single flowers, every one consisting of
one whole leaf, smaller at the bottom then at the brimme, like bells, divided
as it were at the edges into five or six parts, of an orient red or crimson
color in the hotter Countries; but in this it is much more delayed, and
tends near unto a blush, with diverse threads in the middle. The fruit is
great and round, having as it were a crown on the head of it, with a thick
tough hard skin or rind, of a brownish red color on the outside, and yellow
within, stuffed or packt full of small grains, every one encompast with a thin
skin, wherein is contained a clear red juice or liquor, either of a sweet (as
I said before) or sower taste, or between them both of a winie taste: the
root disperseth it self very much underground.

2. Balaustium maius sieve Malus Punica siluestris mayor. The greater wild or
double blossomd Pomegranet tree.
The wild Pomegranet is like unto the tame in the number of purplish branches,
having thorns, and shining fair green leaves, somewhat larger then the
former: from the branches likewise shoot forth flowers, far more beautiful
then those of the tame or manured sort, because they are double, and as large
as a double Province Rose, or rather more double, of an excellent bright
crimson color, tending to a silken carnation, standing in brownish cups or
husks, divided at the brims usually into four or five several points, like
unto the former, but that in this kind there never follows any fruit, no not
in the Country, where it is naturally wild.

3. Balaustium minus. The smaller wild Pomegranet tree.
This smaller kind differs from the former in his leaves, being of a darker
green color, but not in the height of the stem, or purplishnesse of his
branches, or thorns upon them; for this does show it self more like unto a
wild kind then it: the flowers hereof are much smaller, and not so thick and
double, of a deeper or sadder red Orange tawny color, set also in such like
cups or husks.

The Place.
The tame or manured kind grows plentifully in Spain, Portugal, and Italy,
and other in other warm and hot countries. We (as I said before) preserve it
with great care. The wild I think was never seen in England, before John
Tradescante my very loving good friend brought it from the parts beyond the
Seas, and planted it in his Lords Garden at Canterbury.

The Time.
They flower very late with us, that is, not until the middle or end of
August, and the cold euenings or frosts coming so soon upon it, does not
only hinder it from bearing, but many times the sharp winters so pinch it,
that it withers it down to the ground, so that oftentimes it hardly
springs again.

The Names.
The name Malus Punica for the tree, and Malum Punicum for the fruit, or Malus
Granata, and Malum Granatum, is the common name given unto this tree, which is
called in English the Pomegarnet or Pomegranet tree. The flowers of the tame
kind are called Cytini, as Dioscorides says, although Pliny seems either
to make Cytinus to be the flower of the wild kind, or Balaustium to be the
flower of both tame and wild kind: but properly, as I take it, Cytinus is the
cup wherein the flower as well of the came as wild kind does stand; for unto
the similitude of them, both the flowers of Asarum, and the seed vessels of
Hyosciamus are compared and resembled, and not unto the whole flower: the bark
or rind of the fruit is called of diverse Sidion, and in the Apothecaries shops
Psidium, and cortex Granatarum. The wild kind is called Malus Punica
siluestris: In English, The wild Pomegranet tree; the flower thereof is
properly called Balaustium. The lesser kind is usually called Balaustium
Romanum, as the greater is called Creticum and Cyprinum, because they grow in
Candy and Cyprus.

The Virtues.
The use of all these Pomegranets is very much in Physic, to cool and bind
all fluxibility both of body and humors: they are also of singular effect in
all ulcers of the mouth, and other parts of the body, both of man and woman.
There is no part of them but is applied for some of these respects. The rind
also of the Pomegranet is used of diverse in stead of Gauls, to make the best
sort of writing Ink, which is durable to the worlds end.

CHAP. CXV.
Amonum Plinij seu Pseudocapsicum. Tree Night shade or the Winter Cherry tree.
I Have adjoined this plant, for the pleasurable beauty of the green leaves,
and red berries. It grows up to be a yard or four foot high at the most,
having a small woody stem or stock, as big as ones finger or thumb,
covered with a whitish green bark, set full of green branches, and fair
green leaves, somewhat uneven sometimes on the edges, narrower then any Night
shade leaves, and very near resembling the leaves of the Capsicum, or Ginny
pepper, but smaller and narrower, falling away in the Winter, and shooting
fresh in the Spring of the year: the flowers grow often two or three
together, at the joints of the branches with the leaves, being white, opening
starre-fashion, and sometimes turning themselves back, with a yellow pointell
in the middle, very like unto the flowers of Night shade: after the flowers are
past, come forth in their stead small green buttons, which after turn to be
pleasant round red berries, of the bigness of small Cherries when they are
ripe, which with us usually ripen not until the Winter, or about Christmas,
wherein are contained many small whitish seed that are flat: all the whole
plant, as well leaves and flowers as seed, are without either smell or taste:
the root has many yellowish strings and fibers annexed unto it.

The Place.
The original place hereof is not well known, but is thought to be the West
Indies. It has been planted of long time in most of these Countries, where it
abides reasonable well, so that some care be had thereof in the extremity of
the Winter.

The Time.
It flowreth sometimes in June, but usually in July and August, and the fruit
is not ripe (as is said) until the Winter.

The Names.
This plant has diverse names; for it is thought to be that kind of Amomum
that Pliny sets down. Dodonaeus calls it Pseudocapficum, for some
likeness in the leaf and fruit unto the small Capsicum or Ginnie Pepper,
although much unlike in the taste and property. Others do call it
Strichnodendron, that is, Solanum arborescens, and we in English according
thereunto, Tree Night shade. But some Latin asses corrupting the Latin word
Amomum, do call it the Mumme tree. Dalechampius calls it Solanum Americum,
seu Indicum, and says the Spaniards call it in their tongue, Guindas de las
Indias, that is, Cerasa Indiana, Indian Cherries, which if any would follow, I
would not be much against it: but many Gentlewomen do call them Winter
Cherries, because the fruit is not thoroughly ripe until Winter.

The Virtues.
I find no Physical property allotted unto it, more then that by reason of
the insipidity, it is held to be cooling.

CHAP. CXVI.
Ficus Indica minor. The smaller Indian Fig tree.
THis Indian Fig tree, if you will call it a tree (because in our Country it
is not so, although it grows in the natural hot Countries from a woody
stem or body into leaves) is a plant consisting only of leaves, one springing
out of another, into many branches of leaves, and all of them growing out of
one leaf, put into the ground half way, which taking root, all the rest rise
out thereof, those below for the most part being larger then those above; yet
all of them somewhat long, flat, and round pointed, of the thickness of a
finger usually, and smallest at the lower end, where they are joined or spring
out of the other leaves, having at their first breaking out a show of small,
red, or brown pricks, thick set over all the upper side of the leaves, but
with us falling away quickly, leaving only the marks where they stood: but
they have besides this show of great pricks, a few very fine, and small, hard,
white, and sharp, almost insensible pricks, being not so big as hairs on
the vnderside, which will often stick in their fingers that handle them
unadvisedly, neither are they to be discerned unless one look precisely for
them: the leaves on the vnderside having none of those other great pricks or
marks at all, being of a fair fresh pale green color: out of the uppermost
leaves break forth certain green heads, very like unto leaves (so that many
are deceived, thinking them to be leaves, until they mark them better, and be
better experienced in them) but that they grow round and not flat, and are
broad at the top; for that out of the tops of every of them shoots out a
pale yellow flower, consisting of two rows of leaves, each containing five
leaves a piece, laid open with certain yellow threads, tipped with red in the
middle: this green head, until the flower be past, is not of half that
bigness that it attaineth unto after, yet seldom or never comes unto
perfection with us, being long and round, like unto a Fig, small below, and
greater above, bearing upon the flat or broad head the mark of the flower;
some holding still on them the dried leaves, and others having lost them, show
the hollownesse which they have in the top or middle of the head, the sides
round about being raised or standing up higher: this head or fig in our
Country abides green on the outside, and little or nothing reddish within
(although it abide all the Winter, and the Summer following, as sometimes it
does) for want of that heat and comfort of the Sun it has in his natural
place, where it grows reddish on the outside, and containing within it a
bloody red clammy juice, making the urine of them that eat of them as red as
blood, which many seeing, were in doubt of themselves, lest their urine were
not very blood; of what sweetness, like a fig, in the natural places, I am
not well assured, yet affirmed: but those that have been brought unto me,
whose color on the outside was greenish, were of a reddish purple within, and
contained within them round, small, hard seed, the taste was flat, waterish,
or insipide: the root is neither great, nor disperseth it self very deep or
far, but shoots many small roots under the upper crust of the earth.

There is a greater kind hereof, whose leaves are twice or thrice as big,
which having been often brought us, will seldom abide more then one Summer
with us, our Winters always rotting the leaves, that it could not be longer
kept.

The Place.
This Indian Fig tree grows dispersedly in many places of America,
generally called the West Indies: The greater kind in the more remote and hot
Countries, as Mexico, Florida, etc. and in the Bermudas or Summer Islands, from
whence we have often had it. The lesser in Virginia, and those other Countries
that are nearer unto us, which better endures with us.

The Time.
It flowreth with us sometimes in May, or June; but (as I said) the fruit never
comes to perfection in this Country.

The Names.
Diverse do take it to be Opuntia Plinij, whereof he speaks in the 21.
Book and 17. Chapter of his Natural History: but he there says, Opuntia is
an herb, sweet and pleasant to be eaten, and that it is a wonder that the
root should come from the leaf, and so to grow; which words although they
descipher out the manner of the growing of this plant, yet because this is a
kind of tree, and not an herb, nor to be eaten, it cannot be the same: but
especially because there is an herb which grows in the same manner, or very
near unto it, one leaf standing on the top or side of another, being a Sea
plant, fit to be eaten with vinegar and oil (as many other herbs are that
grow in the salt marshes, or near the Sea, whereof Sea Purslane is one) which
Clusius calls Lychen Marinus, and (as Clusius says) Cortusus very fitly
called Opuntia marina, and out of doubt is the very same Opuntia that
Theophrastus makes mention of, and Pliny out of him. Our English people in
Virginia, and the Bermuda Island, where it grows plentifully, because of the
form of the fruit, which is somewhat like to a Pear, and not being so
familiarly acquainted with the growing of Figs, sent it unto us by the name of
the prickly Pear, from which name many have supposed it to be a Pear indeed,
but were therein deceived.

The Virtues.
There is no other especial property given hereunto, by any that have written
of the West Indies, then of the coloring of the urine, as is before said.

CHAP. CXVII.
Yuca sieve Iucca. The supposed Indian Iucca.
THis rare Indian plant has a great thick tuberous root (spreading in time
into many tuberous heads) from the head whereof shoots forth many long, hard,
and guttured leaves, very sharp pointed, compassing as it were one another at
the bottom, of a grayish green color, which do not fall away, but abide
ever green on the plant; from the middle whereof springs forth (now and
then, but not every year) a strong round stalk, divided into diverse branches,
whereon stand diverse white, and somewhat large flowers, hanging down their
heads, consisting of six leaves, with diverse veins, of a weak reddish or
blush color, spread on the back of the three outer leaves, especially from
the middle of the leaves to the bottom, and not rising to the edge of the
leaf of any flower, which fall away without bearing any seed in our Country,
as far as ever could be observed either in the plant that Master Gerard kept
a long time by him, or by Robinus at Paris his plant, which Master Gerard sent
unto him, or yet by that plant, that Vespasian Robin the son of old Robin
sent unto Master John de Franqueuille, and now abides and flourishes in my
Garden.

The Place.
It was first brought into England (as Master Gerard says) from the West
Indies, by a servant of Master Thomas Edwards, an Apothecary of Exeter, and
imparted to him, who kept it unto his death: but perished with him that got it
from his widow, intending to send it to his Country house.

The Time.
It flowreth not until July, and the flowers fall away suddenly, after they
have been blown open a while.

The Names.
Master Gerard first as I think called it Iucca, supposing it to be the true
Yuca of Theuet, wherewith the Indians make bread, called Cassaua: but the true
Iucca is described to have a leaf divided into seven or nine parts, which this
has not: Yet not knowing by what better name to call it, let it hold still his
first imposition, until a fitter may be given it.

The Virtues.
We have not heard of any, that has either read, heard, or experimented the
faculties hereof, nor yet whether it has good or evil taste; for being rare,
and possessed but by a few, they that have it are loath to cut any thereof, for
fear of spoiling and losing the whole root.

Some have affirmed, that in some parts of Turkey, where as they say this plant
grows, they make a kind of cloth from the threads are found running through
the leaves; but I find the threads are so strong and hard, that this cannot be
that plant the relators mean is used in that manner.

1 Yuca sieve Iucca. The Indian Iucca. 2 Arbor vita. The tree of life. 3 Arbor
Judah. Judas tree. 4 Laburnum. Bean Trefoile. 5 Cytisus. Tree Trefoile.
depiction of flowers

CHAP. CXVIII.
Arbor vitae. The tree of life.
THe tree of life rises up in some places where it has stood long, to be a
tree of a reasonable great bigness and height, covered with a redder bark
then any other tree in our Country that I know, the wood whereof is firm and
hard, and spreads abroad many arms and branches, which again send forth
many smaller twigges, bending downwards; from which twiggy or slender
branches, being flat themselves like the leaves, come forth on both sides many
flat winged leaves, somewhat like unto Sauine, being short and small, but not
pricking, seeming as if they were brayded or folded like unto a lace or point,
of a dark yellowish green color, abiding green on the branches Winter and
Summer, of a strong resinous taste, not pleasing to most, but in some ready to
procure casting, yet very cordial and pectorall also to them that can endure
it: at the tops of the branches stand small yellowish dounie flowers, set in
small scaly heads, wherein lie small, long, brownish seed, which ripen well in
many places, and being sown, do spring and bring forth plants, which with
some small care will abide the extremest Winters we have.

The Place.
The first or original place where it naturally grows, as far as I can
learn or understand, is that part of America which the French do in habit,
about the river of Canada, which is at the back of Virginia Northward, and as
it seems, first brought by them from thence into Europe, in the time of
Francis the first French King, where it has so plentifully increased, and so
largely been distributed, that now few Gardens of respect, either in France,
Germany, the Lowe-Countries, or England, are without it.

The Time.
It flowreth in the end of May, and in June; the fruit is ripe in the end of
August and Sptember.

The Names.
All the Writers that have written of it, since it was first known, have made
it to be Thuyae genus, a kind of Thuya, which Theophrastus compares unto a
Cypress tree, in his fifth Book and fifth Chapter: but Omne simile non est
idem, and although it have some likeness, yet I verily believe it is proprium
sui genus, a proper kind of it own, not to be paralleld with any other. For
we find but very few trees, herbs, or plants in America, like unto those
that grow in Europe, the hither part of Africa, or in the lesser Asia, as
experience testifies. Some would make it to be Cedrus Lycia, but so it cannot
be. The French that first brought it, called it Arbor vitae, with what reason
or upon what ground I know not: but ever since it has continued under the
title of the Tree of life.

The Virtues.
It has been found by often experience, that the leaves hereof chewed in the
morning fasting, for some few days together, have done much good to diverse,
that have been troubled with shortness of breath, and to help to expectorate
thin purulentous matter stuffing the lungs. Other properties I have not heard
that it has; but doubtless, the hot resinous smell and taste it has, both
while it is fresh, and after it has been long kept dry, does evidently
declare his tenuity of parts, a digesting and cleansing quality it is possessed
with, which if any industrious would make trial, he should find the effects.

CHAP. CXIX.
Arbor Iudae. Judas tree.
IVdas tree rises up in some places, where it stands open from a wall, and
alone free from other trees (as in a Garden at Batthersey, which sometimes ago
belonged to Master Morgan, Apothecary to the late Queen Elizabeth of famous
memory) to be a very great and tall tree, exceeding any Apple tree in height,
and equal in bigness of body thereunto (as my self can testify, being an
eye witness thereof) when as it had many stalks of flowers, being in the bud,
breaking out of the body of the tree through the bark in diverse places, when
as there was no bough or branch near them by a yard at the least, or yet any
leaf upon the tree, which they gathered to put among other flowers, for
Nosegayes) and in other places it grows to be but an hedge bush, or plant,
with many suckers and shootes from below, covered with a dark reddish bark,
the young branches being more red or purplish: the flowers on the branches come
forth before any show or budding of leaves, three or four standing together
upon a small foote-stalke, which are in fashion like unto Pease blossoms, but
of an excellent deep purplish crimson color: after which come in their places
so many long, flat, large, and thin cods, of a brownish color, wherein are
contained small, blackish brown, flat, and hard seed: the root is great, and
runs both deep, and far spreading in the earth: the leaves come forth by
themselves, every one standing on a long stalk, being hard and very round,
like unto the leaf of the largest Asarum, but not so thick, of a whitish green
on the upper side, and grayish underneath, which fall away every year, and
spring a fresh after the Spring is well come in, and the buds of flowers are
sprung.

There is another of this kind, growing in some places very high, Flore albe.
somewhat like the former, and in other places also full of twiggy branches,
which are greener then the former, as the leaves are likewise: the flowers of
this kind are wholly white, and the cods nothing so red or brown, in all
other things agreeing together.

The Place.
The former grows plentifully in many places of Spain, Italy, Prouence in
France, and in many other places. The other has been sent us out of Italy
many times, and the seed has sprung very well with us, but it is somewhat
tender to keep in the Winter.

The Time.
The flowers (as I said) appear before the leaves, and come forth in April
and May, and often sooner also, the leaves following shortly after; but neither
of them bears perfect seed in our Country, that ever I could learn, or know
by mine own or others experience.

The Names.
Some would refer this to Cercis, whereof Theophrastus makes mention in his
first Book and eighteenth Chapter, among those trees that bear their fruit in
cods, like as Pulse do: and he remembers it again in the fourteenth Chapter
of his third Book, and makes it not unlike the white Poplar tree, both in
greatness and whiteness of the branches, with the leaf of an Iuie, without
corners on the one part, cornered on the other, and sharp pointed, green on
both sides almost alike, having so slender long footestalkes that the leaves
cannot stand forthright, but bend downwards, with a more rugged bark then the
white Poplar tree. Clusius thinks this large description is but an ample
description of the third kind of Poplar, called Lybica, the Aspen tree, which
Gaza translateth Alpina: but who so will well consider it, shall find it
neither answerable to any Poplar tree, in that it bears not cods as Cercis
does; nor unto this Arbor Iudae, because it bears not white branches. Clusius
says also, that the learned of Mompelier in his time, referred it to Colytea
of Theophrastus in his third book and seventeenth chapter, where he does liken
it to the leaves of the broadest leafed Bay tree, but larger and rounder, green
on the vpperside, and whitish underneath, and whereunto (as he says)
Theophrastus gives cods in the fourteenth chapter of the same third book: and
by the contracting of their descriptions both together, says, they agree unto
this Judas tree. But I find some doubts and differences in these places: for
the Colutaea that Dioscorides mentions in the said fourteenth chapter of his
third book, has (as he says there) a leaf like unto the Willow, and
therefore cannot be the same Colutaea mentioned in the seventeenth chapter of
the same third book, which has a broad Bay leaf: indeed he gives seed in
cods: but that with broad Bay leaves is (as he says) without either flower or
fruit; and besides all this, he says the roots are very yellow, which is not
to be found in this Arbor Iudae, or Judas tree: let others now judge if these
things can be well reconciled together. Some have for the likeness of the
cods unto Bean cods, called it Fabago. And Clusius called it Siliqua
siluestris. It is generally in these days called Arbor Iudae, and in English
after the Latin name, until a fitter may be had, Judas tree.

The Virtues.
There is nothing extant in any Author of any Physical use it has, neither
has any later experience found out any.

CHAP. CXX.
Laburnum. Bean Trefoile.
THere be three sorts of these codded trees or plants, one near resembling
another, whereof Anagyris of Dioscorides is one. The other two are called
Laburnum; the larger whereof Matthiolus calls Anagyris altera, and so do
some others also: the third is of the same kind with the second, but smaller.
I shall not for this our Garden trouble you or my self with any more of them
then one, which is the lesser of the two Liburnum, in that it is more frequent,
and that it will far better abide then the Anagyris, which is so tender, that
it will hardly endure the winters of our Country: and the greater Laburnum is
not so easily to be had.

Laburnum. Bean Trefoile.
This codded tree rises up with us like unto a tall tree, with a reasonable
great body, if it abide any long time in a place, covered with a smooth green
bark; the branches are very long, green, pliant, and bending any way, whereon
are set here and there diverse leaves, three always standing together upon a
long stalk, being somewhat long, and not very narrow, pointed at the ends,
green on the vpperside, and of a silver shining color underneath, without any
smell at all: at the joints of these branches, where the leaves stand, come
forth many flowers, much like unto broom flowers, but not so large or open,
growing about a very long branch or stalk, sometimes a good span or more in
length, and of a fair yellow color, but not very deep; after which come
flatthin cods, not very long or broad, but as tough and hard as the cods of
Broom; wherein are contained blackish seed, like, but much less then the
seed of Anagyris vera (which are as big as a kidney bean, purplish and
spotted): the root thrusts down deep into the ground, spreading also far,
and is of a yellowish color.

The Place.
This tree grows naturally in many of the woods of Italy, and upon the Alps
also, and is therefore still accounted to be that Laburnum that Pliny calls
Arbor Alpina. It grows in many gardens with us.

The Time.
It flowreth in May, the fruit or cods, and the seeds therein are ripe in the
end of August, or in September.

The Names.
This tree (as I said before) is called of Matthiolus Anagyris altera, sieve
secunda, of Cordus, Gesner and others, especially of most now adays, Laburnum.
It is probable in my opinion, that this should be that Colutaea of
Theophrastus, mentioned in the fourteenth Chapter of his third book with the
leaf of a Willow; for if you take any one leaf by it self, it may well
resemble a Willow leaf both for form and color, and bears small seed in
cods like unto pulse as that does. Of some it has been taken for a kind of
Cytisus, but not truly. We call it in English, Bean Trefoile, in regard of
his cods and seed therein, somewhat like unto Kidney Beans, and of the
leaves, three always standing together, until a more proper name may be
given it.

The Virtues.
There is no use hereof in Physic with us, nor in the natural place of the
growing, save only to provoke a vomit, which it will do very strongly.

CHAP. CXXI.
Cytisus. Tree Trefoile.
THere are so many sorts of Cytisus or Tree trefoiles, that if I should relate
them all, I should weary the Reader to ouerlooke them, whereof the most part
pertain rather to a general work then to this abstract. I shall not
therefore trouble you with any superfluous, but only with two, which we have
noursed up to furnish waste places in a garden.

Cytisus Maranthae. Horned Tree Trefoile.
This Tree Trefoile which is held of most Herbarists to be the true Cytisus of
Dioscorides, rises up to the height of a man at the most, with a body of the
bigness of a man's thumb, covered with a whitish bark, breaking forth into
many whitish branches spreading far, beset in many places with small leaves,
three always set together upon a small short footestalke, which are rounder,
and whiter then the leaves of Bean Trefoile: at the ends of the branches for
the most part, come forth the flowers three or four togethers, of a fine gold
color, and of the fashion of Broom flowers, but not so large: after the
flowers are past, there come in their places crooked flat thin cods, of the
fashion of a half moon, or crooked horn, whitish when they are ripe, wherein
are contained blackish seed: the root is hard and woody, spreading diverse
ways under the ground: the whole plant has a pretty small hot sent.

Cytisus vulgatior. The common Tree Trefoile.
This Cytisus is the most common in this Land, of any the other sorts of tree
trefoiles, having a blackish colored bark, the stem or body whereof is
larger then the former, both for height and spreading, bearing also three
leaves together, but smaller and greener then the former: the flowers are
smaller, but of the same fashion and color: the cods blackish and thin, and
not very long, or great, but lesser then Broom cods, wherein there lies small
blackish hard seed: the root is diversely dispersed in the ground.

The Place.
The first grows in the kingdom of Naples, and no doubt in many other places
of Italy, as Matthiolus says. The other grows in diverse places of France.

The Time.
They flower for the most part in May or June: the seed is ripe in August or
September.

The Names.
The first (as I said) is thought of most to be the true Cytisus of
Dioscorides, and as is thought, was in these later days first found by
Bartholomaeus Maranta of Naples, who sent it first to Matthiolus, and thereupon
has ever since been called after his name, Cytisus Maranthae. Some do call
it Cytisus Lunatus, because the cods are made somewhat like unto an half
Moon. We call it in English, Horned Tree Trefoile. The other is called Cytisus
vulgaris or vulgatior; in English, The common Tree Trefoile, because we have
not any other so common.

The Virtues.
The chiefest virtues that are appropriate to these plants, are to procure
milk in women's breasts, to fatten pullen, sheep etc. and to be good for bees.

CHAP. CXXII.
Colutaea. The Bastard Sena Tree.
We have in our Gardens two or three sorts of the Bastard Sena tree; a greater
as I may so call it, and two lesser: the one with round thin transparent skins
like bladders, wherein are the seed: the others with long round cods, the one
bunched out or swelling in diverse places, like unto a Scorpions tale, wherein
is the seed, and the other very like unto it, but smaller.

1. Colutaea Vesicaria. The greater Bastard Sena with bladders.
This shrub or tree, or shrubby tree, which you please to call it, rises up to
the height of a pretty tree, the stem or stock being sometimes of the
bigness of a man's arm, covered with a blackish green rugged bark, the wood
whereof is harder then of an Elder, but with an hollownesse like a pith in the
heart or middle of the branches, which are divided many ways, and whereon are
set at several distances, diverse winged leaves, composed of many small round
pointed, or rather flat pointed leaves, one set against another, like unto
Licoris, or the Hatcher Fitch; among these leaves come forth the flowers, in
fashion like unto Broom flowers, and as large, of a very yellow color: after
which appear clear thin swelling cods like unto thin transparent
bladders, wherein are contained black seed, set upon a middle ribbe or sinew
in the middle of the bladder, which if it be a little crushed between the
fingers, will give a crack, like as a bladder full of wind. The root grows
branched and woody.

2. Colutaea Scorpioides mayor. The greater Scorpion podded Bastard Sena.
This Bastard Sena grows nothing so great or tall, but shoots out diversely,
like unto a shrub, with many shoots springing from the root: the branches are
greener, but more rugged, having a white bark on the best part of the elder
grown branches; for the young are green, and have such like winged leaves set
on them as are to be seen in the former, but smaller, greener, and more
pointed: the flowers are yellow, but much smaller, fashioned somewhat like unto
the former, with a reddish stripe down the back of the uppermost leaf: the
long cods that follow are small, long and round, distinguished into many
divisions or dents, like unto a Scorpions tail, from whence has risen the
name: in these several divisions lie several black seed, like unto the
seed of Fenigrecke: the root is white and long, but not so woody as the
former.

3. Colutaea Scorpioides minor. The lesser Scorpion Bastard Sena.
This lesser Bastard Sena is in all things like the former, but somewhat lower,
and smaller both in leaf, flower, and cods of seed, which have not such
eminent bunches on the cods to be seen as the former.

The Place.
They grow as Matthiolus says about Trent in Italy, and in other places: the
former is frequent enough through all our Country, but the others are more
rare.

The Time.
They flower about the middle or end of May, and their seed is ripe in August.
The bladders of the first will abide a great while on the tree, if they be
suffered, and until the wind cause them to rattle, and afterward the skins
opening, the seed will fall away.

The Names.
The name Colutaea is imposed on them, and by the judgment of most writers,
the first is taken to be that Colutaea of Lipara that Theophrastus makes
mention of, in the seventeenth chapter of his third book. But I should rather
think that the Scorpioides were the truer Colutaea of Theophrastus, because
the long pods thereof are more properly to be accounted siliquae, then the
former which are vesicae tumentes, windy bladders, and not siliquae: and no
doubt but Theophrastus would have given some peculiar note of difference if he
had meant those bladders, and not these cods. Let others of judgment be
vmpeeres in this case; although I know the current of writers since Matthiolus,
do all hold the former Colutaea veficaria to be the true Colutaea Liparae of
Theophrastus. We call it in English, Bastard Sena, from Ruellius, who as I
think first called it Sena, from the form of the leaves. The second and third
(as I said before) from the form of the cods received their names, as it is in
the titles and descriptions; yet they may as properly be called Siliquosae, for
that their fruit are long cods.

The Virtues.
Theophrastus says it does wonderfully help to fatten sheep: But sure it is
found by experience, that if it be given to man it causes strong castings both
upwards and downwards; and therefore let every one beware that they use not
this in steed of good Sena, lest they feel to their cost the force thereof.

CHAP. CXII.
Spartum Hispanicum frutex. Spanish Broom.
ALthough Clusius and others have found diverse sorts of this shrubby Spartum or
Spanish Broom, yet because our Climate will nourse up none of them, and even
this very hardly, I shall leave all others, and describe unto you this one only
in this manner: Spanish Broom grows to be five or six foot high, with a
woody stem below, covered with a dark gray, or ash-colored bark, and
having above many pliant, long and slender green twigs, whereon in the
beginning of the year are set many small long green leaves, which fall away
quickly, not abiding long on; toward the tops of these branches grow the
flowers, fashioned like unto Broom flowers, but larger, as yellow as they, and
smelling very well; after which come small long cods, crested at the back,
wherein is contained blackish flat seed, fashioned very like unto the Kidney
beans: the root is woody, dispersing it self diverse ways.

The Place.
This grows naturally in many places of France, Spain and Italy, we have
it as an ornament in our Gardens, among other delightful plaats, to please the
senses of sight and smelling.

The Time.
It flowreth in the end of May, or beginning of June, and bears seed, which
ripeneth not with us until it be late.

The Names.
It is called Spartium Graecorum, and Spartum frutex, to distinguish it from
the sedge or rush, that is so called also. Of some it is called Genista, and
thought not to differ from the other Genista, but they are much deceived; for
even in Spain and Italy, the ordinary Ganista or Broom grows with it,
which is not pliant, and fit to bind Vines, or such like things withal as
this is.

The Virtues.
There is little use hereof in Physic, by reason of the dangerous quality of
vomiting, which it does procure to them that take it inwardly: but being
applied outwardly, it is found to help the Sciatica, or pain of the hippes.

1 Co^utaea vulgaris. Ordinary bastard Seen. 2 Periploca recta Virginiana.
Virginian Silk. 3 Colutae^ Scorpicides. Scorpion bastard Seen. 4 Spartum
Hispanicum. Spanish Broom. 5 Ligustrum. Priuet. 6 Saluia variegata. Party
colored Sage. 7 Maiorana auroa. G^^ded Matierome.
depiction of flowers

CHAP. CXXIIII.
Periploca recta Virginiana. Virginian Silk.
LEst this stranger should find no hospitality with us, being so beautiful a
plant, or not find place in this Garden, let him be here received, although
with the last, rather then not at all. It rises up with one or more strong and
round stalks, three or four foot high, whereon are set at the several
joints thereof two fair, long, and broad leaves, round pointed, with many
veins therein, growing close to the stem, without any foote-stalke: at the
tops of the stalks, and sometimes at the joints of the leaves, grows forth a
great bush of flowers out of a thin skin, to the number of twenty, and
sometimes thirty or forty, every one with a long foote-stalke, hanging down
their heads for the most part, especially those that are outermost, every one
standing within a small husk of green leaves, turned to the stalkeward, like
unto the Lysimachia flower of Virginia before described, and each of them
consisting of five small leaves a piece, of a pale purplish color on the
vpperside, and of a pale yellowish purple underneath, both sides of each leaf
being as it were folded together, making them seem hollow and pointed, with a
few short chiues in the middle: after which come long and crooked pointed cods
standing upright, wherein are contained flat brownish seed, dispersedly lying
within a great deal of fine, soft, and whitish brown silk, very like unto
the cods, seed, and silk of Asclepias, or Swallow-wort, but that the cods are
greater and more crooked, and harder also in the outer shell: the root is long
and white, of the bigness of a man's thumb, running under ground very far, and
shooting up in diverse places, the heads being set full of small white grumes or
knots, yielding forth many branches, if it stand any time in a place: the whole
plant, as well leaves as stalks, being broken, yield a pale milk.

The Place.
It came to me from Virginia, where it grows abundantly, being raised up
from the seed I received.

The Time.
It flowreth in July, and the seed is ripe in August.

The Names.
It may seem very probable to many, that this plant is the same that Prosper
Alpinus in the twenty fifth Chapter of his Book of Egyptian plants, names
Beidelsar; and Honorius Bellus in his third and fourth Epistles unto Clusius
(which are at the end of his History of plants) calls Ossar frutex: And
Clusius himself in the same Book calls Apocynum Syriacum, Palastinum, and
Aegyptiacum, because this agrees with theirs in very many and notable parts;
yet verily I think this plant is not the same, but rather another kind of it
self: First, because it is not frutex, a shrub or woody plant, nor keeps
his leaves all the year, but loses both leaves and stalks, dying down to the
ground every year: Secondly, the milk is not causticke or violent, as Alpinus
and Bellus say Ossar is: Thirdly, the cods are more crooked then those of
Clusius, or of Alpinus, which Honorius Bellus acknowledges to be right,
although greater then those he had out of Egypt: And lastly, the roots of
these do run, whereof none of them make any mention. Gerard in his Herball
gives a rude figure of the plant, but a very true figure of the cods with
seed, and says the Virginians call it Wisanck, and refers it to the
Asclepias, for the likeness of the cods stuffed with silken down. But what
reason Caspar Bauhinus in his Pinax Theatri Botanici had, to call it (for it is
Clusius his Apocynum Syriacum) by the name of Lapathum Aegyptiacum lactescens
siliqua Asclepiadis, I know none in the world: for but that he would show an
extreme singularity in giving names to plants, contrary to all others (which
is very frequent with him) how could he think, that this plant could have any
likeness or correspondencie, with any of the kinds of Dockes, that ever he
had seen, read, or heard of, in face, or show of leaves, flowers, or seed;
but especially in giving milk. I have you see (and that not without just and
evident cause) given it a differing Latin name from Gerard, because the
Asclepias gives no milk, but the Periploca or Apocymum does; and therefore
fitter to be referred to this then to that. And because it should not want an
English name answerable to some peculiar property thereof, I have from the
silken down called it Virginian Silk: but I know there is another plant
growing in Virginia* called Silk Grass, which is much differing from this.

The Virtues.
I know not of any in our Land has made any trial of the properties hereof.
Captain John Smith in his book of the discovery and description of Virginia,
says, that the Virginians use the roots hereof (if his be the same with this)
being bruised and applied to cure their hurts and diseases.

CHAP. CXXV.
Ligustrum. Primme or Priuet.
BEcause the use of this plant is so much, and so frequent throughout all this
Land, although for no other purpose but to make hedges or arbours in Gardens,
etc. whereunto it is so apt, that no other can be like unto it, to be cut,
lead, and drawn into what form one will, either of beasts, birds, or men
armed, or otherwise: I could not forget it, although it be so well known unto
all, to be an hedge bush growing from a woody white root, spreading much
within the ground, and bearing many long, tough, and plyant sprigs and
branches, whereon are set long, narrow, and pointed sad green leaves by
couples at every joint: at the tops whereof break forth great tufts of sweet
smelling white flowers, which when they are fallen, turn into small black
berries, having a purple juice within them, and small seed, flat on the one
side, with an hole or dent therein: this is seen in those branches that are
not cut, but suffered to bear out their flowers and fruit.

The Place.
This bush grows as plentifully in the Woods of our own Country, as in any
other beyond the Seas.

The Time.
It flowreth sometimes in June, and in July; the fruit is ripe in August and a
September.

The Names.
There is great controversy among the modern Writers concerning this plant,
some taking it to be (...) of Dioscorides, other to be Phillyrea of
Dioscorides, which follows next after Cyprus. Pliny makes mention of Cyprus
in two places; in the one he says, Cyprus has the leaf of Ziziphus, or the
Iuiube tree: in the other he says, that certain do affirm, that the Cyprus of
the East Country, and the Ligustrum of Italy is one and the same plant: whereby
you may plainly see, that our Priuet which is Ligustrum, cannot be that Cyprus
of Pliny with Iuiube leaves: Besides, both Dioscorides and Pliny say, that
Cyprus is a tree; but all know that Ligustrum, Priuet, is but an hedge bush:
Again, Dioscorides says, that the leaves of Cyprus give a red color, but
Priuet gives none. Bellonius and Prosper Alpinus have both recorded, that the
true Cyprus of Dioscorides grows plentifully in Egypt, Syria, and those
Eastern Countries, and noursed up also in Constantinople, and other parts of
Greece, being a merchandise of much worth, in that they transport the leaves,
and young branches dried, which laid in water give a yellow color, wherewith
the Turkish women color the nails of their hands, and some other parts of
their bodies likewise, delighting much therein: and that it is not our
Ligustrum, or Priuet, because Cyprus bears round white seed, like Coriander
seed, and the leaves abide green always upon the tree, which grows (if it
be not cut or pruined) to the height of the Pomegranet tree. I have (I
confess) beyond the limits I set for this work spoken concerning our Priuet,
because I have had the seed of the true Cyprus of Dioscorides sent me, which
was much differing from our Priuet, and although it sprang up, yet would not
abide any time, whereas if it had been our Priuet, it would have been
familiar enough to our Country.

The Virtues.
It is of small use in physic, yet some do use the leaves in Lotions, that
serve to cool and dry fluxes or sores in diverse parts.

CHAP. CXXVI.
Saluia variegata. Party colored Sage. And Maiorana versicolor sieve aurea.
Yellow or golden Marierome.
Unto all these flowers of beauty and rarity, I must adioyne two other plants,
whose beauty consists in their leaves, and not in their flowers: as also to
separate them from the others of their tribe, to place them here in one
Chapter, before the sweet herbs that shall follow, as is fittest to furnish
this our Garden of pleasure. This kind of Sage grows with branches and
leaves, very like the ordinary Sage, but somewhat smaller, the chiefest
difference consists in the color of the leaves, being diversely marked and
spotted with white and red among the green: for upon one branch you shall have
the leaves severally marked one from another, as the one half of the leaf
white, and the other half green, with red shadowed over them both, or more
white then green, with some red in it, either parted or shadowed, or dashed
here and there, or more green then white, and red therein, either in the
middle or end of the leaf, or more or less parted or striped with white and
red in the green, or else sometimes wholly green the whole branch together,
as nature lists to play with such varieties: which manner of growing rising
from one and the same plant, because it is the more variable, is the more
delightful and much respected.

There is another speckled Sage parted with white and green, but it is nothing
of that beauty to this, because this has three colors evidently to be
discerned in every leaf almost, the red adding a superaboundant grace to the
rest.

Maiorana aurea sieve versicolor. Yellow or golden Marierome.
This kind of Marierome belongs to that sort is called in Latin Maiorana
latifolia, which Lobel sets forth for Hyssopus Graecorum genuina: In English
Winter Marierome, or pot Marierome: for it has broader and greater leaves then
the sweet Marierome, and a different vmbell or tuft of flowers. The difference
of this from that set forth in the Kitchen Garden, consists chiefly in the
leaves, which are in Summer wholly yellow in some, or but a little green, or
parted with yellow and green more or less, as nature lists to play: but in
Winter they are of a dark or dead green color, yet recovering it self
again: the sent hereof is all one with the pot Marierome.

We have another parted with white and green, much after the manner with the
former.

The Place, Time, Names, and Virtues of both these plants, shall be declared
where the others of their kinds are specified hereafter, and in the Kitchen
Garden; for they differ not in properties.

CHAP. CXXVII.
Lauendula. Lauender Spike.
AFter all these fair and sweet flowers before specified, I must needs add
a few sweet herbs, both to accomplish this Garden, and to please your senses,
by placing them in your Nosegayes, or else where, as you list. And although I
bring them in the end or last place, yet are they not of the least account.

1. Lauendula mayor. Garden Lauender.
Our ordinary Garden Lauender rises up with a hard woody stem above the
ground, parted into many small branches, whereon are set whitish, long, and
narrow leaves, by couples one against another; from among which rises up naked
square stalks, with two leaves at a joint, and at the top diverse small
husks standing round about them, formed in long and round heads or spikes,
with purple gaping flowers springing out of each of them: the root is woody,
and spreads in the ground: The whole plant is of a strong sweet sent, but
the heads of flowers much more, and more piercing the senses, which are much
used to be put among linen and apparel.

There is a kind hereof that bears white flowers, and somewhat broader
leaves, Flore albo.
but it is very rare, and seen but in few places with us, because it is more
tender, and will not so well endure our cold Winters.

2. Lauendula minor sen Spica. Small Lauender or Spike.
The Spike or small Lauender is very like unto the former, but grows not so
high, neither is the head or spike so great and long, but shorter and smaller,
and of a more purplish color in the flower: the leaves also are a little
harder, whiter, and shorter then the former; the sent also is somewhat sharper
and stronger. This is not so frequent as the first, and is nourished but in
some places that are warm, and where they delight in rare herbs and plants.

The Place.
Lauender grows in Spain abundantly, in many places so wild, and little
regarded, that many have gone, and abiden there to distill the oil thereof
whereof great quantity now comes over from thence unto us: and also in
Lanquedocke, and Prouence in France.

The Time.
It flowreth early in those hot Countries, but with us not until June and July.

The Names.
It is called of some Nardus Italica, and Lauendula, the greater is called
Faemina, and the lesser Mas. We do call them generally Lauender, or Lauender
Spike, and the lesser Spike, without any other addition.

The Virtues.
Lauender is little used in inward physic, but outwardly; the oil for cold
and benumbed parts, and is almost wholly spent with us, for to perfume linen,
apparel, gloves, leather, etc. and the dried flowers to comfort and dry up
the moisture of a cold brain.

CHAP. CXXVIII.
Staechas. Sticadoue, Cassidony, or French Lauender.
CAssidony that grows in the Gardens of our Country, may peradventure
somewhat differ in color, as well as in strength, from that which grows in
hotter Countries; but as it is with us, it is more tender a great deal then
Lauender, and grows rather like an herb then a bush or shrub, not above a
foot and a half high, or thereabouts, having many narrow long green leaves
like Lauender, but softer and smaller, set at several distances together about
the stalks, which spread abroad into branches: at the tops whereof stand long
and round, and sometimes four square heads, of a dark greenish purple color,
compact of many scales set together; from among which come forth the flowers,
of a bluish purple color, after which follow seed vessels, which are
somewhat whitish when they are ripe, containing blackish brown seed within
them: the root is somewhat woody, and will hardly abide the injuries of our
cold Winters, except in some places only, or before it have flowred: The whole
plant is somewhat sweet, but nothing so much as Lauender.

The Place.
Cassidony grows in the Islands Staechades, which are over against Marselles,
and in Arabia also: we keep it with great care in our Gardens.

The Time.
It flowreth the next year after it is sown, in the end of May, which is a
month before any Lauender.

The Names.
It is called of some Lauendula siluestris, but most usually Staechas: in
English, of some Stickadoue, or French Lauender; and in many parts of England,
Cassidony.

The Virtues.
It is of much more use in physic then Lauender, and is much used for old
pains in the head. It is also held to be good for to open obstructions, to
expel melancholy, to cleanse and strengthen the liver, and other inward parts,
and to be a Pectorall also.

CHAP. CXXIX.
Abrotanum faemina sieve Santolina. Lauender Cotton.
THis Lauender Cotton has many woody, but brittle branches, hoary or of a
whitish color, whereon are set many leaves, which are little, long, and four
square, dented or notched on all edges, and whitish also: at the tops of these
branches stand naked stalks, bearing on every one of them a larger yellow head
or flower, then either Tansie or Maudeline, whereunto they are somewhat like,
wherein is contained small dark colored seed: the root is hard, and
spreads abroad with many fibers: the whole plant is of a strong sweet sent,
but not unpleasant, and is in many places planted in Gardens, to border knots
with, for which it will abide to be cut into what form you think best; for it
grows thick and bushy, very fit for such works, besides the comely show the
plant it self thus wrought does yield, being always green, and of a sweet
sent; but because it quickly grows great, and will soon run out of form,
it must be every second or third year taken up, and new planted.

The Place.
It is only planted in Gardens with us, for the uses aforesaid especially.

The Time.
It flowreth in July, and stands long in the hot time of the year in his
color, and so will do, if it be gathered before it have stood over long.

The Names.
Diverse do call it as Matthiolus does, Abrotanum faemina, and Santolina; and
some call it Chamaecyparissus, because the leaves thereof, are somewhat like
the leaves of the Cypress tree: We call it in English generally Lauender
Cotton.

The Virtues.
This is usually put among other hot herbs, either into bathes, ointments, or
other things, that are used for cold causes. The seed also is much used for
the worms.

CHAP. CXXX.
Ocimum. Bassill.
BAssill is of two sorts (besides other kinds) for this our Garden, the one
whereof is greater, the other less in every part thereof, as shall be showed.

1. Ocimum Citratum. Common Bassill.
Our ordinary Garden Bassill has one stalk rising from the root, diversely
branched out, whereon are set two leaves always at a joint, which are broad,
somewhat round, and pointed, of a pale green color, but fresh, a little snipt
or dented about the edges, and of a strong or heady sent, somewhat like a
Pomecitron, as many have compared it, and thereof call it Citratum: the flowers
are small and white, standing at the tops of the branches, with two small leaves
at every joint under them, in some plants green, in others brown under them:
after which comes blackish seed: the root perishes at the first approach
of winter weather, and is to be new sown every year.

2. Ocimum minimum sieve Gariophyllatum. Bush Basil.
The bush Basil grows not altogether so high, but is thicker spread out
into branches, whereon grow smaller leaves, and thicker set then the former,
but of a more excellent and pleasant smell by much: the flowers are white like
the former, and the seed black also like it, and perishes as suddenly, or
rather sooner then it, so that it requires more pains to get it, and more
care to nourse it, because we seldom or never have any seed of it.

Ocimum Indicum. Indian Basil.
The Indian Basil has a square reddish green stalk, a foot high or better,
from the joints whereof spread out many branches, with broad fat leaves set
thereon, two always together at the joint, one against another, as other
Basils have, but somewhat deeply cut in on the edges, and oftentimes a little
crumpled, standing upon long reddish footestalkes, of a dark purple color,
spotted with deeper purple spots, in some greater, in others lesser: the
flowers stand at the tops of the stalks spike-fashion, which are of a white
color, with reddish stripes and veins running through them, set or placed in
dark purple colored husks: the seed is greater and rounder then the former,
and somewhat long withal: the root perishes in like manner as the other
former do. The whole plant smells strong, like unto the other Basils.

The Place.
The two last sorts of Basils are greater strangers in our Country then the
first which is frequent, and only sown and planted in curious gardens. The
last came first out of the West Indies.

The Time.
They all flower in August, or July at the soonest, and that but by degrees,
and not all at once.

The Names.
The first is usually called Ocimum vulgar, or vulgatius, and Ocimum Citratum.
In English, Common or Garden Basil. The other is called Ocimum minimum, or
Gariophyllatum, Cloue Basil, or Bush Basil. The last either of his place, or
form of his leaves, being spotted and curled, or all, is called Ocimum Indicum
maculatum, latifolium and crispum. In English according to the Latin, Indian
Basil, broad leafed Basil, spotted or curled Basil, which you please.

The Virtues.
The ordinary Basil is in a manner wholly spent to make sweet, or washing
waters, among other sweet herbs, yet sometimes it is put into nosegayes. The
Physical properties are, to procure a cheerful and merry heart, whereunto the
seed is chiefly used in powder, etc. and is most used to that, and to no other
purpose.

1 Santolina. Lauender Cotton. 2 Lauendula. Lauender Spike. 3 Stoechas.
Cassidony. 4 Chamaed^ys. Germander. 5 Ocimum minus. F^^^ Bassill. 6 Marum.
Herb Masticke. 7 Maio^ana. Sweet Marietome.
depiction of flowers

CHAP. CXXXI.
Maiorana. Sweet Marierome.
We have many sorts of Marierome; some that are sweet, and but Summer plants;
others that are greater and not so sweet; and some also that are wild. Of all
these I will only select some of the choicest that are fit for this place, and
leave the other for the next garden, and the garden of simples, or a general
work: yet hereunto I will adioyne another sweet plant called Masticke, as
participating nearer with them then with Time, whereunto many do refer it.

1. Maiorana mayor aestina. Common sweet Marierome.
The sweet Marierome that is most ftequently sown in our Country, is a low
herb little above a foot high when it is at the highest, full of branches,
and small whitish soft roundish leaves, smelling very sweet: at the tops of
the branches stand diverse small scaly heads, like unto knots, (and therefore of
some called knotted Marierome) of a whitish green color, out of which come
here and there small white flowers, and afterward small reddish seed: the
root is composed of many small threads or strings, which perish with the whole
plant every year.

2. Maiorana tenuifolia. Marierome gentle.
This Marierome has likewise diverse small branches, growing low, and not
higher then the former, but having finer and smaller leaves, hoary and soft,
but much sweeter: the heads are like unto the former, and so are the flowers
and seed, and the whole plant abiding but a Summer in the like manner.

3. Marum. Herb Masticke.
The nearer resemblance that this herb has with Marierome then with Time (as
I said before) has made me place it next unto the small sweet Marierome. It
rises up with a greater, and a more woody stalk then Marierome, two foot
high or better in some places, where it likes the ground and air, branching
out on all sides toward the upper part, leaving the stem bare below, if it
be old, otherwise being young, thinly furnishing the branches from the bottom
with small green leaves, bigger then the leaves of any Time, and coming near
unto the bigness and form of the last recited finer Marierome, but of a
greener color: at the tops of the branches stand small white flowers on a
head, which afterward turn into a loose tuft of a long white hoary matter,
like unto soft down, with some leaves underneath and about it, which abide not
long on the stalks, but are blown away with the wind: the seed is so small
if it have any, that I have not observed it: the root is threddy: the whole
plant is of a sweet resinous sent, stronger then the Marierome, and abides
our winters, if it be carefully planted and regarded.

The Place.
The sweet Marieromes grow naturally in hot Countries: the first in Spain
etc. the second is thought to come out of Syria, or Persia first into Italy,
where they much esteem it, and plant it curiously and carefully in pots, and
set them in their windows, being much delighted therewith for the sweet sent
it has. The first is usually sown every year in most gardens with us: but
the second is very rare and dainty, and must as daintely be preserved, being
more tender then the former. The herb Masticke is thought to be first brought
out of Candie, Clusius says he found it in Spain: It is planted by slippes,
(and not sown) in many gardens, and is much replanted for increase, but
prospers only, or more frequently, in loamie or clay grounds then in any
other soil.

The Time.
The sweet Marieromes bear their knots or scaly heads in the end of July, or
in August. Herb Masticke in June many times, or in the beginning of July.

The Names.
The first of the two sweet Marieromes called Maiorana in Latin a maiore cura,
is taken of most writers to be the Amaracus or Sampsuchum of Dioscorides,
Theophrastus and Pliny, although Galen does seem a little to dissent
therefrom. The other sweet Marierome has his name in his title as much as can
be said of it. The next is thought by the best of the modern Writers to be the
true Marum that Galen prefers for the excellent sweetness, before the
former Marierome in making the Oleum, or vnguentum Amaricinum, and seems to
incline to their opinion that thought Amaracus was derived from Marum. It is
the same also that Galen and others of the ancient Writers make mention of, to
go into the composition of the Trochisci Hedychroi, as well as Amaracus among
the ingredients of the Theriaca Andromachi. In English we call it Masticke
simply, or Herb Mastick, both to distinguish it from that Time that is called
Masticke Time, and from the Masticke Tree, or Gum, so called. Some of later
times, and Clusius with them, have thought this to be Dioscorides his
Tragoriganum, which does somewhat resemble it: but there is another plant that
Matthiolus sets forth for Marum, that in Lobels opinion and mine is the
truest Tragoriganum, and this the truest Marum.

The Virtues.
The sweet Marieromes are not only much used to please the outward senses in
nosegayes, and in the windows of houses, as also in sweet pouders, sweet
bags, and sweet washing waters, but are also of much use in Physic, both to
comfort the outward members, or parts of the body, and the inward also: to
provoke urine being stopped, and to ease the pains thereof, and to cause the
feminine courses. Herb Masticke is of greater force to help the stopping of
urine, then the Marierome, and is put into Antidotes, as a remedy against the
poison of venomous Beasts.

CHAP. CXXXI.
Thymum. Time.
THere are many kinds of Time, as they are usually called with us, some are
called of the garden, and others wild, which yet for their sweetness are
brought into gardens, as Musk Time, and Lemon Time; and some for their beauty,
as embroidered or gold yellow Time, and white Time. But the true Time of the
ancient Writers, called Capitatum, as a special note of distinction from all
other kinds of Time, is very rare to be seen with us here in England, by
reason of the tenderness, that it will not abide our Winters. And all the
other sorts that with us are called garden Times, are indeed but kinds of
wild Time, although in the defect or want of the true Time, they are used in
the stead of it. With the Times I must do as I did with the Marieromes in the
Chapter before, that is, reserve the most common in use, for the common use of
the Kitchen, and show you only those here, that are not put to that use: and
first with the true Time, because it is known but to a few.

1. Thymum legitimum capitatum. The true Time.
The true Time is a very tender plant, having hard and hoary brittle branches,
spreading from a small woody stem, about a foot and a half high, whereon
are set at several joints, and by spaces, many small, long, whitish, or hoary
green leaves, of a quick sent and taste: at the tops of the branches stand
small long whitish green heads, somewhat like unto the heads of Stoechas, made
as it were of many leaves or scales, out of which start forth small purplish
flowers (and in some white, as Bellonius says) after which comes small
seed, that soon falls out, and if it be not carefully gathered, is soon
lost, which made (I think) Theophrastus to write, that this Time was to be
sown of the flowers, as not having any other seed: the root is small and
woody. This holds not his leaves in Winter, no not about Seuill in Spain,
where it grows abundantly, as Clusius records, finding it there naked or
spoiled of leaves. And will not abide our Winters, but perishes wholly, root
and all.

2. Serpillum hortense sieve maius. Garden wild Time.
The wild Time that is cherished in gardens grows upright, but yet is low,
with diverse slender branches, and small round green leaves, somewhat like unto
small fine Marierome, and smelling somewhat like unto it: the flowers grow in
roundels at the tops of the branches, of a purplish color: And in another of
this kind they are of a pure white color.

There is another also like hereunto, that smells somewhat like unto Musk;
and therefore called Musk Time, whose green leaves are not so small as the
former, but larger and longer.

3. Serpillum Citratum. Lemon Time.
The wild Time that smells like unto a Pomecitron or Lemon, has many weak
branches trayling on the ground, like unto the first described wild Time, with
small dark green leaves, thinly or sparsedly set on them, and smelling like
unto a Lemon, with whitish flowers at the tops in roundels or spikes.

4. Serpillum aureum sieve verficolor. Gilded or embroidered Time.
This kind of wild Time has small hard branches lying or leaning to the
ground, with small party colored leaves upon them, divided into stripes or
edges, of a gold yellow color, the rest of the leaf abiding green, which for
the variable mixture or placing of the yellow, has caused it to be called
embroidered or gilded Time.

The Place.
The first grows as is said before, about Seuill in Spain, in very great
abundance as Clusius says; and as Bellonius says, very plentifully on the
mountains through all Greece. The others grow some in this Country, and some
in others: but we preserve them with all the care we can in our gardens, for
the sweet and pleasant sents and varieties they yield.

The Time.
The first flowreth not until August; the rest in June and July.

The Names.
Their names are severally set down in their titles, as is sufficient to
distinguish them; and therefore I shall not need to trouble you any further
with them.

The Virtues.
The true Time is a special help to melancholicke and spleneticke diseases,
as also to flatulent humors, either in the upper or lower parts of the body.
The oil that is Chimically drawn out of ordinary Time, is used (as the whole
herb is, in the stead of the true) in pills for the head and stomach. It is
also much used for the toothach, as many other such like hot oils are.

CHAP. CXXXII.
Hyssopus. Hyssope.
THere are many varieties of Hyssope, beside the common or ordinary, which I
reserve for the Kitchen garden, and intend only in this place to give you the
knowledge of some more rare: viz. of such as are noursed up by those that are
curious, and fit for this garden: for there are some other, that must be
remembered in the Physic garden, or garden of Simples, or else in a general
work.

1. Hyssopus folijs niueis. White Hyssope.
This white Hyssope is of the same kind and smell with the common Hyssope; but
differs, in that this many times has diverse leaves, that are wholly of a
white color, with part of the stalk also: others are parted, the one half
white, the other half green, and some are wholly green, or with some spots
or stripes of white within the green, which makes it delightful to most
Gentlewomen.

2. Hyssopus folijs cinereis. Russet Hyssope.
As the last has party colored leaves, white and green, so this has his
leaves of an ash color, which of some is called russet; and has no other
difference either in form or smell.

3. Hyssopus aureus. Yellow or golden Hyssope.
All the leaves of this Hyssope are wholly yellow, or but a little green in
them, and are of so pleasant a color, especially in Summer, that they provoke
many Gentlewomen to wear them in their heads, and on their arms, with as much
delight as many fine flowers can give: but in Winter their beautiful color is
much decayed, being of a whitish green, yet recover themselves again the next
Summer.

4. Hyssopus surculis densis. Double Hyssope.
As this kind of Hyssope grows lower then the former or ordinary kind, so
it has more branches, slenderer, and not so woody, leaning somewhat down
toward the ground, so wonderfully thick set with leaves, that are like unto
the other, but of a darker green color, and somewhat thicker withal, that it
is the only fine sweet herb, that I know fittest (if any be minded to plant
herbs) to set or border a knot of herbs or flowers, because it will well
abide, and not grow too woody or great, nor be thin of leaves in one part,
when it is thick in another, so that it may be kept with cutting as smooth and
plain as a table. If it be suffered to grow up of it self alone, it rises
with leaves as before is specified, and flowreth as the common does, and of
the: same sent also, not differing in any thing, but in the thickness of the
leaves on the stalks and branches, and the aptness to be ordered as the
keeper pleases.

Chamaedrys. Germander.
Lest Germander should be utterly forgotten, as not worthy of our Garden,
seeing many (as I said in my treatise or introduction to this Garden) do
border knots therewith: let me at the leaft give it a place, although the last,
being more used as a strewing herb for the house, then for any other use. It
is (I think) sufficiently known to have many branches, with small and
somewhat round endented leaves on them, and purplish gaping flowers: the roots
spreading far abroad, and rising up again in many places.

The Place.
These Hyssopes have been most of them noursed up of long time in our English
Gardens, but from whence their first original should be, is not well known.
The Germander also is only in Gardens, and not wild.

The Time.
They flower in June and July.

The Names.
The several names whereby they are known to us, are set forth in their
titles; and therefore I need not here say more of them then only this, that
neither they here set down, nor the common or ordinary sort, nor any of the
rest not here expressed, are any of them the true Hyssope of the ancient Greek
Writers, but supposititiae, used in the stead thereof. The Germander, from the
form of the leaves like unto small oaken leaves, had the name Chamaedrys given
it, which signifies a dwarf Oak.

The Virtues.
The common Hyssope is much used in all pectorall medicines, to cut fleagme,
and to cause it easily to be avoided. It is used of many people in the Country,
to be laid unto cuts or fresh wounds, being bruised, and applied either alone,
or with a little Sugar. It is much used as a sweet herb, to be in the windows
of an house. I find it much commended against the Falling Sickness,
especially being made into Pills after this manner: Of Hyssope, Horhound, and
Castor, of each half a dram, of Peony roots (the male kind is only fit to
be used for this purpose) two drams, of Assa faetida one scruple: Let them be
beaten, and made into pills with the juice of Hyssope; which being taken for
seven days together at night going to bed, is held to be effectual to give
much ease, if not thoroughly to cure those that are troubled with that disease.
The use of Germander ordinarily is as Time, Hyssope, and other such herbs, to
border a knot, whereunto it is often appropriate, and the rather, that it might
be cut to serve (as I said) for a strewing herb for the house among others.
For the physical use it serves in diseases of the spleen, and the stopping of
urine, and to procure women's courses.

Thus have I led you through all my Garden of Pleasure, and showed you all the
varieties of nature noursed therein, pointing unto them, and describing them
one after another. And now lastly (according to the use of our old ancient
Fathers) I bring you to rest on the Grass, which yet shall not be without some
delight, and that not the least of all the rest.

1 Thymum legitimum. The true Time. 2 Serpillum maius bortense. Garcen walde
Time. 3 Serpillum Citratum. Lemon Time. 4 Hyssopus verfi^olo sieve aureus.
Golden Hyssope. 5 Chamaedrys. Germander. 6 Spartum Austriacum sieve Gramen
plumarium minus. The lesser feather Grass. 7 Gramen striatum vel sulcatum
Painted Grass or Ladies Laces.
depiction of flowers

CHAP. CXXXIII.
Gramina. Grasses.
THere are among an infinite number (as I may so say) of Grasses, a few only
which I think fit to be planted in this Garden, both for the rarity of them,
and also for your delight, and the excellent beauty that is in them above many
other plants. One of them has long ago bin respected, and cherished in the
country gardens of many Gentlewomen, and others. The others are known but unto
a few.

1. Gramen striatum. Painted Grass or Ladies laces.
This kind of Grass has many stiff, hard, round stalks, full of joints,
whereon are set at every joint one long leaf, somewhat broad at the bottom,
where it compasses the stalk, and smaller to the end, where it is sharp
pointed, hard or rough in handling, and striped all the length of the leaf
with white streakes or lines, that they seem party colored laces of white and
green: the tops of the stalks are furnished with long spikie tufts, like unto
the tufts of Couch Grass: the roots are small, white, and threddy, like the
roots of other Grasses.

2. Gramen Plumarium minus. The lesser Feather-Grasse.
This lesser Feather-Grasse has many small, round, and very long leaves or
blades, growing in tufts, much finer and smaller then any other Grass that I
know, being almost like unto hairs, and of a fresh green color in Summer,
but changing into gray, like old hay in Winter, being indeed all dead, and
never reviving; yet hardly to be plucked away until the Spring, and then other
green leaves or rushes rise up by them, and in their stead, and are above a
foot in length: from the middle of these tufts come forth rounder and bigger
rushes, which are the stalks, and which have a chaffie round ear about the
middle thereof, which when it is full grown, is somewhat higher then the
tops of the leaves or rushes, opening it self (being before close) at the
top, and showing forth three or four long ails or beards, one above another,
which bend themselves a little downwards (if they stand over long before they
are gathered, and will fall off, and be blown away with the wind) being so
finely feathered on both sides, all the length of the beard, and of a pale or
grayish color, that no feather in the tail of the Bird of Paradise can be
finer, or to be compared with them, having sticking at the end of every one of
them, within the ear, a small, long, whitish, round, hard, and very sharp
pointed grain, like unto an oaten grain, that part of the stalk of the
feather that is next under it, and above the seed for some two or three
inches, being stiff and hard, and twining or curling it self, if it be
suffered to stand too long, or to fall away, otherwise being straight as the
feather it self: the root is composed of many long, hard, small threddy
strings, which run deep and far, and will not willingly be removed, in that
it gains strength every year by standing.

3. Gramen Plumarium maius. The greater Feather-Grasse.
The greater Feather-Grasse is like unto the lesser, but that both the leaves
and the feathers are greater, and nothing so fine, grosser also, and of less
beauty and respect, though whiter then it; and therefore is not so much
regarded: for I have known, that many Gentlewomen have used the former lesser
kind, being tied in tufts, to set them in stead of feathers about their beds,
where they have lain after childe-bearing, and at other times also, when as
they have been much admited of the Ladies and Gentles that have come to visit
them.

The Place.
The first of these Grasses, as Lobel says, grows naturally in the woods and
hills of Sauoy. It has long ago been received into our English gardens. The
second, as Clusius says, in Austria, from whence also (as I take it) the
greater came, and are both in the gardens of those, that are curious obseruers
of these delights.

The Time.
The first is in its pride for the leaves all the Spring and Summer, yielding
his bush in June. The other give their feather-like sprigs in July and August,
and quickly (as I said) are shed, if they be not carefully gathered.

The Names.
The first is called by Lobel Gramen sulcatum, or strutum album; of others
Gramen pictum. The French call it Aiguellettes d'armes, of the fashion that
their Ensigns, Pennons, or Streamers used in wars were of, that is, like unto
a party colored curtain. In English usually Ladies laces, and Painted Grass.
The first of the other two is called Gramen plumarium or plumosum, and minus is
added for the distinction of it. Clusius calls it Spartum Austriacum, of the
likeness and place where he found it. The last is called Gramen plumarium, or
plumosum mains, The greater Feather-Grasse.

The Virtues.
These kinds of Grasses are not in any time or place that I do hear of
applied to any Physical use; and therefore of them I will say no more: but
here I will end the prime part of this work.

THE ORDERING OF THE KITCHEN GARDEN.
CHAP. I. The situation of a Kitchen Garden, or Garden of Herbs, and what sort
of manure is fittest to help the decaying of the soil thereof.
Having given you the best rules and instructions that I can for your flower
Garden, and all the flowers that are fit to furnish it, I now proceed to your
herb garden, which is not of the least respect belonging to any man's house,
nor utterly to be neglected for the many vtilities are to be had from it, both
for the Masters profit and pleasure, and the meynies content and nourishment:
all which if I should here set down, I had a large field to wander in, and
matter sufficient to entreat of, but this work permits not that liberty:
and I think there are but few but either know it already, or conceive it
sufficiently in their minds. Passing therefore no further in such discourses, I
come to the matter in hand, which is to show you where the fittest place is for
an herb garden. As before I showed you that the beauty of any worthy house is
much the more commended for the pleasant situation of the garden of flowers, or
of pleasure, to be in the sight and full prospect of all the chief and
choicest rooms of the house; so contrariwise, your herb garden should be on
the one or other side of the house, and those best and choice rooms: for the
many different sents that arise from the herbs, as Cabbages, Onions, etc. are
scarce well pleasing to perfume the lodgings of any house; and the many
ouertures and breaches as it were of many of the beds thereof, which must
necessarily be, are also as little pleasant to the sight. But for private men's
houses, who must like their habitations as they fall unto them, and cannot have
time or means to alter them, they must make a virtue of necessity, and convert
their places to their best advantage, by making their profit their chiefest
pleasure, and making one place serve for all uses. The choice of ground for
this Garden, is (as I said before) where it is fat, fertile and good, there
needs the less labor and cost: and contrariwise, where it is cold, wet, dry
or barren, there must be the more helps still added to keep it in heart. For
this Garden by reason of the much and continual stirring therein, the herbs
and roots drawing out the substance of the fertility thereof more abundantly
then in the former, must be continually helped with soil, or else few things
of goodness or worth will come forward therein. The stable soil of horses is
best and more proper for any cold grounds, for being the hottest, it will
cause any the seeds for this Garden to prosper well, and be more forward then
in any other ground that is not so helped. The stable soil of Cattle is of a
colder and moister nature, and is therefore more proper for the hot sandy or
grauelly grounds, and although it be longer before it be brought to mould
then that of horses, yet it will outlast it more then twice so long. Let every
one therefore take according to the nature of the ground such helps as are
most fit and convenient, as I have here and before showed. But I do here
ingenuously confess my opinion of these forcings and helpings of ground, that
howsoever it does much good to some particular things, which because they
delight in heat, and cannot be brought to perfection without it in this our
Country, which is colder then their natural from whence they are brought,
must therefore have artificial helps to forward them; yet for many other
things the compost does much alter and abate the natural vigor, and
quickenesse of taste, that is perceived in them that grow in a natural fat or
sandy soil that is not so helped.

CHAP. II. The form of a Garden of herbs for necessary uses, with the
ordering thereof.
AS our former Garden of pleasure is wholly formable in every part with
squares, trayles, and knots, and to be still maintained in their due form and
beauty: so on the contrary side this Garden cannot long conserve any form,
for that every part thereof is subject to mutation and alteration. For although
it is convenient that many herbs do grow by themselves on beds, cast out into
some proportion fit for them, as Time, Hissope, Sage, etc. yet many others may
be sown together on a plot of ground of that largeness that may serve every
man's particular use as he shall have occasion to employ it, as Reddish, Lettice
and Onions, which after they are grown up together may be drawn up and taken
away, as there is occasion to spend them: but Carrots or Parsneps being sown
with others must be suffered to grow last, because they require a longer time
before they be fit to be taken up. Other herbs require some large compass of
ground whereon they may grow of themselves without any other herbs growing
among them, as Artichokes, Cowcumbers, Melons, Pompions. And some will do so
with their Cabbages also, but the best and most frugall way now used, is to
plant them round about the border of your plot or ground whereon you plant
Cowcumbers, Pompions, or other things, in that by this means so much ground
will be well saved, and the other things be no whit hindered thereby, which
else a great deal of ground must be employed for them apart. So that by this
that I have here said, you may perceive the form of this Garden is for the
most part, to be still out of form and order, in that the continual taking
up of the herbs and roots that are sown and planted, causes the beds or
parts of this Garden to lie broken, dismembered, and out of the order that at
the first it was put into. Remember herewithall that (as I said before) this
Garden requires the continual help of soil to be brought into it, in that
the plenty of these manner of herbs and roots do so much waste the
fertility and fatness of the ground, that without continual refreshing it
would quickly become so poor and barren, that it would not yield the worth of
the seed. The ordinary time to soil a Garden, is to bring in manure or dung
before Christmas, and either bury it some small depth, not too deep, or else
to lay it upon the ground that the winter frostes may pierce it, and then turn
it shallow into the ground to sow your seeds in the Spring.

CHAP. III. How to order diverse Garden herbs, both for their sowing, spending,
and gathering of the seed.
Our chiefest and greatest Gardiners now adays, do so provide for themselves
every year, that from their own grounds they gather the seed of many herbs
that they sow again: for having gained the best kind of diverse herbs, they
will be still furnished with the same, and be not to seek every year for new
that oftentimes will not yield them half the profit that their choice seed
will: I say of many herbs, but not of all; for the best of them all has not
ground sufficient for all sorts, nor will our climate bring some to that
perfection that other foreign does, and therefore the seed of some things are
continually brought from beyond Sea unto us. And again although our chief
Gardiners do still provide their own seed of diverse things from their own
ground, because as I said it is of the best kind, yet you must understand
also, that good store of the same sorts of seeds are brought from beyond the
Seas, for that which is gathered in this Land is not sufficient to serve every
man's use in the whole Kingdom by many parts; yet still it is true, that our
English seed of many things is better then any that comes from beyond the
Seas: as for example, Reddish, Lettice, Carrots, Parsneps, Turnips, Cabbages,
and Leekes, of all which I intend to write in this place; for these are by them
so husbanded, that they do not sow their own grounds with any other seed of
these sorts but their own: which that you may know the manner how to do, I
will here set it down, that every one may have the best directions if they
will follow them. Of Reddish there are two sorts, one more early then the
other: they use therefore to sow their early Reddish first, that they may have
the earliest profit of them, which is more worth in one fortnight, then in a
month after. And to effect this they have some artificial helps also; which
are these: They use to dig up a large plot of ground where they intend to sow
their seed a little before or after Christmas, casting it into high balkes or
ridges five or six foot asunder, which they suffer to lie and take all the
extreme frosts in January to mellow the earth, and when the frostes are past,
they then begin to bring into it good store of fresh stable dung, which they
lay neither too deep nor too thick, and cover it with the mould a hand
breadth thickness above the dung, which does give such a warmth and comfort to
whatsoever is sown thereon, that it forces it forward much sooner then any
other way can do: And to prevent both the frostes, and the cold bitter winds
which often spoil their seed new sprung up, they use to set great high and
large mattes made of reeds, tied together, and fastened unto strong stakes,
thrust into the ground to keep them up from falling, or being blown down with
the wind; which mattes they place on the North and East side to break the
force of these winds, and are so sure and safe a defense, that a brick wall
cannot better defend any thing under it, then this fence will. In this manner
they do every year to bring forward their seed to gain the more by them,
and they that will have Reddish early, must take the same course. The other
sort of Reddish for the most part is sown in February, a fortnight after the
other at the least, and likewise every month after unto September, that they
may have young continually. For the black Reddish, although many in many
places do sow it in the same time, and in the same manner that the ordinary
is sown, yet the nature thereof is to run up to seed more speedily then the
other, if it have so rich ground to grow upon, and therefore the best time to
sow it is in August, that so it may abide all winter, wherein is the chiefest
time for the spending thereof, and to keep it until the beginning of the next
year from running up to seed the gathering whereof, as also of the other
sort, is all after one manner, that is, to be pulled up when the pods change
whitish, and then hanged upon bushes, pales, or such other thing, until they
be thorough dry, and then beaten or thrashed out upon a smooth plancher, or
upon clothes, as every ones store is, and their conueniencie. Lettice is sown
oftentimes with the early Reddish, in the same manner before said, that they
may have Lettice likewise as early as the time of the year will permit them,
which they pull up where they grow too thick, spending them first, and so
taking, up from time to time, until they stand two foot in sunder one from
another, and begin to spindle and shoot up for seed. In this is used some
art to make the plants strong to give the better seed without danger of
rotting or spoiling with the wet, which often happens to those about whom
this caution is not observed: Before your Lettice is shot up, mark out the
choysest and strongest plants which are fittest to grow for seed, and from
those when they are a foot high, strippe away with your hand the leaves that
grow lowest upon the stalk next the ground, which might rot, spoil or hinder
them from bearing so good seed; which when it is near to be ripe, the stalks
must be cut off about the middle, and laid upon mats or clothes in the Sun,
that it may there fully ripen and be gathered; for it would be blown away with
the wind if it should be suffered to abide on the stalks long. Parsneps must
be sown on a deep trenched mellow ground, otherwise they may run to seed the
first year, which then are nothing worth: or else the roots will be small
staruelings and short, and run into many spires or branches, whereby they
will not be of half the worth. Some use to sow them in August and September,
that so they may be well grown to serve to spend in Lent following, but their
best time is in February, that the Summers growth may make them the fairer and
greater. When they run up to seed, you shall take the principal or middle
heads, for those carry the Master seed, which is the best, and will produce
the fairest roots again. You shall hardly have all the seed ripe at one
instant, for usually the chiefest heads will be fallen before the other are
ripe: you must therefore still look them over, and cut them as they ripen.
Carrots are usually sown in March and April, and if it chance that some of
them do run up for seed the same year, they are to be weeded out, for
neither the seed nor roots of them are good: You must likewise pull them up
when they are too thick, if you will have them grow fair, or for seed, that
they may grow at the least three or four foot in sunder: the stalks of
Carrots are limber, and fall down to the ground; they must therefore be
sustained by poles laid acrosse on stalks thrust into the ground, and tied to
the poles and stalks to keep them up from rotting or spoiling upon the
ground: the seed hereof is not all ripe at once, but must be tended and
gathered as it ripeneth, and laid to dry in some dry chamber or floor, and
then beaten out with a stick, and winnowed from the refuse. Turnips are sown
by themselves upon a good ground in the end of July, and beginning of August,
to have their roots best to spend in winter; for it often happens that those
seeds of Turnips that are sown in the Spring, run up to seed the same
year, and then it is not accounted good. Many do use to sow Turnips on those
grounds from whence the same year they have taken off Reddish and Lettice, to
make the greater profit of the ground, by having two crops of increase in one
year. The stalks of Turnips will bend down to the ground, as Carrots do,
but yet must not be bound or ordered in that manner, but suffered to grow
without staking or binding, so as they grow of some good distance in sunder:
when the seed begins to grow ripe, be very careful to preserve it from the
birds, which will be most busy to devour them. You shall understand likewise
that many do account the best way to have the fairest and most principal
seed from all these fore-recited herbs, that after they are sown, and risen
to a reasonable growth, they be transplanted into fresh ground. Cabbages also
are not only sown for the use of their heads to spend for meat, but to gather
their seed likewise, which howsoever some have endeavored to do, yet few
have gained good seed, because our sharp hard frostes in winter have spoiled
and rotted their stocks they preserved for the purpose; but others have found
out a better and a more sure way, which is, to take up your stocks that are
fittest to be preserved, and bring them into the house, and there wrap them
either in clothes, or other things to defend them from the cold, and hang them
up in a dry place, until the beginning of March following, then planting them
in the ground, and a little defend them at the first with straw cast over them
from the cold nights, thereby you may be sure to have perfect good seed, if
your kind be of the best: Sow your seed in the months of February or March,
and transplant them in May where they may stand to grow for your use, but be
careful to kill the worms or Caterpillars that else will devour all your
leaves, and be careful also that none of the leaves be broken in the
planting, or otherwise rubbed, for that oftentimes hinders the well closing
of them. Leekes are for the most part wholly noursed up from the seed that is
here gathered; and because there is not so much store of them either sown or
spent, as there is of Onions by the twentieth part, we are still the more
careful to be provided from our own labors; yet there be diverse Gardiners in
this Kingdom, that do gather some small quantity of Onion seed also for
their own or their private friends spending. The sowing of them both is much
about one time and manner, yet most usually Leeks are sown later then Onions,
and both before the end of March at the furthest; yet some sow Onions from the
end of July to the beginning of September, for their Winter provision. Those
that are sown in the Spring, are to be taken up and transplanted on a fresh
bed prepared for the purpose, or else they will hardly abide a Winter; but
having taken root before Winter, they will bear good seed in the Summer
following: You must stake both your Leekes and your Onion beds, and with poles
laid a cross, bind your lopple headed stalks unto them, on high as well as
below, or else the wind and their own weight will bear them down to the
ground, and spoil your seed. You must thin them, that is, pull up
continually after they are first sprung up those that grow too thick, as you
do with all the other herbs before spoken of, that they may have the more
room to thrive. Of all these herbs and roots before spoken of, you must take
the likeliest and fairest to keep for your seed; for if you should not take
the best, what hope of good seed can you expect? The time for the spending of
these herbs and roots, not particularly mentioned, is until they begin to
run up for seed, or until they are to be transplanted for seed, or else
until Winter, while they are good, as every one shall see cause.

CHAP. IIII. How to order Artichokes, Melons, Cowcumbers, and Pompions.
THere are certain other herbs to be spoken of, which are wholly noursed up
for their fruit sake, of whom I shall not need to say much, being they are so
frequent in every place. Artichokes being planted of fair and large slips,
taken from the root in September and October (yet not too late) will most of
them bear fruit the next year, so that they be planted in well dunged ground,
and the earth raised up like unto an Anthill round about each root, to defend
them the better from the extreme frosts in Winter. Others plant slips in March
and April, or sooner, but although some of them will bear fruit the same
year, yet all will not. And indeed many do rather choose to plant in the
spring then in the fall, for that oftentimes an extreme hard Winter following
the new setting of slips, when they have not taken sufficient heart and root
in the ground, does utterly pierce and perish them, when as they that are set
in the Spring have the whole Summers growth, to make them strong before they
feel any sharp frosts, which by that time they are the better able to bear.
Musk Melons have been begun to be noursed up but of late days in this Land,
wherein although many have tried and endeavored to bring them to perfection,
yet few have attained unto it: but those rules and orders which the best and
skilfullest have used, I will here set down, that who so will, may have as
good and ripe Melons as any other in this Land. The first thing you are to
look unto, is to provide you a piece of ground fit for the purpose, which is
either a sloping or sheluing bank, lying open and opposite to the South Sun,
or some other fit place not sheluing, and this ground also you must so prepare,
that all the art you can use about it to make it rich is little enough; and
therefore you must raise it with mere stable soil, thorough rotten and well
turned up, that it may be at the least three foot deep thereof, which you
must cast also into high beds or balkes, with deep trenches or furrows
between, so as the ridges may be at the least a foot and a half higher then
the furrows; for otherwise it is not possible to have good Melons grow ripe.
The choice of your seed also is another thing of especial regard, and the
best is held to be Spanish, and not French, which having once gained, be sure
to have still of the same while they last good, that you may have the seed of
your own ripe Melons from them that have eaten them, or save some of the best
your self for the purpose. I say while they last good; for many are of
opinion, that no seed of Musk Melons gathered in England, will endure good to
sow again here above the third year, but still they must be renewed from
whence you had your choicest before. Then having prepared a hot bed of dung in
April, set your seeds therein to raise them up, and cover them, and order
them with as great care or greater then Cowcumbers, etc. are used, that when
they are ready, they may be transplanted upon the beds or balkes of that ground
you had before prepared for them, and set them at the least two yards in
sunder, every one as it were in a hole, with a circle of dung about them, which
upon the setting being watered with water that has stood in the Sun a day or
two, and so as often as need is to water, cover them with straw (some use
great hollow glasses like unto bell heads) or some such other things, to defend
them both from the cold euenings or days, and the heat of the Sun, while
they are young and new planted. There are some that take upon them great skill,
that mislike of the raising up of Melons, as they do also of Cowcumbers, on a
hot bed of horse dung, but will put two or three seeds in a place in the very
ground where they shall stand and grow, and think without that former manner
of forcing them forwards, that this their manner of planting will bring them on
fast and sure enough, in that they will pluck away some of the worst and
weakest, if too many rise up together in a place; but let them know for
certain, that howsoever for Cowcumbers their purpose and order may do
reasonable well, where the ground is rich and good, and where they strive not
to have them so early, as they that use the other way, for Musk Melons, which
are a more tender fruit, requiring greater care and trouble in the noursing,
and greater and stronger heat for the ripening, they must in our cold climate
have all the art used unto them that may be, to bring them on the more early,
and have the more comfort of the Sun to ripen them kindly, or else they will
not be worth the labor and ground. After you have planted them as aforesaid,
some of good skill do advise, that you be careful in any dry season, to give
them water twice or thrice every week while they are young, but more afterward
when they are more grown, and that in the morning especially, yea and when the
fruit is grown somewhat great, to water the fruit it self with a watering pot
in the heat of the day, is of so good effect, that it ripeneth them much
faster, and will give them the better taste and smell, as they say. To take
likewise the fruit, and gather it at the full time of his ripeness is no small
art; for if it be gathered before his due time to be presently eaten, it will
be hard and green, and not eat kindly; and likewise if it be suffered too
long, the whole goodness will be lost: You shall therefore know, that it is
full time to gather them to spend presently, when they begin to look a little
yellowish on the outside, and do smell full and strong; but if you be to send
them far off, or keep them long upon any occasion, you shall then gather
them so much the earlier, that according to the time of the carriage and
spending, they may ripen in the lying, being kept dry, and covered with woollen
clothes: When you cut one to eat, you shall know it to be ripe and good, if
the seed and pulpe about them in the middle be very waterish, and will easily
be separated from the meat, and likewise if the meat look yellow, and be
mellow, and not hard or green, and taste full and pleasant, and not waterish:
The usual manner to eat them is with pepper and salt, being pared and sliced,
and to drown them in wine, for fear of doing more harm. Cowcumbers and
Pompions, after they are noursed up in the bed of hot dung, are to be severally
transplanted, each of them on a large plot of ground, a good distance in
sunder: but the Pompions more, because their branches take up a great deal
more ground, and besides, will require a great deal more watering, because the
fruit is greater. And thus have you the ordering of those fruits which are of
much esteem, especially the two former, with all the better sort of persons;
and the third kind is not wholly refused of any, although it serves most
vually for the meaner and poorer sort of people, after the first early ripe are
spent.

CHAP. V. The ordering of diverse sorts of herbs for the pot, for meat, and
for the table.
Time, Sauory, and Hyssope, are usually sown in the Spring on beds by
themselves, every one a part; but they that make a gain by selling to others
the young roots, to set the knots or borders of Gardens, do for the most part
sow them in July and August, that so being sprung up before Winter, they will
be the fitter to be taken up in the Spring following, to serve any man's use
that would have them. Sage, Lauender, and Rosemary, are altogether set in the
Spring, by slipping the old stalks, and taking the youngest and likeliest of
them, thrusting them either twined or otherwise half a foot deep into the
ground, and well watered upon the setting; if any seasonable weather do
follow, there is no doubt of their well thriuing: the hot Sun and piercing
drying Winds are the greatest hindrances to them; and therefore I do advise
none to set too soon in the Spring, nor yet in Autumn, as many do practice:
for I could never see such come to good, for the extremity of the Winter
coming upon them so soon after their setting, will not suffer their young
shootes to abide, not having taken sufficient strength in the ground, to
maintain themselves against such violence, which does often pierce the
strongest plants. Marierome and Bassill are sown in the Spring, yet not too
early; for they are tender plants, and do not spring until the weather be
somewhat warm: but Bassill would be sown dry, and not have any water of two
or three days after the sowing, else the seed will turn to a gelly in the
ground. Some use to sow the seed of Rosemary, but it seldom abides the first
Winter, because the young plants being small, and not of sufficient strength,
cannot abide the sharpnes^e of some Winters, notwithstanding the covering of
them, which kills many old plants; but the usual way is to slip and set,
and so they thrive well. Many do use to sow all or the most sorts of
Pot-herbes together on one plot of ground, that they need not to go far to
gather all the sorts they would use. There are many sorts of them well known
unto all, yet few or none do use all sorts, but as every one likes; some use
those that others refuse, and some esteem those not to be wholesome and of a
good relish, which others make no scruple of. The names of them are as
follows, and a short relation of their sowing or planting.

Rosemary, Time, and Sauorie are spoken of before, and Onions and Leekes.

Mints are to be set with their roots in some by-place, for that their roots
do creep so far under ground, that they quickly fill up the places near
adjoining, if they be not pulled up.

Clarie is to be fowne, and seedeth and dies the next year, the herb is
strong, and therefore a little thereof is sufficient.

Nep is sown, and dies often after seeding, few do use it, and that but a
little at a time: both it and Clarie are more used in Tansies then in Broths.

Costmarie is to be set of roots, the leaves are used with some in their
Broths, but with more in their Ale.

Pot Marierome is set of roots, being separated in sunder.

Penniroyall is to be set of the small heads that have roots, it creeps and
spreads quickly.

All isanders are to be sown of seed, the tops of the roots with the green
leaves are used in Lent especially.

Parsley is a common herb, and is sown of seed, it seedeth the next year
and dies: the roots are more used in broths then the leaves, and the leaves
almost with all sorts of meats.

Fennel is sown of seed, and abides many years yielding seed: the roots
also are used in broths, and the leaves more seldom, yet serve to trim up
many fish meats.

Borage is sown of seed, and dies the next year after, yet once being
suffered to seed in a Garden, will still come of it own shedding.

Buglosse comes of seed, but abides many years after it has given seed,
if it stand not in the coldest place of the Garden.

Marigolds are sown of seed, and may be after transplanted, they abide two or
three years, if they be not set in too cold a place: the leaves and flowers
are both used.

Langedebeefe is sown of seed, which shedding it self will hardly be
destroyed in a Garden.

Arrach is to be sown of seed, this likewise will rise every year of it own
seed, if it be suffered to shed it self.

Beetes are sown of seed, and abides some years after, still giving seed.

Blites are used but in some places; for there is a general opinion held of
them, that they are naught for the eyes: they are sown every year of seed.

Bloodwort once sown abides many years, if the extremity of the frosts kill
it not, and seedeth plentifully.

Patience is of the same nature, and used in the same manner.

French Mallows are to be sown of seed, and will come of it own sowing, if
it be suffered to shed it self.

Ciues are planted only by parting the roots; for it never gives any seed
at all.

Garlic is ordered in the same manner, by parting and planting the roots
every year.

These be all the sorts are used with us for that purpose, whereas I said
before, none uses all, but every one will use those they like best: and so
much shall suffice for potherbes.

CHAP. VI. The manner and ordering of many sorts of herbs and roots for
Sallets.
IF I should set down all the sorts of herbs that are usually gathered for
Sallets, I should not only speak of Garden herbs, but of many herbs, etc.
that grow wild in the fields, or else be but weeds in a Garden; for the
usual manner with many, is to take the young buds and leaves of every thing
almost that grows, as well in the Garden as in the Fields, and put them all
together, that the taste of the one may amend the relish of the other: But I
will only show you those that are sown or planted in gardens for that purpose.
Asparagus is a principal and delectable Sallet herb, whose young shootes when
they are a good handful high above the ground, are cut an inch within the
ground, which being boiled, are eaten with a little vinegar and butter, as a
Sallet of great delight. Their ordering with the best Gardiners is on this
wise: When you have provided seed of the best kind, you must sow it either
before Christmas, as most do, or before the end of February; the later you
sow, the later and the more hardly will they spring: after they are grown up,
they are to be transplanted in Autumn on a bed well trenched in with dung; for
else they will not be worth your labor, and set about a foot distance in
sunder, and look that the more careful you are in the replanting of them, the
better they will thrive, and the sooner great: after five or six years
standing they usually do decay; and therefore they that strive to have
continually fair and great heads, do from seed raise up young for their
store. You must likewise see that you cut not your heads or young shoot too
nigh, or too much, that is, to take away too many heads from a root, but to
leave a sufficient number uncut, otherwise it will kill the heart of your
roots the sooner, causing them to dye, or to give very small heads or shootes;
for you may well consider with your self, that if the root have not head
enough left it above the ground to shoot green this year, it will not, nor
cannot prosper under ground to give increase the next year. The ordering of
Lettice I have spoken of before, and shall not need here to repeat what has
been already said, but refer you thereunto for the sowing, planting, etc.
only I will here show you the manner of ordering them for Sallets. There are
some sorts of Lettice that grow very great, and close their heads, which are
called Cabbage Lettice, both ordinary and extraordinary, and there are other
sorts of great Lettice that are open, and close not, or cabbage not at all,
which yet are of an excellent kind, if they be used after that especial
manner is fit for them, which is, That when they are planted (for after they
are sown, they must be transplanted) of a reasonable distance in sunder, and
grown to be of some bigness, every one of them must be tied together with
bast or thread toward the tops of the leaves, that by this means all the
inner leaves may grow whitish, which then are to be cut up and used: for the
keeping of the leaves close does make them taste delicately, and to be very
tender. And these sorts of Lettice for the most part are spent after Summer is
past, when other Lettice are not to be had. Lambs Lettice or Corn Sallet is
an herb, which abiding all Winter, is the first Sallet herb of the year that
is used before any ordinary Lettice is ready; it is therefore usually sown in
August, when the seed thereof is ripe. Purslane is a Summer Sallet herb, and
is to be sown in the Spring, yet somewhat late, because it is tender, and
ioyeth in warmth; and therefore diverse have sown it upon those beds of dung,
whereon they noursed up their Cowcumbers, etc. after they are taken away, which
being well and often watered, has yielded Sallet until the end of the year.
Spinach is sown in the Spring, of all for the most part that use it, but yet
if it be sown in Summer it will abide green all the Winter, and then seedeth
quickly: it is a Sallet that has little or no taste at all therein, like as
Lettice and Purslane; and therefore Cooks know how to make many a good dish of
meat with it, by putting Sugar and Spice thereto. Coleworts are of diverse
kinds, and although some of them are wholly spent among the poorer sort of
people, yet some kinds of them may be dressed and ordered as may delight a
curious palate, which is, that being boiled tender, the middle ribs are taken
cold, and laid in dishes, and vinegar and oil poured thereon, and so eaten.
Coleflowers are to be had in this Country but very seldom, for that it is
hard to meet with good seed: it must be sown on beds of dung to force it
forward, or else it would perish with the frost before it had given his head of
flowers, and transplanted into very good and rich ground, lest you lose the
benefit of your labors. Endive is of two sorts, the ordinary, and another that
has the edges of the leaves curld or crumpled; it is to be whited, to make it
the more dainty Sallet, which is usually done in this manner: After they are
grown to some reasonable greatness (but in any case before they shoot forth a
stalk in the midst for seed) they are to be taken up, and the roots being
cut away, lay them to dry or wither for three or four hours, and then bury
them in sand, so as none of them lie one upon another, or if you can, one to
touch another, which by this means will change whitish, and thereby become
very tender, and is a Sallet both for Autumn and Winter. Succorie is used by
some in the same manner, but because it is more bitter then Endive, it is not
so generally used, or rather used but of a very few: and whereas Endive will
seed the same year it is sown, and then dye, Succorie abides many years,
the bitterness thereof causing it to be more Physical to open obstructions;
and therefore the flowers pickled up, as diverse other flowers are used to be
now adays, make a delicate Sallet at all times when there is occasion to use
them. Of red Beetes, the roots are only used both boiled and eaten cold with
vinegar and oil, and is also used to trim up or garnish forth many sorts of
dishes of meat: the seed of the best kind will not abide good with us above
three years, but will degenerate and grow worse; and therefore those that
delight therein must be curious, to be provided from beyond Sea, that they may
have such as will give delight. Sorrel is an herb so common, and the use so
well known, both for sauce, and to season broths and meats for the sound as
well as sick persons, that I shall not need to say any more thereof.
Cheruill is a Sallet herb of much use, both with French and Dutch, who do
much more delight in herbs of stronger taste then the English do: it is sown
early, and used but a while, because it quickly runs up to seed. Sweet
Cheruill, or as some call it, Sweet Cis, is so like in taste unto Anise seed,
that it much delights the taste among other herbs in a Sallet: the seed is
long, thick, black, and cornered, and must be sown in the end of Autumn,
that it may lie in the ground all the Winter, and then it will shoot out in
the Spring, or else if it be sown in the Spring, it will not spring up that
year until the next: the leaves (as I said before) are used among other
herbs: the roots likewise are not only cordial, but also held to be
preservative against the Plague, either green, dried, or preseru^d with sugar.
Rampion roots are a kind of Sallet with a great many, being boiled tender,
and eaten cold with vinegar and pepper. Cresses is an herb of easy and quick
growth, and while it is young eaten either alone, or with parsley and other
herbs: it is of a strong taste to them that are not accustomed thereunto, but
it is much used of strangers. Rocket is of the same nature and quality, but
somewhat stronger in taste: they are both sown in the Spring, and rise, seed
and dye the same year. Tarragon is an herb of as strong a taste as either
Rocket or Cresses, it abides and dies not every year, nor yet gives ripe
seed (as far as ever could be found with us) any year, but makes sufficient
increase within the ground, spreading his roots all abroad a great way off.
Mustard is a common sauce both with fish and flesh, and the seed thereof (and
no part of the plant besides) is well known how to be used being grownded, as
every one I think knows. The roots of horse Radish likewise being grownd
like Mustard, is used both of strangers and our own nation, as sauce for fish.
Tansie is of great use, almost with all manner of persons in the Spring of the
year: it is more usually planted of the roots then otherwise; for in that the
roots spread far and near they may be easily taken away, without any hurt to
the rest of the roots. Burnet, although it be more used in wine in the Summer
time then any way else, yet it is likewise made a sallet herb with many, to
amend the harsh or weak relish of some other herbs. Skirrets are better to be
sown of the seed then planted from the roots, and will come on more speedily,
and be fairer roots: they are as often eaten cold as a Sallet, being boiled
and the pith taken out, as stewed with butter and eaten warm. Let not Parsley
and Fenell be forgotten among your other Sallet herbs, whereof I have spoken
before, and therefore need say no more of them. The flowers of Marigolds picked
clean from the heads, and pickled up against winter, make an excellent Sallet
when no flowers are to be had in a garden. Cloue Gilloflowers likewise
preserved or pickled up in the same manner (which is stratum super stratum, a
lay of flowers, and then strawed over with fine dry and poudered Sugar, and so
lay after lay strawed over, until the pot be full you mean to keep them in,
and after filled up or covered over with vinegar) make a Sallet now adays in
the highest esteem with Gentles and Ladies of the greatest note: the planting
and ordering of them both is spoken of severally in their proper places. Goats
bearbe that grows in Gardens only, as well as that which grows wild in
Meadows, etc. bearing a yellow flower, are used as a Sallet, the roots being
boiled and pared are eaten cold with vinegar, oil and pepper; or else stewed
with butter and eaten warm as Skirrets, Parsneps etc. And thus have you here
set down all those most usual Sallets are used in this Kingdom: I say the
most usual, or that are noursed up in Gardens; for I know there are some other
wild herbs and roots, as Dandelion etc. but they are used only of
strangers, and of those whose curiosity searches out the whole work of
nature to satisfy their desires.

CHAP. VII. Of diverse Physical herbs fit to be planted in Gardens, to serve
for the especial uses of a family.
Having thus showed you all the herbs that are most usually planted in Kitchen
Gardens for ordinary uses, let me also add a few other that are also noursed
up by many in their Gardens, to preserve health, and help to cure such small
diseases as are often within the compass of the Gentlewomens skils, who, to
help their own family, and their poor neighbors that are far remote from
Physicians and Chirurgions, take much pains both to do good unto them, and to
plant those herbs that are conducing to their desires. And although I do
recite some that are mentioned in other places, yet I thought it meet to
remember them altogether in one place. Angelica, the garden kind, is so good
an herb, that there is no part thereof but is of much use, and all cordial
and preservative from infectious or contagious diseases, whether you will
distill the water of the herb, or preserve or candie the roots or the green
stalks, or use the seed in powder or in distillations, or decoctions with
other things: it is sown of seed, and will abide until it give seed, and
then dies. Rue or Herb grace is a strong herb, yet used inwardly against the
plague as an Antidote with Figs and Wall-nuts, and helps much against windy
bodies: outwardly it is used to be laid to the wrestes of the hands, to drive
away agues: it is more usually planted of slips then raised from seed, and
abides long if sharp frostes kill it not. Dragons being distilled are held to
be good to expel any evil thing from the heart: they are altogether planted
of the roots. Setwall, Valerian, or Capons tail, the herb often, but the
root much better, is used to provoke sweating, thereby to expel evil vapors
that might annoy the heart: it is only planted of the roots when they are
taken up, and the young replanted. Asarabacca, the leaves are often used to
procure vomiting being stamped, and the strained juice to a little quantity,
put into a draught of ale and drunk, thereby to ease the stomach of many
evil and gross humors that there lie and offend it; diverse also take the
leaves and roots a little boiled in wine, with a little spice added thereunto,
to expel both tertian and quartan agues: the roots of our English growing is
more available for these purposes then any outlandish: it is planted by the
root; for I could never see it spring of seed. Masterwort comes somewhat
near in property unto Angelica, and besides very effectual to disperse wind
in the body, whether of the collicke or otherwise; as also very profitable to
comfort in all cold causes: it yields seed, but yet is more usually planted
from the roots being parted. Balm is a cordial herb both in smell and
taste, and is wholly used for those purposes, that is, to comfort the heart
being distilled into water either simple or compound, or the herb dried and
used: it is set of the roots being parted, because it gives no seed that
ever I could observe. Camomill is a common herb well known, and is planted of
the roots in alleyes, in walks, and on banks to sit on, for that the more it
is trodden on, and pressed down in dry weather, the closer it grows, and the
better it will thrive: the use thereof is very much, both to warm and comfort,
and to ease pains being applied outwardly after many fashions: the decoction
also of the flowers provoke sweat, and they are much used against agues.
Featherfew is an herb of greater use for women then for men, to dissolve
flatulent or windy humors, which causes the pains of the mother: some use to
take the juice thereof in drink for agues: it is as well sown of the seed as
planted of the roots. Costmary is used among those herbs that are put in o^le
to cause it have a good relish, and to be somewhat physical in the month of
May, and does help to provoke urine: it is set of the roots being parted.
Maudlin is held to be a principal good herb to open and cleanse the liver,
and for that purpose is used many ways, as in ale, in tansies, and in broths
etc. the seed also is used, and so is the herb also sometimes, to kill the
worms in children: it is sown of the seed, and planted also of the separated
roots. Cassidonie is a small kind of Lauender, but differing both in form
and quality: it is much used for the head to ease pains thereof, as also put
among other things to purge melancholicke diseases: it is sown of seed, and
abides not a winter unless it be well defended, and yet hardly gives ripe
seed again with us. Smallage is a great opening herb, and much more then
either Parsley or Fenell, and the roots of them all are often used together in
medicines: it is sown of seed, and will not be wanting in a Garden if once
you suffer it to sow it self. Cardus Benedictus, or the Blessed Thistle, is
much used in the time of any infection or plague, as also to expel any evil
symptom from the heart at all other times. It is used likewise to be boiled in
posse^ drink, and given to them that have an ague, to help to cure it by
sweating or otherwise. It is usually sown of seed, and dies when it has
given seed. Winter Cherries are likewise nursed up in diverse gardens, for that
their property is to give help to them that are troubled either with the
stopping or heat of their urine the herb and berries are often distilled, but
the berries alone are more often used: after it is once planted in a garden it
will run under ground, and abide well enough, Celondine is held to be good
for the iaundise, it is much used for to clear dim eyes, either the juice or
the water dropped into them: it is sown of seed, and being once brought into
a garden, will hardly be weeded out; the seed that sheddeth will so sow it
self, and therefore some corner in a garden is the fittest place for it.
Tobacco is of two sorts, and both used to be planted in Gardens, yet the
English kind (as it is called) is more to be found in our Country Gardens
then the Indian sort: the leaves of both sorts indifferently, that is, of
either of which is next at hand, being stamped and boiled either by it self,
or with other herbs in oil or hogs suet, do make an excellent salve for
green wounds, and also to cleanse old ulcers or sores; the juice of the green
leaves drunk in ale, or a dried leaf steeped in wine or ale for a night, and
the wine or ale drunk in the morning, provoke to cast, but the dried leaf
much stronger then the green: they are sown of seed, but the Indian kind is
more tender, and will not abide a winter with us abroad. Spurge that usually
grows in Gardens, is a violent purger, and therefore it is needful to be
very careful how it is used: the seed is more ordinarily used then any other
part of the plant, which purges by vomiting in some, and both upwards and
downwards in many; the juice of the herb, but especially the milk thereof, is
used to kill wartes: it is sown of seed, and when it does once shed it self,
it will still continue springing of the fallen seed. Bearefoote is sown of
seed, and will hardly abide transplanting unless it be while it is young; yet
abides diverse years, if it stand not in too cold a place. This I speak of
the greater kind; for the lower small wild kind (which is the most ordinary
in this land) will never decay: the leaves are sometimes used green, but most
usually dried and poudered, and given in drink to them that have the worms:
it purges melancholy, but especially the roots. In many Countries of this
Land, and elsewhere, they use to thrust the stalk of the great kind through
the ear or dewlap of Kine and Cattle, to cure them of many diseases. Salomons
Seal, or (as some call it) Ladder to heaven, although it does grow wild in
many places of this Land, yet is planted in Gardens: it is accounted an
excellent wound herb to consolidate, and bind, insomuch that many use it with
good success to cure ruptures, and to stay both the white and the red flux in
women: it is planted altogether of the roots, for I could never find it
spring from the seed, it is so strong. Comfry likewise is found growing wild
in many places by ditch sides, and in moist places, and therefore requires
some moist places of the garden: it is wholly used for knitting, binding, and
consolidating fluxes and wounds, to be applied either inwardly or outwardly:
The roots are stronger for those purposes then any other parts of the plant.
Licoris is much used now adays to be planted in great quantity, even to fill
many acres of ground, whereof rises a great deal of profit to those that know
how to order it, and have fit grounds for it to thrive in; for every ground
will not be aduantagious: It will require a very rich, deep and mellow ground,
either natural or artificial; but for a private house where a small quantity
will serve, there needs not so much curiosity: it is usually planted of the
top heads, when the lower roots (which are the Licoris that is used) and the
runners are cut from them. Some use to make an ordinary drink or beuerage of
Licoris, boiled in water as our usual ale or beer is with malt, which
fermented with barme in the same manner, and tunned up, serves in stead
thereof, as I am credibly informed: It is otherwise in a manner wholly spent
for colds, coughes and rheumes, to expectorate phlegm, but used in diverse
forms, as in juice, in decoctions, syrrups, roules, trochisces, and the green
or dried root of it self.

And these are the most ordinary Physical herbs that are used to be planted
in gardens for the use of any Country family, that is (as I said before) far
remote from Physicians or Cbirurgions abidings, that they may use as occasion
serves for themselves or their neighbors, and by a little care and pains in
the applying may do a great deal of good, and sometimes to them that have not
wherewith to spend on themselves, much less on Physicians or Chirurgions, or
if they have, may oftentimes receive less good at their hands then at others
that are taught by experience in their own families, to be the more able to
give help to others.

THE KITCHEN GARDEN. THE SECOND PART,
COntaining as well all sorts of herbs, as roots and fruits, that are usually
planted in Gardens, to serve for the use of the Table whether of the poor or
rich of our Country: but herein I intend not to bring any fruit bearing
trees, shrubbes, or bushes; for I reserve them for my Orchard, wherein they shall
be set forth. So that in these three parts, I suppose the exquisite ornament of
any worthy house is consummate for the exterior bounds, the benefit of their
riches extending also to the furnishing of the most worthy inward parts
thereof: but because many take pleasure in the sight and knowledge of other
herbs that are Physical, and much more in their properties and virtues, if
unto these three I should add a Physic Garden, or Garden of Simples, there
would be a quadripartite complement, of whatsoever art or nature, necessity
or delight could affect: which to effect (as many my friends have entreated it
at my hands) will require more pains and time then all this work together:
yet to satisfy their desires and all others herein, that would be informed in
the truth, and reformed of the many errors and slips set forth and published
heretofore of plants by diverse, I shall (God assisting and granting life)
labor to perform, that it may show it self to the light in due conueniencie,
if these be well and gratefully accepted. And because I ended with some sweet
herbs in the former part, I will in this part begin with the rest, which I
reserved for this place, as fitter for the pot and kitchen then for the hand or
bosom, and so descend to other herbs that are for meat or sallets: and after
them to those roots that are to be eaten, as meat or as sallets: and lastly
the fruits that grow near, or upon the ground, or not much above it; as the
Artichoke, etc. in which I make a shorter description then I did in the former,
rather endeavoring to show what they are, and whereunto they are used, then
the whole variety or any exact declaration: which method, although in some
sort it may be fitting for this purpose, yet it is not for an history or
herball: I shall therefore require their good acceptance for whose sake I do
it, not doubting, but that I, or others, if they write again of this subject,
may polish and amend what formerly has been either mis set, or not so
thoroughly expressed, besides some additions of new conceits; seeing I tread
out a new path, and therefore those that follow may the easilier see the
Meanders, and so go on in a direct line.

CHAP. I.
Maiorana latifolia, sieve mayor Anglica. Winter, or pot Marierome.
WInter Marierome is a small bushie herb like unto sweet Marierome, being
parted or divided into many branches, whereon do grow broader and greener
leaves, set by couples, with some small leaves likewise at the several joints
all along the branches: at the tops whereof grow a number of small purplish
white flowers set together in a tuft, which turn into small and round seed,
bigger then sweet Marierome seed: the whole plant is of a small and fine sent,
but much inferior to the other, and is nothing so bitter as the sweet
Marierome, and thereby both the fitter and more willingly used for meats: the
root is white and threddy, and perishes not as the former, but abides many
years.

The Use of winter Marierome.
The use of this Marierome is more frequent in our Land then in others, being
put among other pot-herbes and farsing (or faseting herbs as they are called)
and may to good profit be applied in inward as well as outward griefs for to
comfort the parts, although weaker in effect then sweet Marieromes.

CHAP. II.
Thymum vulgatius sieve durius. Ordinary Garden Time.
THe ordinary Garden Time is a small low woody plant with brittle branches,
and small hard green leaves, as every one knows, having small white purplish
flowers, standing round about the tops of the stalks: the seed is small and
brown, darker then Marierome seed: the root is woody, and abides well diverse
Winters.

Thymum latifolium. Masticke Time.
This Time has neither so woody branches, nor so hard leaves, but grows
lower, more spreading, and with somewhat broader leaves: the flowers are of a
purplish white color, standing in roundles round about the stalks, at the
joints with leaves at them likewise. This Time endures better and longer then
the former, and by spreading it self more then the former, is the more apt to
be propagated by slipping, because it has been seldom seen to give seed:
It is not so quick in sent or taste as the former, but is fitter to set any
border or knot in a garden, and is for the most part wholly employed to such
uses.

The Use of Time.
To set down all the particular uses whereunto Time is applied, were to weary
both the Writer and Reader; I will but only note out a few: for besides the
physical uses to many purposes, for the head, stomach, spleen, etc. there is
no herb almost of more use, in the houses both of high and low, rich and
poor, both for inward and outward occasions; outwardly for bathings among
other hot herbs, and among other sweet herbs for strewings: inwardly in most
sorts of broths, with Rosmary, as also with other faseting (or rather farsing)
herbs, and to make sauce for diverse sorts both fish and flesh, as to stuff
the belly of a Goose to be roasted, and after put into the sauce, and the
powder with bread to strew on meat when it 1 Ma^orana mayor Anglica. Pot
Marierome. 2 Thymum vulgatius. Garden Time. 3 Satureia. Sauorie. 4 Hyssopus.
Hyssope. 5 Pulegium. Penniroyall. 6 Saluia mayor. Common Sage. 7 Saluia minor
pr^nata. Sage of virtue.
depiction of plants is roasted, and so likewise on roasted or fried fish. It is
held by diverse to be a speedy remedy against the sting of a Be, being bruised
and laid thereon.

CHAP. III.
Satureia sieve Thymbra. Sauorie.
THere are two sorts of of Sauory, the one called Summer, and the other Winter
Sauorie: The Summer Sauory is a small tender herb, growing not above a foot
and a half high, or thereabouts, rising up with diverse brittle branches,
slenderly or sparsedly set with small long leaves, soft in handling, at every
joint a couple, one against another, of a pleasant strong and quick sent and
taste: the flowers are small and purplish, growing at the tops of the
stalks, with two small long leaves at the joints under them: the seed is
small, and of a dark color, bigger then Time seed by the half: the root is
woody, and has many strings, perishing every year wholly, and must be new
sown again, if any will have it.

The Winter Sauorie is a small low bushie herb, very like unto Hyssope, but
not above a foot high, with diverse small hard branches, and hard dark green
leaves thereon, thicker set together then the former by much, and as thick as
common Hyssope, sometimes with four leaves or more at a joint, of a reasonable
strong sent, yet not so strong or quick as the former: the flowers are of a
pale purplish color, set at several distances at the tops of the stalks,
with leaves at the joints also with them, like the former: the root is woody,
with diverse small strings thereat, and abides all the winter with his green
leaves: it is more usually increased by slipping or dividing the root, and new
setting it severally again in the Spring, then by sowing the seed.

The Use of Sauorie.
The Summer Sauorie is used in other Countries much more then with us in their
ordinary diets, as condiment or sauce to their meats, sometimes of it self,
and sometimes with other herbs, and sometimes strewed or laid upon the dishes
as we do Parsley, as also with beans and pease, rise and wheat; and
sometimes the dried herb boiled among pease to make pottage.

The Winter Sauorie is one of the (farsing) faseting herbs as they call them,
and so is the Summer Sauorie also sometimes. This is used also in the same
manner that the Summer Sauorie is, set down before, and to the same purposes:
as also to put into puddings, sawsages, and such like kinds of meats. Some
do use the powder of the herb dried (as I said before of Time) to mix with
grated bread, to bread their meat, be it fish or flesh, to give it the
quicker relish. They are both effectual to expel wind.

CHAP. IIII.
Hyssopus. Hyssope.
GArden Hyssope is so well known to all that have been in a Garden, that I
shall but actum agere, to bestow any time thereon, being a small bushie plant,
not rising above two foot high, with many branches, woody below, and tender
above, whereon are set at certain distances, sundry small, long and narrow
green leaves: at the top of every stalk stand bluish purple gaping
flowers, one above another in a long spike or ear: after which follows the
seed, which is small and blackish: the roots are composed of many threddy
strings; the whole plant is of a strong sweet sent.

The Use of Hyssope.
Hyssope is much used in Ptisans and other drinks, to help to expectorate
phlegm. It is many Country peoples medicine for a cut or green wound, being
bruised with sugar and applied. I find it is also much commended against the
falling sickness, especially being made into pills after the manner before
rehearsed. It is accounted a special remedy against the sting or biting of an
Adder, if the place be rubbed with Hyssope, bruised and mixed with honey, salt
and cummin seed. A decoction thereof with oil, and anointed, takes away the
itching and tingling of the head, and vermin also breeding therein. An oil
made of the herb and flowers, being anointed, does comfort benumbed sinews
and joints.

CHAP. V.
Pulegium. Pennyroyall.
PEnnyroyall also is an herb so well known, that I shall not need to spend
much time in the description of it: having many weak round stalks, divided
into sundry branches, rather leaning or lying upon the ground then standing
upright, whereon are set at several joints, small roundish dark green
leaves: the flowers are purplish that grow in gardens, yet some that grow wild
are white, or more white then purple, set in roundles about the tops of the
branches; the stalks shoot forth small fibers or roots at the joints, as it
lies upon the ground, thereby fastening it self therein, and quickly
increases, and ouer-runneth any ground, especially in the shade or any moist
place, and is replanted by breaking the sprouted stalks, and so quickly
grows.

Other sorts of Pennyroyall are fit for the Physic Garden, or Garden of
Simples.

The Use of Pennyroyall.
It is very good and wholesome for the lunges, to expel cold thin phlegm, and
afterward to warm and dry it up: and is also of the like property as Mintes,
to comfort the stomach, and stay vomiting. It is also used in women's baths and
washings: and in men's also to comfort the sinews. It is yet to this day, as it
has been in former times, used to be put into puddings, and such like meats
of all sorts, and therefore in diverse places they know it by no other name then
Pudding-grasse.

The former age of our great Grandfathers, had all these hot herbs in much and
familiar use, both for their meats and medicines, and therewith preserved
themselves in long life and much health: but this delicate age of ours, which
is not pleased with any thing almost, be it meat or medicine, that is not
pleasant to the palate, does wholly refuse these almost, and therefore cannot
be partaker of the benefit of them.

CHAP. VI.
Salvia. Sage.
THere are two especial kinds of Sage noursed up in our Gardens, for our
ordinary use, whereof I intend to write in this place, leaving the rest to his
fitter place. Our ordinary Sage is reckoned to be of two sorts, white and red,
both of them bearing many four square woody stalks, in some whiter, in
others redder, as the leaves are also, standing by couples at the joints, being
long, rough, and wrinkled, of a strong sweet sent: at the tops of the stalks
come forth the flowers, set at certain spaces one above another, which are
long and gaping, like unto the flowers of Clary, or dead Nettles, but of a
bluish purple color; after which come small round seed in the husk that
bore the flower: the root is woody, with diverse strings at it: It is more
usually planted of the slips, pricked in the Spring time into the ground, then
of the seed.

Saluia minor sieve pinnata. Small Sage or Sage of virtue.
The lesser Sage is in all things like unto the former white Sage, but that his
branches are long and slender, and the leaves much smaller, having for the most
part at the bottom of each side of the leaf a piece of a leaf, which makes
it show like finns or ears: the flowers also are of a bluish purple color,
but lesser. Of this kind there is one that bears white flowers.

The Use of Sage.
Sage is much used of many in the month of May fasting, with butter and
Parsley, and is held of most much to conduce to the health of man's body.

It is also much used among other good herbs to be tund up with Ale, which
thereupon is termed Sage Ale, whereof many barrels full are made, and drunk in
the said month chiefly for the purpose before recited: and also for teeming
women, to help them the better forward in their child bearing, if there be
fear of abortion or miscarrying.

It is also used to be boiled among other herbs, to make Gargles or waters to
wash sore mouths and throats: As also among other herbs, that serve as
bathings, to wash men's legs or bodies in the Summer time, to comfort nature,
and warm and strengthen aged cold sinews, and lengthen the strength of the
younger.

The Kitchen use is either to boil it with a Calves head, and being minced, to
be put with the brains, vinegar and pepper, to serve as an ordinary sauce
thereunto: Or being beaten and iuyced (rather then minced as many do) is put
to a roasted Pigges brains, with Currants for sauce thereunto. It is in small
quantity (in regard of the strong taste thereof) put among other fasting
herbs, to serve as sauce for pieces of Veale, when they are farsed or stuffed
therewith, and roasted, which they call Olliues.

For all the purposes aforesaid, the small Sage is accounted to be of the more
force and virtue.

CHAP. VII.
Horminum sativum. Garden Clary.
THere is but one sort of Garden Clary, though many wild, which has four
squares stalks, with broad rough wrinkled whitish leaves, somewhat unevenly cut
in on the edges, and of a strong sweet sent, growing some next the ground, and
some by couples upon the stalks: the flowers grow at certain distances, with
two small leaves at the joints under them, somewhat like unto the flowers of
Sage, but lesser, and of a very whitish or bleake blew color: the seed is of
a blackish brown color, somewhat flat, and not so round as the wild: the
roots spread not far, and perish every year that they bear flowers and
seed. It is altogether to be sown of seed in the Spring time, yet sometimes
it will rise of it own sowing.

The Use of Clary.
The most frequent and common use of Clary, is for men or women that have weak
backs, to help to comfort and strengthen the raines, being made into Tansies
and eaten, or otherwise. The seed is used of some to be put into the corner of
the eye, if any mote or other thing have happened into it: but assuredly
although this may peradventure do some good, yet the seed of the wild will
do much more. The leaves taken dry, and dipped into a batter made of the
yolks of eggs, flower, and a little milk, and then fried with butter until
they be crispe, serve for a dish of meat accepted with many, unpleasant to
none.

CHAP. VIII.
Nepeta. Nep.
ALthough those that are Herbarists do know three sorts of Nep, a greater and
two lesser, yet because the lesser are not usual, but in the Gardens of those
that delight in natures varieties, I do not here show you them. That which is
usual (and called of many Cat Mint) bears square stalks, but not so great
as Clarie, having two leaves at every joint, somewhat like unto Balm or Spear
Mintes, but whiter, softer, and longer, and nicked about the edges, of a strong
sent, but nothing so strong as Clary: the flowers grow at the tops of the
stalks, as it were in long spikes or heads, somewhat close together, yet
compassing the stalks at certain joints, of a whitish color, for form and
bigness like unto Balm, or somewhat bigger: the roots are composed of a
number of strings, which dye not, but keep green leaves upon them all the
Winter, and shoot anew in the Spring. It is propagated both by the seed, and
by slipping the roots.

The Use of Nep.
Nep is much used of women either in baths or drinks to procure their feminine
courses: as also with Clarie, being fried into Tansies, to strengthen their
backs. It is much commended of some, if the juice thereof be drunk with wine,
to help those that are bruised by some fall, or other accident. A decoction of
Nep is available to cure the scabbe in the head, or other places of the body.

CHAP. IX.
Melissa. Baulme.
THe Garden Baulme which is of common known use, has diverse square blackish
green stalks, and round, hard, dark, green pointed leaves, growing thereon
by couples, a little notched about the edges, of a pleasant sweet sent,
drawing nearest to the sent of a Lemon or Citron; and therefore of some called
Citrago: the flowers grow about the tops of the stalks at certain
distances, being small and gaping, of a pale carnation color, almost white:
the roots fasten themselves strongly in the ground, and endure many years,
and is increased by dividing the roots; for the leaves dye down to the ground
every year, leaving no show of leaf or stalk in the Winter.

The Use of Baulme.
Baulme is often used among other hot and sweet herbs, to make baths and
washings for men's bodies or legs, in the Summer time, to warm and comfort
the veins and sinews, to very good purpose and effect, and has in former
ages been of much more use then now adays. It is also used by diverse to be
stilled, being steeped in Ale, to make a Baulme water, after the manner they
have been taught, which they keep by them, to use in the stead of Aqua vitae,
when they have any occasion for their own or their neighbors Families, in
sudden qualmes or passions of the heart: but if they had a little better
direction (for this is somewhat too rude) it would do them more good that take
it: For the herb without all question is an excellent help to comfort the
heart, as the very smell may induce any so to believe. It is also good to heal
green wounds, being made into salues: and I verily think, that our
forefathers hearing of the healing and comfortable properties of the true
natural Baulme, and finding this herb to be so effectual, gave it the name
of Baulme, in imitation of his properties and virtues. It is also an herb
wherein Bees do much delight, as has been found by experience of those that
have kept great store; if the Hiues be rubbed on the inside with some thereof,
and as they think it draws others by the smell thereof to resort thither.
Pliny says, it is a present remedy against the stinging of Bees.

CHAP. X.
Mentha. Mintes.
THere are diverse sorts of Mints, both of the garden, and wild, of the woods,
mountains, and standing pooles or waters: but I will only in this place bring
to your remembrance two or three sorts of the most usual that are kept in
gardens, for the uses whereunto they are proper.

Red Mint or brown Mint has square brownish stalks, with somewhat long and
round pointed leaves, nicked about the edges, of a dark green color, set by
couples at every joint, and of a reasonable good sent: the flowers of this
kind are reddish, standing about the tops of the stalks at distances: the
roots run creeping in the ground, and as the rest, will hardly be cleared
out of a garden, being once therein, in that the smallest piece thereof will
grow and increase apace.

Spear Mint has a square green stalk, with longer and greener leaves then
the former, set by couples, of a better and more comfortable sent, and
therefore of much more use then any other: the flowers hereof grow in long
ears or spikes, of a pale red or blush color: the roots creep in the ground
like the other.

Party colored or white Mint has square green stalks and leaves, somewhat
larger then Spear Mint, and more nicked in the edges, whereof many are parted,
half white and half green, and some more white then green, or more green
then white, as nature lists: the flowers stand in long heads close set
together, of a blush color: the roots creep as the rest do.

The Use of Mintes.
Mintes are oftentimes used in baths, with Baulme and other herbs, as a help
to comfort and strengthen the nerves and sinews.

It is much used either outwardly applied, or inwardly drunk, to strengthen
and comfort weak stomachs, that are much given to casting: as also for
feminine fluxes. It is boiled in milk for those whose stomachs are 1 Horminum
sativum. Garden Clary. 2 Nepeta. Nep. 3 Melissa. Baulme. 4 Mentha satiua.
Garden Mintes. 5 Balsamita mas, seu Cestus hortorum. Costmary. 6 Ageratum.
Maudeline.
depiction of plants apt to cause it to curdle. And applied with salt, is a
good help for the biting of a mad dog.

It is used to be boiled with Mackarell, and other fish.

Being dried, is often and much used with Penniroyall, to be put into
puddings: as also among pease that are boiled for pottage.

Where Dockes are not ready at hand, they use to bruise Mintes, and lay them
upon any place that is stung with Bees, Waspes, or such like, and that to good
purpose.

CHAP. XI.
Balsamita mas and faemina, seu Costus hortorum mayor and minor. Costmary and
Maudeline.
COstmary or Alecoast is a sweet herb, bearing many broad and long pale green
leaves, snipped about the edges, every one upon a long foote-stalke; among
which rise up many round green stalks, with such like leaves on them, but
lesser up to the top, where it spreads it self into three or four
branches, every one bearing an vmbell or tuft of gold yellow flowers, somewhat
like unto Tansie flowers, but lesser, which turn into small heads, containing
small flat long seed: the root is somewhat hard and stringy, and being
divided, is replanted in the Spring of the year for increase.

Maudeline has somewhat long and narrow leaves, snipt about the edges: the
stalks are two foot high, bearing many yellow flowers on the tops of the
branches, in an vmbell or tuft like unto Tansie: the whole herb is sweet, and
somewhat bitter, and is replanted by flipping.

The Use of Costmary and Maudeline.
Costmary is of especial use in the Spring of the year, among other such like
herbs, to make Sage Ale, and thereupon I think it took the name of Alecoast.

It is also used to be put among other sweet herbs, to make sweet washing
water, whereof there is great store spent.

The leaves have an especial virtue to comfort both the stomach and heart, and
to warm and dry a moist brain. The seed is much used in the Country, to be
given to children for the worms, in the stead of wormseed, and so is the seed
of Maudeline also.

Maudeline is much used with Costmary and other sweet herbs, to make sweet
washing water: the flowers also are tied up with small bundels of Lauender
tops, these being put in the middle of them, to lie upon the tops of beds,
presses, etc. for the sweet sent and savor it casts. It is generally
accounted of our Apothecaries to be the true Eupatorium of Auicen, and the true
Ageratum of Dioscorides; but Dodonaeus seems to contradict both.

CHAP. XII.
Tanacetum vulgar and crispum. Tansie.
Our Garden Tansie has many hard green leaves, or rather wings of leaves; for
they are many small ones, set one against another all along a middle ribbe or
stalk, and snipt about the edges: in some the leaves stand closer and thicker,
and somewhat crumpled, which has caused it to be called double or curld
Tansie, in others thinner and more sparsedly: It rises up with many hard
stalks, whereon grow at the tops upon the several small branches gold yellow
flowers like buttons, which being gathered in their prime, will hold the color
fresh a long time: the seed is small, and as it were chaffie: the root
creeps under ground, and shoots up again in diverse places: the whole
herb, both leaves and flowers, are of a sharp, strong, bitter smell and
taste, but yet pleasant, and well to be endured.

The Use of Tansie.
The leaves of Tansie are used while they are young, either shred small with
other herbs, or else the juice of it and other herbs fit for the purpose,
beaten with eggs, and fried into cakes (in Lent and the Spring of the year)
which are usually called Tansies, and are often eaten, being taken to be very
good for the stomach, to help to digest from thence bad humors that cleave
thereunto: As also for weak raines and kidneyes, when the urine passes away by
drops: This is thought to be of more use for men then for women. The seed is
much commended against all sorts of worms in children.

CHAP. XIII.
Pimpinella sieve Sanguisorba. Burnet.
BVrnet has many winged leaves lying upon the ground, made of many small,
round, yet pointed green leaves, finely nicked on the edges, one set against
another all along a middle ribbe, and one at the end thereof; from among which
rise up diverse round, and sometimes crested brown stalks, with some few such
like leaves on them as grow below, but smaller: at the tops of the stalks
grow small brown heads or knaps, which shoot forth small purplish flowers,
turning into long and brownish, but a little cornered seed: the root grows
down deep, being small and brownish: the whole plant is of a stipticke or
binding taste or quality, but of a fine quick sent, almost like Baulme.

The Use of Burnet.
The greatest use that Burnet is commonly put unto, is to put a few leaves into
a cup with Claret wine, which is presently to be drunk, and gives a pleasant
quick taste thereunto, very delightful to the palate, and is accounted a
help to make the heart merry. It is sometimes also while it is young, put
among other Sallet herbs, to give a finer relish thereunto. It is also used
in vulnerary drinks, and to stay fluxes and bleedings, for which purposes it
is much commended. It has been also much commended in contagious and
pestilentiall agues.

CHAP. XIIII.
Hippolapathum sativum, sieve Rhabarbarum Monachorum. Monks Rubarbe or Patience.
GArden Patience is a kind of Docke in all the parts thereof, but that it is
larger and taller then many others, with large and long green leaves, a great,
strong, and high stalk, with reddish or purplish flowers, and three square
seed, like as all other Dockes have: the root is great and yellow, not having
any show of flesh colored veins therein, no more then the other kind with
great round thin leaves, commonly called Hippolapathum rotundifolium, Bastard
Rubarbe, or Monks Rubarbe, the properties of both which are of very weak
effect: but I have a kind of round leafed Dock growing in my Garden, which was
sent me from beyond Sea by a worthy Gentleman, Mr. Dr. Matthew. Lister, one of
the Kings Physicians, with this title, Rhaponticum verum, and first grew with
me, before it was ever seen or known elsewhere in England, which by proof I have
found to be so like unto the true Rubarbe, or the Rha of Pontus, both for form
and color, that I dare say it is the very true Rubarbe, our climate only
making it less strong in working, less heavy, and less bitter in taste: For
this has great and thick roots, as diversely discolored with flesh colored
veins as the true Rubarbe, as I have to show to any that are desirous to see
and know it; and also other smaller sprayes or branches of roots, spreading
from the maine great root, which smaller branches may well be compared to the
Rhaponticum which the Merchants have brought us, which we have seen to be
longer and slenderer then Rubarbe, but of the very same color: this bears so
goodly large leaves, that it is a great beauty in a garden to behold them: for
I have measured the stalk of the leaf at the bottom next the root to be of
the bigness of any man's thumb; and from the root to the leaf it self, to
be two foot in length, and sometimes more; and likewise the leaf it self,
from the lower end where it is joined to the stalk, to the end or point
thereof, to be also two foot in length, and sometimes more; and also in the
broadest part of the leaf, to be two foot or more over in breadth: it bears
whitish flowers, contrary to all other Dockes, and three square brownish seed
as other Dockes do, but bigger, and therefore assuredly it is a Docke, and the
true Rubarbe of the Arabians, or at the least the true Rhaponticum of the
Ancients. The figure of the whole plant I have caused to be cut, with a dried
root as it grew in my garden by it self, and have inserted it here, both
because Matthiolus gives a false figure of the true Rubarbe, and that this
has not been expressed and set forth by any before.

The Use of Patience, and of the Rubarbe.
The leaves of Patience are often, and of many used for a pot-herbe, and
seldom to any other purpose: the root is often used in Diet-beere, or ale, or
in other drinks made by decoction, to help to purge the liver, and cleanse the
blood. The other Rubarbe or Rhaponticum, whereof I make mention, and give you
here the figure, I have tried, and found by experience to purge gently, without
that astriction that is in the true Rubarbe is brought us from the East Indies,
or China, and is also less bitter in taste; whereby I conjecture it may be
used in hot and feauerish bodies more effectually, because it does not bind
after the purging, as the East India Rubarbe does: but this must be given in
double quantity to the other, and then no doubt it will do as well: The
leaves have a fine acide taste: A syrrupe therefore made with the juice and
sugar, cannot but be very effectual in dejected appetites, and hot fits of
agues; as also to help to open obstructions of the liver, as diverse have often
tried, and found available by experience.

CHAP. XV.
Lapathum sanguineum. Blood-wort.
AMong the sorts of pot-herbes Blood-worte has always been accounted a
principal one, although I do not see any great reason therein, especially
seeing there is a greater efficacy of binding in this Docke, then in any of
the other: but as common use has received it, so I here set it down.
Blood-worte is out of the sorts of Dockes, and has long leaves like unto the
smaller yellow Docke, but striped with red veins, and ouer-shadowed with red
upon the green leaf, that it seems almost wholly red sometimes: the stalk
is reddish, bearing such leaves, but 1 Tanacetum. Tansie. 2 Pimpinella. Burnet.
3 Rhaponticum verum seu potius Rhabarbarum verum. True Raponticke or rather
true Rubarbe. 4 Lapithum sativum seu Patientia. Monks Rubarbe or Patience. 5
Lapathum sanguineum. Bloudwort. 6 Acetosa. Sorrel.
depiction of plants smaller up to the top, where it is divided into diverse
small branches, whereon grow purplish flowers, and three square dark red
seed, like unto others: the roots are not great, but somewhat long, and very
red, abiding many years, yet sometimes spoiled with the extremity of winter.

The Use of Blood-worte.
The whole and only use of the herb almost, serves for the pot, among other
herbs, and, as I said before, is accounted a most especial one for that
purpose. The seed thereof is much commended for any flux in man or woman, to
be inwardly taken, and so no doubt is the root, being of a stipticke quality.

CHAP. XVI.
Oxalis sieve Acetosa. Sorrel.
Sorrel must needs be reckoned with the Dockes, for that it is so like unto
them in all things, and is of many called the sower Docke. Of Sorrels there are
many sorts, but I shall not trouble you with any other in this place, then the
common Garden Sorrel, which is most known, and of greatest use with us; which
has tender green long leaves full of juice, broad, and bicorned as it were,
next unto the stalk, like as Arrach, Spinach, and our English Mercury have,
of a sharp sower taste: the stalks are slender, bearing purplish long heads,
wherein lie three square shining brown seed, like, but lesser then the other:
the root is smaller then any of the other Dockes, but brown, and full of
strings, and abides without decaying, having green leaves all the winter,
except in the very extremity thereof, which often takes away all or most of
his leaves.

The Use of Sorrel.
Sorrel is much used in sawces, both for the whole, and the sick, cooling the
hot livers, and stomachs of the sick, and procuring unto them an appetite
unto meat, when their spirits are almost spent with the violence of their
furious or fiery fits; and is also of a pleasant relish for the whole, in
quickening up a dull stomach that is ouer-loaden with every days plenty of
dishes. It is diverse ways dressed by Cooks, to please their Masters stomachs.

CHAP. XVII.
Buglossum luteum, sieve Lingua Bouis. Langdebeefe.
Unto this place may well be referred our ordinary Borage and Buglosse, set
forth in the former Book, in regard of the properties whereunto they are much
employed, that is, to serve the pot among other herbs, as is sufficiently
known unto all. And yet I confess, that this herb (although it be called
Buglossum luteum, as if it were a kind of Buglosse) has no correspondency with
Buglosse or Borage in any part, saving only a little in the leaf; and our
Borage or Buglosse might more fitly, according to the Greek name, be called
Ox tongue or Langdebeefe; and this might in my judgment more aptly be
referred to the kinds of Hieratium Hawkeweed, whereunto it nearest approaches:
but as it is commonly received, so take it in this place, until it come to
receive the place is proper for it. It has diverse broad and long dark green
leaves, lying upon the ground, very rough in handling, full of small hairs or
pricks, ready to enter into the hands of any that handle it; among which
rises 1 Lingua bouis sieve Buglossum luteum. Langdebeefe. 2 Atriplex sieve Olus
aureum. Arrach. 3 Blitum. Blites. 4 Beta. Beetes. 5 Hipposelinum sieve Olus
atrum. Allisanders. 6 Selinum dulce. Sweet Parsley.
depiction of plants up a round green hairy or prickly stalk, bearing at the
top, among a few small green leaves, diverse small yellow flowers in rough
heads, which turn into down, containing within them brown yellowish small
long seeds, somewhat like unto the seed of Hawkeweede: the root is woody,
which perishes quickly after it has borne seed; but is tender while it is
young.

The Use of Langdebeefe.
The leaves are only used in all places that I know, or ever could learn, for
an herb for the pot among others, and is thought to be good to loosen the
belly.

CHAP. XVIII.
Atriplex sieve Olus Aureum. Arrach.
THere be diverse kinds of Arrach, or Orach, as some do call them; some of the
Garden, whereof I mean to entreat in this place; others wild of the Fields,
etc. and others of the Sea, which are not to be spoken of in this work, but
referred to a general history. The white garden Arrach, or Orach, has diverse
leaves, standing upon their several footestalkes, broad at the bottom,
ending in two points like an arrow, with two feathers at the head, and small
pointed at the end of the leaf, of a whitish yellow green color, and as it
were strewed over with flower or meal, especially while they are young: the
stalk likewise is mealy, bearing many branches with small yellow flowers on
them, which turn into small leafie seeds: the rooote grows somewhat deep in
the ground, with many small threads fastened thereto: it quickly springs up of
the seed, grows great, and fades away as soon as it has borne seed.

The purple Arrach is in all things like unto the white, saving only in the
color of the leaf, stalk, seed, etc. which are all of a mealy dusty
purplish color.

The Use of Arrach.
Arrach is cold and moist, and of a lubricke or slippery quality, whereby it
quickly passes through the stomach and belly, and makes it soluble, and is
of many used for that purpose, being boiled and buttered, or put among other
herbs into the pot to make pottage.

There are many dishes of meat made with them while they are young, for being
almost without savor of themselves, they are the more conuertible into what
relish any one will make them with Sugar, Spice etc.

CHAP. XIX.
Blitum. Blites.
THere be diverse sorts of Blites, some whereof I have entreated in the former
part of this work, under the title of Amaranthus, Flower gentle: others that
are noursed up in Gardens, I will set forth in this place, which are only two,
that have come to my knowledge, that is, the white and the red, and are of a
quality as near unto Arrach as unto Beetes, participating of both, and
therefore I have placed them betwixt them. The white Blite has leaves somewhat
like unto Beetes, but smaller, rounder, and of a whitish green color, every
one standing upon a small long footestalke: the stalk rises up two or three
foot high, with many such like leaves thereon: the flowers grow at the top in
long round tufts or clusters, wherein are contained small round seed: the
root is very full of threads or strings.

The red Blite is in all things like the white, but that his leaves and tufted
heads are exceeding red at the first, and after turn more purplish.

The Use of Blites.
Blites are used as Arrach, either boiled of it self or stewed, which they
call Loblolly, or among other herbs to be put into the pot; and yet some do
utterly refuse it, because in diverse it provoke castings. It is altogether
insipide or without taste, but yet by reason of the moist slipperie quality it
has, it helps to loosen the belly. The vnsauorinesse whereof has in many
Countries grown into a proverb, or byword, to call dull, slow, or lazy
persons by that name: They are accounted more hurtful to the stomach, and so
to the head and eyes, then other herbs, and therefore they are the less used.

CHAP. XX.
Beta. Beetes.
THere are many diversities of Beetes, some growing naturally in our own
Country, others brought from beyond Sea; whereof some are white, some green,
some yellow, some red: the leaves of some are of use only, and the root not
used: others the root is only used, and not the leaves: and some again, both
root and leaf. The ancient Authors, as by their works appear, knew but two
sorts, the white and the black Beete, whereof the white is sufficiently known,
and was of them termed Sicula, of the later Physicians Sicla, because it was
thought first to be brought from Sicilie: the black abides some controversy;
some thinking that our common green Beete, because it is of a dark green
color, was that they called the black Beete; others that our small red Beete,
which is of a dark red color, was their black Beete, which in my opinion is
the more likely: But to come to the matter in hand, and give you the
descriptions of them which are in use with us, and leave controversies to such
a work as is fit for them, wherein all such matters may be discussed at large.

The common white Beete has many great leaves next the ground (in some hot
Countries growing to be three foot long, and very broad, in our Country they
are very large, but nothing near that proportion) of a whitish green color;
the stalk is great, strong, and ribbed or crested, bearing great store of
leaves upon it up to the very top almost: the flowers grow in very long
tufts, small at the ends, and turning down their heads, which are small pale
greenish yellow burres, giving cornered prickly seed: the root is great, long
and hard, when it has given seed, of no use at all, but abides a former
winter with leaves upon it, as all other sorts following do*

The common red Beet differs not from the white Beete, but only that it is
not so great, and both the leaves and roots are somewhat red: the leaves be
in some more red then in others, which have but red veins or strakes in them,
in some also of a fresh red, in others very dark red: the root hereof is red,
spongy, and not used to be eaten.

The common green Beete is also like unto the white Beete, but of a dark
green color. This has been found near the salt Marshes by Rochester, in
the foote-way going from the Lady Levesons house thither, by a worthy, diligent
and painful obseruer and preserver both of plants and all other natures
varieties, often remembered before in this work, called John Tradescante, who
there finding it, gave me the knowledge thereof, and I have upon his report set
it here down in this manner:

The Roman red Beete, called Beta raposa, is both for leaf and root the most
excellent Beete of all others: his roots be as great as the Carrot, exceeding
red both within and without, very sweet and good, fit to be eaten: this Beete
grows higher then the last red Beete, whose roots are not used to be eaten:
the leaves likewise are better of taste, and of as red a color as the former
red Beete: the root is sometimes short like a Turnep, whereof it took the name
of Rapa or raposa; and sometimes as I said before, like a Carrot and long: the
seed is all one with the lesser red Beete.

The Italian Beete is of much respect, whose fair green leaves are very large
and great, with great white ribs and veins therein: the stalk in the Summer
time, when it is grown up to any height, is six square in show, and yellowish
withal, as the heads with seed upon them seem likewise.

The great red Beete that Master Let a Merchant of London gave unto Master
Gerrard, as he sets it down in his Herball, seems to be the red kind of
the last remembered Beete, whose great ribs as he says, are as great as the
middle ribbe of the Cabbage leaf, and as good to be eaten, whose stalk rose
with him to the height of eight cubits, and bore plenty of seed.

The Use of Beetes.
Beetes, both white, green and red, are put into the pot among other herbs,
to make pottage, as is commonly known unto all, and are also boiled whole, both
in France usually with most of their boiled meats, and in our Country, with
diverse that delight in eating of herbs.

The Italian Beete, and so likewise the last red Beete with great ribs, are
boiled, and the ribs eaten in sallets with oil, vinegar and pepper, and is
accounted a rare kind of sallet, and very delicate.

The root of the common red Beete with some, but more especially the Roman
red Beete, is of much use among Cooks to trim or set out their dishes of
meat, being cut out into diverse forms and fashions, and is grown of late
days into a great custom of service, both for fish and flesh.

The roots of the Roman red Beete being boiled, are eaten of diverse while
they are hot with a little oil and vinegar, and is accounted a delicate sallet
for the winter; and being cold they are so used and eaten likewise.

The leaves are much used to mollify and open the belly, being used in the
decoction of Glisters. The root of the white kind scraped, and made up with a
little honey and salt, rubbed on and laid on the belly, provoke to the
stool. The use of eating Beetes is likewise held to be helpefull to
spleneticke persons.

CHAP. XXI.
Hipposelinum, sieve Olus atrum. Alisanders.
ALisanders has been in former times thought to be the true Macedonian
Parsley, and in that error many do yet continue: but this place gives not
leave to discuss that doubt: but I must here only show you, what it is, and to
what use it is put ordinarily for the Kitchen. The leaves of Alisanders are
winged or cut into many parts, somewhat resembling Smallage, but greater,
broader, and more cut in about the edges: the stalks are round and great, two
foot high or better, bearing diverse leaves on them, and at the top spokie
roundles of white flowers on several small branches, which turn into black
seed, somewhat cornered or crested, of an aromaticall bitter taste: the root
is black without, and white within, and abides well the first year of the
sowing, perishing after it has borne seed.

The Use of Alisanders.
The tops of the roots, with the lower part of the stalks of Alisanders, are
used in Lent especially, and Spring of the year, to make broth, which although
it be a little bitter, yet it is both wholesome, and pleasing to a great many,
by reason of the aromaticall or spicie taste, warming and comforting the
stomach, and helping it digest the many waterish and flegmaticke meats are in
those times much eaten. The roots also either raw or boiled are often eaten
with oil and vinegar. The seed is more used physically then the root, or any
other part, and is effectual to provoke plenty of urine in them that piss by
drops, or have the Strangury: It helps women's courses, and warmeth their
benumbed bodies or members, that have endured fierce cold days and nights,
being boiled and drunk.

CHAP. XXII.
Selinum dulce. Sweet Parsley or sweet Smallage.
THis kind of sweet Parsley or Smallage, which soever you please to call it;
for it resembles Smallage as well in the largeness of the leaves, as in the
taste, yet sweeter and pleasanter, is (as I take it) in this like unto sweet
Fennel (that has his sweetness from his natural soil and clymate; for
howsoever it be reasonable sweet the first year it is sown with us, yet it
quickly does degenerate, and becomes no better then our ordinary Fennel
afterward). The first year it is sown and planted with us (and the first
that ever I saw, was in a Venetian Ambassadors Garden in the Spittle yard,
near Bishops gate street) is so sweet and pleasant, especially while it is
young, as if Sugar had been mingled with it: but after it is grown up high
and large, it has a stronger taste of Smalladge, and so likewise much more the
next year; that it grows from the seed was gathered here: the leaves are
many, spreading far about the root, broader and of a fresher green color
then our ordinary Smalladge, and upon longer stalks: the seed is as plentiful
as Parsley, being small and very like unto it, but darker of color.

The Use of sweet Parsley.
The Venetians use to prepare it for meat many ways, both the herb and the
root eaten raw, as many other herbs and roots are, or boiled or fried to be
eaten with meat, or the dried herb poudered and strewed upon meat; but most
usually either whited, and so eaten raw with pepper and oil, as a dainty
Sallet of it self, or a little boiled or stewed: the taste of the herb being
a little warming, but the seed much more, helps cold windy stomachs to
digest their meat, and to expel wind.

CHAP. XXIII.
Petrosolinum and Apium. Parsley and Smalledge.
WE have three sorts of Parsley in our Gardens, and but one of Smalladge: Our
common Parsley, Curld Parsley, and Virginia Parsley; which last, although it be
but of late known, yet it is now almost grown common, and of as good use as
the other with diverse. Our common Parsley is so well known, that it is almost
needless to describe it, having diverse fresh green leaves, three always
placed together on a stalk, and snipt about the edges, and three stalks of
leaves for the most part growing together: the stalks grow three or four
foot high or better, bearing spikie heads of white flowers, which turn into
small seed, somewhat sharp and hot in taste: the root is long and white.

Curld Parsley has his leaves curled or crumpled on the edges, and therein is
the only difference from the former.

Virginia Parsley is in his leaf altogether like unto common Parsley for the
form, consisting of three leaves set together, but that the leaves are as
large as Smallage leaves, but of a pale or whitish green color, and of the
same taste of our common Parsley: the seed hereof is as the leaves, twice if
not thrice as big as the ordinary Parsley, and perishes when it has given
seed, abiding usually the first year of the sowing.

Smallage is in form somewhat like unto Parsley, but greater and greener, and
less pleasant, or rather more bitter in taste: the seed is smaller, and the
root more stringy.

The Use of Parsley.
Parsley is much used in all sorts of meats, both boiled, roasted, fried,
stewed, etc. and being green it serves to lay upon sundry meats, as also to
draw meat withal. It is also shred and stopped into poudered beef, as also
into legs of Mutton, with a little beef suet among it, etc.

The roots are often used to be put into broth, to help to open obstructions
of the liver, reins, and other parts, helping much to procure urine.

The roots likewise boiled or stewed with a leg of Mutton, stopped with
Parsley as aforesaid, is very good meat, and of very good relish, as I have
proved by the taste; but the roots must be young, and of the first years
growth, and they will have their operation to cause urine.

The seed also is used for the same cause, when any are troubled with the
stone, or gravel, to open the passages of urine.

Although Smallage grows in many places wild in moist grounds, yet it is
also much planted in Gardens, and although his evil taste and savor does
cause it not to be accepted into meats as Parsley, yet it is not without many
special good properties, both for outward and inward diseases, to help to
open obstructions, and provoke urine. The juice cleanses ulcers; and the
leaves boiled with Hogs grease, heals felons on the joints of the fingers.

CHAP. XXIIII.
Foeniculum. Fenell.
THere are three sorts of Fenell, whereof two are sweet. The one of them is
the ordinary sweet Fenell, whose seeds are larger and yellower then the
common, and which (as I said before in the Chapter of sweet Parsley) does
soon degenerate in this our Country into the common. The other sweet Fenell
is not much known, and called Cardus Fenell by those that sent it out of
Italy, whose leaves are more thick and bushie then any of the other. Our
common Fenell, whereof there is green and red, has many fair and large
spread leaves, finely cut and divided into many small, long, green, or reddish
leaves, yet the thicker tufted the branches be, the shorter are the leaves: the
stalks are round, with diverse joints and leaves at them, growing five or six
foot high, bearing at the top many spoakie rundels of yellow flowers: the
Common, I mean, does turn into a dark grayish flat seed, and the Sweet
into larger and yellower: the root is great, long, and white, and endures
diverse years.

The Use of Fenell.
Fenell is of great use to trim up, and strowe upon fish, as also to boil or
put among fish of diverse sorts, Cowcumbers pickled, and other fruits, etc. The
roots are used with Parsley roots, to be boiled in broths and drinks to open
obstructions. The seed is of much use with other things to expel wind. The
seed also is much used to be put into Pippin pies, and diverse 1 Petrosolinum.
Parsley. 2 Atium. Smallage. 3 Foeniculum. Fenell. 4 Anethum. Dill. 5 Myrrhis
sieve Ce^efolium magnum. Sweet Cheruill. 6 Cerefolium vulgar. Common Cheruil^.
depiction of plants other such baked fruits, as also into bread, to give it
the better relish.

The sweet Cardus Fenell being sent by Sir Henry Wotton to John Tradescante,
had likewise a large direction with it how to dress it; for they use to white
it after it has been transplanted for their uses, which by reason of the
sweetness by nature, and the tenderness by art, causes it to be the more
delightful to the taste, especially with them that are accustomed to feed on
green herbs.

CHAP. XXV.
Anethum. Dill.
DIll does much grow wild, but because in many places it cannot be had, it is
therefore sown in Gardens for the uses whereunto it serves. It is a smaller
herb then Fenell, but very like, having fine cut leaves, not so large, but
shorter, smaller, and of a stronger and quicker taste: the stalk is smaller
also, and with few joints and leaves on them, bearing spoakie tufts of yellow
flowers, which turn into thin, small, and flat seeds: the root perishes
every year, and rises again for the most part of it own sowing.

The Use of Dill.
The leaves of Dill are much used in some places with Fish, as they do Fenell;
but because it is so strong many do refuse it.

It is also put among pickled Cowcumbers, wherewith it does very well agree,
giving unto the cold fruit a pretty spicie taste or relish.

It being stronger then Fenell, is of the more force to expel wind in the
body. Some use to eat the seed to stay the Hickocke.

CHAP. XXVI.
Myrrhis sieve Cerefolium maius and vulgar. Sweet Cheruill and ordinary
Cheruill.
THe great or sweet Cheruill (which of some is called Sweet Cicely) has
diverse great and fair spread winged leaves, consisting of many leaves set
together, deeply cut in the edges, and every one also dented about, very like,
and resembling the leaves of Hemlockes, but of so pleasant a taste, that one
would verily think, he chewed the leaves or seeds of Aniseedes in his mouth:
The stalk is reasonable great, and somewhat cornered or crested about three or
four foot high, at the top whereof stand many white spoakie tufts of
flowers, which change into brown long cornered great seed, two always joined
together: the root is great, blackish on the outside, and white within, with
diverse fibers annexed unto it, and perishes not, but abides many years, and
is of a sweet, pleasant, and spicie hot taste, delightful unto many.

The common Cheruill is a small herb, with slender leaves, finely cut into
long pieces, at the first of a pale yellowish green color, but when the
stalk is grown up to seed, both stalks and leaves become of a dark red
color: the flowers are white, standing upon scattered or thin spread tufts,
which turn into small, long, round, and sharp pointed seeds, of a brownish
black color: the root is small, with diverse long slender white strings, and
perishes every year.

The Uses of these Cheruils.
The common Cheruill is much used of the French and Dutch people, to be boiled
or stewed in a pipkin, either by it self, or with other herbs, whereof they
make a Loblolly, and so eat it. It is used as a pot-herbe with us.

Sweet Cheruill, gathered while it is young, and put among other herbs for a
sallet, adds a meruellous good relish to all the rest. Some commend the
green seeds sliced and put in a sallet of herbs, and eaten with vinegar and
oil, to comfort the cold stomach of the aged. The roots are used by diverse,
being boiled, and after eaten with oil and vinegar, as an excellent sallet for
the same purpose. The preserved or candid roots are of singular good use to
warm and comfort a cold flegmaticke stomach, and is thought to be a good
preservative in the time of the plague.

CHAP. XXVII.
Malua Crispa. French Mallows.
THe curld or French Mallow grows up with an upright green round stalk, as
high usually as any man, whereon from all sides grow forth round whitish green
leaves, curld or crumpled about the edges, like a ruff, else very like unto an
ordinary great Mallow leaf: the flowers grow both upon the stalk, and on the
other branches that spring from them, being small and white; after which come
small cases with black seed like the other Mallows: the root perishes when
it has borne seed, but abides usually the first year, and the second
runs up to flower and seed.

The Use of French Mallows.
It is much used as a pot-herbe, especially when there is cause to move the
belly downward, which by his slippery quality it does help forward. It has
been in times past, and so is to this day in some places, used to be boiled or
stewed, either by it self with butter, or with other herbs, and so eaten.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Imtubum. Succorie and Endive.
I Put both Succorie and Endive into one chapter and description, because they
are both of one kindred; and although they differ a little the one from the
other, yet they agree both in this, that they are eaten either green or
whited, of many.

Endive, the smooth as well as the curld, bears a longer and a larger leaf
then Succorie, and abides but one year, quickly running up to stalk and
seed, and then perishes: whereas Succorie abides many years, and has long
and narrower leaves, somewhat more cut in, or torn on the edges: both of them
have blew flowers, and the seed of the smooth or ordinary Endive is so like
unto the Succorie, that it is very hard to distinguish them asunder by sight;
but the curld Endive gives blackish and flat seed, very like unto black
Lettice feed: the roots of the Endive perish, but the Succorie abides.

The Use of Succory and Endive.
Although Succorie be somewhat more bitter in taste then the Endiues, yet it
is oftentimes, and of many eaten green, but more usually being buried a while
in sand, that it may grow white, which causes it to lose both some part of the
bitterness, as also to be the more tender in the eating; and Horace shows
it to be used in his time, in the 32. Ode of his first Book, where he says, Me
pascunt Oliuae, me Cithorea leuesque Maluae. Endive being whited in the same,
or any other manner, is much used in winter, as a sallet herb with great
delight; but the curld Endive is both far the fairer, and the tenderer for
that purpose.

CHAP. XXIX.
Spinachia, sieve Olus Hispanicum. Spinach.
SPinach or Spinach is of three sorts (yet some do reckon of four, accounting
that herb that bears no seed to be a sort of it self, when it is but an
accident of nature, as it falls out in Hemp, Mercury, and diverse other
herbs) two that bear prickly seed, the one much greater then the other: the
third that bears a smooth seed, which is more dainty, and noursed up but in
few Gardens: The common Spinach which is the lesser of the two prickly sorts,
has long green leaves, broad at the stalk, and rent, or torn as it were
into four corners, and sharp pointed at the ends: it quickly runs up to
stalk, if it be sown in the Spring time; but else, if at the end of Summer,
it will abide all the winter green, and then suddenly in the very beginning of
the Spring, run up to stalk, bearing many leaves both below and at the
top, where there does appear many small greenish flowers in clusters, and
after them prickly seed: The other greater sort that has prickly seed, is in
all things like the former, but larger both in stalk, leaf and seed. The
smooth Spinach has broader, and a little rounder pointed leaves then the
first, especially the lower leaves; for those that grow upwards upon the
stalk, are more pointed, and as it were three square, of as dark a green
color as the former: at the several joints of the stalks and branches, stand
clustering many small greenish flowers, which turn into clusters of round
whitish seed, without any prickles at all upon them: the root is long, white
and small, like unto the other, with many fibers at it: If it be often cut, it
will grow the thicker, or else spindle up very thinly, and with but few leaves
upon the stalk.

The Use of Spinach.
Spinach is an herb fit for sallets, and for diverse other purposes for the
table only; for it is not known to be used Physically at all. Many English
that have learned it of the Dutch people, do stew the herb in a pot or
pipkin, without any other moisture then it own, and after the moisture is a
little pressed from it, they put butter, and a little spice unto it, and make
therewith a dish that many delight to eat of. It is used likewise to be made
into Tartes, and many other varieties of dishes, as Gentlewomen and their
Cooks can better tell then my self; unto whom I leave the further ordering of
these herbs, and all other fruits and roots of this Garden: For I intend only
to give you the knowledge of them, with some brief notes for their use, and no
more.

1 Malua crispa. French Mallows. 2 Endiuia. Endive. 3 Cichorium. Succory. 4
Spinachia. Spinach. 5 Lactuca crispa. Curld Lettice. 6 Lactuca parula. An open
Lettice. 7 Lactuca capitata vulgaris. Ordinary cabbage Lettice. 8 Lactuca
capitata Romana. The great Roman cabbage Lettice. 9 Lactuca ag^^ina. Corn
Sallet or Lambs Lettice.
depiction of plants

CHAP. XXX.
Lactuca. Lettice.
THere are so many sorts, and so great diversity of Lettice, that I doubt I
shall scarce be believed of a great many. For I do in this Chapter reckon up
unto you eleauen or twelve differing sorts; some of little use, others of more,
being more common and vulgar; and some that are of excellent use and service,
which are more rare, and require more knowledge and care for the ordering of
them, as also for their time of spending, as some in the spring, some in
summer, others in autumn, and some being whited for the winter. For all these
sorts I shall not need many descriptions, but only show you which do cabbage,
and which are loose, which of of them are great or small, white, green or red,
and which of them bear white seeds, and which of them black. And lastly I
have thought good to add another Sallet herb, which because it is called
Lambs Lettice of many, or Corn Sallet of others, is put in only to fill up a
number in this Chapter, and that I must speak of it, and not that I think it
to be any of the kinds of Lettice.

All sorts of Lettice, after a while that they have closed themselves, if they
be of the Cabbage kinds, or otherwise being loose, and never closing, send
forth from among the middle of their leaves a round stalk (in some greater, in
others lesser, according to their kind) full of leaves like unto the lower,
branching at the top into sundry parts, whereon grow diverse small star-like
flowers, of a pale yellowish color; after which come seed, either white or
blackish, as the plant yields, whereat hangs some small piece of a cottony
down, wherewith the whole head is stored, and is carried away with the wind,
if it be not gathered in time: the root is somewhat long and white, with some
fibers at it, and perishes quickly after the seed is ripe.

The Roman red Lettice is the best and greatest of all the rest. For John
Tradescante that first, as I think, brought it into England, and sowed it, did
write unto me, that after one of them had been bound and whited, when the
refuse was cut away, the rest weighed seventeen ounces: this has black seed.

The white Roman Lettice is like unto it, having long leaves like a Teasell,
it is in goodness next unto the red, but must be whited, that it may eat
kindly: the seed hereof is white.

The Virginia Lettice has single and very broad reddish leaves, and is not of
any great regard, and therefore is kept but of a few: it bears black seed.

The common Lumbard Lettice that is loose, and another kind thereof that does
somewhat cabbage, have both white seeds.

The Venice Lettice is an excellent Cabbage Lettice, and is best to be sown
after Midsummer for lateward Lettice; they be sometimes as great as the crown
of a man's hatt: the seed hereof is white, and grows to be of a mean height.

Our common Cabbage Lettice is well known, and bears black seed.

The curld Lettice which is open, and differs but little from Endive, bears
black seed.

Another sort of curld Lettice does cabbage, and is called Flanders Cropers, or
Cropers of Bruges; this grows lowest, and has the smallest head, but very
hard and round, and white while it grows: the seed is black.

A kind of Roman Lettice is of a dark green color, growing as low as the
Venice Lettice, and is an excellent kind, bearing black seed.

And lastly our winter Lettice is wonderful hardy to endure our cold: It is
but single, and must be sown at Michaelmas, but will be very good, before any
of the other good sorts sown in the Spring, will be ready to be used, and
bears white seed.

To instruct a nouice (for I teach not a Gardener of knowledge) how to gather
his seed that it may be good, is in this manner: Let him mark out those
plants that he means shall run up for seed, which must be the most likely;
and after they have begun to shoot forth stalks, strip away the lower leaves,
for two or three hands breadth above the ground, that thereby in taking away
the lowest leaves, the stalk do not rot, nor the seed be hindered in the
ripening.

There are two manner of ways to whiten Lettice to make them eat the more
tender: the one is by raising up earth like moale hills, round about the plants
while they are growing, which will make them grow white: the other is by tying
up all the loose leaves round together while it grows, that so the close
tying may make it grow white, and thereby be the more tender.

Lambs Lettice or Corn Sallet is a small plant while it is young, growing
close upon the ground, with many whitish green, long and narrow, round pointed
leaves, all the winter, and in the beginning of the spring (if it be sown in
autumn, as it is usual to serve for an early sallet) rises up with small
round stalks, with two leaves at every joint, branching forth at the top,
and bearing tufts of small bleake blew flowers, which turn into small round
whitish seed: the root is small and long, with some small threads hanging
thereat: the whole plant is of a waterish taste, almost insipide.

The Use of Lettice.
All sorts of Lettice are spent in sallets, with oil and vinegar, or as every
one please, for the most part, while they are fresh and green, or whited, as
is declared of some of the sorts before, to cause them to eat the more
delicate and tender. They are also boiled, to serve for many sorts of dishes of
meat, as the Cooks know best.

They all cool a hot and fainting stomach.

The juice of Lettice applied with oil of Roses to the foreheads of the sick
and weak wanting sleep, procures rest, and takes away pains in the head:
bound likewise to the cods, it helps those that are troubled with the Colts
evil. If a little camphire be added, it restrains immoderate lust: but it is
hurtful to such as are troubled with the shortness of breath.

Lambs Lettice is wholly spent for sallets, in the beginning of the year, as
I said, before any almost of the other sorts of Lettice are to be had.

CHAP. XXXI.
Portulaca. Purslane.
PVrslane has many thick round shining red stalks, full of juice, lying upon
the ground for the most part; whereon are set diverse long, thick, pale green
leaves, sometimes alone by themselves, and sometimes many small ones together
with them; among which grow small yellow flowers, which stand in little green
husks, containing black seed: the root is small, and perishes every year,
and must be new sown in April, in the alleyes of the Garden between the
beds, as some have heretofore used, where it may have the more moisture, or, as
I have seen in some Gardens, upon those beds of dung that Gardiners have used
to nourse up their Cowcumbers, Melons, and Pompions, whereon after they have
been taken away, they have sown Purslane, where if it be much watered, the
warmth of the dung, and the water given it, the Purslane has grown great and
large, and continued until winter.

The Use of Purslane.
It is used as Lettice in sallets, to cool hot and faint stomachs in the hot
time of the year, but afterward if only for delight, it is not good to be
too prodigal in the use thereof.

The seed of Purslane does cool much any inflammation inward or outward, and
does a little bind withal.

CHAP. XXXII.
Dracoherba sieve Tarchon and Dracunculus hortensis. Tarragon.
TArragon has long and narrow dark green leaves, growing on slender and
brittle round stalks, two or three foot high, at the tops whereof grow forth
long slender spikes of small yellowish flowers, which seldom give any good
seed, but a dustie or chaffie matter, which flies away with the wind: the
root is white, and creeps about under ground, whereby it much increases:
the whole herb is of a hot and biting taste.

The Use of Tarragon.
It is altogether used among other cold herbs, to temper their coldness, and
they to temper its heat, so to give the better relish unto the Sallet; but
many do not like the taste thereof, and so refuse it.

There are some Authors that have held Tarragon not to be an herb of it own
kind, but that it was first produced, by putting the seed of Lin or Flax
into the root of an Onion, being opened and so set into the ground, which when
it has sprung, has brought forth this herb Tarragon, which absurd and idle
opinion, Matthiolus by certain experience says, has been found false.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Nasturtium hortense. Garden Cresses.
GArden Cresses grow up to the height of two foot or thereabouts, having many
small, whitish, broad, endented, torn leaves, set together upon a middle ribbe
next the ground, but those that grow higher upon the stalks are smaller and
longer: the tops of the stalks are stored with white flowers, which turn into
flat pods or pouches, like unto Shepherd purse, wherein is contained flat
reddish seed: the root perishes every year: the taste both of leaves and
seeds are somewhat strong, hot, and bitter.

The Use of Cresses.
The Dutchmen and others use to eat Cresses familiarly with their butter and
bread, as also stewed or boiled, either alone or with other herbs, whereof
they make a Hotch potch, and so eat it. We do eat it mixed among Lettice or
Purslane, and sometimes with Tarragon or Rocket, with oil and vinegar and a
little salt, and in that manner it is very sauoury to some men's stomachs.

The use of Cresses physically is, it helps to expectorate tough phlegm, as
also for the pains of the breast; and as it is thought takes away spots,
being laid to with vinegar. The seed is given of many to children for the
worms.

1 Portulaca. Purslane. 2 Dracho herba seu Tarchon. Tarragon. 3 Eruca satiua.
Garden Rocket. 4 Nasturtium sativum. Garden Cresse. 5 Sinapi. Mustard. 6
Asparagus. Asparagus or Sperage.
depiction of plants

CHAP. XXXIIII.
Eruca satiua. Garden Rocket.
Our Garden Rocket is but a wild kind brought into Gardens; for the true
Roman Rocket has larger leaves; this has many long leaves, much torn or
rent on the edges, smaller and narrower then the Roman kind: the flowers
hereof are of a pale yellowish color, whereas the true is whitish, consisting
of four leaves: the seed of this is reddish, contained in smaller and longer
pods then the true, which are shorter and thicker, and the seed of a whitish
yellow color: the roots of both perish as soon as they have given seed.
Some have taken one sort of the wild kind for Mustard, and have used the
seed for the same purpose.

The Use of Rocket.
It is for the most part eaten with Lettice, Purslane, or such cold herbs, and
not alone, because of its heat and strength; but that with the white seed is
milder. The seed of Rocket is good to provoke urine, and to stir up bodily
lust.

The seed bruised, and mixed with a little vinegar, and of the gall of an Ox,
cleanses the face of freckles, spots, and blew marks, that come by beatings,
falls, or otherways.

Matthiolus says, that the leaves boiled, and given with some Sugar to little
children, cures them of the cough.

The seed is held to be helpful to spleneticke persons; as also to kill the
worms of the belly.

CHAP. XXXV.
Sinapi sativum. Garden Mustard.
THe Mustard that is most usual in this Country, howsoever diverse do for
their private uses sow it in their Gardens or Orchards, in some convenient
corner, yet the same is found wild also abroad in many places. It has many
rough long divided leaves, of an ouerworne green color: the stalk is divided
at the top into diverse branches, whereon grow diverse pale yellow flowers, in
a great length, which turn into small long pods, wherein is contained blackish
seed, inclining to redness, of a fiery sharp taste: the root is tough and
white, running deep into the ground, with many small fibers at it.

The Use of Mustard.
The seed hereof grownd between two stones, fitted for the purpose, and called
a Querne, with some good vinegar added unto it, to make it liquid and running,
is that kind of Mustard that is usually made of all sorts, to serve as sauce
both for fish and flesh.

The same liquid Mustard is of good use, being fresh, for Epilepticke persons,
to warm and quicken those dull spirits that are sopite and scarce appear, if
it be applied both inwardly and outwardly.

It is with good success also given to those that have short breathes, and
troubled with a cough in the lungs.

CHAP. XXXVI.
Asparagus. Sperage or Asparagus.
ASparagus rises up at the first with diverse whitish green scaly heads, very
brittle or easy to break while they are young, which afterward rise up into
very long and slender green stalks, of the bigness of an ordinary riding
wand at the bottom of most, or bigger or lesser, as the roots are of growth,
on which are set diverse branches of green leaves, shorter and smaller then
Fennel up to the top, at the joints whereof come forth small mossie
yellowish flowers, which turn into round berries, green at the first, and of
an excellent red color when they are ripe, showing as if they were beads of
Corrall, wherein are contained exceeding hard and black seed: the roots are
dispersed from a spongious head into many long, thick, and round strings,
whereby it sucketh much nourishment out of the ground, and increases
plentifully thereby.

We have another kind hereof that is of much greater account, because the
shootes are larger, whiter, and being dressed taste more sweet and pleasant,
without any other difference.

The Use of Asparagus.
The first shootes or heads of Asparagus are a Sallet of as much esteem with
all sorts of persons, as any other whatsoever, being boiled tender, and eaten
with butter, vinegar, and pepper, or oil and vinegar, or as every ones manner
does please; and are almost wholly spent for the pleasure of the palate. It is
specially good to provoke urine, and for those that are troubled with the stone
or gravel in the reins or kidneyes, because it does a little open and cleanse
those parts.

CHAP. XXXVII.
Brassica. Cabbages and Coleworts.
THere is greater diversity in the form and color of the leaves of this
plant, then there is in any other that I know grows upon the ground. But this
place requires not the knowledge of all sorts which might be shown, many of
them being of no use with us for the table, but for delight, to behold the
wonderful variety of the works of God herein. I will here therefore show you
only those sorts that are ordinary in most Gardens, and some that are rare,
received into some especial Gardens: And first of Cabbages, and then of
Coleworts.

Our ordinary Cabbage that closes hard and round, has at the first great
large thick leaves, of a grayish green color, with thick great ribs, and
lie open most part of the Summer without closing, but toward the end of Summer,
being grown to have many leaves, it then begins to grow close and round in
the middle, and as it closes, the leaves grow white inward; yet there be some
kinds that will never be so close as these, but will remain half open, which
we do not account to be so good as the other: in the middle of this head, the
next year after the sowing, in other Countries especially, and sometimes in
ours, if the Winter be mild, as may be seen in diverse Gardens (but to prevent
the danger of our Winter frosts, our Gardiners now do use to take up diverse
Cabbages with their roots, and tying a cloth or some such thing about the
roots, do hang them up in their houses, where they may be defended from cold,
and then set them again after the frosts are past) and then there shoots out
a great thick stalk, divided at the top into many branches, bearing thereon
diverse small flowers, sometime white, but most commonly yellow, made of four
leaves, which turn into long, round, and pointed pods, containing therein
small round seed, like unto Turnep seed: the root spreads not far nor
deep, and dies usually in any great froste; for a small frost makes the
Cabbage eat the tenderer.

The red Cabbage is like unto the white, last spoken of, but differing in
color and greatness; for it is seldom found so great as the white, and the
color of the leaves is very variable, as being in some stripped with red, in
others more red, or very deep red or purple.

The sugar loaf Cabbage, so called because it is smaller at the top then it
is at the bottom, and is of two sorts, the one white, the other green.

The Sauoy Cabbadge, one is of a deep green colored leaf, and curld when it
is to be gathered; the other is yellowish: neither of both these do close so
well as the first, but yet are used of some, and accounted good.

The Cole flower is a kind of Coleworte, whose leaves are large, and like the
Cabbage leaves, but somewhat smaller, and endented about the edges, in the
middle whereof, sometimes in the beginning of Autumn, and sometimes much
sooner, there appears a hard head of whitish yellow tufts of flowers, closely
thrust together, but never open, nor spreading much with us, which then is
fittest to be used, the green leaves being cut away close to the head: this
has a much pleasanter taste then either the Coleworte, or Cabbage of any
kind, and is therefore of the more regard and respect at good men's tables.

The ordinary Coleworte is sufficiently known not to close or cabbage, and
gives seed plentifully enough.

The other Colewortes that are noursed up with those that delight in
curiosities, besides the aforesaid ordinary green, which is much used of
Dutchmen, and other strangers, are these: The Curld Coleworte either wholly of
a green color, or of diverse colors in one plant, as white, yellow, red,
purple or crimson, so variably mixed, the leaves being curld on the edges, like
a ruff band, that it is very beautiful to behold.

There is also another curld Colewort of less beauty and respect, being but a
little curld on the edges, whose leaves are white, edged with red, or green
edged with white.

Two other there are, the one of a popingaye green color: the other of a fine
deep green, like unto the Sauoyes.

Then there is the Cole rape, which is also a kind of Coleworte, that bears
a white head, or headed stalk above the ground, as big as a reasonable
Turnep, but longer, and from the top thereof springs out diverse great
leaves, like unto Colewortes; among which rise diverse stalks that bear yellow
flowers, and seed in pods, almost as small as Mustard seed: the root is
somewhat long, and very bushie with threads.

The Use of Cabbages and Colewortes.
They are most usually boiled in poudered beef broth until they be tender, and
then eaten with much fat put among them.

The great ribs of the Popingay, and deep green Colewortes, being boiled and
laid into dishes, are served to the table with oil and vinegar in the Lent
time for very good sallets.

In the cold Countries of Russia and Muscouia, they powder up a number of
Cabbages, which serve them, especially the poorer sort, for their most ordinary
food in winter; and although they stink most grievously, yet to them they are
accounted good meat.

It is thought, that the use of them does hinder the milk in Nurses breasts,
causing it to dry up quickly: but many women that have given suck to my
knowledge have denied that assertion, affirming that they have often eaten
them, and found no such effect. How it might prove in more delicate bodies then
theirs that thus said, I cannot tell: but Matthiolus auerreth it to increase
milk in Nurses breasts; so differing are the opinions of many. The seed
grossly bruised and boiled a little in flesh broth, is a present remedy for
the Collicke; the seed and the broth being taken together, easing them that
are troubled therewith of all griping pains: as also for the stone in the
kidneyes. A Lohoc or licking Electuary made of the pulpe of 1 Brassica
capitata. Close Cabbage. 2 Brassica patula. Open Cabbage. 3 Brassica Sabaudica
cris^a. Curld Sauoye Colewort. 4 Caulis florida. Cole flower. 5 Caulis crispa.
Curld Colewort. 6 Caulis crispa variata. Changeable curld Colewort. 7
Rapocaulis. Cole rape.
depiction of plants the boiled stalks, and a little honey and Almond milk,
is very profitable for shortness of breath, and those that are entering into a
Consumption of the lunges. It has been formerly held to be helpefull in all
diseases: for Crisippus, an ancient Physician, wrote a whole Volume of the
virtues, applying it to all the parts of the body: which thing need not seem
wonderful, in that it is recorded by writers, that the old Romans having
expelled Physicians out of their Commonwealth, did for many hundred of years
maintain their health by the use of Cabbages, taking them for every disease.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
Sisarum. Skirrets.
AFter all the herbs before rehearsed, fit for sallets, or otherwise to be
eaten, there must follow such roots as are used to the same purpose: and
first, Skirrets have many leaves next the ground, composed of many small smooth
green leaves, set each against other upon a middle ribbe, and every one snipt
about the edges: the stalk rises up two or three foot high, set with the
like leaves, having at the top spoakie tufts of white flowers, which turn
into small seed, somewhat bigger and darker then Parsley seed: the roots be
many growing together at one head, being long, slender, and rugged or uneven,
of a whitish color on the outside, and more white within, having in the middle
of the root a long small hard pith or string: these heads are usually taken up
in February and March, or sooner if any so please, the greater number of them
being broken off to be used, the rest are planted again after the heads are
separated, and hereby they are increased every year by many; but it is now
adays more sown of the seed, which come forwards well enough if the ground be
fat and good.

The Use of Skirrets.
The roots being boiled, peeled and pithed, are stewed with butter, pepper and
salt, and so eaten; or as others use them, to roll them in flower, and fry
them with butter, after they have been boiled, peeled and pithed: each way, or
any way that men please to use them, they may find their taste to be very
pleasant, far beyond any Parsnep, as all agree that taste them.

Some do use also to eat them as a sallet, cold with vinegar, oil, etc.
being first boiled and dressed as before said. They do help to provoke urine,
and as is thought, to procure bodily lust, in that they are a little windy.

CHAP. XXXIX.
Pastinaca satiua latifolia. Parsneps.
THe common garden Parsnep has diverse large winged leaves lying upon the
ground, that is, many leaves set one by another on both sides of a middle
stalk, somewhat like as the Skirret has, but much larger, and closer set: the
stalk rises up great and tall, five or six foot high sometimes, with many such
leaves thereon at several joints; the top whereof is spread into diverse
branches, whereon stand spoakie rundles of yellow flowers, which turn into
brownish flat seed: the root is long, great and white, very pleasant to be
eaten, and the more pleasant if it grow in a fat sandy soil.

There is another sort of garden Parsnep, called the Pine Parsnep, that is not
common in every Garden, and differs from the former in three notable parts.
The root is not so long, but thicker at the head and smaller below; the stalk
is neither so big, 1 Sisarum. Skirrits. 2 Pastinaca latifolia. Parsneps. 3
Pastinaca tenuifolia. Carrets. 4 Rapu^. Turnips. 5 Napus saetivus. Narewes. 6
Raphanus niger. Black Raddish. 7 Raphanus vulgaris. Common. Raddish.
depiction of plants nor so high; and the seed is smaller: yet as John
Tradescante says (who has given me the relation of this, and many other of
these garden plants, to whom every one is a debtor) the root hereof is not
altogether so pleasant as the other.

Moreover the wild kind, which grows in many places of England (and whereof
in some places there might be gathered a quarter sack full of the seed) if it
be sown in Gardens, and there well ordered, will prove as good as the former
kind of Garden Parsneps.

The Use of Parsneps.
The Parsnep root is a great nourisher, and is much more used in the time of
Lent, being boiled and stewed with butter, then in any othertime of the year;
yet it is very good all the winter long. The seed helps to dissolve wind,
and to provoke urine.

CHAP. XL.
Pastina satiua tenuifolia. Carrots.
THe Carrot has many winged leaves, rising from the head of the root, which
are much cut and divided into many other leaves, and they also cut and divided
into many parts, of a deep green color, some whereof in Autumn will turn
to be of a fine red or purple (the beauty whereof allureth many Gentlewomen
oftentimes to gather the leaves, and stick them in their hats or heads, or pin
them on their arms in stead of feathers): the stalk rises up among the
leaves, bearing many likewise upon it, but nothing so high as the Parsnep,
being about three foot high, bearing many spoakie tufts of white flowers,
which turn into small rough seed, as if it were hairy, smelling reasonable
well if it be rubbed: the root is round and long, thick above and small
below, either red or yellow, either shorter or longer, according to his kind;
for there is one kind, whose root is wholly red quite thoroughout; another
whose root is red without for a pretty way inward, but the middle is yellow.

Then there is the yellow, which is of two sorts, both long and short: One of
the long yellow sorts, which is of a pale yellow, has the greatest and longest
root, and likewise the greatest head of green, and is for the most part the
worst, being spongy, and not firm.

The other is of a deep gold yellow color, and is the best, having a smaller
head, or tuft of green leaves upon it.

The short roots are likewise distinguished, into pale and deep yellow
colors.

The Use of Carrots.
All these sorts being boiled in the broth of beef, either fresh or salt, but
more usually of salted beef, are eaten with great pleasure, because of the
sweetness of them: but they nourish less then Parsneps or Skirrets.

I have not often known the seed of this Garden kind to be used in
Physic: but the wild kind is often and much used to expel wind, etc.

CHAP. XLI.
Rapum hortense. Turnips.
THere are diverse sorts of Turnips, as white, yellow, and red: the white are
the most common, and they are of two kinds, the one much sweeter then the other.

The yellow and the red are more rare, and noursed up only by those that are
curious: as also the Navewe, which is seen but with very few.

The ordinary Garden Turnep has many large, and long rough green leaves, with
deep and uneven gashes on both sides of them: the stalk rises up among the
leaves about two foot high, spread at the top into many branches, bearing
thereon yellow flowers, which turn into long pods, with blackish round seed in
them: the root is round and white, some greater, some smaller; the best kind
is known to be flat, with a small pigges tale-like root underneath it; the
worser kind which is more common in many places of this land, both North and
West, is round, and not flat, with a greater pigges tayle-like root underneath.

The yellow kind does often grow very great, it is hardly discerned from the
ordinary kind while it grows, but by the greatness and spreading of the
leaves being boiled, the root changes more yellow, somewhat near the color
of a Carrot.

The red Turnep grows usually greater then any of the other, especially in a
good ground, being of a fair red color on the outside, but being pared, as
white as any other on the inside. This, as Matthiolus says, does grow in the
Country of Anania, where he has seen an infinite number of them that have
waighed fifty pound a piece, and in some places he says, a hundred pound a
piece, both which we would think to be incredible, but that we see the kind is
greatly given to grow, and in warm Countries they may so thrive, that the
bulk or bigness of the root may so far pass the growth of our Country,
as that it may rise to that quantity above specified.

The Navew gentle is of two kinds, a smaller and a greater; the smaller is
usually called in France, Navean de Cane, the root is somewhat long with the
roundnesse; this kind is twice as big as a man's thumb, and many of them
less: The other is long and great, almost as big as the short Carrot, but for
the most part of an uneven length, and roundnesse unto the very end, where it
spreads into diverse small long fibers: neither of them does differ much from
the Turnep, in leaf, flower or seed.

The Use of Turnips.
Being boiled in salt broth, they all of them eat most kindly, and by reason
of their sweetness are much esteemed, and often seen as a dish at good men's
tables: but the greater quantity of them are spent at poor men's feasts. They
nourish much, and engender moist and loose flesh, and are very windy. The seed
of the Navew gentle is (as I take it) called of Andromachus in the composition
of his Treakle, Bunias dulcis: for Dioscorides and Pliny do both say, that
the seed of the tame Bunias or Napus is put into Antidotes, and not the seed
of the wild, which is more sharp and bitter; neither the seed of the Turnep,
which is called in Greek (...) in Latin Rapum, because the seed is not
sweet.

CHAP. XLII.
Raphanus. Raddish.
THere are two principal kinds of Garden Raddish, the one is blackish on the
outside, and the otherwhite; and of both these there is some division again,
as shall be showed. Dittander and horse Raddish be reckoned kinds thereof.

The ordinary Raddish has long leaves, unevenly gashed on both sides, the
stalk rises up to the height of three or four foot, bearing many purplish
flowers at the top, made of four leaves a piece, which turn into thick and
short pods, wherein are contained round seed, greater then Turnep or Coleworte
seed, and of a pale reddish color: the root is long, white, and of a reddish
purple color on the outside toward the top of it, and of a sharp biting
taste.

There is a small kind of Raddish that comes earlier then the former, that we
have had out of the low Countries, not differing in any thing else.

The black Raddish I have had brought me out of the low Countries, where they
sell them in some places by the pound, and is accounted with them a rare winter
sallet: the root of the best kind is blackish on the outside (and yet the
seed gathered from such an one, has after the sowing again, given roots,
whereof some have been black, but the most part white on the outside) and
white within, great and round at the head, almost like a Turnep, but ending
shorter then a Raddish, and longer then a Turnep, almost peare-fashion, of a
firmer and harder substance then the ordinary Raddish, but no less sharp and
biting, and somewhat strong withal; the leaves are somewhat smaller, and with
deeper gashes, the flower and seed are like the former, but smaller.

Another sort of black Raddish is like in leaf and seed to the former, but
the flower is of a lighter purple color: the root is longer and smaller, and
changes also to be white as the former does, so that I think they have both
risen from one kind.

The Horse Raddish is a kind of wild Raddish, but brought into Gardens for
the use of it, and has great large and long green leaves, which are not so
much divided, but dented about the edges: the root is long and great, much
stronger in taste then the former, and abides diverse years, spreading with
branches under ground.

Dittander is likewise a wild kind hereof, having long pointed bluish green
leaves, and a root that creeps much under ground: I confess this might have
bin placed among the herbs, because the leaves and not the roots are used;
but let it pass now with the kinds of Raddish.

The Use of these Raddishes.
Raddishes do serve usually as a stimulum before meat, giving an appetite
thereunto; the poor eat them alone with bread and salt. Some that are early
sown, are eaten in April, or sooner if the season permit; others come later;
and some are sown late to serve for the end of Summer: but (as of all things
else) the earlier are the more accepted.

The black Raddishes are most used in the winter, (yet some in their natural
and not forced grounds, have their roots good most part of the Summer) and
therefore must be sown after Midsomer; for if they should be sown earlier,
they would presently run up to stalk and seed, and so lose the benefit of
the root. The Physical property is, it is often used in medicines that help
to break the stone, and to avoid gravel.

The Horse Raddish is used Physically, very much in Melancholicke, Spleneticke
and Scorbuticke diseases. And some use to make a kind of Mustard with the
roots, and eat it with fish.

Dittander or Pepperworte is used of some cold churlish stomachs, as a sauce
or sallet sometimes to their meat, but it is too hot, bitter and strong for
weak and tender stomachs.

Our Gardiners about London use great fences of reed tied together, which
seems to be a mat set upright, and is as good as a wall to defend the cold
from those things that would be defended, and to bring them forwards the
earlier.

CHAP. XLIII.
Cepa. Onions.
We have diverse sorts of Onions, both white and red, flat, round and long, as
shall be presently showed: but I will do with these as I do with the rest,
only give you one description for them all, and afterward their several names
and varieties, as they are to be known by.

Our common Garden Onion has diverse long green hollow leaves, seeming half
flat; among which rises up a great round hollow stalk, bigger in the middle
then any where else, at the top whereof stands a close round head, covered
at the first with a thin skin, which breaks when the head is grown, and
shows forth a great vmbell 1 Raphanus ru^acanus. Horse Raddish. 2 Lepidium
sieve Piperitis. Dittander. 3 Cepae rotun^ae Round Onions. 4 Cepae longae. Long
Onions. 5 Porrum. Leekes 6 Allium. Garlic. 7 Rapun^ulus. Rampions. 8
Tragopogon. Goats b^a^d.
depiction of plants of white flowers, which turn into blackeseede: but then
the head is so heavy that the stalk cannot sustain it, but must be vpheld
from falling to the ground, lest it rot and perish: the root as all know is
round, in some greater, in others lesser, or flat, in some red on the outside
only, in others quite thorough out, in some white, and very sharp and strong,
in others milder, and more pleasant, and some so pleasant that they may be
eaten as an Apple: All these kinds of Onions, contrary to the nature of all
other bulbous roots, have no off-set, or other root growing to it, but are
every one alone single by themselves; and therefore it seems, the Latins, as
Columella records, have given it the name Vnio, and the French it should
seem following the Latin, and the English the French, do call it Oignon and
Onion, as an unite, or as if they were but one and one, and dye every year
after seed bearing.

The red flat kind is most usually with us the strongest of them all, yet I
have had a great red Onion brought me from beyond Sea, that was as great
almost as two men's fistes, flat and red quite thoroughout, and very pleasant
both to smell unto, and to eat, but did quickly degenerate; so that we plainly
see, that the soil and climate does give great alteration to plants of all
sorts.

The long kind we call St. Omers Onions, and corruptly among the vulgar, St.
Thomas Onions.

The other red kind we call Strasborough Onions, whose outside only is red,
and are very sharp and fierce.

The white Onions both long and flat, are like unto Chalke-stones lying upon
the ground, when they are ripe and fit to be gathered.

And lastly, there is the Spanish Onion, both long and flat, very sweet, and
eaten by many like an apple, but as John Tradescante says, who has been in
Spain, that the Spaniards themselves do not eat them so familiarly, as they
do those white Onions that come out of our own Country, which they have
there more plentifully then their sweet Onions.

The Use of Onions.
Onions are used many ways, as sliced and put into pottage, or boiled and
peeled and laid in dishes for sallets at supper, or sliced and put into water,
for a sauce for mutton or oysters, or into meat roasted being stuffed with
Parsley, and so many ways that I cannot recount them, every one pleasing
themselves, according to their order, manner or delight.

The juice of Onions is much used to be applied to any burnings with fire, or
with Gun-pouder, or to any scaldings with water or oil, and is most familiar
for the Country, where upon such sudden occasions they have not a more fit or
speedy remedy at hand: The strong smell of Onions, and so also of Garlic and
Leekes, is quite taken away from offending the head or eyes, by the eating of
Parsley leaves after them.

CHAP. XLIIII.
Porrum. Leekes.
THere be likewise sundry sorts of Leekes, both great and small. Leekes are
very like unto Onions, having long green hollow-like leaves, flattish on the
one side, and with a ridge or crest on the back side: if they be suffered to
grow uncut, then in the second or third year after the sowing, they will send
forth a round and slender stalk, even quite thoroughout, and not swollen or
bigger in the middle like the Onion, bearing at the top a head of purplish
flowers, and black seed after them, very like unto Onion seed, that it is
hard to distinguish them: the root is long and white, with a great bush of
fibers hanging at it, which they call the beards.

The unset Leeke has longer and slenderer roots then the other, which being
transplanted, grows thicker and greater.

The French Leeke, which is called the Vine Leeke, is the best of all others.

Our common kind is of two sorts, one greater then another.

Another sort increases altogether by the root, as Garlic does.

And then Ciues, which are the smallest, and increase abundantly only by the
root.

Some do account Scalions to be rather a kind of Onions then Leekes, and call
them Cepa Ascalonica, or Ascalonitides, which will quickly spend it self, if
it be suffered to be uncut; but all Authors affirm, that there is no wild
kind of Onion, unless they would have it to be Gethyum, whereof Theophrastus
makes mention, saying, that it has a long neck (and so these Scalions have)
and was also of some called Gethyllides, which antiquity accounted to be
dedicated to Latona, the mother of Apollo, because when she was big with
child of Apollo, she longed for these Leekes.

The Use of Leekes.
The old World, as we find in Scripture, in the time of the children of
Isreal's being in Egypt, and no doubt long before, fed much upon Leekes, Onions,
and Garlic boiled with flesh; and the antiquity of the Gentiles relate the
same manner of feeding on them, to be in all Countries the like, which
howsoever our dainty age now refuses wholly, in all sorts except the poorest;
yet Muscouia and Russia use them, and the Turks to this day, (as Bellonius
writes) observe to have them among their dishes at their tables, yea although
they be Bashas, Cades, or Vaiuodas, that is to say, Lords, Judges, or
Governors of countries and places. They are used with us also sometimes in
Lent to make pottage, and is a great and general feeding in Wales with the
vulgar Gentlemen.

Onions boiled or roasted under the embers, and mixed with sugar and butter, are
good for those that are troubled with coughes, shortness of breath, and
wheesing. An Onion made hollow at the bottom, and some good Treakle put into
it, with a little juice of Citrons (or Lemons in the stead thereof) being well
baked together under the embers, after the hole is stopped again, and then
strained forth, and given to one that has the plague, is very helpefull, so as
he be laid to sweat upon it.

Ciues are used as well to be shred among other herbs for the pot, as to be
put into a Sallet among other herbs, to give it a quicker relish.

Leekes are held to free the chest and lungs from much corruption and rotten
phlegm, that sticks fast therein, and hard to be avoided, as also for them
that through hoarsenesse have lost their voice, if they be either taken raw,
or boiled with broth of barley, or some such other supping, fit and conducing
thereunto. And baked under hot embers is a remedy against a surfeit of
Mushromes.

The green blades of Leekes being boiled and applied warm to the Hemorrhoides
or piles, when they are swollen and painful, give a great deal of case.

CHAP. XLV.
Allium. Garlic.
I Have spoken of diverse sorts of Garlic called Moly, in the former book: I
shall need in this place to show only those kinds, that this Garden nourseth
up, and leave the rest to his fit time and place.

Garlic has many long green leaves, like unto Onions, but much larger, and
not hollow at all as Onions are: the stalk rises up to be about three foot
high, bearing such a head at the top thereof as Onions and Leekes do, with
purplish flowers, and black seed like Leekes: the root is white within,
covered over with many purplish skins, and is divided into many parts or
cloves, which serve both to set again for increase, and also to use as need
shall require, and is of a very strong smell and taste, as every one knows,
passing either Onions or Leekes, but exceeding wholesome withal for them that
can take it.

Allium Vrsinum. Ramsons.
Ramsons are another kind of Garlic, and has two or three fair broad
leaves, of a fresh or light green color, pointed at the end: the stalk
grows about an hand length high, bearing many small and pure white
starre-like flowers at the top, and afterward small, black, and smooth
round seed: the root is also divided into many parts, whereby it is much
increased, and is much milder then the former, both in smell and taste.

The Use of Garlic.
It being well boiled in salt broth, is often eaten of them that have strong
stomachs, but will not brook in a weak and tender stomach.

It is accounted, and so called in diverse Countries, The poor man's Treakle,
that is, a remedy for all diseases. It is never eaten raw of any man that I
know, as other of the roots aforesaid, but sodden always and so taken.

Ramsons are oftentimes eaten with bread and butter, and otherwise also, as
every man's affection and course of life leads him to use.

CHAP. XLVI.
Rapunculus sieve Rapuntium. Rampions.
GArden Rampions are of two sorts, the one greater, the other lesser: the
leaves of Rampions are in the one somewhat broad like a Beete, in the other
somewhat long and narrow, and a little broader at the end, of a light green
color, lying flat upon the ground all the first winter, or year of the
springing, and the next Spring shoots forth stalks two or three foot high,
bearing at the top, in the bigger sort, a long slender spike of small horned
or crooked flowers, which open their brimmes into four leaves; in the lesser
many small purplish bells, standing upon several small foote-stalkes, which
turn into heads, bearing small blackish seed: the root is white, branched
into two or three roots, of the bigness and length of a man's finger or thumb.

The Use of Rampions.
The roots of both are used for Sallets, being boiled, and then eaten with
oil and vinegar, a little salt and pepper.

CHAP. XLVII.
Tragopogon. Goats beard.
Goats beard has many long and narrow leaves, broader at the bottom, and
sharper at the end, with a ridge down the back of the leaf, and of a pale
green color; among which rises up a stalk of two or three foot high,
smooth and hollow, bearing thereon many such like leaves, but smaller and
shorter, and at the top thereof on every branch a great double yellow flower,
like almost unto the flower of a Dandelion, which turns into a head, stored
with down, and long whitish seed therein, having on the head of every one
some part of the down, and is carried away with the wind if it be neglected:
the root is long and round, somewhat like unto a Parsnep, but far smaller,
blackish on the outside, and white within, yielding a milkie juice being
broken, as all the rest of the plant does, and of a very good and pleasant
taste. This kind, as also another with narrower leaves, almost like grass,
grow wild abroad in many places, but are brought into diverse Gardens. The
other two kinds formerly described in the first part, the one with a purple
flower, and the otherwith an ash-colored, have such roots as these here
described, and may serve also to the same purpose, being of equal goodness,
if any will use them in the same manner; that is, while they are young, and of
the first years sowing, else they all grow hard, in running up to seed.

The Use of Goats beard.
If the roots of any of these kinds being young, be boiled and dressed as a
Parsnep, they make a pleasant dish of meat, far passing the Parsnep in many
men's judgments, and that with yellow flowers to be the best.

They are of excellent use being in this manner prepared, or after any other
fit and convenient way, to strengthen those that are macilent, or growing into
any consumption.

CHAP. XLVIII.
Carum. Carawayes.
CArawayes has many very fine cut and divided leaves lying on the ground,
being always green, somewhat resembling the leaves of Carrots, but thinner,
and more finely cut, of a quick, hot, and spicie taste: the stalk rises not
much higher then the Carrot stalk, bearing some leaves at the joints along the
stalk to the top, where it brancheth into three or four parts, bearing
spoakie vmbels of white flowers, which turn into small blackish seed, smaller
then Aniseede, and of a hotter and quicker taste: the root is whitish, like
unto a Parsnep, but much smaller, more spreading under ground, and a little
quick in taste, as all the rest of the plant is, and abides long after it
has given seed.

The Use of Carawayes.
The roots of Carawayes being boiled may be eaten as Carrots, and by reason of
the spicie taste does warm and comfort a cold weak stomach, helping to
dissolve wind (whereas Carrots engender it) and to provoke urine, and is a
very welcome and delightful dish to a great many, yet they are somewhat
stronger in taste then Parsneps.

The seed is much used to be put among baked fruit, or into bread, cakes,
etc. to give them a relish, and to help to digest wind in them are subject
thereunto.

It is also made into Comfits, and put into Trageas, or as we call them in
English, Dredges, that are taken for the cold and wind in the body, as also
are served to the table with fruit.

CHAP. XLIX.
Pappas sine Battatas. Potatoes.
THree sorts of Potatoes are well known unto us, but the fourth I rest
doubtful of, and dare not affirm it upon such terms as are given unto it,
until I may be better informed by mine own sight.

The Spanish kind has (in the Islands where they grow, either naturally, or
planted for increase, profit, and use of the Spaniards that nourse them) many
firm and very sweet roots, like in shape and form unto Asphodill roots,
but much greater and longer, of a pale brown on the outside, and white within,
set together at one head; from whence rise up many long branches, which by
reason of their weight and weakness, cannot stand of themselves, but traile on
the ground a yard and a half in length at the least (I relate it, as it has
grown with us, but in what other form, for flower or fruit, we know not)
whereon are set at several distances, broad and in a manner three square
leaves, somewhat like triangled Iuie leaves, of a dark green color, the two
sides whereof are broad and round, and the middle pointed at the end, standing
reasonable close together: thus much we have seen grow with us, and no more:
the root rather decaying then increasing in our country.

The Potatoes of Virginia, which some foolishly call the Apples of youth, is
another kind of plant, differing much from the former, saving in the color
and taste of the root, having many weak and somewhat flexible branches,
leaning a little downwards, or easily borne down with the wind or other
thing, beset with many winged leaves, of a dark grayish green color, whereof
diverse are smaller, and some greater then others: the flowers grow many
together upon a long stalk, coming forth from between the leaves and the
great stalks, every one severally upon a short footstalke, somewhat like the
flower of Tobacco for the form, being one whole leaf six cornered at the
brimmes, but somewhat larger, and of a pale bluish purple color, or pale dove
color, and in some almost white, with some red threads in the middle, standing
about a thick gold yellow pointell, tipped with green at the end: after the
flowers are past, there come up in their places small round fruit, as big as
a Damson or Bulleis, green at the first, and somewhat whitish afterward, with
many white seeds therein, like unto Nightshade: the roots are rounder and
much smaller then the former, and some much greater then others, dispersed
under ground by many small threads or strings from the roots, of the same
light brown color on the outside, and white within, as they, and near of the
same taste, but not altogether so pleasant.

The Potatos of Canada, (which has diverse names given it by diverse men, as
Bauhinus upon Matthiolus calls it, Solanum tuberosum esculentum, Pelleterius
of Middleborough in his Plantarum Synonimia, Heliotropium Indicum tuberosum,
Fabius Columna in the second part of his Phytobasanos, Flos Solis Farnesianus,
sieve Aster Peruanus tuberosus: We in England, from some ignorant and idle head,
have called them Artichokes of Jerusalem, only because the root, being boiled,
is in taste like the bottom of an Artichoke head: but they may most fitly be
called, Potatos of Canada, because their roots are in form, color and taste,
like unto the Potatos of Virginia, but greater, and the French brought them
first from Canada into these parts) rises up with diverse stiff, round
stalks, eight or ten foot high in our Country, where they have scarce
showed their flowers, whereas the very head of flowers in other Countries, as
Fabius Columna expresses it, being of a Pyramid or Sugar loaf fashion, broad
spreading below, and smaller pointed upwards toward the top, is near of the
same length, whereon are set large and broad rough green leaves, very like
unto the leaves of the flower of the Sun, but smaller, yet growing in the
very same manner, round about the stalks: at the very later end of Summer, or
the beginning of Autumn, if the root be well planted and defended, it will
give a show of a few small yellow flowers at the top, like unto the flowers of
Aster or Starre-worte, and much smaller then any flower of the Sun, which
come to no perfection with us: the root, while the plant 1 Carum. Carawayes. 2
Battatas Hisoanorum. Spanish Potatoes. 3 Papas seu Battatas Virginianorum.
Virginia Potatoes. 4 Battatas de Canada. Potatoes of Canada, or Artichokes of
Jerusalem.
depiction of plants is growing above ground, increases not to his full
growth, but when the Summer is well spent, and the springing of the stalk is
past, which is about the end of August, or in September, then the root is
perceived to be increased in the earth, and will before Autumn be spent, that
is, in October, swell like a mound or hillocke, round about the foot of the
stalks, and will not have his roots fit to be taken up, until the stalks be
half withered at the soonest; but after they be withered, and so all the
winter long until the Spring again, they are good, and fit to be taken up
and used, which are a number of tuberous round roots, growing close together;
so that it has been observed, that from one root, being set in the Spring,
there has been forty or more taken up again, and to have ouer-filled a pecke
measure, and are of a pleasant good taste as many have tried.

The Use of all these Potato's.
The Spanish Potato's are roasted under the embers, and being pared or peeled
and sliced, are put into sack with a little sugar, or without, and is delicate
to be eaten.

They are used to be baked with Marrow, Sugar, Spice, and other things in Pyes,
which are a dainty and costly dish for the table.

The Comfit-makers preserve them, and candy them as diverse other things, and so
ordered, is very delicate, fit to accompany such other banqueting dishes.

The Virginia Potato's being dressed after all these ways before specified,
makes almost as delicate meat as the former.

The Potato's of Canada are by reason of their great increasing, grown to be
so common here with us at London, that even the most vulgar begin to despise
them, whereas when they were first received among us, they were dainties for a
Queen.

Being put into seething water they are soon boiled tender, which after they
be peeled, sliced and stewed with butter, and a little wine, was a dish for a
Queen, being as pleasant as the bottom of an Artichoke: but the too frequent
use, especially being so plentiful and cheap, has rather bred a loathing
then a liking of them.

CHAP. L.
Cinara. Artichokes.
THe fruits that grow upon or near the ground, are next to be entreated of,
and first of Artichokes, whereof there be diverse kinds, some accounted tame
and of the Garden, others wild and of late planted in Gardens, Orchards or
Fields, of purpose to be meat for men.

The Artichoke has diverse great, large, and long hollowed leaves, much cut in
or torn on both edges, without any great show of prickles on them, of a kind
of whitish green, like unto an ash color, whereof it took the Latin name
Cinara: the stalk is strong, thick and round, with some skins as it were
down all the length of them, bearing at the top one scaly head, made at the
first like a Pineapple, but after growing greater, the scales are more
separate, yet in the best kinds lying close, and not staring, as some other
kinds do, which are either of a reddish brown, whitish, or greenish color,
and in some broad at the ends, in others sharp or prickly: after the head
has stood a great while, if it be suffered, and the Summer prove hot and
kindly, in some there will break forth at the top thereof, a tuft of bluish
purple thrumes or threads, under which grow the seed, wrapped in a great deal
of dounie substance: but that root that yields flowers will hardly abide the
next winter; but else being cut off when it is well grown, that dounie matter
abides close in the middle of the head, having the bottom thereof flat and
round, which is that matter or substance that is used to be eaten: the root
spreads it self in the ground reasonable 1 Cinarasatiua rubra. The red
Artichoke. 2 Cinara satiua alba. The wh^te Artichoke. 3 Cinara patala. The
French Artichoke. 4 Ci^ara ^luestis. The Thistle Artichoke. 5 Carduus
esculentas. The Chardon.
depiction of plants well, yielding diverse heads of leaves or suckers, whereby
it is increased.

The white Artichoke is in all things like the red, but that the head is of a
whitish ash color, like the leaves, whereas the former is reddish.

We have also another, whose head is green, and very sharp upwards, and is
common in many places.

We have had also another kind in former times that grew as high as any man,
and branched into diverse stalks, every one bearing a head thereon, almost as
big as the first.

There is another kind, called the Musk Artichoke, which grows like the
French kind, but is much better in spending, although it have a lesser bottom.

The French Artichoke has a white head, the scales whereof stand staring far
asunder one from another at the ends, which are sharp: this is well known by
this quality, that while it is hot after it is boiled, it swells so strong,
that one would verily think it had bin boiled in stinking water, which was
brought over after a great froste that had well nigh consumed our best kinds,
and are now almost clean cast out again, none being willing to have it take up
the room of better.

There is a low kind that grows much about Paris, which the French esteem
more then any other, and is lower then the former French kind, the head
whereof as well as the leaves, is of a fresher green color, almost yellowish.

Then there is the Thistle Artichoke, which is almost a wild kind, and
grows smaller, with a more open and prickly head then any of the former.

And lastly, the Chardon as they call it, because it is almost of the form and
nature of a Thistle, or wild Artichoke. This grows high, and full of sharp
prickles, of a grayish color. John Tradescante assured me, he saw three
acres of Land about Brussels planted with this kind, which the owner whited
like Endive, and then sold them in the winter: We cannot yet find the true
manner of dressing them, that our Country may take delight therein.

All these kinds are increased by slipping the young shootes from the root,
which being replanted in February, March, or April, have the same year many
times, but the next at the most, borne good heads.

We find by daily experience, that our English red Artichoke is in our
Country the most delicate meat of any of the other, and therefore diverse
thinking it to be a several kind, have sent them into Italy, France, and
the Low Countries, where they have not abode in their goodness above two
year, but that they have degenerated; so that it seems, that our soil and
climate has the pre-eminence to nourish up this plant to his highest
excellency.

The Use of Artichokes.
The manner of preparing them for the Table is well known to the youngest
Housewife I think, to be boiled in fair water, and a little salt, until
they be tender, and afterward a little vinegar and pepper, put to the
butter, poured upon them for the sauce, and so are served to the Table.

They use likewise to take the boiled bottomes to make Pyes, which is a
delicate kind of baked meat.

The Chardon is eaten raw of diverse, with vinegar and oil, pepper and salt,
all of them, or some, as every one likes for their delight.

CHAP. LI.
Fabae and Phaseoli. Garden and French Beans.
THe Garden Bean is of two colors, red or black, and white, yet both rise
from one; the small or field Beans I make no mention of in this place; but
the French or Kidney Bean is almost of infinite sorts and colors: we do not
for all that intend to trouble you in this place, with the knowledge or
relation of any more then is fit for a Garden of that nature, that I have
propounded it in the beginning.

Our ordinary Beans, serving for food for the poorer sort for the most part,
are planted as well in fields as in gardens, because the quantity of them that
are spent takes up many acres of land to be planted in, and rise up with one,
two or three stalks, according to the fertility of the soil, being smooth and
square, higher then any man oftentimes, whereon are set at certain distances,
from the very bottom almost to the top, two long smooth fleshy and thick
leaves almost round, one standing by another at the end of a small footestalke:
between these leaves and the stalk, come forth diverse flowers, all of them
looking one way for the most part, which are close a little turned up at the
brimmes, white and spotted with a blackish spot in the middle of them, and
somewhat purplish at the foot or bottom, of the form almost of Broom or Pease
flowers, many of which that grow upward toward the top, do seldom bear
fruit, and therefore are gathered to distill, and the tops of the stalks cut
off, to cause the rest to thrive the better; after which grow up long great
smooth green pods, greater then in any other kind of Pulse, which grow black
when they are ripe, and contain within them two, three or four Beans, which
are somewhat flat and round, either white or reddish, which being full ripe
grow blackish: the root has diverse fibers annexed unto the maine root, which
dies every year.

The French or Kidney Bean rises up at the first but with one stalk, which
afterward divides it self into many arms or branches, every one of them
being so weak, that without they be sustained with sticks or poles, whereon
with their winding and claspers they take hold, they would lie fruitless upon
the ground: upon these branches grow forth at several places long
footestalkes, with every of them three broad, round and pointed green leaves
at the end of them, toward the tops whereof come forth diverse flowers, made
like unto Pease blossoms, of the same color for the most part that the fruit
will be of, that is to say, either white, or yellow, or red, or blackish, or of
a deep purple etc. but white is most usual for our Garden; after which come
long and slender flat pods, some crooked, and some straight, with a string as
it were running down the back thereof, wherein are contained flattish round
fruit, made to the fashion of a kidney: the root is long, and spreads with
many fibers annexed unto it, perishing every year.

The Use of these Beans.
The Garden Beans serve (as I said before) more for the use of the poor then
of the rich: I shall therefore only show you the order the poor take with
them, and leave curiosity to them that will bestow time upon them. They are
only boiled in fair water and a little salt, and afterward stewed with some
butter, a little vinegar and pepper being put unto them, and so eaten: or else
eaten alone after they are boiled without any other sauce. The water of the
blossoms distilled, is used to take away spots, and to clear the skin. The
water of the green husks or cods is good for the stone.

The Kidney Beans boiled in water husk and all, only the ends cut off, and
the string taken away, and stewed with butter etc. are esteemed more sauory
meat to many men's pallates, then the former, and are a dish more oftentimes at
rich men's Tables then at the poor.

CHAP. LII.
Pisum. Pease.
THere is a very great variety of manured Pease known to us, and I think more
in our Country then in others, whereof some prosper better in one ground and
country, and some in others: I shall give you the description of one alone for
all the rest, and recite unto you the names of the rest.

Garden Pease are for the most part the greatest and sweetest kinds, and are
sustained with stakes or bushes. The Field Pease are not so used, but grow
without any such ado. They spring up with long, weak, hollow, and brittle
(while they are young and green) whitish green stalks, branched into diverse
parts, and at every joint where it parts one broad round leaf compassing the
stalk about, so that it comes as it were thorough it: the leaves are winged,
made of diverse small leaves set to a middle ribbe, of a whitish green color,
with claspers at the ends of the leaves, whereby it takes hold of whatsoever
stands next unto it: between the leaves and the stalks come forth the
flowers, standing two or three together, every one by it self on his own
several stalk, which are either wholly white, or purple, or mixed white and
purple, or purple and blew: the fruit are long, and somewhat round cods,
whereof some are greater, others lesser, some thick and short, some plain and
smooth, others a little crooked at the ends; wherein also are contained diverse
forms of fruit or pease; some being round, others cornered, some small, some
great, some white, others gray, and some spotted: the root is small, and
quickly perishes.

The kinds of Pease are these: The Rounciuall. The green Hasting. The Sugar
Pease. The spotted Pease. The gray Pease. The white Hasting. The Pease without
skins.


The Scottish or tufted Pease, which some call the Rose Pease, is a good white
Pease fit to be eaten.

The early or French Pease, which some call Fulham Pease, because those grounds
thereabouts do bring them soonest forward for any quantity, although sometimes
they miscarry by their haste and earliness.

Cicer Arietinum. Rams Ciches.
This is a kind of Pulse, so much used in Spain, that it is usually one of
their dainty dishes at all their feasts: They are of two sorts, white and red;
the white is only used for meat, the other for medicine. It bears many
upright branches with winged leaves, many set together, being small, almost
round, and dented about the edges: the flowers are either white or purple,
according to the color of the Pease which follow, and are somewhat round at
the head, but cornered and pointed at the end, one or two at the most in a
small roundish cod.

The Use of Pease.
Pease of all or the most of these sorts, are either used when they are green,
and be a dish of meat for the table of the rich as well as the poor, yet
every one observing his time, and the kind: the fairest, sweetest, youngest,
and earliest for the better sort, the later and meaner kinds for the meaner,
who do not give the dearest price: Or

Being dry, they serve to boil into a kind of broth or pottage, wherein many
do put Time, Mints, Sauory, or some other such hot herbs, to give it the
better relish, and is much used in Town and Country in the Lent 1
Fabasatiua. Garden Beans. 2 Phaseoli satiui. French Beans. 3 Pisum vulga^e.
Garden Pease. 4 Pisum vmbellatum sieve Roseum. Rose Pease or Scottish Pease. 5
Pisum Saccharatum. Sugar Pease. 6 Pisum maculatum. Spotted Pease. 7 Cicer
Arietinum. Rams Ciches or Cicers.
depiction of plants time, especially of the poorer sort of people.

It is much used likewise at Sea for them that go long voyages, and is for
change, because it is fresh, a welcome diet to most persons therein.

The Rams Ciches the Spaniards call Grauancos, and Garauancillos, and eat them
boiled and stewed as the most dainty kind of Pease that are, they are of a
very good relish, and do nourish much; but yet are not without that windy
quality that all sorts of Pulse are subject unto: they increase bodily lust
much more then any other sorts, and as it is thought, does help to increase
seed.

CHAP. LIII.
Cucumer. The Cowcumber.
OF Cowcumbers there are diverse sorts, differing chiefly in the form and
color of the fruit, and not in the form of the plant; therefore one
description shall serve in stead of all the rest.

The Cowcumber brings forth many trailing rough green branches lying on the
ground, all along whereof grow several leaves, which are rough, broad, uneven
at the edges, and pointed at the ends, with long crooked tendrels coming forth
at the same joint with the leaf, but on the other side thereof: between the
stalks and the leaves at the joints come forth the flowers severally, every one
standing on a short foot-stalke, opening it self into five leaves, of a
yellowish color, at the bottom whereof grows the fruit, long and green at
the first, but when it is thorough ripe, a little yellowish, having many
furrows, and uneven bunches all the length of it, wherein is a white firm
substance next unto the skin, and a clear pulpe or watery substance, with
white flat seed lying dispersed through it: the root is long and white, with
diverse fibers at it.

The kinds.
The first described is called, The long green Cowcumber.

There is another is called, The short Cowcumber, being short, and of an equal
bigness in the body thereof, and of an unequal bigness at both ends.

The long Yellow, which is yellowish from the beginning, and more yellow when
it is ripe, and has been measured to be thirteen inches long: but this is
not that small long Cowcumber, called of the Latins, Cucumis anguinus.

Another kind is early ripe, called The French kind.

The Dantsicke kind bears but small fruit, growing on short branches or
runners: the pickled Cowcumbers that are usually sold are of this kind.

The Muscouie kind is the smallest of all other, yet known, and bears not
above four or five at the most on a root, which are no bigger then small
Lemons.

The Use of Cowcumbers.
Some use to cast a little salt on their sliced Cowcumbers, and let them stand
half an hour or more in a dish, and then pour away the water that comes
from them by the salt, and after put vinegar, oil, etc. thereon, as every one
likes: this is done, to take away the overmuch waterishnesse and coldness of
the Cowcumbers.

In many countries they use to eat Cowcumbers as we do Apples or Pears,
paring and giving slices of them, as we would to our friends of some dainty
Apple or Pear.

The pickled Cowcumbers that come from beyond Sea, are much used with us for
sauce to meat all the Winter long. Some have striuen to equal them, by
pickling up our Cowcumbers at the later end of the year, when they are
cheapest, taking the little ones and scalding them thoroughly well, which after
they put in brine, with some Dill or Fenell leaves and stalks: but these are
nothing comparable to the former, we either missing of the right and orderly
pickling of them, or the kind it self differing much from ours (as I said of
the Dantsicke kind) for ours are neither so tender and firm, nor so sauoury
as the other.

The raw or green Cowcumbers are fittest for the hotter time of the year,
and for hot stomachs, and not to be used in colder weather or cold stomachs,
by reason of the coldness, whereby many have been overtaken.

The seed is used physically in many medicines that serve to cool, and a
little to make the passages of urine slippery, and to give ease to hot diseases.

CHAP. LIIII.
Melo. Milions or Musk Melons.
THere be diverse sorts of Melons found out at this day, differing much in the
goodness of taste one from another. This Country has not had until of late
years the skill to nourse them up kindly, but now there are many that are so
well experienced therein, and have their ground so well prepared, as that they
will not miss any year, if it be not too extreme unkindly, to have many ripe
ones in a reasonable time: yet some will be later then others always.

The Melon is certainly a kind of Cowcumber, it does so near resemble it,
both in the manner of his growing, having rough trailing branches, rough uneven
leaves, and yellow flowers: after which come the fruit, which is rounder,
thicker, bigger, more rugged, and spotted on the outside then the Cowcumber, of
a russet color, and green underneath, which when it grows full ripe, will
change a little yellowish, being as deep furrowed and ribbed as they, and
besides having chaps or rifts in diverse places of the rind: the inward hard
substance is yellow, which only is eaten: the seed which is bigger, and a
little yellower then the Cowcumber, lying in the middle only among the moister
pulpe: the smell and changing of his color, fore-shew their ripeness to them
that are experienced: the root is long, with many fibers at it. The fruit
requires much watering in the hot time of the day, to cause them to ripen the
sooner, as I have observed by diverse of the best skill therein.

The Use of the kinds of Melons.
The best Melon feed do come to us out of Spain, some have come out of
Turkey, but they have been nothing so good and kindly.

Some are called Sugar Melons, others Pear Melons, and others Musk Melons.

They have been formerly only eaten by great personages, because the fruit was
not only delicate but rare; and therefore diverse were brought from France, and
since were noursed up by the Kings or Noblemens Gardiners only, to serve for
their Masters delight: but now diverse others that have skill and conueniencie
of ground for them, do plant them and make them more common.

They pair away the outer rind, and cut out the inward pulpe where the seed
lies, slice the yellow firm inward rind or substance, and so eat it with
salt and pepper (and good store of wine, or else it will hardly digest) for
this is firmer, and has not that moisture in it that the Cowcumbers have. It
is also more delicate, and of more worth, which recompenseth the pain.

The seed of these Melons are used as Cowcumbers physically, and together with
them most usually.

CHAP. LV.
Pepo. Pompions.
WE have but one kind of Pompion (as I take it) in all our Gardens,
notwithstanding the diversities of bigness and color.

The Pompion or great Melon (or as some call it Milion) creeps upon the
ground (if nothing be by it whreeon it may take hold and climb) with very
great, ribbed, rough, and prickly branches, whereon are set very large rough
leaves, cut in on the edges with deep gashes, and dented besides, with many
claspers also, which wind about every thing they meet withal: the flowers
are great and large, hollow and yellow, divided at the brims into five parts,
at the bottom of which, as it is in the rest, grows the fruit, which is very
great, sometimes of the bigness of a man's body, and oftentimes less, in some
ribbed or bunched, in others plain, and either long or round, either green or
yellow, or gray, as Nature lists to show her self; for it is but waste time,
to recite all the forms and colors may be observed in them: the inner rind
next unto the outer is yellowish and firm: the seed is great, flat, and
white, lying in the middle of the watery pulpe: the root is of the bigness of
a man's thumb or greater, dispersed under ground with many small fibers joined
thereunto.

Gourds are kinds of Melons; but because we have no use of them, we leave
them unto their fit place.

The Use of Pompions.
They are boiled in fair water and salt, or in powdered beef broth, or
sometimes in milk, and so eaten, or else buttered. They use likewise to take
out the inner watery substance with the seeds, and fill up the place with
Pippins, and having laid on the cover which they cut off from the top, to
take out the pulpe, they bake them together, and the poor of the City, as
well as the Country people, do eat thereof, as of a dainty dish.

The seed hereof, as well as of Cowcumbers and Melons, are cooling, and serve
for emulsions in the like manner for Almond milkes, etc. for those are troubled
with the stone.

CHAP. LVI.
Fragaria. Strawberries.
THere be diverse sorts of Strawberries, whereof those that are noursed up in
Gardens or Orchards I intend to give you the knowledge in this place, and leave
the other to a fitter; yet I must needs show you of one of the wild sorts,
which for his strangeness is worthy of this Garden: And I must also inform
you, that the wild Strawberry that grows in the Woods is our Garden
Strawberry, but bettered by the soil and transplanting.

The Strawberry has his leaves closed together at the first springing up,
which afterward spread themselves into three divided parts or leaves, every
one standing upon a small long foote-stalke, green on the vpperside, grayish
underneath, and snipped or dented about the edges; among which rise up diverse
small stalks, bearing four or five flowers at the tops, consisting of five
white round pointed leaves, somewhat yellowish in the bottom, with some yellow
threads therein; after which come the fruit, made of many small grains set
together, like unto a small Mulberry or Raspis, reddish when it is ripe, and of
a pleasant winy taste, wherein is enclosed diverse small blackish seed: the
root is reddish and long, with diverse small threads at it, and sends 1
^^c^mis (...), u^ vulgaris. The ordinary Cowcumber. 2 Cucumis Hispanicus. The
long yellow Spanish Cowcumber. 3 Melo vulgaris. The ordinary Melon. 4 Melo
maximus optimus. The greatest Musk Melon. 5 Pepo. The Pompion. 6 Fraga
vulgaris. Common Strawberries. 7 Fraga Bohemica maxima. The great Bohemia
Strawberries. 8 Fraga acuseata. The prickly Strawberry.
depiction of plants forth from the head thereof long reddish strings running
upon the ground, which shoot forth leaves in many places, whereby it is much
increased.

The white Strawberry differs not from the red, but in the color of the
fruit, which is whiter then the former when it is thorough ripe, enclining to
redness.

The green Strawberry likewise differs not, but that the fruit is green on
all sides when it is ripe, save on that side the Sun lies upon it, and there
it is somewhat red.

The Virginia Strawberry carries the greatest leaf of any other, except the
Bohemian, but scarce can one Strawberry be seen ripe among a number of plants;
I think the reason thereof to be the want of skill, or industry to order it
aright. For the Bohemia, and all other Strawberries will not bear kindly, if
you suffer them to grow with many strings, and therefore they are still cut
away.

There is another very like unto this, that John Tradescante brought with him
from Brussels long ago, and in seven years could never see one berry ripe on
all sides, but still the better part rotten, although it would every year
flower abundantly, and bear very large leaves.

The Bohemia Strawberry has been with us but of late days, but is the
goodliest and greatest, both for leaf next to the Virginian, and for beauty
far surpassing all; for some of the berries have been measured to be near
five inches about. Master Quester the Postmaster first brought them over into
our Country, as I understand, but I know no man so industrious in the careful
planting and bringing them to perfection in that plentiful manner, as Master
Vincent Sion who dwelt on the Banck side, near the old Paris garden stairs,
who from seven roots, as he affirmed to me, in one year and a half, planted
half an acree of ground with the increase from them, besides those he gave
away to his friends, and with him I have seen such, and of that bigness
before mentioned.

One Strawberry more I promised to show you, which although it be a wild
kind, and of no use for meat, yet I would not let this discourse pass,
without giving you the knowledge of it. It is in leaf much like unto the
ordinary, but differs in that the flower, if it have any, is green, or
rather it bears a small head of green leaves, many set thick together like
unto a double ruff, in the midst whereof stands the fruit, which when it is
ripe, shows to be soft and somewhat reddish, like unto a Strawberry, but with
many small harmless prickles on them, which may be eaten and chewed in the
mouth without any manner of offense, and is somewhat pleasant like a Strawberry:
it is no great bearer, but those it does bear, are set at the tops of the
stalks close together, pleasant to behold, and fit for a Gentlewoman to wear
on her arm, etc. as a raritie in stead of a flower.

The Use of Strawberries.
The leaves of Strawberries are always used among other herbs in cooling
drinks, as also in lotions, and gargles for the mouth and throat: the roots
are sometimes added to make it the more effectual, and withal somewhat the
more binding.

The berries themselves are often brought to the Table as a rear service,
whereunto claret wine, cream or milk is added with sugar, as every one
likes; as also at other times, both with the better and meaner sort, and are a
good cooling and pleasant dish in the hot Summer season.

The water distilled of the berries, is good for the passions of the heart,
caused by the perturbation of the spirits, being either drunk alone, or in
wine; and makes the heart merry.

Some do hold that the water helps to cleanse the face from spots, and to
add some cleerenesse to the skin.

CHAP. LVII.
Angelica. Garden Angelica.
Having thus furnished you out a Kitchen Garden with all sorts of herbs, roots
and fruits fit for it, and for any man's private use, as I did at the first
appropriate it; let me a little transcend, and for the profit and use of
Country Gentlewomen and others, furnish them with some few other herbs, of the
most especial use for those shall need them, to be planted at hand in their
Gardens, to spend as occasion shall serve, and first of Angelica.

Angelica has great and long winged leaves, made of many broad green ones,
divided one from another upon the stalk, which is three foot long or better
sometimes, among which rise up great thick and hollow stalks with some few
joints, whereat does always stand two long leaves compassing the stalk at the
bottom, in some places at the joints spring out other stalks or branches,
bearing such like leaves but smaller, and at the tops very large vmbels of
white flowers, that turn into whitish seed somewhat thick: the root grows
great with many branches at it, but quickly perishes after it has borne
seed: to preserve the root therefore the better, they use to cut it often in
the year, thereby to hinder the running up to seed: the whole plant, both
leaf, root and seed, is of an excellent comfortable sent, savor and taste.

The Use of Angelica.
The distilled water of Angelica, either simple or compound, is of especial
use in deliquium animi, vel cordis tremores and passiones, that is, swounings,
when the spirits are overcome and faint, or tremblings and passions of the
heart, to expel any windy or noisome vapors from it. The green stalks or the
young roots being preserved or candied, are very effectual to comfort and
warm a cold and weak stomach: and in the time of infection is of excellent
good use to preserve the spirits and heart from infection. The dried root made
into powder, and taken in wine or other drink, will abate the rage of lust in
young persons, as I have it related unto me upon credit: A Syrup made thereof
in this manner, is very profitable to expectorate phlegm out of the chest and
lunges, and to procure a sweet breath. Into the green stalk of Angelica as
it stands growing, make a great gashe or incision, wherein put a quantity of
fine white Sugar, letting it there abide for three days, and after take it
forth by cutting a hole at the next joint under the cut, where the Syrup
rests, or cut off the stalk, and turn it down, that the Syrup may drayne
forth; which keep for a most delicate medicine.

CHAP. LVIII.
Dracunculus hortensis sieve Serpentaria. Dragons.
DRagons rises out of the ground with a bare or naked round whitish stalk,
spotted very much with purplish spots and strakes, bearing at the top thereof
a few green leaves very much divided on all sides, standing upon long
footestalkes, in the middle whereof (if the root be old enough) comes forth
a great long husk or hose, green on the outside, and of a dark purplish
color on the inside, with a slender long reddish pestell or clapper in the
middle: the root is great, round, flat and whitish on the outside, and whiter
within, very like unto the roots of Arum, or Wakerobin, and tasting somewhat
sharp like it.

The Use of Dragons.
The chief use whereunto Dragons are applied, is, that according to an old
received custom and tradition (and not the judgment of any learned Author)
the distilled water is given with Mithridatum or Treakle to expel noisome and
pestilentiall vapors from the heart.

CHAP. LIX.
Ruta. Garden Rue, or Herb Grace.
GArden Rue or Herb Grace grows up with hard whitish woody stalks, whereon
are set diverse branches of leaves, being divided into many small ones, which
are somewhat thick and round pointed, of a bluish green color: the flowers
stand at the tops of the stalks consisting of four small yellow leaves, with
a green button in the middle, and diverse small yellow threads about it, which
growing ripe, contain within them small black seed: the root is white and
woody, spreading far in the ground.

The Use of Rue.
The many good properties whereunto Rue serves, has I think in former times
caused the English name of Herb Grace to be given unto it. For without doubt
it is a most wholesome herb, although bitter and strong, and could our dainty
stomachs brook the use thereof, it would work admirable effects being
carefully and skilfully applied, as time and occasion did require: but not
indiscreetly or hand over head, as many use to do that have no skill. Some do
rippe up a beade roll of the virtues of Rue, as Macer the Poet and others, in
whom you shall find them set down, to be good for the head, eyes, breast,
liver, heart, spleen, etc. In some places they use to boil the leaves of Rue,
and keep them in pickle, to eat them as Sampire for the help of weak eyes.
It is very available in glisters or drinks against the wind or the collicke,
and to procure urine that is stayed by the pains thereof. The distilled water
is often used for the same purposes aforesaid: but beware of the too frequent
or overmuch use thereof, because it heateth exceedingly, and wastes nature
mightily.

CHAP. LX.
Carduus Benedictus. The Blessed Thistle.
CArduus benedictus or the blessed Thistle, has many weak tender branches
lying for the most part on the ground, whereon are set long and narrow leaves,
much cut in or waued about the edges, hairy or rough in handling, yet without
any hard or sharp thorns or prickles at all, that the tenderest hand may
touch them without harm: but those that grow toward the tops of the stalks
are somewhat more prickly, and the heads which grow on the tops of the several
branches are somewhat sharp, set with prickles like a Thistle: the flower is
yellow, and the seed lying within the woolly or flocky down like to all other
thistles, are blackish, long and round, with a few hairs on the head of them:
the root is white, and perishes every year after it has given seed.

The Use of the blessed Thistle.
The distilled water hereof is much used to be drunk against agues of all
sorts, either pestilentiall or humorall, of long continuance or of less: 1
Angellica. Angellica. 2 Dracuncu^us bortensis. Dragons. 3 ^uta bortensis.
Garden R^e, or Herbegrace. 4 Carduits benedict. b^essed Thistle. 5 Alkakengi
su^e Solanum Halic^cabum and Vesicatium, Winter Che^^^. 6 Asarum Asarabacca. 7
Liqueritia.
depiction of plants but the decoction of the herb given in due time, has the
more forcible operation: it helps to expel worms, because of the
bitterness, and is thereby also a friend to the stomach ouercharged with
chollar, and to cleanse the liver: it provoke sweat and urine, is helpefull
to them are troubled with the stone, and to ease pains in the sides.

CHAP. LXI.
Solanum veficarium, sieve Alkakengi. Winter Cherries.
THe Winter Cherry has a running or creeping root in the ground, of the
bigness wany times of ones little finger, shooting forth at several joints in
several places, whereby it quickly spreads a great compass of ground: the
stalk rises not above a yard high, whereon are set many broad and long
green leaves, somewhat like unto the leaves of Nightshade, but larger: at the
joints whereof come forth whitish flowers made of five leaves a piece, which
after turn into green berries, enclosed with thin skins or bladders, which
change to be reddish when they grow ripe, the berry likewise being reddish,
and as large as a Cherry, wherein are contained many flat and yellowish seed
lying within the pulpe: which being gathered and strung up, are kept all the
year to be used upon occasion.

The Use of Winter Cherries.
The distilled water of the herb and fruit together, is often taken of them
that are troubled with the sharpness or difficulty of urine, and with the
stone in the kidneyes, or grauel in the bladder: but the berries themselves
either green or dried boiled either in broth, in wine, or in water, is much
more effectual: It is likewise conducing to open obstructions of the liver,
etc. and thereby to help the yellow Iaundise.

CHAP. LXII.
Asarum. Asarabacca.
A Sarabacca, from a small creeping root set with many fibers, shoots forth
diverse heads, and from every of them sundry leaves, every one standing upon a
long green stalk, which are round, thick, and of a very sad or dark green
color, and shining withal: from the roots likewise spring up short stalks,
not fully four fingers high, at the top of every one of which stands the
flower, in fashion very like the seed vessel of Henbane seed, of a greenish
purple color, which changes not his form, but grows in time to contain
therein small cornered seed: the green leaves abide all the winter many times,
but usually sheddeth them in winter, and recouereth fresh in the spring.

The Use of Asarabacca.
The leaves are much and often used to procure vomits, five or seven of them
bruised, and the juice of them drunk in ale or wine. An extract made of the
leaves with wine artificially performed, might be kept all the year thorough,
to be used upon any present occasion, the quantity to be proportioned
according to the constitution of the patient. The root works not so strongly
by vomit, as the leaves, yet is often used for the same purpose, and besides is
held available to provoke urine, to open obstructions in the liver and
spleen, and is put among diners other simples, both into Mithridatum and
Andromachus Treakle, which is usually called Venice Treakle. A dram of the
dried roots in powder given in white wine a little before the fit of an ague,
takes away the shaking fit, and thereby cause the hot fit to be the more
remiss, and in twice taking expel it quite.

CHAP. LXIII.
Glycyrrhiza sieve Liqueritia. Licorice.
ALthough there are two sorts of Licorice set down by diverse Authors, yet
because this Land familiarly is acquainted but with one sort, I shall not need
for this Garden, to make any further relation of that is unknown, but only of
that sort which is sufficiently frequent with us. It rises up with diverse
woody stalks, whereon are set at several distances many winged leaves, that
is to say, many narrow long green leaves set together on both sides of the
stalk, and an odd one at the end, very well resembling a young Ash tree
sprung up from the seed: this by many years continuance in a place without
removing, and not else, will bring forth flowers many standing together
spike-fashion one above another upon the stalks, of the form of Pease
blossoms, but of a very pale or bleake blew color, which turn into long
somewhat flat and smooth cods, wherein is contained small round hard seed: the
root runs down exceeding deep into the ground, with diverse other smaller
roots and fibers growing with them, and shoot out suckers from the maine
roots all about, whereby it is much increased, of a brownish color on the
outside, and yellow within, of a far more weak sweet taste, yet far more
pleasing to us then that Licorice that is brought us from beyond Sea; because
that, being of a stronger sweet taste has a bitterness joined with it, which
makes it the less pleasing and acceptable to most.

The Use of Licorice.
Our English Licorice is now adays of more familiar use (as I said before)
then the outlandish, and is wholly spent and used to help to digest and
expectorate phlegm out of the chest and lunges, and does allay the sharpness
or saltness thereof. It is good also for those are troubled with shortness of
breath, and for all sorts of coughes. The juice of Licorice artificially made
with Hyssope water, serves very well for all the purposes aforesaid. It being
dissolved with Gum Tragacanth in Rose water, is an excellent Lohoc or licking
medicine to break phlegm, and to expectorate it, as also to avoyde thin frothy
matter, or thin salt phlegm, which often fretteth the lunges. It does also
lenifie exulcerated kidneyes, or the bladder, and helps to heal them. It is
held also good for those that cannot make their water but by drops, or a small
deal at a time.

The dried root finely minced, is a special ingredient into all Trageas or
Dredges, serving for the purposes aforesaid, but the use of them is almost
wholly left now adays with all sorts.

Thus have I showed you not only the herbs, roots and fruits, noursed up in
this Garden, but such herbs as are of most necessary uses for the Country
Gentlewomens houses: And now I will show you the Orchard also.

THE ORDERING OF THE ORCHARD. The third part, or ORCHARD.
CHAP. I. The situation of an Orchard for fruit-bearing trees, and how to amend
the defects of many grounds.
AS I have done in the two former parts of this Treatise, so I mean to
proceed in this; first to set down the situation of an Orchard, and then
other things in order: And first, I hold that an Orchard which is, or should
be of some reasonable large extent, should be so placed, that the house should
have the Garden of flowers just before it open upon the South, and the Kitchen
Garden on the one side thereof, should also have the Orchard on the other side
of the Garden of Pleasure, for many good reasons: First, for that the fruit
trees being grown great and tall, will be a great shelter from the North and
East winds, which may offend your chiefest Garden, and although that your
Orchard stand a little bleake upon the winds, yet trees rather endure these
strong bitter blasts, then other smaller and more tender shrubs and herbs can
do. Secondly, if your Orchard should stand behind your Garden of flowers more
Southward, it would shadow too much of the Garden, and besides, would so bind
in the North and East, and North and West winds upon the Garden, that it would
spoil many tender things therein, and so much abate the edge of your pleasure
thereof, that you would willingly wish to have no Orchard, rather then that it
should so much annoy you by the so ill standing thereof. Thirdly, the falling
leaves being still blown with the wind so abundantly into the Garden, would
either spoil many things, or have one daily and continual attending thereon,
to cleanse and sweep them away. Or else to avoid these great inconveniences,
appoint out an Orchard the farther off, and set a greater distance of ground
between. For the ground or soil of the Orchard, what I have spoken concerning
the former Garden for the bettering of the several grounds, may very well
serve and be applied to this purpose. But observe this, that whereas your
Gardens before spoken of may be turned up, manured, and bettered with soil if
they grow out of heart, your Orchard is not so easily done, but must abide
many years without altering; and therefore if the ground be barren, or not
good, it had the more need to be amended, or wholly made good, before you
make an Orchard of it; yet some there be that do appoint, that where every
tree should be set, you only dig that place to make it good: but you must
know, that the roots of trees run further after a little times standing,
then the first compass they are set in; and therefore a little compass of
ground can maintain them but a little while, and that when the roots are
run beyond that small compass wherein they were first set, and that they are
come to the barren or bad ground, they can thrive no better then if they had
been set in that ground at the first, and if you should afterward dig
beyond that compass, intending to make the ground better further off, you
should much hurt the spreading roots, and put your trees in danger: the
situation of hills in many places is grauelly or chalky, which is not good for
trees, because they are both too stony, and lack mellow earth, wherein a tree
does most joy and prosper, and want moisture also (which is the life of all
trees) because of the quick descent of rain to the lower grounds: and besides
all these inconveniences there is one more; your trees planted either on hills
or hill sides, are more subject to the fury and force of winds to be
ouerturned, then those that grow in the lower grounds; for the strongest and
most forcible winds come not usually out of the North East parts, where you
provide best defense, but from the South and West, whence you look for the
best comfort of the Sun. To help therefore many of the inconveniences of
the hills sides, it were fit to cause many leauels to be made thereon, by
raising the lower grounds with good earth, and sustaining them with brick or
stone walls, which although chargeable, will counteruaile your cost, beside the
pleasure of the walks, and prospect of so worthy a work. The plain or level
grounds as they are the most frequent, so they are the most commendable for an
Orchard, because the moulds or earths are more rich, or may better and sooner
be made so; and therefore the profits are the more may be raised from them. A
stiff clay does nourish trees well, by reason it contains moisture; but in
regard of the coldness thereof, it kills for the most part all tender and
early things therein: sea-cole ashes therefore, bucke ashes, street soil,
chaulke after it has lain abroad and been broken with many years frosts and
rain, and sheep dung, are the most proper and fittest manure to help this
kind of soil. The dry sandy soil, and grauelly ground are on the contrary
side as bad, by reason of too much heat and lack of moisture: the dung of
kine or cattle in good quantity bestowed thereon, will much help them. The
amending or bettering of other sorts of grounds is set down toward the end of
the first Chapter of the first part of this work, whereunto I will refer
you, not willing to repeat again the same things there set down. The best
way to avoid and amend the inconveniences of high, boisterous, and cold
winds, is to plant Walnut trees, Elmes, Oaks or Ashes, a good distance
without the compass of your Orchard, which after they are grown great, will
be a great safeguard thereunto, by breaking the violence of the winds from
it. And if the soil of your Orchard want moisture, the conueying of the sink
of the house, as also any other draine of water thereinto, if it may be, will
much help it.

CHAP. II. The form of an Orchard, both ordinary, and of more grace and rarity.
ACcording to the situation of men's grounds, so must the plantation of them of
necessity be also; and if the ground be in form, you shall have a formal
Orchard: if otherwise, it can have little grace or form. And indeed in the
elder ages there was small care or heed taken for the formality; for every
tree for the most part was planted without order, even where the master or
keeper found a vacant place to plant them in, so that oftentimes the ill
placing of trees without sufficient space between them, and negligence in not
looking to uphold them, procured more waste and spoil of fruit, then any
accident of wind or weather could do. Orchards in most places have not brick
or stone walls to secure them, because the extent thereof being larger then of a
Garden, would require more cost, which every one cannot undergo; and therefore
mud walls, or at the best a quick set hedge, is the ordinary and most usual
defense it finds almost in all places: but with those that are of ability to
compass it with brick or stone walls, the gaining of ground, and profit of the
fruit trees planted there against, will in short time recompense that charge.
If you make a doubt how to be sure that your Orchard wall shall have sufficient
comfort of the Sun to ripen the fruits, in regard the trees in the Orchard
being so nigh thereunto, and so high withal, will so much shadow the wall,
that nothing will ripen well, because it will want the comfort of the Sun:
you may follow this rule and advice, to remedy those inconveniences. Having an
Orchard containing one acre of ground, two, three, or more, or less, walled
about, you may so order it, by leaving a broad and large walk between the
wall and it, containing twenty or twenty four foot (or yards if you will)
that the wall shall not be hindered of the Sun, but have sufficient comfort for
your trees, notwithstanding the height of them, the distance between them and
the wall being a sufficient space for their shadow to fall into: and by
compassing your Orchard on the inside with a hedge diagram of planting scheme
(wherein may be planted all sorts of low shrubs or bushes, as Roses,
Cornellian Cherry trees plashed low, Gooseberries, Curran trees, or the like)
you may enclose your walk, and keep both it and your Orchard in better form
and manner, then if it lay open. For the placing of your trees in this Orchard,
first for the walls: Those sides that lie open to the South and Southwest Sun,
are fittest to be planted with your tenderest and earliest fruits, as
Apricockes, Peaches, Nectarius, and May or early Cherries: the East, North and
West, for Plums and Quinces, as you shall like best to place them. And for the
Orchard it self, the ordinary manner is to place them without regard of
measure or difference, as Pears among Apples, and Plums among Cherries
promiscuously; but some keep both a distance and a division for every sort,
without intermingling: yet the most graceful Orchard contains them all, with
some others, so as they be placed that one do not hinder or spoil another;
and therefore to describe you the model of an Orchard, both rare for
comeliness in the proportion, and pleasing for the profitablenesse in the use,
and also durable for continuance, regard this figure is here placed for your
direction, where you must observe, that your trees are here set in such an
equal distance one from another every way, and as is fittest for them, that
when they are grown great, the greater branches shall not gall or rub one
against another; for which purpose twenty or sixteen foot is the least to be
allowed for the distance every way of your trees, and being set in rows every
one in the middle distance, will be the most graceful for the plantation, and
besides, give you way sufficient to pass through them, to pruine, loppe, or
dress them, as need shall require, and may also be brought (if you please) to
that graceful delight, that every alley or distance may be formed like an
arch, the branches of either side meeting to be enterlaced together. Now for
the several sorts of fruit trees that you shall place in this model, your
best direction is to set Damsons, Bulleis, and your taler growing Plums on the
outside, and your lower Plums, Cherries, and Apples on the inside, having
regard, that you place no Pear tree to the Sunward, of any other tree, lest it
ouershadow them: Let your Pear trees therefore be placed behind, or on the
one side of your lower trees, that they may be as it were a shelter or defense
on the North and East side. Thus may you also plant Apples among Plums and
Cherries, so as you suffer not one to ouer-growe or ouer-toppe another; for by
pruning, lopping, and shredding those that grow too fast for their fellows,
you may still keep your trees in such a conformity, as may be both most comely
for the sight, and most profitable for the yielding of greater and better store
of fruit. Other sorts of fruit trees you may mix among these, if you please,
as Filberds, Cornellian Cherries in standerds, and Medlers: but Service trees,
Baye trees, and others of that high sort, must be set to guard the rest. Thus
have I given you the fairest form could as yet be devised; and from this
pattern, if you do not follow it precisely, yet by it you may proportion your
Orchard, be it large or little, be it walled or hedged.

CHAP. III. Of a noursery for trees, both from sowing the kernels, and planting
fit stocks to graft upon.
ALthough I know the greater sort (I mean the Nobility and better part of the
Gentry of this Land) do not intend to keep a Nursery, to raise up those
trees that they mean to plant their walls or Orchards withal, but to buy them
already grafted to their hands of them that make their living of it: yet
because many Gentlemen and others are much delighted to bestow their pains in
grafting themselves, and esteem their own labors and handie work far
above other men's: for their encouragement and satisfaction, I will here set
down some convenient directions, to enable them to raise an Orchard of all
sorts of fruits quickly, both by sowing the kernels or stones of fruit, and by
making choice of the best sorts of stocks to graft on: First therefore to
begin with Cherries; If you will make a Nursery, wherein you may be stored
with plenty of stocks in a little space, take what quantity you think good
of ordinary wild black Cherrie stones, cleansed from the berries, and sow
them, or prick them in one by one on a piece of ground well turned up, and
large enough for the quantity of stones you will bestow thereon, from the
midst of August unto the end of September, which when they are two or three
years old, according to their growth, you may remove them, and set them anew
in some orderly rows, having pruned their tops and their roots, which at the
next years growth after the new planting in any good ground, or at the second,
will be of sufficient bigness to graft upon in the bud what sorts of Cherries
you think best: and it is fittest to graft them thus young, that pruning your
stocks to raise them high, you may graft them at five or six foot high, or
higher, or lower, as you shall see good, and being thus grafted in the bud,
will both more speedily and safely bring forward your grafts, and with less
danger of losing your stocks, then by grafting them in the stock: for if the
bud take not by inoculating the first year, yet your tree is not lost, nor put
in any hazard of loss; but may be grafted anew the year following, if you
will, in another place thereof, whereas if you graft in the stock, and it do
not take, it is a great chance if the stock dye not wholly, or at least be not
so weakened both in strength and height, that it will not be fit to be
grafted a year or two after. In the same manner as you do with the black,
you may deal with the ordinary English red Cherrie stones, or kernels, but
they are not so apt to grow so straight and high, nor in so short a time as
the black Cherrie stones are, and besides are subject in time to bring out
suckers from the roots, to the hinderance of the stocks and grafts, or at the
least to the deformity of your Orchard, and more trouble to the Gardener, to
pull or dig them away. Plumme stones may be ordered in this manner likewise,
but you must make choice of your Plums; for although every Plumme is not so fit
for this purpose, as the white Pear Plumme, because it grows the goalest and
freest, the bark being smooth and aptest to be raised, that they may be
grafted upon; yet diverse other Plummes may be taken, if they be not at hand, or
to be had, as the black and red Pear Plumme, the white and red Wheat Plumme,
because they are nearest in goodness unto it. Peach stones will be soon
raised up to graft other sorts of Peaches or Nectorins upon, but the nature of
the Peach root being spongie, is not to abide long. As for Almonds, they will
be raised from their stones to be trees of themselves; but they will hardly
abide the removing, and less to be grafted upon. Apricocke stones are the
worst to deal withal of any sort of stone fruit; for although the Apricocke
branches are the fittest stocks to graft Nectorins of the best sorts upon, yet
those that are raised from the kernels or stones will never thrive to be
brought on for this purpose; but will starve and dye, or hardly grow in a long
time to be a straight and fit stock to be grafted, if it be once removed. Your
Cornellian Cherrie trees are wholly, or for the most part raised from the
stones or kernels; yet I know diverse do increase them, by laying in their
lowest branches to take root: and thus much for stone fruits. Now for Apples
and Pears, to be dealt withal in the same manner as aforesaid. They use to
take the pressing of Crabs whereas Veriuyce is made, as also of Cidar and Perry
where they are made, and sowing them, do raise up great store of stocks; for
although the beating of the fruit does spoil many kernels, yet there will be
enough left that were never touched, and that will spring: the Crabbe stocks
some prefer for the fittest, but I am sure, that the better Apple and Pear
kernels will grow fairer, straighter, quicklier, and better to be grafted on.
You must remember, that after two or three years you take up these stocks,
and when you have pruned both top and root, to set them again in a thinner
and fitter order, to be afterward grafted in the bud while they are young, as
I shall show you by and by, or in the stock if you will suffer them to grow
greater. Now likewise to know which are the fittest stocks of all sorts to
choose, thereon to graft every of these sorts of fruits, is a point of some
skill indeed; and therefore observe them as I do here set them down: for be
you assured, that they are certain rules, and known experiences, whereunto
you may trust without being deceived. Your black Cherrie stocks (as I said
before) are the fittest and best for all sorts of Cherries long to abide and
prosper, and even May or early Cherry will abide or live longer, being grafted
thereon, either in the budde or in the stock, then on the ordinary red Cherry
stock; but the red Cherry stock is in a manner the only tree that most
Nursery men do take to graft May Cherries on in the stock (for it is but a
late experience of many, to graft May Cherries in the bud) many also do graft
May Cherries on Gascoigne Cherry stocks, which do not only thrine well, but
endure longer then upon any ordinay Cherry stock: For indeed the May Cherries
that are grafted upon ordinary red Cherrie stocks, will hardly hold above a
dozen years bearing well, although they come forwarder at the first, that is,
do bear sooner then those that are grafted on Gascoigne or black Cherry
stocks; but as they are earlier in bearing, so they are sooner spent, and the
Gascoigne and black Cherry stocks that are longer in coming forward, will
last twice or thrice their time; but many more grafts will miss in grafting of
these, then of those red Cherry stocks, and besides, the natures of the
Gascoigne and black Cherry stocks are to rise higher, and make a goodlier
tree then the ordinary red stock will, which for the most part spreads wide,
but rises not very high. The English red Cherry stock will serve very well to
graft any other sort of Cherry upon, and is used in most places of this Land,
and I know no other greater inconvenience in it, then that it shoots out many
suckers from the root, which yet by looking unto may soon be removed from
doing any harm, and that it will not last so long as the Gascoigne or black
Cherry stock will. May Cherries thus grafted low, do most usually serve to
be planted against a wall, to bring on the fruit the earlier; yet some graft
them high upon standards, although not many, and it is, I think, rather
curiosity (if they that do it have any walls) then any other matter that
causes them thus to do: for the fruit is naturally small, though early, and
the standard Cherries are always later then the wall Cherries, so that if they
can spare any room for them at their walls, they will not plant many in
standards. Now concerning Plummes (as I said before) for the sowing or setting
of the stones, so I say here for their choice in grafting of them, either in
the budde or stock. The white Pear Plumme stock, and the other there
mentioned, but especially the white Pear Plumme is the goodliest, freest, and
fittest of all the rest, as well to graft all sort of Plummes upon, as also to
graft Apricockes, which can be handsomely, and to any good purpose grafted upon
no other Plum stock, to rise to be worth the labor and pain. All sorts of
Plums may be grafted in the stock, and so may they also in the bud; for I know
none of them that will refuse to be grafted in the bud, if a cunning hand
perform it well; that is, to take off your bud cleanely and well, when you
have made choice of a fit cyon: for, as I shall show you anon, it is no small
piece of cunning to choose your cyon that it may yield fit buds to graft
withal, for every plum is not of a like aptnes to yield them: But Apricocks
cannot be grafted in the stock for any thing that ever I could hear or learn,
but only in the bud, and therefore let your Plum stock be of a reasonable
size for Apricockes especially, and not too small, that the graft ouergrow not
the stock, and that the stock be large enough to nourish the graft. As your
Plum stocks serve to graft both Apricockes and Plummes, so do they serve also
very well to graft Peaches of all sorts; and although Peach stocks will serve
to be grafted with Peaches again, yet the Peach stock (as I said before) will
not endure so long as the Plumme stock, and therefore serves but for
necessity if Plum stocks be not ready, or at hand, or for the present time, or
that they afterward may graft that sort of Peach on a Plumme stock: for many
might lose a good fruit, if when they meet with it, and have not Plumme
stocks ready to graft it on, they could not be assured that it would take upon
another Peach stock or branch, or on the branch of an Apricocke either. Plumme
stocks will serve likewise very well for some sorts of Nectorins; I say, for
some sorts, and not for all: the green and the yellow Nectorin will best
thrive to be grafted immediately on a Plumme stock; but the other two sorts of
red Nectorins must not be immediately grafted on the Plumme stock, but upon a
branch of an Apricocke that has been formerly grafted on a Plumme stock, the
nature of these Nectorins being found by experience to be so contrary to the
Plum stock, that it will sterue it, and both dye within a year, two or three
at the most: Diverse have tried to graft these red Nectorins upon Peach stocks,
and they have endured well a while; but seeing the Peach stock will not last
long it self, being ouerweake, how can it hold so strong a nature as these red
Nectorins, which will (as I said before) sterue a Plum stock that is
sufficient durable for any other Plumme?

Apricocke stocks from the stones are hardly nursed up, and worse to be
removed, and if a red Nectorin should be grafted on an Apricock raised from the
stone, and not removed, I doubt it might happen with it as it does with many
other trees raised from stones or kernels, and not removed, that they would
hardly bear fruit: for the nature of most trees raised from stones or kernels,
and not removed, is to send great downeright roots, and not to spread many
forwards; so that if they be not cut away that others may spread abroad, I
have seldom seen or known any of them to bear in any reasonable time; and
therefore in removing, these great downright roots are always shred away,
and thereby made fit to shoot others forwards. Hereby you may perceive, that
these red Nectorins will not abide to be grafted upon any other stock well,
then upon an Apricocke branch, although the green and the yellow (as I said
before) will well endure and thrive upon Plums. The suckers or shootes both of
Plums and Cherries that rise from their roots, either near their stocks, or
farther off, so that they be taken with some small roots to them, will serve
to be stocks, and will come forward quickly; but if the suckers have no small
roots whereby they may comprehend in the ground, it is almost impossible it
should hold or abide. There is another way to raise up either stocks to graft
on, or trees without grafting, which is, by circumcising a fair and fit branch
in this manner: About Midsomer, when the sap is thoroughly risen (or before
if the year be forward) they use to bind a good quantity of clay round about
a fair and straight branch, of a reasonable good size or bigness, with some
convenient bands, whether it be ropes of hey, or of any other thing, about an
handful above the joint, where the branch spreads from the tree, and cutting
the bark thereof round about under the place where the clay is bound, the sap
is hereby hindered from rising, or descending further then that place so
circumcised, whereby it will shoot out small knubs and roots into the clay,
which they suffer so to abide until the beginning of winter, whenas with a
fine Saw they cut off that branch where it was circumcised, and afterward
place it in the ground where they would have it to grow, and stake it, and
bind it fast, which will shoot forth roots, and will become either a fair
tree to bear fruit without grafting, or else a fit stock to graft on
according to the kind: but oftentimes this kind of propagation misseth, in
that it sends not forth roots sufficient to cause it to abide any long time.
Let me yet before I leave this narration of Plummes, give you one admonition
more, that upon whatsoever Plumme stock you do graft, yet upon a Damson
stock that you never strive to graft, for it (above all other sorts of Plumme
stocks) will never give you a tree worth your labor. It remains only of
stone fruit, that I speak of Cornelles, which as yet I never saw grafted upon
any stock, being as it should seem utterly repugnant to the nature thereof,
to abide grafting, but is wholly raised up (as I said before) either from the
stones, or from the suckers or layers. For Pears and Apples your usual
stocks to graft on are (as I said before, speaking of the nursing up of trees
from the kernels) your Crabbe stocks, and they be accepted in every Country
of this Land as they may conveniently be had, yet many do take the stocks of
better fruit, whether they be suckers, or stocks raised from the kernels (and
the most common and known way of grafting, is in the stock for all sorts of
them, although some do use whipping, packing on, or incising, as every one
list to call it: but now we do in many places begin to deal with Pears and
Apples as with other stone fruit, that is, graft them all in the bud, which is
found the most compendious and safest way both to preserve your stock from
perishing, and to bring them the sooner to cover the stock, as also to make the
goodlier and straighter tree, being grafted at what height you please:) for
those stocks that are raised from the kernels of good fruit (which are for the
most part easily known from others, in that they want those thorns or
prickles the wild kinds are armed withal:) I say for the most part; for I
know that the kernels of some good fruit has given stocks with prickles on
them (which, as I think, was because that good fruit was taken from a wild
stock that had not been long enough grafted to alter his wild nature; for
the longer a tree is grafted, the more strength the fruit takes from the
graft, and the less still from the stock) being smoother and fairer then the
wild kinds, must needs make a goodlier tree, and will not alter any whit the
taste of your fruit that is grafted thereon, but rather add some better
relish thereunto; for the Crabbe stocks yielding harsh fruit, must give part
of their nature to the grafts are set thereon, and therefore the taste or
relish, as well as some other natural properties of most fruits, are somewhat
altered by the stock. Another thing I would willingly give you to understand
concerning your fruits and stocks, that whereas diverse for curiosity and to
try experiments have grafted Cherries upon Plumme stocks, or Plums on Cherry
stocks, Apples upon Pear stocks, and Pears upon Apple stocks, some of
these have held the graft a year, two or three peradventure, but I never knew
that ever they held long, or to bear fruit, much less to abide or do well:
bestow not therefore your pains and time on such contrary natures, unless it
be for curiosity, as others have done: Yet I know that they that graft pears
on a white thorn stock have had their grafts seem to thrive well, and
continue long, but I have seldom seen the fruit thereof answerable to the
natural wild Pear stock; yet the Medlar is known to thrive best on a white
thorn. And lastly, whereas diverse do affirm that they may have not only good
stocks to graft upon, but also fair trees to bear store of fruit from the
kernels of Pears or Apples being pricked into the ground, and suffered to grow
without removing, and then either grafted or suffered to grow into great trees
vngrafted; and for their bearing of fruit, assign a dozen or twenty years
from the first setting of the kernels, and abiding vngrafted, I have not seen
or heard that experience to hold certain, or if it should be so, yet it is too
long time lost, and too much fruit also, to wait twenty years for that profit
may be gained in a great deal of less time, and with more certainty. Unto
these instructions let me add also one more, which is not much known and
used, and that is, to have fruit within four or five years from the first
sowing of your stones or kernels in this manner: After your stones or kernels
are two or three years old, take the fairest top or branch, and graft it as
you would do any other cyon taken from a bearing tree, and look what rare
fruit, either Pear or Apple, the kernel was of that you sowed, or Peach or
Plum etc. the stone was set, such fruit shall you have within two or three
years at the most after the grafting, if it take, and the stock be good. And
thus may you see fruit in far less time then to stay until the tree from a
kernel or stone bears fruit of it self.

CHAP. IIII. The diverse manners of grafting all sorts of fruits used in our
Land.
THe most usual manner of grafting in the stock is so common and well known
in this Land to every one that has any thing to do with trees or an Orchard,
that I think I shall take upon me a needless work to set down that is so
well known to most; yet how common soever it is, some directions may profit
every one, without which it is not easily learned. And I do not so much spend
my time and pains herein for their sakes that have knowledge, but for such as
not knowing would feign be taught privately, I mean, to read the rules of the
art set down in private, when they would refuse to learn of a Gardener, or
other by sight: and yet I discommend not that way unto them to learn by sight;
for one may see more in an instant by sight, then he shall learn by his own
practice in a great while, especially if he be a little practiced before he see
a cunning hand to do it. There are many other kinds of grafting, which shall
be spoken of hereafter, and peradventure even they that know it well, may
learn something they knew not before.

1. The grafting in the stock, is, to set the sprigge of a good fruit into the
body or stock of another tree, be it wild or other, be it young or old, to
cause that tree to bring forth such fruit as the tree bore from whence you took
the sprigge, and not such as the stock or tree would have borne, if it had not
been grafted, and is performed in this manner: Look what tree or stock you
will choose to graft on, you must with a small fine saw and very sharp, whip
off, or cut off the head or top thereof at what height you either think best
for your purpose, or conueni^^t for the tree: for if you graft a great tree,
you cannot without endangering the whole, cut it down so low to the ground, as
you may without danger do a small tree, or one that is of a reasonable size;
and yet the lower or nearer the ground you graft a young tree, the safer it is
both for your stock and graft, because the sap shall not ascend high, but
soon give vigor to the graft to take and shoot quickly: After you have cut
off the top of your stock, cut or smooth the head thereof with a sharp
knife, that it may be as plain and smooth as you can, and then cleave it with
a hammer or mallet, and with a strong knife, cleauer or chessell, either in the
middle of it if it be small, or of a reasonable size, or on the sides an inch
or more within the bark, if it be great: into both sides of the cleft put your
grafts, or into one if the stock be smaller; which grafts must be made fit
for the purpose on this fashion: Having made choice of your grafts from the
top branches especially, or from the sides of that tree whereof you would have
the fruit, and that they be of a reasonable good size, not too small or too
great for your stocks, and of one or the same years shoot; (and yet many do
cut an inch or more of the old wood with the sprigge of the last years
growth, and so graft the old and young together (but both are good, and the old
wood no better then the young) cut your graft not too long, but with two, three
or four eyes or buds at the most, which at the lower or bigger end for an inch
long or more (for the greater stocks, and an inch or less for the lesser
sort) must be so cut, that it be very thin on the one side from the shoulders
downward, and thicker on the other, and thin also at the end, that it may go
down close into the cleft, and rest at the shoulders on the head of the
stock: but take heed that in cutting your grafts your knife be very sharp
that you do not raise any of the bark, either at the sides or the end, for
fear of losing both your pains and graft, and stock too peradventure; and
let not your grafts be made long before you set them, or else put the ends of
them in water to keep them fresh and clean: when you set them you must open
the cleft of your stock with a wedge or chessell as most do, that the graft
may go easily into it, and that the bark of both graft and stock may join
close the one to the other, which without stirring or displacing must be so
left in the cleft, and the wedge or chessell gently pulled forth; but because
in the doing hereof consists in a manner the whole loss or gain of your
pains, graft and stock, to prevent which inconvenience I do use an iron
Instrument, the form whereof is shown in the following page, marked with the
letter A, crooked at both ends, and broad like unto a chessell, the one
bigger, and the other lesser, to fit all sorts of stocks, and the iron handle
somewhat long between them both, that being thrust or knocked down into the
cleft, you may with your left hand open it as wide as is fit to let in your
graft, without strayning, which being placed, this iron may be pulled or
knocked up again without any moving of your graft: when you have thus done,
you must lay a good handful or more (according to the bigness of your stock)
of soft and well moistened clay or loame, well tempered together with short cut
hey or horse dung, upon the head of your stock, as low or somewhat lower then
the cleft, to keep out all wind, rain or air from your graft until
Midsomer at the least, that the graft be shot forth somewhat strongly, which
then if you please may be removed, and the cleft at the head only filled with a
little clay to keep out earewigs, or other things that may hurt your graft.

A. The Iron Instrument with chessels at each end, the one bigger and the other
lesser, to keep the cleft of the Tree open until the graft be placed in the
stock, which with a knock upwards will be easily taken away. B. The small
Penne-knife with a broad and thin ended hafte, to raise the sides both of the
bud and the downright slit in the body or arm of a Tree to be grafted in the
bud. C. A pen or quil cut half round to take off a bud from the branch. D. An
Iuory Instrument made to the same fashion. E. A shield of brass made hollow
before to be put into the slit, to keep it open until the bud be put into its
place. F. The manner of grafting called incising or splicing. G. A Ladder made
with a stool at the top, to serve both to graft higher or lower, and also to
gather fruit without spoiling or hurting any buddes or branches of Trees. 1.
The first slit in the body or arm of a Tree to be grafted in the bud with the
cross cut at the head. 2. The same slit opened on both sides, ready to receive
the budde should be put therein: these small pieces serve as well as trees to
show the manner and order of the grafting. 3. The branch of a Tree with one
budde cut ready to be taken off, and another not yet touched. 4. The bud clean
taken off from the branch, both the foreside and backside. 5. The graft or bud
now put into the stock or tree you intend to be grafted: but the binding
thereof is omitted.

diagram of grafting tools and techniques

2. Inarching is another manner of grafting in the stock, and is more
troublesome, and more casual also then the former, and is rather a curiosity
then any way of good speed, certainety or profit, and therefore used but of a
few. Yet to show you, the manner thereof, it is thus: Having a tree well
grown, be it high or low, yet the lower the better, with young branches well
spread, they use to set stocks round about it, or on the one side as you
please; into which stocks they ingraft the young branches of the well grown
tree as they are growing (before they cut them from the tree) by bowing down
the branch they intend to graft, and putting it into the stock, having first
cut off the head thereof, and cut a notch in the middle of the head a little
slope on both sides, wherein the branch must be fitted: let the branch be cut
thin on the vnderside, only of that length as may suffice to fit the notch in
the stock, leaving about half a yard length of the branch, to rise above or
beyond the stock, which being bound on, and clayed over or covered with red
or green soft wax, they let so abide, that if it take in the stock they cut
off the branch a little below the grafting place in November following, and
removing the stock, they have thus gained a grafted and grown tree the first
year: but it is usually seen, that where one branch takes, three do miss:
yet this manner of grafting was much in use for May Cherries, when they were
first known to us, and the way thought to be a rare manner of grafting to
increase them, until a better way was found out, which now is so common and
good also, that this is not now scarce thought upon.

3. Another kind of grafting in the stock is called of some whipping, of some
splicing, of others incising, and of others packing on (and as I hear, is much
used in the West parts especially, and also in the North parts of this Land)
and is performed in this manner: Take and slice the branch of a tree (so as the
branch be not too big) or else a young tree of two, or three, or four years
growth at the most, quite off slope wise, about an inch and a half long or
more, and cut a deep notch in the middle thereof, then fit into it a graft just
of that size or bigness, cut on both sides with shoulders, and thin at the
end, that it may join close in the notch, and neither bigger or lesser, but
that the bark of the one may be fitted just to the bark of the other, the
figure whereof is expressed at the letters E.F. which show the one to be with a
shoulder and the other without; bind them gently together with bast, and put
clay or wax over the place, until it be taken: this is much used of late
days for such young trees as are risen of stones or kernels after the second
or third years growth, and thrive very well in that it not only saves much
time, but diverse checks by removing and grafting.

4. Inoculating or grafting in the budde is another manner of grafting, which
is the taking of a budde from one tree, and putting it into the bark of
another tree, to the end, that thereby you may have of the same kind of fruit
the tree bare from whence the budde was taken; and although it be sufficiently
known in many places of this Land, yet as I understand, good Gardiners in the
North parts, and likewise in some other places, can scarce tell what it
means, or at the least how to do it well. It is performed after a different
fashion from the former, although they all tend unto one end, which is the
propagating of trees. You must for this purpose observe, that for those trees
you would graft, either with, or upon, you choose a fit time in Summer, when
the sap is well risen, and your graft well shot, that the bark will rise
easily and cleanly, both of stock and graft, which time I cannot appoint,
because both the years do differ in earliness, and the several parts or
countries of this Land likewise one from another, but most usually in these
Southern parts, from the beginning of June unto the end of it, or to the
middle of July, or either somewhat before or after. First (as I said) having
taken the fittest time of the year, you must take especial care, that your
grafts be well grown, and of the same years shoot, and also that the buds or
eyes have but single leaves at them, as near as you can: for I would utterly
refuse those buds that have above two leaves as unprofitable, either in Peaches
or any other fruit; and therefore see that your grafts or cyons be taken from
the chiefest place of the tree, that is, either from the top, or from a
sunnie side thereof, and not from the contrary side if you may otherwise, nor
from any vnder-boughes; for seeing your graft is so small a thing, you had
need take the more care that it be the best and fairest. You must to take off
this eye or budde from the sprigge, have a small sharp penknife, the end of
the haft being made flat and thin, like a chessell or wedge, the figure
whereof is set forth at the letter B, and a pen or goose quill cut, to be less
then half round, and to be broad at the end, but not sharp pointed like a
pen, or else such a piece of bone or Iuorie made in that fashion as the quill
is, to be thin, hollow, or half round, the figures of both which are marked
with the letters C, D. with your knife cut the bark of the bud (having first
cut off the leaf, leaving only the short foote-stalke thereof at the bud)
about a strawes breadth above the eye thereof half round, and then from that
round or overthwart cut, with your knife cut it down on both sides of the eye,
close to the bud slopewise about an inch long or thereabouts, that it be broad
at the head above the eye, and pointing at the end like a shield or scutcheon;
and then cutting away the rest of the bark from about it, with the thin flat
end of the haft of your knife raise up both sides of your bud a little, and
with your quill or bone put under the bark, raise your budde, and thrust it
quite off, beginning at the top or head of your eye; but see that you thrust
it off close to the wood of the branch or sprigge, and that you do not leave
the eye of the budde behind sticking upon the branch; for if that eye be left
or lost, your bud is worth nothing; you must cast it away, and cut another that
may have that eye abiding within the budde on the inside: you may perceive if
that eye be wanting, if you see an empty hole in the place where the eye
should be, to fill it up on the inside thereof; thus having taken off your bud
well and cleanly, which is set forth unto you at the figures 3 and 4. presently
set it on the tree you would graft (for your small bud can abide no delay, lest
by taking the air too long it become dry, and nothing worth) in this manner:
Cut the bark of your tree you would graft in a smooth place, at what height
you please, first above or overthwart, and then down right in the middle
thereof, more then an inch long, the figure whereof you shall have at the
figure 1. and then raise up both sides of the bark, first one, and then
another, with the flat and thin haft end of your knife, a pretty way inwards
(for if the bark will not rise easily, the stock is not then fit to graft
upon) put in your budde into the cleft with the point downwards, holding the
stalk of the leaf that is with the budde between your fingers of the one
hand, and opening the cleft with the flat end of your knife with the other
hand, that the head of your bud may be put close under the overthwart cut in
the stock or tree (which must not be raised or stirred as the sides are) and
the eye of the bud stand just in the middle of the slit that is downeright, and
then closing the bark of the stock or tree softly unto the bud thus put in
with your fingers, let it be bound gently with a small long piece of baste, or
other such like soft thing, first above the eye, and then compassing it below
as close as you can, but not too hard in any case, until you have bound it all
over the slit you made, especially the lower end, lest any wind get in to dry
and spoil it; and having tied both ends thereof fast, leave it so for a
fornight or somewhat more, in which space it will take and hold, if it be well
done, which you shall perceive, if the bud abide green, and turn not black,
when you have unloosed the tying; for if it hold fast to the tree, and be fresh
and good, tie it up gently again, and so leave it for a fortnight longer, or a
month if you will, and then you may take away your binding clean: this budde
will (if no other mischance happen unto it) spring and shoot forth the next
year, (and sometimes the same year, but that is seldom) and therefore in the
beginning of the year, cut off the head of the grafted tree about an handful
above the grafted place, until the graft be grown strong, and then cut it off
close, that the head may be covered with the graft, and do not suffer any buds
to sprout besides the graft, either above or below it. If you graft diverse
buds upon one stock (which is the best way) let that only remain and abide
that shoots best forth, and rub off, or take away the other: the several
parts of this grafting I have caused to be expressed for your further
information.

5. Grafting in the scutcheon is accounted another kind of grafting, and
differs very little from grafting in the budde: the difference chiefly
consists in this, that in stead of the down right slit, and that above
overthwart, they take away just so much bark of the great tree, as your bud is
in bigness, which usually is a little larger then the former, and placing it
therein, they bind it as formerly is said: some use for this purpose a pair
of compasses, to give the true measure both of bud and stock; this manner of
grafting is most used upon greater trees, whose young branches are too high to
graft upon in the former manner, and whose tops they cut off (for the most part)
at the latter end of the next year after the bud is taken: both these ways
were invented to save the loss of trees, which are more endangered by grafting
in the stock, then any of these ways; and besides, by these ways you may
graft at a far grea height without loss.

CHAP. V. Of the manner of grafting and propagating all sorts of Roses.
Having now spoken of the grafting of trees, let me adioyne the properties of
Roses, which although they better fit a Garden then an Orchard, yet I could not
in a fitter place express them then here, both for the name and affinity of
grafting, and because I do not express it in the first part. All sorts of
Roses may be grafted (although all sorts are not, some serving rather for
stocks for others to be grafted on) as easily as any other tree, and is only
performed, by inoculating in the same manner I have set down in the former
Chapter of grafting trees in the bud; for both stock and budde must be dealt
with after the same fashion. And although some have boasted of grafting Roses
by slicing or whipping, as they call it, or in the stock, after the first
manner, set down in the former Chapter, yet I think it rather a brag, not
having seen or heard any true effect proceed from that relation. The sweet
Briar or Eglantine, the white and the Damask Roses, are the chiefest stocks
to graft upon. And if you graft low or near the ground, you may by laying
down that graft within the ground, after it has bin shot out well, and of a
years growth, by pinning it fast down with short sticks, a thwart or acrosse,
cause that grafted branch, by taking root, to become a natural Rose, such as
the graft was, which being separated and transplanted after it has taken root
well, will prosper as well as any natural sucker. And in this manner, by laying
down branchese at length into the ground, if they be full of spreading small
branches, you may increase all sorts of Roses quickly and plentifully; for they
will shoot forth roots at the joint of every branch: But as for the manner of
grafting white Roses or Damask upon Broom stalks or Barbary bushes, to cause
them to bring forth double yellow Roses, or upon a Willowe, to bear green
Roses, they are all idle conceits, as impossible to be effected, as other
things, whereof I have spoken in the ninth Chapter of my first part, concerning
a Garden of flowers, unto which I refer you to be satisfied with the reasons
there alleged. And it is the more needless, because we have a natural double
yellow Rose of it own growing. The sowing of the seeds of Roses (which are
sometimes found upon most sorts of Roses, although not every year, and in
every place) has bin formerly much used; but now the laying down of the
young shootes is a way for increase so much used, being safe and very speedy
to take, especially for those Roses that are not so apt to give suckers, that
it has almost taken quite away the use of sowing of the seeds of Roses, which
yet if any one be disposed to make the trial, they must gather the seed out
of the round heads, from amongst the down, wherein they lie very like unto
the berries of the Eglantine or sweet Briar bush, and especially of those
Roses that be of the more single kinds, which are more apt to give berries
for seed then the more double, although sometimes the double Roses yield the
like heads or berries. Their time of sowing is in the end of September (yet
some reserve them until February) and their manner of noursing is to be
transplanted, after the first or second years growth, and tended carefully,
that while they are young they be not lost for want of moisture in the dry time
of Summer.

CHAP. VI. Certain rules and observations in and after grafting, not remembered
in the former Chapter.
THe time of some manners of grafting being not mentioned before, must here be
spoken of. For the grafting of all sorts of trees in the stock, the most
usual time is from the middle of February until the middle of March, as the
year and the country is more forward or backward, with us about London we
never pass midde March: but because the May Cherrie is first ripe, and
therefore of a very forward nature, it does require to be grafted somewhat
sooner then others. The time of gathering likewise, or cutting your grafts for
grafting in the stock, is to be observed, that they be not long gathered
before they be grafted, for fear of being too dry, which I commend, howsoever
diverse say, if they be long kept they are not the worse; and therefore if you
be forced to have your grafts from far, or by some other chance to keep them
long, be careful to keep them moist, by keeping their ends stuck in moist
clay; but if near hand, neglect no time I say after the cutting of them for
their grafting, but either the same, or the next day, or very speedily after,
in the mean time being put into the ground to keep them fresh. The grafts
taken from old trees, because they are stronger, and shoot forth sooner, are
to be sooner grafted then those that are taken from younger trees: of a good
branch may be made two, and sometimes three grafts sufficient for any
reasonable stock. For whipping, the time is somewhat later then grafting in
the stock, because it is performed on younger trees, which (as I said before)
do not so early bud or shoot forth as the elder. Inarching likewise is
performed much about the later end of the grafting time in the stock; for
being both kinds thereof they require the same time of the year. The times of
the other manners of graftings are before expressed, to be when they have shot
forth young branches, from whence your buds must be taken; and therefore need
not here again to be repeated. If a graft in the stock does happen not to
shoot forth when others do (so as it holds green) it may perchance shoot out
a month or two after, and do well, or else after Midsummer, when a second time
of shooting, or the after Spring appears: but have an especial care, that
you take not such a graft that shall have nothing but buds for flowers upon it,
and not an eye or bud for leaves (which you must be careful to distinguish)
for such a graft after it has shot out the flowers must of necessity dye, not
having wherewith to maintain it self. Also if your good graft do miss, and
not take, it does hazard your stock at the first time, yet many stocks do
recover to be grafted the second time; but twice to fail is deadly, which is
not so in the inoculating of buds in the green tree: for if you fail therein
three, or three times three, yet every wound being small, and the tree still
growing green, will quickly recover it, and not be afterward seen. Some use
to graft in the stock the same year they remove the stock, to save time, and
a second check by grafting; but I like better both in grafting in the stock,
and in the bud also, that your trees might be planted in the places where you
would have them grow, for a year or two at the least before you graft them,
that after grafting there should be no remouall, I need not be tedious, not
yet I hope very sollicitous to remember many other triuiall, or at the least
common known things in this matter. First, for the time to remove trees, young
or old, grafted or vngrafted, to be from a fortnight after Michaelmas until
Candlemas, or if need be, somewhat after, yet the sooner your remove is, the
better your trees will thrive, except it be in a very moist ground. For the
manner or way to set them: viz. in the high and dry grounds set them deeper,
both to have the more moisture, and to be the better defended from winds; and
in the lower and moister grounds shallower, and that the earth be mellow, well
turned up, and that the finer earth be put among the small roots, wherein
they may spread, and afterward gently trodden down, that no hollownesse
remain among the roots: as also that after setting (if the time be not
ouermoist) there may be some water powered to the roots, to moisten and fasten
them the better; and in the dry time of Summer, after the setting, let them not
want moisture, if you will have them thrive and prosper; for the want thereof
at that time, has often Killed many a likely tree. To stake and fence them
also if need be after they are new set, and so to continue for two or three
years after, is very expedient, lest winds or other casualties spoil your
pains, and overthrow your hopes. And likewise to defend your grafts from birds
lighting on them, to break or displace them, to stick some pricks or sharp
pointed sticks longer then your graft into your clay, that so they may be a
sure defense of it: As also to tie some woollen clothes about the lower end of
your stocks, or thrust in some thorns into the ground about the roots, to
defend them from having their barks eaten by ^^^nies, er hurt by some other
noisome vermin.

CHAP. VII. Observations for the dressing and well keeping of Trees and an
Orchard in good order.
THere are two manner of ways to dress and keep trees in good order, that
they may be both graceful and fruitful; the one is for wall-trees, the other
is for standards: for as their forms are different, so is their keeping or
ordering. Wall trees, because they are grafted low, and that their branches
must be plasht or tackt unto the wall to fasten them, are to be so kept, that
all their branches may be suffered to grow, that shoot forth on eithet side
of the body, and led either along the wall, or upright, and one to lap over
or under another as is convenient, and still with pieces of lists, parings of
felt, pieces of soft leather, or other such like soft thing compassing the
arms or branches, fastened with small or great nails, as need requires, to
the walls, only those buds or branches are to be nipped or cut off, that shoot
forward, and will not so handsomely be brought into conformity, as is fitting;
yet if the branches grow too thick, to hinder the good of the rest, or too
high for the wall, they may, nay they must be cut away or lopped off: and if
any dead branches also happen to be on the trees, they must be cut away, that
the rest may have the more liberty to thrive. Diverse also by carefully nipping
away the waste and superfluous buds, do keep their trees in conformity,
without much cutting. The time to pruine or plash, or tie up wall trees, is
usually from the fall of the leaf, to the beginning of the year, when they
begin to blossom, and most especially a little before or after Christmas: but
in any case not too late, for fear of rubbing off their buds. Some I know do
plash and tie up their wall trees after bearing time, while the leaves are
green, and their reason is, the buds are not so easy or apt to be rubbed
from the branches at that time, as at Christmas, when they are more grown: but
the leaves must needs be very cumbersome, to hinder much both the orderly
placing, and close fastening of them to the wall. This labor you must perform
every year in its due time; for if you shall neglect and ouerslip it, you
shall have much more trouble, to bring them into a fit order again, then at
the first. The standard trees in an Orchard must be kept in another order; for
whereas the former are suffered to spread at large, these must be pruined both
from superfluous branches that ouerload the trees, and make them less
fruitful, as well as less sightly, and the under or water boughs likewise,
that draw much nourishment from the trees, and yet themselves little the
better for it, I mean to give fruit. If therefore your Orchard consist of
young trees, with a little care and pains it may be kept in that comely order
and proportion it was first destined unto; but if it consist of old grown
trees, they will not without a great deal of care and pains be brought into
such conformity, as is befitting good and comely trees: for the mark of those
boughs or branches that are cut off from young trees, will quickly be healed
again, the bark growing quickly over them, whereby they are not worse for
their cutting; but an old tree if you cut off a bough, you must cut it close
and cleanly, and lay a searcloth of tallow, wax, and a little pitch melted
together upon the place, to keep off both the wind, sun, and rain, until
the bark have covered it over again: and in this manner you must deal
withal such short stumps of branches, as are either broken short off with the
wind, or by carelessness of want of skill, or else such arms or branches as
are broken off close, or sliued from the body of the tree: for the rain
beating and falling into such a place, will in short time rotte your tree, or
put it in danger, besides the deformity. Some use to fill up such an hole with
well tempered clay, and tacke a cloth or a piece of leather over it until it
be recovered, and this is also not amiss. Your young trees, if they stand in
any good ground, will be plentiful enough in shooting forth branches; be
careful therefore if they grow too thick, that you pruine away such as grow
too close (and will, if they be suffered, spoil one another) as they may be
best spared, that so the sun, air, and rain may have free access to all
your branches, which will make them bear the more plentifully, and ripen them
the sooner and the more kindly. If any boughs grow at the top too high,
cut them also away, that your trees may rather spread then grow too high. And
so likewise for the under boughs, or any other that by the weight of fruit
fall or hang down, cut them off at the half, and they will afterward rise
and shoot upwards. You shall observe, that at all those places where any
branches have been cut away, the sap will ever be ready to put forth: if
therefore you would have no more branches rise from that place, rub off or
nippe off such buddes as are not to your mind, when they are new shot: and
thus you may keep your trees in good order with a little pains, after you have
thus pruined and dressed them. One other thing I would advertise you of, and
that is how to preserve a fainting or decaying tree which is ready to perish,
if it be not gone too far or past cure, take a good quantity of ox or horse
blood, mix therewith a reasonable quantity of sheep or pigeons dung, which
being laid to the root, will by the often raines and much watering recover it
self, if there be any possibility; but this must be done in January or
February at the furthest.

CHAP. VIII. Diverse other observations to be remembered in the well keeping of
an Orchard.
THere be diverse other things to be mentioned, whereof care must be had, either
to do or avoid, which I think fit in this Chapter promiscuously to set down,
that there may be nothing wanting to furnish you with sufficient knowledge of
the care, pains, and casualties that befall an Orchard: for it has many
enemies, and every one labors as much as in them lie, to spoil you of your
pleasure, or profit, or both, which must be both speedily and carefully
prevented and helped; and they are these: Moss, Caterpillars, Ants, Earwigs,
Snailes, Moales, and Birds. If Moss begin to ouergrowe your trees, look to it
betimes, lest it make your trees barren: Some use to hacke, and crossehacke, or
cut the bark of the bodies of their trees, to cause it fall away; but I fear
it may endanger your trees. Others do either rub it off with a hair cloth,
or with a long piece of wood formed like a knife, at the end of a long stick
or pole, which if it be used cautelously without hurting the buds, I like
better. Caterpillars, some smoke them with burning wet straw or hay, or such
like stuff under the trees; but I do not greatly like of that way: others cut
off the boughs whereon they breed, and tread them under their feet, but that
will spoil too many branches; and some kill them with their hands: but some
do use a new devised way, that is, a pomp made of lattin or tin,
spout-fashion, which being set in a tubbe of water under or near your trees,
they will cause the water to rise through it with such a force, and through the
branches, that it will wash them off quickly. To destroy Ants, that eat your
fruit before and when it is ripe, some use to anoint the bodies of their trees
with tar, that they may not creep up on the branches; but if that do not
help, or you will not use it, you must be careful to find out their hill,
and turn it up, pouring in scalding water, either in Summer, but especially if
you can in Winter, and that will surely destroy them. I have spoken of Earwigs
in the first part of this work, entreating of the annoyances of Gilloflowers,
and therefore I refer you thereunto: yet one way more I will here relate
which some do use, and that is with hollow canes of half a yard long or more,
open at both ends for them to creep in, and stuck or laid among the branches
of your trees, will soon draw into them many Earwigs, which you may soon
kill, by knocking the cane a little upon the ground, and treading on them with
your foot. Snailes must be taken with your hands, and that every day,
especially in the morning when they will be creeping abroad. Moales by running
under your trees make them less fruitful, and also put them in danger to be
blown down, by leaving the ground hollow, that thereby the roots have not
that strength in the ground, both to shoot and to hold, that otherwise they
might have. Some have used to put Garlic, and other such like things into
their holes, thinking thereby to drive them away, but to no purpose: others
have tried many other ways; but no way does avail any thing, but killing
them either with a Moale spade, or a trappe made for the purpose as many do
know: and they must be watched at their principal hill, and trenched round,
and so to be caught. Birds are another enemy both to your trees and fruit; for
the Bullfinch will destroy all your stone fruit in the budde, before they
flower, if you suffer them, and Crows, etc. when your Cherries are ripe: for
the smaller birds, Lime twigs set either near your trees, or at the next water
where they drink, will help to catch them and destroy them. And for the
greater birds, a stone bow, a birding or fowling piece will help to lessen
their number, and make the rest more quiet: or a mill with a clacke to scarre
them away, until your fruit be gathered. Some other annoyances there are, as
suckers that rise from the roots of your trees, which must be taken away
every year, and not suffered to grow any thing great, for fear of robbing
your trees of their liuelihood. Bark bound, is when a tree does not shoot and
increase, by reason the bark is as it were dry, and will not suffer the sap
to pass unto the branches: take a knife therefore, and slit the bark down
almost all the length of the tree in two or three places, and it will remedy
that evil, and the tree will thrive and come forward the better after. Bark
pilled is another evil that happens to some trees, as well young as old,
either by reason of casual hurts, or by the gnawing of beasts, howsoever it
be, if it be any great hurt, lay a plaster thereon made of tallow, tar,
and a little pitch, and bind it thereto, letting it so abide until the wound
be healed: yet some do only apply a little clay or loame bound on with ropes
of hay. The Canker is a shrewd disease when it happens to a tree; for it will
eat the bark round, and so kill the very heart in a little space. It must be
looked unto in time before it has run too far; most men do wholly cut
away as much as is fretted with the Canker, and then dress it, or wet it with
vinegar or Cowes piss, or Cowes dung and urine, etc. until it be destroyed,
and after healed again with your salve before appointed. There are yet some
other enemies to an Orchard: for if your fence be not of brick or stone, but
either a mudde wall, or a quick set or dead hedge, then look to it the more
carefully, and prevent the coming in of either horse, or kine, sheep, goats,
or dear, hare, or conie; for some of them will break through or over to bark
your trees, and the least hole almost in the hedge will give admittance to
hares and conies to do the like. To prevent all which, your care must be
continual to watch them or avoid them, and to stop up their entrance. A
dog is a good servant for many such purposes, and so is a stone bow, and a
piece to make use of as occasion shall serve. But if you will take that
medicine for a Canker spoken of before, which is Cowes dung and urine mixed
together, and with a brush wash your trees often to a reasonable height, will
keep hares and conies from eating or barking your trees. Great and cold winds
do often make a great spoil in an Orchard, but great trees planted without
the compass thereof, as Wall-nuts, Oaks, Elmes, Ashes, and the like, will
stand it in great stead, to defend it both early and late. Thus have I showed
you most of the evils that may happen to an Orchard, and the means to help
them, and because the number is great and daily growing, the care and pains
must be continual, the more earnest and diligent, lest you lose that in a
moment that has been growing many years, or at the least the profit or beauty
of some years fruit.

CHAP. IX. The manner and way how to plant, order, and keep other trees that
bear green leaves continually.
THe way to order those trees that bear their leaves green continually, is
differing from all others that do not so: for neither are they to be planted
or removed at the time that all other trees are set, nor do they require that
manner of dressing, pruining and keeping, that others do. And although many
ignorant persons and Gardiners do remove Bay trees, and are so likewise
persuaded that all other trees of that nature, that is, that carry their green
leaves continually, may be removed in Autumn or Winter, as well as all other
trees may be; yet it is certain it is a great chance if they do thrive and
prosper that are set at that time, or rather it is found by experience, that
scarce one of ten prospers well that are so ordered. Now in regard that there
be diverse trees and shrubs mentioned here in this book that bear ever green
leaves, wherein there is very great beauty, and many take pleasure in them; as
the ordinary Bay, the Rose Bay, and the Cherry Bay trees, the Indian Fig, the
Cypress, the Pine tree, the Myrtle and dwarf Box, and many others; I will
here show you how to plant and order them, as is fittest for them. For in that
they do not shed their green leaves in winter as other trees do, you may in
reason be persuaded that they are of another nature; and so they are indeed:
for seeing they all grow naturally in warm Countries, and are from thence
brought unto us, we must both plant them in a warmer place, and transplant them
in a warmer time then other trees be, or else it is a great hazard if they do
not perish and dye, the cold and frosts in the winter being able to pierce them
through, if they should be transplanted in winter, before they have taken
root. You must observe and take this therefore for a certain rule, that you
always remove such trees or shrubbes as are ever green in the spring of the
year, and at no time else if you will do well, that is, from the end of
March, or beginning of April, unto the middle or end of May, especially your
more dainty and tender plants, shadowing them also for a while from the heat
of the Sun, and giving them a little water upon their planting or
transplanting; but such water as has not presently been drawn from a Well or
Pumpe, for that will go near to kill any plant, but such water as has stood in
the open air for a day at the least, if not two or three. Yet for dwarf Box
I confess it may endure one month to be earlier planted then the rest,
because it is both a more hardy and low plant, and thereby not so much subject
to the extremity of the cold: but if you should plant it before winter, the
frosts would raise it out of the ground, because it cannot so soon at that
time of the year take root, and thereby put it in danger to be lost. Moreover
all of them will not abide the extremity of our winter frosts, and therefore
you must of necessity house some of them, as the Rose Bay, Myrtle, and some
others, but the other sorts being set where they may be somewhat defended from
the cold winds, frostes, and snow in winter, with some covering or shelter for
the time, will reasonably well endure and bear their fruit, or the most of
them. If any be desirous to be furnished with store of these kinds of trees
that will be noursed up in our Country, he may by sowing the seed of them in
square or long wooden boxes or chests made for that purpose, gain plenty of
them: but he must be careful to cover them in winter with some straw or
fearne, or bean hame, or such like thing laid upon cross sticks to bear it
up from the plants, and after two or three years that they are grown somewhat
great and strong, they may be transplanted into such places you mean they
shall abide: yet it is not amiss to defend them the first year after they are
transplanted, for their more security: the seeds that are most usually sown
with us, are, the Cypress tree, the Pine tree, the Baye, the Pyracantha or
prickly Coral tree, and the Myrtle: the Rose Bay I have had also risen from
the seed that was fresh, and brought me from Spain. But as for Orange trees,
because they are so hardly preserved in this our cold climate (unless it be
with some that do bestow the housing of them, besides a great deal more of
care and respect unto them) from the bitterness of our cold long winter
weather (although their kernels being put into the ground in the Spring or
Summer, and if care be had of them and convenient keeping, will abide, and by
grafting the good fruit on the crab stock they may be in time nursed up) I
do not make any other especial account of them, nor give you any further
relation of their ordering. Now for the ordering of these trees after they are
either planted of young sets, or transplanted from the seed, it is thus: First
for Bay trees, the most usual way is to let them grow up high to be trees,
and many plant them on the North or East side of their houses that they may not
be scorched with the Sun; but the bitter winters which we often have, do
pinch them shrewdly, insomuch that it kills even well grown trees sometimes
down to the root: but some do make a hedge of them being planted in order,
and keep them low by lopping of them continually, which will make them bush and
spread. The Cypress tree is never lopped, but suffered to grow with all the
branches from a foot above the ground, if it may be, straight upright; for
that is his native grace and greatest beauty, and therefore the more branches
do dye that they must be cut away, the more you deforme his property. The
Pine tree may be used in the same manner, but yet it will better endure to
sustain pruining then the Cypress, without any such deformity. The
Laurocerasus or Cherry Bay may be diversely formed, that is, it may be either
made to grow into a tall tree by shredding still away the under branches, or
else by suffering all the branches to grow to be a low or hedge bush, and both
by the suckers and by laying down the lower branches into the earth, you may
soon have much increase; but this way will cause it to be the longer before
it bear any fruit. The Rose Baye will very hardly be increased either by
suckers or by layers, but must be suffered to grow without lopping, topping or
cutting. The Pyracantha or Prickly Coral tree may be made to grow into a
reasonable tall tree by shredding away the lower branches, or it may be
suffered to grow low into an hedge bush, by suffering all the branches to grow
continually, you may also propagate it by the suckers, or by laying down the
lower branches. The Myrtle of all sorts abides a low bush spreading his
branches full of sweet leaves and flowers, without any great increase of it
self, yet sometimes it gives suckers or shootes from the roots: but for the
more speedy propagating of them, some do put the cuttings of them into the
earth, and thereby increase them. There are some other trees that are not of
any great respect, as the Yew tree, and the Savine bush, both which may be
increased by the cuttings, and therefore I need not make any further relation
or amplification of them, and to say thus much of them all, is (I think)
sufficient for this Work.

CHAP. X. The ordering, curing, and propagating Vines of all sorts.
IN most places of this country there is small care or pains taken about the
ordering of Vines: it suffices for the most part with them that have any, to
make a frame for it to spread upon above a man's height, or to tacke it to a
wall or window, etc. and so to let it hang down with the branches and fruit,
until the weight thereof, and the force of winds do tear it down
oftentimes, and spoil the grapes: and this way does somewhat resemble that
course that the Vineyard keepers observe in the hot countries of Syria, Spain,
and Italy, and in the furthest parts of France as I hear likewise: for in most
of these hot countries they use to plant an Olive between two Vines, and let
them run thereupon. But many of the other parts of France, etc. do not
suffer any trees to grow among their Vines; and therefore they plant them
thick, and pruine them much and often, and keep them low in comparison of
the other way, fastening them to pearches or poles to hold them up. And
according to that fashion many have adventured to make Vineyards in England,
not only in these later days, but in ancient times, as may well witness the
sundry places in this Land, entitled by the name of Vineyards; and I have
read, that many Monasteries in this Kingdom having Vineyards, had as much
wine made therefrom, as sufficed their couents year by year: but long since
they have been destroyed, and the knowledge how to order a Vineyard is also
utterly perished with them. For although diverse, both Nobles and Gentlemen,
have in these later times endeavored to plant and make Vineyards, and to that
purpose have caused French men, being skillful in keeping and dressing of
Vines, to be brought over to perform it, yet either their skill failed them,
or their Vines were not good, or (the most likely) the soil was not fitting;
for they could never make any wine that was worth the drinking, being so small
and heartlesse, that they soon gave over their practice. And indeed the soil
is a maine matter to be chiefly considered to seat a Vineyard upon: for even
in France and other hot countries, according to the nature of the soil, so is
the relish, strength, and durabilitie of the wine. Now although I think it a
fruitless labor for any man to strive in these days to make a good Vineyard
in England, in regard not only of the want of knowledge, to make choice of the
fittest ground for such Vines as you would plant thereupon, but also of the true
manner of ordering them in our country; but most chiefly and above all others,
that our years in these times do not fall out to be so kindly and hot, to ripen
the grapes, to make any good wine as formerly they have done; yet I think it
not amiss, to give you instructions how to order such Vines as you may nourse
up for the pleasure of the fruit, to eat the grapes being ripe, or to preserve
and keep them to be eaten almost all the winter following: And this may be
done without any great or extraordinary pains. Some do make a low wall, and
plant their Vines against it, and keep them much about the height thereof, not
suffering them to rise much higher: but if the high brick or stone walls of
your Garden or Orchard have buttresses thereat, or if you cause such to be
made, that they be somewhat broad forwards, you may the more conveniently
plant Vines of diverse sorts at them, and by sticking down a couple of good
stakes at every buttresse, of eight or ten foot high above ground, tacking a
few lathes acrosse upon those stakes, you may thereunto tie your Vines, and
carry them thereon at your pleasure: but you must be careful to cut them every
year, but not too late, and so keep them down, and from far spreading, that
they never run much beyond the frame which you set at the buttresses: as also
in your cutting you never leave too many joints, nor yet too few, but at the
third or fourth joint at the most cut them off. I do advise you to these
frames made with stakes and lathes, for the better ripening of your grapes: for
in the blooming time, if the branches of your vines be too near the wall, the
reflection of the Sun in the day time, and the cold in the night, do
oftentimes spoil a great deal of fruit, by piercing and withering the tender
foot-stalkes of the grapes, before they are formed, whereas when the blossoms
are past, and the fruit growing of some bigness, then all the heat and
reflection you can give them is fit, and therefore cut away some of the
branches with the leaves, to admit the more Sun to ripen the fruit. For the
diverse sorts of grapes I have set them down in the Book following, with
brief notes upon every of them, whether white or black, small or great,
early or late ripe; so that I need not here make the same relation again.
There does happen some diseases to Vines sometimes, which that you may help, I
think it convenient to inform you what they are, and how to remedy them when
you shall be troubled with any such. The first is a luxurious spreading of
branches and but little or no fruit: for remedy whereof, cut the branches
somewhat more near then usual, and bare the root, but take heed of wounding
or hurting it, and in the hole put either some good old rotten stable dung of
Horses, of else some Ox blood new taken from the beasts, and that in the
middle of January or beginning of February, which being well tempered and
turned in with the earth, let it so abide, which no doubt, when the comfort of
the blood or dung is well soaked to the bottom by the raines that fall
thereon, will cause your Vine to fructify again. Another fault is, when a
Vine does not bring the fruit to ripeness, but either it withers before it
be grown of any bigness, or presently after the blooming: the place or the
earth where such a Vine stands, assuredly is too cold, and therefore if the
fault be not in the place, which cannot be helped without removing to a
better, dig out a good quantity of that earth, and put into the place thereof
some good fresh ground well heartned with dung, and some sand mixed therewith
(but not salt or salt water, as some do advise, nor yet urine, as others would
have) and this will hearten and strengthen your Vine to bear out the frut unto
maturitie. When the leaves of a Vine in the end of Summer or in Autumn,
untimely do turn either yellow or red, it is a great sign the earth is too
hot and dry; you must therefore in stead of dung and sand, as in the former
defect is said, put in some fresh loame or short clay, well mixed together with
some of the earth, and so let them abide, that the frosts may mellow them. And
lastly, a Vine sometimes bears some store of grapes, but they are too many
for it to bring to ripeness; you shall therefore help such a Vine (which no
doubt is of some excellent kind, for they are most usually subject to this
fault) by nipping away the blossoms from the branches, and leaving but one or
two bunches at the most upon a branch, until the Vine be grown older, and
thereby stronger, and by this mean inured to bear out all the grapes to
ripeness. These be all the diseases I know do happen to Vines: for the
bleeding of a Vine it seldom happens of it self, but comes either by
cutting it untimely, that is, too late in the year, (for after January, if
you will be well advised, cut not any Vine) or by some casual or wilful
breaking of an arm or a branch. This bleeding in some is unto death, in others
it stays after a certain space of it self: To help this inconvenience,
some have seared the place where it bleedeth with an hot iron, which in many
have done but a little good; others have bound the bark close with packe-thred
to stay it; and some have tied over the place, being first dried as well as may
be, a plaster made with wax rossen and turpentine while it is warm. Now for
the propagating of them: You must take the fairest and goalest shot branches of
one years growth, and cut them off with a piece of the old wood unto it, and
these being put into the ground before the end of January at the furthest,
will shoot forth, and take root, and so become Vines of the same kind from
whence you took them. This is the most speedy way to have increase: for the
laying down of branches to take root, does not yield such store so
plentifully, nor do suckers rise from the roots so abundantly; yet both
these ways do yield Vines, that being taken from the old stocks will become
young plants, fit to be disposed of as any shall think meet.

CHAP. XI. The way to order and preserve grapes, fit to be eaten almost all the
Winter long, and sometimes unto the Spring.
ALthough it be common and usual in the parts beyond the Sea to dry their
grapes in the Sun, thereby to preserve them all the year, as the Raisins of
the Sun are, which cannot be done in our Country for the want of sufficient
heat thereof at that time: or otherwise to scald them in hot water (as I
hear) and afterward to dry them, and so keep them all the year, as our
Malaga Raisins are prepared that are packed up into Frayles: yet I do intend
to show you some other ways to preserve the grapes of our Country fresh, that
they may be eaten in the winter both before and after Christmas with as much
delight and pleasure almost, as when they were new gathered. One way is, when
you have gathered your grapes you intend to keep, which must be in a dry time,
and that all the shrunk, dried, or evil grapes in every bunch be picked away,
and having provided a vessel to hold them, be it of wood or stone which you
will, and a sufficient quantity of fair and clean dry sand; make stratum
super stratum of your grapes and the sand, that is, a lay of sand in the
bottom first, and a lay of grapes upon them, and a lay or strowing again of
sand upon those grapes, so that the sand may cover every lay of grapes a
fingers breadth in thickness, which being done one upon another until the
vessel be full, and a lay of sand uppermost, let the vessel be stopped close,
and set by until you please to spend them, being kept in some dry place and
in no sellar: let them be washed clean in fair water to take away the sand
from so many you will spend at a time. Another way is (which Camerarius sets
down he was informed the Turks use to keep grapes all the winter unto the
next summer) to take so much meal of Mustard seed, as will serve to strew
upon grapes, until they have filled their vessels, whereon afterward they
pour new wine before it has boiled, to fill up their vessels therewith, and
being stopped up close, they keep them a certain time, and selling them with
their liquour to them that will use them, they do wash the seeds or meal
from them when they use them. Another way is, that having gathered the fairest
ripe grapes, they are to be cast upon threads or strings that are fastened at
both ends to the side walks of a chamber, near unto the seeling thereof, that
no one bunch touch another, which will be so kept a great while, yet the
chamber must be well defended from the frosts, and cold winds that pierce in
at the windows, lest they perish the sooner: and some will dippe the ends of
the branches they hang up first in molten pitch, thinking by searing up the
ends to keep the bunches the better; but I do not see any great likelihood
therein. Your chamber or closet you appoint out for this purpose must also be
kept somewhat warm, but especially in the more cold and frostie time of the
year, lest it spoil all your cost and pains, and frustrate you of all your
hopes: but although the frosts should pierce and spoil some of the grapes on a
bunch, yet if you be careful to keep the place warm, the fewer will be
spoiled. And thus have I showed you the best directions to order this Orchard
rightly, and all the ways I know are used in our Country to keep grapes good
any long time after the gathering, in regard we have not that comfort of a
hotter Sun to preserve them by its heat.

The fruits themselves shall follow every one in their order; the lower
shrubbes or bushes first, and the greater afterward.

THE THIRD PART CALLED THE ORCHARD,
COntaining all sorts of trees bearing fruit for man's use to eat, proper and
fit for to plant an Orchard in our climate and country: I bound it with this
limitation, because both Dates, Olives, and oother fruits, are planted in the
Orchards of Spain, Italy, and other hot countries, which will not abide in
ours. Yet herein I will declare whatsoever Art, striving with Nature, can cause
to prosper with us, that whosoever will, may see what can be effected in our
country. And first to begin with the lower shrubbes or bushes, and after
ascend to the higher trees.

CHAP. I.
Rubus Idaeus. Raspis.
THe Raspis berrie is of two sorts, white and red, not differing in the form
either of bush, leaf, or berry, but only in the color and taste of the
fruit. The Raspis bush has tender whitish stemmes, with reddish small pricks
like hairs set round about them, especially at the first when they are young;
but when they grow old they become more woody and firm, without any show of
thorns or prickles upon them, and has only a little hairinesse that covers
them: the leaves are somewhat rough or rugged, and wrinkled, standing three or
five upon a stalk, somewhat like unto Roses, but greater, and of a grayer
green color: the flowers are small, made of fine whitish round leaves, with a
dash as it were of blush cast over them, many standing together, yet every one
upon his own stalk, at the tops of the branches; after which come up small
berries, somewhat bigger then Strawberries, and longer, either red or white,
made of many grains, more eminent then in the Strawberry, with a kind of
douninesse cast over them, of a pleasant taste, yet somewhat sour, and nothing
so pleasant as the Strawberrie. The white Raspis is a little more pleasant then
the red, wherein there is small seed enclosed: the roots creep under ground
very far, and shoot up again in many places, much increasing thereby.

There is another whose stem and branches are wholly without prickles: the
fruit is red, and somewhat longer, and a little more sharp.

The Use of Raspis.
The leaves of Raspis may be used for want of Bramble leaves in gargles, and
other decoctions that are cooling and drying, although not fully to that effect.

The Conserve or Syrup made of the berries, is effectual to cool an hot
stomach, helping to refresh and quicken up those that are overcome with
faintness.

The berries are eaten in the Summer time, as an afternoones dish, to please
the taste of the sick as well as the sound.

The juice and the distilled water of the berries are very comfortable and
cordial.

It is generally held of many, but how true I know not, that the red wine that
is usually sold at the Vintners, is made of the berries of Raspis that grow in
colder countries, which gives it a kind of harshnesse: And also that of the
same berries growing in hotter climates, which gives unto the wine a more
pleasant sweetness, is made that wine which the Vintners call Alligant: but we
have a Vine or Grape come to us under the name of the Alligant Grape, as you
shall find it set down hereafter among the Grapes; and therefore it is likely
to be but an opinion, and no truth in this, as it may be also in the other.

CHAP. II.
Ribes rubra, alba, nigra. Currants red, white, and black.
THe bushes that bear those berries, which are usually called red Currants, are
not those Currants either blew or red, that are sold at the Grocers, nor any
kind thereof; for that they are the grapes of a certain Vine, as shall be
showed by and by: but a far differing kind of berry, whereof there are three
sorts, red, white, and black.

The red Curran bush is of two sorts, and grows to the height of a man,
having sometimes a stem of two inches thickness, and diverse arms and
branches, covered with a smooth, dark, brownish bark, without any prick or
thorn at all upon any part thereof, whereon do grow large cornered blackish
green leaves, cut in on the edges, seeming to be made of five parts, almost
like a Vine leaf, the ends a little pointing out, and standing one above
another on both sides of the branches: the flowers are little and hollow,
coming forth at the joints of the leaves, growing many together on a long
stalk, hanging down above a fingers length, and of an herbie color: after
which come small round fruit or berries, green at the first, and red as a
Cherry when they are ripe, of a pleasant and tart taste: the other differs
not in any other thing then in the berries, being twice as big as the
former: the root is woody, and spreads diversely.

The white Curran bush rises usually both higher then the red, and straighter
or more upright, bigger also in the stem, and covered with a whiter bark:
the leaves are cornered, somewhat like the former, but not so large: the
flowers are small and hollow like the other, hanging down in the same manner
on long stalks, being of a whiter color: the berries likewise grow on the
long stalks, somewhat thicker set together, and of a clear white color, with
a little black head, so transparent that the seeds may be easily seen
thorough them, and of a more pleasant winie taste then the red by much.

The black Curran bush rises higher then the white, with more plentiful
branches, and more pliant and twiggie: the stem and the elder branches being
covered with a brownish bark, and the younger with a paler: the flowers are
also like unto little bottles as the others be, of a greenish purple color,
which turn into black berries, of the bigness of the smaller red Currants:
the leaves are somewhat like unto the leaves of the red Currants, but not so
large: both branches, leaves, and fruit have a kind of stinking sent with them,
yet they are not unwholesome, but the berries are eaten of many, without
offending either taste or smell.

The Use of Currants.
The red Currants are usually eaten when they are ripe, as a refreshing to an 1
Rubus Idaeus. The Raspis. 2 Ribes fructu rubro vel albo. White or red Currants.
3 Grossularia vulgaris. The ordinary Gooseberry 4 Grossularia fructu rubro. The
great red Gooseberry. 5 Grossularia aculeata. The prickly Gooseberry. 6
Oxyaecantha seu Berberis. The Barbary bush. 7 Auellana Byzantina. The Filberd
of Constantinople. 8 Auellana rubra nostras. The best red Filberd.
depiction of plants hot stomach in the heat of the year, which by the
tartness is much delighted. Some preserve them, and conserve them also as
other fruits, and spend them at need.

The white Currants, by reason of the more pleasant winie taste, are more
accepted and desired, as also because they are more dainty, and less common.

Some use both the leaves and berries of the black Currants in sawces, and
other meats, and are well pleased both with the savor and taste thereof,
although many mislike it.

CHAP. III.
Vva Crispa sieve Grossularia. Gooseberries or Feaberries.
We have diverse sorts of Gooseberries, besides the common kind, which is of
three sorts, small, great, and long. For we have three red Gooseberries, a
blew and a green.

The common Gooseberrie, or Feaberrie bush, as it is called in diverse Countries
of England, has oftentimes a great stem, covered with a smooth dark
colored bark, without any thorn thereon, but the elder branches have here
and there some on them, and the younger are whitish, armed with very sharp
and cruel crooked thorns, which no man's hand can well avoid that does handle
them, whereon are set very green and small cornered leaves cut in, of the
fashion almost of Smallage, or Hawthorne leaves, but broad at the stalk: the
flowers come forth single, at every joint of the leaf one or two, of a
purplish green color, hollow and turning up the brims a little: the berries
follow, bearing the flowers on the heads of them, which are of a pale green at
the first, and of a greenish yellow color when they are ripe, striped in
diverse places, and clear, almost transparent, in which the seed lies. In
some these berries are small and round; in others much greater; a third is
great, but longer then the other: all of them have a pleasant winie taste,
acceptable to the stomach of any (but the long kind has both the thicker
skin, and the worser taste of the other) and none have been distempered by the
eating of them, that ever I could hear of.

The first of the red Gooseberries is better known I think then the rest, and
by reason of the small bearing not much regarded; the stem is somewhat big,
and covered with a smooth dark colored bark, the younger branches are
whiter, and without any thorn or prick at all, so long, weak, small, and
slender, that they lie upon the ground, and will there root again: the leaves
are like unto the former Gooseberries, but larger: the flowers and berries
stand single, and not many to be found any year upon them, but are somewhat
long, and are as great as the ordinary Gooseberry, of a dark brownish red
color, almost blackish when they are ripe, and of a sweetish taste, but
without any great delight.

The second red Gooseberry rises up with a more straight stem, covered with
a brownish bark; the young branches are straight likewise, and whitish, and
grow not so thick upon it as the former red kind, and without any thorn also
upon them: the leaves are like unto the former red, but smaller: the berries
stand singly at the leaves as Gooseberries do, and are of a fine red color
when they are ripe, but change with standing to be of a darker red color, of
the bigness of the small ordinary Gooseberry, of a pretty tart taste, and
somewhat sweet withal.

The third red Gooseberry which is the greatest, and known but unto few, is so
like unto the common great Gooseberry, that it is hardly distinguished: the
fruit or berries grow as plentifully on the branches as the ordinary, and are
as great and round as the great ordinary kind, but reddish, and some of them
paler, with red stripes.

The blew Gooseberry rises up to be a bush like unto the red Curran, and of
the same bigness and height, with broader and redder leaves at the first
shooting out, then the second red Gooseberry: the berries are more sparingly
set on the branches, then on the small red, and much about the same bigness,
or rather lesser, of the color of a Damson, with an ouershadowing of a bluish
color upon them, as the Damson has, before it be handled or wiped away.

The green prickly Gooseberry is very like unto the ordinary Gooseberry in
stem and branches, but that they are not stored with so many sharp prickles;
but the young shootes are more plentiful in small prickles about, and the
green leaf is a little smaller: the flowers are alike, and so are the
berries, being of a middle size, and not very great, green when they are
thorough ripe as well as before, but mellower, and having a few small short
prickles, like small short hairs upon them, which are harmless, and without
danger to any the most dainty and tender palate that is, and of a very good
pleasant taste. The seed hereof has produced bushes bearing berries, having
few or no prickles upon them.

The Use of Gooseberries.
The berries of the ordinary Gooseberries, while they are small, green, and
hard, are much used to be boiled or scalded to make sauce, both for fish and
flesh of diverse sorts, for the sick sometimes as well as the sound, as also
before they be near ripe, to bake into tarts, or otherwise, after many
fashions, as the cunning of the Cook, or the pleasure of his commanders will
appoint. They are a fit dish for women with child to stay their longings, and
to procure an appetite unto meat.

The other sorts are not used in Cookery that I know, but serve to be eaten at
pleasure; but in regard they are not so tart before maturity as the former,
they are not put to those uses they be.

CHAP. IIII.
Oxyacantha, sed potius Berberis. Barberries.
THe Barberry bush grows oftentimes with very high stemmes, almost two men's
height, but usually somewhat lower, with many shootes from the root, covered
with a whitish rind or bark, and yellow underneath, the wood being white and
pithy in the middle: the leaves are small, long, and very green, nicked or
finely dented about the edges, with three small white sharp thorns, for the
most part set together at the setting on of the leaves: the flowers do grow
upon long clustering stalks, small, round, and yellow, sweet in smell white
they are fresh, which turn into small, long, and round berries, white at the
first, and very red when they are ripe, of a sharp sour taste, fit to set
their teeth on edge that eat them: the root is yellow, spreading far under
the upper part of the ground, but not very deep.

There is (as it is thought) another kind, whose berries are thrice as big
as the former, which I confess I have not seen, and know not whether it be
true or no: for it may peradventure be but the same, the goodness of the
ground and air where they grow, and the youngnesse of the bushes causing that
largeness, as I have observed in the same kind, to yield greater berries.

There is said to be also another kind, whose berries should be without stones
or seed within them, not differing else in any thing from the former: but
because I have long heard of it, and cannot understand by all the inquiry I
have made, that any has seen such a fruit, I rest doubtful of it.

The Use of Barberries.
Some do use the leaves of Barberries in the stead of Sorrel, to make sauce
for meat, and by reason of their sowrenesse are of the same quality.

The berries are used to be pickled, to serve to trim or set out dishes of
fish and flesh in broth, or otherwise, as also sometime to be boiled in the
broth, to give it a sharp relish, and many other ways, as a Master Cook can
better tell then my self.

The berries are preserved and conserved to give to sick bodies, to help to
cool any heat in the stomach or mouth, and quicken the appetite.

The depurate juice is a fine menstrue to dissolve many things, and to very
good purpose, if it be cunningly handled by an Artist.

The yellow inner bark of the branches, or of the roots, are used to be
boiled in Ale, or other drinks, to be given to those that have the yellow
iaundise: As also for them that have any fluxes of choler, to help to stay
and bind.

Clusius sets down a secret that he had of a friend, of a clean differing
property, which was, that if the yellow bark were laid in steep in white
wine for the space of three hours, and afterward drunk, it would purge one
very wonderfully.

CHAP. V.
Nux Auellana. The Filberd.
THe Filberd tree that is planted in Orchards, is very like unto the Hasell nut
tree that grows wild in the woods, growing upright, parted into many boughs
and tough pliable twigges, without knots, covered with a brownish, speckled,
smooth, thin rind, and green underneath: the leaves are broad, large,
wrinkled, and full of veins, cut in on the edges into deep dents, but not
into any gashes, of a dark green color on the vpperside, and of a grayish
ash color underneath: it has small and long catkins in stead of flowers, that
come forth in the Winter, when as they are firm and close, and in the Spring
open themselves somewhat more, growing longer, and of a brownish yellow color:
the nuts come not upon those stalks that bore those catkins, but by
themselves, and are wholly enclosed in long, thick, rough husks, bearded as
it were at the upper ends, or cut into diverse long iagges, much more then the
wood nut: the nut has a thin and somewhat hard shell, but not so thick and
hard as the wood nut, in some longer then in other, and in the long kind, one
has the skin white that covers the kernels, and another red.

There is another sort of the round kind that came from Constantinople, whose
husk is more cut, torn, or iagged, both above and below, then any of our
country; the bark also is whiter, and more rugged then ours, and the leaves
somewhat larger.

We have had from Virginia Hasell nuts, that have been smaller, rounder,
browner, thinner sheld, and more pointed at the end then ours: I know not if
any has planted of them, or if they differ in leaf or any thing else.

The Use of Filberds.
Filberds are eaten as the best kind of Hasell nuts, at bankets among other
dainty fruits, according to the season of the year, or otherwise, as every one
please: But Macer has a Verse, expressing prettily the nature of these nuts,
which is, Ex minimis nucibus nulli datur esca salubris. that is, There is no
wholesome food or nourishment had from these small kind of nuts.

Yet they are used sometime physically to be rested, and made into a Lohoc or
Electuary, that is used for the cough or cold. And it is thought of some, that
Mithridates meant the kernels of these nuts, to be used with Figs and Rue for
his Antidote, and not of Walnuts.

CHAP. VI.
Vitis. The Vine.
THere is so great diversities of Grapes, and so consequently of Vines that
bear them, that I cannot give you names to all that here grow with us: for John
Tradescante my very good friend, so often before remembered, has assured me,
that he has twenty sorts growing with him, that he never knew how or by what
name to call them. One description therefore shall serve (as I use to do in
such varieties) for all the rest, with the names afterward, of as many as we
can give, and the several forms, colors and proportions of the grapes.

The manured Vine, in the places where it has abiden long time, grows to
have a great body, stem or trunk, sometimes of the bigness of a man's arm,
sleeue and all, spreading branches if it be suffered without end or measure,
but usually stored with many arms or branches, both old and new, but weak,
and therefore must be sustained; whereof the old are covered with a thin scaly
rind, which will often chap and peele off of it self; the youngest being of a
reddish color, smooth and firm, with a hollownesse or pith in the middle:
from the ioints of the young branches, and sometimes from the body of the
elder, break out on every side broad green leaves, cut on the edges into
five divisions for the most part, and besides notched or dented about: right
against the leaf, and likewise at other joints of the branches, come forth
long twining or clasping tendrels, winding themselves about any thing stands
next unto them: at the bottom of these leaves come forth clusters of small
greenish yellow bloomes or flowers, and after them the berries, growing in the
same manner in clusters, but of diverse forms, colors, tastes and greatness.
For some grapes are great, others less, some very small (as the Currants that
the Grocers sell) some white, some red, blew, black, or partie-coloured, some
are are as it were square, others round: some the clusters are close, others
open, some are sweet, others sower or harsh, or of some other mixed taste;
every one differing from others, very notably either in taste, color or
form; within every one of which grapes, (and yet there is a grape without
stones) are contained one, two, or more kernels or stones, some of them being
small, others greater: the roots spread far and deep. They that keep their
Vines in the best order, do cut them low, not suffering them to grow high, or
with too many branches, whereby they grow the better, take up the lesser room,
and bring their grapes fairer and sweeter.

The kinds of Vines and Grapes.
Our ordinary Grape both white and red, which excels Crabs for veriuice,
and is not fit for wine with us.

The white Muscadine Grape is a very great Grape, sweet and firm, some of
the bunches have weighed six pound, and some of the grapes half an ounce.

The red Muscadine is as great as the white, and chiefly differs in color.

The Burlet is a very great white Grape, but fitter for veriuice then wine for
the most part; yet when a hot year happens fit for it, the Grape is pleasant.

The little black Grape that is ripe very early.

The Raisin of the Sun Grape is a very great Grape, and very great clusters,
of a reddish color when it is ripe with us, yet in an extraordinary hot
year, it has got a little blewnesse cast over it by the heat: but naturally
very blew.

The Curran Grape (or the Grape of Corinth) is the least Grape of all, and
bears both few, and very seldom with us, but in reasonable great clusters,
and of a blackish blew color, when they are ripe with us, and very sweet.
There is another sort of them that are red or brown, and of a sower taste,
nothing so sweet.

The Greek wine Grape is a blackish Grape, and very sweet.

The Frontignack is a white Grape, of a very sweet and delicate taste, as the
wine declares, that smells as it were of Musk.

The square Grape is reported to bear a Grape not fully round, but sided, or as
it were square, whereby it became so called.

The Damasco Grape is a great white grape, very sweet, and is the true Vva
Zibeba, that the Apothecaries should use in the Trochisci Ciphi: and such we
have had in former times come over unto us in great, long and round white
boxes, containing half an hundred weight a piece.

The Russet Grape is a reasonable fair grape, exceeding sweet and whitish,
with a thick skin, crusted over with a show of ash color.

The white long Grape is like unto a Pigeons egg, or as it were pointed
pendent like a Pearl.

The partie-coloured Grape is a reasonable great Grape, and discolored when it
is ripe, sometimes the whole bunches, and sometimes but some of the grapes
being parted whitish, and black half through, very variably.

The Rhenish wine Grape is a white Grape, and endures the cold of winter when
it comes early, more then the Muscadine before set down, and is nothing so
sweet.

The White wine Grape is very like unto the Rhine Grape, the soil only and
climate adding more sweetness unto the one then to the other.

The Claret wine Grape is altogether like the white Grape, but that it is not
white, but of a reddish color, which lying bruised upon the skins before they
are pressed, give that Claret tincture to the wine.

The Teint is a Grape of a deeper or darker color, whose juice is of so deep
a color, that it serves to color other wine.

The Bursarobe is a fair sweet white Grape of much esteem about Paris.

The Alligant is a very sweet Grape, giving so deep and lively a colored red
wine, that no other whatsoever is comparable to it, and therefore usually called
Spaniards blood.

The blew or black Grape of Orleans is another black Grape, giving a dark
colored sweet wine much commended in those parts.

The Grape without stones is also a kind by it self, and grows naturally
near Ascalon, as Brochard affirms, the wine whereof is read, and of a good
taste.

The Virginia Vine, whereof I must needs make mention among other Vines,
bears small Grapes without any great store of juice therein, and the stone
within it bigger then in any other Grape: naturally it runs on the ground,
and bears little.

The Use of Vines, Grapes, and other parts that come of them.
The green leaves of the Vine are cooling and binding, and therefore good to
put among other herbs that make gargles and lotions for sore mouths.

And also to put into the broths and drink of those that have hot burning
feauers, or any other inflammation.

They stay (as it is held for true) women's longings, if they be either taken
inwardly, or applied outwardly.

Wine is usually taken both for drink and medicine, and is often put into
sawces, broths, cawdles, and gellies that are given to the sick. As also into
diverse Physical drinks, to be as a vehiculum for the properties of the
ingredients.

It is distilled likewise after diners manners, with diverse things, for diverse
and sundry waters to drink, and for diverse purposes both inward and outward.

1 Vuae nigrae minores. The small black Grape. 2 Vuae caeruleae maiores. The
great blew Grape. 3 Vuae Moschatellinae. The Muscadine Grape. 4 Vuae
Suratenses. The Burlet Grape. 5 Vuae insold^^. The Raysins of the tun Grape.
6 Ficus. The Fig tree.
depiction of plants

Also distilled of it self, is called Spirit of wine, which serves to
dissolve, and to draw out the tincture of diverse things, and for many other
purposes.

The juice or veriuice that is made of green hard grapes, before they be ripe,
is used of the Apothecaries to be made into a Syrup, that is very good to
cool and refresh a faint stomach.

And being made of the riper grapes is the best veriuice, far exceeding that
which is made of crabs, to be kept all the year, to be put both into meats
and medicines.

The grapes of the best sorts of Vines are pressed into wine by some in these
days with us, and much more as I verily believe in times past, as by the name
of Vineyard given to many places in this Kingdom, especially where Abbeys and
Monasteries stood, may be coniectured: but the wine of late made has been
but small, and not durable, like that which comes from beyond Sea, whether
our unkindly years, or the want of skill, or a convenient place for a Vineyard
be the cause, I cannot well tell you.

Grapes of all sorts are familiarly eaten when they are ripe, of the sick
sometimes as well as the sound.

The dried grapes which we call great Raysins, and the Currants which we call
small Raysins, are much used both for meats, broths, and sawces, in diverse
manners, as this Country in general above any other, wherein many thousands
of Frailesfull, Pipes, Hogs-heads, and Buts full are spent yearly, that it
breeds a wonder in them of those parts where they grow and provide them, how
we could spend so many.

The Raysins of the Sun are the best dried grapes, next unto the Damasco, and
are very wholesome to eat fasting, both to nourish, and to help to loosen the
belly.

The dried Lees of wine called Argoll or Tartar, is put to the use of the
Goldsmith, Dyer, and Apothecary, who do all use it in several manners, uery
one in his art.

Of it the Apothecaries make Cremer Tartari, a fine medicine to be used, as
the Physician can best appoint, and does help to purge humors by the stool.

Thereof likewise they make a kind of water or oil, fit to be used, to take
away freckles, spots, or any such deformities of the face or skin, and to
make it smooth. It causes likewise hair to grow more abundantly in those
places where it naturally should grow.

The liquor of the Vine that runs forth when it is cut, is commended to be
good against the stone wheresoever it be; but that liquor that is taken from
the end of the branches when they are burnt, is most effectual to take away
spots and marks, ring-wormes and tetters in any place.

CHAP. VII.
Ficus. The Fig tree.
THe Fig trees that are noursed up in our country are of three sorts, whereof
two are high; the one bearing against a wall goodly sweet and delicate Figs,
called Figs of Algarua, and is bluish when it is ripe: the other tall kind is
nothing so good, neither does bear ripe Figs so kindly and well, and
peradventure may be the white ordinary kind that comes from Spain. The
third is a dwarf kind of Fig tree, not growing much higher then to a man's
body or shoulders, bearing excellent good Figs and blew, but not so large as
the first kind.

The Fig trees of all these three kinds are in leaves and growing one like
unto another, saving for their height, color, and sweetness of the fruit,
having many arms or branches, hollow or pithy in the middle, bearing very
large leaves, and somewhat thick, divided sometimes into three, but usually
into five sections, of a dark green color on the vpperside, and whitish
underneath, yielding a milkie juice when it is broken, as the branches also or
the figs when they are green: the fruit breaks out from the branches
without any blossom, contrary to all other trees of our Orchard, being round
and long, fashioned very like unto a small Pear, full of small white grains or
kernels within it, of a very sweet taste when it is ripe, and very mellow or
soft, that it can hardly be carried far without bruising.

The other two sorts you may easily know and understand, by so much as has
been said of them. Take only this more of the Fig tree, That if you plant it
not against a brick wall, or the wall of an house, etc. it will not ripen so
kindly. The dwarf Fig tree is more tender, and is therefore planted in great
square tubs, to be removed into the sun in the Summer time, and into the
house in Winter.

The Use of Figs.
Figs are served to the table with Raysins of the Sun, and blanched
Almonds, for a Lenten dish.

The Figs that grow with us when they are ripe, and fresh gathered, are eaten
of diverse with a little salt and pepper, as a dainty banquet to entertain a
friend, which seldom passes without a cup of wine to wash them down.

In Italy (as I have been informed by diverse Gentlemen that have lived there
to study physic) they eat them in the same manner, but dare not eat many
for fear of a fever to follow, they do account them to be such breeders of
blood, and heaters of it likewise.

The Figs that are brought us from Spain, are used to make Ptisan drinks,
and diverse other things, that are given them that have coughes or colds.

It is one of the ingredients also with Nuts and Rice, into Mithridates
counterpoison.

The small Figs that grow with us, and will not ripen, are preserved by the
Comfitmakers, and candid also, to serve as other moist or candid banqueting
stuff.

CHAP. VIII.
Sorbus. The Service tree.
THere are two kinds of Service trees that are planted in Orchards with us,
and there is also a wild kind like unto the later of them, with Ashen leaves,
found in the woods growing of it self, whose fruit is not gathered, nor used
to be eaten of any but birds. And there is another kind also growing wild
abroad in many places, taken by the Country people where it grows, to be a
Service tree, and is called in Latin, Aria Theophrasti, whole leaves are
large, somewhat like Nut tree leaves, but green above, and grayish underneath:
some do use the fruit as Services, and for the same purposes to good effect,
yet both of these wild kinds we leave for another work, and here declare
unto you only those two sorts are noursed up in our Orchards.

The more common or ordinary Service tree with us, is a reasonable great tree,
covered with a smooth bark, spread into many great arms, whereon are set
large leaves, very much cut in on the edges, almost like unto a Vine leaf, or
rather like unto that kind of Maple, that is usually called the Sycomore tree
with us: the flowers are white, and grow many clustering together, which after
bring forth small brown berries when they are ripe, of the bigness almost of
Hasell nuts, with a small tuft, as if it were a crown on the head, wherein are
small black kernels.

The other kind, which is more rare with us, and brought into this Land by
John Tradescante, heretofore often remembered, has diverse winged leaves, many
set together like unto an Ashen leaf, but smaller, and every one endented
about the edges: the flowers grow in long clusters, but nothing so many, or so
close set as the wild kind: the fruit of this tree is in some round like an
Apple, and in others a little longer like a Pear, but of a more pleasant taste
then the ordinary kind, when they are ripe and mellowed, as they use to do
with both these kinds, and with Medlars.

The Use of Services.
They are gathered when they grow to be near ripe (and that is never before
they have felt some frosts) and being tied together, are either hung up in some
warm room, to ripen them thoroughly, that they may be eaten, or (as some use
to do) lay them in straw, chafe, or branne, to ripen them.

They are binding, fit to be taken of them that have any scouring or laske, to
help to stay the flux; but take heed, lest if you bind too much, more pain
and danger may come thereof then of the scouring.

CHAP. IX.
Mespilus. The Medlar tree.
THere are three sorts of Medlers: The greater and the lesser English, and the
Neapolitan.

The great and the small English Medlar differ not one from the other in any
thing, but in the size of the fruit, except that the small kind has some
pricks or thorns upon it, which the great one has not, bearing diverse
boughs or arms, from whence break forth diverse branches, whereon are set
long and somewhat narrow leaves, many standing together; in the middle whereof,
at the end of the branch, comes the flower, which is great and white, made of
five leaves, broad at the ends, with a nicke in the middle of every one; after
which comes the fruit, being round, and of a pale brownish color, bearing a
crown of those small leaves at the top, which were the husk of the flower
before, the middle thereof being somewhat hollow, and is harsh, able to choke
any that shall eat it before it be made mellow, wherein there are certain
flat and hard kernels.

The Medlar of Naples grows likewise to be a reasonable great tree,
spreading forth arms and branches, whereon are set many gashed leaves,
somewhat like unto Hawthorne leaves, but greater, and likewise diverse thorns
in many places: the flowers are of an herbie green color, and small, which
turn into smaller fruit then the former, and rounder also, but with a small
head or crown at the top like unto it, and is of a more sweet and pleasant
taste then the other, with three seeds only therein ordinarily.

The Use of Medlars.
Medlars are used in the same manner that Services are, that is, to be eaten
when they are mellowed, and are for the same purposes to bind the body when
there is a cause: yet they as well as the Services, are often eaten by them
that have no need of binding, and but only for the pleasant sweetness of
them when they are made mellow, and sometimes come as a dish of ripe fruit at
their fit season, to be served with other sorts to the table.

CHAP. X.
Lotus. The Lote or Nettle tree.
THe first kind of Lote tree, whereof Dioscorides makes mention, is but of
one kind; but there are some other trees spoken of by Theophrastus, that may
be referred thereunto, which may be accounted as bastard kinds thereof, of
which I mean to entreat in this Chapter, having given you before the
description 1 Sorbus legitima. The true Service tree. 2 Sorbus vulgaris sieve
Torminalis. The ordinary Service tree. 3 Mespilus vulgaris. The common Me^lar
tree 4 Mespilus Aronia. The Medlar of Naples. 5 Lotus arbor. The Nettle tree. 6
Lotus Virginiana. The Pishamin or Virginia Plumme. 7 Cornus mas. The Cornell
Cherry tree.
depiction of plants of another kind hereof (by the opinion of good Authors)
under the name of Laurocerasus.

The first or true Lote tree grows to be a tree of a great height, whose
body and elder branches are covered with a smooth dark green bark, the
leaves are somewhat rough in handling, of a dark green color, long pointed,
and somewhat deep dented about the edges, somewhat like unto a Nettle leaf,
and oftentimes grow yellow toward Autumn: the flowers stand here and there
scattered upon the branches; after which come round berries like unto Cherries,
hanging downwards upon long foot-stalkes, green at the first, and whitish
afterward; but when they are ripe they become reddish, and if they be suffered
to hang too long on the branches, they grow blackish, of a pleasant austere
taste, not to be misliked, wherein is a hard round stone.

The second, which is a bastard kind, and called Guatacum Pataninum, grows
to be a fair tree, with a smooth dark green bark, shooting out many fair
great boughs, and also slender green branches, beset with fair broad green
leaves, almost like unto the leaves of the Cornell tree, but larger: the
flowers grow along the branches close unto them, without any or with a very
short foote-stalke consisting of four green leaves, which are as the husk,
containing within it a purplish flower, made of four leaves somewhat reddish:
the fruit stands in the middle of the green husk, green at the first, and
very harsh, but red and round when it is ripe, and somewhat like a Plumme, with
a small point or prick at the head thereof, and of a reasonable pleasant taste
or relish, wherein are contained flat and thick brown seeds or kernels, like
unto the kernels of Cassia Fistula, somewhat hard, and not so stony, but that
it may somewhat easily be cut with a knife.

The third is called in Virginia Pishamin, The Virginia Plumme (if it be not
all one with the former Guaiacana, whereof I am more then half persuaded) has
grown with us of the kernels that were sent out of Virginia, into great trees,
whose wood is very hard and brittle, and somewhat white withal: the branches
are many, and grow slender to the end, covered with a very thin greenish
bark, whereon do grow many fair broad green leaves, without dent or notch on
the edges, and so like unto the former Guaiacum, that I verily think it (as I
before said) to be the same. It has not yet borne flower or fruit in our
Country that I can understand: but the fruit, as it was sent to us, is in
form and bigness like unto a Date, covered with a blackish skin, set in a
husk of four hard leaves, very firm like unto a Date, and almost as sweet,
with great flat and thick kernels within them, very like unto the former, but
larger.

The Use of these Lote trees.
The first sort is eaten as an helper to cool and bind the body: the last, as
Captain Smith relates in the discovery of Virginia, if the fruit be eaten
while it is green, and not ripe, is able by the harsh and binding taste and
quality to draw ones mouth awry (even as it is said of the former Guaiacana)
but when it is thorough ripe it is pleasant, as I said before.

CHAP. XI.
Cornus mas. The Cornell tree.
THe Cornell tree that is planted in Orchards, being the male (for the female
is an hedge bush) is of two sorts, the one bearing red, the other whiter
berries, which is very rare yet in our country, and not differing else.

It grows to a reasonable bigness and height, yet never to any great tree,
the wood whereof is very hard, like unto horn, and thereof it obtained the
name: the body and branches are covered with a rugged bark, and spreads
reasonable well, having somewhat smooth leaves, full of veins, plain, and not
dented on the edges: the flowers are many small yellow tufts, as it were of
short hairs or threads set together, which come forth before any leaf, and
fall away likewise before any leaf be much open: the fruit are long and round
berries, of the bigness of small Olives, with an hard round stone within them,
like unto an Olive stone, and are of a yellowish red when they are ripe, of a
reasonable pleasant taste, yet somewhat austere withal.

The white (as I said) is like unto the red, but only that his fruit is more
white when it is ripe.

The Use of the Cornelles.
They help to bind the body, and to stay laskes, and by reason of the
pleasantness in them when they are ripe, they are much desired.

They are also preserved and eaten, both for rarity and delight, and for the
purpose aforesaid.

CHAP. XII.
Cerasus. The Cherry tree.
THere are so many varieties and differences of Cherries, that I know not well
how to express them unto you, without a large relation of their several
forms. I will therefore endeavor after one general description (as my
custom is in many other the like variable fruits) to give as brief and short
notes upon all the rest, as I can both for leaf and fruit, that so you may the
better know what the fruit is, when you have the name.

The English Cherrie tree grows in time to be of a reasonable bigness and
height, spreading great arms, and also small twiggy branches plentifully; the
leaves whereof are not vary large or long, but nicked or dented about the
edges: the flowers come forth two or three or four at the most together, at a
knot or joint, every one by it self, upon his own small and long
footestalke, consisting of five white leaves, with some threads in the middle;
after which come round berries, green at the first, and red when they are
through ripe, of a mean bigness, and of a pleasant sweet taste, somew hat
tart withal, with a hard white stone within it, whose kernel is somewhat
bitter, but not unpleasant.

The Flanders Cherrie differs not from the English, but that it is somewhat
larger, and the Cherry somewhat greater and sweeter, and not so sower.

The early Flanders Cherry is more rathe or early ripe, almost as soon as the
May Cherry, especially planted against a wall, and of many false knaves or
Gardiners are sold for May Cherrie trees.

The May Cherrie in a standard bears ripe fruit later then planted against a
wall, where the berries will be red in the very beginning of May sometimes.

The Archdukes Cherrie is one of the fairest and best cherries we have, being
of a very red color when it is ripe, and a little long more then round, and
somewhat pointed at the end, of the best relish of any Cherrie whatsoever, and
of a firm substance; scarce one of twenty of our Nurserie men do sell the
right, but give one for another: for it is an inherent quality almost
hereditarie with most of them, to sell any man an ordinary fruit for whatsoever
rare fruit he shall ask for: so little they are to be trusted.

The ounce Cherrie has the greatest and broadest leaf of any other cherrie,
but bears the smallest store of cherries every year that any does, and yet
blossometh well: the fruit also is nothing answerable to the name being not
very great, of a pale yellowish red, near the color of Amber, and therefore
some have called it, the Amber Cherrie.

The great leafed Cherrie is thought of diverse to be the Ounce Cherrie,
because it has almost as great a leaf as the former: but the fruit of this
also does not answer the expectation of so great a leaf, being but of a mean
bigness, and a small bearer, yet of a pale reddish color.

The true Gascoign Cherry is known but to a few; for our Nursery men do so
change the names of most fruits they sell, that they deliver but very few true
names to any: In former times before our wild black Cherrie was found to grow
plentifully in our own woods in many places of this Land, the French
continually stored us with wild stocks to graft upon, which then were called
Gascoigne stocks, but since they have so termed another red Cherrie, and
obtruded it upon their customers: but the true is one of our late ripe white
Cherries, even as Gerard says, it is a great cherrie and spotted: and this is
that Cherrie I so commend to be a fit stock to graft May cherries upon.

The Morello Cherrie is of a reasonable bigness, of a dark red color when
they are full ripe, and hang long on, of a sweetish sower taste, the pulpe or
substance is red, and somewhat firm: if they be dried they will have a fine
sharp or sower taste very delectable.

The Hartlippe Cherrie is so called of the place where the best of this kind
is noursed up, being between Sitting bourne and Chattam in Kent, and is the
biggest of our English kinds.

The smaller Lacure or Heart Cherrie is a reasonable fair Cherrie, full above,
and a little pointing downward, after the fashion of an heart, as it is usually
painted, blackish when it is full ripe, and lesser then the next.

The great Lacure or Heart Cherrie differs not in form, but in greatness,
being usually twice as great as the former, and of a reddish black color
also: both of them are of a firm substance, and reasonable sweet. Some do
call the white cherrie, the White heart cherrie.

The Luke Wards Cherrie has a reasonable large leaf, and a larger flower
then many other: the cherries grow with long stalks, and a stone of a mean
size within them, of a dark reddish color when they are full ripe, of a
reasonable good relish, and bears well.

The Corone Cherrie has a leaf little differing from the Luke Wards cherrie;
the fruit when it is ripe, is of a fair deep red color, of a good bigness,
and of a very good taste, neither very sweet or sower: the pulpe or juice
will stain the hands.

The Vrinall Cherrie in a most fruitful year is a small bearer, having many
years none, and the best but a few; yet does blossom plentifully every year
for the most part: the cherrie is long and round, like unto an Vrinall, from
whence it took his name; reddish when it is full ripe, and of an indifferent
sweet relish.

The Agriot Cherrie is but a small Cherrie, of a deep read color when it is
ripe, which is late; of a fine sharp taste, most pleasant and wholesome to the
stomach of all other cherries, as well while they are fresh as being dried,
which manner they much use in France, and keep them for the use both of the
sick and sound at all times.

The Biguarre Cherrie is a fair cherrie, much spotted with white spots upon the
pale red berry, and sometimes discolored half white and half reddish, of a
reasonable good relish.

The Morocco Cherrie has a large white blossom, and an indifferent big
berrie, long and round, with a long stalk of a dark reddish purple color, a
little tending to a blew when it is full ripe, of a firm substance: the juice
is of a blackish red, discoloring the hands or lips, and of a pleasant taste:
Some do think that this and the Morello be both one.

The Naples Cherrie is also thought to be all one with the Morello or Morocco.

The white Spanish Cherrie is an indifferent good bearer, the leaf and
blossom somewhat large, and like the Luke Wards cherrie: the cherries are
reasonable fair berries, with long stalks and great stones, white on the
outside, with some redness, on the one side of a firm substance, and
reasonable sweet, but with a little aciditie, and is one of the late ripe ones:
But there is another late ripe white Cherry, which some call the Gascoigne,
before remembered.

The Flanders cluster Cherrie is of two sorts, one greater then another: the
greater kind has an indifferent large leaf; the blossoms have many threads
within them, showing as it were many parts, which after turn into clusters of
berries, four, five or six together, and but with one stalk under them, as
if they grew one out of another, and sometimes they will bear but two or
three, and most of them but one cherry on a stalk, which are red when they are
ripe, very tender, and waterish sweet in eating.

The lesser is in all things like the greater, but smaller, which makes the
difference.

The wild cluster or birds cluster Cherry bears many blossoms set all along
the stalks, and cherries after them in the same manner, like long thin bunch
of grapes, and therefore called of some the Grape cherry: there are of them
both red and black.

1 Cerasus pracox. The May Cherry. 2 Cerasus Batanica. The Flanders Cherry. 3
Cerasus hispanica five alba. The white Cherry. 4 Cerasus plat^phyllos. The
great leafed Cherry. 5 Cerasus Luca Wards. Luke Wards Cherry. 6 Cerasus
Neapolita^^. The Naples Cherry. 7 Cerasus Cora^^ta. The Heart Cherry. 8 Cerasus
maculata. The bignarre or spotted Cherry. 9 Cerasus a^ium recemosa. The wild
cluster Cherry. 10 Cerasus Corymbifera. The Flanders cluster Cherry. 11 Cerasus
Archiducu. The Archdukes Cherry. 12 Chamacerasus. The dwarf Cheryy.
depiction of fruit

The soft sheld Cherrie is a small red cherrie when it is ripe, having the
stone within it so soft and tender, that it may easily be broken in the eating
of the cherrie.

John Tradescantes Cherrie is most usually sold by our Nursery Gardiners, for
the Archdukes cherrie, because they have more plenty thereof, and will better
be increased, and because it is so fair and good a cherrie that it may be
obtruded without much discontent: it is a reasonable good bearer, a fair great
berrie, deep colored, and a little pointed.

The Baccalaos or New Foundland Cherrie has a shining long leaf, most like
unto a Peach lease, the blossoms come very many together as it werein an
vmbell, which is such a cluster as is neither like the Flanders cluster, nor
the wild cluster cherrie blossom: it brings forth berries standing in the
same manner every one upon his own footestalke, being no bigger then the
largest berrie of the red Curran tree or bush, of a pale or waterish red color
when it is ripe.

The strange long cluster Cherrie, or Padus Theophrasti Dalechampio is reckoned
by the Author of that great Herball that goes under his name, among the sorts
of cherries; and so must I until a fitter place be found for it. It grows in
time to be a great tree, with a sad colored bark both on the body and
branches, whereon do grow many leaves, somewhat broad, shorter, harder, and a
little more crumpled then any cherrie leaf: the blossoms are very small, and
of a pale or whitish color, smelling very sweet and strong, or rather heady,
like Orange flowers, growing on small long branches, very like the top of
flowers upon the Laburnum or Bean trefoile trees: after which come small
black berries, growing together all along the long stalk, like unto the wild
cluster or birds cherrie mentioned before, but not much bigger then tares, with
small stones within them, and little or no sustance upon them: the French call
the tree Putier, because the wood thereof stinketh, and make it to be
wonderful that the blossoms of the tree should be so sweet, and the wood so
stinking.

The Cullen Cherrie is a dark red cherrie like the Agriot, which they of those
parts near Cullen and Vtrecht etc. use to put into their drink, to give it
the deeper color.

The great Hungarian Cherrie of Zwerts is like both in leaf and fruit unto
the Morello cherrie, but much greater and fairer, and a far better bearer: for
from a small branch has been gathered a pound of cherries, and this is usual
continually, and not accidentally, most of them four inches in compass about,
and very many of them more of a fair deep red color, and very sweet,
excelling the Archdukes cherry, or any other whatsoever.

The Cameleon or strange changeable Cherry deservedly has this name, although
of mine own imposition, not only because it bears usually both blossoms,
green and ripe fruit at one time thereupon, but that the fruit will be of many
forms; some round, some as it were square, and some bunched forth on one side
or another, abiding constant in no fashion, but for the most part showing forth
all these diversities every year growing upon it: the fruit is of a very red
color, and good taste.

The great Rose Cherry, or double blossomd Cherry differs not in anything
from the English Cherrie, but only in the blossoms, which are very thick of
white leaves, as great and double as the double white Crowfoote, before
remembered, and sometimes out of the middle of them will spring another smaller
flower, but double also; this seldom bears fruit, but when it does I suppose
it comes from those blossoms are the least double, and is red, no bigger
then our ordinary English cherrie.

The lesser Rose or double blossomd Cherrie bears double flowers also, but
not so thick and double as the former; but bears fruit more plentifully, of
the same color and bigness with the former.

The Dwarf Cherrie is of two sorts; one whose branches fall down low, round
about the body of it, with small green leaves, and fruit as small, of a deep
red color.

The other, whose branches, although small, grow more upright, having greener
shining leaves: the fruit is little bigger then the former, red also when it is
ripe, with a little point at the end: both of them of a sweetith relish, but
more sower.

The great bearing Cherry of Master Millen is a reasonable great red cherry,
bearing very plentifully, although it be planted against a North wall, yet it
will be late ripe, but of an indifferent sweet and good relish.

The long finger Cherry is another small long red one, being long and round
like a finger, whereof it took the name: this is not the Vrinall cherry before,
but differing from it.

The Use of Cherries.
All these sorts of Cherries serve wholly to please the palate, and are eaten
at all times, both before and after meals.

All Cherries are cold, yet the sower more then the sweet; and although the
sweet do most please, yet the sower are more wholesome, if there be regard
taken in the using.

The Agriot or sower Cherries are in France much used to be dried (as is said
before) as Pruines are, and so serve to ministered to be the sick in all hot
diseases, as fevers etc. being both boiled in their drinks, and taken now and
then of themselves, which by reason of their tartness, do please the stomach
passing well.

The Gum of the Cherrie tree is commended to be good for those are troubled
with the gravel or stone. It is also good for the cough being dissolved in
liquour, and stirs up an appetite. The distilled water of the black
Cherries, the stones being broken among them, is used for the same purpose, for
the gravel, stone, and wind.

CHAP. XIII.
Prunus. The Plumme tree.
THere are many more varieties of Plummes then of Cherries, so that I must
follow the same order with these that I did with them, even give you their
names apart, with brief notes upon them, and one description to serve for all
the rest. And in this recital I shall leave out the Apricockes which are
certainly a kind of Plum, of an especial difference, and not of a Peach, as
Galen and some others have thought, and set them in a chapter by themselves,
and only in this see down those fruits are usually called Plums.

The Plum tree (especially diverse of them) rises in time to be a reasonable
tall and great tree, whose body and greater arms are covered with a more
rugged bark, yet in some more or less, the younger branches being smooth in
all, the leaves are somewhat rounder then those of the Cherrie tree, and much
differing among themselves, some being longer, or larger, or rounder then
others, and many that are exercised herein, can tell by the leaf what Plum the
tree bears (I speak this of many, not of all) as in many Cherries they can
do the like: the flowers are white, consisting of five leaves: the fruit is as
variable in form, as in taste or color, some being ovall or Pear fashion or
Almond like, or sphericall or round, some firm, some soft and waterish, some
sweet, some sower or harsh, or differing from all these tastes: and some
white, others black, some red, others yellow, some purple, others blew, as
they shall be briefly set down unto you in the following lines, where I mean
not to insert any the wild or hedge fruit, but those only are fit for an
Orchard, to be stored with good fruit: and of all which sorts, the choysest for
goodness, and rarest for knowledge, are to be had of my very good friend
Master John Tradescante, who has wonderfully labored to obtain all the
rarest fruits he can hear off in any place of Christendom, Turkey, yea or the
whole world; as also with Master John Millen, dwelling in Old street, who
from John Tradescante and all others that have had good fruit, has stored
himself with the best only, and he can sufficiently furnish any.

The Amber Primordian Plumme is an indifferent fair Plumme, early ripe, of a
pale yellowish color, and of a waterish taste, not pleasing.

The red Primordian Plumme is of a reasonable size, long and round, reddish on
the outside, of a more dry taste, and ripe with the first sorts in the
beginning of August.

The blew Primordian is a small plumme, almost like the Damascene, and is
subject to drop off from the tree before it be ripe.

The white Date Plum is no very good plum.

The red Date plumme is a great long red pointed plumme, and late ripe, little
better then the white.

The black Mussell plumme is a good plumme, reasonable dry, and tastes well.

The red Mussell Plumme is somewhat flat as well as round, of a very good
taste, and is ripe about the middle of August.

The white Mussell plumme is like the red, but somewhat smaller, and of a
whitish green color, but not so well tasted.

The Imperial plum is a great long reddish plum, very waterish, and ripeneth
somewhat late.

The Gaunt plum is a great round reddish plum, ripe somewhat late, and eats
waterish.

The red Pescod plum is a reasonable good plum.

The white Pescod plum is a reasonable good rellished plumme, but somewhat
waterish.

The green Pescod plum is a reasonable big and long pointed plum, and ripe in
the beginning of September.

The Orange plum is a yellowish plum, moist, and somewhat sweetish.

The Morocco plumme is black like a Damson, well tasted, and somewhat dry in
eating.

The Dine plum is a late ripe plum, great and whitish, speckled all over.

The Turkey plum is a large long blackish plum, and somewhat flat like the
Mussell plum, a well rellished dry plum.

The Nutmeg plumme is no bigger then a Damson, and is of a greenish yellow
color when it is ripe, which is with us about Bartholmew tide, and is a good
plum.

The Perdigon plumme is a dainty good plumme, early blackish, and well
rellished.

The Verdoch plum is a great fine green shining plum fit to preserve.

The Ienua plum is the white Date plum, before remembered.

The Barberry plum is a great early black plum, and well tasted.

The Pruneola plum is a small white plum, of a fine tart taste: it was wont to
be usually brought over in small round boxes, and sold most commonly at the
Comfitmakers, (cut in twain, the stone cast away) at a very dear rate: the
tree grows and bears well with us.

The Shepway Bulleis is of a dark bluish brown color, of a larger size then
the ordinary, and of a sharp taste, but not so good as the common.

The white and the black Bulleis are common in most Countries, being small
round plums, lesser then Damsons, sharper in taste, and later ripe.

The Flushing Bulleis grows with his fruit thick clustring together like
grapes.

The Winter Creke is the latest ripe plum of all sorts, it grows plentifully
about Bishops Hatfield.

The white Pear plum early ripe, is of a pale yellowish green color.

The late ripe white Pear plum is a greater and longer plum, greenish white,
and is not ripe until it be near the end of September, both waterish plums.

The black Pear plum is like unto the white Pear plumme, but that the color
is blackish when it is ripe, and is of a very good relish, more firm and dry
then the other.

The red Pear plumme is of the same fashion and goodness, but is the worst of
the three.

The white Wheat plum is a waterish fulsome plum.

The red Wheat plum is like the other for taste.

The Bowl plum is flat and round, yet flatter on the one side then on the
other, which caused the name, and is a very good rellished black plum.

The Friars plumme is a very good plum, well tasted, and coming clean from
the stone, being black when it is ripe, and some whitish spots upon it.

The Catalonia plum is a very good plum.

The don Alteza is also a very good plum.

The Muscadine plum, some call the Queen mother plumme, and some the Cherry
plum, is a fair red plum, of a reasonable bigness, and ripe about Bartholmew
tide.

The Christian plum, called also the Nutmeg plum; the tree grows very
shrubby, 1 Prunum Imperiale. The Imperial Plum. 2 Prunum Tureicum. The Turkey
Plum. 3 Prunum pracox rubrum. The red Primordian Plum. 4 Prunum Mytellinum. The
Mussell Plum. 5 Prunum Ambarinum. The Amber Plum. 6 Prunum Regineum. The Queen
mother Plum. 7 Prunum viride. The green Oysterly Plum. 8 Prunum Arantiacum. The
Orange Plum. 9 Prunum Myristicum. The Nutmeg Plum. 10 Prunum Siliquosum. The
Pescod Plum. 11 Prunum Gandanense. The Ganat Plum. 12 Prunum Dactylites. The
Date Plum. 13 Prunum Pyrinum praecox. The early Pear Plum.
depiction of fruit and will abide good for six weeks at the least after it is
gathered, and after all other plums are spent.

The Cherry plum remembered before, speaking of the Muscadine plum, is a very
good plum, but small.

The Amber plum is a round plum, as yellow on the outside almost as yellow
wax, of a sour unpleasant taste that which I tasted, but I think it was not
the right; for I have seen and tasted another of the same bigness, of a paler
color, far better rellished, and a firmer substance, coming clean from the
stone like an Apricocke.

The Apricocke plum is a good plum when it is in its perfection, but that is
seldom; for it does most usually crack, thereby diminishing much of its
goodness, and besides yields gum at the crackes.

The Eason plum is a little red plum, but very good in taste.

The Violet plum is a small and long blackish blew plum, ripe about Bartholomew
tide, a very good dry eating fruit.

The Grape plum is the Flushing Bulleis before remembered

The Dennie plum is called also the Cheston, or the Friars plum before
remembered.

The Damask Violet plum, or Queen mother plum spoken of before.

The black Damascene plum is a very good dry plum, and of a darkeblew color
when it is ripe.

The white Damson is nothing so well rellished as the other.

The great Damson or Damask plum is greater then the ordinary Damson, and
sweeter in taste.

The blew Damson well known, a good fruit.

The Coferers plum is flat, like unto a Pear plum, it is early ripe and
black, of a very good relish.

The Margate plum the worst of an hundred.

The green Oysterly plum is a reasonable great plum, of a whitish green color
when it is ripe, of a moist and sweet taste, reasonable good.

The red Mirobalane plum grows to be a great tree quickly, spreading very
thick and far, very like the black Thorn or Sloe bush: the fruit is red,
earlier ripe, and of a better taste then the white.

The white Mirobalane plum is in most things like the former red, but the fruit
is of a whitish yellow color, and very pleasant, especially if it be not over
ripe: both these had need to be plashed against a wall, or else they will
hardly bear ripe fruit.

The Olive plum is very like a green Olive, both for color and bigness, and
grows low on a small bushing tree, and ripeneth late, but is the best of all
the sorts of green plums.

The white diapred plum of Malta, scarce known to any in our Land but John
Tradescante, is a very good plum, and striped all over like diaper, and thereby
so called.

The black diapred plum is like the Damascene plum, being black with spots,
as small as pins points upon it, of a very good relish.

The Peake plum is a long whitish plum, and very good.

The Pishamin or Virginia plum is called a plum, but utterly differs from all
sorts of plums, the description whereof may truly inform you, as it is set
down in the tenth Chapter going before, whereunto I refer you.

The Use of Plums.
The great Damask or Damson Plummes are dried in France in great quantities,
and brought over unto us in Hogs-heads, and other great vessels, and are those
Prunes that are usually sold at the Grocers, under the name of Damask Prunes:
the black Bulleis also are those (being dried in the same manner) that they
call French Prunes, and by their tartness are thought to bind, as the other,
being sweet, to loosen the body.

The Bruneola Plumme, by reason of his pleasant tartness, is much accounted
of, and being dried, the stones taken from them, are brought over to us in
small boxes, and sold dear at the Comfitmakers, where they very often
accompany all other sorts of banqueting stuffes.

Some of these Plums, because of their firmness, are undoubtedly more wholesome
then others that are sweet and waterish, and causeless offense in their
stomachs that eat them; and therefore are preserved with Sugar, to be kept
all the year. None of them all is used in medicines so much as the great
Damson or Damask Prune, although all of them for the most part do cool,
lenifie, and draw forth choler, and thereby are fitted to be used of such as
have chollericke Agues.

CHAP. XIIII.
Mala Armeniaca sieve Praecocia. Apricockes.
THe Apricocke (as I said) is without question a kind of Plumme, rather then a
Peach, both the flower being white, and the stone of the fruit smooth also,
like a Plumme, and yet because of the excellency of the fruit, and the
difference therein from all other Plummes, I have thought it meet to entreat
thereof by it self, and show you the varieties have been observed in these
times.

The Apricocke tree rises up to a very great height, either standing by it
self (where it bears not so kindly, and very little in our country) or
planted against a wall, as it is most usual, having a great stem or body,
and likewise many great arms or branches, covered with a smooth bark: the
leaves are large, broad, and almost round, but pointed at the ends, and finely
dented about the edges: the flowers are white, as the Plumme tree blossoms,
but somewhat larger, and rounder set: the fruit is round, with a cleft on the
one side, somewhat like unto a Peach, being of a yellowish color as well on
the inside as outside, of a firm or fast substance, and dry, not ouermoist in
the eating, and very pleasant in taste, containing within it a broad and flat
stone, somewhat round and smooth, not rugged as the Peach stone, with a
pleasant sweet kernel (yet some have reported, that there is such as have
their kernels bitter, which I did never see or know) and is ripe almost with
our first or earliest Plummes, and thereof it took the name of Pracox; and it
may be was the earliest of all others was then known, when that name was
given.

The great Apricocke, which some call the long Apricocke, is the greatest and
fairest of all the rest.

The smaller Apricocke, which some call the small round Apricocke, is thought
to be small, because it first sprang from a stone: but that is not so; for the
kind it self being inoculated, will be always small, and never half so
fair and great as the former.

The white Apricocke has his leaves more folded together, as if it were half
double: it bears but seldom, and very few, which differ not from the
ordinary, but in being more white, without any red when it is ripe.

The Mascoline Apricocke has a finer green leaf, and thinner then the
former, and bears very seldom any store of fruit, which differs in nothing
from the first, but that it is a little more delicate.

The long Mascoline Apricocke has his fruit growing a little longer then the
former, and differs in nothing else.

The Argier Apricocke is a smaller fruit then any of the other, and yellow, but
as sweet and delicate as any of them, having a blackish stone within it,
little bigger then a Lacure Cherry stone: this with many other sorts John
Tradescante brought with him returning from the Argier voyage, whither he went
voluntary with the Fleet, that went against the Pirates in the year 1620.

The Use of Apricockes.
Apricockes are eaten oftentimes in the same manner that other dainty Plummes
are, between meals of themselves, or among other fruit at banquets.

They are also preserved and candid, as it pleases Gentlewomen to bestow
their time and charge, or the Comfitmaker to sort among other candid fruits.

Some likewise dry them, like unto Pears, Apples, Damsons, and other Plummes.

Matthiolus does wonderfully commend the oil drawn from the kernels of the
stones, to anoint the inflamed haemorrhoides or piles, the swellings of
ulcers, the roughness of the tongue and throat, and likewise the pains of
the ears.

CHAP. XV.
Mala Persica. Peaches.
AS Iordered the Cherries and Plummes, so I intend to deal with Peaches,
because their varieties are many, and more known in these days then in former
times: but because the Nectorin is a differing kind of Peach, I must deal
with it as I did with the Apricocke among the Plummes, that is, place it in a
Chapter by it self.

The Peach tree of it self grows not usually altogether so great, or high as
the Apricocke, because it is less durable, but yet spreads with fair great
branches, from whence spring smaller and slenderer reddish twigges, whereon are
set long narrow green leaves, dented about the edges: the blossoms are
greater then of any Plumme, of a deep blush or light purple color: after
which comes the fruit, which is round, and sometimes as great as a reasonable
Apple or Pippin (I speak of some sorts; for there be some kinds that are much
smaller) with a furrow or cleft on the one side, and covered with a freese or
cotton on the outside, of color either russet, or red, or yellow, or of a
blackish red color; of differing substances and tastes also, some being firm,
others waterish, some cleaving fast to the stone on the inside, others parting
from it more or less easily, one excelling another very far, wherein is
contained a rugged stone, with many chinkes or clefts in it, the kernel
whereof is bitter: the roots grow neither deep nor far; and therefore are
subject to the winds, standing alone, and not against a wall. It sooner waxes
old and decays, being sprung of a stone, then being inoculated on a Plumme
stock, whereby it is more durable.

The great white Peach is white on the outside as the meat is also, and is a
good well rellished fruit.

The small white Peach is all one with the greater, but differs in size.

The Carnation Peach is of three sorts, two are round, and the third long; they
are all of a whitish color, shadowed over with red, and more red on the side
is next the sun: the lesser round is the more common, and the later ripe.

The grand Carnation Peach is like the former round Peach, but greater, and is
as late ripe, that is, in the beginning of September.

The red Peach is an exceeding well rellished fruit.

The russet Peach is one of the most ordinary Peaches in the Kingdom, being of
a russet color on the outside, and but of a reasonable relish, far meaner
then many other.

The Island Peach is a fair Peach, and of a very good relish.

The Newington Peach is a very good Peach, and of an excellent good relish,
being of a whitish green color on the outside, yet half reddish, and is ripe
about Bartholmew tide.

The yellow Peach is of a deep yellow color; there be hereof diverse sorts,
some good and some bad.

The St. James Peach is the same with the Queens Peach, here below set down,
although some would make them differing.

The Melocotone Peach is a yellow fair Peach, but differing from the former
yellow both in form and taste, in that this has a small crooked end or point
for the most part, it is ripe before them, and better rellished then any of
them.

1 Malus Armeni^ea five Pracociae. The Apricoeke. 2 Malus Persica Melocotonea.
The Melocotone Peach. 3 Persica Moschatellina. The Nutmeg Peach 4 Perfleanigra.
The black Peach. 5 Perfica Caemea longa. The long Carnation Peach. 6 Perfica
Reginea. The Queens Peach. 7 Amygalalus. The Almond. 8 Perficadu Treas. The
Peach du Troas. 9 Nuciperfica rubra optima. The best Roman red Nectorin. 10.
Nuciperfica rubra altera. The bastard red Nectoria with a pincking bl^stome.
depiction of fruit

The Peach du Troas is a long and great withish yellow Peach, red on the
outside; early ripe, and is another kind of Nutmeg Peach.

The Queens Peach is a fair great yellowish brown Peach, shadowed as it were
over with deep red, and is ripe at Bartholmew tide, of a very pleasant good
taste.

The Roman Peach is a very good Peach, and well pullished.

The Durasme or Spanish Peach is of a dark yellowish red color on the
outside, and white within.

The black Peach is a great large Perch, of a very dark brown color on the
outside, it is of a waterish taste, and late ripe.

The Alberza Peach is late ripe, and of a reasonable good taste.

The Almond Peach, so called, because the kernel of the stone is sweet, like
the Almond, and the fruit also somewhat pointed like the Almond in the husk;
it is early ripe, and like the Newington Peach, but lesser.

The Man Peach is of two sorts, the one longer then the other, both of them are
good Peaches, but the shorter is the better rellished.

The Cherry Peach is a small Peach, but well tasted.

The Nutmeg Peach is of two sorts, one that will be hard when it is ripe, and
eats not so pleasantly as the other, which will be soft and mellow; they are
both small Peaches, having very little or no resemblance at all to a Nutmeg,
except in being a little longer then round, and are early ripe.

Many other sorts of Peaches there are, whereunto we can give no especial
name; and therefore I pass them over in silence.

The Use of Peaches.
Those Peaches that are very moist and waterish (as many of them are) and not
firm, do soon putrefie in the stomach, causing surfeits oftentimes; and
therefore every one had need be careful, what and in what manner they eat
them: yet they are much and often well accepted with all the Gentry of the
Kingdom.

The leaves, because of their bitterness, serve well being boiled in Ale or
Milk, to be given unto children that have worms, to help to kill them, and
do gently open the belly, if there be a sufficient quantity used.

The flowers have the like operation, that is, to purge the body somewhat more
forceably then Damask Roses; a Syrup therefore made of the flowers is very
good.

The kernels of the Peach stones are oftentimes used to be given to them that
cannot well make water, or are trouble d with the stone; for it opens the
stoppings of the vritory passages, whereby much ease ensues.

CHAP. XVI.
Nucipersica. Nectorins.
I Presume that the name Nucipersica, does most rightly belong unto that kind
of Peach, which we call Nectorins, and although they have been with us not
many years, yet have they been known both in Italy to Matthiolus, and others
before him, who it seems knew no other then the yellow Nectorin, as
Dalechampius also: But we at this day do know five several sorts of
Nectorins, as they shall be presently set down; and as in the former fruits,
so in this, I will give you the description of one, and brief notes of the
rest.

The Nectorin is a tree of no great bigness, most usually lesser then the
Peach tree, his body and elder boughs being whitish, the younger branches very
red, whereon grow narrow long green leaves, so like unto Peach leaves, that
none can well distinguish them, unless it be in this, that they are somewhat
lesser: the blossoms are all reddish, as the Peach, but one of a differing
fashion from all the other, as I shall show you by and by: the fruit that
follows is smaller, rounder, and smoother then Peaches, without any cleft on
the side, and without any douny cotton or freeze at all; and herein is like
unto the outer green rind of the Wallnut, whereof as I am persuaded it took
the name, of a fast and firm meat, and very delicate in taste, especially the
best kinds, with a rugged stone within it, and a bitter kernel.

The Musk Nectorin, so called, be cause it being a kind of the best red
Nectorins, both smells and eats as if the fruit were steeped in Musk: some
think that this and the next Roman Nectorin are all one.

The Roman red Nectorin, or cluster Nectorin, has a large or great purplish
blossom, like unto a Peach, reddish at the bottom on the outside, and
greenish within: the fruit is of a fine red color on the outside, and grows
in clusters, two or three at a joint together, of an excellent good taste.

The bastard red Nectorin has a smaller or pincking blossom, more like
threads then leaves, neither so large nor open as the former, and yellowish
within at the bottom: the fruit is red on the outside, and grows never but
one at a joint; it is a good fruit, but eats a little more rawish then the
other, even when it is full ripe.

The yellow Nectorin is of two sorts, the one an excellent fruit, mellow, and
of a very good relish; the other hard, and no way comparable to it.

The green Nectorin, great and small; for such I have seen abiding constant,
although both planted in one ground: they are both of one goodness, and
accounted with most to be the bestrellished Nectorin of all others.

The white Nectorin is said to be differing from the other, in that it will
be more white on the outside when it is ripe, then either the yellow or
green: but I have not yet seen it.

The Use of Nectorins.
The fruit is more firm then the Peach, and more delectable in taste; and is
therefore of more esteem, and that worthily.

CHAP. XVII.
Amygdala. Almonds.
THe Almond also may be reckoned unto the stock or kindred of the Peaches, it
is so like both in leaf and blossom, and somewhat also in the fruit, for the
outward form, although it has only a dry skin, and no pulpe or meat to
be eaten: but the kernel of the stone or shell, which is called the Almond,
makes recompense of that defect, whereof some are sweet, some bitter, some
great, some small, some long, and some short.

The Almond tree grows upright, higher and greater then any Peach; and is
therefore usually planted by it self, and not against a wall, whose body
sometime exceeds any man's fadome, whereby it shows to be of longer
continuance, bearing large arms, and smaller branches also, but brittle,
whereon are set long and narrow leaves, like unto the Peach tree: the blossoms
are purplish, like unto Peach blosoms, but paler: the fruit is somewhat like a
Peach for the form of the skin or outside, which is rough, but not with any
such cleft therein, or with any pulpe or meat fit to be eaten, but is a
thick dry skin when it is ripe, covering the stone or shell, which is smooth
and not rugged, and is either long and great, or small, or thick and short,
according as the nut or kernel within it is, which is sweet both in the
greater and smaller, and only one smaller kind which is bitter: yet this I
have observed, that all the Almond trees that I have seen grow in England,
both of the sweet and bitter kinds, bear Almonds thick and short, and not
long, as that sort which is called the Jorden Almond.

The Use of Almonds.
They are used many ways, and for many purposes, either eaten alone with
Figs, or Raysins of the Sun, or made into paste with Sugar and Rosewater
for Marchpanes, or put among Flower, Eggs, and Sugar, to make Mackerons, or
crusted over with Sugar, to make Comfits, or mixed with Rosewater and Sugar, to
make Butter, or with Barley water, to make Milk, and many other ways, as
every one list, that has skill in such things.

The oil also Almonds is used many ways, both inwardly and outwardly, for
many purposes; as the oil of sweet Almonds mixed with poudered white Sugar
Candy, for coughes and hoarsenesse, and to be drunk alone, or with some other
thing (as the Syrup of Marsh Mallows) for the stone to open and lenifie the
passages, and make them slipperie, that the stone may passet the easier. And
also for women in Child bed after their sore travel. And outwardly either by
it self, or with oil of Tartar to make a cream, to lenifie the skin, parched
with the wind or otherwise, or to anoint the stomach either alone, or with
other things to help a cold.

The oil of bitter Almonds is much used to be dropped into their ears that
are hard of hearing, to help to open them. And as it is thought, does more
scour and cleanse the skin then the sweet oil does, and is therefore more
used of many for that purpose, as the Almonds themselves are.

CHAP. XVIII.
Mala Arantia. Orenges.
I Bring here to your consideration, as you see, the Orange tree alone, without
mentioning the Citron or Lemmon trees, in regard of the experience we have seen
made of them in diverse places: For the Orange tree has abiden with some
extraordinary looking and tending of it, when as neither of the other would by
any means be preserved any longtime. If therefore any be desirous to keep
this tree, he must so provide for it, that it be preserved from any cold,
either in the winter or spring, and exposed to the comfort of the sun in
summer. And for that purpose some keep them in great square boxes, and lift
them to and fro by iron hooks on the sides, or cause them to be rolled by
trundels, or small wheels under them, to place them in an house, or close
gallerie for the winter time: others plant them against a brick wall in the
ground, and defend them by a shed of boardes, covered over with seare-cloth in
the winter, and by the warmth of a stoue, or other such thing, give them some
comfort in the colder times: but no tent or mean provision will preserve them.

The Orange tree in the warm Countries grows very high, but with us (or else
it is a dwarf kind there of) rises not very high: the bark of the elder
stemmes being of a dark color, and the young branches very green, whereon
grow here and there some few thorns: the leaves are fair, large, and very
green, in form almost like a Bay leaf, but that it has a small ear, or
piece of a leaf, fashioned like unto an heart under every one of them, with
many small holes to be seen in them, if you hold them up between you and the
light, of a sweet but strong smell, naturally not falling away, but always
abiding on, or until new be come up, bearing green leaves continually: the
flowers are whitish, of a very strong and heady sent; after which come small
round fruit, green at the first, while they are small, and not near
maturitie, but being grown and ripe, are (as all men know) red on the out side,
some more pale then others, and some kinds of a deeper yellowish red,
according to the climate, and as it receives the heat of the sun, wherein
is contained sower or sweet juice, and thick white kernels among it: it
bears in the warm Countries both blossoms and green fruit continually upon
it, and ripe fruit also with them for the best part of the year, but
especially in Autumn and Winter.

The Use of Orenges.
Orenges are used as sauce for many sorts of meats, in respect of their sweet
sowernesse, giving a relish of delight, whereinsoeuer they are used.

The inner pulpe or juice does serve in agues and hot diseases, and in Summer
to cool the heat of dejected stomachs, or fainting spirits.

1 Malus Arantia. The Orange tree, 2 Malus. The Apple tree. 3 Malum
Carbonarium. The Pomewater. 4 Malum Curtipendulum. The golden (...) 5 Melapium.
The Pearemaine. 6 Malum Reginei^^. The Queen Apple. 7 Malum Primo matu^um. The
Genneting. 8 Malum Regule. The pound Ro^all. 9 Malum Kentij ad feruescondum.
The Kentish Codlin. 10 Malum Regineum spurium. The Bardfield Quining.
depiction of fruit

The dried rind, by reason of the sweet and strong sent, serves to be put
among other things to make sweet pouthers.

The outer rindes, when they are cleansed from all the inner pulpe and skins,
are preserved in Sugar, after the bitterness by often steepings has been
taken away, and do serve either as Succots, and banqueting stuffes, or as
ornaments to set out dishes for the table, or to give a relish unto meats,
whether baked or boiled: Physically they help to warm a cold stomach, and to
digest or break wind therein: or they are candid with Sugar, and serve with
other dried Iunquets.

The water of Orange flowers is oftentimes used as a great persume for glones,
to wash them, or in stead of Rose Water to mix with other things.

It is used to be drunk by some, to prevent or to help any pestilentiall
fever.

The ointment that is made of the flowers, is very comfortable both for the
stomache, against the could or cough, or for the head, for pains and disinesse.

The kernels or seed being cast into the ground in the spring time, will
quickly grow up, (but will not abide the winter with us, to be kept for
growing trees) and when they are of a finger length high, being plucked up, and
put among sallats, will give them a marvelous fine aromaticke or spicy taste,
very acceptable.

The seed or kernels are a little cordial, although nothing so much as the
kernels of the Pomecitron.

CHAP. XIX.
Poma. Apples.
THe sorts of Apples are so many, and infinite almost as I may say, that I
cannot give you the names of all, though I have endeavored to give a great
many, and I think it almost impossible for any one, to attain to the full
perfection of knowledge herein, not only in regard of the multiplicitie of
fashions, colors and tastes, but in that some are more familiar to one
Country then to another, being of a better or worse taste in one place then in
another, and therefore diversely called: I will therefore as I have done before,
give you the description of the Tree in general, as also of the Paradise or
dwarf Apple, because of some especial difference, and afterward the names of
as many, with their fashions, as have come to my knowledge, either by sight or
relation: for I do confess I have not seen all that I here set down, but
use the help of some friends, and therefore if it happen that the several
names do not answer unto several sorts, but that the same fruit may be
called by one name in one Country, that is called by another elsewhere, excuse
it I pray you; for in such a number, such a fault may escape unknown.

The Apple tree for the most part is neither very high, great or straight, but
rather usually boweth and spreads (although in some places it grows fairer
and straighter then in others) having long and great arms or boughs, and from
them smaller branches, whereon do grow somewhat broad, and long green
leaves, nicked about the edges: the flowers are large and white, with blush
colored sides, consisting of five leaves: the fruit (as I said) is of diverse
forms, colors and tastes, and likewise of a very variable durabilitie; for
some must be eaten presently after they are gathered, and they are for the most
part the earliest ripe; others will abide longer upon the trees, before they
be fit to be gathered; some also will be so hard when others are gathered,
that they will not be fit to be eaten, for one, two or three months after they
be gathered; and some will abide good but one, two or three months, and no
more; and some will be best, after a quarter or half a years lying, unto the
end of that year or the next. The Paradise or dwarf Apple tree grows
nothing so high as the former, and many times not much higher then a man may
reach, having leaves and flowers altogether like the other, the fruit is a
fair yellow Apple, and reasonable great, but very light and spongy or loose,
and of a bitterish sweet taste, nothing pleasant. And these faults also are
incident unto this tree, that both body and branches are much subject unto
cancker, which will quickly eat it round, and kill it; besides it will have
many bunches, or tuberous swellings in many places, which grow as it were
scabby or tough, and will soon cause it to perish: the root sends forth
many shootes and suck^rs, whereby it may be much increased. But this benefit
may be had of it, to recompense the former faults, That being a dwarf Tree,
whatsoever fruit shall be grafted on it, will keep the graft low like unto it
self, and yet bear fruit reasonable well. And this is a pretty way to have
Pippins, Pomewaters, or any other sort of Apples (as I have had my self, and
also seen with others) growing low, that if any will, they may make a hedge
row of these low fruits, planted in an Orchard all along by a walk side: but
take this Caveat, if you will avoid the danger of the cancker and knots, which
spoil the tree, to graft it hard unto the ground, that thereby you may give as
little of the nature of the stock thereunto as possibly you can, which will
undoubtedly help it very much.

The kinds or sorts of Apples.
The Summer pippin is a very good apple first ripe, and therefore to be first
spent, because it will not abide so long as the other.

The French pippin is also a good fruit and yellow.

The Golding pippin is the greatest and best of all sorts of pippins.

The Russet pippin is as good an apple as most of the other sorts of pippins.

The spotted pippin is the most durable pippin of all the other sorts.

The ordinary yellow pippin is like the other, and as good; for indeed I know
no sort of pippins but are excellent good well rellished fruits.

The great pearemaine differs little either in taste or durabilitie from the
pippin, and therefore next unto it is accounted the best of all apples.

The summer pearemaine is of equal goodness with the former, or rather a
little more pleasing, especially for the time of its eating, which will not be
so long lasting, but is spent and gone when the other begins to be good to
eat.

The Russetting is also a firm and a very good apple, not so waterish as the
pippin or pearemaine, and will last the best part of the year, but will be very
mellow at the last, or rather half dried.

The Broading is a very good apple.

The Pomewater is an excellent good and great whitish apple, full of sap or
moisture, somewhat pleasant sharp, but a little bitter withal: it will not
last long, the winter frosts soon causing it to rot, and perish.

The Flower of Kent is a fair yellowish green apple both good and great.

The Gilloflower apple is a fine apple, and finely spotted.

The Marligo is the same, that is called the Marigold apple, it is a middle
sized apple, very yellow on the outside, shadowed over as it were with red, and
more red on one side, a reasonable well rellished fruit.

The Blandrill is a good apple.

The Dauie Gentle is a very good apple

The Gruntlin is somewhat a long apple, smaller at the crown then at the
stalk, and is a reasonable good apple.

The gray Costerd is a good great apple, somewhat whitish on the outside, and
abides the winter.

The green Costerd is like the other, but greener on the outside continually.

The Haruy apple is a fair great goodly apple, and very well rellished.

The Dowse apple is a sweetish apple not much accounted of.

The Pome-paris is a very good apple.

The Belle boon of two sorts winter and summer, both of them good apples, and
fair fruit to look on, being yellow and of a mean bigness.

The pound Royal is a very great apple, of a very good and sharp taste.

The Doves Bill a small apple.

The Deusan or apple John is a delicate fine fruit, well rellished when it
begins to be fit to be eaten, and endures good longer then any other apple.

The Master William is greater then a pippin, but of no very good relish.

The Master John is a better tasted apple then the other by much.

The Spicing is a well tasted fruit.

Pome de Rambures all fair and good apples brought from France. Pome de
Capanda all fair and good apples brought from France. Pome de Calual all fair
and good apples brought from France.
The Queen apple is of two sorts, both of them great fair red apples, and
well rellished, but the greater is the best.

The Bastard Queen apple is like the other for form and color, but not so
good in taste: some call this the bardfield Queening.

The Boughton or greening is a very good and well tasted apple.

The Leathercoate apple is a good winter apple, of no great bigness, but of a
very good and sharp taste.

The Pot apple is a plain Country apple.

The Cowsnout is no very good fruit.

The Gildiling apple is a yellow one, not much accounted.

The Cats head apple took the name of the likeness, and is a reasonable good
apple and great.

The Kentish Codlin is a fair great greenish apple, very good to eat when it
is ripe; but the best to coddle of all other apples.

The Stoken apple is a reasonable good apple.

The Geneting apple is a very pleasant and good apple.

The Worcester apple is a very good apple, as big as a Pomewater.

Donime Couadis is a French apple, and of a good relish.

The French Goodwin is a very good apple.

The old wife is a very good, and well rellished apple.

The town Crab is an hard apple, not so good to be eaten raw as roasted, but
excellent to make Cider.

The Virgilling apple is a reasonable good apple.

The Crows egg is no good rellished fruit, but noursed up in some places of
the common people.

The Sugar apple is so called of the sweetness.

Sops in wine is so named both of the pleasantness of the fruit, and beauty
of the apple.

The woman's breast apple is a great apple.

The black apple or pippin is a very good eating apple, and very like a
Pearemaine, both for form and bigness, but of a black sooty color.

Tweenty sorts of Sweetings and none good.

The Pear apple is a small fruit, but well rellished being ripe, and is for
shape very like unto a small short Pear, and green.

The Paradise apple is a fair goodly yellow apple, but light and spongy, and
of a bitterish sweet taste, not to be commended.

The apple without blossom, so called because although it have a small show of
a blossom, yet they are but small threads rather than leaves, never showing to
be like a flower, and therefore termed without blossom: the apple is neither
good eating nor baking fruit.

Wildings and Crabs are without number or use in our Orchard, being to be had
out of the woods, fields and hedges rather then any where else.

The Use of Apples.
The best sorts of Apples serve at the last course for the table, in most men's
houses of account, where, if there grow any rare or excellent fruit, it is then
set forth to be seen and tasted.

Diverse other sorts serve to bake, either for the Masters Table, or the meynes
sustenance, either in pyes or pans, or else stewed in dishes with Rosewater and
Sugar, and Cinnamon or Ginger cast upon.

Some kinds are fittest to roast in the winter time, to warm a cup of wine,
ale or beer; or to be eaten alone, for the nature of some fruit is never so
good, or worth the eating, as when they are roasted.

Some sorts are fittest to scald for Codlins, and are taken to cool the
stomach, as well as to please the taste, having Rosewater and Sugar put to
them.

Some sorts are best to make Cider of, as in the West Country of England great
quantities, yea many Hogsheads and Tons full are made, especially to be
carried to the Sea in long voyages, and is found by experience to be of
excellent use, to mix with water for beuerage. It is usually seen that those
fruits that are neither fit to eat raw, roasted, nor baked, are fittest for
Cider, and make the best.

The juice of Apples likewise, as of pippins, and pearemaines, is of very good
use in Melancholicke diseases, helping to procure mirth, and to expel
heaviness.

The distilled water of the same Apples is of the like effect.

There is a fine sweet ointment made of Apples called Pomatum, which is much
used to help chapt lips, or hands, or for the face, or any other part of the
skin that is rough with wind, or any other accident, to supple them, and
make them smooth.

CHAP. XX.
Cydonia. Quinces.
We have some diversities of Quinces, although not many, yet more then our
elder times were acquainted with, which shall be here expressed.

The Quince tree grows oftentimes to the height and bigness of a good Apple
tree, but more usually lower, with crooked and spreading arms and branches
far abroad, the leaves are somewhat round, and like the leaves of the Apple
tree, but thicker, harder, fuller of veins, and white on the vnderside: the
blossoms or flowers are white, now and then dashed over with blush, being large
and open, like unto a single Rose: the fruit follows, which when it is ripe
is yellow, and covered with a white cotton or freeze, which in the younger is
thicker and more plentiful, but waxes less and less, as the fruit ripeneth,
being bunched out many times in several places, and round, especially about
the head, some greater, others smaller, some round like an Apple, others long
like a Pear, of a strong heady sent, accounted not wholesome or long to be
endured, and of no durabilitie to keep, in the middle whereof is a core, with
many blackish seeds or kernels therein, lying close together in cells, and
compassed with a kind of clearegelly, which is easier seen in the scalded
fruit, then in the raw.

The English Quince is the ordinary Apple Quince, set down before, and is of
so harsh a taste being green, that no man can endure to eat it raw, but
either boiled, stewed, roasted or baked; all which ways it is very good.

The Portingall Apple Quince is a great yellow Quince, seldom coming to be
whole and fair without chapping; this is so pleasant being fresh gathered,
that it may be eaten like unto an Apple without offense.

The Portingall Pear Quince is not fit to be eaten raw like the former, but
must be used after some of the ways the English Quince is appointed, and so it
will make more dainty dishes then the English, because it is less harsh, will
be more tender, and take less sugar for the ordering then the English kind.

The Barbary Quince is like in goodness unto the Portingall Quince last spoken
of, but lesser in bigness.

The Lions Quince.

The Brunswicke Quince.

The Use of Quinces.
There is no fruit growing in this Land that is of so many excellent uses as
this, serving as well to make many dishes of meat for the table, as for
banquets, and much more for the Physical virtues, whereof to write at large is
neither convenient for me, nor for this work: I will only briefly recite
some, as it were to give you a taste of that plenty remains therein, to be
converted into sundry forms: as first for the table, while they are fresh (and
all the year long after being pickled up) to be baked, as a dainty dish, being
well and orderly cookt. And being preserved whole in Sugar, either white or
red, serve likewise, not only as an after dish to close up the stomach, but
is placed among other Preserues by Ladies and Gentlewomen, and bestowed on
their friends to entertain them, and among other sorts of Preserues at
Banquets. Codiniacke also and Marmilade, Ielly and Paste, are all made of
Quinces, chiefly for delight and pleasure, although they have also with them
some physical properties.

We have for the use of physic, both Juice and Syrup, both Conserve and
Condite, both binding and loosening medicines, both inward and outward, and all
made of Quinces.

The Ielly or Muccilage of the seeds, is often used to be laid upon women's
breasts, to heal them being sore or raw, by their childrens default giving
them suck.

Athenaeus recites in his third book, that one Philarchus found, that the
smell of Quinces took away the strength of a certain poison, called
Phariacum. And the Spaniards have also found, that the strength of the juice of
white Ellebor (which the Hunters use as a poison to dippe their arrow heads in,
that they shoot at wild beasts to kill them) is quite taken away, if it stand
within the compass of the smell of Quinces. And also that Grapes, being hung
up to be kept, and spent in Winter, do quickly rot with the smell of a Quince.

CHAP. XXI.
Pyra. Pears.
THe variety of pears is as much or more then of apples, and I think it is as
hard in this, as before in apples, for any to be so exquisite, as that he
could number up all the sorts that are to be had: for we have in our country
so many, as I shall give you the names of by and by, and are hitherto come to
our knowledge: but I verily believe that there be many, both in our country,
and in others, that we have not yet known or heard of; for every year almost
we attain to the knowledge of some, we knew not of before. Take therefore,
according to the manner before held, the description of one, with the several
names of the rest, until a more exact discourse be had of them, every one
apart.

The Pear tree grows more slowly, but higher, and more upright then the
apple tree, and not less in the bulk of the body: his branches spread not so
far or wide, but grow vprighter and closer: the leaves are somewhat broader
and rounder, green above, and whiter underneath then those of the apple tree:
the flowers are whiter and greater: the fruit is longer then round for the most
part, smaller at the stalk, and greater at the head, of so many differing
forms, colors, and tastes, that hardly can one distinguish rightly between
them, the times also being as variable in the gathering and spending of them,
as in apples: the root grows deeper then the apple tree, and therefore
abides longer, and gives a faster, closer, and smoother gentle wood, easy to
be wrought upon.

The kinds of Pears.
The Summer bon Chretien is somewhat a long pear, with a green and yellow
russetish coat, and will have sometimes red sides; it is ripe at Michaelmas:
some use to dry them as they do Prunes, and keep them all the year after. I
have not seen or heard any more Summer kinds hereof then this one, and
needs no wall to nourse it as the other.

1 Malus Cotouo^. The Quince tree. 2 Cydonium Lu^itanicum. The Portingall
Quince. 3 Pyrus. The Pear tree. 4 Pyrum Pompeianum, sieve Cucume^inum hyemale.
The Winter Bon Chretien. 5 Pyrum pictum vel striatum. The painted or striped
Pear of ^erusalem. 6 Pyrum Palatinal^. The Burgomot Pear. 7 Pyrum Cucumerinum
sieve Pompeianum aestivum. The Summer Bon Chretien. 8 Pyrum Volemam. The best
Warden. 9 Pyrum Librale. The ocua^ Pear. 10 Pyrum Windsorianum. The Windsor
Pear. 11 Pyrum Cucumerinum. The Gratiosa Pear. 12 Pyrum Caryophyllatum. The
Gilloflower Pear.
depiction of fruit

The Winter bon Chretien is of many sorts, some greater, others lesser, and all
good; but the greatest and best is that kind that grows at Syon: All the
kinds of this Winter fruit must be planted against a wall, or else they will
both seldom bear, and bring fewer also to ripeness, comparable to the wall
fruit: the kinds also are according to their lasting; for some will endure
good much longer then others.

The Summer Bergomot is an excellent well rellished pear, flattish, and short,
not long like others, of a mean bigness, and of a dark yellowish green
color on the outside.

The Winter Bergomot is of two or three sorts, being all of them small fruit,
somewhat greener on the outside then the Summer kinds; all of them very
delicate and good in their due time: for some will not be fit to be eaten when
others are will-nigh spent, every of them outlasting another by a month or
more.

The Diego pear is but a small pear, but an excellent well rellished fruit,
tasting as if Mask had been put among it; many of them grow together, as it
were in clusters.

The Duetete or double headed pear, so called of the form, is a very good
pear, not very great, of a russettish brown color on the outside.

The Primating pear is a good moist pear, and early ripe.

The Geneting pear is a very good early ripe pear.

The green Chesill is a delicate mellow pear, even melting as it were in the
mouth of the eater, although greenish on the outside.

The Catherine pear is known to all I think to be a yellow red sided pear,
of a full waterish sweet taste, and ripe with the foremost.

The King Catherine is greater then the other, and of the same goodness, or
rather better.

The Russet Catherine is a very good middle sized pear.

The Windsor pear is an excellent good pear, well known to most persons, and
of a reasonable greatness: it will bear fruit some times twice in a year
(and as it is said) three times in some places.

The Norwich pear is of two sorts, Summer and Winter, both of them good fruit,
each in their season.

The Worster pear is blackish, a far better pear to bake (when as it will
be like a Warden, and as good) then to eat raw; yet so it is not to be
misliked.

The Musk pear is like unto a Catherine pear for bigness, color, and
form; but far more excellent in taste, as the very name imports.

The Rosewater pear is a goodly fair pear, and of a delicate taste.

The Sugar pear is an early pear, very sweet, but waterish.

The Summer Popperin both of them are very good firm dry pears, somewhat
spotted, and brownish on the outside.

The Winter Popperin both of them are very good firm dry pears, somewhat
spotted, and brownish on the outside.

The green Popperin is a winter fruit, of equal goodness with the former.

The Soueraingne pear, that which I have seen and tasted, and so termed unto
me, was a small brownish yellow pear, but of a most dainty taste; but some do
take a kind of Bon Chretien, called the Elizabeth pear, to be the Sovereign
pear; how truly let others judge.

The Kings pear is a very good and well tasted pear.

The pear Royal is a great pear, and of a good relish.

The Warwick pear is a reasonable fair and good pear.

The Greenfield pear is a very good pear, of a middle size.

The Jews pear is a brownish green pear, ripe about the end of September, a
reasonable well rellished fruit, and very moist.

The Bishop pear is a middle sized pear, of a reasonable good taste, not very
waterish; but this property is oftentimes seen in it, that before the fruit is
gathered, (but more usually those that fall of themselves, and the rest within
a while after they are gathered) it will be rotten at the core, when there will
not be a spot or blemish to be seen on the outside, or in all the pear,
until you come near the core.

The Wilford pear is a good and a fair pear.

The Bell pear a very good green pear.

The Portingall pear is a great pear, but more goodly in show then good
indeed.

The Gratiola pear is a kind of Bon Chretien, called the Cowcumber pear, or
Spinola's pear.

The Rolling pear is a good pear, but hard, and not good before it be a
little rolled or bruised, to make it eat the more mellow.

The Pimpe pear is as great as the Windsor pear, but rounder, and of a very
good relish.

The Turnep pear is a hard winter pear, not so good to eat raw, as it is to
bake.

The Arundell pear is most plentiful in Suffolk, and there commended to be a
very good pear.

The Berry pear is a Summer pear, reasonable fair and great, and of so good
and wholesome a taste, that few or none take harm by eating never so many of
them.

The Sand pear is a reasonable good pear, but small.

The Morley pear is a very good pear, like in form and color unto the
Windsor, but somewhat grayer.

The pear prick is very like unto the Greenfield pear, being both fair,
great, and good.

The good Rewell is a reasonable great pear, as good to bake as to eat raw,
and both ways it is a good fruit.

The Hawks bill pear is of a middle size, somewhat like unto the Rolling
pear.

The Petworth pear is a winter pear, and is great, somewhat long, fair, and
good.

The Slipper pear is a reasonable good pear.

The Robert pear is a very good pear, plentiful in Suffolk and Norfolk.

The pound pear is a reasonable good pear, both to eat raw, and to bake.

The ten pound pear, or the hundred pound pear, the truest and best, is the
best Bon Chretien of Syon, so called, because the grafts cost the Master so
much the fetching by the messengers expenses, when he brought nothing else.

The Gilloflower pear is a winter pear, fair in show, but hard, and not fit
to be eaten raw, but very good to bake.

The pear Couteau is neither good one way nor other.

The Binsce pear is a reasonable good winter pear, of a russetish color, and
a small fruit: but will abide good a long while.

The Pucell is a green pear, of an indifferent good taste.

The black Sorrel is a reasonable great long pear, of a dark red color on
the outside.

The red Sorrel is of a redder color, else like the other.

The Surrine is no very good pear.

The Summer Hasting is a little green pear, of an indifferent good relish.

Pear Gergonell is an early pear, somewhat long, and of a very pleasant taste.

The white Genneting is a reasonable good pear, yet not equal to the other.

The Sweater is somewhat like the Windsor for color and bigness, but nothing
near of so good a taste.

The blood red pear is of a dark red color on the outside, but piercing very
little into the inner pulpe.

The Honey pear is a long green Summer pear.

The Winter pear is of many sorts, but this is only so called, to be
distinguished from all other Winter pears, which have several names given
them, and is a very good pear.

The Warden or Luke Wards pear of two sorts, both white and red, both great
and small.

The Spanish Warden is greater then either of both the former, and better also.

The pear of Jerusalem, or the stripped pear, whose bark while it is young, is
as plainly seen to be stripped with green, red, and yellow, as the fruit it
self is also, and is of a very good taste: being baked also, it is as red as
the best Warden, whereof Master William Ward of Essex has assured me, who is
the chief keeper of the Kings Granary at Whitehall.

Hereof likewise there is a wild kind no bigger then ones thumb, and striped
in the like manner, but much more.

The Choke pears, and other wild pears, both great and small, as they are
not to furnish our Orchard, but the Woods, Forests, Fields, and Hedges, so we
leave them to their natural places, and to them that keep them, and make good
use of them.

The Use of Pears.
The most excellent sorts of Pears, serve (is I said before of Apples) to make
an after-course for their masters table, where the goodness of his Orchard is
tried. They are dried also, and so are an excellent repaste, if they be of the
best kinds, fit for the purpose.

They are eaten familiarly of all sorts of people, of some for delight, and of
others for nourishment, being baked, stewed, or scalded.

The red Warden and the Spanish Warden are reckoned among the most excellent of
Pears, either to bake or to roast, for the sick or for the sound: And
indeed, the Quince and the Warden are the two only fruits are permitted to
the sick, to eat at any time.

Perry, which is the juice of Pears pressed out, is a drink much esteemed as
well as Cider, to be both drunk at home, and carried to the Sea, and found to
be of good use in long voyages.

The Perry made of Choke Pears, notwithstanding the harshnesse, and evil
taste, both of the fruit when it is green, as also of the juice when it is new
made, does yet after a few months become as mild and pleasant as wine, and
will hardly be known by the sight or taste from it: this has been found
true by often experience; and therefore we may admire the goodness of God,
that has given such facility to so wild fruits, altogether thought vselesse,
to become useful, and apply the benefit thereof both to the comfort of our
souls and bodies.

For the Physical properties, if we do as Galen teaches us, in secundo
Alimentorum, refer the qualities of Pears to their several tastes, as
before he had done in Apples, we shall not need to make a new work; those
that are harsh and sour do cool and bind, sweet do nourish and warm, and
those between these, to have middle virtues, answerable to their temperatures,
etc.

Much more might be said, both of this and the other kinds of fruits; but let
this suffice for this place and work, until a more exact be accomplished.

CHAP. XXII.
Nux Iuglans. The Wallnut.
ALthough the Wallnut tree be often planted in the middle of great Courtyards,
where by reason of his great spreading arms it takes up a great deal of
room, his shadow reaching far, so that scarce any thing can well grow near
it; yet because it is likewise planted in fit places or corners of Orchards,
and that it bears fruit or nuts, often brought to the table, especially while
they are freshest, sweetest, and fittest to be eaten, let not my Orchard want
his company, or you the knowledge of it. Some do think that there are many
sorts of them, because some are much greater then others, and some longer then
others, and some have a more frangible shell then others; but I am certainly
persuaded, that the soil and climate where they grow, are the whole and only
cause of the varieties and differences. Indeed Virginia has sent unto us two
sorts of Wallnuts, the one black, the other white, whereof as yet we have no
further knowledge. And I know that Clusius reports, he took up at a banquet
a long Wallnut, differing in form and tenderness of shell from others, which
being set, grew and bore far tenderer leaves then the other, and a little
snipt about the edges, which (as I said) might alter with the soil and
climate: and besides you may observe, that many of Clusius differences are very
nice, and so I leave it.

The Wallnut tree grows very high and great, with a large and thick body or
trunk, covered with a thick cloven whitish green bark, tending to an
ash color; the arms are great, and spread far, breaking out into smaller
branches, whereon do grow long and large leaves, five or seven set together
one against another, with an odd one at the end, somewhat like unto Ashen
leaves, but far larger, and not so many on a stalk, smooth, and somewhat
reddish at the first springing, and tender also, of a reasonable good sent, but
more strong and headie when they grow old: the fruit or nut is great and
round, growing close to the stalks of the leaves, either by couples or by
three set together, covered with a double shell, that is to say, with a green
thick and soft outer rind, and an inner hard shell, within which the white
kernel is contained, covered with a thin yellow rind or peeling, which is
more easily peeled away while it is green then afterward, and is as it were
parted into four quarters, with a thin woody piece parting it at the head,
very sweet and pleasant while it is fresh, and for a while after the
gathering; but the elder they grow, the harder and more oily: the catkins or
blowings are long and yellow, made of many scaly leaves set close together,
which come forth early in the Spring, and when they open and fall away, upon
their stalks arise certain small flowers, which turn into so many nuts.

The Use of Wallnuts.
They are often served to the table with other fruits while they abide fresh
and sweet; and therefore many to keep them fresh a long time have devised
many ways, as to put them into great pots, and bury them in the ground, and so
take them out as they spend them, which is a very good way, and will keep them
long.

The small young nuts while they are tender, being preserved or candid, are
used among other sorts of candid fruits, that serve at banquets.

The juice of the outer green husks are held to be a sovereign remedy
against either poison, or plague, or pestilentiall fever.

The distilled water of the husks drunk with a little vinegar, if the fits
grow hot and tedious, is an approved remedy for the same.

The water distilled from the leaves, is effectual to be applied to fluent or
running ulcers, to dry and bind the humors.

Some have used the powder of the catkins in white wine, for the suffocation or
strangling of the mother.

The oil of Wallnuts is used to varnish Ioyners works. As also is accounted
far to excel Linseede oil, to mix a white color withal, that the color
be not dimmed. It is of excellent use for the coldness, hardness and
contracting of the sinews and joints, to warm, supple, and to extend them.

CHAP. XXIII.
Castanea Equina. The Horse Chestnut.
ALthough the ordinary Chestnut is not a tree planted in Orchards, but left to
Woods, Parkes, and other such like places; yet we have another sort which we
have noursed up from the nuts sent us from Turkey, of a greater and more
pleasant aspect for the fair leaves, and of as good use for the fruit. It
grows in time to be a great tree, spreading with great arms and branches,
whereon are set at several distances goodly fair great green leaves, divided
into six, seven, or nine parts or leaves, every one of them nicked about the
edges, very like unto the leaves of Ricnus, or Palma Christi, and almost as
great: it bears at the ends of the branches many flowers set together upon a
long stalk, consisting of four white leaves a piece, with many threads in the
middle, which afterward turn into nuts, like unto the ordinary Chestnuts, but
set in rougher and more prickly husks: the nuts themselves being rounder and
blacker, with a white spot at the head of each, formed somewhat like an heart,
and of a little sweeter taste.

The Use of this Chestnut.
It serves to bind and stop any manner of flux, be it of blood or humors,
either of the belly or stomach; as also the much spitting of blood. They are
roasted and eaten as the ordinary sort, to make them taste the better.

They are usually in Turkey given to horses in their prouender, to cure them of
coughes, and help them being broken winded.

CHAP. XXIIII.
Morus. The Mulberrie.
THere are two sorts of Mulberries sufficiently known to most, the blackish and
the white: but we have had brought us from Virginia another sort, which is of
greater respect then either of the other two, not only in regard of the
ratitie, but of the use, as you shall presently understand.

1. Morus nigra. The black Mulberrie.
The black Mulberrie tree grows oftentimes tall and great, and oftentimes
also crooked, and spreading abroad, rather then high; for it is subject to
abide what form you will conform it unto: if by suffering it to grow, it will
mount up, and if you will bind it, or plash the boughs, they will so abide,
and be carried over arbours, or other things as you will have it. The body
grows in time to be very great, covered with a rugged or thick bark, the
arms or branches being smoother, whereon do grow round thick leaves pointed
at the ends, and nicked about the edges, and in some there are to be seen deep
gashes, making it seem somewhat like the Vine leaf: the flowers are certain
short dounie catkings, which turn into green berries at the first, afterward
red, and when they are full ripe black, made of many grains set together,
like unto the black berrie, but longer and greater: before they are ripe, they
have an austere and harsh taste, but when they are full ripe, they are more
sweet and pleasant; the juice whereof is so red, that it will stain the hands
of them that handle and eat them.

2. Morus alba. The white Mulberrie.
The white Mulberrie tree grows not with us to that greatness or bulk of
body that the black does, but runs up higher, slenderer, more knotty, hard
and brittle, with thinner spread arms and branches: the leaves are like the
former, but not so thick set on the branches, nor so hard in handling, a
little paler also, having somewhat longer stalks: the fruit is smaller and
closer set together, green, and somewhat harsh before they be ripe, but of a
wonderful sweetness, almost ready to procure loathing when they are thorough
ripe, and white, with such like seed in them as in the former, but smaller.

3. Morus Virginiana. The Virginia Mulberrie.
The Virginia Mulberry tree grows quickly with us to be a very great tree,
spreading many arms and branches, whereon grow fair great leaves, very like
unto the leaves of the white Mulberrie tree: the berry or fruit is longer and
redder then either of the other, and of a very pleasant taste.

The Use of Mulberries.
The greatest and most especial use of the planting of white Mulberries, is
for the feeding of Silk worms, for which purpose all the Eastern Countries,
as Persia, Syria, Armenia, Arabia etc. and also the hither part of Turkey,
Spain also and Italy, and many other hot Countries do nourish them, because
it is best for that purpose, the worms feeding thereon, giving the finest and
best silk; yet some are confident that the leaves of the black will do as
much good as the white: but that respect must be had to change your seed,
because therein lies the greatest mystery. But there is a Book or Tractate
printed, declaring the whole use of whatsoever can belong unto them: I will
therefore refer them thereunto, that 1 Nux Iuglans. The Wallnut. 2 Castanea
equina. The horse Chestnut. 3 Morus nigra-vel alba. The Mulberry. 4 Morus
Vi^giniana The Virginia Mulberry. 5 Laurus vulgaris. The ordinary Bay tree, 6
Laurea Cerasus Virginiana, The Virginia Cherry Bay.
depiction of plants would further understand of that matter.

Mulberries are not much desired to be eaten, although they be somewhat
pleasant, both for that they stain their fingers and lips that eat them, and
do quickly putrefie in the stomach, if they be not taken before meat.

They have yet a Physical use, which is by reason of the astringent quality
while they are red, and before they be ripe, for sore mouths and throats, or
the like, whereunto also the Syrup, called Diamoron, is effectual.

Corollarium. A COROLEARIE To this Orchard.
THere are certain other trees that bear no fruit fit to be eaten, which yet
are often seen planted in Orchards, and other fit and convenient places bout
an house, whereof some are of especial use, as the Bay tree etc. others for
their beauty and shadow are fit for walks or arbours; some being ever green
are most fit for hedge-rowes; and some others more for their raritie then for
any other great use, whereof I thought good to entreat apart by themselves, and
bring them after the fruit trees of this Orchard, as an ornament to accomplish
the same.

1. Laurus. The Bay tree.
THere are to be reckoned up five kinds of Bay trees, three whereof have been
entreated of in the first part, a fourth we will only bring hereto your
consideration, which is that kind that is usually planted in every man's yard
or orchard, for their use throughout the whole land, the other we will leave to
be considered of in that place is fit for it.

The Bay tree rises up oftentimes to carry the face of a tree of a mean
bigness in our Country (although much greater in the hoter) and oftentimes
shoots up with many suckers from the root, showing it self more like to a
tall shrubbe or hedgebush, then a tree, having many branches, the young ones
whereof are sometimes reddish, but most usually of a light or fresh green
color, when the stem and elder boughs are covered with a dark green
bark: the leaves are somewhat broad, and long pointed as it were at both the
ends, hard and sometimes crumpled on the edges, of a dark green color above,
and of a yellowish green underneath, in smell sweet, in taste bitter, and
abiding ever green: the flowers are yellow and mossie, which turn into
berries that are a little long as well as round, whose shell or outermost peele
is green at the first, and black when it is ripe; wherein is contained an
hard bitter kernel, which cleaves in two parts.

The Use of Bays.
The Bay leaves are of as necessary use as any other in Garden or Orchard; for
they serve both for pleasure and profit, both for ornament and for use, both
for honest Civil uses, and for Physic, yea both for the sick and for the
sound, both for the living and for the dead: And so much might be said of this
one tree, that if it were all told, would as well weary the Reader, as the
Relater: but to explain my self; It serves to adorn the house of God as
well as of man: to procure warmth, comfort and strength to the limbs of men
and women, by bathings and annoyntings outward, and by drinks etc. inward to
the stomach, and other parts: to season vessels etc. wherein are preserved our
meats, as well as our drinks: to crown or encircle as with a garland, the
heads of the living, and to stick and deck forth the bodies of the dead: so
that from the cradle to the grave we have still use of it, we have still need
of it.

The berries likewise serve for stitches inward, and for pains outward, that
come of cold either in the joints, sinews, or other places.

2. Laurea Cerasus, sieve Laurus Virginiana. The Virginian Bay, or Cherry Baye.
THis Virginian (whether you will call it a Baye, or a Cherrie, or a Cherrie
Bay, I leave it to every ones free will and judgment, but yet I think I may
as well call it a Bay as others a Cherrie, neither of them being answerable to
the tree, which neither bears such berries as are like Cherries, neither
bears ever green leaves like the Bay: if it may therefore be called the
Virginia Cherry Bay, for a distinction from the former Bay Cherry that bears
fair black Cherries, it will more fitly agree thereunto, until a more proper
may be imposed) rises up to be a tree of a reasonable height, the stem or
body thereof being almost as great as a man's leg, spreading forth into
diverse arms or boughs, and they again into diverse small branches, whereon
are set without order diverse fair broad green leaves, somewhat like unto the
former Bay leaves, but more limber and gentle, and not so hard in handling,
broader also, and for the most part ending in a point, but in many somewhat
round pointed, very finely notched or toothed about the edges, of a bitter
taste, very near resembling the taste of the Bay leaf, but of little or no
sent at all, either green or dried, which fall away every autumn, and spring
a fresh every year: the blossoms are small and white, many growing together
upon a long stalk, somewhat like the Bird Cherry blossoms, but smaller, and
come forth at the ends of the young branches, which after turn into small
berries, every one set in a small cup or husk, green at the first, and black
when they are ripe, of the bigness of a small pease, of a strong bitter taste,
and somewhat aromaticall withal, but without any fleshy substance like a
Cherry at all upon it; for it is altogether like a berry.

The Use of this Virginia Cherry Bay.
Being a stranger in our Land, and possessed but of a very few, I do not hear
that there has been any trial made thereof what properties are in it: let
this therefore suffice for this present, to have showed you the description and
form thereof, until we can learn further of his uses.

3. Pinus. The Pine tree.
MY purpose in this place is not to show you all the diversities of Pine trees,
or of the rest that follow, but of that one kind is planted in many places of
our Land for ornament and delight, and there does reasonably well abide: take
it therefore into this Orchard, for the raritie and beauty of it, though we
have little other use of it.

The Pine tree grows with us, though slowely, to a very great height in many
places, with a great straight body, covered with a grayish green bark, the
younger branches are set round about, with very narrow long whitish green
leaves, which fall away from the elder, but abide on the younger, being both
winter and summer always green. It has growing in sundry places on the
branches, certain great hard woody clogs (called of some apples, of others
nuts) composed of many hard woody scales, or tuberous knobs, which abide for
the most part always green in our Country, and hardly become brownish, as in
other Countries, where they have more heat and comfort of the Sun, and where
the scales open themselves; wherein are contained white long and round kernels,
very sweet while they are fresh, but quickly growing oylely and rancide.

The Use of the Pine apples and kernels.
The Cones or Apples are used of diverse Vintners in this City, being painted,
to express a bunch of grapes, whereunto they are very like, and are hung up in
their bushes, as also to fasten keys unto them, as is seen in many places.

The kernels within the hard shells, while they are fresh or newly taken out,
are used many ways, both with Apothecaries, Comfit-makers, and Cooks: for of
them are made medicines, good to lenifie the pipes and passages of the lungs
and throat, when it is hoarse. Of them are made Comfits, Pastes, Marchpanes,
and diverse other such like: And with them a cunning Cook can make diverse Keck
shoses for his Masters table.

Matthiolus commends the water of the green apples distilled, to take away
the wrinkles in the face, to abate the ouer-swelling breasts of Maidens, by
fomenting them after with linen clothes, wet in the water; and to restore such
as are ravished into better terms.

4. Abies. The Fur tree.
THe Fur tree grows naturally higher then any other tree in these parts of
Christendom where no Cedars grow, and even equalling or ouer-topping the Pine:
the stem or body is bare without branches for a great height, if they be
elder trees, and then branching forth at one place of the body four ways in
manner of a cross, those boughs again having two branches at every joint, on
which are set on all sides very thick together many small narrow long hard
whitish green leaves, and while they are young tending to yellowness, but
nothing so long or hard or sharp pointed as the Pine tree leaves, growing
smaller and shorter to the end of the branches: the bloomings are certain
small long scaly catkins, of a yellowish color, coming forth at the joints of
the branches, which fall away: the cones are smaller and longer then of the
Pine tree, wherein are small three square seed contained, not half so big as
the Pine kernels.

The Use of the Fur tree.
The use of this tree is grown with us of late days to be more frequent for
the building of houses then ever before: for hereof (namely of Deal timber and
Deal boords) are framed many houses, and their floores, without the help of
any other timber or board of any other tree almost; as also for many other
works and purposes. The yellow Rossen that is used as well to make salues as
for many other common uses, is taken from this tree, as the Pitch is both from
the Pitch and Pine trees, and is boiled to make it to be hard, but was at the
first a yellow thin clear Turpentine, and is that best sort of common
Turpentine is altogether in use with us, as also another more thick, whitish,
and troubled, both which are used in salues, both for man and beast (but not
inwardly as the clear white Venice Turpentine is) and serves both to draw,
cleanse and heal. Dodonaeus seems to say, that the clear white Turpentine,
called Venice Turpentine, is drawn from the Fur: but Matthiolus confuteth
that opinion, which Fulsius also held before him.

5. Ilex arbor. The euer-greene Oak.
THe Ilex or euer-greene Oak rises in time to be a very great tree, but very
long and slow in growing (as is to be seen in the Kings privy Garden at
Whitehall, growing just against the back gate that opens into the way going
to Westminster, and in some other places) spreading many fair large great arms
and branches, whereon are set small and hard green leaves, somewhat endented
or cornered, and 1 Piaus The Pine tree. 2 Abies. The Fur tree. 3 Ilex. The
ever green Oak. 4 Cupressus. The Cipresse tree. 5 Arbutus. The Strawberry
tree. 6 Alaternus. The ever green Priuet.
depiction of trees prickly on the edges, especially in the young trees, and
sometimes on those branches that are young and newly sprung forth from the
elder roots, but else in a manner all smooth in the elder grown, abiding
green all the winter as well as summer, and are of a grayish green on the
vnderside. It bears in the spring time certain slender long branches (like
as other Oaks do) with small yellowish mossie flowers on them, which fall
away, and are unprofitable, the acornes not growing from those places, but from
others which are like unto those of our ordinary Oak, but smaller and blacker,
and set in a more rugged husk or cup. This and no other kind of Ilex do I
know to grow in all our land in any Garden or Orchard: for that kind with long
and narrower leaves, and not prickly, growing so plentifully as Matthiolus
says in Tuscane, I have not seen: and it is very probable to be the same that
Pliny remembers to have the leaf of an Olive; but not as some would have it,
that Smilax Theophrastus makes mention of in his third Book and sixteenth
Chapter of his History of Plants, which the Arcadians so called, and had the
leaf of the Ilex, but not prickly: for Theophrastus says, the timber of
Smilax is smooth and soft, and this of the Ilex is harder, and stronger then an
Oak.

The Use of the Ilex or euer-greene Oak.
Seeing this is to be accounted among the kinds of Oak (and all Oaks by
Dioscorides his opinion are binding) it is also of the same quality, but a
little weaker, and may serve to strengthen weak members. The young tops and
leaves are also used in gargles for the mouth and throat.

6 Cupressus. The Cypress tree.
THe Cypress tree that is noursed up by us, in our Country, does grow in those
places where it has been long planted, to a very great height, whose body
and boughs are covered with a reddish ash-colored bark; the branches grow not
spreading, but upright close unto the body, bushing thick below, and small
upwards, spire fashion, those below reaching near half the way to them above,
whereon do grow ever green leaves, small, long and flat, of a resinous sweet
smell, and strong taste, somewhat bitter: the fruit, which are called nuts,
grow here and there among the boughs, sticking close unto them, which are
small, and cloven into diverse parts, but close while they are young, of a
russetish brown color; wherein are contained small brown seed, but not so
small as motes in the Sun, as Matthiolus and others make them to be.

The Use of the Cypress tree.
For the goodly proportion this tree bears, as also for his euer-greene head,
it is and has been of great account with all Princes, both beyond, and on
this side of the Sea, to plant them in rows on both sides of some spacious
walk, which by reason of their high growing, and little spreading, must be
planted the thicker together, and so they give a goodly, pleasant and sweet
shadow: or else alone, if they have not many, in the middle of some quarter, or
as they think meet. The wood thereof is firm and durable, or never decaying,
of a brown yellow color, and of a strong sweet smell, whereof Chests or Boxes
are made to keep apparel, linen, furs, and other things, to preserve them
from moths, and to give them a good smell.

Many Physical properties, both wood, leaves and nuts have, which here is not
my purpose to unfold, but only to tell you, that the leaves being boiled in
wine, and drunk, help the difficulty of making urine, and that the nuts are
binding, fit to be used to stay fluxes or laskes, and good also for ruptures.

7. Arbutus. The Strawberry tree.
THe Strawberry tree grows but slowly, and rises not to the height of any
great tree, no not in France, Italy, or Spain: and with us the coldness of
our country does the more abate his vigor, so that it seldom rises to the
height of a man: the bark of the body is rough, and smooth in the younger
branches: the leaves are fair and green, very like unto Baye leaves, finely
dented or snipped about the edges, abiding always green thereon both Winter
and Summer: the flowers come forth at the end of the branches upon long
stalks, not clustering thick together, but in long bunches, and are small,
white, and hollow, like a little bottle, or the flower of Lilly Conually, which
after turn into rough or rugged berries, most like unto Strawberries (which
has given the name to the tree) somewhat reddish when they are ripe, of a
harsh taste, nothing pleasant, wherein are contained many small seeds: It
hardly brings his fruit to ripeness in our country; for in their natural
places they ripen not until Winter, which there is much milder then with us.

The Use of the Strawberry tree.
Amatus Lusitanus I think is the first that ever recorded, that the water
distilled from the leaves and flowers hereof, should be very powerful against
the plague and poisons: for all the ancient Writers do report, that the fruit
hereof being eaten, is an enemy to the stomach and head. And Clusius likewise
sets down, that at Lishbone, and other places in Portingall where they are
frequent, they are chiefly eaten, but of the poorer sort, women and boys. They
are somewhat astringent or binding, and therefore may well serve for fluxes. It
is chiefly noursed with us for the beauty and rareness of the tree; for that
it bears his leaves always green.

8. Alaternus. The ever green Priuet.
THe tree which we have growing in our country called Alaternus, grows not to
be a tree of any height; but abiding low, spreads forth many branches,
whereon are set diverse small and hard green leaves, somewhat round for the
form, and endented a little by the edges: it bears many small whitish green
flowers at the joints of the stalks, and setting on of the lower leaves
clustering thick together, which after turn into small black berries,
wherein are contained many small grains or seeds: the beauty and verdure of
these leaves abiding so fresh all the year, does cause it to be of the greater
respect; and therefore finds place in their Gardens only, that are curious
conseruers of all natures beauties.

The Use of the ever green Priuet.
It is seldom used for any Physical property, neither with us, nor in the
places where it is natural and plentiful: but as Clusius reports, he
learned that the Portingall Fishermen do dye their nets red with the decoction
of the bark hereof, and that the Dyers in those parts do use the small pieces
of the wood to strike a blackish blew color.

9. Celastrus Theophrasti Clusio. Clusius his Celastrus.
ALthough the Collectour (who is thought to be Ioannes Molineus of the great
Herball or History of plants, and generally bearing Daleschampius name, because
the finding and relation of diverse herbs therein expressed, is appropiate to
him, and printed at Lions) of all our modern Writers does first of all others
appoint the Celastrus, whereof Theophrastus only among all the ancient Writers
of plants makes mention, to be the first Alaternus that Clusius has set forth
in his History of rarer plants: yet I find, that Clusius himself before his
death does appropiate that Celastrus of Theophrastus to another plant, growing
in the Garden at Leyden, which formerly of diverse had been taken to be a kind
of Laurus Tinus, or the wild Baye; but he impugning that opinion for diverse
respects, decyphreth out that Leyden tree in the same manner that I do: and
because it is not only fair, in bearing his leaves always green, but rare
also, being noursed up in our Land in very few places, but principally with a
good old Lady, the widow of Sir John Leuson, dwelling near Rochester in Kent;
I thought it fit to commend it for an ornament, to adorn this our Garden and
Orchard. It grows up to the height of a reasonable tree, the body whereof is
covered with a dark colored bark, as the elder branches are in like manner;
the younger branches being green, whereon are set diverse leaves thick
together, two always at a joint, one against another, of a sad but fair
green color on the vpperside, and paler underneath, which are little or
nothing at all snipped about the edges, as large as the leaves of the Laurus
Tinus, or wild Baye tree: at the end of the young branches break forth
between the leaves diverse small stalks, with four or five flowers on each of
them, of a yellowish green color, which turn into small berries, of the
bigness of black Cherries, green at the first, and red when they begin to be
ripe, but growing black if they hang too long upon the branches, wherein is
contained a hard shell, and a white hard kernel within it, covered with a
yellowish skin. This abides (as I said before) with green leaves as well
Winter as Summer; and therefore fittest to be planted among other of the same
nature, to make an ever green hedge.

The Use of Clusius his Celastrus.
Being so great a stranger in this part of the Christian world, I know none
has made trial of what property it is, but that the taste of the leaves is
somewhat bitter.

10. Pyracantha. The ever green Hawthorne, or prickly Coral tree.
THis ever green shrubbe is so fine an ornament to a Garden or Orchard, either
to be noursed up into a small tree by it self, by pruining and taking away the
suckers and under branches, or by suffering it to grow with suckers, thick and
plashing the branches into a hedge, for that it is pliable to be ordered either
way; that I could not but give you the knowledge thereof, with the description
in this manner. The younger branches are covered with a smooth dark bluish
green bark, and the elder with a more ash colored, thick set with leaves
without order, some greater and others smaller, somewhat like both in form and
bigness unto the leaves of the Barberry tree, but somewhat larger, and more
snipt about the edges, of a deeper green color also, and with small long
thorns scattered here and there upon the branches: the flowers come forth as
well at the ends of the branches, as at diverse places at the joints of the
leaves, standing thick together, of a pale whitish color, a little dashed over
with a show of blush, consisting of five leaves a piece, with some small
threads in the middle, which turn into berries, very like unto Hawthorne
berries, but much redder and dryer, almost like polished Coral, wherein are
contained four or five small yellowish white three square seed, somewhat
shining. It is thought to be the Oxyacantha of Dioscorides; but seeing
Dioscorides does explain the form of the leaf in his Chapter of Medlars,
which he concealed in the Chapter of Oxyacantha, it cannot be the same: for
Mespilus Anthedon of Theophrastus, or Aronia of Dioscorides, has the leaf of
Oxyacantha, as Dioscorides says, or of Smalladge, as Theophrastus, which
cannot agree to this Thorn; but does most lively delineate out our white
Thorn or Hawthorne, that now there is no doubt, but that Oxyacantha of
Dioscorides is the Hawthorne tree or bush.

The Use of this Coral tree.
Although Lobel makes mention of this tree to grow both in Italy, and 1
Celastrus Theophrasti Clufio. Clusius his Celastrus. 2 Pyracantha. The ever
green prickly Coral tree, 3 Taxus. The Yewe tree. 4 Buxus arbor. The Box tree
5 Buxus humilis. The low or dwarf Box. 6 Sabina. The Sauine tree. 7
Paliurus. Christ's thorn. 8 Larix. The Larch tree.
depiction of trees Prouence in France, in some of their hedges, yet he says
it is neglected in the natural places, and to be of no use with them: neither
do I hear, that it is applied to any Physical use with us, but (as I before
said) it is preserved with diverse as an ornament to a Garden or Orchard, by
reason of his ever green leaves, and red berries among them, being a pleasant
spectacle, and fit to be brought into the form of an hedge, as one please to
lead it.

11. Taxus. The Yewe tree.
THe Yewe tree grows with us in many places to be a reasonable great tree,
but in hoter countries much bigger, covered with a reddish gray scaly bark;
the younger branches are reddish likewise, whereon grow many winged leaves,
that is, many narrow long dark green leaves, set on both sides of a long
stalk or branch, never dying or falling away, but abiding on perpetually,
except it be on the elder boughs: the flowers are small, growing by the
leaves, which turn into round red berries, like unto red Asparagus berries, in
taste sweetish, with a little bitterness, and causing no harm to them for any
thing has been known in our country,

The Use of the Yewe tree.
It is found planted both in the corners of Orchards, and against the windows
of Houses, to be both a shadow and an ornament, in being always green, and to
deck up Houses in Winter: but ancient Writers have ever reckoned it to be
dangerous at the least, if not deadly.

12. Buxus. The Box tree.
THe Box tree in some places is a reasonable tall tree, yet growing slowly;
the trunk or body whereof is of the bigness of a man's thigh, which is the
biggest that ever I saw: but sometimes, and in other places it grows much
lower, usually not above a yard, or a yard and a half high, on the back sides
of many Houses, and in the Orchards likewise: the leaves are small, thick and
hard, and still the greater or lesser the tree is, the greater or lesser are
the leaves, round pointed, and of a fresh shining green color: the flowers
are small and greenish, which turn into heads or berries, with four horns,
whittish on the outside, and with reddish seed within them.

Buxus aureus. Gilded Box.
There is another kind hereof but lately come to our knowledge, which differs
not in any thing from the former, but only that all the leaves have a yellow
list or guard about the edge of them on the vpperside, and none on the lower,
which makes it seem very beautiful; and is therefore called gilded Box.

Buxus humilis. Dwarf Box.
We have yet another kind of Box, growing small and low, not above half a
foot, or a foot high at the most, unless it be neglected, which then does
grow a little more shrubby, bearing the like leaves, but smaller, according to
the growth, and of a deeper green color: I could never know that this kind
ever bore flower or seed, but is propagated by slipping the root, which
increases very much.

The Use of Box.
The wood of the Box tree is used in many kinds of small works among Turners,
because it is hard, close, and firm, and as some have said, the roots much
more, in regard of the diverse waves and crooked veins running through it. It
has no Physical use among the most and best Physicians, although some have
reported it to stay fluxes, and to be as good as the wood of Guaiacum, or
Lignum vitae for the French disease. The leaves and branches serve both Summer
and Winter to deck up houses; and are many times given to horses for the bots.

The low or dwarf Box is of excellent use to border up a knot, or the long
beds in a Garden, being a maruailous fine ornament thereunto, in regard it both
grows low, is ever green, and by cutting may be kept in what manner every
one please, as I have before spoken more largely.

13. Sabina. The Sauine tree or bush.
THe Sauine tree or bush that is most usual in our country, is a small low
bush, not so high as a man in any place, nor so big in the stem or trunk
as a man's arm, with many crooked bending boughs and branches, whereon are set
many small, short, hard, and prickly leaves, of a dark green color, fresh and
green both Winter and Summer: it is reported, that in the natural places it
bears small black berries, like unto Juniper, but with us it was never
known to bear any.

The Use of Sauine.
It is planted in out-yards, backsides, or void places of Orchards, as well to
cast clothes thereon to dry, as for medicines both for men and horses: being
made into an oil, it is good to anoint childrens bellies for to kill the
Worms: and the powder thereof mixed with Hogs grease, to anoint the running
sores or scabs in their heads; but beware how you give it inwardly to men,
women, or children. It is often put into horses drenches, to help to cure them
of the bots, and other diseases.

14. Paliurus. Christ's thorn.
THis thorny shrubbe (wherewith as it is thought, our Savior Christ was
crowned, because as those that have traveled through Palestina and Iudaea, do
report no other thorn does grow therein so frequent, or so apt to be writhed)
rises in some places to a reasonable height, but in our country seldom
exceeds the height of a man, bearing many slender branches, full of leaves,
set on either side thereof one by one, which are somewhat broad and round, yet
pointed, and full of veins, thick set also with small thorns, even at the
foot of every branch, and at the foot of every leaf one or two, some
standing upright, others a little bending down: the flowers are small and
yellow, standing for the most part at the end of the branches, many growing
upon a long stalk, which after turn into round, flat, and hard shelly fruit,
yet covered with a soft fleshy skin, within which are included two or three
hard, small, and brown flat seeds, lying in several partitions. The leaves
hereof fall away every year, and spring forth a fresh again the next May
following. The rarity and beauty of this shrubbe, but chiefly (as I think) the
name has caused this to be much accounted of with all lovers of plants.

The Use of Christ's thorn.
We have so few of these shrubbes growing in our country, and those that are,
do, for any thing I can understand, never bear fruit with us; that there is
no other use made hereof then to delight the owners: but this is certainly
received for the Paliurus of Dioscorides and Theophrastus, and thought also by
Matthiolus to be the very true Rhamnus tertius of Dioscorides. Matthiolus also
seems to contradict the opinion is held by the Physicians of Mompelier, and
others, that it cannot be the Paliurus of Theophrastus. It is held to be
effectual to help to break the stone, both in the bladder, reins, and
kidneyes: the leaves and young branches have an astringent quality, and good
against poisons and the bitings of serpents.

15. Larix. The Larch tree.
THe Larch tree, where it naturally grows, rises up to be as tall as the
Pine or Fur tree, but in our Land being rare, and noursed up but with a few,
and those only lovers of rarities, it grows both slowly, and becomes not
high: the bark hereof is very rugged and thick, the boughs and branches grow
one above another in a very comely order, having diverse small yellowish knobs
or bunches set thereon at several distances; from whence do yearly shoot
forth many small, long, and narrow smooth leaves together, both shorter and
smaller, and not so hard or sharp pointed as either the Pine or Fur tree
leaves, which do not abide the Winter as they do, but fall away every year,
as other trees which shed their leaves, and gain fresh every Spring: the
blossoms are very beautiful and delectable, being of an excellent fine
crimson color, which standing among the green leaves, allure the eyes of the
beholders to regard it with the more desire: it also bears in the natural
places (but not in our Land that I could hear) small soft cones or fruit,
somewhat like unto Cypress nuts, when they are green and close.

The Use of the Larch tree.
The coals of the wood hereof (because it is so hard and durable as none more)
is held to be of most force being fired, to cause the Iron oar to melt, which
none other would do so well. Matthiolus contesteth against Fuchsius, for
deeming the Venice Turpentine to be the liquid Rossen of the Fur tree, which
he assures upon his own experience and certain knowledge, to be drawn from
this Larch tree, and none other; which clear Turpintine is altogether used
inwardly, and no other, except that of the true Turpintine tree, and is very
effectual to cleanse the reins, kidneyes, and bladder, both of gravel and
the stone, and to provoke urine: it is also of especial property for the
gonorrhaea, or running of the reins, as it is called, with some powder of
white Amber mixed therewith, taken for certain days together. Taken also in
an Electuary, it is singular good for to expectorate rotten phlegm, and to
help the consumption of the lungs. It is used in plasters and salues, as the
best sort of Turpintine. The Agaricke that is used in physic, is taken from
the bodies and arms of this tree. And Matthiolus does much insist against
Brasauolus, that thought other trees had produced Agaricke, affirming them to
be hard Fungi, or Mushroms (such as we call Touch-wood) wherewith many use to
take fire, struck thereinto from steel.

16. Tilia. The Line or Linden tree.
THere are two sorts of Line trees, the male and the female; but because the
male is rare to be seen, and the female is more familiar, I will only give
you the description of the female, and leave the other.

The female Line tree grows exceeding high and great, like unto an Elm, with
many large spreading boughs, covered with a smooth bark, the innermost being
very plyant and bending from whence come smaller branches, all of them so
pliable, that they may be led or carried into any form you please: the leaves
thereon are very fair, broad, and round, somewhat like unto Elm leaves, but
fairer, smoother, and of a fresher green color, dented finely about the
edges, and ending in a sharp point: the flowers are white, and of a good
smell, many standing together at the top of a stalk, which runs all along
the middle ribbe of a small long whitish leaf; after which come small round
berries, wherein is contained small blackish seed: this tree is wholly
neglected by those that have them, or dwell near them, because they suppose it
to be fruitless, in regard it bears chaffie husks, which in many places
fall away, without giving ripe seed.

1 Tilia faemina. The Line or Linden tree. 2 Tamariscus. The Tamariske tree. 3
Acer maius latifolium. The Sycomore tree. 4 ^a^hylodendron. The bladder nut. 5
Rhus Myrtifolia. The Myrtle leafed-Sumach. 6 Rhus Virginiana. The Bucks horn
tree. 7 Vitis seu Potius Hedera Virginensis. The Virginia Vine or rather Iuie.
depiction of trees

The Use of the Line tree.
It is planted both to make goodly Arbours, and Summer banqueting houses,
either below upon the ground, the boughs serving very handsomely to plash
round about it, or up higher, for a second above it, and a third also: for the
more it is depressed, the better it will grow. And I have seen at Cobham in
Kent, a tall or great bodied Line tree, bare without boughs for eight foot
high, and then the branches were spread round about so orderly, as if it were
done by art, and brought to compass that middle Arbor: And from those boughs
the body was bare again for eight or nine foot (wherein might be placed
half an hundred men at the least, as there might be likewise in that
underneath this) and then another row of branches to encompasse a third
Arbor, with stayres made for the purpose to this and that underneath it: upon
the boughs were laid boards to tread upon, which was the goodliest spectacle
mine eyes ever beheld for one tree to carry.

The coals of the wood are the best to make Gunpowder. And being kindled, and
quenched in vinegar, are good to dissolve clotted blood in those that are
bruised with a fall. The inner bark being steeped in water yields a slimie
juice, which is found by experience, to be very profitable for them that have
been burnt with fire.

17. Tamarix. Tamariske tree.
THe Tamariske tree that is common in our country, although in some places it
does not grow great, yet I have seen it in some other, to be as great as a
great apple tree in the body, bearing great arms; from whose smaller branches
spring forth young slender red shootes, set with many very fine, small, and
short leaves, a little crisped, like unto the leaves of Sauine, not hard or
rough, but soft and green: the flowers be white mossie threads, which turn
into dounie seed, that is carried away with the wind.

Tamariscus folijs ablidis. White Tamariske.
There is another kind hereof very beautiful and rare, not to be seen in this
Land I think, but with Mr. William Ward, the Kings servant in his Granary,
before remembered, who brought me a small twigge to see from his house at Boram
in Essex, whose branches are all red while they are young, and all the leaves
white, abiding so all the Summer long, without changing into any show of green
like the other, and so abides constant year after year, yet shedding the
leaves in Winter like the other.

The Use of Tamariske.
The greatest use of Tamariske is for spleneticke diseases, either the leaves
or the bark made into drinks; or the wood made into small Cans or Cups to
drink in.

18. Acer maius latifolium. The great Maple or Sycomore tree.
THe Sycomore tree, as we usually call it (and is the greatest kind of Maple,
cherished in our Land only in Orchards, or elsewhere for shade and walks,
both here in England, and in some other countries also) grows quickly to be
a fair spreading great tree, with many boughs and branches, whose bark is
somewhat smooth: the leaves are very great, large, and smooth, cut into four
or five divisions, and ending into so many corners, every one standing on a
long reddish stalk: the bloomings are of a yellowish green color, growing
many together on each side of a long stalk, which afrer turn into long and
broad winged seed, two always standing together on a stalk, and bunched out
in the middle, where the seed or kernel lies, very like unto the common Maple
growing wild abroad, but many more together, and larger.

The Use of the Sycomore tree.
It is altogether planted for shady walks, and has no other use with us that
I know.

19. Nux Vesicaria. The bladder Nut.
THis tree grows not very high, but is of a mean stature, when it is
preserved and pruined to grow upright, or else it shoots forth many twigges
from the roots, and so is fit to plant in a hedge row, as it is used in some
places: the body and arms are covered with a whitish green bark: the
branches and leaves on them are like unto the Elder, having three or five
leaves set one against another, with one of them at the end, each whereof is
nicked or dented about the edges: the flowers are sweet and white, many
growing together on a long stalk, hanging downward, in form resembling a
small Daffodill, having a small round cup in the middle, and leaves about it:
after which come the fruit, enclosed in russetish green bladders, containing
one or two brownish nuts, lesser then Hasell nuts, whose outer shell is not
hard and woody, like the shell of a nut, but tough, and hard withal, not easy
to break, within which is a green kernel, sweetish at the first, but
loathsome afterward, ready to procure casting, and yet liked of some people,
who can well endure to eat them.

The Use of the Bladder Nut.
The greatest use that I know the tree or his fruit is put unto, is, that it is
received into an Orchard, either for the rarity of the kind, being suffered to
grow into a tree, or (as I said before) to make an hedge, being let grow into
suckers.

Some Quacksaluers have used these nuts as a medicine of rare virtue for the
stone, but what good they have done, I never yet could learn.

20. Rhus Myrtifolia. The Myrtle leafed Sumach.
THis low shrubbe grows seldom to the height of a man, having many slender
branches, and long winged leaves set thereon, every one whereof is of the
bigness of the broad or large Myrtle leaf, and set by couples all the length
of the ribbe, running through the middle of them. It bears diverse flowers at
the tops of the branches, made of many purple threads, which turn into small
black berries, wherein are contained small, white, and rough seed, somewhat
like unto Grape kernels or stones. This uses to dye down to the ground in my
Garden every Winter, and rise up again every Spring, whether the nature thereof
were so, or the coldness of our climate the cause thereof, I am not well
assured. It is also rare, and to be seen but with a few.

The Use of this Sumach.
It is used to thicken or tanne leather or hides, in the same manner that the
ordinary Sumach does; as also to stay fluxes both in men and women.

21. Rhus Virginiana. The Virginia Sumach, or Buckes horn tree of Virginia.
THis strange tree becomes in some places to be of a reasonable height and
bigness, the wood whereof is white, soft, and pithy in the middle, like unto
an Elder, covered with a dark colored bark, somewhat smooth: the young
branches that are of the last years growth are somewhat reddish or brown,
very soft and smooth in handling, and so like unto the Velvet head of a Dear,
that if one were cut off from the tree, and showed by it self, it might soon
deceive a right good Woodman, and as they grow seem most like thereunto,
yielding a yellowish milk when it is broken, which in a small time becomes
thick like a gum: the leaves grow without order on the branches, but are
themselves set in a seemly order on each side of a middle ribbe, seven, nine,
ten, or more on a side, and one at the end, each whereof are somewhat broad and
long, of a dark green color on the vpperside, and paler green underneath,
finely snipped or toothed round about the edges: at the ends of the branches
come forth long and thick brown tufts, very soft, and as it were woolly in
handling, made all of short threads or thrums; from among which appear many
small flowers, much more red or crimson then the tufts, which turn into a very
small seed: the root shoots forth young suckers far away, and round
about, whereby it is mightily increased.

The Use of this Sumach.
It is only kept as a rarity and ornament to a Garden or Orchard, no body,
that I can hear of, having made any trial of the Physical properties.

22. Vitis, seu potius Hedera Virginensis. The Virginia Vine, or rather Iuie.
THis slender, but tall climing Virginia Vine (as it was first called; but
Iuie, as it does better resemble) rises out of the ground with diverse stems,
none much bigger then a man's thumb, many less; from whence shoot forth many
long weak branches, not able to stand upright, unless they be sustained: yet
planted near unto a wall or pale, the branches at several distances of the
leaves will shoot forth small short tendrels, not twining themselves about any
thing, but ending into four, five, or six, or more small short and somewhat
broad claws, which will fasten like a hand with fingers so close thereunto,
that it will bring part of the wall, mortar, or board away with it, if it be
pulled from it, and thereby stay it self, to climb up to the top of the
highest chimney of a house, being planted thereat: the leaves are crumpled, or
rather folded together at the first coming forth, and very red, which after
growing forth, are very fair, large, and green, divided into four, five,
six, or seven leaves, standing together upon a small foote-stalke, set without
order on the branches, at the ends whereof, as also at other places sometime,
come forth diverse short tufts of buds for flowers; but we could never see them
open themselves, to show what manner of flower it would be, or what fruit would
follow in our country: the root spreads here and there, and not very deep.

The Use of this Virginian.
We know of no other use, but to furnish a Garden, and to increase the number
of rarities.

And thus have I finished this work, and furnished it with whatsoever Art and
Nature concurring, could effect to bring delight to those that live in our
Climate, and take pleasure in such things; which how well or ill done, I must
abide every ones censure: the judicious and courteous I only respect, let
Momus bite his lips, and eat his heart; and so Farewell.

FINIS.
Index omnium stirpium quae in hoc opere continentur.
A
ABies page 600 Abrotanum foeminum, sieve Santolina 449 Acanthus Ac^le^t^s 330
Acanthus sativus ^bid. Acer manis sieve Sycomorus 610 Acetosa 486 Aconitum
bacciferum, i. e. Christophoriana Aconitum flore albido 214 Aconitum hyemale
ibid. Aconitum luteum Ponticum ibid. Aconitum salutiferum 216 Admirabilis
pervana 364 Aethiopis 385 Agluophotis, i.e. Paeonia Alaternus 603 Albucum 148
Alcea Aegyptia sieve Bamia 369 Alcea Americana 368 Alcea fruticosa pentaphyllea
ib. Alcea peregrina sieve veficaria ib. Alisma Dodonaei, i.e. Saponaria Alisma
Dioscoridis Fab. Columna, i. e. Auricula Vrsi Alisma syluarum, i.e. Paralysis
Allium 613 Althaea frutex 369 Amaracus, i.e. Maiorana. Amarella, i.e.
Matricaria Amaranthus panniculis sparsis 371 Amaranthus purpureus ib.
Amaranthus tricolor ib. Amaranthus luteus, i.e. Heliocrysum Ambreboi, i.e.
Cyanus Orientalis Amellus Virgilij, i.e. Aster Atticus Italorum Amomum Plinij,
i.e. Pseudocapsicum Dodonaei Amygdalus 583 Anagyris altera, i.e. Laburnum.
Anchusa 251 Anemone eiusque species 199 ad 214 An^thum 494. Angelica 529
Anthemis flore luteo 294 Anthemis Leucanthemis, i.e. Chamemaelum Anthericos 148
Anthora 494 Antimclum, i.c. Mandragoras Antirrhinum 269 Apium 491 Apocynum
Syriacum 444 Apocynum Virginianum 445 Aquilegia 271 Arbor Alpina Plinij, i.e.
Laburnum Arbor Iudae 437 Arbor Vitae 438 Arbu^us 603 Argyrocome, i.e.
Gnaphalium Americanum Armerius 319 Armoraria pratensis 256 Armoraria altera,
i.e. Muscipula Lobelij Arthanita, i e. Cyclamen Arthritica, i.e. Paralysis
Arundo Indica, sieve Canna Indica 376 Asarum 532 Asparagus 503 Asphodelus
bulbosus albus 138 Asphodelus bulbosus Galeni ibid. Asphodelus hyacinthinus,
i.e. bulbosus Asphodelus mayor albus 146 Asphodelus minor luteus, i.e. Hastula
regia Aster Atticus Italorum 299 Aster Pervanus Columnae, i.e. Battatas de
Canada Attamusco, i.e. Narcissus Virginianus Atriplex, i.e. Olus aureum
Avellana, and Byzantina Aurelia, i.e. Chrysocome Auricula muris mayor, i.e.
Pulmonaria Gallorum Auricula Vrsi eiusque species 235
B
BAlaustium 430 Balsamina faemina and Balsamella 278 Balsamita mas and faemina
482 Balsamum alpinum, i.e. Ledum alpinum 424 Bamia, i.e. Alcea Aegyptia
Baptisecula, i.e. Cyanus Barba hirci, i.e. Tragopogon Battatas Hispanorum,
Virginianum, and Canadense 518 Behen rubrum, i. Valeriana rubra Dodonaei Bellis
caerulea sieve Glebularia 321 Bellis mayor flore pleno 322 Bellis minor flore
pleno eiusque species ibid. Belvidere Italorum, i. Scoparia, sieve Linaria magna
268 Ben rubrum Monspeliense, i. Muscipula Lobelij Berberis 561 Beta 488
Binizade and Binizante, i. Anemone tenuifolia Blattaria 383 Blito di tree colori
372 Blitum 488 Bolbonach, i. Viola lunaris and latifolia 26^ Borrago, Borrago
semper virens 249 Botanaria, i. Globularia Branca vrsina, i. Acanthus sativus
Brassica eiusque species 503 Bubonium sieve Inguinalis, i. Aster Atticus
Italorum Bulbus agrestis, i. Colchicum Buccinum Romanorum, i. Delphinium Bulbus
Eriophorus 124 Bulbus esculentus Lacunae, i. Ornithogalum luteum 140 Bulbus
Leucanthemos i. Ornithogalum album Bulbus vnifolius 140 Bulbus vomitorius
Matthioli, i. Muscari Buglossum 249 Buglossum Hispanicum, i. Anchusa Buglossum
luteum 486 Bunias dulcis, i. Napus 509 Buphthalmum 293 Buphthalmum maius i.
Helleborus niger ferulaceus Buxus arbor. Buxus humilis, and Buxus verficoribus
folijs 606
C
CAcalia Loniceri. i. Lilium Conuallium Calcaris flos, i. Delphinium Calceolus
Mariae 367 Calendula maxima and simplex 296. 298 Callionymus Gesneri, i. Lilium
conuallium Caltha, i. Calendula Caltha Africana, i. Flos Africanus Caltha
palustris flore pleno 224 Camomilla vulgaris, and flore pleno 290 Campanula
mayor pyramidalis 354 Campana lazura, i. Convolvulus caeruleus mayor 359
Campanula perficifolia alba and caerulea 353 Canicida, i. Aconitum luteum
Ponticum Canis cerebrum, i. Antirrhinum Cannacorus, i. Canna Indica Canna
Indicaflore luteo punctato 376 Canna Indica flore rubro ibid. Cantabrica
Plinij, i. Caryophyllus Capnos fabacea radice, i. Radix caua minor 275
Caprifolium perfoliatum sieve Italicum 405 Cardamine flore pleno, and trifolia
389 Carduus benedictus 530 Carduus Eriocephalus, i. tomentosus 332 Carduus
mollis 330 Carlina humilis 332 Carthamus sieve Cnicus sativus 329 Carum 515
Caryophylli maiores and maximi 316 Caryophylli syluestres 314 Caryophyllus
marinus and mediterraneus 317 Caryophyllus Indicus. i. Flos Africanus Cassaua,
i. Iucca 434 Cavala lale, i. Tulipae praecoces Caffalale, i. Tulipae mediae
Caucafon, i. Moly Indicum Caulis vulgaris, Crispa, Subaudica 504 Caulis florida
ibid Caulo rapum ibid. Cedrus Lycia 436 Celastrus 603 Cepa alba, rubra etc. 510
Cerasa Indiana 432 Cerasus flore pleno 402 Cerasorum diuersitas 571 Cerasus
Trapezuntina, i. Laurocerasus Cercis 437 Cerefolium maius and vulgar 494
Cervicaria, i. Trachelium Chamaecistus Frisicus 424 Chamaecyparissus, i.
Santolina Chamaedaphne 498 Chamaedrys 456 Chamaeiris angustifolia 187
Chamaeiris latifolia 186 Chamaelaea Alpina 397 Chamaelaea Germanica, i.
Mesereon 397 Chamaelea tricoccos ibid Chamaeleo, vide Carlina Chamaemalus, i.
Malus Paradiseus Chamaemelum, i. Camomilla Chamaenerium flore Delphinij 270
Chamaepauce Cordi, i. Ledum Silefiacum Chamaerhododendros Chamaelaaefolio
Lobelij, i. Ledum Alpidum Charantia foemina, i. Balsamina foemina Cheiri sieve
Keiri, i. Leucoium luteum 256 Chondrilla aurea, i. Pilosella mayor 300
Chrysanthemum odoratum, i. Chamaemelum nudum Chrysanthemum Peruvianum, i. Flos
Solis Chrysanthemum Creticum 295 Chrysocome sieve Stoechas citrina 374 Cichorium
495 Cinara alba, rubra, moschata etc. 5^8 Circaea. i. Mandragoras Cistus annuus
422 Cistus mas 421 Cistus faemina 422 Cistus Ledon ibid Claues sancti Petri, i.
Paralysis Clematis Daphnoides, i. Vinca peruinca 391 Clematis altera sieve vrens
flore albo ibid Clematis peregrina flore rubro 392 Clematis peregrina flore
purpureo ibid Clematis peregrina flore purpureo pleno ibid Clematis peregrina
flore carneo pleno 393 Clematis caerulea Pannonica ibid Clematis surrecta sieve
Flammula louis ibid Clematis flore albo pleno, vel surrecta flore duplici 392
Clematis Virginiana, i. Maracos 393 Clymenum Matthioli, i. Lathyrus latifolius
sieve Pisum perenne Cneorum Matthioli 397 Cneorum nigrum and album Theophraesti
426 Cnicus sieve Carthamus sativus 329 Colchicum Anglicum Byzantinum etc. 154
etc. Colchicum vernum 158 Colytea Theophrasti 438 Colutea vulgaris, and
Scorpioides 440 Coma aurea sieve Heliochrysum Condrilla aurea, i. Pilosella
mayor Consolina minor, i. Bellis minor vulgaris Consolida regalis, i.
Delphinium Convolvulus Americanus 358 Convolvulus caeruleus mayor 357
Convolvulus caeruleus minor 358 Convolvulus purpureus mayor ibid Convolvulus
purpureus minor spicaefolijs 359 Corchorus Dalechampij, i. Pilosella mayor
Cornus mas fructu albo, rubro 570 Corona Imperialis 28 Cortusa Matthioli 240
Corydalis 276 Cosmosandalos, i. Calceolus Mariae Costus hortorum mayor and
minor 482 Cotonea malus 589 Cotyledon altera minor, and flore rubro 232 Crocus
vernus albus, purpureus etc. 160 ad 170 Crocus Hispanicus, i. Carthami flores
Cucumis hortensis 524 Cuminum syluestre alterum Dioscoridis Matthiolo, i.
Delphinium Cupressus 601 Cyanus Baetitus supinus 327 Cyanus floridus Turcicus
ibid. Cyanus minor variorum colorum 326 Cyanus Orientalis, i. floridus Turcicus
Cyclamen Antiochenum 196 Cyclamen autumnale hederaefolio ibid Cyclamen vernum.
Veronense etc. 195 Cyclaminus idem Cydonia malus 589 Cyprus Plinij, i.
Ligustrum Orientale 414. 445 Cytisus vulgaris. Maranthae etc 440
D
DActylus Trapezuntinus, i. Laurocerasus Daphnoides, i. Laureola 398 Datura
Turcarum, i. Stramonium Delphinium 276 Delphinium buccinum, i. Chamaenerium
Delphinium Hispanicum parvum 277 Dens caninus 193 Dentali, i. Dens caninus
Devebohini, i. Narcissus medio purpureus Dictamus albus and Diptamus albus, i.
Fraxinella Digitalis 380 Diosanthos Theophrasti Dalechampio, i. Aquilegia
Diosanthos, sieve Iouis flos, i. Caryophyllus Dipcadi, i. Muscari Dracoherba,
seu Tarchon 500 Draba sieve Arabis Dodonaei, i. Thlaspi Creticum Dracunculus
mayor 529
E.
ELleborine flore albo etc. 347 Elleborus albus vulgaris and praecox 346
Elleborus niger, vel Helleborus niger 344 Endiuia 495 Ephemerum lethale, i
Colchicum Ephemerum non lethale, i. Lilium conuallium Ephemerum Virginianum 152
Epimedium 283 Eranthemum, i. Flos Adonidis Eriphium Galeni, i. Radix caua Eruca
satiua 502 Eryngium Montanum sieve Pannonicum 330
F
FAba vulgaris 521 Fabago, i. Arbor Iudae Ficus Arbor and humilis 566 Ficus
Indica 432 Flamma Theophrasti i. Amaranthus minor purpureus Flammula Iouis, i.
Clematis surrecta Flos Adonis 293 Flos Africanus 303 Flos Amoris, i. Amaranthus
Flos Cancri, i. Canna Indica Flos Cardinalis, i. Trachelium Americanum 356 Flos
Caryophylleus, sieve Caryophyllus 314 Flos Constantinopolitanus sieve Lychnis
Chalcedonica Flos maximus, i. Flos Solis Flos Cuculi, i. Cardamine Flos Cuculi,
i. Lychnis syluestris plumaria Flos frumenti, i. Cyanus minor Flos noctis, i.
Convolvulus mayor purpureus Flos Diuae Katharinae, i. Nigella Flos Meleagridis,
i. Fritillaria Flos Regius, i. Delphinium Flos Indicus vel Tunetensis, i.
Africanus Flos Solis Farnesianus Columnae, i. Battatas de Canada Flos Solis 295
Faeniculum 492 Fragaria 526 Fraxinella 333 Fritillaria 44 Frutex Coronarius
Clusij, i. Syringa alba 414 Fucus herba, i. Anchusa
G.
GAllipo lale, i. Anemone tenuifolia Galeopsis Pannonica sieve Lamium Pannonicum
385 Gelosia Tragi, i. Amaranthus tricolor Gelseminum, i. Iasminum Genista
Hispanica sieve Spartum Hispanicum 442 Gentiana mayor 350 Gentiana Asclepiadis
folio ibid Gentiana cruciata ibid Gentianella verna 352 Gentianella autumnalis
sieve Pneumonanthe ibid Geranium tuberosum vel bulbosum 228 Geum Alpinum
Lobelij, i. Sanicula guttata Geranium batrachoides, fuscum etc. 229 Gith, i.
Nigella Giul catamer lale, i. Anemone latifolia multiplex Gladiolus Byzantinus,
Italicus etc. 189 Globularia caerulea 322 Globularia lutea montana 323
Glycyrrhiza sieve Liqueritia 533 Gnaphalium Americanum 374 Gnaphalium Montanum,
sieve Pes Cati vel Pilosella minor Montana 375 Gnaphalium Roseum ibid. Gramen
str^atum vel pictum 458 Gramen marinum, i. Caryophyllus marinus minor Gramen
plu narium vel plumosum 458 Grossularia sieve Vva crispa valgaris, baccis
rubris, caeruleis, aculeatis etc. 560 Guaiacana sieve Guaiacum Patauinum idem
est cum Pishamin Virginianorum, Loti species
H.
HAstula regia, i. Asphodelus luteus minor Hedera Virginiana 612 Hedysarum
clypeatum 339 Heliotropium Indicum Pelleterij, i Battatas de Canada Heliocrysum
374 Helleboraster sieve Pseudohelleborus 345 Helleborus albus and vernus praecox
346 Helleborus niger verus 344 Helleborus niger ferulaceus, i. Buphthalmum
maius 293 Helleborine 347 Hemerocallis, i. Martagon Hemerocallis Valentina
Clusij, i. Pseudonarcissus marinus, vel Pancratium vulgo Hepatica nobilis sieve
trifolia 225 Herba clauellata, i. Viola tricolor Herba sancti Petri, i.
Paralysis Herba Sanctae Catharinae, i. Balsamina faemina Herba Margarita, i.
Bellis minor Herba Regina, i. Tobacco Herba Tunica, i. Caryophyllus and
Armerius Herba Trinitatis, i. Hepatica trifolia Hermodactylus Matthioli 188
Gesneri 194 Hermodactylum Colchicum 160 Hesperis 262 Hippolapathum, i.
Patientia sieve Lapathum sativum, and Rhabarbarum Monachorum 483 Hippolapathum
rotundifolium 484 Hipposelinum sieve Olus atrum 490 Hirculus Frisicus, i.
Chamaecistus Friciscus Horminum sativum 478 Hyacinthus and eius genera 111 ad
133 Hyacynthus Poetarum, i. Iris bulbosa Anglicana Hyssopus folijs aureis 455
Hyssopus vulgaris 476 Hypecoum Matthioli, i. Alcea vesicaria
I.
IAcea Baetica 328 Iacea marina Baetica ib. Iasminum Americanum 359 Iasminum
Arabicum 410 Iasminum album 406 Iasminum Catalonicum ibid Idaeus dactylus, i.
Poeonia Ilex arbor 600 Intubum, i. Endiuia and Cichorium 495 Iouis flos, i.
Caryophyllus Iphium Theophrasti, i. Caryophyllus Iris bulbosa and eius varietas
171 ad 179 Iris Chalcedonica 179 Iris Dalmatica Damascena etc. 180 etc. Iris
Persica 172 Iris Tripolitana 182 Iris tuberosa 188 Iucca 434 Ixine Theophrasti,
i. Carlina
K
KEiri, sieve Leucoium luteum 256 Keiri albo flore 257
L
LAburnum 438 Lactuca agnina. Capitata etc. 498 Lamium Pannonicum, i. Galeopsis
Pannonica 385 Lapathum sanguineum 484 Larix 608 Lathyrus latifolius, i. Pisum
perenne 338 Lathyrus siliquis orobi ib. Lauendula mas and faemina 447 Lauendula
syluestris, i. Staechas Laurus 598 Laurus regia, i Laurocerasus 401 Laurus
Rosea, i. Oleander Laurus Tinus 400 Laurea Cerasus 599 Lauro cerasus 401 Ledum
Alpinum. Silesiacum 424 Ledum id est Cistus Ledon Leimonia Theophrasti Clusio,
i. Anemone syluestris Leontostomium, i, Aquilegia Leucoium bulbosum 109
Leucoium hortense simplex and multiplex 258 Leucoium luteum multiplex 257
Leucoium marinum Syriacum 260 Leucoium melancholicum ibid Leuconacissolirion, i
Leucoium bulbosum Libanotis Coronaria, i. Rosmarinus Ligustrum 445 Ligustrum
Orientale, i. Cyprus Plinij 410 Lilac, i. Syringa caerulea 407 Lilac flore
argenteo 408 Liliago, i. Phalangium: vel alijs Lilium non bulbosum sieve
Liliasphodelus Liliasphodelus 148 Lilionarcissus, i. Tulipa Lilium
Alexandrinum, i Ornithogalum Arabicum 135 Lilium album 40 Lilium aureum, rubrum
etc 39 Lilium conuallium 340 Lilium Macedonicum 36 Lilium Montanum 33 Lilium
non bulbosum. i. Liliasphodelus Lilium Perficum vel Susianum 28 Lilium
syluestre, i Montanum Lilium variegatum, i. Fritillaria Limonium peregrinum
Rauwolfij 250 Linaria magna sieve Belvidere Italorum 268 Liqueritia 583 Linaria
caerulea purpurea odorata 66 Lingua Bouis vel Buglosum luteum 486 Linum
syluestre album, luteum 266 Lotus Africana Dalechampij, i. Laurocerasus Lotus
Arbor 568 Lotus tetragonolobus sieve siliquosus flore rubello, i. Pisum
quaaratum Lunaria Arthritica, i. Paralysis, etiamque and Auriculae Vrsi Lunaria
Graeca mayor odorata
i. Bolbonach, seu Viola latifolia 265 Lunaria caerulea, i. Soldanella Alpina,
sieve Montana 234 Lupinus 335 Lychnis Chalcedonica flore simplici, and flore
pleno 253 Lychnis Coronaria 252 Lychnis plumaria syluestris multiplex 253
Lychnis syluestris flore albo pleno, and flore rubro pleno 254 Lycopersicum
Galeni, i. Flos Africanus, pomum Amoris Anguillarae
M.
MAiorana aurea 446 Maiorana tenuifolia 452 Maiorana vulgaris ibid Maiorana
latifolia vulgaris 474 Mala Aethyopica 379 Mala Arantia 584 Mala Armeniaca sieve
praecocia 579 Malus Cotonea vel Cydonia 589 Malus Granata seu Punica 428
Malorum Persicorum diuersitas 580 Malorum varia genera 586 Malus Punica satiua
428 Malus Punica syluestris, i. Balaustium Maluacrispa 495 Malua Hispanica
flore carneo amplo 366 Malua horaria, i. Alcea peregrina 370 Malua hortensis
simplex and multiplex 369 Malua Rosea, i. hortensis Mandragoras mas and faemina
377 Maracoc sieve Clematis Virginiana 393 Marguerites and Margueritons, i.
Bellis minor multiplex Martagon album, flore carneo 33 Martagon Chymistarum, i.
Lilium aureum sieve rubrum Martagon Byzantinum seu Constantinopolitanu^ 34
Martagon Pannonicum flore spadiceo 35 Martagon Imperiale 33 Martagon Pomponeum
36 Martagon Phoeniceo flore 34 Martagon rarissimum, i. Narcissus tertius
Matthioli Matric aria flore pleno 289 Medica Cochleata. Spinosa 338. etc.
Medium Dioscoridis, i. Viola Mariana Melampodium, i. Helleborus niger
Melanthium, i. Nigella Melissa 479 Melo Moscatus etc. 525 Mentha 480 Mespilus
Aronia. Vulgaris 568 Mezereon, i. Chamaelaea Germanica Mirabilia Peruviana 394
Moly alterum genus Plinij Dodonaeo, i. Phalangium Moly varia genera 141 ad 146
Morion, i. Mandragoras Morus vulgaris, alba, Virginiana 599 Muschoromi, i.
Muscari Moschatella, i. Hesperis Muscipula Lobelij, i. Benrubrum Monsp. 254
Myrobalanus prunus 577 Myrrhis, i. Cerefolium maius Myrtus mayor and minor 427
N.
NApellus 215 Napellus Moisis, i. Anthora 216 Napus mayor and minor 509
Narcissus Caperonius, i. Fritillaria Narcissorum varia genera 67 ad 108
Narcissus marinus, i. tertius Matthioli Narcissus Iacobaeus flore rubro 169
Narcissus Matthioli, i. Ornithogalum Neapolitanum Narcissus Trapezunticus 30
Narcissus Virgineus 86 and 91 Nardus Italica, i. Lauendula Nardus montana 386
Nasturtium Indicum 280 Nasturtium hortense 500 Nepeta 479 Nerium, i. Oleander
Nerium Alpinum, i. Ledum Alpinum Nicotiana, i. Tobacco Nigella flore albo
duplici 287 Nigella flore caeruleo multiplici ibid Nigella Hispanica ibid Nil
Auicennae, i. Convolvulus caeruleus mayor Nozelha, i. Crocus Clusio.
Sysirinchium Boelio 171 Nucipersica and eius varietas 583 Nux Auellana,
Byzantina 562 Nux Iuglans 595 Nux Metel, i. Stramonium maius Nux vesicaria seu
Staphylodendron 611
O.
OCellus Barbaricus, and Damascenus, i. Caryophyllus Ocimastrum Valerianthon,
i. Valeriana rubra Dodonaei Ocimoides semper virens 254 Ocimum citratum,
Indicum 450 Odontitis, i. Lychnis plumaria Oenanthe Myconi, i. Ranunculus
thalictri folio minor 218 Olus album, i. Lactuca agnina Olus atrum, i.
Hipposelinum Olus aureum, i. Atriplex Olus hispanicum, i. Spinachia Opuntia, i.
Lychen marinum 433 Opuntia seu Ficus Indica ibid Orchis Melitias seu Apifera
192 Orchis hermaphroditica etc. ibid. Ornithogalum Aethiopicum 138 Ornithogalum
Arabicum 134 Ornithogalum luteum 140 Ornithogalum Neapolitanum 138 Ornithogalum
Pannonicum 136 and 138 Orobus Venetus 338 Orontium, i. Antirrhinum Os Leonis,
i. Antirrhinum Ostrys Theophrasti 410 Osyris, i. Scoparia vel Linaria magna
Oxalis sieve Acetosa 487 Oxyacantha sieve Berberis and sine acinis 561
P.
PAdus Theophrasti, i. Cerisier blanc Gallorum sieve Cerasus racemosus Paeonia
mas and faemina simplex and multiplex 341 etc. Paliurus 607 Palma Christi, i.
Ricinus Palma Christi, i. Orchis sieve Satyrium Basilicum Pancratium, i. Scilla
rubra, and non Pseudonarcissus marinus, vide page 108 and 153 Panis porcinus,
i. Cyclamen. Papaver sativum flore pleno 286 Papaver syluestre flore pleno
ibid. Pappas sieve Battatas Hispanorum Canadense Virginianum 516 Paralysis
diuersarum specierum 242 etc. Paralytica alpina mayor and minor, i. Auricula
Vrsi and Paralysis minor Parthenium, i. Matricaria Parthenium Galeni, i.
Amaracus Pastinaca latifolia 506 Pastinaca tenuifolia 508 Pedua Penorum, i.
Flos Africanus Pennachio Persiano, i. Lilium Persicum Pepo 526 Peruinca sieve
Vinca peruinca 391 Periclymenum perfoliatum 404 Periclymenum rectum 415
Periploca Virginiana 444 Pes cati, i. Gnaphalium Montanum Petroselinum 491
Petum and Picielt, i. Tobacco. Perebecenuc, i. Tobacco Phalangium Allobrogicum
150 Phalangium ephemerum Virginianum 152 Phalangium Italicum maius 150
Phalangium ramosum and non ramosum ibid. Phaseolus vulgaris 521 Phillyrea 445
Phlomitis, i. Aethiopis Phlox sieve flamma Theophrasti, i. Viola flammea sieve
tricolor Pilosella mayor sieve Chondrilla aurea 300 Pilosella minor montana, i.
Gnophalium montanum 375 Pimpinella sieve Sanguisorba 483 Pinus 599 Piper
montanum, i. Chamaelaeae frutex vel semen Pishamin Virginianorum, i. Guaiacum
Patauinum Pisum pe^ enne, Lathyrus latifolius 340 Pisum quadratum rubrum 338
Pisum vulgar, roseum, maculatum etc. 522 Planta Cardinalis, i. Trachelium
Americanum 356 Planta maxima, i, Flos Solis Plantago rosea 352 Pneumonanthe, i.
Gentiana autumnalis 352 Poma amoris maiora and minora 379 Pomo^um varietas 586
Pomum spinosum, i. Stramonium 362 Porrum 512 Portulaca 499 Pothos Theophrasti,
i. Aquilegia Primula veris simplex and multiplex 242. etc. Prunorum magna
varietas 575 Pseudocapsicum, i. Amomum Plinij 431 Pseudohelleborus Matthioli,
i. Helleborus niger ferulaceus Pseudohermodactylus Matthioli, i. Dens Caninus
Pseudonarcissus Anglicus, Germanicus, Hispanicus, etc. 99. etc. Pseudolotus
Matthioli, i. Laurocerasus, est and Guatacum Patavinum and Pishamin
Virginianorum Pseudorhabarbarum est Rhabarbarum Monachorum 274 Psidium, i.
Cortex Granatorum Ptarmica flore pleno 288 Pulegium 477 Pulmonaria Tragi and
Gallorum, i, Pilosella mayor 300 Pulmonaria maculosa and non maculosa 248
Pulsatilla 200 Pyracantha 604 Pyramidalis Lutetiana, i. Campanula mayor sieve
lactescens 354 Pyretrum officinarum 292 Pyretrum syluestre 288 Pyrus and eius
varietas 590
Q.
QVamoclit Indorum, i. Convolvulus Americanus 358 Quinua Indorum, i. Amaranthus
mayor sieve panusculis sparsis
R.
RAdix Caua mayor, and minor 275 Ranunculus Anglicus, Asiaticus, Creticus etc.
276 ad 223 Ranunculus monophyllos, i. Aconitum hyemale Ranunculus nemorum and
syluarum, i. Anemones syluestres Raphanus vulgaris and nigra radice 509 Rapum
hortense, luteum, rubrum ibid. Rapunculus hortensis 514 Rhabarbarum Monachorum
and Pseudorhabarbarum 274 Rhabarbarum and Rhaponticum verum 483 Rhododendron,
i. Oleander Rhus Virginiana 611 Rhus Myrtifolia ibid. Ribes fructu albo, nigro,
rubro 558 Rosa Alpina, i. Ledum alpidum 424 Rosa Iunonis, i. Lilium album Rosa
satuina, i. Paeonia Rosa montana, i. Alpina Rosa vltramarina, i. Malua rosea
Rosa Anglica, Cinamomea, Damascena, etc. 412 ad 425 Rosmarinum vulgar 425
Rosmarinum aureum ibid Rosmarinum latifolium 426 Rosmarinum syluestre
Matthioli, i. Ledum Alpinum Rubus Idaeus 557 Rubus Idaeus non spinosus ibid
Ruta hortensis 530 Ruta palustris vel pratensis, i. Thalictrum
S
SAbda^ifa i. Alcea Americana Sabina 607 Saliuaris, i Pyretrum Saluta mayor and
minor 478 Saluta variegata 446 Sambach Ara^um, i. Syringa Arabica flore duplica
Sambacus Rosea 411 Sampsuchum, i. M^^r^^ Sana sa cta and Sa^iab^rba, i Tobacco
Sandalida Cretic^, i. P^^^^ qua^ratum Sani^u^^ ^d^p^^ vel montana, i. Cortusa
Matthioli Sanicula trifolia, i. Car^amine trifolia Sanicula guttata 231
Sanguisorba vel P^mpinella 483 Sanguis H rculis, i. Elleborus albus Santolina,
i. Abretanum ^aemina 449 Saponaria flore duplici 352 Saponaria altera i.
Trachelium minus, and Valeriana rubra Dodon. Sarahug, i. H^acinthus Lillifolius
Satu^cia vel ^hymbra 476 Sa yrium E^ythronium and Triphyllum Dioscoridis i.
Tulipa 66 Satyrium Orchidis species 192 Scabiosa rubra Austriaca 324 Scabiosa
rubra Indica ibid Scarlatea, i. Amerius Scoparia, i. Lanaria magna 268
Scorpioides maius and minus 340 Scorsonera 301 Scylla alba, rubra 133 Sedum
serratum 232 Segetalis, i. Gladiolus Selinum dulce 491 Serincade, i. Narcissus
medio purpureus Serincade catamer lale, i. Narcissus flore pleno Serpentaria,
i. Dracunculus Serpentina, i. Scorsonera Serpillum aureum, Citratum etc. 454
Sesamoides minus, al^quibus est Helleborus niger ferurulaceus Sicla and Sicula,
i. Beta Sidium idem quod Psidium Siliqua syluestris, i. Arbor Iudae Simboline
idem quod Zumbul Indicum, Hyacinthi Orientalis species Sinapi 502 Sisarum 506
Sisyrinchium alterum, i, Cardamine altera Sisyrinchium Mauritanicum etc, 171
Sisyrinchium Cordi, i. Ornithogalum Solanum arborescens, i. Amomum Plinij
Solanum faetidum spinosum Bauhini, i. Stramonium Solanum Mexiocanum Bauh^ni, i.
Mirabilia Solanum pomiferum Gesneri and Bauhini, i. Pomum amoris Solanum
vesicarium, i. Alkakengi Solanum esculentum Bauhini, i. Battatas de Virginia
Sol Indianus, i. Flos solis Soldanella alpina 234 Sophonia, i. Amaranthus
tricolor Sorbus legitima and Torminalis 567 Spartum Austriacum, i. Gramen
plumosum Spartum Hispanicum frutex, i. Genista Hispanica 442 Spinachia 496
Staphylodendron, i. Nux vesicaria Sternutamentoria, i. Ptarmica Stoechas 448
Stoechas Citrina, i. Chrysocome Struthium non est Saponaria 353 Stramonium
maius and minus 360 Sumach Virginense 612 Susamgiul, i. Lilium Persicum, and
Hyacinthus stellatus, Byzantinus alter Sycomorus, sieve Acer maius latifolium
610 Symphitum maculosum, i. Pulmonaria Syringa alba, caerulea 408 Syringa
Arabica flore albo duplici 408 Syringa Italica Lobelij, i. Syringa flore albo
simplici Syringa Italica flore albo pleno Boslers 410
T
Tobacco 363 Tamarix vel Tamariscus 610 Tanacetum vulgar 482 Tanacetum
Pervanum, i. Flos Africanus Tarchon herba 500 Taxus arbor 606 Thalictrum vel
Thalietrum Hispanicum 274 Thesium Theophrasti, i. Radix caua Thlaspi Baeticum
marinum 390 Thraupalus Theophrasti Dalechampio, i. Sambucus rosea Thridacias,
i. Mandragoras Thuya, i. Arbor vitae 436 Thymbra, i Satureia 476 Thymum
legitimum capitatum 454 Thymum durius and latifolium 474 Tilia faemina 608
Trachellum maius and minus 354 Trachelium Americanum 356 Tragium Dioscoridis,
i. Fraxinella Tragopogon caeruleum, purpureum 302 Tragopogon luteum 514
Tragoriganum Matthioli 453 Trifolium fruticans, i. lasminum luteum Trifolium
aureum i Hepatica Trifolium nobile i Hepatica Trinitas, seu herba trinitatis,
i. Hepatica Tulipa Armeniaca Boloniensis, Bombycina, Byzantina, Cretica etc. 52
etc. Tulipae mediae 55 Tulipae pracoces 48 Tulipae serotinae 61 Tusai and
Turfana, i. Corona Imperialis
V.
VAccinium Virgilij 128 Valeriana rubra Dodonaei 386 Valeriana Graeca 388
Valerianthon, i. Valeriana rubra Dodonaei Verbascum odoratum and i. Paralysis
Verbasculum odoratum i. Paralysis Veratrum album and nigrum, i. Helleborus
albus and niger Vernilago, i. Chamaelaeo albus Vetonica altera, vel altilis,
aut Coronaria, i. Caryophyllus hortensis Vetonica agrestis, i. Armerius
Victorialis rotunda, i. Gladiolus Vincaperuinca 391 Viola alba, i. Leucoium
Viola alba bulbosa, i. Leucoium bulbosum Viola Damascena, i. Hesperis Viola
flammea, i. Tricolor Viola hyemalis, i. Hesperis Viola latifolia and Bolbonach
265 Viola Lunaris Bolbonach 265 Viola lutea, i. Leucoium luteum sieve Keiri
Viola peregrina, i. Bolbonach Viola mariana 354 Viola martia 281 Viola
Matronalis, i. Hesperis Viola tricolor simplex and duplex 282 Viperaria and
Viperina, i. Scorsonera Vitis Corinthiaca, Damascena etc. 563 Vitis Virginiana
564 Vitis Virginense seu potius Hedera Virginiana 612 Vmbilicus Veneris, i,
Cotiledon 234 Vva crispa, i. Grossularia 560 Vvularia, i. Trachelium, est and
Hippoglossum
Y.
YVcca, sieve Iucca 434
Z.
ZAmbach Arabi, i. Iasminum Arabicum Zufiniare, i. Martagon
Constantinopolitanum Zumbul Arabi, i. Ornithogalum Arabicum Zumbul Indi, i.
Orientalis mayor praecox
A Table of the English names of such Plants as are contained in this Book.
A.
WHite Aconite 214 Yellow Aconite, or winter Wolfes bane, ibid. Adonis flower
293 Alkanet, or Sea Buglosse 250 Anemone, or winde-flower, and the kinds 199 to
214 Yellow Anemone 194 Allisanders 490 Almond, and the kinds 583 Angelica 529
Apricocks 579 Apples and the several sorts 586 Double blossomd Apple tree 404
Apples of Love 379 Thorn Apples 360 Arrach white and purple 488 Asara^acca 532
Asparagus 503 Asphodill and his kinds 146 Asphodill with Lilly flowers 148
B
BAldmony or Gentian 350 Balm 479 The Balsame apple 278 Barberies 561 Barbery
Buttons, and Thorny Buttons 339 Barrenwort 283 Batchelours Buttons double,
white and red 254 Batchelours Buttons yellow 218 and 224 The Bay tree 598 The
Cherry Bay tree, or Bay Cherry 401 The dwarf Bay 397 The Kings Bay, that is,
the Cherry Bay The Rose Bay 400 The Virginia Bay Cherry 599 The wild Bay 400
The Bee-flower 192 and 258 Bears breech 330 Bears ears, and the sorts 235
etc. Bears ear Sanicle 240 Bears foot 344 Beetes, and the kinds 489 Garden
Beans and French Beans 521 Bell flowers, and the kinds 353 Canterbury Bells
354 and 356 Couentry Bells 354 Blites 488 Bloodwort 484 The great blew Bindeweed
359 The small blew Bindeweed 360 Blew Bottles 326 Borrage, and everliving
Borage 249 Ladies Bower, and Virgins Bower single and double 393 Dwarf Box
and gilded Box 606 Flower of Bristow, or None such 253 Spanish Broom 442
Double flowred Bruisewort or Sopewort 352 Garden Buglosse 249 Marsh buglosse
and Sea buglosse 250 Burnet 483 Butterfly Orchis 192
C
CAbbage, and his kinds 503 Calves snout or Snapdragon 269 Double Camomill and
naked Camomill 290 Rose Campion 252 Featherd wild Campion single and double
253 The Crimson Cardinals flower 356 Carawayes 515 Carnations and Gilloflowers
306 Caterpillars great and small 340 Cassidonie 443 Lobels Catch fly 254
Clusius his Celastrus 604 Sweet Cheruill or great Cheruill 494 Garden Cheruill
ib. Party colored Cicheling 338 The Christmas flower 344 The Cherry tree, and
the kinds thereof 572 The double blossomd Cherry tree 402 The Cypress tree
602 The sweet gum Cistus 422 Burning Clamberer or Climer 391 Hungarian Climer
393 Virginian Climer or Maracoc ibid Coleflower, Colewort, Colerape 504
Colombines 271 Tufted Colombines 274 The prickly ever green Coral tree 604
Corneflower 326 Corn sallet or Lambs Lettice 428 The Cornell tree 570
Costmary 482 Cotton weeds 375 Cowcumbers, diverse 524 Cowslips of diverse sorts
242. etc. French Cowslips or Bears ears 235 Cowslips of Jerusalem 248 Cranes
bill, and the kinds 228 Garden Cresses 500 Indian Cresses 280 Crow flower 253
Crow foot of diverse kinds 216 to 223 Crown Imperial 28 The double Cuckoo
flower 253 and 389 Currants, white, red and black 558 The true Curran Vine and
Grape 563
D
DAffodils, and the diversities thereof, from 67 to 108 Checkerd Daffodill, and
the kinds 44 Dittander 508 Bastard Dittanie 333 Dogs tooth Violet 193 Dragons
529 The Dragon flower 385 Double Dasie, and blew Dasies 321
E.
WHite Ellebor of two sorts 346 Wild white Ellebor 347 The true black Ellebor
or Christmas flower 344 Garden Endive 495
F
FEllworte or Gentian 350 Fennel 492 Fennel flower 287 Double Fetherfew 289
The Princes Feather 232 The Fig tree, and the kinds 566 The Indian Fig tree
433 The Finger flower 383 The Fur tree 600 The Corn Flagge 189 The flagge or
flowerdeluce 79 etc. The flowerdeluce of Constantinople 79 The flowerdeluce of
Persia 172 The bulbous flowerdeluces 172 to 179 The velvet flowerdeluce 188
Wild flax or Tode flax 266 Fox gloves, and the kinds 380 Fillbeards
ordinary, and of Constantinople 562 Flower of Bristow, or None such, single and
double 253 Purple flower gentle, and the kinds 371 Golden flower gentle or
golden flower of life 372 The flower of the Passion, or Maracoc 393 The flower
of the Sun 295 The Sultans flower 327 The friars Crown 332 Fritillaria or
checkerd Daffodil 44 Double fritillaria ibid.
G
Garlic 513 Gentian great and small 350 Germander 456 Gilloflowers and
Carnations 306 Queens Gilloflowers or Dames Violets 262 Stock Gilloflowers
single and double 258 The Ginny hen-flower, that is, Fritillaria 44 Goats beard
blew and purple 302 Goats beard yellow 514 Candy Goldilocks 372 Golds, that is,
Marigolds 296 Gooseberries of diverse sorts 560 Herb Grace or Rue 530 Grape
flower 114 Vipers Graesse 301 Feather Grass 458 Painted Grass ib. The
Guaiacum of Padoa 570
H
HAres bells 122 Hearts ease single and double 282 The blew Helmet flower or
Monks hood 215 The wholesome Helmet flower ibid Hollihockes single and double
369 Holewort or Hollow-roote 275 Hyssope common 476 Gilded Hyssope 455 Hungary
or mountain Sea Holly 330 Honisockles double 404 Red Honysockles or upright
Honysockles 405 The ever green Hawthorne tree, or the ever green prickly Coral
tree 604
I
IAcinths, and the several sorts 111 to 133 White Iasmine and yellow Iasmine
406 Double white Iasmine 408 Sweet John's single and double 319 Ione silver Pin,
that is, Poppies double 286 Judas tree 437 The supposed Indian Iucca 434 The
Virginia Ivye 612
K
SPanish Sea Knapweede 328
L
LAdies laces or painted grass 458 Laedies smockes double 389 Lambs Lettice
498 Langedebeefe 486 The Larch tree 608 Larkes heels or spurs single and
double 276 Yellow Larkes heel, that is, Indian Cresses 280 Lauender spike 447
Lauender cotton 449 French Lauender or Sticadoue 448 Mountain Laurel 398
Leekes 512 Lettice, and the kinds thereof 498 Licorice 533 The tree of Life 436
The chekerd Lilly, that is, Fritillaria The Conual Lilly, or Lilliconvally 340
The Day Lilly 148 The Persian Lilly 28. 30 The Mountain Lilly 33 The red or
gold Lilly 39 The white Lilly 40 The Line or Linden tree 608 Liue-long, or Life
everlasting 375 Noble Liuerwort or Hepatica 225 Lungwort or Cowslips of
Jerusalem 248 Lupines white, blew and yellow 325
M.
SWeet Marierome 452 Gilded or yellow Marierome 446 French Mallows 495
Spanish Mallowe 366 Shrub Mallow 369 Thorny Mallow 368 Venice Mallow ibid. Red
Maiths, and white 293 Mandrake male and female 377 The great Maple or Sycomore
tree 611 Marigolds 296 Corn Marigolds of Candy 295 French Marigolds 303 Double
Marsh Marigolds 224 The Spanish Marigold is the greatest double broad leafed
Anemone 207 The blew or purple Marigold 299 Martagons of diverse sorts 33
Masticke the herb 452 Medlars 568 The Melancholy Gentleman 260 Musk Melons
525 The Marvel of the world 364 Mirtles 427 Moly or Mountain Garlic 144
etc. Monks hoode, or Larkes spurs 276 Monks hood or helmet flower 215
Counterpoyson Monks hood 216 Blew Moone-wort 234 Half Moons 339 Golden
Mouse-eare 330 Mulberries, and Virginia Mulberry 599 Moth-Mulleine 383 Woody
Mulleine or French Sage 384 Ethiopian Mullein 385 The Mumme tree 432 Mustard
502
N.
SPotted Nauelwort 232 Navew 509 The Nectorin, and the kinds thereof 582
Neesewort, or Neesing root 346 N^ppe 479 The Nettle tree 568 Hungarian dead
Nettle 385 Nigella, or the Fenel-flower 287 Tree Night shade, that is, the
Winter Cherry tree 432 Nonesuch, or the flower of Bristow 253 The bladder Nut
611 The Filberd Nut of Constantinople 562 The Spanish or Barberry Nut 171 The
Wall Nut 594
O
THe ever green Oak 600 Spurge Olive 397 Mountain Spurge Olive ibid Onions,
and the kinds 510 Sea Onion 133 Orchis of Virginia 194 Orenges 584 Ox eye 293
Ox lips 245
P
PAnsies single and double 282 Parsley, and sweet Parsley 491 Virginia Parsley
492 Parsneps 506 Pasque flower, or Pass flower 200 Patience, or Monks Rubarbe
483 Peaches, and the kinds 586 Double blossomd Peach tree 404 Pears, and the
several sorts 590 The prickl^ Pear, that is, the Indian Fig Pearls of
Spain 115 Garden Pease of diverse sorts 522 Crimson Pease blossom 338 Pease
everlasting ibid Blew upright everlasting Pease ibid Pelletory of Spain 292
Double wild Pelletory 288 Penny flower, that is, white Satin Peony single and
double 342 Perwinkle single and double 392 Pinkes single and double 314 The
Pine tree 599 The blew and the white Pipe tree 408 The double white Pipe tree,
or double Iasmine 410 Rose Plantane 352 Plums, and the kinds 575 The
Pomegranet tree 428 The double blossomd Pomegranet tree 430 Pompions 526 Double
garden Poppies 284 Double wild Poppy 286 Potato's of Spain, of Virginia, of
Canada 516 Pride of London 310 Primme or Priuet 445 The ever green Priuet 603
Primroses, and the kinds 242 etc. Tree Primrose of Virginia 264 Purslane 499
Purse tassels 116 and 118 Pushamin or Pishamin, the Virginia Plum 570
Q.
QVinces, and the kinds 589
R
RAmpions 514 Raspis, white and red 557 Reddish, black Reddish, horse Reddish
509 Red and yellow flowred Indian Reed 376 Rosarubie, that is, Adonis flower
293 Rose tree, and the several kinds 412. to 425 Juno's Rose, that is, the
white Lilly The Elder or Guelder Rose 401 The Holly Rose or Sage Rose 421 The
Mountain Rose 424 Rock Roses 397 Rosemarie common and gilded etc. 425 The
Marie Rose or Rosemary of Silesia 424 Rocket 502 Garden Rue or Herb grace 530
True Rubarbe, Monks Rubarke, Rubarbe of Pontus 483
S
SAge great and small 478 Gilded Sage 446 Sage of Jerusalem 248 French Sage
384 Saffron flowers of diverse sorts of the spring time and of the fall 160 to
170 Meadow Saffrons or Colchicum, that is, the Son before the Father, and the
kinds 154 Spotted Sanicle 231 Bears ear Sanicle 240 Satyrion 192 The Sauine
tree 607 Summer Sauorie and winter Sauory 476 White Satin flower 265 Red
Satin flower 339 Scabious white and red 324 Scorsonera or Vipers grass 301
Bastard Sena tree 440 The true and the ordinary Service 567 Mountain Setwall
386 Virginia Silk 444 Skirrets 506 Our Ladies Slipper 347 Smallage 491 Ladies
Smocks double 388 Snayles 338 Snapdragons 269 Mountain Soldanella 434 Double
flowred Sopewort 352 Sorrel 486 Sowbread, and the kinds 195 to 199 The Kings
Spear or yellow Asphodill 148 Sperage or Asparagus 503 Spiderworte, and the
kinds 150 etc. Spinach 496 Star flowers of diverse sorts, or Stars of
Bethlehem 130. to 140 The green Star flower or bulbed Asphodill of Galen 136
Starwort or Sharewort, and Italian Starwort 299 Sticadoue or Cassidonie 448
Stock gilloflowers single and double 258 Storkes bills of diverse sorts 228
Strawberries of many sorts 526 The Strawberry tree 603 Succory 495 The Sultans
flower, or Turkey Corn flower 327 The Sun flower or flower of the Sun 295 The
Virginia Sumach 611 The Myrtle leafed Sumach ibid The Sycomore tree 610
T
INdian Tobacco of diverse sorts 363 The green and the white Tamariske tree 610
Tansie single and double 482 The blessed Thistle 530 The gentle Thistle. Globe
Thistle etc. 332 Christ's Thorn 607 Thrift ordinary, and the great Sea Thrift
317 Throatwort, and Giants Throatewort single and double 354 Bean Trefoyle 438
Shrub Trefoile 407 Tree Trefoile 439 Candie Tufts 390 Golden Tufts 375 Spanish
Tu^^s 274 and 340 The early flowring Tulipa 46 The mean flowring Tulipa 54 The
dwarf Tulipa 52 The Persian Tulipa ibid The Turks Cap, that is, the Tulipa
The true Time 454 Gilded Time, Moske and Lemmon Time ibid Garden Time, and
Masticke Time 474
V
REd Valerian of Dodonaeus 386 Greek Valerian 388 Mountain Valerian 386
Violets single and double 282 The bulbous Violet 169 The Dogs tooth Violet 193
Dames Violets 262 Mercuries Violets 357 Vines, and the several kinds of grapes
564 Vipers grass 301 Virginia Vine 564 Virginia Vine, or Virginia Ivy 612
W.
THe Walnut tree 594 Single and double Wall-flowers of many sorts 257 Widow
Wayle 397 The Willow-flower 270 The Wind-flower or Anemone, single and double
of many sorts 199 to 214 Wild Wind-flower single and double 202 Sweet Williams,
and the kinds 319 Winter Gilloflowers 258 Winter Wolfes bane, and yellow Wolfes
bane 214 Winter Cherries 532 The Winter Cherrie tree 431 Double Wood-bine or
Honisuckle 404
Y.
THe Yew tree 606
A Table of the Virtues and Properties of the Herbs contained in this Book.
A.
IN fear of Aborsment, or mis-carrying in women 478 Good against Aches 290
Good in hot Agues and to drive away their fits 223. 484. 532. 536. 538. 564
575. 579. 584 595 From whence Agaricke is taken 608 A Syrup of Angelica 529
Good for dejected appetites, 484. 486. 499. 561. 562. 578. 575. 584. To perfume
Apparel, Leather, etc. 421 448. 586 For the Apoplexy 349 Astringent or to
bind 428. 431
B
FOr weak Backs and reins 479. 483 A Balsame for green wounds 426 To cause
Barrenness 284 Good for Bathing 294. 376. 421. 449 474. 477. 478. 479. 480
Good for Bees 440. 480 Good to take away the sting of Bees and waspes 476. 479.
480. 482 Good to open and mollify the Belly, and make it soluble 333. 370.
421. 488 489. 490. 495. 566. 578. 582 To cleanse the Blood 484 To dissolve
clotted Blood 610 To increase Blood 567 To help the spitting of Blood 595 To
stay Bleeding 230. 396. 483 Hurtful for a short Breath 499 Good for the
shortness of Breath 364. 436. 502. 506. 513. 533 For a stinking Breath 529 To
make a sweet Breeth ibid For cold and moist Brains 335. 427. 448 481. 482 To
abate the ouer-swelling of Maidens Breasts 600 To help pains in the Breast
500 To heal women's sore Breasts 590 To draw out broken Bones etc. out of the
flesh 190 For Bruises by falls etc. 479. 608. 610 Good for Burnings or scaldings
362. 512 610
C.
TO cleanse Cankers 364 To procure Castings or vomitings 189 434. 442. 489. 532
To stay Casting or vomiting 477. 480 To feed or make Cattle fat 348. 440 442
Causticke or burning plants 396 The best Coals for Gunpowder 610 The best
Coals for lasting 608 For the Wind Collicke 216. 293. 453 455. 476. 504. 508.
515. 530 To Cleanse, purge and dry 276 To set an orient red Color on the cheek
of a woman 241 To make a deep blew Color 179. 603 To make a red Color ibid
To give a luster to a white Color 595 To make a yellow Color 421 For the
Colts evil, or immoderate lust 499 To warm and comfort Cold griefs 214 376.
434 477. 478. 480. 491 Cooling and drying 323. 353. 378. 421 438. 486, 499.
528. 562. 557. 564. 576 562. 568. 576. 578. 590. 594. 598. 602 603. 607 Cooling
and moistning 234. 283. 380. 432 579 For a Consumption 519. 608 Cordial to
comfort the heart 170. 216 252. 298. 301. 314. 328. 421. 427. 436 450. 480.
482. 483. 526. 528. 530. 558 586 For the Cough in young children 502 Good for
Coughes and colds 134. 295. 513 533. 562. 567. 575. 584. 586 Mithridates
Counterpoyson 567 Good for Crampes and shrinking of sinews 425
D.
TO procure an easy and speedy Delivery to women in travel 40. 199. 274 410
To stay rheumaticke Distillations 288 376. 386. 427 To cure the biting of a mad
Dog 300 353. 482 To help the Dropsy 235. 290. 353 To cause Drowsinesse like
unto drunkenness 362
E.
FOr pains in the Ears 580. 584 Good for sore and weak Eyes 216 421. 427.
479. 530 Hurtful to the head and Eyes 489 For the Epilepsie or falling
sickness 194 335. 344. 456. 477. 502
F.
TO cleanse the Face, and other patts of the skin, and make it fresh 40. 189
247. 336. 396. 500. 502. 521. 528. 566 584. 589. 600 For the Falling sickness
194. 335. 344 456. 477. 502 Farsing or faseting herbs 474. 476. 478 To heal
Felons on the joints of the fingers 492 To procure the Feminine courses 289
335. 453. 456. 477. 479. 491 To stay the Feminine or menstruall courses 372.
396. 480. 486. 608. 611 To cleanse Fistula's 364 To expel thin Phlegm 477 To
extenuate and expectorate tough Phlegm 134. 264. 436. 448. 456. 477. 500, 529
530. 533. 608 For the bloody Flixe and all other Fluxes 193. 231. 372. 425.
431. 446, 483. 486 568. 595. 602. 605. 608, 611 To take away Freckles, spots,
etc. 500 566 For the French disease 283. 353. 606
G
TO stay the Gonorrhaea or running of the reins 608 Good for the Gout 349
H.
TO cause the hair to grow 566 For the falling of the Hair 425 Hurtful to
the Head and eyes 489 Good for the Head and Heart 134. 170 298. 426. 455. 474.
530. 586 Good for the Head and stomach 455. 474 530. 586 For pains in the Head
288. 292. 426 448. 499 For the swimming and dissinesse of the Head 241. 247.
586 For the passion of the Heart, and to make it merry 480. 528. 529, 589 To
expel venomous vapors from the Heart 170. 301. 529. 530. 586 To procure
Health 477. 478 To ease the Hemorrhodes or piles 513 580 For an Hoarsenesse
580. 584. 600 For the bots in Horses 606. 607 For the cough in Horses 595 To
stay the Hickock 494 To purge phlegmatic and watery Humors 329
I.
FOr the yellow Iaundise 132. 134. 150 170. 275. 290. 531. 562 To make
excellent Ink 431 To assuage hot Inflammations 362. 378 380 To help the
Itching of the Head 477 To cure the Itch 380
K.
TO heal exulcerated Kidneyes 533
L.
TO stay a Laske or looseness 132. 323 421. 425. 446. 483. 562. 568. 570. 571
578. 595 For the Lepry and deformity of the skin 306 For chapt Lips and hands
etc. 589 To tanne or thicken Leather 611 To cleanse the Liver 484. 532 To cool
and strengthen the Liver 226 448. 486 Good for the Lunges and old coughes 134.
249. 300. 353. 364. 436. 448. 456 477. 502. 506. 513. 529. 530. 533. 600 608 To
stay immoderate lust 499. 529
M.
TO take away blew Marks 427. 500 502. 566 For the Measels and small pocks
170. 216 To straw on Meat 474. 476 For Melancholicke diseases 345. 450. 448
455, 510, 589 To comfort and strengthen cold and weak Members, 170, 290, 407,
427, 448, 449 453, 474, 477, 491, 598 To strengthen the Memory 427, 428 To keep
Milk from curdling in the stomach 482 To increase Milk in women's breasts 440
504 For the Morphew and other discolorings of the skin, 336, 396, 427, 566 For
the Mother in women 344, 378 To keep garments from Moths 376, 611 To engender
Moths 386 Good to wash and cleanse the Mouth 428 431, 446, 528, 557, 564, 598 To
cure Ulcers in the Mouth 431 For a surfeit of Mushroms 513
N.
TO waste Nature 530 For a cricke in the Neck 66 To procure Neesing 189, 289
To stay bleeding at the Nose 396
O.
TO open Obstructions 448, 484, 492, 532 To take away the offense of the smell
of Onions, Garlic, Leekes etc. 512 A remedy for them that have taken Opium
too liberally 289
P.
TO ease Pains 290, 370 For the Palsy 241, 247 For the Plague or
pestilentiall fevers 160, 170, 216, 275, 298, 328, 333, 335, 353, 483, 495,
513, 529, 530, 586, 595, 603. From whence Pitch is made 600 For the small Pocks
170, 216 An especial Antidote against Poison 134, 339, 353 Against the Poison
of the Helmet flower and other venomous herbs, and against all other
infectious diseases 216, 333, 335, 353, 483, 529 Against the Poison of the
Spider Phalangium, Scorpions, Serpents, and other venomous beasts 152, 301,
328, 333, 335, 402, 453. 477, 607 To take away the strength of certain Poisons
590 Poison to all fourefooted beasts 402 For sweet Pouthers and sweet bags 189
421, 450, 453, 586 To Purge gently 284, 421, 566 To Purge vehemently, and
stubborn diseases 189, 346, 360, 400, 562 To fatten Pullen 440, 442
R.
TO restore Rauishment 600 To hinder young persons from growing Ripe too soon
132 Fences of Reeds as good as walls 510 To draw Rheum 214, 288, 292 To stay
Rheumaticke distillations 287 288, 376, 427, 482 From whence Rossen is made 60
Good for Ruptures 602
S.
TO put into Sawsages etc. 476, 477, 478, 480, 482 For Scaldings and burnings
362, 512 To take away Scars and marks 223, 247 336, 521, 568 For the Sciatica
or pain in the hippes and joints 160, 442 To cleanse the head of Scurfe 134,
396 477, 479, 607 For the Scurvie 389, 510 To increase Seed 524 To ease pains
in the Sides 532, 599 To clear the Sight 134, 427, 479, 530 To comfort the
Sinews and joints 426 427, 477, 478, 480, 595, 599 To procure Sleep 286, 362,
378, 499 To keep the body Soluble 333, 376, 421 480, 488, 495, 566, 578, 582 To
cleanse the head of running Sores 134 607 For the shrinking of Sinews 425, 426
599 To break plague Sores 223, 300 Good for Sores and wounds 303, 446 600 Good
for the Spleen 198, 288. 455. 456 474. 490. 502. 510. 530. 610 To draw out
Splinters etc. out of the flesh 190 Good for Stitches 599 Good for the Stomach
and Liver 134, 353 455, 473, 483. 491, 532 Hurtful to the head and Stomach
489 607 For cold and windy Stomachs 301, 455 476. 491, 495, 586 To cool an hot
Stomach 380, 486, 499. 525, 526, 528, 558, 560, 562, 566, 575, 584, 589 To
warm a cold Stomach 474, 477, 480 482, 495, 500, 515, 529, 586, 598 For the
Stone in the reins and kidneyes 230, 274, 293, 335, 370, 425, 492, 503. 504,
510, 521, 526, 532, 533, 566. 575. 582, 584. 607. 608. 611 For the Strangury
491 Good against Surfets 287 To cause Surfets 582 To provoke Sweating. 264.
290. 532 To help Swounings 274. 301. 529
T.
TO draw out Thorns etc. out of the flesh 190 Good for swollen Throats 300 To
wash the mouth and Throat 357. 478 528. 598 For the Toothache 134. 292 The
poor man's Treakle 514 For Trageas or dredges 573 Common Turpentine from whence
it is taken 600 Venice Turpentine from whence it is taken 600. 608
V.
TO help Venery 66. 190. 193, 194. 502. 506. 524 To take away Vermin and Lice
in the head etc. 477 To recover the Voice being lost 513 To cicatrise old
Ulcers 275. 364 To cleanse Ulcers 492. 580 For running Ulcers 364. 595 To
procure Vomiting 189. 439. 442. 532 To stay Vomiting 477. 480 To cure the
biting of a Viper or Adder 302 To cause the Urine to seem blood 433 For the
stopping of Urine 132. 264. 353 376. 453. 456. 483. 491. 492. 502. 503 506.
508. 515. 525. 530. 532. 533. 582 602. 608
W.
TO purge watery humors 329 To make sweet Waters 421, 450. 453 482 To break
Wind 301. 455. 476. 491, 494. 508. 515. 529. 530. 575. 586 To stay the longing
of Women with child 561. 564 For the Worms 134. 216. 336. 345. 449. 482. 483.
500. 502. 532. 582. 607 Good to cure Wounds 241. 252. 364. 389 445. 446. 456.
480. 483. 492 Good Wound herbs 230. 231. 235. 241. 323. 383. 389. 406.
Faults escaped in some Copies.
FOlio 8. line 14. for own read home. f. 12. l. 27. for trouble read treble.
f 42. l. 5. read, like unto that of a Lilly f. 66. l. 42. for (...) read
(...). f. 73. l. 37 for top of the flower, ^ead cup f. 134. l. 36. for composed
read compassed. f 150. l. 4. for has, read have, and line 5. for is are. f.
173. l. 12. put out these words, the inside, in the beginning of the line. f.
189. l. 38. read Binuflorum ordinibus. f. 218. l. 19. read go^lons, and line
28 pratensis. f. 272. line 36. read Pothos. f. 276 l. 12. Chelidonia. f. 281.
l. 37. for has, have. and l 28. Mastuerzo. f. 284 l. 15. Vicenza. f. 287. l.
39. Citrina. f. 290. l. 39. read provoke, and, help. f. 329. l. 37. for
Melancholicke, read Flegmaticke. f. 330. 331. 333. read Eryngium in all
places f. 336. l. 8. read, and not very flat. f. 356. l. 31. Americanum. f.
357. l. 26. Cervicaria. f. 3^8. l. 45. read, before it can have. f. 372. l. 9.
blo^ out, except it. f. 389. for spockes, read smockes f. 393 l. 3. in the
margent for caeruleo, read pleno. f. 397. l. 10. read dwarf. f. 424. l. 45.
Hirculus. f. 428. l. 20. Tarentina. f. ^31. l. 10. Cyprium. l. 19. Amomum. f.
438. l. 17. for D^oscorides, read Theophrastus. f. 442. l. 3. for castings
read purgings. f. 509. l. 35. read (...) f. 513. l. 24. transfer all that
clause of Onions unto the o her side, under the use of Onions. f. 516. l. 37.
transfer these words, [Bauhinus upon Matthiolus calls it Solanum tuberosum
esculenium] unto the former Potatoes of Virginia. f. 520. l. 13. for swells,
read smells. f. 541. l. 51. read, after your stocks raised from stones. f.
566. l. 20. for as, read and. and l. 29. every one. f. 567. l. 24. for Rice,
read Rue. f. 575. l. 8. read serve to be ministered to the sick. f. 588 l. 3.
Capandu. f. 594. l. 18. for facility, read faculty. f. 595. l. 39. read
Ricinus. f. 600. l. 4. Fuchsius

LONDON, Printed by HVMFREY LOWNES and ROBERT YOUNG at the sign of the Star
on Bread-street hill. 1629.


