A Book of Christian exercise, appertaining to RESOLVTION, that is showing how
that we should resolve our selves to become Christians in deed: by R. P.

Perused, and accompanied now with a Treatise tending to Pacification: by Edm.
BVNNY.

Heb. 13, 8. Jesus Christ yesterday, and to day, and the same for ever.

Imprinted at London by N. Newton, and A. Hatfield, for John Wight.

1584.



Hoc insigne prius proavis, musisque decorum, Postremo Petri concelebravit
honos.

TO THE MOST REverend Father in God, his very good Lord and Patron, EDWIN, by
the providence of God Archbishop of York, Primate of England, and Metropolitan,
etc.
MAY it please your Grace to understand, that whereas at the first by a frind of
mine, and after by mine own experience, I perceived, that the book ensuing was
willingly read by diverse, for the persuasion that it has to godliness of life,
which notwithstanding in many points was corruptly set down: I thought good in
the end, to get the same published again in some better manner than now it is
come forth among them; that so the good, that the reading thereof might
otherwise do, might carry no hurt or danger withal, so far as by me might be
praevented. For this cause I have taken the pains, both to purge it of certain
points that carried either some manifest error, or else some other
inconvenience with them: and to join another short Treatise withal, to ^^^ort
those that are not yet persuaded, to join with us likewise in the truth of
Religion. For so to accept of our adversaries labors so much as is good, may I
trust bring to pass with some few of them, that themselves will better
perceive, that wherein they shall do well, they may look to be as readily
encouraged by us, as, when they do il, to be admonished, or reprehended either,
as the case does require: and others likewise of their welwillers (yet
notwithstanding in this vary from them, that they stand more indifferent in
the cause of religion, and mean not otherwise to persist in their opinions, but
so far as they think they have reason for them) may so be the rather induced to
assure them selves (as the truth indeed is) that wherein they have sufficient
warrant for the points that they stand on, they are not in any wise misliked by
us, but only for those, wherein they have no sufficient groundwork to bear them
out. I was also very glad, both that some of them had taken pains in that kind
of labor: and that others of their profession were sometimes occupied in reading
of such. For whereas by their books that are of the Controversies, the readers
of them that are before smitted with that kind of infestion, are often times
thereby the more entangled in their errors, and more kindled likewise with
inordinate heat, against al those that more sincerely hold the Christian faith:
by this kind of labor it may fall out, that coming thereby to the fear of God,
though but after a corrupter manner, yet therein may they possibly find a ready
way, first to draw them somewhat on, to a better advisement of their wais; and
then after that, to epsy their wonted errors likewise, and to join with us in
the truth of religion. In which course the better to help them, I have added
this other Treatise withal; so to bring before their eyes, how the case for
that matter does stand betwixt us, and how little cause there is for them so
much to be afraid of our profession, as some have born them in hand that they
ought: trusting withal, that as they do already agree with us in many points of
great importance; so they can be content to condescend unto us in the rest
likewise, if it may appeer unto them, that in so doing they shall do none
otherwise, than as of conscience, and duty they ought.

Both which books when I thought to have praesented unto your Grace, I was for
a time stayed by this, for that I thought them not a praesent worthy enough,
in respect of my labors therein. But when I did more deeply consider, that I
might very well hope of better acceptance, than the strict woorthines of the
thing should deserve, I was then fully resolved to be so bold as to praesent
your G. with them such as they be: and, for whatsoever wants, either in them,
or me, to rest in the good assurance that I have, that your G. will
notwithstanding of your own inclination in good part take them. As also I take
it, that I am by good reason induced so to do, both for that the dignity of
your place in the church of God among us, and mine own special duty besides,
does of right require it, and much more than it, if mine ability might
accordingly serve: and the nature of the matter in one principal point is such,
as that by a certain kind of necessity it leads me thereunto. For whereas it
may be the persuasion of some, that no such work as is at the first so corrupt
in it self, should be brought forth to light by any of us, though never so
warily we purged it before (wherein notwithstanding there be many good reasons
to ground upon, for those that are otherwise minded:) hence is it, that your
Graces censure, especially here in these parts, is of me and others of the same
jurisdiction, especially to be regarded, for the place that God has given you
among us. In which kind of labor, as Castalion first, then also Master Rogers
have done very well, in that little book of Kempicius, that is called The
Imitation of Christ, leaving out the corruption of it, and taking only that
which was sound: so has John Baptist Fikler been very bold in wresting that
which another had written so well, of the power of the magistrate over his
subjects, and the duty of subjects to him again, altogether to the
establishing of the Popes supremacy, and to animate their own confoederates
against their godly and lawful princes; changing nothing else (to speak of)
but those very titles, and otherwise using the others matter, method, and
style. Nevertheles, as the former of these examples show us, how such things
may rightly be used: so the other likewise may admonish those that would
mislike to have their oversights so helped, that they had need as much to go
about to excuse their own fellows, as to impugn any others therefore, that use
their freedom more moderately. As for my self, having used my liberty so
easily as I have done, altering no more than need required, and doing the same
in quiet manner, without any grief against the Author whosoever it were; or
disgrace to his doings (so much as might be, not betraieng the truth:) I am the
less careful (under the protection of your Graces censure) either of the
censure, or assalts of others, that are more led by affection than reason. To
be short, whereas the former of these two books calls men from the love of
the world; and the latter likewise, does call men from their woonted errors unto
the truth: in both these respects, I thought your G. would so much the rather
accept of them. For having had so long experience of the world as you have,
very likelihood teaches, that needs you must grow more and more from the love
thereof: and it is sufficiently known unto al, that having found this mercy
your self, to be delivered from the former ignorance, and to be brought to the
knowledge of the truth, you have in like sort (in this long course that God
has given you) much called on others to do the like. These books therefore
that treat of the same, I thought should be the rather welcome. And I beseech
almighty God, the fountain and giver of al good things, to give you grace so
to consider of the one, and to go on forward in the other, as that more and
more departing from the love of the world, and more and more performing the
work of the ministry, you bring the former at length to nothing, and make the
other a pollished work for the day of the Lord.

Your Graces most humble in the Lord, EDM. BVNNY.

The Praeface to the Reader.
COncerning the former of these two Books (gentle Reader) I have to admonish
thee of certain things thereunto belonging: and first as touching the Author of
it; then as touching the book it self. Of the Author.
Who it is that was the Author of it, I do not know, for that the Author has
not put to his name, but only two letters in the end of his praeface: which two
letters I have set down under the title of the book it self. But whosoever it
is, that was the Author of it, himself does set down, both the occasion
whereupon he wrote it; and what was his intent, and purpose therein. The occasion
of it was, that one Gasper Loart Doctor of Divinity, and a Jesuit friar, By
what occasion he wrote.
had before written a book of much like argument in the Italian tongue: which a
countrie-man of ours at Paris in France had about four years since translated
into English; and had done (as he thought) much good thereby. Whereupon the
Author heerof minding to have imprinted that again, and to have enriched it,
both with matter, and method: he found the course that he determined, to have
this issu in the end, that he thought not good to imprint again that book of
Doctor Loarts, but rather to make another of his own, and to gather in
thereunto, whatsoever is in that book, or others such like, to this effect.
Which course when he had taken, he thought good to follow this order therein:
first to show, how to resolve our selves to serve God indeed; then, how to
begin to do it; and lastly, how to continu unto the end. And so setting in hand
with the work, and having finished the first part, that has he sent over in
the mean season, His intent and purpose.
until he shall be able to finish the rest. His intent and purpose was, as
himself does witness, that his countrie-men might have some one sufficient
direction for matters of life, among so many books of controversies: for that
those (though otherwise he account them needful) do help but little, he says,
often times to good life; but rather fill the heads of men with a spirit of
contradiction and contention, that for the most part hinders devotion.
Insomuch that he much misliketh, that men commonly spend so much of their time
so unprofitably, talking of faith, but not seeking to build thereon as they
ought to do, and so do but weary themselves in vain: making much ado, but
getting but little profit thereby; much disquieting our selves and others, and
yet obtaining but small reward. Which complaint of his is just indeed, as the
matter is handled by many. And so having protested his good meaning therein,
desires al, though they dissent from him in religion: yet, laieng aside
hatred, malice, and wrathful contention, to join together in amendment of
life, and in praieng one for another. Which we might have heard in his own
words, but that he interlaceth other things withal, that I dare not in
conscience and duty to God commend unto thee. Of the book it self.
Concerning the book it self it seems to be most of al gathered out of
certain of the Schoolmen (as they are termed) that living in the corrupter
time of the church, did most of al by that occasion treat of reformation of
life; when as others were rather occupied about the controversies, that were
most in quaestion among them. And although my self have bestowed no great time
in them: yet by the little that I have bestowed, I see it to resemble them so
much (especially for the invention of it) that as we find sometimes a ready
help in the face of the child, to guess at the father; so in this likewise, me
think that we have in the book it self, that which may lead us to this
conjecture. But my meaning at this time is no more but this, first to show thee
what it was as it is set forth by the Author himself: and then what is done
thereunto by me, that so I might get it published to al. In what manner it came
forth at the first.
As it is set forth by the Author himself, if we consider the substance of
it, surely it was well worth the labor (a few points only excepted) and much of
it, of good persuasion to godliness of life. But if we consider the form, or
manner of it, therein may thou find, that it was needful for me, before hand
to admonish thee of these few things. First, that throughout the whole book
the Author has used, in those scriptures that he alleges, the vulgar
translation that was before in common use with them: and some special words
praecisely, such as before they have taken upon them to observe, and therein
still to descent from us. The vulgar translation is known well enough: so that I
need to say nothing of it. Those special words that praecisely he uses, are,
Our Lord, when it is more agreeable to the text to say, The Lord: justice, for
righteousness: poenance, for repentance: merit, for good works, or the service
of God: and a few others. Then also in diverse parts of the book there were
mingled in withal, certain opinions and doctrines of their own profession, most
of them such as are manifest corruptions, and some of them no more but
over-venturous: and certain places alleged out of others, little appertaining
to the matter, What is don to it since. First in the substance which is
approoved.
or else more coldly handling the matters propounded, than that well they could
match with the residu that are in the Treatise to that purpose alleged. In
this manner came it into my hands: and so it is yet extant among them. Now
concerning my doings therein, first for the substance of it, because it is, much
of it, good, I have so far not only conceived liking of it my self: but also
have done my best endeavor, thus to publish it unto al; that so many as will, may
take to themselves the benefit of it. In which kind of argument though many
others in these our dais have done very commendably likewise? Yet I do
specially commend this unto thee, the rather for that it proceeds from those,
that otherwise are for diverse points, the greatest adversaries that we have in
the cause of religion. And whereas inordinate contention is not only unseemly
for the church of God, but also hurtful to the cause of religion, a special
point of wisdom it is, when God has bestowed any good gift on any of us al,
that others should so aesteem thereof, as that they make the same a mean to
moderate the bitterness of their affections toward al those, that gladly would
live peaceably with all, so much as they might: as also on the other side it is
very clear, that those that will not (so far as the cause of religion it self
does permit them) may have just occasion to be ashamed; and thereby to find
out, what kind of spirit it is that does lead them. So the substance of the
book is such, as that a mind that is well disposed, may with one, and the
selfsame labor, gather out of it, both lessons of godliness unto it self: and
that which may somewhat occasion some better agreement among certain of us; with
such of them I mean, as stand more indifferent, and are content to dissent no
further from us, than of conscience they think that they ought. The former of
which will yield us this fruit, that we shall address our selves to do, in some
good measure, our service to God: the other, that we shall do it with a quieter
conscience, Then in the form or manner of it, which is amended.
our selves desirous to be at peace withal, so far as conveniently may be
obtained. On the other side likewise, because I found the manner and form so far
forth out of order as I have declared, therefore did I endeavor my self to help
it a little as need required. But as touching the transsation that they use* I
have altogether let them alone therewith* partly to condescend so far unto them,
as to suffer themselves in such case to use what translation they will, and with
good will to hear them therein; and partly for that diverse points of the matter
were so grounded thereupon, that the translation might not be amended, unless
the matter were altered likewise. So far forth therefore as there was no
manifest error taken in withal, I have left it wholly unto them: though
otherwise it might often times be amended. For which cause also I did the rather
omit to meddle with the quotations to allege the verse of the chapter withal,
because that in distinguishing of the verses we disagree sometimes: and
forbearing to obtrude ours to them, unless I thought they would take it in
good part; have forborne likewise to use theirs, for that we find it not so
agreeable to the truth it self. As for those special words of theirs, that the
Author so praecisely uses, I have used my liberty therein: sometimes letting
them stand as they are; and sometimes altering them, when they were abused, or
otherwise the case did so require. Those other points of their proper opinions,
wherein we dissent from them, and they (no dowt) from the truth it self, I have
clean left out; and some of those venturous points besides: together with
certain of those places likewise, which he has alleged out of others, that
did not so much appertain to the matter that he had in hand; or not so
effectually touched the same, as himself otherwise has done. The former of
which I therefore left out, for that neither my self could allow to leave any
such as (to my knowledge) might be any hurt; or else but occasion of stumbling
to others: neither could I so have gotten it forth to the use of al, carrieng
still such corruption with it. And this have I done so much the rather, for that
most of those things seem rather to be added by some that had the perusing of
the book, before it might be allowed among them to come to the print, than by
the proper Author thereof: they do so little often times agree with the argument
that there he has in hand, nor with the manner of handling of it. As for
example, in the first part of the book and third chapter, setting down the end
of man's life, which he says is the service of God, eight or nine times in that
chapter is joined withal the gaining of heaven: which notwithstanding is not
agreeable to the manner of the Authors handling of that point, as it may appeer
in the whole discourse there, and namely by his place of Zachary in the
beginning of the third, and by his division in the beginning of the fourth
chapter, where notwithstanding the gaining of heaven is very odly put in again.
The other sort likewise I thought good to leave forth, for that being
impertinent, they might discredit some part of the rest, or else but weaker
than the rest, might so let down the affections again which were stirred up
before by the other. And truly the spirit in these dais does proceed a great
deal more effectually, both in doctrine and exhortation, than it did in the
dais of diverse of those that were here alleged. Wherein, if there shall be any
that shall think, either on the one side, that I have put out too much, or on
the other, that I have put out too little, neither am I desirous to overrule
their judgments, nor very careful to maintain mine own, if any shall come with
better matter: contenting my self only with this, that I have done what seemed
to me to be most expedient to the glory of God, and to the benefit of his
people here. And so without any further defense of my doings therein, now
(gentle Reader) I send thee over to the book it self: where if thou shall
bestow a little pains (though it be no more, but once with advisement to read
it over) I dowt not, but that thou will confess thy labor to be well bestowed.
Which when thou shall find, then descending to the Author of it, seeing
himself desires to be helped by thy prayers, thou shall do well, both to thank
God for him for this which is done, and to solicit him with thy prayers, on
behalf of him and the rest, that it would please him to give them a further
knowledge of the truth in Christ, so far as his wisdom has thought expedient,
to the setting forth of his own glory, and to the salvation of those that are
his. And God give us al (so many as do appertain to his kingdom) his grace in
that measure, that both we may agree together in the truth of religion, and
altogether employ our selves in his service here, in peace and quietness one
with another. And so I bid thee heartily farewell. At Bolton-Percy, in the
ancientie or liberties of York, the 9. of Iulie. 1584.

Thy hearty wel-willer in Christ, EDMUND BVNNY.

The book of Christian exercise, appertaining to Resolution.
The first part.
The contents of the first part of this book, touching the helps of resolution
to serve God.

How necessary a thing it is, for a man to resolve, to leave vanities, and to
serve God. What argument the devil uses to draw men from this resolution. How
wilful ignorance doth-increase, and not excuse sin. What mind a man should have
that would read this Treatise.

That inconsideration heerin is a great enemy to resolution. What
inconveniences grow thereby. The nature, and commodity of consideration. Of the
exact manner of meditating the particulars of religion in the fathers of old:
and the fashion of believing in gross at this day.
The third Chapter.
How, du consideration of this end helps a man to judge of himself. What
mind a man should have to creatures. The lamentable condition of the world by
want of this du consideration. And the mischief thereof at the last day.
The fourth Chapter.
How exactly both these parts are to be exercised. The description of a
Christian life. The lamentable condition of our negligence heerin. The care and
diligence of many of the fathers touching the same. The remedies that they
used, for the one part: and what monuments of piety they left behind, touching
the other. The indifferent estates of good, and evil men: as well praesently,
and at the day of death; as in the life to come.

A principal point of wisdom in an accountant, for viewing of the state of his
account before hand. The majesty of ceremonies, and circumstances used by God
at the first publication of his law in writing: and his severe punishment of
offenders. The sharp speeches of our savior against sinners. Why two judgments
are appointed after death. The sudden coming of them both. The demands in our
account, at the general judgment. The circumstances of horror and dread
before, at, and after the same. What a treasure a good conscience will then be.
The pitiful case of the damned. How easily the dangers of those matters may be
praevented in du time.

Gods infinite hatred to sinners. The reasons why God hates them. That they
are enemies to God, and to themselves. How God punishes sinners: as well the
penitent, as the obstinate: and of the bitter speeches in scripture against
sinners. Of the seven miseries and losses which come by sin. The obstinacy of
sinners in this age. Two principal causes of sin. Of the danger to live in sin.
How necessary it is to fear.
The seventh Chapter.
A contemplation of the majesty of God: and of his benefits. Of the several
uses of sacraments. Diverse complaints against sinners in the person of God. Our
intolerable contempt and ingratitude against so great a majesty and
benefactor. Of great causes we have to love God, beside his benefits. How he
requires nothing of us but gratitude. That it rests in du resolution to
serve him. An exhortation to this gratitude, with a short prayer for a penitent
sinner in this case.

The induration of some hearts, kept from resolution by worldly respects. Of the
matters of terror, pain, and misery, that principally molest a man at his
death. A contemplation of the terrors, speech, or cogitation of a sinner at the
hour of death. Of diverse apparitions and visions to the just and to the wicked
lieng a dieng. How al these miseries may be praevented.

How God uses the motive of threats to induce men to resolution. Of the
everlasting pain in hell, reserved for the damned, and common to all that are
there. Of the two parts thereof: that is, pain sensible, and pain of loss.
Vehement conjectures touching the severitie of those pains. Of the several
names of hell in diverse toongs. Of the particular pains for particular
offenders, peculiar in quality and quantity to the sins of each offender. Of
the woorm of conscience.
The tenth Chapter.
How God is the best play master. Of his infinite magnificence. The nature,
greatness, and valu of his rewards. A description of paradise. Of two parts of
felicity in heaven. A contemplation of the commodities of the said two
felicities joined together. The honor whereunto a Christian man is born by
baptism. An admonition against security in this life.
The contents of the second part of this book: The second part.
touching impediments of resolution.
The first Chapter.
Nine special privileges and helps, wherewith the virtuous are aided above the
wicked. 1 The force of Gods grace for easing of virtuous life, against al
temptations. 2 Of what force love is heerin. And how a man may know, whether he
have love toward God, or no. 3 Of a peculiar light of understanding pertaining
to the just. 4 Of internal consolation of mind. 5 Of the quiet of a good
conscience in the just. 6 Of hope in God which the virtuous have. And that the
hope of the wicked, is indeed no hope, but mere presumption. 7 Of freedom of
soul and body, which the virtuous have. 8 Of the peace of mind in the
virtuous, toward God, their neighbor, and themselves. 9 Of the expectation of
the reward, that the virtuous have.
Of the comfort that holy men have, after their conversion: And how the best
men have had greatest conflicts therein. Of Saint Austens conversion, and four
annotations thereupon.
The second Chapter.
1 First, that it is an ordinary means of salvation to suffer some
tribulation. 2 Secondly, that there be thirteen special considerations of Gods
purpose, in sending afflictions to his servants: which are laid down and
declared in particular. 3 Thirdly, what special considerations of comfort a man
may have in tribulation.
The third Chapter.
1 First, how, and in what sense the world and commodities thereof are vanities:
and of three general points of worldly vanities. 2 Secondly, how worldly
commodities are mere deceits. 3 Thirdly, how the same are pricking thorns. 4
Fourthly, how the same are misery and affliction. 5 Fifthly, how they strangle
a man. With a description of the world. 6 Sixthly, how a man may avoid the
danger thereof, and use the commodities thereof to his own benefit.
The fourth Chapter.
That prolonging of our iniquities, in hope of Gods mercy, is to build our
sins on Gods bak. Of the two feet of our Lord: that is, mercy and truth. Of
two dangers of sinners: and how Gods goodness helps not them, that persevere
in sin. Whether Gods mercy be greter than his justice. The description of true
fear. Of servile fear, and of the fear of children: and how servile fear is
profitable for sinners.

Of seven special reasons, why the devil mooveth us to delay: and of six
principal causes, which make our conversion harder by delay. How hard it is to
repent in old age, for him that is not accustomed to some hardness before: and
what charge a man draws to himself, by delay. That the example of the thief
saved on the cross, is no warrant to such as defer their conversion. Of diverse
reasons, why conversion made at the last hour is insufficient.

The four effects of sloth: and the means how to remoove them. The cause of
Atheism, at this day. And the way to cure careless men. Of two degrees of
hardness of heart. How hardness of heart is in all persecutors. The description of
an hard heart: and the danger thereof. The conclusion of the whole book.
FINIS.
THE FIRST PART OF THIS BOOK.
CHAP. I. Of the end and parts of this Book: with a necessary advertisement
to the Reader.
THIS first book has for his proper end, The end of this book.
to persuade a Christian by name to become a true Christian in deed* at the
least, in resolution of mind. And for that there be two principal things
necessary to this effect: therefore this first book shall be divided into two
parts. Two parts of this book.
In the first shall be declared important reasons and strong persuasions, to
provoke a man to this resolution: In the second shall be refuted all the
impediments, which our spiritual enemies (the flesh, the world, and the devil)
are wont to lay for the stopping of the same: knowing very well, that of this
resolution depends all our whole service of GOD. For he that never resolves
himself to do well, and to leave the dangerous state of sin wherein he lives,
is far of from ever doing the same. But he that sometimes resolves to do it,
although by frailty he performs it not at that time: The necessity of
resolution.
yet is that resolution much acceptable before God; and his mind the redier to
return after to the like resolution again, and by the grace of God, to put it
manfully in execution. But he that wilfully resists the good motions of the
holy Ghost, Acts. 7.
and discourteously contemns his Lord, knocking at the door of his conscience,
greatly provoke the indignation of GOD against him, Apoc. 3.
and commonly grows harder and harder daily, until he be given over into a
reprobate sense, Romans 1.
which is the next door to damnation it self.

An advertisement.
2 One thing therefore I must advertise the Reader before I go any further, that
he take great heed of a certain principal deceit of our ghostly adversary,
whereby he draws many millions of souls into hell daily: which is, to fear
and terrify them from hearing or reading any thing contrary to their present
humor or resolution. As for example, an usurer, from reading books of
restitution: a lecherer, from reading discourses against that sin: a worldling,
from reading spiritual books or treatises of devotion. And he uses commonly
this argument to them for his purpose: The devils argument.
Thou see, how thou art not yet resolved to leave this trade of life, wherein
thou art: and therefore the reading of these books will but trouble and afflict
thy conscience, and cast thee into sorrow and melancholy, and therefore read
them not at al* This (I say) is a cunning sleight of Satan, whereby he leads
many blindfolded to perdition: even as a faulkener carries many hawks quietly
being hooded, which otherwise he could not do, if they had the use of their
sight.

3 If ignorance did excuse sin, then this might be some refuge for them that
would live wickedly: Wilful ignorance increases sin.
But this kind of ignorance (being voluntary and wilful) increases greatly
both the sin, and the sinners evil state. For of this man the holy Ghost
speaks in great disdain. Noluit intelligere vt been ageret. Psalm. 35.
He would not understand to do well. And again: Quia tu scientiam repulisti,
repellam te. Ose. 4.
For that thou have rejected knowledge I will reject thee. And of the same men
in another place the same holy Ghost says: They do lead their lives in
pleasure, Job. 21.
and in a moment go down unto hell, which say to God, Go from us, we will not
have the knowledge of thy wais. See S. Austen of this sin De gra. and lib. arb.
chap. 3. and S. Chrisostom hom. 26. in epist. ad Romans
Let every man therefore beware of this deceit, and be content at the least, to
read good books, to frequent devout company, and other like good means of his
amendment, albeit he were not yet resolved to follow the same: yea although he
should find some grief and repugnance in himself to do it. For these things
can never do him hurt, but may do him very much good: and it may be, that the
very contrarictie and repugnance which he bears in frequenting these things
against his inclination, may move the merciful Lord, which sees his hard case,
to give him the victory over himself in the end, and to send him much more
comfort in the same, than before he had dislike. For he can easily do it, only
by altering our taste with a little drop of his holy grace, and so make those
things most sweet and pleasant, which before tasted both bitter and vnsaverie.

What mind a man should bring to the reading of this book.
4 Wherefore as I would heartily wish every Christian soul, that comes to read
these considerations following, should come with an indifferent mind laid down
wholly into Gods hands, to resolve and do, as it should please his holy spirit
to move him unto, although it were to the loss of all worldly pleasures
whatsoever (which resignation is absolutely necessary to every one that
desires to be saved) so, if some can not presently win that indifferency of
themselves, yet would I counsel them in any case to conquer their minds to so
much patience, as to go through to the end of this book, and to see what may
be said at least to the matter, although it be without resolution to follow the
same. For I doubt not, but God may so pearse these men's hearts before they come
to the end, as their minds may be altered, and they yield themselves unto the
humble and sweet service of their Lord and Savior, Luc. 15.
and that the Angels in heaven may rejoice and triumph of their regaining, as
of sheep most dangerously lost before.

CHAP. II. How necessary it is to enter into earnest consideration and
meditation of our estate.
THE prophet Jeremy after a long complaint of the miseries of his time, fallen
upon the Jews by reason of their sins, utters the cause thereof in these
words: All the earth is fallen into utter desolation, Iere. 12.
for that there is no man which considers deeply in his heart. Signifieng
hereby, that if the Jews would have entered into deep and earnest
consideration of their lives and estate, before that great desolation fell upon
them, they might have escaped the same, as the Ninevites did by the
fore-warning of Jonas: Jonas. 3.
albeit the sword was now drawn, and the hand of God stretched out, within
forty days to destroy them. So important a thing is this consideration. In
figure whereof, al beasts in old time, which did not ruminate, or chew their
cud, were accounted unclean by the law of Moises: Leu. 11. Deuteronomy. 14.
as no dowt, but that soul in the sight of God must needs be, which resolves
not in heart, nor cheweth in often meditation of mind, the things required at
her hands in this life.

2 For, of want of this consideration, and du meditation, all the foul errors
of the world are committed, and many thousand Christians do find themselves
within the very gates of hell, before they mistrust any such matter toward
them: being carried thorough the vale of this life blindfolded with the veil of
negligence and inconsideration, as beasts to the slawghter hows, and never
suffered to see their own danger, until it be too late to remedy the same.

3 For this cause the holy scripture does recommend unto us most carefully,
this exercise of meditation, and diligent consideration of our duties, to
deliver us thereby from the peril, which inconsideration leads us unto.

4 Moises having delivered to the people his embassage from God, touching al
particulars of the law, adds this clause also from God, as most necessary:
These words must remain in thy heart, Deuteronomy. 6.
thou shall meditate upon them, both at home, and abroad, when thou go to
bed, and when thou risest again in the morning. Deuteronomy. 11.
And again, in another place: Teach your children these things, that they may
meditate in their hearts upon them. The like commandment was given by God
himself, Iosu. 1.
to Joshua at his first election to govern the people: to wit, that he should
meditate upon the law of Moises both day and night, to the end, he might keep
and perform the things written therein. And God adds presently the commodity
he should reap thereof. For then (says he) shall thou direct thy way aright,
and shall understand the same. Signifieng, that without this meditation a man
goes both amiss and also blindly, not knowing himself whither.

5 Saint Paul having described unto his scholar Timothy, the perfect duty of
a Prelate, adds this advertisement in the end: Haec meditare. Meditate*
ponder and consider upon this. 1. Tim. 4.
And finally, whenever the holy scripture describes a wise, happy, or just
man (for all these are one in scripture, for that justice is only true wisdom
and felicity:) one chief point is this: Psalm. 1. Pro. 15. Eccl. 14.
He will meditate upon the law of God, both day and night. And for examples in
the scripture, how good men did use to meditate in times past, I might here
reckon up great store, as that of Isaac, Genesis 24.
who went forth into the feelds toward night to meditate: also that of
Ezechias the king, who (as the scripture says) did Esai. 38.
meditate like a dove that is, in silence, with his heart only, Or moorn: for it
was in the way of sorrowing or lamentation
without I did meditate upon thy commandments which I loved. Psalm. 118.
And again: Psalm. 62. Psalm. 118.
I will meditate upon thee in the mornings. And again: O Lord how have I loved
thy law? It is my meditation all the day long. And with what fervor and
vehemency he used to make these his meditations, he shows when he says of
himself: Psalm. 38.
My heart did wax hot within me, and fire did kindle in my meditations.

6 This is recorded by the holy Ghost of these ancient good men, to confound us
which are Christians, who being far more bound to fervor than they, by reason
of the greater benefits we have received: yet do we live so lazily (for the
most part of us) as we never almost enter into the meditation and earnest
consideration of Gods laws and commandments; of the mysteries of our faith; of
the life, and death of our Savior; or of our duty toward him: and much less
do we make it our daily study and cogitation, as those holy kings did,
notwithstanding al their great business in the commonwealth.

7 Who is there of us now adays, which makes the laws and commandments or
justifications of God (as the scripture terms them) his daily meditations as
king David did? Psalm. 118.
Neither only in the day time did he this, Psalm. 76.
but also by night in his heart, as in another place he testifies of himself.
How many of us do pass over whole dais, and months without ever entering into
these meditations? Nay, God grant there be not many Christians in the world,
which know not what these meditations do mean. We believe in gross the
mysteries of our Christian faith, Belief in gross.
as that there is an hell; an heaven; a reward for virtue; a punishment for vice;
a judgment to come; an account to be made; and the like: but for that we chew
them not well by deep consideration, and do not digest them well in our hearts,
by the heat of meditation; they help us little to good life, no more than a
preservative put in a man's pocket can help his health.

8 What man in the world would adventure so easily upon sin (as commonly men
do, Marvelous effects of inconsideration.
which drink it up as easily as beasts drink water) if he did consider in
particular the great danger and loss of grace; the loss of Gods favor, and
purchasing his eternal wrath; also the death of Gods own son sustained for sin;
the inaestimable torments of hell for the everlasting punishment of the same?
Which albeit every Christian in sum does believe: yet because the most part
do never consider them with du circumstances in their hearts: therefore they are
not moved with the same, but do bear the knowledge thereof locked up in their
breasts, without any sense or feeling: even as a man carries fire about him in
a flint stone without heat; or perfumes in a pommander without smell, except the
one be beaten, and the other be chafed.

9 And now to come nere our matter, which we mean to handle in this book) what
man living would not resolve himself thoroughly to serve God in deed, and to
leave al vanities of the world, if he did consider as he should do, the
weighty reasons he has to moove him thereunto: the reward he shall receive for
it; and his infinite danger if he do it not? But because (as I have said
(scarce one among a thousand does enter into these considerations, or if he do,
it is with less attention, or continuance, than so great a matter requires,
hereof it comes, that so many men perish daily, and so few are saved: for
that, by lack of consideration, they never resolve themselves to live as they
should do, and as the vocation of a Christian man requires. So that we may
also complain with holy Jeremy, alleged in the beginning, that our earth
also of Christianity, Iere. 12.
is brought to desolation, for that men do not deeply consider in their hearts.

10 Consideration is the key which opens the door to the closet of our heart,
The nature of consideration.
where al our books of account do lie. It is the looking glass, or rather the
very eye of our soul, whereby she sees her self, and looks into al her
whole estate: her riches; her good gifts; her defects; her safety; her danger;
her way she walks in; her pase she holds: and finally, the place and end
which she draws unto. And without this consideration, she runs on blindly
into a thousand brakes and briers, stumbling at every step, into some one
inconvenience or other, and continually in peril of some great and deadly
mischief. And it is a wonderful matter to think, that in other business of this
life, men both see and confess, that nothing can be either begun, prosecuted,
or well ended, without consideration: and yet in this great business of the
kingdom of heaven, no man almost uses or thinks the same necessary.

11 If a man had to make a journey but from England to Constantinople, A fit
similitude.
albeit he had made the same once or twice before, yet would he not pass it
over without great and often consideration: especially, whether he were right,
and in the way or no; what pase he held; how near he was to his wais end; and
the like. And think thou (my deer brother) to pass from earth to heaven,
and that, by so many hills, and dales, and dangerous places, never passed by
thee before, and this without any consideration at al? Thou art deceived if
thou think so, for this journey has far more need of consideration, than
that, being much more subject to bypaths and dangers: every pleasure of this
world; every lust; every dissolute thought; every alluring sight* and tempting
sound; every devil upon the earth, or instrument of his (which are infinite)
being a thief, and lieng in wait to spoil thee, and to destroy thee upon this
way toward heaven.

12 Wherefore I would give counsel to every wise passenger, to look well about
him, and at least wise once a day, to enter into consideration of his estate,
and of the estate of his treasure which he carries with him, in a brickle
vessel, as Saint Paul affirms, 2. Cor. 4.
I mean his soul, which may as soon be lost by inconsideration, as the
smallest, and nicest jewel in this world, as partly shall appeer by that which
hereafter I have written for the help of this consideration, whereof both I my
self and al other Christians do stand in so great need in respect of our
acceptable service to God. For surely if my soul, or any other did consider
attentievly but a few things of many which she knows to be true: she could
not but speedily reform her self, with infinite mislike and detestation of her
former course. As for example, if she considered thoroughly that her only
coming into this life was to attend to the service of God; Deuteronomy. 6. Luc. 1.
and that she notwithstanding attends only, or the most part, to the vanities
of this world: that she must give account at the last day of every idle word;
Mat. 12.
and yet that she makes none account, not only of words, but also, not of evil
deeds: that no fornicator, 1. Cor. 5. Ephesians. 5.
no adulterer, no usurer, no covetous, or unclean person shall ever enjoy the
kingdom of heaven, as the scripture says; and yet she thinks to go thither,
living in the same vices: Genesis 6. Genesis 19.
that one only sin has been sufficient to damn many thousands together; and yet
she being laden with many, thinks to escape: that the way to heaven is hard,
strait, and painful, Mat. 7.
by the affirmation of God himself; and yet she thinks to go in, living in
pleasures and delites of the world: that al holy saints that ever were (as the
Apostles, Acts. 1. 1. Cor. 4. 2. Cor. 4.6.11.12. 1. Cor. 9. Phili. 2. 1. Cor. 2.
and mother of Christ her self, with all good men since) chose to them selves to
live an austere life (in painful labor, profitable to others, fasting,
praieng, punishing their bodies, and* the like) and for all this, lived in fear
and trembling of the judgments of God; and she, attending to none of these
things, but following her pastimes, makes no doubt of her own estate: If (I
say) my soul or any other did in deed, and in earnest consider these
things, or the least part of a thousand more that might be considered, and
which our Christian faith does teach us to be true: she would not wander (as the
most part of Christian souls do) in such desperate peril thorough want of
consideration.

13 What makes thieves to seem mad unto wise men, A comparison.
that seeing so many hanged daily for theft before their eyes will yet
notwithstanding steal again, but lak of consideration? Mat. 7. Luc. 12. Romans 1.
1. Cor. 1. 2.3. Gal. 3.
And the very same cause makes the wisest men of the world to seem very
fools, and worse than frantiks unto God and good men, that knowing the
vanities of the world, and the danger of sinful life, do follow so much the one,
and fear so little the other. If a law were made by the authority of man, that
whosoever should adventure to drink wine, should without delaie hold his hand
but half an hour in the fire, or in boiling lead, for a punishment: I think
many would forbear wine, albeit naturally they loved the same, and yet a law
being made by the eternal majesty of God, that whosoever commits sin, shall
boil everlastinglie in the fire of hell, without ease or end: many one for
lack of consideration, do commit sin, with as little fear, as they do eat or
drink.

The conclusion of this chapter.
14 To conclude therefore, consideration is a most necessary thing to be taken
in hand, especially in these our days, wherein vanity has so much prevailed
with the most, as it seems to be true wisdom, and the contrary thereof, to be
mere folly, and contemptible simplicity. But I doubt not by the assistance
of God, and help of consideration, to discover in that which follows, the
error of this matter unto the discreet Reader, which is not wilfully blinded,
or obstinately given over unto the captivity of his ghostly enemy (for some
such men there be:) of whom God says as it were pitieng and lamenting their
case, They have made a leag with death, Esai. 28.
and a covenant with hell it self: that is, they will not come out of the danger
wherein they be, but will headlong cast themselves into everlasting perdition,
rather than by consideration of their estate, recover to themselves eternal
life and glory, from which deadly obstinacy the Lord of his mercy deliver
us all, that belong unto him.

CHAP. III. Of the end for which man was created, and placed in this world.
NOw then, in the name of almighty God, and with the assistance of his holy
spirit, let the Christian man or woman desirous of salvation, first of al
consider attentivelie, as a good marchant-factour is wont to do, when he is
arrived in a strange country; or as a captain sent by his prince to some great
exploit is accustomed when he comes to the place appointed: that is, to think
for what cause he came thither; why he was sent; to what end; what to attempt;
what to prosecute; what to perform; what shall be expected and required at his
hands upon his return by him that sent him thither! For these cogitations (no
doubt) shall stir him up to attend to that which he came for, and not to emploie
himself in impertinent affairs. The like (I say) would I have a Christian to
consider, and to ask of himself, why and to what end was he created of God,
and sent hither into this world, what to do, wherein to bestow his days, he
shall find, for no other cause or end, but only to serve God in this life.
Deuteronomy. 6. Iosu. 22. Genesis 14.
This was the condition of our creation, and this was the only consideration
of our redemption, prophesied by Zachary before, That we being delivered from
the hands of our enemies, Luc. 1.
might serve him in holiness and righteousness all the days of our life.

2 Of this it follows first, that seeing the end and final cause of our being
in this world, The first consequence.
is to serve God in this life, that whatsoever we do, or endeavor, or bestow
our time in, either contrary, or impertinent to this end, which is only to the
service of God, though it were to gain all the kingdoms of the earth: yet is it
mere vanity, folly, and lost labor; and will turn us one day to grief,
repentance, and confusion; for that it is not the matter for which we came into
this life, or of which we shall be asked account at the last day, except it be
to receave judgment for the same.

3 Secondly, it follows of the premises, that seeing our only end and business
in this world, The second consequence.
is to serve God, and that al other earthly creatures are put here to serve us
to that end; we should (for our parts) be indifferent to al these creatures, as
to riches or poverty; to health or sickness; to honor or contempt: and we
should desire only so much, or little of the same, as were best for us to our
said end that we intend; that is, to the service of God, for whosoever desires
or seeks the creatures more than this, runs from his end for the which he
came hither.

4 By this now may a careful Christian take some scantling of his own estate
with God, and make a conjecture whether he be in the right way or no. For if he
attend only or principally to this end, for which he was sent hither, that is,
so serve God, if his cares, cogitations, studies, endeavors, labors, talk, and
other his actions, run upon this matter, and that he cares no more for other
creatures, as honor, riches, learning, and the like: then they are necessary
unto him for this end, which he pretends: if his days and life (I say) be
spent in this study of the service of God, then is he dowtles a most happy and
blessed man, and shall at length attain to the kingdom of God.

5 But if he find himself in a contrary case, that is, not to attend to this
matter for which only he was sent hither, nor to have in his heart and study
this service of God, but rather some other vanity of the world, as promotion,
wealth, pleasure, sumptuous apparel, gorgious buildings, beauty, or any other
thing else that pertains not to this end: if he spend his time (I say) about
these trifles, having his cares and cogitations, his talk and delight, more in
them than about the other great business for which he was sent: then is he in a
perilous course, ^eading directly to perdition, except he alter and change the
same. For most certain it is, that whosoever shall not attend unto the service
he came for, shall never attain to thereward promised to that service.

6 And because the most part of the world, not only of infidels, but also of
Christians, do amiss in this point, and do not attend to this thing for which
they were only created and sent hither: Luc. 13.23.
thence it is that Christ and his holy saints have alwais spoken so hardly of
the small number that are in state of salvation even among Christians, and have
uttered some speeches which seem very rigorous to flesh and blood, and scarce
true, albeit they must be fulfilled: Mat. 19. Mar. 10.
as, that It is easier for a camel to go thorough a nedels eye, than for a rich
man to enter into heaven. The reason of which saying (and many mo) stands in
this, that a rich man or worldling attending to heap riches can not attend to
do that which he came for into this world, and consequently never attain
heaven, except God work a miracle, and so cause him to contemn his riches, and
to use them only to the service of God: as some times he does, and we have a
rare example in the Gospel of Zacheus, who being a very rich man, Luc. 19.
presently upon the entering of Christ into his house, and much more into his
heart by faith, gave half his goods unto the poor, and offered withal, that
whom soever he had injuried, to him he would make four-times so much
restitution. The lamentable state of men of the world.


7 But hereby now may be seen the lamentable state of many thousand
Christians in the world, which are so far of from bestowing their whole time
and travel in the service of God, as they never almost think of the same; or,
if they do, it is with very little care or attention. Good Lord, how many men
and women be there in the world, which bearing the name of Christians, scarce
spend one hour of four and twenty in the service of God! How many do beat
their brains about worldly matters; and how few are troubled with this care!
How many find time to eat, drink, sleep, disport, deck, and paint themselves
out to the world; and yet have no time to bestow in this greatest business of
all other! How many spend over whole days, weeks, months, and years, in
hauking, hunting, and other pastimes; without making account of this matter!
What shall be come of these people? What will they say at the day of judgment?
What excuse will they have?

8 If the merchant factor (which I spoke of before) after many years spent
beyond the seas returning home to geeve accounts to his master, A comparison.
should yield a reconing of so much time spent in singing, so much in daunsing,
so much in courting, and the like: who would not laugh at his accounts? But
being further asked by his master, what time he bestowed on his merchandise
which he sent him for; if he should answer, none at all, nor that he ever
thought or studied upon that matter: who would not think him worthy of all
shame, and punishment? And surely with much more shame and confusion shall they
stand at the day of judgment, who being placed here to so great a business, as
is the service of almighty God, have notwithstanding neglected the same,
bestowing their studies, labors, and cogitations in the vain trifles of this
world: which is as much from the purpose, as if men being placed in a course to
run at a golden game of infinite price, they should leave their mark, and some
step aside after flies, or feathers in the air; and some other stand still
gathering up the dung of the ground. And how were these men worthy (trow you)
to receave so great a reward as was proposed to them?

9 Wherefore (deer Christian) if thou be wise, consider thy case while thou have
time, follow the Apostles counsel: Gal. 6.
examine thy own works, and wais, and deceave not thy self. Yet may thou have
grace to reform thy self, because the day time of life yet remains. John. 9.
The dreadful night of death will overtake thee shortly, when there will be no
more time of reformation. What will al thy labor and toil in procuring of
worldly wealth, profit or comfort thee at that hour, when it shall be said to
thee, as Christ said to thy like in the gospel, when he was now come to the top
of his worldly felicity: Luc. 12.
Thou fool, this night shall they take away thy soul: and then, who shall have
the things, which thou have gotten together? Believe me (deer brother) for I
tell thee no untruth, one hour bestowed in the service of God, will more comfort
thee at that time, than an hundred years bestowed in advauncing thy self and
thy house in the world. And if thou might feel now the case, wherein thy
poor heart shall be then, for omitting of this thing, which it should most have
thought upon: thou would take from thy sleep, and from thy meat also, to
recompense thy negligence for the time past. The difference betwixt a wise man
and a fool is this, that the one provideth for a mischeef while time serves:
but the other, when it is too late.

10 Resolve thy self therefore good Christian while thou have time. Resolve thy
self without delay, to take in hand presently and to apply for the time to
come, the great and weighty business for which thou wast sent hither* which
only in deed is weighty and of importance; and al others are mere trifles and
vanities, but only so far forth as they concern this. Believe not the world,
which for running awrie in this point, is detested by thy savior; Ioh. 7.8.2.
1. John. 2.
and every friend thereof, pronounced an enemy to him by his Apostle. Say at
length unto thy savior, I do confess unto thee O Lord, A prayer.
I do confess and can not deny, that I have not hitherto attended to the thing
for which I was created, redeemed, and placed here by thee: I do see my error,
I can not dissemble my greevous fault: and I do thank thee ten thousand times,
that thou have given me the grace to se it, while I may yet by thy grace amend
it: which by thy holy grace I mean to do, and without delay to alter my course:
beseeching thy divine majesty, that as thou have given me this light of
understanding to see my danger, and this good motion to reform the same; so
thou will continue toward me thy blessed assistance, for performance of the
same, to thy honor and my souls health. Amen.

CHAP. IIII. Of the end of man in particular: and of two special things
required at his hands in this life
HAving spoken of the end of man in general in the former chapter, and showed
that it is to serve God: it seems convenient (for that the matter is of great
and singular importance) to treat somewhat more in particular, wherein this
service of God does consist: that thereby a Christian may judge of himself,
whether he perform the same or no; and consequently, whether he do the thing
for which he was sent into this world.

Two parts of our end in this life.
2 First therefore it is to be understood, that the whole service which God
requires at a Christian man's hands in this life, consists in two things: the
one, to fly evil; and the other to do good. And albeit these two things were
required of us also before the coming of Christ (as appears by David whose
commandment is general; Decline from evil, and do good: Psalm. 36.
and by Esaias the prophet whose words are; Leave to do perversely, and learn to
do well. Esai. 1.
) Yet much more particularly, and with far greater reason are they demanded at
the hands of Christian people, who by the death and passion of their Redeemer,
do receave grace and force to be able in some measure to perform these two
things, which the law did not give, albeit it commanded the same.

3 But now we being redeemed by Christ, and receaving from him not only the
renewing of the same commandment, Romans 6.
for the performance of these two things, but also force and ability by his
grace whereby we are made somewhat able to do the same: we remain more bound
thereto in reason and duty than before, for that this was the fruit and effect
of Christ his holy passion as Saint Peter says, That we being dead to sin,
should live unto righteousness. 1. Pet. 2.
Or as Saint Paul more plainly declares the same when he says, Tit. 2.
The grace of God our Savior has appeared to al men, instructing us to this
end, that we renouncing al wickedness, and worldly desires, should live soberly,
justly, and godly in this world.

4 These two things then are the service of God, for which we were sent into
this world: the one to resist sin; Two parts of the service of God.
the other to follow good works. In respect of the first we are called soldiers,
John. 7. 2. Cor. 10. 1. Tim. 1. 2. Tim. 2. Phil. 1. Heb. 10. and 12. Matt.
9.10.20. Luke 10. 1. Tim. 5. Psa. 125. Mat. 13.
and our life a warfare upon the earth: for that as soldiers do alwais lie in
wait to resist their enemies: so ought we to resist sin and the temptations
thereof. And in respect of the second, we are called laborers, stewards,
fermers, and the like, for that as these men attend diligently to their gain
and increase of substance in this life, so should we to good works, to the
glory of God, and benefit of others here in this life.

5 These therefore are two special points which a Christian man should meditate
upon; two special exercises wherein he should be occupied: two special legs
whereupon he must walk in the service of God: and finally two wings whereby he
must fly and mount up unto a Christian life. And whosoever wants either of
these, though he had the other: yet can he not ascend to any true godliness, no
more than a bird can fly lacking one of her wings. I say, that neither
innocence is sufficient without good works: nor good works any thing
available, where innocence from sin is not. The later is evident by the people
of Israel, whose sacrifices, oblations, prayers, and other good works commended
and commanded by God himself, were oftentimes abominable to God: for that the
dooers thereof lived in sin and wickedness, as at large the prophet Esaias
declares? Esai. 1.
The former also is made apparent by the parable of the foolish virgins, who,
Mat. 25.
albeit they were innocent from sin, yet because they gave not attendance, they
were shut out of the doors. Luc. 13. Mat. 25.
And at the last day of judgment Christ shall say to the damned, because you
clothed me not, fed me not, and did not other deeds of charity appointed to
your vocation: therefore go you to everlasting fire, etc. Both these points then
are necessary to a Christian to the service of God: and so necessary, as one
without the other avails not, as I have said. How we ought to resist sin.
And touching the first, which is resisting of sin, we are willed to do it even
unto death, and with the last of our blood (if it were need) and in diverse
places of scripture, Heb. 12. Ephesians. 5. Iaco. 4. 1. Pet. 5.
the holy ghost wills us most diligently to prepare our selves, to resist the
devil manfully which tempts us to sin: and this resistance ought to be made
in such perfect manner as we yield not wittingly and willingly to any sin
whatsoever, either in work, word, or consent of heart, insomuch that whosoever
should give secret consent of mind to the performance of a sin, if he had time,
Matt. 5.
place, and ability thereunto, Exo. 12. Deuteronomy. 5.
is condemned by the holy scripture in that sin, even as if he had committed
the same now in act. And touching the second, which is good works, How we must
do good works.
we are willed to do them abundantly, diligently, joifully, and incessantly,
for so says the scripture. Whatsoever thy hand can do, Eccl. 9.
do it instantly. And again: Eccl. 1. Gal. 6.
Walk worthy of God, fructifieng in every good work: And again Saint Paul
says: Let us do good works unto al men. And again in the very same place; 1.
Cor. 15.
Let us never leave of to do good, for the time will come when we shall reap
without end. And in another place he wills us To be stable, immovable, and
abundant in good works, knowing that our labor shall not be unprofitable.

A description of a christian.
6 By this it may be seen (deer brother) what a perfect creature is a good
Christian, that is, as Saint Paul describes him, The hand work of GOD, and
creature of Christ to good works, wherein he has prepared that he should walk.
Ephesians. 2.
It appears (I say) what an exact life the true life of a Christian is: which
is a continual resistance of al sin, both in thought, word, and deed, and a
performance or exercise of al good works, that possibly he can devise to do.
What an Angelical life is this? Nay more than Angelical, for that angels being
now placed in their glory, have neither temptation of sin to resist, nor can do
any work (as we may) for to increase their further glory.

The perfection of a christian life.
7 If Christians did live according to this their duty, that is in doing al good
that they might, and never consenting to evil: what needed there almost any
temporal laws? What a goodly common wealth were Christianity? Who will not
marvel at the rare examples of many good forefathers of ours, wherein such
simplicity, such truth, such conscience, such almsdeeds, such sincerity, such
virtue, such religion and devotion, is reported to have been. The cause was, for
that they studied upon these two points of a Christian man's duty, and labored
for the performance thereof, every man as God gave him grace. And we because we
look not into these matters, are become as loose and wicked in life, as ever
the Gentiles, or infidels were. And yet is God the same God still, and will accept
at our hands no other account, than he did of those forefathers of ours, for
the performance of these two parts of our duty toward him. What then shall
become of us, which do not live in any part as they did? And to enter yet
somewhat more into the particular consideration of these things, who is there
now a days amongst common Christians (for no doubt there be in secret many
servants of God which do it) but of those which bear the name of Christians,
and most stur abroad in the world, who is there (I say) that takes any pain
about the first point, that is, touching the resisting of the concupiscence of
sin? Which concupiscence, or natural motion of sin, remaining in us, Augu. lib.
2. cont. Julian. and lib. 1. de peccat. mer. cap. vlt. Io. Cassian. 1.5. ca.
12. and deinceps.
as a remnant of our natural malady in punishment of the sin of our first
father Adam, is left in us now after baptism, ad agonem, that is, to strive
withal, and to resist. But alas how many be there which do resist (as they
should) these evil motions of concupiscence? Who does ever examine his
conscience of the same? Who does not yield commonly consent of heart, to every
motion that comes, with pleasure: of covetousnes, of anger, of revenge, of
pride, of ambition, and (above al) of lechery, and other filthy sins of the
flesh: knowing notwithstanding (by the protestation of our Savior Christ
himself) that every such consent of heart, Mat. 5.
is as much in substance of sin, as the act, and makes the soul guilty of
eternal damnation!

8 It is a woonderful matter to consider, and able to make a man astonished to
think, what great care, fear, diligence, and labor, good men in old times did
take about this matter of resisting sin, and how little we take now. Job the
just, Job. 9.
having less cause to fear than we, says of himself: I did fear al my doings
(o Lord) considering that thou do not pardon such as offend thee. But the
good king David which had now tasted Gods heavy hand for consenting to sin
before, shows himself yet more careful and fearful in the matter, Psalm. 76.
when he says: I did meditate in the night time together with my heart, and it
was my whole exercise, and I did brush or sweep mine own spirit within me. What
a diligent examination of his conscience, thoughts and cogitations was this in
a king! And all this was for the avoiding and resisting of sin: as also it was
in Saint Paul, who examined his conscience so narrowly, and resisted al
temptations with such diligence, and attention, as he could pronounce of
himself, 1. Cor. 4.
that to his knowledge he was in his ministry guilty of nothing: albeit he
does confess in another place, that he had most vile and strong temptations of
the flesh laid upon him of the devil by Gods appointment. 2. Cor. 12.
Yet by the grace of Christ he resisted and overcame al. For the better
performance whereof it is likely that he used also these external helps and
remedies of true fasting, earnest praieng, diligent watching, and severe
chastising of his body, by continual and most painful labor in his vocation,
2. Cor. 6. and 11. 1. Tim. 1. 1. Cor. 9.
whereof he makes mention in his writings. As also al godly men (by his
example) have used the like helps since, for the better resisting of sinful
temptations when need required, and the like. Whereof I could here recite great
store of examples out of the holy fathers: Remedies used by the ancient fathers
for resisting of sin.
which would make a man to wonder, and afeard also (if he were not past fear)
to see what extreme pain and diligence those first Christians took, in
watching every little sleight of the devil, and in resisting every little
temptation or cogitation of sin: whereas we never think of the matter, nor make
account either of cogitation, consent of heart, word, or work: but do yield to
al, whatsoever our concupiscence moves us unto; do swalow down every hook laid
us by the devil; and most greedily do devour every poisoned pleasant bait,
which is offered by the enemy for the destruction of our souls: and thus much
about resisting of sin.

How much we fail in doing good works.
9 But now touching the second point, which is continual exercising our selves
in good works, it is evident in itself, that we utterly fail (for the most
part of us) in the same. I have showed before how we are in scripture commanded
to do them, without ceasing, and most diligently whiles we have time of day to
do them in: John. 6.
for as Christ says; The night will come when no man can work any more. I might
also show how certain of our forefathers the saints of God, were most diligent
and careful in doing good works in their dais, even as the husbandman is
careful to cast seed into the ground whiles fair weather lasts, and the
merchant to lay out his money whiles the good market endures. Gal. 6. Phil. 2.
They knew the time would not last long which they had to work in: and therefore
they bestirred themselves whiles opportunity served: they never ceased, but
came from one good work to another, well knowing, what they did, and how good
and acceptable service it was unto God.

Although many such things were done to superstitious and very il uses: yet even
then also were they sometimes sufficient testimonies of a great care to do well
(so far as their knowledge served them) in so many as did not wilfully er; but
were desirous to know the truth, and to do accordingly. And so may those also
be (in such a sense) examples to us.
monuments of their almsdeeds, yet extant to the world, are sufficient
testimonies of the same: to wit, the infinite churches builded, and endued with
great and abundant maintenance for the ministers of the same: so many
schools, colleges, universities: so many bridges, highwais, and publik
commodities. Which charitable deeds (and a thousand mo both private and publik;
secret and open, which I cannot report) came out of the purses of our good
ancesters: who oftentimes not only gave of their abundance, but also saved from
their own mouths, and bestowed it upon deeds of charity, to the glory of God;
and benefit of others. Whereas we are so far of from giving away our
necessaries, as we will not bestow our very superfluities: but will employ them
rather, upon hawks and dogs, and other brute beasts, and sometimes also upon
much viler uses, than to the relief of our poor brethren.

11 Alas (deer brother) to what a careless and senseles estate are we come,
touching our own salvation and damnation! S. Paul cries out unto us; Phil. 2.
Work your own salvation with fear and trembling: and yet no man (for that)
makes account thereof. S. Peter warns us gravely and earnestly; 2. Pet. 1.
Brethren take you great care to make your vocation and election sure by good
works: and yet who (almost) will think upon them! Christ himself thundereth in
these words; I tell you, Luc. 16.
make your selves frinds (in this world) of unjust mammon, that when you faint
they may receive you into eternal tabernacles: And yet for all that we are not
moved herewithal: so dead we are, and lumpish to al goodness.

12 If God did exhort us to good deeds for his own commodity, or for any gain
that he is to take thereby: yet in reason we ought to pleasure him therein, seeing
we have received al from his only liberality before. But seeing he asks it at
our hands for no need of his own, but only for our gain, and to pay us home
again with advantage: it is more reason we should harken unto him. If a common
honest man upon earth should invite us to do a thing, promising us of his
honesty a sufficient reward, we would beleve him: but God making infinite
promises unto us in scripture of eternal reward to our well doing (as that we
shall eat with him; Luc. 22. Mat. 13. Romans 8. Apoc. 22.
drink with him; reign with him; possess heaven with him; and the like) can
not move us notwithstanding to works of charity. But because those forefathers
of ours were moved herewithal, as having hearts of softer metal than ours are
of; therefore they brought forth such abundant fruit as I have showed.

13 Of all this then that I have said, the godly Christian may gather, first,
the lamentable estate of the world at this day, when amongst the small number of
those which bear the name of Christians, so many are like to perish, for not
performing of these two principal points of their uocation. Secondly, he may
gather the cause of the infinite difference of reward for good and evil in the
life to come, The different state of a good and evil man at the day of death.
which some men will seem to marvel at: but in deed is most just and
reasonable, considering the great diversity of life in good and evil men
whiles they are in this world. For the good man does not only endevor to avoid
sin: but also by resisting the same, daily and hourly increases in the favor
of God. The loose man by yielding consent to his concupiscence, does not only
lose the favor of God, but also doubleth sin upon sin without number. The good
man, besides avoiding sin does infinite good works, at the least wise in desire
and heart, where greter ability serves not. But the wicked man neither in heart
nor deed does any good at al, but rather seeks in place thereof to do hurt.
The good man imploieth al his mind, heart, words, and hands, to the service of
God, and of his servants for his sake. But the wicked man bends al his force
and powers both of body and mind, to the service of vanities, the world, and
his flesh. Insomuch, that as the good man increases hourly in the favor of
God, to which is du increase of grace and glory in heaven: so the evil from
time to time, in thought, word, or deed, or in all at once, heapeth up sin and
damnation upon himself; to which is du vengeance, and increase of torments in
hell: and in this contrary course they pass over their lives for twenty,
thirty, or forty years, and so come to die. And is it not reason now, that
seeing there is so great diversity in their estates: there should be as great
or more diversity also, in their reward? Especially seeing God is a great God,
and rewards small things with great wages, either of everlasting glory or
everlasting pain. Thirdly and lastly, the diligent and careful Christian may
gather of this, what great cause he has to put in practice the godly counsel
of Saint Paul, which is; That every man should prove and examine his own works.
Gal. 6.
And so be able to judge of himself, in what case he stands: and if upon
this examination he find himself awry, to thank God of so great a benefit, as
is the revealing of his danger, whiles yet there is time and place to amend. No
dowt, many perish daily by Gods justice in their own gross ignorance, who if
they had received this special favor, as to see the pit before they fell in, it
may be they would have escaped the same. Use Gods mercy to thy gain then
(gentle brother) and not to thy further damnation. If thou see by this
examination, that hitherto thou have not led a true Christian life: resolve thy
self to begin now, and cast not away wilfully that precious soul of thine,
which Christ has bought so deerly; and which he is most ready to save, and to
indu with grace and eternal glory, if thou would yield the same into his
hands, and be content to direct thy life according to his most holy, easy, and
sweet commandments.

CHAP. V. Of the severe account that we must yield to God of the matters
aforesaid.
AMongst other points of a prudent servant this is to be esteemed on principal,
A principal point of wisdom in a servant.
to consider in every thing committed to his charge, what account shall be
demanded touching the same: also what manner of man his master is: whether
gentle, or rigorous; mild or stern; careless or exquisite in his accounts:
also whether he be of ability to punish him at his pleasure, finding him
faulty: and finally, how he has dealt with others before in like matters: for
according to these circumstances (if he be wise) he will govern himself and use
more or less diligence in the charge committed.

2 The like wisdom would I counsel a Christian to use, in the matters before
recited: A necessary consideration.
to wit, touching our end for which God sent us hither, and the two principal
points thereof, enjoined for our exercise in this life: to consider (I say) what
account we shall be demanded for the same; in what manner; by whom; with what
severitie; with what danger of punishment, if we be found negligent and
rechlesse therein.

3 For better understanding whereof, it is to be noted first, with what order,
and with what ceremonies and circumstances God gave us this charge, or rather
made and proclaimed this law of our behavior and service toward him. For
albeit he gave the same commandment to Adam in his first creation, and
imprinted it afterward by nature into the hearts of each man before it was
written (as Saint Paul testifies) yet for more plain declarations sake, Romans
2. Romans 7.
and to convince us the more of our wickedness (as the same Apostle notes) he
published the same law in writing tables, Gal. 3.
upon the mount Synay: but with such terror, and other circumstances of
majesty (as also the Apostle notes to the Hebrews) as may greatly astonish
the breakers thereof. Heb. 12.
Let any man read the nineteen chapter of Exodus, and there he shall see what a
preparation there was for the publishing of this law. Exo. 19.
First, God calls Moises up to the hill, The dredful publication of the law.
and there reckons up many of the benefits which he had bestowed upon the
people of Israel: and promises them many mo, if they would keep the law which
he was then to give them. Moises went to the people, and returned answer again,
that they would keep it. Then caused God the people to be sanctified against
the third day, to wash al their garments, and that no man should company with
his wife: also to be charged that none upon pain of death should presume to
mount up to the hill but Moises alone, and that whosoever should dare but to
touch the hill should presently be stoned to death. When the third day was come,
Acts. 7.
the Angels (as Saint Steeven interprets it) were ready to promulgate the
law. The trumpets sounded mightily in the air: great thunder brake out from
the sky, with fearce lightenings, horrible clouds, thick mists, and terrible
smoke rising from the mountain. And in the midst of all this majesty, and
dreadful terror, God spoke in the hearing of al: Exo. 20. Deuteronomy. 5.
I am thy Lord God which have brought thee out of the land of Egypt: me only
shall thou serve: and the rest which follows, containing a perfect description
of our duty in this life, commonly called the ten commandments of God.

4 Al which terror and majesty, Heb. 12.
the apostle himself as I have said, applies to this meaning, that we should
greatly tremble to break this law, delivered us with such circumstances of
dread and fear: signifieng also hereby, that the exaction of this law, must
needs be with greater terror at the day of judgment, seeing that the
publication thereof, was with such astonishment and dread. For so we see alwais
great princes laws to be executed upon the offenders with much more terror than
they were proclaimed. And this may be a forcible reason to move a Christian to
look unto his duty.

Gods punishments.
5 Secondly, if we consider the sharp execution used by God upon offenders of
this law, both before it was written, and since; we shall find great cause of
fear also: as the wonderful punishment upon Adam, Genesis 3.
and so many millions of people besides, for his one fault: the drowning of all the world together: Genesis 7.
the burning of Sodom and Gomorra with brimstone: Genesis 19. 1. Re. 28. 2. Re. 12.
the reprobation of Saul: the extreme chastisement of David: and the like.
Which al being done by God with such rigor, for less and fewer sins than ours
are, and also upon them, whom he had more cause to spare than he has to
tolerate us: may be admonishments what we must look for at Gods hands, for
breach of this law of serving him in this life.

Christ's speeches.
6 Thirdly, if we consider the speeches and behavior of our Lord and master
Christ in this matter, we shall have yet more occasion to dowt our own case:
who albeit he came now to redeem us, and to pardon al, in all mildnes,
humility, clemency, and mercy: yet in this point of taking accounts, he is
not wont to show but austeritie and great rigor: not only in words, and
familiar speeches with his Apostles; but also in examples and parables to this
purpose. Mat. 25.
For so in one parable he damneth that poor servant to hell (where should be
weping and gnashing of teeth) only for that he had not augmented his talent
delivered him. And Christ confesses there of himself, that he is a hard man,
reaping where he sowed not, and gathering where he cast not abroad: expecting
also advantage at our hands, Mat. 24.
for the talents lent us, and not accepting only his own again. And
consequently threatening much more rigor to them which shall mispend his talents,
as the most of us do. Again, he damneth the servant whom he found asleep: Mat.
22.
he damned the poor man, which was compelled to come into the wedding, Mat. 25.
only for that he came without a wedding garment: he damned the five foolish
virgins, for that they had not their oil with them, and were not ready (jump
at the very hour) to go in with him, and would not know them when they came
after: and finally he promises to damn al those (without exception) which shall
work iniquity, Mat. 13.
as S. Matthew testifies.

7 Moreover, being asked by a certain ruler on a time, how he might be saved:
he would geeve him no other hope (so long as he sought salvation by his works)
though he were a prince, but only this; If thou will enter into life, Luc. 18.
Mat. 19.
keep the commandments of God. And talking with his disciples at another time
of the same matter, he geeveth them no other rule of their life, but this; If
ye love me, keep my commandments. As who should say, Ioh. 14.
if you were never so much my disciples, if ye break my commandments, there is
no more love nor frindship betwixt us. And S. John (which best of al others
knew his meaning herein) expounds it in this sense, when he says; If a man
(says he) knows God, John. 2.
and yet keeps not his commandments he is a liar, and the truth is not in
him. And more yet (to take away al hope or expectation from his disciples of
any other way pleasing him than by keeping his commandments) he says in
another place, Mat. 5.
that He came not to take away the law, but to fulfill it, and straight way he
infers upon the same; Whosoever therefore shall break one of the least of
these commandments shall be called the least in the kingdom of heaven. For
which cause at his departure out of the world, the very last words that he
spoke to his Apostles were these, that They should teach men to observe al his
commandments whatsoever. Mat. 28.


8 By which appears the severe meaning that Christ had touching our account
for the keeping of his commandments in this life. The which also may be
gathered by that being asked whether the number were small of them that should
be saved: Luc. 13.
he counseleth men to strive to go into the strait gate: for that many should
be shut out, yea even of them, which had eaten and drunken with him, and had
enjoied the corporal presence of his blessed body, but had not regarded to
live as he commanded them. In which case he signifies that no respect or
frindship must take place, with him at the last day: for which cause he said to
the man whom he had healed at the fish pools side in Jerusalem, Behold now thou
art hole, Ioh. 5.
see thou sin no more, least worse come to thee than before. And generally he
warns us in Saint Mathews gospel, that we agree with our adversaries, Mat. 5.
and make our accounts straight in this life: otherwise we shall pay the
uttermost farthing in the life to come. And yet more severely he says in
another place: That we shall render account at the day of judgment, Mat. 12.
for every idle word which we have spoken.

9 Which day of judgment he warns us of before, and foretells the rigor
and danger in sundry places of holy scripture to the end we should prevent
the same: and so direct our lives while we have time in this world; as we may
present our selves at that day without fear and danger, or rather with great
joy and comfort; when so many thousands of wicked people shall appeer there, to
their eternal confusion.

10 And because there is nothing which so fitly shows the severitie of Christ
in taking our account at the last day, Of the day of judgment.
as the order and manner of this judgment described most diligently by the holy
scripture it self: it shall make much for our purpose, to consider the same.
Two judgments after death.
And first of al, it is to be noted, that there be two judgments appointed
after death; whereof the one is called particular; whereby each man presently upon
his departure from this world, receaveth particular sentence, John. 5. Mat. 25.
and 16.
either of punishment, or of glory, according to his deeds in this life (as
Christ's own words are) whereof we have examples in Lazarus, and the rich
glutton, who were presently carried the one to pain, Luc. 16.
the other to rest, as Saint Luke testifies? And to dowt of this, were
obstinacy as Saint Austen affirms. The other judgment is called general,
Lib. 2. de anima. ca. 4.
for that it shall be of al men together in the end of the world, where shall a
final sentence be pronounced (either of reward or punishment) upon al men that
ever lived, according to the works which they have done, 2. Cor. 5.
good or bad, in this life: and afterward never more question be made of
altering their estate: that is, of easing the pain of the one, or ending the
glory of the other.

The particular judgment. Aug. trac. 49. in Io.
11 Now as touching the first of these two judgments, albeit the holy ancient
fathers, especially Saint Austen, do gather and consider diverse particulars of
great severitie and fear (as the passage of our soul from the body to the
tribunal seat of God, under the custody both of good and evil angels: the fear
she has of them: the sudden strangenes of the place where she is: the terror
of Gods presence; the strait examination she must abide; and the like) yet for
that the most of these things are to be considered also in the second judgment
which is general; I will pass over to the same, noting only certain reasons
yielded by the holy fathers, why God after the first judgment, Why there be
two judgments appointed.
wherein he had assigned to each man according to his deserts in particular,
would appoint moreover this second general judgment. Whereof the first is, for
that Consider well this reason good reader.
and familiars corrupted by them; or else books and means which may in time
corrupt others. Al which being not yet done, but coming to pass after their
death, they cannot so conveniently receave their judgment for the same
presently: but as the evil falls out, so their pains are to be increased. The
like may be said of the good. So that (for examples sake) Saint Paul's glory is
increased daily, and shall be unto the worlds end, by reason of them that daily
profit by his writings and example: and the pains of the wicked are for the
like reason daily augmented. But at the last day of judgment, shall be an end of
al our doings, and then it shall be seen evidently, what each man is to have in
the justice, and mercy of God.

Of the general day of judgment.
12 To speak then of this second judgment general, and common for all the world,
wherein as the scripture says, God shall bring into judgment every error which
has been committed. Eccl. 12.
There are diverse circumstances to be considered, and diverse men do set down
the same diversely: but in mine opinion, no better, plainer, or more effectual
declaration can be made thereof, than the very scripture makes it self,
setting forth unto us in most significant words, all the manner, order, and
circumstances, with the preparation thereunto as follows.

Luc. 21. Mat. 24. Mar. 13.
13 At that day, there shall be signs in the sun, and in the moon, and in the
stars: the sun shall be darkened: the moon shall geeve no light: the stars shall
fall from the skies: and all the powers of heaven shall be moved: the firmament
shall leave his situation with a great violence: the elements shall be dissolved
with heat: and the earth, with all that is in it, shall be consumed with fire:
the earth also shall moove off her place, and shall fly like a little dear or
sheep. The distress of nations upon the earth shall be great, Esai. 13.
by reason of the confusion of the noise of the sea and fluds, and men shall
wither away for fear and expectation of these things, that then shall come upon
the whole world. And then shall the sign of the Son of man appeer in the sky,
and then shall all the tribes of the earth moorn and wail: and they shall see the
Son of man coming in the clouds of heaven, with much power and glory, 1. Cor.
13.
great authority, and majesty. And then in a moment in the twinkling of an
eye, Mat. 25.
he shall send his Angels with a trumpet and with a great cry at midnight, and
they shall gather together his elect from the four parts of the world, from
heaven to earth. Al must be presented before the judgment seat of Christ, 2.
Cor. 5.
who will bring to light those things which were hidden in darkness, 1. Co. 4.a.
and will make manifest the thoughts of men's hearts: and whatsoever has been
spoken in chambers in the ear, Luc. 12.
shall be preached upon the house top. Account shall be asked of every idle word,
and he shall judge our very righteousness it self. Psalm. 74.
Then shall the just stand in great constancy, against those which have
afflicted them in this life: and the wicked seeing that, shall be troubled with
an horrible fear, Sap. 5.
and shall say to the hills, fall upon us, Luc. 23.
and hide us from the face of him that sits upon the throne, and from the
anger of the lamb, Apoc. 6.
for that the great day of wrath is come. Then shall Christ separate the sheep
from the goats, Mat. 25.
and shall put the sheep on his right hand and the goats on the left, and shall
say to those on the right hand, come ye blessed of my father, possess the
kingdom prepared for you, from the beginning of the world: I was hungry; and
you gave me to eat: I was a stranger, and you gave me harbor: I was naked, and
you clothed me: I was in prison, and you came to me. Then shall the just say, O
Lord, when have we done these things for thee? And the King shall answer: truly
when you did them to the lest of my brothers you did it to me. Then shall he say
to them on his left hand; Depart from me (you accursed) into everlasting fire,
prepared for the devil and his angels: for I was hungry, and ye fed me not: I
was a stranger, and you harbored me not: I was naked, and you clothed me not: I
was sick, and in prison, and you visited me not. Then shall they say, O Lord,
when have we seen thee hungry, or thirsty, or a stranger, or naked, or sick,
or in prison and did not minister unto thee? And he shall answer, verily I tell
you, seeing you have not done it to one of these lesser, you have not done it
to me. And then these men shall go into eternal punishment; and the just into
life everlasting.

14 Tell me what a dreadful preparation is here laid down? How many
circumstances of fear and horror? It shall be (says the scripture) at midnight,
when commonly men are asleep: it shall be with hideous noise of trumpets; sound
of waters; motion of all the elements: what a night will that be trowest thou, to
see the earth shake; the hills and dales moved from their places; the moon
darkened; the stars fall down from heaven; the whole element shivered in pieces;
and all the world in a flaming fire.

15 Can any tongue in the world express a thing more forcibly than this matter
is expressed by Christ, the Apostles, and Prophets themselves? What mortal heart
can but tremble in the midst of this unspeakable terror? Is it marvel if the
very just men and the Angels themselves are said to fear it? And then (as S.
Peter reasons;) If the just shall scarce be saved; 1. Pet. 4.
where shall the wicked man, and sinner appeer? What a dreadful day will it be
for the careless and loose Christian (which has passed his time pleasantly in
this world) when he shall see so infinite a sea of fears and miseries to rush
upon him?

16 But besides al these most terrible and fearce preparations, there will be
many other matters, of no less dreadful consideration: as to see al sepulchers
open at the sound of the trumpet, and to yield forth al their dead bodies,
which they have received from the beginning of the world: to see al men, women
and children, kings and Queens, princes and potentates, to stand there naked in
the face of al creatures: their sins revealed, their secret offenses laid open,
done and committed in the closets of their palaces, and they constrained and
compelled to geeve accounts of a thousand matters, whereof they would disdain
to have been told in this life: as, how they have spent the time; how they
have employed their wealth; what behavior they have used toward their brethren;
The demands at the last day.
how they have mortified their senses; how they have ruled their appetites; how
they have obeyed the inspirations of the holy ghost; and finally how they used
al good gifts in this life?

17 Oh (dear brother) it is unpossible to express what a great treasure a
good conscience will be at this day: it will be more worth, than ten thousand
worlds: for wealth will not help: the judge will not be corrupted with money: no
intercession of worldly frinds shall prevail for us at that day, no not of the
angels themselves: whose glory shall be then as the prophet says; To bind
kings in fetters, and noble men in iron manacles, Psa. 149.
to execute upon them the judgment prescribed, and this shall be glory to al
his saints. Alas, what will al those wise people do then, that now live in
delites, and can take no pain in the service of God? What shift will they make
in those extremities? Whether will they turn them? Whose help will they crave?
They shall see al things cry vengeance about them; al things yield them cause
of fear and terror* but nothing to yield them any hope or comfort. A pitiful
case. Anselm.
Above them shall be their judge offended with them for their wickedness: beneath
them hell open, and the cruel furnace ready boiling to receave them: on the
right hand shall be their sins accusing them: on the left hand the devils ready
to execute Gods eternal sentence upon them: within them; their conscience
gnawing: without them, al damned souls bewailing: on every side the world
burning. Good Lord what will the wretched sinner do, environed with all these
miseries? How will his heart sustain these anguishes? What way will he take? To go
back is impossible: to go forward is intolerable. What then shall he do, but
(as Christ foretells) he shall dry up for very fear: Mat. 24. Apoc. 6. Apoc.
9.
seek death, and death shall fly from him, cry to the hills, to fall upon him,
and they refusing to do him so much pleasure, he shall stand there as a most
desperate forlorn, and miserable caitife wretch, until he receave that
dreadful and irrevocable sentence; Mat. 25.
Go you accursed into everlasting fire.

18 Which sentence once pronounced, The last sentence pronounced.
consider what a doleful cry and shout will straight follow. The good rejoising
and singing praises in the glory of their savior: the wicked bewailing,
blaspheming, and cursing the day of their nativitie. Consider the intolerable
upbraieng of the wicked infernal spirits, against these miserable condemned
souls, now delivered to them in pray for ever. With how bitter scofs and taunts
will they hale them on, to torments. Consider the eternal separation that then
must be made: of fathers and children; mothers and daughters; frinds and
companions: the one to glory, the other to confusion, with out ever seeing one
the other again: and (that which shall be as great a grief as any other: if it
be true that some conceave, that our knowledge one of another here on earth shall
so far remain) the son going to heaven shall not pity his own father or mother
going to hell, but shall rejoice at the same, for that it turns to Gods glory,
for the execution of his justice. What a separation (I say) shall this be? What
a farewell? Whose heart would not break at that day, to make this separation, if
a heart could break at that time, and so end his pains? But that will not be.
Where are al our delites now! Where are al our pleasant pastimes become? Our
bravery in apparel; our glistering in gold; our honor done to us with cap and
knee; al our delicate fare; al our musik; al our wanton daliances and
recreations we were wont to have; al our good frinds and merry companions,
accustomed to laugh, and to disport the time with us? Where are they become? Oh
(dear brother) how sower will all the pleasures past of this world seem at that
hour? How doleful will their memory be unto us? How vain a thing will al our
dignities, our riches, our possessions appear? And on the contrary side, how
joiful will that man be, that has attended in this life to live virtuously,
albeit with pain, and contempt of the world? Happy creature shall he be, that
ever he was born, and no tongue but Gods can express his happiness.

19 And now to make no other conclusion of all this, The conclusion.
but even that which Christ himself makes: let us consider how easy a matter
it is now for us (with a little pain) to avoid the danger of this day, and for
that cause it is foretold us by our most merciful judge and Savior, to the end
we should by our diligence avoid it. For thus he concludes after al his former
threatenings; Videte, vigilate, etc. Mar. 13.
Look about you, watch and pray ye, for you know not when the time shall be.
But as I say to you, so I say to al, be watchful. And in another place, having
reckoned up all the particulars before recited, least any man should dowt that
al should not be fulfilled, he says; Heaven and earth shall pass, Mat. 24.
but my words shall not pass. And then he adds this exhortation; Attend
therefore unto your selves, A goodly exhortation of Christ.
that your hearts be not overcome with banqueting, and dronkenes, and with the
cares of this life, and so that day come upon you suddenly. For he shall come as
a snare upon them which inhabit the earth: be you therefore watchful, and
alwais pray, that you may be worthy to escape al these things which are to
com, and to stand confidently before the Son of man at this day. What a frindly
and fatherly exhortation is this of Christ? Who could desire a more kind,
gentle, or effectual forewarning? Is there any man that can plead ignorance
hereafter? The very like conclusion gathered Saint Peter out of the premises,
2. Pet. 3.
when he says; The day of the Lord shall come as a thief: in which the
elements shall be dissolved, etc. Seeing then al these things must be dissolved:
what manner of men ought we to be in holy conversation, and piety, expecting
and going on to meet the coming of that day of the Lord, etc. This meeting of
the day of judgment (which Saint Peter speaks of) is an earnest longing
after it, which never is had until first there go before a du examination of
our estate, and speedy amendment of our life past. Therefore says most notably
the wise man; Eccl. 18.
Provide thee of a medicine before the sore come, and examine thy self before
judgment: and so shall thou find propitiation in the sight of God. To which
Saint Paul agrees when he says; If we would judge our selves, 1. Cor. 11.
we should not be judged. But because no man enters into du judgment of
himself, and of his own life: thereof it comes, that so few do prevent this
latter judgment; so few are watchful, and so many fall a sleep in ignorance of
their own danger. Our Lord give us grace to look better about us.

CHAP. VI. A consideration of the nature of sin, and of a sinner: for the
justifying of Gods severitie showed in the Chapter before.
TO the end that no man may justly complain of the severe account which God is
to take of us at the last day, or of the severitie of his judgment set down in
the chapter before: it shall not be amiss to consider in this chapter the cause
why God does show such severitie against sin and sinners; as both by that which
has been said does appeer, and also by the whole course of holy scripture;
where he in every place almost denounces his extreme hatred, wrath, and
indignation against the same: Gods hatred to sinners.
as where it is said of him; That he hates al those that work iniquity. And
that both the wicked man and his wickedness, Psalm. 5. Psalm. 14. Pro. 15. Job.
11. Esai. 1. Psalm. 13. Psalm. 49. Eccl. 15.
are in hatred with him. And finaly that the whole life of sinners, their
thoughts, words and works, yea and their good actions also, are abominations
in his sight, whiles they live in sin. And that (which yet is more) he cannot
abide nor permit the sinner to praise him, or to name his testament with his
mouth, as the holy Ghost testifies: and therefore no marvel if he show such
rigor to him at the last day, whom he so greatly hates and abhors in this
life.

2 There might be many reasons alleged of this: as the breach of Gods
commandments; the ingratitude of a sinner in respect of his benefits, and the
like: which might justify sufficiently his indignation toward him. The reason
why God so hates a sinner.
But there is one reason above the rest, which opens the whole fountain of
the matter: and that is, the intolerable injury don unto God, in every sin
that wittingly we do commit; which in deed is such an opprobrious injury, and
so dishonorable, as no mean potentate could bear the same at his subjects
hands: and much less God himself (who is the God of majesty, may abide to
have the same so often iterated against him, as commonly it is by a wicked man.

3 And for the understanding of this injury, we must note, that every time we
commit such a sin, there does pass thorough our heart (though we mark it not) a
certain practik discourse of our understanding (as there does also in every
other election) whereby we lay before us, on the one side, the profit of that
sin, which we are to commit, that is, the pleasure that draws us to it: and
on the other part, the offense of God, that is, the leesing of his frindship by
that sin if we do it: and so having as it were the balances there before us,
and putting God in one end, and in the other the aforesaid pleasure: The
injury done to God by sin.
we stand in the midst deliberating and examining the weight of both parts, and
finally, we do make choice of the pleasure, and do reject God: that is, we do
choose rather to leese the frindship of God, with his grace, and whatsoever he
is worth besides, than to lose that pleasure and delectation of sin. Now what
thing can be more horrible, than this? What can be more spiteful to God, than
to prefer a most vile pleasure before his majesty? Is not this worse than
intolerable injury of the Jews, Mat. 17. Mar. 15.
who chose Barrabas the murderer, and rejected Christ their Savior? Surely how
heinous soever that sin of the Jews were, yet in two points this does seem to
exceed it: the one, in that the Jews knew not whom they refused in their
choice, as we do; the other in that they refused Christ but once, and we do it
often, yea daily, and hourly, when with advisement we give consent in our hearts
unto sin.

4 And is it marvel then, that God deals so severely and sharply in the world
to come with wicked men, who do use him so opprobriously and contemptuously in
this life? Surely the malice of a sinner is great toward God, and he does not
only dishonor him by contempt of his commandments, The malice of a sinner
toward God.
and by preferring most vile creatures before him: but also bears a secret
hatred and grudge against his majesty, and would (if it lay in his power) pull
him out of his seat, or (at the leastwise) wish there were no God at al to
punish sin after this life. Let every sinner examine the bottom of his
conscience in this point, whether he could not be content, there were no
immortality of the soul; no reckoning after this life; no judge; no
punishment; no hell; and consequently no God, to the end he might the more
securely enjoy his pleasures?

5 And because God (which searches the heart and reins, sees well this
traitorous affection of sinners toward him, lurking within their bowels, Sapi.
1. Romans 8. Psalm. 7. Romans 5. Iaco. 4. 1. Ioh. 3.
how smooth soever their words are: therefore he denounces them for his enemies
in the scripture, and professes open war and hostility against them. And then
suppose you, what a case these miserable men are in, (being but seely worms of
the earth) when they have such an enemy to fight against them, as does make the
very heavens to tremble at his look. And yet that it is so, hear what he
says, what he threatens, what he thu^dreth against them. After he had by the
mouth of Esaias the prophet repeated many sins abominable in his sight (as the
taking of bribes, Sinners enemies to God, and God to them.
oppressing of poor people, and the like) he defieth the dooers thereof, as his
open enemies, saying; Thus says the Lord of hosts, Such like also. Isa. 26.11
the strong Lord of hosts of Israel: Behold I will be revenged upon my enemies,
and will comfort my self in their destruction. And the prophet David, as he was
a man in most high favor with God, and made very privy to his secrets: so he
very much does utter this severe meaning and infinite displeasure in God
against sinners, calling them his enemies, vessels of his wrath, and ordained
to eternal ruin and destruction: and complains that the world will not believe
this point; An unwise man (says he) will not learn this, Psalm. 90.
neither will the fool understand it. What is this? How sinners after they be
sprung up, and workers of iniquity (after they have appeered to the world) do
perish everlastingly? And what is the reason of this? He answers immediately;
Because thy enemies (o Lord) behold, o Lord, thine enemies shall perish, and al
those that work iniquity shall be consumed. By this we see, that al sinners be
enemies to God, and God to them, and we see also upon what ground and reason.
But yet (for the further justifieng of Gods severitie) let us consider in what
measure his hatred is toward sin: how great; how far it proceeds; within
what bounds it is comprehended; or if it has any limits or bounds at al, as
indeed it has not, but is infinite, Gods hatred infinite against sinners.
that is without measure or limitation. And (to utter the matter as in truth it
stands) if all the toongs in the world were made one tongue; and all the
understandings of al creatures (I mean of Angels and men) were made one
understanding: yet could neither this tongue express, nor this understanding
co^ceave the great hatred of Gods heart toward every sin, which we do wittingly
commit. And the reason hereof stands in two points. First, for that God by
how much more he is better than we are; by so much more he loves goodness and
hates sin, than we do: and because he is infinitely good; therefore his love to
goodness is infinite, as also his hatred to evil, and consequently his rewards
to them both are infinite, the one in hell, the other in heaven.

Why every sin deserves infinite punishment.
6 Secondly we see by experience, that how much more great and worthy the
person is, against whom an offense is committed, so much greater the offense
is: as the selfsame blow geeven to a servant, and to a prince differs
greatly in offense, and deserves different hatred and punishment. And for that
every sin which we advisedly commit, is done directly against the person of God
himself, as has been declared before, whose dignity is infinite: therefore
the offense or guilt of every such sin is infinite, and consequently deserves
infinite hatred, and infinite punishment at Gods hands. Hereof follows the
reason of diverse things both said and done by God in the scriptures, Romans 8. 1.
Cor. 1.
and taught by Divines touching the punishment of sin, which seem strange unto
the wisdom of the world, and in deed scarce credible. As first of al, that
dreadful punishment of eternal and irrevocable damnation of so many thousands,
The punishment of Angels.
yea millions of Angels created to glory, with almost infinite perfection, and
that for one only sin, once committed, and that only in thought, as Divines do
hold. Secondly, the rigorous punishment of our first parents Adam and Eve, Of
Adam and Eve.
and al their posterity, for eating of the tree forbidden: for which fault,
besides the chastising of the offenders themselves, and all the creatures of the
earth for the same, and al their children and offspring after them, both before
the incarnation of Christ, and since (for albeit we are delivered from the
guilt of that sin yet temporal chastisements remain upon us for the same: as
hunger, thirst, cold, sickness, death, and a thousand miseries mo) besides also
the infinite men damned for the same: besides this (I say, which in man's reason
may seem severe enough) Gods wrath and justice could not be satisfied except
his own son had come down into the world; and taken our flesh upon him, and by
his pains satisfied for the same. And when he was come down and had in our
flesh subjected himself unto his fathers justice, albeit the love his father
bare him, were infinite: yet that God might show the greatness of his hatred and
justice against sin, Esai. 53.
he never left to lay on upon his own blessed dear son: no not then when he
saw him sorrowful unto death, and bathed in a sweat of blood and water, and
crieng; O Father mine, Mat. 26. Mar. 14. Luc. 22.
if it be possible let this cup pass from me. And yet more pitifully after
upon the cross; O my God, why have thou forsaken me. Notwithstanding all this
(I say) his father delivered him not, Mat. 27. Psalm. 21. Esai. 53.
but laid on stripe upon stripe, pain upon pain, torment after torment, until
he had rendered up his life and soul into his said fathers hands: which is a
wonderful and dreadful document of Gods hatred against sin.

The sin of Esau.
7 I might here mention the sin of Esau in selling his inheritance for a little
meat: of which the Apostle says; Genesis 25. and 27. Heb. 12. Of Saul. 1. Re. 15.
and 16. 1. Re. 9. and 15. and 16.
He found no place of repentance after, though he sought the same with tears.
Also the sin of Saul who (his sin being but one sin, and that only of omission,
in not killing Agag the king of Amalek, and his cattle, as he was willed) was
utterly cast off by GOD for the same (though he were his anointed and chosen
servant before) and could not get remission of the same, though both he, and
Samuel the prophet did greatly lament and bewail the same sin, or at least,
that he was rejected.

2. Reg. 9. Psalm. 6.34.68.108.105.29. 2. Re. 12.
8 Also I might allege the example of king David, whose two sins, albeit (upon
his hearty repentance) God forgave: yet notwithstanding all the sorrow that
David conceaved for the same, God chastised him with marvelous severitie: as
with the death of his son; and other continual affliction on himself as long
as he lived. And all this to show his hatred against sin, and thereby to terrify
us from committing the same.

9 Of this also do proceed al those hard and bitter speeches in scripture
touching sinners, which coming from the mouth of the holy Ghost (and therefore
being most true and certain) may justly geeve al them great cause of fear which
live in sin, as where it is said; Death, Eccl. 40.
blood, contention, edge of sword, oppression, hunger, contrition, and whips:
al these things are created for wicked sinners. And again; Psalm. 10. Psalm. 9.
God shall rain snares of fire upon sinners, brimstone with tempestuous winds,
shall be the portion of their cup. Again, God will be known at the day of
judgment upon the sinner, who shall be taken in the works of his own hands: many
whips belong unto a sinner: Psalm. 3. Psalm. 9. Psalm. 36. Psa. 144.
let sinners be turned into hell: God shall scatter al sinners: God shall dash the
teeth of sinners in their mouths: God shall scoff at a sinner, Psalm. 57. Psalm.
36. Psa. 103.
when he sees his day of destruction comes on: the sword of sinners shall
turn into their own hearts: thou shall see when sinners shall perish: the arms of
sinners shall be crushed and broken: sinners shall wither from the earrh: Psa.
140.
desire not the glory and riches of a sinner, for thou do not know the
subversion which shall come upon him: Eccl. 2. Psalm. 71. Esai. 13.
God has given him riches to deceave him therewith: behold, the day of the Lord
shall come (a cruel day and full of indignation, wrath and fury) to make
desolate the earth, and to crush in pieces her sinners within her. Psalm. 57.
The just man shall rejoice seeing this revenge, and then shall he wash his hands
in the blood of sinners. These and a thousand such sentences more of scripture,
which I omit, uttered by the holy Ghost against sinners, may instruct us of
their pitiful estate, and of the unspeakable hatred of God against them, as
long as they persist in sin.

10 Of al these considerations the holy scriptures do gather one conclusion
greatly to be noted and considered by us: which is; Miseros facit populos
peccatum: Pro. 14. Psalm. 10.
Sin brings men to misery. And again; Qui diligit iniquitatem, odit animam
suam: He which loves iniquity, hates his own soul. Or as the Angel Raphael
utters it in other words; Tob. 12.
) They which commit sin, are open enemies to their own souls. Wherefore they
lay down to al men, this general, severe, and most necessary commandment,
upon all the pains before recited. Quasi a facie colubrifuge peccata. And again;
Eccl. 21.
Cave ne aliquando peccato consentias. Beware thou never consent to sin, Tob. 4.
for howsoever the world does make little account of this matter, of whom (as
the scripture notes;) The sinner is praised in his lusts, Psalm. 9.
and the wicked man is blessed. Yet most certain it is, for that the spirit of
God avoucheth it; 1. Ioh. 3.
Qui facit peccatum ex diabolo est: He which commits sin is of the devil.
And therefore is to receave his portion among devils at the latter day.

11 And is not all this sufficient (deer brother) to make us detest sin, The
obstinacy of sinners.
and to conceave some fear in committing thereof? Nay is not all this strong
enough to batter their hearts, which live in state of sin, and do commit the
same daily, without consideration or scruple? What obstinacy and hardness of
heart is this? Surely we see the holy Ghost prophesied truly of them when he
said; Sinners alienated from God, Psalm. 57.
are possessed with a fury like a serpent, and like a deaf cocatrice which
stops her ears to the inchanter. This fury (I say) is the fury or madness of
wilful sinners, which stop their ears like serpents, to all the holy
enchantments that God can use unto them for their conversion: that is, to al
his internal motions and good inspirations; to al remorse of their own
consciences; to al threatenings of holy scriptures; to al admonishments of Gods
servants; and to all the other means which God does use for their salvation.

12 Good Lord, The losses that came by sin.
who would wittingly commit any sin, for the gaining of ten thousand worlds, if
he considered the infinite damages, hurts, inconveniences, and miseries which
do come by the committing of one sin? For first, he that in such sort sins,
Isa. 11. and Ier. ibid.
leeseth the grace of God, which was given him: which is the greatest gift that
God can give to a creature in this life, and consequently he leeseth al those
things which did accompany that grace: as the virtues and gifts of the holy
Ghost, whereby the soul was beautified in the sight of her spouse, and armed
against the assaults of her enemies. Secondly, he leeseth the favor of God, and
consequently his fatherly protection, care and providence over him, and gains
him to be his professed enemy. Which, how great a loss it is, we may esteem
by the state of a worldly courtier, which should leese the favor of an earthly
prince, and incur mortal hatred by the same. Thirdly, he leeseth al
inheritance, claim, and title to the kingdom of heaven, which is du only by
grace, as S. Paul notes: and consequently depriveth himself, of al dignities
and commodities following the same in this life: Romans 6.
as the condition and high privilege of a son of God; the communion of saints;
the protection of Angels, and the like. Fourthly, he leeseth the quiet, joy,
and tranquillity of a good conscience, and all the favors, cherishments,
consolations, and other comforts, wherewith the holy Ghost is wont to visit
the minds of the just* Fifthly, he leeseth the reward of al his good works done
since he was born, and whatsoever he does or shall do while he stands in that
state. Sixthly, he makes himself guilty of eternal punishment, and ingrosseth
his name in the book of perdition, and consequently binds himself to al
those inconveniences, whereto the reprobate are subject: that is, to be inherit
or of hell fire; to be in the power of the devil, and his angels; to be subject
to al sin and temptation of sin; and his soul (which was before the temple of
the holy Ghost; the habitation of the blessed Trinity, and place of repose for
the Angels to visit) now to be the nest of scorpions, and dungeon of devils,
and himself a companion of the miserable damned. Lastly, he abandoneth Christ,
and renounceth the portion he had with him, making himself a persecuter of the
same by treading him under his feet. And crucifieng him again, Heb. 10. Heb. 6.
and defiling his blood (as the Apostle says) in sinning against him, which
died for sin, Romans 6.
and therefore the same Apostle pronounces a marvelous heavy sentence against
such in these words; If we sin wilfully now after we have received knowledge of
the truth: Heb. 10. Romans 16.
there remains no more sacrifice for sins, but rather a certain terrible
expectation of judgment, and emulation of fire which shall consume the
adversaries. To which Saint Peter agrees, when he says; 2. Pet. 2.
It had been better not to have known the way of justice, than after such
knowledge to slide back again from the holy commandment which was given.

13 Now then let our worldlings go and solace themselves with sin as much as
they will: Excuse of sin.
let them excuse and pleasantly defend the same, saying; Pride is but a point
of gentry; gluttony, good fellowship; lechery, and wantonness, a trik of
youth; and the like: they shall find one day, that these excuses will not be
received; but rather that these pleasant devises, will be turned into tears.
They shall prove that God will not be jested with, but that he is the same God
still, Gal. 6.
and will ask as severe account of them, as he has done of others before:
although it please not them now to keep any account of their life at al: but
rather to turn al to disport and pleasure, persuading themselves, that
howsoever God has dealt with others before, yet he will forgive al to them: but
the holy scripture reasons after another manner, which I would have every
wise Christian to consider.

14 Saint Paul comparing the Jews sins with ours, Romans 11.
makes this collection; If God spared not the natural boughs, take heed least
he spare not thee. And thereupon he infers this admonition; Noli altum
sapere, sed time; Be not too high minded, but fear. Again, the Apostle
reasons thus upon the old and the new law: he that broke the law of Moises,
being convicted by two or three witnesses, Heb. 10.
dies for the same without commiseration or mercy: and how much more greevous
punishment does he deserve which breaking the law or Christ by wilful sin,
treads the Son of God under his feet; polluteth the blood of the new
testament; and reprocheth the holy Ghost? In like manner reasons Saint Peter
and Saint Jude touching the sin of Angels, 2. Pet. 2. Ep. Iud.
and ours. If God spared not the Angels when they sinned; but did thrust them
down to hell, there to be tormented, and to be kept unto judgment with eternal
chains under darkness: how much less will he spare us? 2. Pet. 2.
And again: If the Angels which pass us in power and strength, are not able to
bear Gods execrable judgment against them, what shall we do? Again in another
place, he reasons thus: If the just man shall hardly be saved, where shall the
wicked man and sinner appear? 2. Pet. 4.
By which examples we are instructed to reason in like sort: A good manner of
reasoning.
if God have punished so severelie one sin in the Angels, in Adam, and in
others before recited: what shall I look for, which have committed so many sins
against him? If God have damned so many for lesser sins than mine be: what will
he do to me for greater? If God has born longer with me, than he has done
with many other, whom he has cut off without geving them time of repentance:
what reason is there, that he should bear longer with me? If David and others
after their sins forgeeven them, were nevertheles so sharply chasticed, what
punishment remains for me either here or in the world to come; for so many,
and so greevous sins committed? Mat. 7. Luc. 13.
If it be true that our Savior says, that the way is hard, and the gate narrow
whereby men go into heaven, and that they shall answer for every idle word before
they enter there: what shall become of me, Mat. 12.
which do live so easy a life, and do keep no account of my deeds, and much
less of my words? If good men in old time did take such pains in the way of
their salvation, and yet (as Saint Peter says) the very just were scarce
saved: what a state am I in which take no pain at al, but do live in all kind of
pleasure and worldly delites?

15 These kinds of consequents were more true and profitable for us, whereby we
might enter into some consideration of our own danger, and into some fear of
the judgments of God, for want whereof the most part of sins amongst Christians
are committed: for so the holy scripture describing diverse causes of wickedness
among men, puts these two for principal. First, the flattery of the world;
Quoniam laudatur peccator in desiderijs animae suae: Psalm. 9.
For that the sinner is praised in his lusts. And secondly; Quia auferuntur
indicia tua a facie eius: For that thy judgments (o Lord) are not before his
face. And on the contrary side speaking of himself he says; How necessary
it is to fear.
I have kept the wais of the Lord, and have not behaved my self impiously
toward God. And he geeveth the reason thereof immediately; For that al his
judgments are in my sight. And again; I have feared thy judgments, Psa. 118.
o Lord. And again; I have been mindful of thy judgments. And how profitable
this fear is, he shows in the same place, demanding this fear most instantly
at Gods hands: for so he prays; Strike my flesh thorough with thy fear, o
Lord. And S. Paul (after he had showed to the Corinthians, that We must al be
presented before the judgment seat of Christ) makes this conclusion; 2. Cor.
5.
We knowing therefore these things, do persuade the fear of the Lord unto men.
And Saint Peter after a long declaration of the majesty of God, and Christ now
reigning in heaven, concludes thus; If then you call him father, 1. Pet. 1.
which does judge every man according to his works without exception of
persons: do you live in fear, during the time of this your habitation upon
earth. A necessary lesson (no dowt) for all men, but specially for those which
by reason of their sins and wicked life, do remain in displeasure and hatred of
God, and hourly subject (as I have showed) to the fury of his judgments:
which if they once fall into, they are both irrevocable, and intolerable: and
they may be fallen into as easily, and by as many wais, as a man may come to
death, which are infinite, especially to them, who by their wickedness have lost
the peculiar protection of God, and so consequently of his angels too (as I
have showed) and have subjected themselves to the feends of darkness, who do
nothing else but seek their destruction both of body and soul, with as great
diligence as they can. What wise man then would but fear in such a case? The
danger of them which live in sin.
Who could eat, or drink, or sleep quietly in his bed until by true and hearty
repentance, he had discharged his conscience of sin? A little stone falling
from the hows upon his head; or his horse stumbling under him as he rides; or
his enemy meeting him on the high way; or an agew coming with eating or
drinking a little too much; or ten thousand means besides (whereof he stands
daily and hourly in danger) may rid him of this life, and put him in that case,
as no creature of this world, nor any continuance of time shall be able to
deliver him thence again. And who then would not fear? Who would not tremble?

16 The Lord of his mercy geeve us his holy grace, to fear him as we should
do, and to make such account of his justice, as he by threatening the same would
have us to do. And then shall not we delay the time, but resolve our selves to
serve him whiles he is content to accept of our service, and to pardon us al
our offenses, if we would once make this resolution from our heart.

CHAP. VII. Another consideration for the further justifying of Gods judgments
and declaration of our demerit taken from the majesty of God, and his benefits
toward us.
ALbeit the most part of Christians through their wicked life arrive not to that
estate wherein holy David was, when he said to God; Psa. 118.
Thy judgments o Lord are pleasant unto me, as indeed they are to al those
that live virtuously, and have the testimony of a good conscience: yet at
leastwise, that we may say with the same prophet; The judgments of the Lord
are true and justified in themselves: And again; Thou art just o Lord, Psalm. 18.
and thy judgment is right. I have thought good, to ad a reason or two mo in
this chapter, whereby it may appeer how great our offense is toward God, by
sinning as we do, and how righteous his judgments and justice are against us
for the same.

2 And first of al is to be considered the majesty of him against whom we sin:
The majesty of God.
for most certain it is (as I have noted before) that every offense is so much
the greater, and more greevous, by how much greater and more noble the person
is against whom it is done, and the party offending more base and vile. And in
this respect God (to terrify us from offending him) names himself often,
with certain titles of majesty, as to Abraham; Genesis 17. Esai. 66.
I am the almighty Lord: And again; Heaven is my seat, and the earth is my
footstool. And again, he commanded Moises to say to the people in his name,
this embassage; Harden not your necks any longer, Deu. 10.
for that your Lord and God, is a God of gods, and a Lord of lords, a great
God, both mighty and terrible, which accepts neither person nor bribes.

3 First then I say, consider (gentle Christian) of what an infinite majesty
he is, whom thou a poor woorm of the earth, have so often and so
contemptuously offended in this life. We see in this world, that no man dares
to offend openly, or say a word against the majesty of a prince within his own
dominions: and what is the majesty of all the princes upon earth, compared to
the thousandth part of the majesty of God, Psa. 148.
who with a word made both heaven and earth, and all the creatures therein, and
with half a word can destroy the same again: whom all the creatures which he
made, as the Angels, the heavens, and all the elements besides, do serve at a
bek and dare not offend? Only a sinner is he which imboldeneth himself against
this majesty, Job. 9.
and fears not to offend the same, whom the Angels do praise, the dominations
do adore, the powers do tremble, and the highest heavens together, with
Cherubins and Seraphins do daily honor and celebrate.

4 Remember then (deer brother) that every time thou do commit a sin, thou
give as it were a blow in the face, to this God of great majesty, 1. Tim. 6.
who (as Saint Paul says;) Dwells in an unaccessible light: which no man in
this world can abide to look upon: As also it appears by the example of Saint
John evangelist, Apoc. 1.
who fell down dead for very fear at the appearance of Christ unto him, as
himself testifies. And when Moises desired to see God once in his life, and
made humble petition for the same: God answered, that no man could see him and
live: but yet (to satisfy his request, and to show him in part what a terrible
and glorious God he was) he told Moises, that he should see some piece of his
glory: but he added, Exo. 35.
that it was needful he should hide himself in the hole of a rock, and be
covered with Gods own hands for his defense, while God (in some measure of his
majesty) did pass by in glory. And when he was past, God took away his
hand, and suffered Moises to see his hinder parts only, which was
notwithstanding, most terrible to behold.

5 The prophet Daniel also describes the majesty of this God showed unto him
in vision, in these words; Dan. 7.
I did see (says he) when the thrones were set, and the old of many dais sat
down: his apparel was as white as snow: his hair like unto pure wool, his
thron was of a flame of fire, and his chariots were burning fire, a swift flud
of fire came from his face: a thousand thousands did serve him, and ten
thousand hundred thousands did assist him, he sat in judgment, and the books
were opened before him. All this and much more is recorded in scripture, to
admonish us thereby what a prince of majesty he is whom a sinner offends.

6 Imagine now (brother mine) that thou see this great king sitting in his
chair of majesty; A contemplation of the majesty of God.
with chariots of fire; unspeakable light; and infinite millions of Angels
about him, as the scripture reports. Imagine further, (which is most true) that
thou see all the creatures in the world stand in his presence, and trembling
at his majesty, and most carefully attending to do that for which he created
them: as the heavens to move about: the earth to bring forth sustenance: and
the like. Imagine further that thou see al these creatures (how big or little
soever they be) to hang and depend only of the power and virtue of God: whereby
they stand, move, and consist: and that there passes from God, to each creature
in the world, yea to every part that has motion or being in the same some
beam of his virtue: as from the sun, we see infinite beams to pass into the
air. Consider (I say) that no one part of any creature in the world (as the
fish in the sea, the grass on the ground, the leaves of the trees, or the
parts of man upon the face of the earth) can grow, moove, or consist, without
some little stream of virtue, and power come to it continually from God. So that
thou must imagine God to stand as a most glorious sun in the midst: and from him
to pass forth infinite beams or streams of virtue to al creatures that are,
either in heaven, earth, the air, or the water, and to every part thereof: and
upon these beams of his virtue, al creatures to hang: and if he should stop but
any one of them, it would destroy and annihilate presently some creature or
other. This I say, if thou shall consider touching the majesty of God, and the
infinite dread that al creatures have of him, except only a sinner (for the
devils also do fear him, Iac. 2.
as Saint James says:) thou will not marvel of the severe judgment of God,
appointed for his offense. For sure I am, that very shame of the world makes
us to have more regard in offending the poorest frind we have in this life,
than a wicked man has in offending God: which is an intolerable contempt of
so great a majesty.

7 But now if we adjoin to this contemplation of majesty, A consideration of
the benefits of God.
another consideration of his benefits bestowed upon us: our default will grow
to be far greater, for that to injury him who has done us good, is a thing
most detestable even in nature it self. And there was never yet so fearce an
heart, no not amongst brute beasts, but that it might be won with courtesy and
benefits: but much more amongst reasonable creatures does benificence prevail,
especially if he come from great personages, whose love and frindship (declared
unto us but in small gifts) does greatly bind the hearts of the receavers to love
them again.

8 Consider then (deer Christian) the infinite good turns and benefits which
thou have received at the hands of this great God, thereby to win thee to his
love, and that thou should leave of to offend and injury him, and albeit no
tongue created either of man or Angel, can express the one half of these gifts
which thou have received from him, or the value of them, or the great love and
hearty good will wherewith he bestowed them upon thee: yet for some memory sake,
I will repeat certain general and principal points thereof, whereunto the rest may
be referred.

The benefit of creation.
9 First then he has bestowed upon thee, the benefit of thy creation, whereby he
made thee of nothing to the likeness of himself, and appointed thee to so noble
an end, as is to serve him in this life, and to reign with him in the life to
come, furnishing thee for the present with the service and subjection of al
creatures. The greatness of this benefit may partly be conceaved, if thou do
imagine thy self to lak but any one part of thy body, as a leg, an arm, an
eye, or the like: and that one should freely geeve the same unto thee: or if
thou want but any one sense, as that thou were deaf or blind, and one
should restore sight or hearing unto thee: how would thou esteem of this
benefit? How much would thou profess thy self beholding unto him for the
same? And if the gift of one of these parts only would seem such a benefit
unto thee: how great ought thou to esteem the free gift of so many parts
together?

10 Ad to this now (as I have said) that he has created thee to the likeness of
no other thing, but of himself; to no other end, but to be his honorable
servant in this world, and his compartener in kingly glory for all eternity to
come: and this he has done to thee, being only a piece of dirt or clay before.
Now imagine thou of what manner of love proceeded this. But yet ad further, how
he has created all this magnificent world for thee, and all the creatures thereof
to serve thee in this business: the heaven to distinguish times and seasons, and
to geeve thee light: the earth, and aier, and water, to minister most infinite
variety of creatures for thy use and sustinance: and has made thee lord of
al, to use them for thy comfort and his service. And what magnificent gifts are
these? And what shameful ingratitude is it, to turn the same to the dishonor
and injury of so loving a geever as thou do, by using them to serve thee in
sin.

11 But yet consider a little further, The benefit of redemption.
the benefit of thy redemption, much greater than all the former: which is, that
thou having lost al those former benefits again, and made thy self guilty by
sin of eternal punishment, whereto the Angels were now delivered for their sin
committed before: 1. Pet. 2.
God chose to redeem thee, and not the Angels, and for satisfieng of thy
fault, to deliver his own only Son to death for thee. O Lord, what heart can
conceave the greatness of this benefit? Imagine thy self (being a poor man)
had committed a greevous crime against a kings majesty, together with some
great man of his cheifest nobility, and that the king being offended highly
with you both, should notwithstanding pardon thee, and put the noble man to
death: and further also (being no other way to save thy life) should lay the
pains of death du to thee, upon his only son and heir, for thy sake: how much
would thou think, that this king loved thee? How greatly would thou
esteem thy self beholding and bounden to that young prince, which should offer
himself to his fathers justice to die for thee a poor worm (and not for the
noble man, as he would not die for the Angels) and to put his head in the
halter for thine only offenses? Could thou ever have the heart to become
enemy to this man after, or willingly and wittingly to offend him? And yet,
such is our case, and much more bounden toward Christ and his father, whom the
most of us notwithstanding do daily offend, dishonor, and injury by sin.

The benefits of vocation and justification.
12 But yet there follow on mo benefits of God unto us, as our vocation and
justification: vocation, whereby he has called us from infidelity, to the
state of Christians; and thereby made us partakers of this our redemption, which
infidels are not. For albeit he paid the ransom for all in general: yet he has
not imparted the benefit thereof to al, but to such only as best it pleased his
divine goodness to bestow it upon. Romans 8. 1. Cor. 1.
After which followed our justification whereby we were not only set free from
al our sins committed before, and from al pain and punishment du to the same:
but also our souls beutified and enriched with his holy grace, Romans 5. 1. Co.
13. Esai. 11.
accompanied with the virtues theological, as faith, hope and charity, and
with the gifts of the holy Ghost: and by this grace we are made just and
righteous in the sight of God, and entitled to the most blessed inheritance of
the kingdom of heaven.

13 After these do insu a great number of benefits together (as to us being now
made the children and deer frinds of God) and every one of them, of infinite
price and valu. The benefit of the sacraments.
As the gift of the holy sacraments, left for our comfort and preservation,
being nothing else but conduits to convey Gods grace unto us, especially these
two which appertain to al, to wit, the sacrament of Baptism, and of his blessed
body and blood, whereof the first, is to purge our souls from sin, the second
to feed and comfort the same after she is purged. The first is a bath made of
Christ his own blood, The use of sacraments.
to wash and bath our wounds therein: the second as a most comfortable and rich
garment, to cover our soul withal after she is washed. In the first, Christ
has substituted in his place his spouse the church, to pronounce in his name
remission of sins: in the second he has left himself, and his own flesh and
blood Sacramentally to be a precious food, to cherish her withal.

14 Besides al these, The benefit of preservation and inspiration.
there is yet another gift named our preservation, whereby God has preserved us
from so many dangers into which others have fallen, and wherein we had fallen
also; if Gods holy hand had not stayed us: as from superstition, heresy, and
infidelity, and many other greevous sins: and especially from death and
damnation, which long ago by our wickedness we deserved to have been executed
upon us. Also there are the benefits of godly inspirations and admonitions,
whereby God has often both knocked inwardly at the door of our conscience,
Apoc. 3.
and warned us outwardly by so many wais and means: as are good books; good
sermons; good exhortations; good company; good example of others; and a
hundred means else, which he at diverse times has and does use, thereby to gain
us and our souls unto his eternal kingdom, by stirring us to abandon vicious
life, and to betake our selves to his holy and sweet service.

15 Al which rare and singular benefits being measured, either according to the
valu of themselves, or according to the love of that heart, from which they do
proceed, ought to move us most vehemently, to gratitude toward the giver:
which gratitude should be, to resolve our selves at length to serve him
unfainedly, and to prefer his favor before al worldly or mortal respects
whatsoever. Or if we can not obtain so much of our selves; yet at leastwise not
to offend him any more by our sins and wickedness.

16 There is not so fearce or cruel a nature in the world (as I noted before)
but is mollified, allured, and won by benefits: and stories do make report of
strange examples in this kind, even among brute beasts, as of the gratitude of
lions, dogs, and the like, toward their masters and benefactors. Only an
obstinate sinner is he, Aelian in hist. animal.
among all the savage creatures that are, whom neither benefits can move; nor
courtesies can mollify; nor promises can allure; nor gifts can gain to the
faithful service of God his Lord and master.

17 The greatest sinner that is in the world, The intolerable ingratitude of a
sinner.
if he give his servant but twenty nobles a year, or his tenant some little
farm to live upon, and if for this they serve him not at a bek; he cries out
of their ingratitude: and if they should further maliciously seek to offend
him, and to join with his professed enemy against him; how intolerable a
matter would it seem in his sight? And yet he himself, dealing much more
ingratefully and injuriously with God, thinks it a matter of no
consideration, but easily pardonable. I say, he deals more ingratefully with
God, for that he has received a thousand for one, in respect of all the
benefits that a mortal man can give to another: for he has received al in all
from God: the bread which he eats; the ground which he treads; the light
which he beholds; together with his eyes to see the sun; and finally
whatsoever is within, or without his body: as also the mind, with the spiritual
gifts thereof, whereof each one is more worth than a thousand bodies: I say also,
that he deals more injuriously with God, for that notwithstanding al these
benefits, he serves Gods open enemy the devil, and commits daily sin and
wickedness, which God hates more than any heart created can hate a mortal
enemy, being that in very deed which persecuted his Son our savior, Sin
persecuted Christ unto death.
with such hostility, as it took his most precious life from him, and nailed
him fast to the wood of the cross.

Gods complaint against sinners.
18 Of this extreem ingratitude and injury, God himself is enforced to
complain in diverse places of the scripture, as where we says; Retribuebant
mihi mala pro bonis. They returned me home evil for good. Psalm. 34.
And yet much more vehemently in another place, he calls the heavens to
witness of this iniquity, Iere. 2.
saying; Obstupescite coeli super haec. O you heavens be you astonished at
this. As if he should say by a figurative kind of speech, go out of your wits
you heavens with marvel, at this incredible iniquity of man toward me. For so
he expounds the whole matter more at large in another place; Isai. 1.
Audite coeli and auribus percipe terra: Harken ye heavens, and thou earth bend
hither thine ears: Filios enutrivi and exaltavi, ipsi autem spreuerunt me: I
have norished up children and have exalted them, and now they contemn me. What
a pitiful complaint is this of God against most vile and base worms of the
earth? But yet God amplifieth this iniquity more by certain examples and
comparisons; The ox (says he) knows his owner, and the ass knows the
manger of his Lord and master: but yet my people know not me: woe be to the
sinful nation, to the people laden with iniquity, to this naughty seed, to
wicked children. What complaint can be more vehement than this? What threatening
can be more dreadful than this woe, coming from the mouth of him which may
punish us at his pleasure?

19 Wherefore (deer brother) if thou have grace, cease to be ungrateful to God
any longer: cease to offend him which has by so many wais prevented thee with
benefits: cease to render evil for good; hatred for love; contempt, for his
fatherly affection toward thee. He has done for thee all that he can: Isai. 4.
he has given thee all that thou art: yea and (in a certain manner) all that he
is worth himself: and means besides to make thee partaker of al his glory
in the world to come, and requires no more for all this at thy hands, but love
and gratitude. O (deer brother) why will thou not yield him this? Why will thou
not do as much to him, as thou would have another man to do to thee, for
less than the ten thousand part of these benefits which thou have received?
For I dare well say, that if thou had given a man but an alms at thy door,
thou would think him bound to love thee for it, albeit thou had nothing in
thee worth love besides. But now thy Lord (besides these his gifts) has
infinite causes to make thee love him, that is, all the causes which any thing
in the world has to purchase love, and infinite more besides: for, if all the
perfections of al things created in heaven and in earth (which do procure love)
were put together in one, Causes of love in God besides his benefits.
as al their beauty; al their virtue; al their nobility; al their goodness, and
the like: yet thy Lord and Savior whom thou contemnest, does pass all this, and
that by many and infinite degrees: for that he is not only, al these things
together; but also he is very beauty it self; virtue it self; wisdom it
self; sweetness it self; nobility it self; goodness it self; and the very
fountain and welspring where hence al these things are derived by little pieces
and parcels unto his creatures.

20 Be ashamed then (good Christian) of this thy ingratitude, to so great; so
good; and bountiful a Lord: and resolve thy self for the time to come, to
amend thy course of life and behavior toward him. Say with the prophet, which
had less cause to say so than thou; A prayer.
Domine propitiare peccatomeo: Psalm. 24.
multum est enim. O Lord pardon me mine offenses: for it is great in thy sight.
I know there is nothing (O Lord) which does so much displease thee, or dry up
the fountain of thy mercy, and so binds thy hands from doing good, as
ingratitude in the receavers of thy benefits, wherein hitherto I have exceeded
al other: but I have done it (O Lord) in mine ignorance, not considering thy
gifts unto me, nor what account thou would demand again of the same. But
now seeing thou have vouchsafed to make me worthy of this grace also, whereby
to see and know mine own state and default: I hope hereafter by direction of
the same grace of thine, to show my self a better child toward thee. O Lord,
I am overcome at the lenth with consideration of thy love: and how can I have
the heart to offend thee hereafter, seeing thou have prevented me so many wais
with benefits, even when I demanded not the same? Can I have hands ever more to
sin against thee which have given up thine own most tender hands, to be nailed
on the cross for my sins heretofore? No, no, it is too great an injury
against thee (O Lord) and woe worth me that have done it so often heretofore.
But by thy holy assistance, I trust not to return to such iniquity for the
time to come: to which (O Lord) I beseech thee for thy mercy sake, from thy
holy throne of heaven, to say, Amen.

CHAP. VIII. Of what opinion and feeling we shall be, touching these matters, at
the time of our death.
The induration of some hearts.
THe holy scriptures do teach us, and experience makes it plain, that during
the time of this life, the commodities, preferments, and pleasures of the
world, do possess so strongly the hearts of many men, and do hold them chained
with so forcible inchauntments, being forsaken also upon their just deserts of
the grace of God: say and threaten what a man can, and bring against them all the whole scripture, even from the beginning of Genesis to the end of the
Apocalips (as indeed it is al against sin and sinners) yet will it prevail
nothing with them, being in that lamentable case, as either they believe not,
or esteem not, whatsoever is said to that purpose, against their settled life
and resolution to the contrary. Of this we have infinite examples in scripture:
as of Sodom and Gomorra, with the cities about, Genesis 19.
which could not hear the warnings that good Lot gave unto them. Also of
Pharao, Ex. 6.7.8.9.
whom, all that ever Moises could do, either by signs or saiengs, moved
nothing. Also of Judas, who by no fair means or threatenings, used to him by
his master, Matthew. 26.
would change his wicked resolution. But especially the prophets, sent from
God, from time to time, to dissuade the people from their naughty life, and
consequently from the plaegs hanging over them, do give abundant testimony of
this: complaining every where, of the hardness of sinners hearts, that would not
be moved with all the exhortations, preachings, promises, and thunderings that
they could use. The prophet Zachary shall testify for all in this matter, Zach.
7.
who says of the people of Israel a little before their destruction; Hoc ait
Dominus exercituum, etc. This says the Lord of hosts: judge justly: And so
forth. And presently he adds; And they would not attend, but turning their
baks went away, and stopped their ears, to the end they might not hear, and
they did put their hearts as an adamant stone, to the end they might not hear
the law and the words which God did send in his spirit, by the hands of the
former prophets, whereby Gods great indignation was stirred up.

2 This then is, and alwais has been the fashion of worldlings, and reprobate
persons, to harden their hearts as an adamant stone, against any thing that shall
be told them for the amendment of their lives, and for the saving of their
souls. Whiles they are in health and prosperity they will not know God. As in
another place he complains yet, as the prophet says; God will have his day,
Esai. 1.
with these men also when he will be known. And that is; Cognoscetur dominus
iudicia faciens. Psalm. 9.
God will be known when he begins to do judgment. And this is at the day of
death, which is the next door to judgment, as the Apostle testifies, Heb. 9.
saying; It is appointed for all men once to die, and after that ensues
judgment.

Esai. 2.13.34.37.61.
3 This I say is the day of God, most terrible, sorrowful, and full of
tribulation, to the wicked, wherein God will be known, to be a righteous God, and
to restore to every man according as he has done while he lived: as Saint Paul
says, 2. Cor. 5.
or as the prophet describes it; He will be known then to be a terrible God,
Psalm. 75.
and such a one, as takes away the spirit of princes, a terrible God to the
kings of the earth. The great change of things at the day of death.
At this day, as there will be a great change in all other things, as mirth will
be turned into sorrow; laughings, into weepings; pleasures, into pains;
stoutnes, into fear; pride, into despair; and the like: so especially will
there be a strange alteration in judgment and opinion: for that the wisdom of
God, whereof I have spoken in the former chapters, and which (as the scripture
says) Is accounted holy of the wise of the world; 1. Cor. 2.
will then appear in her likeness, and as it is in very deed, will be confessed
by her greatest enemies to be only true wisdom: and al carnal wisdom of
worldlings, Romans 8. 1. Cor. 1.
to be mere folly, as God calls it.

4 This the holy scripture sets down clearly when it describes the very
speeches and lamentations of the wise men of this world at the last day,
saying, touching the virtuous whom they despised in this life. Sap. 5.
Nos insensati, etc. We senseles men did esteem their life to be madness, and
their end to be dishonorable: but look how they are now accounted among the
children of God, and their portion is with the saints? We have erred from the
way of truth; and the light of righteousness, has not shined before us; neither
has the sun of understanding appeered unto us. We have wearied out our selves
in the way of iniquity and perdition, and we have walked craggy paths: but the
way of the Lord we have not known. Hitherto are the words of scripture: whereby
we may perceave, what great change of judgment there will be at the last day,
from that which men have now of al such matters: what confessing of folly;
what acknowledging of error; what hearty sorrow for labor lost; what fruitles
repentance for having run awry. Oh that men would consider these things now; We
have wearied out our selves (say these miserable men) in the way of iniquity
and perdition, and we have walked craggie paths. What a description is this of
lamentable worldlings, who beat their brains daily, and weary out themselves in
pursuit of vanity, and chaf of this world, for which they suffer
notwithstanding more pains oftentimes, than the just do in purchasing of
heaven? And when they arrive to, at the last day wearied and worn out with
troble and toil, they find that al their labor is lost, al their vexation
taken in vain: for that the little pelf which they have gotten in the world,
and for which they have strugled so sore, will help them nothing, but rather
greatly afflict and torment them: for better understanding whereof, it is to be
considered, that three things will principally molest these men at the day of
their death, and unto these may all the rest be referred.

Of the souls parting from the body the first matter of misery in death.
5 The first is the excessive Those pains in death are especially to be
restreined to the death of the worldly: for the godly have for the most part
a singular comfort therein.
pains which commonly men suffer in the separation of the soul and body, which
have lived so long together as two deer frinds, united in love and pleasure,
and therefore most loath to part now, but only heart, which holds out longest,
as the principal part, but yet must finally be constrained to render it self
though with never so much pain and resistance: which pain how great and strong
it is, may appeer by the breaking in pieces of the very strings and holds
wherewith it was environed, through the excessive vehemency of this deadly
torment. But yet before it come to this point, to yield, no man can express
the cruel conflict that is betwixt death and her, and what distresses she
abides in time of her agony. Imagine that a prince possessed a goodly city in all peace, wealth and pleasure, and greatly frinded of al his neighbors about
him, who promise to assist him in all his needs and affairs: and that upon the
sudden, his mortal enemy should come and besiege this city, A similitude
expressing the pains of death.
and taking one hold after another; one wall after another; one castle after
another; should drive this prince only to a little tower, and besiege him
therein, al his other holds being beaten down, and his men slain in his sight:
what fear, anguish, and misery would this prince be in? How often would he
look out at the windows and loope holes of his tower, to see whether his frinds
and neighbors would come to help him or no? And if he saw them al to abandon
him, and his cruel enemy even ready to break in upon him, would he not be in a
pitiful plight trow you? And even so fares it with a poor soul, at the hour
of death. The body wherein she reigns like a joly princess in all pleasure,
whiles it flourished, is now battered and overthrown by her enemy, which is
death: the arms, legs, and other parts wherewith she was fortified, as with walls
and words during time of health, are now surprised and beaten to the ground, and
she is driven only to the heart, as to the last and extreemest refuge, where she
is also most fearcely assailed in such sort, as she cannot hold out long. Her
deer frinds which soothed her in time of prosperity, and promised assistance,
as youth, physik, and other humane helps, do now utterly abandon her: the
enemy will not be pacified or make any leag, but night and day assaulteth this
turret wherein she is, and which now begins to shake and shiver in pieces,
and she looks hourly when her enemy in most raging and dreadful manner, will
enter upon her. What think you is now the state of this afflicted soul? It is
no marvel if a wise man become a fool, or a stout worldling most abject, in
this instant of extremity as we often see they do in such sort, as they can
dispose of nothing well, either toward God or the world at this hour: the cause
is the extremity of pains, oppressing their minds, as Saint Austen also
proves (or some other under his name) and gives us therwithal a most
excellent forewarning, Ser. 48. ad frat. in eremo.
if men were so gracious as to follow it: When you shall be in your last siknes
deer brother (says he) O how hard and painful a thing will it be for you to
repent of your faults committed? And why is this, but only for that, all the
intention of your mind will run thither, where all the force of your pain is?
Many impediments shall let men at that day: as the pain of the body; the fear
of death; the sight of children (for the which their fathers shall oftentimes
think themselves often damned; the weeping of the wise; the flattery of the
world; the temptation of the devil; the dissimulation of physicians for lucre
sake; and the like. And believe thou (O man) which read this, that thou
shall quickly prove all this true upon thy self, and therefore I beseech thee
that thou will repent before thou come unto this last day: dispose of thy
house, and make thy testament while thou art thine own man: for if thou tarry
until the last day, thou shall be led whether thou would not. Hitherto are
the Authors words.

6 The second thing, The second matter of misery in death.
which shall make death terrible and greevous to a worldly man is the sudden
parting (and that for ever and ever) from all the things, which he loved most
deerly in this life: as, from his riches, possessions, honors, offices, fair
buildings, with their commodities, goodly apparel with rich jewels; from wife
and children; kindred, and frinds; and the like: wherewith he thought himself a
blessed man in this life, and now, to be plucked from them upon the sudden,
without ever hope to see or use them again, oh what a greef, what a torment will
this be? For which cause the holy scripture says; Eccl. 41.
O mors, quam amara est memoria tua, homini pacem habenti in substantijs suis:
O death, how bitter is thy memory unto a man that has peace and rest in his
substance and riches? As who would say: there is no more bitterness or grief in
the world to such a man, than to remember or think on death only, but much more
to go to it himself, and that out of hand, when it shall be said unto him, as
Christ reports it was to the great wealthy man in the Gospel, which had his
barns full, and was come now to the highest top of felicity; Luc. 12.
Stulte, hac nocte animam tuam repetent a te, quae autem parasti, cuius erunt?
Thou fool, even this night they will take thy soul from thee, and then who
shall have all that thou have scraped together?

The sorrow of leaving al.
7 It is unpossible I say, for any tongue to express the doleful state of a
worldly man in this instant of death, when nothing that ever he has gathered
together, with so much labor and toil, and wherein he was wont to have so much
confidence, will now do him good any longer, but rather afflict him with the
memory thereof, considering that he must leave al to others, and go himself to
give account for the getting and using of the same (perhaps to his eternal
damnation) whiles in the mean time other men in the world do live merrily and
pleasantly upon that he has gotten, little remembering, and less caring for
him, which lies perhaps burning in unquenchable fire, for the riches left unto
them. This is a woeful and lamentable point, which is to bring many a man, to
great sorrow and anguish of heart at the last day, when al earthly joies must be
left, al pleasures and commodities for ever abandoned. Oh what a doleful day of
parting will this be! What will thou say (my friend) at this day, when al thy
glory, al thy wealth, al thy pomp is come to an end? What art thou the better
now to have lived in credit with the world? In favor of princes? Exalted of
men? Feared, reverenced, and advanced: seeing now al is ended, and that thou
can use these things no more?

8 But yet there is a third thing which more than all the rest will make this day
of death to be troublesome and miserable unto a worldly man, and that is, The
third matter of misery in death.
the consideration what shall become of him, both in body and soul. And for his
body, it will be no small horror to think, Eccl. 10.
that it must inherit serpents, beasts, and worms, as the scripture says: that
is, it must be cast out to serve for the food of vermins: that body I mean,
which was so delicately handled before, with variety of meats, pillows, and
beds of down, so trimly set forth in apparel, and other ornaments, whereupon the
wind might not blow, nor the sun shine: that body (I say) of whose beutie
there was so much pride taken, and whereby so great vanity and sin was
committed: The cogitation of the body.
that body, which in this world was accustomed to al pampering, and could
abide no austeritie or discipline, must now come to be abandoned of al men, and
left only to be devoured of worms. Which thing albeit it can not but breed
much horror in the heart of him that lies a dieng: yet is it nothing in respect
of the dreadful cogitations, which he shall have touching his soul: as, what
shall become of it? Whither it shall go after her departure out of the body? And
then considering that it must go to the judgment seat of God, and there to
receive sentence, either of unspeakable glory, or insupportable pains: he
falls to consider more in particular, the danger thereof, by comparing Gods
justice and threats (set down in scripture against sinners) with his own life:
he begins to examine the witness, which is his conscience, and he finds it
ready to lay infinite accusations against him, when he comes to the place of
justice.

9 And now deer (brother) begins the misery of this man. For scantly there
is not a severe saying of God in all the scripture, which comes not now to his
mind, to terrify him withal at this instant: Mat. 19.
as; If thou will enter into life, keep the commandments. He that says he
knows God, 1. Ioh. 2.
and keeps not his commandments, is a liar. Many shall say unto me at that
day, Lord, Matt. 7. Romans 2.
Lord, etc. Not the hearers of the law, but the doers of the law shall be
justified. Luc. 13.
Go from me al workers of iniquity into everlasting fire. De not you know, 1.
Cor. 6.
that wicked men shall not possess the kingdom of God? Be not deceived, for
neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor unclean handlers of
their own bodies, nor Sodomites, nor thieves, nor covetous men, nor dronkards,
nor bakbiters, nor extortioners, shall ever possess the kingdom of God. Romans 8.
If you live according to the flesh, you shall die: and the works of the flesh
are manifest, as fornication, uncleannes, wantonness, Gal. 5.
luxury, poisonings, enmities, contentions, emulations, hatred, strife,
dissentions, sects, envy, murder, dronkenes, gluttony, and the like. Whereof I
foretell you, as I have told you before, that they which do these things shall
never attein to the kingdom of God. 2. Cor. 5. Iere. 2. Apo. 20.
We must al be presented before the judgment seat of Christ, and every man
receive particularly, according as he has done in this life, good or evil:
every man shall receive according to his works. 2. Pet. 2.
God spared not the Angels when they sinned. You shall give account of every
idle word at the day of judgment. 1. Pet. 4.
If the just shall scarce be saved, where shall the wicked man and sinner appeer?
Few are saved, Mat. 19.
and a rich man shall hardly enter into the kingdom of heaven.

10 Al these things (I say) and a thousand mo touching the severitie of Gods
justice, and the account which shall be demanded at that day, will come into his
mind that lies a dieng, and our ghostly enemy (which in this life labored to
keep these things from our eyes, thereby the easier to draw us to sin) will now
lay al and more too, before our face; amplifieng and urging every point to the
uttermost; alleging alwais our conscience for his witness. Which when the poor
soul in dieng cannot deny, it must needs terrify her greatly: for so we see
that it does daily, even many good and virtuous men. Saint Ierom reported of
holy Saint Hilarion, whose soul being greatly afeard, upon these
considerations, to go out of the body, after long conflict, he took courage in
the end, and said to his soul; Ierom in vita Hilarionis abba.
Go out my soul, go out: why art thou afeard: thou have served Christ almost
threescore and ten years, and art thou now afeard of death? But if so good a
man was so afeard at this passage, yea, such an one as had served God with all
purity of life, and perfect zeal for threescore and ten years together: what
shall they be, which scarce have served God truly one day in all their lives, but
rather have spent al their years in sin and vanity of the world? Must not
these men be needs in great extremity at this passage?

11 Now then (deer Christian) these things being so, that is, this passage of
death being so terrible, so dangerous, and yet so unavoydable as it is: seeing
so many men perish, and are overwhelmed daily in the same, as it cannot be
denied but there do: and both holy scriptures and ancient fathers do testify
it by examples and records unto us: what man of discretion would not learn to
be wise by other men's dangers? Or what reasonable creature would not take heed,
and look about him, being warned so manifestly, and apparently, of his own
peril? If thou be a Christian, and do believe indeed the things which
Christian faith does teach thee: then do thou know and most certainly believe
also, that of what state, age, strength, dignity, or condition soever thou be
now, yet that thou thy self (I say) which now in health and mirth read
this, and think that it little pertains to thee, must one of these dais
(and it may be shortly after the reading hereof) come to prove al these things
upon thy self, which I have here written: that is, thou must with sorrow and
grief be enforced to thy bed, and there after al thy struglings, with the
darts of death, thou must yield thy body which thou love so much, to the
bait of worms, and thy soul to the trial of justice, for her doings in this
life.

12 Imagine then (my frind) thou I say which art so fresh and frolik at this
day, that the ten, A very profitable consideration.
twenty, or two years, or (it may be) two months, which thou have yet to
live, were now ended, and that thou were even at this present, stretched out
upon a bed, wearied and worn with dolor and pain, thy carnal frinds about thee
weeping and howling, the physicians departed with their fees, as having given
thee over, and thou lieng there alone mute and dum in most pitiful agony,
expecting from moment to moment, the last stroke of death to be given thee. Tell
me, in this instant, what would all the pleasures and commodities of this world
do thee good? What comfort would it be to thee, to have been of honor in this
world, to have been rich, and purchased much, to have born office, and been in
the princes favor? To have left thy children or kindred wealthy, to have trodden
down thine enemies, to have sturred much, and born great sway in this life?
What ease (I say) or comfort would it be to thee, to have been fair, to have
been gallant in apparel, goodly in personage, glittering in gold? Would not al
these things rather afflict than profit thee at this instant? For now should
thou see the vanity of these trifles: now would thy heart begin to say within
thee; O folly and miserable blindness of mine! The cogitation and spech of the
soul at the day of death.
Lo, here is an end now of al my delites and prosperities: al my joies, al my
pleasures, al my mirth, al my pastimes are now finished: where are my frinds,
which were wont to laugh with me? My servants wont to attend me; my children
wont to disport me? Where are al my coches and horses, wherewith I was wont to
make so goodly a show, the caps and knees of people wont to honor me, the
troops of suitors following me? Where are al my daliances and triks of love; al
my pleasant musik; al my gorgeous buildings; al my costly feasts and
banquetings? And above al other, where are my deer and sweet frinds, who seemed
they would never have forsaken me? But al are now gone, and have left me here
alone to answer the rekoning for all, and none of them will do so much as to go
with me to judgment, or to speak one word in my behalf.

13 Woe worth to me, that I had not foreseen this day sooner, and so have made
better provision for the same: it is now too late, and I fear me I have
purchased eternal damnation, for a little pleasure, and lost unspeakable glory,
for a floting vanity. Oh how happy and twice happy are they which so live,
as they may not be afeard of this day? I now see the difference betwixt the
ends of good and evil, and marvel not though the scriptures say of the one;
Psa. 115.
The death of saints is precious. And of the other; The death of sinners is
miserable. Psalm. 33.
Oh that I had lived so virtuously as some other have done, or as I had often
inspirations from God to do; or that I had done the good deeds I might have
done: how sweet and comfortable would they be to me now in this my last, and
extreemest distres?

14 To these cogitations and speeches (deer brother) shall thy heart be enforced,
of what estate soever thou be, at the hour of death, if thou do not prevent it
now by amendment of life, which only can yield thee comfort in that sorrowful
day. For of good men the judge him self says; His autem fieri incipientibus,
Luc. 21.
respicite and levate capita vestra, quoniam appropinquat redemptio vestra:
When these things begin to come upon other men, do you lift up your heads, for
that your redemption comes on, from the labors and toils of this world. And
the holy prophet says of the virtuous man which has done good works in this
life, that he shall be at this time; Beatus vir: An happy man: And he gives
the cause; Quia in die mala liberabit eum dominus, Psalm. 4.
and opem feret illi super lectum doloris eius: For that God will deliver him in
this evil day, and will assist him upon the bed of his sorrow. Which is meant (no
dowt) of the bed of his last departure especially, for that of al other beds,
this is the most sorrowful, as I have showed, being nothing else but an heap of
al sorrows together, especially to them which are drawn unto it before they are
ready for the same, as commonly al they are, which defer their amendment from
day to day, and do not attend to live in such sort now, as they shall wish they
had done when they come to that last passage.

CHAP. IX. Of the pains appointed for sin after this life.
AMongst all the means, which GOD uses toward the children of men, to moove
them to this resolution, whereof I entreat, the strongest and most forcible (to
the common sort of men) is, the consideration of punishments prepared by him
for rebellious sinners, and transgressors of his commandments. Wherefore he
uses this consideration often, as may appeer by all the prophets, who do almost
nothing else, but threaten plaegs and destruction to offenders, And this mean
has often times prevailed more than any other that could be used, The force of
fear.
by reason of the natural love which he bare toward our selves: and
consequently the natural fear which we have of our own danger. So we read that
nothing could moove the Ninivites so much as the foretelling them of their
imminent destruction. And Saint John Baptist, Ioh. 5.
although he came in a simple and contemptible manner, Mat. 3. Mar. 1. Luc. 3.
yet preaching unto the people. The terror of vengeance to come, and that the
ax was now put to the tres, to cut down for the fire al those which repented
not: He moved the very publicans and soldiers to fear (which otherwise are
people of very hard metal) who came unto him upon this terrible embassage, and
asked what they should do to avoid these punishments?

2 After then that we have considered of death, and of Gods severe judgment,
which insueth after death, and wherein every man has to receave according to
his works in this life, 2. Cor. 5.
as the scripture says: it follows that we consider also of the punishments
which are appointed for them that shall be found faulty in that account, hereby
at lestwise (if no other consideration will serve) to induce christians to this
resolution of serving God. For, as I have noted before, if every man have
naturally a love of himself, and desire to conserve his own ease: then should
he also have fear of peril, whereby he is to fall into extreme calamity. In
sermon. de primordijs.
This expresses saint Bernard excellently according to his wont. O man (says
he) if thou have left al shame (which apperteineth to so noble a creature as
thou art) if thou feel no sorrow (as carnal men do not) yet lose not fear
also, which is found in very beasts. We use to load an ass, and to weary him
out with labor, and he cares not because he is an ass: but if thou would
thrust him into fire, or fling him into a ditch, he would avoid it as much as
he could, for that he loves life, and fears death. Fear thou then, and be
not more insensible than a beast: fear death; fear judgment; fear hell. This
fear is called the beginning of wisdom, Prou. 9.
and not shame or sorrow, for that the spirit of fear is more mighty to resist
sin, than the spirit of shame or sorrow, wherefore it is said; Remember the end,
and thou shall never sin: That is, Eccl. 7.
remember the final punishments appointed for sin, after this life. Thus far
Saint Bernard.

3 First therefore to speak in general of the punishments reserved for the life
to come, if the scriptures did not declare in particular their greatness unto
us: yet are there many reasons to persuade us, that they are most severe,
dolorous, and intolerable. For first, as God is a God in all his works, that is
to say, great, Gods majesty.
woonderful, and terrible: so especially he shows the same in his
punishments, Psalm. 71. Deu. 10. Psalm. 4. Psalm. 93.
being called for that cause in scripture; Deus iustitiae: God of justice: As
also; Deus vltionum: God of revenge. Wherefore seeing al his other works, are
full of majesty and exceeding our capacities: we may likewise gather, that his
hand in punishment must be woonderful also. God himself teaches us to reason
in this manner, when he says; And will ye not then fear me? Iere. 5.
And will ye not tremble before my face, which have put the sand as a stop unto
the sea, and have given the water a commandment never to pass it, no, not
when it is most trobled, and the floods most outrageous? As who would say: If I
am woonderful, and do pass your imagination, in these works of the sea, and
others which you see daily: you have cause to fear me, considering that my
punishments are like to be correspondent to the same.

Gods mercy.
4 Another conjecture of the great and severe justice of God, may be the
consideration of his infinite and unspeakable mercy: the which as it is the
very nature of God, and without end or measure, as his Godhead is; so is also
his justice. And these two are the two arms (as it were) of God, embracing and
kissing one the other, Psalm. 84.
as the scripture says, therefore as in a man of this world, if we had the
mesure of one arm, we might easily conjecture of the other: so seeing the
woonderful examples daily of Gods infinite mercy toward them that repent: we
may imagine by the same, his severe justice toward them, whom he reserveth to
punishment in the next life, and whom for that cause, he calls in the
scriptures; Vasa furoris: vessels of his fury, Esai. 13. Psalm. 7.
or vessels to show his fury upon.

5 A third reason to persuade us of the greatness of these punishments, Gods
patience.
may be the marvelous patience, and long suffering of God in this life: as for
example, in that he suffers diverse men from one sin, to another; from one
day, to another; from one year, to another; from one age, to another; to spend
al (I say) in dishonor and dispite of his majesty, adding offense to offense,
and refusing al persuasions, allurements, good inspirations, or other means of
frindship, that his mercy can devise to offer for their amendment. And what
man in the world could suffer this? Or what mortal heart can show such patience?
But now if all this should not be requited with severitie of punishment, in the
world to come, upon the obstinate: it might seem against the law of justice
and equity, and one arm in God might seem longer than the other. Saint Paul
touches this reason in his epistle to the Romans, where he says; Do thou
not know that the benignity of God is used to bring thee to repentance? Romans 2.
And thou by thy hard and impenitent heart do hoord up vengeance unto thy
self, in the day of wrath, and appeerance of Gods just judgments which shall
restore to every man according to his works? He uses here the words of
Hoording up of vengeance, to signify that even as the covetous man, does hoord
up money to money daily, to make his heap great: so the unrepentant sinner
does hoord up sin to sin: and God on the contrary side hoordeth up vengeance
to vengeance, until his mesure be full, to restore in the end; Measure against
measure; As the prophet says, and to pay us home; According to the multitude
of our own abominations. Esai. 27.
This God meant when he said to Abraham; Iere. 16. Genesis 15.
That the iniquities of the Amorrheans were not yet full up. Also in the
revelations unto Saint John the Evangelist, when he used this conclusion of
that book; He that does evil, Apoc. 21.
let him do yet more evil: and he that lies in filth, let him yet become more
filthy: for behold, I come quikly, and my reward is with me, to render to
every man according to his deeds. By which words God signifies that his
bearing and tollerating with sinners in this life, is an argument of his
greater severitie in the life to come, which the prophet David also declares,
when talking of a careless sinner he says; Dominus irridebit eum quoniam
prospicit quod veniet dies eius. Psalm. 36.
The Lord shall scof at him, foreseeing that his day shall come. This day (no
dowt) is to be understood the day of account and punishment, after this life,
for so does God more at large declare himself in another place in these words;
And thou son of man, Ezec. 7.
this says thy Lord God: the end is come, now (I say) the end is come upon
thee. And I will show in thee my fury, and will judge thee according to thy
wais. I will lay against thee al thy abominations, and my eye shall not spare
thee, neither will I take any mercy upon thee, but I will put thine own wais
upon thee, and thou shall know that I am the Lord. Behold, affliction comes
on, the end is come, the end (I say) is come: it has watched against thee, and
behold it is come: crushing is now come upon thee: the time is come: the day
of slaughter is at hand. Shortly will I pour out my wrath upon thee, and I will
fill my fury in thee, and I will judge thee according to thy wais, and I will
lay al thy wickedness upon thee: my eye shall not pity thee: neither will I
take any compassion upon thee, but I will lay thy wais upon thee, and thy
abominations in the midst of thee, and thou shall know that I am the Lord that
strikes. Hitherto is the speech of God himself.

6 Seeing then now we understand in general, Of pains in particular.
that the punishments of God in the life to come are most certain to be great
and severe, to al such as fall into them (for which cause the Apostle says;
Heb. 10.
Horrendum est incidere in manus Dei viventis: It is an horrible thing to fall
into the hands of the living God) let us consider somewhat in particular what
manner of pains and punishments they shall be.

7 And first of al, Of the name of hell in diverse toongs.
touching the place of punishment appointed for the damned, commonly called
hell, the scripture in diverse languages, uses diverse names, but al tending to
express the greevousnes of punishment there suffered. As in Latin it is called
Infernus, Esa. 5. and 38.
a place beneath or under ground (as most of the old fathers do interpret.) But
whether it be under ground, or no, most certain it is, that it is a place most
opposite to heaven, which is said to be above. And this name is used to
signify the miserable suppressing and hurling down of the damned, to be trodden
under the feet, Mala. 4.
not only of God, but also of good men for ever. For The matter in hand is not
by this place substantially prooved.
so Behold, the day of the Lord comes burning like a furnace, and al proud
and wicked men shall be straw to that furnace, and you that fear my name shall
tread them down, and they shall be as burnt ashes under the soles of your feet
in that day. And this shall be one of the greatest miseries that can happen to
the proud and stout potentates of the world, to be thrown down, with such
contempt, and to be trodden under feet of them, whom they so much despised in
this world.

Esai. 14. Mat. 14. Apo. 14. Apo. 11. Mat. 11.
8 The Hebrew word which the scripture uses for hell, is Seol, which signifies
a great ditch or dungeon. In which sense it is also called in the Apocalypse;
Lacus irae Dei: The lake of the wrath of God. And again; Stagnum ardens igne
and sulphur: In com. supra verba vivelatenter.
A poole burning with fire and brimstone. In Greek the scripture uses three
words for the same place. 2. Pet. 4. Job. 10. Mat. 22. and 25. 2. Pet. 4.
The first is, Elades, used in the Gospel, which (as Plutarch notes)
signifies a place where no light is. The second is Zophos, in Saint Peter,
which signifies darkness it self. In which sense it is called also of Job;
Terra tenebrosa and operta mortis caligine: A dark land, and overwhelmed with
deadly obscurity. Also in the Gospel; Tenebrae exteriores: Utter darkness. The
third greek word is Tartaros: used also by Saint Peter: which word being
derived of the verb Tarasso (which signifies to terrify, troble, and vex)
imports an horrible confusion of tormentors in that place: even as Job says
of it; Job. 10.
Ibi nullus ordo, sed sompiternus horror inhabitat: There dwells no order,
but everlasting horror.

Matt. 5.10.18.23. Mark. 9. Luc. 12.
9 The Chaldie word, which is also used in Hebrew, and translated to the Greek,
is Gehenna, first of al used by Christ for the place of them which are damned,
as Saint Ierom notes upon the tenth chapter of Saint Mathews gospel. And this
word being compounded of Gee and Hinnom signifies a valley nigh to Jerusalem,
called the valley of Hinnom, The valley Hinnom.
in which the old idolatrous Jews, were wont to burn alive their own children
in the honor of the devil, and to sound with trumpets, timbrels, and other loud
instruments, whiles they were doing thereof, that the childrens voices and cries
might not be heard: which place was afterward used also for the receipt of al
filthiness, as of doong, dead carions, and the like. And it is most probable,
that our Savior used this word above al other for hell, thereby to signify the
miserable burning of souls in that place, the pitiful clamors and cries of the
tormented; the confuse and barbarous noise of the tormentors; together with the
most lothsom filthiness of the place, which is otherwise described in the
scriptures, by the names of adders, snakes, cocatrices, scorpions, and other
venomous creatures, as shall be afterward declared.

10 Having declared the names of this place, and thereby also in some part, the
nature: it remains now, that we consider, what manner of pains men suffer
there. The pains of hell universal.
For declaration whereof, we must note, that as heaven and hell are contrary,
assigned to contrary persons, for contrary causes: so have they in all
respects contrary properties, conditions, and effects, in such sort, as
whatsoever is spoken of the felicity of the one, may serve to infer the
contrary of the other. As when Saint Paul says; that No eye has seen, nor
ear heard, nor heart conceived the ioies that God has prepared for them that
shall be saved. 1. Cor. 2.
We may infer, that the pains of the damned must be as great. Again, when the
scripture says, that the felicity of them in heaven is a perfect felicity,
Exo. 33.
containing Omne bonum: Al goodness. So that no one kind of pleasure can be
imagined which they have not: we must think on the contrary part, that the
misery of the damned, must be also a perfect misery, containing al
afflictions that may be, without wanting any. So that, as the happiness of the
good is infinite, and universal; so also is the calamity of the wicked
infinite, and universal. Now in this life all the miseries and pains which fall
upon man, are but particular, and not universal. As for example: we see one man
pained in his eyes; another in his bak: which particular pains notwithstanding
sometimes are so extreme, as life is not able to resist them; and a man would
not suffer them long for the gaining of many worlds together. But suppose now a
man were tormented in all the parts of his body at once, as in his head, his
eyes, his tongue, his teeth, his throat, his stomak, his belly, his back, his
heart, his sides, his thighs, and in all the joints of his body besides: suppose
(I say) he were most cruelly tormented with extreme pains in all these parts
together, without ease or intermission: what thing could be more miserable than
this? What sight more lamentable? If thou should see a dogly in the street so
afflicted: I know thou could not but take compassion upon him. Well then,
consider what difference there is between abiding these pains for a week, or
for all eternities; in suffering them upon a soft bed, or upon a burning
grediron and boiling furnace; among a man's frinds comforting him, or among the
furies of hell whipping and tormenting him. Consider this (I say gentle reader)
and if thou would take a great deal of labor, rather than abide the one, in
this life: be content to sustain a little pain, rather than to incur the other
in the life to come.

11 But to consider these things yet further, Peculiar torments to every part.
not only al these parts of the body which have been instruments to sin, shall
be tormented together, but also every sense both external and internal for the
same cause shall be afflicted with his particular torment, contrary to the
object wherein it delited most, and took pleasure in this world. As if for
example, the lascivious eyes were afflicted with the uglie and fearful sight of
devils: the delicate ears, with the horrible noise of damned spirits: the nise
smell, with poisoned stench of brimstone, and other unsupportable filth: the
dainty taste, with most ravenous hunger and thirst: and all the sensible parts
of the body with burning fire. Again, the imagination shall be tormented, with
the apprehension of pains present, and to come; the memory, with the
remembrance of pleasures past; the understanding, with consideration of the
felicity lost, and the misery now come on. O poor Christian, what will thou
do amidst the multitude of so greevous calamities?

The pains of hell exercised for torment, not for chastisement.
12 It is a woonderful matter, and able (as one father says) to make a
reasonable man go out of his wits, to consider what God has revealed unto us
in the scriptures, of the dredful circumstances of this punishment, and yet to
see, how little the rechlesse men of the world do fear it. For first, touching
the universalitie, variety, and greatness of the pain, not only the reasons
before alleged, but also diverse other considerations in the scriptures do
declare. As where it is said of the damned; Apo. 20. and 14. Apo. 18. Luc. 16.
Cruciabuntur die and nocte: They shall be tormented day and night. And again;
Date illi tormentum: Give her torment, speaking of Babylon in hell, by which is
signified, that the pains in hell are exercised, not for chastisement, but for
torment of the parties. And torments commonly we see in this world to be as
great and as extreme, as the wit of a man can reach to devise. Imagine then,
when God shall lay his head to devise torments (as he has done in hell) what
manner of torments will they be?

The fearce nature of the fire of hell.
13 If creating an element here for our comfort (I mean the fire) he could
create the same so terrible as it is, in such sort as a man would not hold his
only hand in it one day, for to gain a kingdom: what a fire think you has he
provided for hell, which is not created for comfort, but only for torment of
the parties? Our fire has many differences from that, and therefore is truly
said of the holy fathers, to be but a painted and fained fire in respect of
that. For our fire was made to comfort (as I have said) and that, to torment.
Our fire has need to be fed continually with wood, or else it goes out: that
burns continually, without feeding. Ours gives light: that gives none.
Ours is out of his natural place, and therefore shifteth to ascend, and to get
from us, as we see: but that is in the natural place, where it was created, and
therefore it abides there perpetually. Ours consumes the matter laid in it,
and so quiklie dispatcheth the pain: that tormenteth, but consumes not, to the
end the pain may be everlasting. Our fire is extinguished with water, and
greatly abated by the coldness of the air about it: that has no such
abatement, or qualification. Finally, what a strange and incredible kind of
fire that is, appears by these words of our savior so often repeated; Mat.
8.13.22.24. Luc. 13.
There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. Weeping is to be referred to the
effect of extreme burning in that fire, for that the torment of scalding and
burning inforceth tears sooner than any other torment, as appears in them,
which upon the sudden do put an hot thing into their mouth, or scald any other
Gnashing and chattering of the teeth are not al one; and proceed of diverse
causes.
gnashing of teeth or chattering at least (as every man knows) proceeds of
great and extreme cold. Imagine then what a fire this is, which has such
extreme effects, both of heat, and cold. O mighty Lord what a strange God art
thou! How woonderful and terrible in all thy works and inventions? How bountiful
art thou to those that love and serve thee? And how severe to them which
contemn thy commandments? Have thou devised a way how they which lie burning
in a lake of fire and brimstone, Apo. 21.
shall also be tormented with extreme cold? What understanding of man can
conceave how this may be? But thy judgments (O Lord) are a depth without
bottom, and therefore I leave this to thy only providence, Psalm. 35.
praising thee eternally for the same.

Particular pains for particular offenders.
14 Besides these general pains common to all that be in that place, the
scripture signifies also that there shall be particular torments, peculiar both
in quality and quantity to the sins and offenses of each offender. For to that
end says the prophet Esai to God; Esai. 17. Esai. 28. Ierem. 2. Apo. 20. Ps.
27.98. Eze. 24. Osee. 12. Zach. 1.
Thou will judge in measure against measure. And God says of himself; I will
exercise judgment in weight, and justice in measure. And that is the meaning
of al those threts of God to sinners, where he says that he will pay them home
according to their particular works, and according to the inventions of their
own hearts. In this sense it is said in the Apocalypse, of Babylon now thrown
down into the lake; Look how much she has glorified her self, Apo. 18.
and has lived in delites: so much torment and affliction give her. Li. de
very. Pan. ca. 2.
Whereof the holy fathers have gathered the variety of torments that shall be
in that place. As there be differences of sins: so shall there be variety of
torments (says old Ephraem) as if the adulterer should have one kind of
torment; the murderer, an other; the thief, another; the drunkard, another;
the liar another. As if the proud man should be trodden under feet, to
recompense his pride: the glutton, suffer inestimable hunger: the drunkards,
extreme thirst: the delicious mouth filled up with gaul: and the delicate
body, seared with hot burning irons.

15 The holy Ghost signifies such a thing, when he says in the scriptures,
of the wicked worldling; Job. 20.
His bread in his belly shall be turned into the gaul of serpents: A marvelous
description used by the scripture.
he shall be constrained to spu out again the riches which he has devoured:
nay, God shall pull them out of his belly again: he shall be constrained to suk
the gauls of cocatrices, and the tongue of an adder shall kill him: he shall pay
sweetly for all that ever he has done: and yet shall he not be consumed, but
shall suffer according to the multitude of al his devises: utter darkness lies
in wait for him: and fire which needs no kindling shall eat him up: this is
the wicked man's portion from God. By which words and such like, it is plainly
showed, that worldlings shall receive as it were particular and proper torments
for their gluttony, for their delicate fare, for their extortion, and the
like. Which torments shall be greater than any mortal tongue can express: as may
appeer by the vehement and horrible words, which the holy Ghost here uses to
insinuate the same.

The straitnes of pains in hell.
16 Beside this, the scripture shows unto us, not only the universalitie,
particularitie, and severitie of these pains, but also the straitnes thereof,
without aid, help, ease, or comfort, when it says; Mat. 22.
We shall be cast in bound both hand and feet: For it is some kind of comfort
in this world, to be able to resist or strive against our afflictions: but here
we must lie still and suffer al. Again, when it says; Mat. 25.
Clausa est ianua: The gate is shut: That is, the gate of al mercy, of al
pardon, of al ease, of al intermission, of al comfort, is shut up from heaven,
from earth, from the creator, and from creatures: insomuch as no consolation is
ever to be hoped for more: as in all the miseries of this life there is alwais
some. This straitnes is likewise most livelie expressed in that dreadful
parable of the rich glutton in hell: who was driven to that necessity; Luc. 16.
as he desires that Lazarus might dip the top of his finger in water to cool
his tongue, in the mids of that fire wherein he says he was: The wonderful
example of the rich glutton.
and yet could not he obtain it. A small refreshing (it seems) it would have
been unto him, if he had obtained the same. But yet to show the straitnes of
the place, it was denied him. Oh you that live in the sinful wealth of the
world, consider but this one example of Gods severitie, and be afeard. This man
was in great roialtie a little before, and nothing regarded the extreme misery
that Lazarus was in: but now would he give a thousand worlds (if he had them)
for one drop of water to cool his tongue. What demand could be less than this?
He durst not ask to be delivered thence, or to have his torments diminished, or
to ask a great vessel of water to refresh his whole body therein: but only so
much as would stik on the top of a man's finger, to cool his tongue. To what need
was this rich man now driven? What a great imagination had he of the force of
one drop of water? To what pitiful change, was his tongue now come unto, that was
wont to be so diligently applied with all kinds of pleasant liquors? Oh that
one man can not take example by another; either this is true, or else the Son of
God is a liar. And then, what men are we, that seeing our selves in danger of
this misery, do not seek with more diligence to avoid the same?

17 In respect of these extremities and strait dealings of God, in denieng al
comfort and consolation at this day, the scripture says, Apo. 16. Eze. 23.
Apo. 13.
that men shall fall into rage, fury, and utter impatience, blaspheming God, and
cursing the day of their nativitie, with eating their own tongs for grief,
Luc. 3.
and desiring the roks and mountains to come and fall on them, to end their
pains.

The eternity of the pains.
18 Now if we ad to this, the eternity, and everlasting continuance of these
torments: we shall see that it increases the matter greatly. For in this world
there is no torment so great, but that time either takes away, or diminishes
the same. For either the tormentor, or the tormented dies, or some occasion or
other happens, to alter, or mitigate the matter. But here is no such hope or
comfort: but Crutiabuntur (says the scripture) in secula seculorum, Apo. 21.
in stagno ardente igne and sulphur: They shall be tormented for ever, in a
poole burning with fire and brimstone. As long as God is God, so long shall they
burn there: neither shall the tormentor nor the tormented die, but both live
eternally, for the eternal misery of the parties to be punished.

19 O (says one father in a godly meditation) if a sinner damned in hell did
know, A wonderful saying.
that he had to suffer those torments there, no mo thousands of years than
there be sands in the sea, and gras piles in the ground; or, no mo thousand
millions of ages, than there be creatures in heaven, and in earth: he would
greatly rejoice thereof, for he would comfort himself at the least with this
cogitation, that once yet the matter would have an end. But now (says this good
man) this word Never, breaks his heart, when he thinks on it, and that after
a hundred thousand millions of worlds there suffered, he has as far to his end
as he had at the first day of his entrance to these torments. Consider (good
Christian) what a length one hour would seem unto thee, if thou had but to
hold thy hand in fire and brimstone, only during the space thereof. We see, if
a man be greevouslie sik, though he be laid upon a very soft bed, yet one
night seems a long time unto him. He turns and tosseth himself from side
to side, telling the clok, and counting every hour, as it passes, which
seems to him a whole day. And if a man should say unto him, that he were to
abide that pain but seven years together: he would go nigh to despair for
grief. Now if one night seem so long and tedious to him that lies on a good
soft bed, afflicted only with a little agu: what will the lieng in fire and
brimstone do, when he shall know evidentlie, that he shall never have end thereof?
Oh (deer brother (the sacietie of continuance is lothsom, even in things that
are not evil of themselves. If thou should be bound alwais to eat one only
meat: it would be displeasant to thee in the end. If thou should be bound to
sit still al thy life in one place without moving: it would be greevous unto
thee; albeit no man did torment thee in that place. What then will it be to lie
eternally, that is, world without end, in most exquisite torments? Is it any
way tolerable? What judgment then, what wit, what discretion is there left in
men, which make no more account of this matter than they do?

Darkness in hell.
20 I might here ad another circumstance which the scripture adds; to wit,
that al these torments shall be in darkness: Mat. 8.22.
a thing dreadful of it self unto man's nature. For there is not the stoutest
man in the world, if he found himself alone, and naked in extreme darkness, and
should hear a noise of spirits coming toward him, but he would fear, albeit
he felt never a lash from them on his body. Derision.
I might also ad another circumstance, that the prophet adds; which is, Psalm.
36.
that God and good men shall laugh at them that day, which will be no small
affliction. For as to be moved by a man's frind in time of adversity, is some
comfort: so to be laughed at, especially by him who only may help him, is a
great and intolerable increase of his misery.

21 And now all this that I have spoken of hitherto, is but one part of a damned
man's punishment only, called by Divines; Poena sensus: The pain of sense or
feeling; that is, the pain or punishment sensibly inflicted upon the soul and
body. But yet besides this, there is another part of his punishment, called
Poena damni: The pain of loss or damage: Pains of damnage which the damned
suffer.
which by all learned men's opinion) is either greater, or no less than the
former. And this is the infinite loss which a damned man has, in being
excluded for ever and ever from the sight of his creator, and his glory. Which
sight only, being sufficient to make happy and blessed al them that are
admitted unto it, must needs be an infinite misery to the damned man to lak
that eternally. And therefore this is put as one of the first and cheifest
plaegs to be laid upon him; Tollatur impius, ne videat gloriam dei: Let the
wicked man be taken away to hell, Esai. 26.
to the end he may not see the glory of God. And this loss contains al
other losses and damages in it: as the loss of eternal bliss, and joy (as I
have said (of eternal glory, of eternal society with the Angels, and the
like: which losses when a damned man considers (as he can not but consider
them still) he takes more greef thereof (as Divines do hold) than by all the
other sensible torments that he abides besides.

22 Whereunto apperteineth the worm of conscience: in scripture so called, for
that, The worm of conscience.
as a worm lies eating and gnawing the wood wherein she abides: Mar. 9. Esai.
66. Eccle. 7^ Iudit. 6.
so shall the remorse of our own conscience lie within us, griping and
tormenting us for ever. And this worm or remorse shall principally consist in
bringing to our minds, all the means and causes of our present extreme
calamities: as our negligences, whereby we lost the felicity which other men
have gotten. And at every one of these considerations, this worm shall give us
a deadly bit, The cogitations of the damned.
even unto the heart. As when it shall lay before us all the occasions that we had
offered to avoid this misery, wherein now we are fallen, and to have gotten the
glory which we have lost: how easy it had been to have done it: how nigh we
were oftentimes to resolve our selves to do it; and yet how ungratiously we
left of that cogitation again: how many times we were foretold of this danger,
and yet how little care and fear we took of the same: how vain the worldly
trifles were, wherein we spent our time, and for which we lost heaven, and fell
into this intolerable misery: how they are exalted whom we thought fools in
the world: and how we are now prooved fools and laughed at, which thought our
selves wise. These things (I say) and a thousand mo being laid before us by
our own conscience, shall yield us infinite greef; for that it is now too late
to amend the^. And this greef is called the worm or remorse of our own
conscience: which worm shall more enforce men to weep and houl, than any torment
else, considering how negligentlie, foolishlie, and vainlie, they are come into
those so insupportable torments, and that now there is no more time to redress
their errors.

23 Now only is the time of weeping and lamenting for these men: but al in
vain. Now shall they begin to fret and fume, and marvel at themselves, saying:
Where was our wit? Where was our understanding? Where was our judgment, when
we followed vanities, and contemned these matters? This is the talk of sinners
in hell (says the scripture; Sap. 5.
) What has our pride, or what has the glory of our riches profited us? They
are al now vanished like a shadow: we have wearied out our selves in the way of
iniquity and perdition, but the way of the Lord we have not known. This (I
say) must be the everlasting song of the damned worm-eaten conscience in hell:
eternal repentance, without profit. Whereby he shall be brought to such
desperation (as the scripture notes) as he shall turn into fury against
himself, tear his own flesh, rent his own soul (if it were possible) and
invite the feends to torment him, seeing he has so beastly behaved himself
in this world, as not to provide in time, for this principal matter, only
(indeed) to have been thought upon. Oh if he could have but another life to
live in the world again, how would he pass it over? With what diligence? With
what severitie? But it is not lawful: we only which are yet alive have that
singular benefit, if we know it, or would resolve our selves to make the most of
it. One of these dais, we shall be past it also, and shall not recover it again,
no not one hour, if we would give a thousand worlds, for the same, as indeed
the damned would do, if they might. Let us now therefore so use the benefit of
our present time, as when we are past hence, we have not need to wish our
selves here again.

24 Now is the time we may avoid al: now is the time we may put our selves out
of danger of these matters: now (I say) if we resolve our selves out of hand.
For we know not what shall become of us to morrow: it may be to morrow our hearts
will be as hard and careless of these things, as they have been heretofore, and
as Pharao his heart was, after Moises departure from him. Oh that he had
resolved himself thoroughlie while Moises was with him, how happy had he
been? If the rich glutton had taken the time while he was in prosperity, how
blessed a man had he been? He was foretold of his misery (as we are now) by
Moises and the prophets, Luc. 16.
as Christ signifies: but he would not hear. Afterward he was in such
admiration of his own folly, that he would have had Lazarus sent from Abraham's
bosom unto his brethren to warn them of his success. But Abraham told him, it
was bootlesse, for they would not have believed Lazarus, but rather have
persecuted him as a liar, and defamer of their honorable brother dead, if he
should have come and told them of his torments. Indeed so would the wicked of
the world do now, if one should come and tell them, that their parents or frinds
are damned in hell, for such and such things: and do beseech them to look better
to their lives, to the end by their coming thither, they do not increase the
others pains, for being some cause of their damnation (for this is only the
cause of care which the damned have toward the living, and not for any love
they now bear them) if (I say) such a message should come from hell, to the
flourishing sinners of this world, would they not laugh at it? Would they not
persecute eagarlie the parties that should bring such news: what then can God
devise to do for the saving of these men? What way, what means may he take,
when neither warning, nor example of others, nor threats, nor exhortations will
do any good? We know, or may know, that leading the life which we do, we can
not be saved. We know, or ought to know, that many before us have been damned
for less matters. We know, and can not choose but know, that we must shortly
die, and receave our selves, as they have received living as they did, or
worse. We see by this laid down before, that the pains are intolerable, and
yet eternal, which do expect us for the same. We confess them most miserable,
that for any pleasure or commodity of this world, are now fallen into those
pains. What then should let us to resolve, to dispatch our selves quiklie of al
impediments? To break violently from al bonds and chains of this wicked world,
that do let us from this true and zealous service of God? Why should we sleep
one night in sin, seeing that night may chance to be our last, and so the
everlasting cutting off, of al hope for the time to come?

25 Resolve thy self therefore (my deer brother) if thou be wise, and clear thy
self from this danger, while God is willing to receive thee, and mooveth thee
thereunto by these means, as he did the rich man by Moises and the prophets
while he was yet in his prosperity. Let his example be often before thine
eyes, and consider it thoroughly, and it shall do thee good. God is a wonderful
God, and to show his patience and infinite goodness, he wooeth us in this life,
seeks unto us, and lays himself (as it were) at our feet, to moove us to
our own good, to win us, to draw us, and to save us from perdition. But after
this life he alters his course of dealing: he turns over the leaf, and
changes his style. Of a lamb, he becomes a lion to the wicked: and of a
savior, a just and severe punisher. What can be said, or don more to moove us?
He that is forewarned, and sees his own danger, before his face, and yet is
not stirred, nor made the more wary or fearful thereby, but notwithstanding will
come or slide into the same: may well be pitied, but surely by no means can he
be helped, making himself incapable of al remedies, that may be used.

CHAP. X. Of the most honorable and munificent rewards proposed to al them that
truly serve God.
THE reasons and considerations laid down before, in the former chapters might
well suffice, to stir up the heart of any reasonable Christian, to take in hand
this resolution, whereof we talk, and whereunto I so much covet to persuade thee
(for thy only good and gain) gentle reader. But for that al hearts are not of
one constitution in this respect, nor al drawn and stirred with the same means:
I purpose to adjoin here a consideration of commodity, whereunto commonly, each
man is prone by nature. And therefore I am in hope it shall be more forcible to
that we go about, than any thing else that hitherto has been spoken. I mean
then to treat of the benefits which are reaped by service of God, of the gain
drawn thence, and of the good pay and most liberal reward which God performs
to his servants, God the best pay master.
above all the masters created, that may be served. And though the just fear of
punishment (if we serve him not) might be sufficient to drive us to this
resolution: and the infinite benefits already received, induce us to the same,
in respect of gratitude (of both which somewhat has been said before:) yet am I
content so far to enlarge this liberty to thee (good reader) that except I
show this resolution, which I crave to be more gainful and profitable than any
thing else in the world that can be thought of: thou shall not be bound unto it
for any thing that hitherto has been said in that behalf. For as God in all
other things is a God of great majesty, full of bounty, liberality, and
princely magnificence; so is he in this point above al other: in such sort, as
albeit whatsoever we do, or can do, is but du det unto him, and of it self
deserves nothing: yet of his munificent majesty, he lets pass no one jot
of our service unrewarded, Mat. 10. Mark. 9.
no not so much as a cup of cold water.

2 God commanded Abraham to sacrifice unto him his only son Isaac, Genesis 22.
which he loved so much: but when he was ready to do the same, God said; Do it
not: it is enough for me that I see thine obedience. And because thou have not
refused to do it, I swear to thee (says he) by my self, that I will multiply
thy seed as the stars of heaven, and the sands of the sea: and among them also
one shall be Christ, the Savior of the world. Was not this a good pay for so
little pains? 2. Reg. 7.
King David one night, began to think with himself, that he had now an house
of Cedar, and the Ark of God lay but under a tent, and therefore resolved to
build an house for the said Ark. Which only cogitation God took in so good
part, as he sent Nathan the prophet unto him presently, to refuse the thing,
but yet to tell him, that for so much as he had determined such a matter: God
would build an house, or rather a kingdom, to him, and his posterity, which
should last for ever, Psalm. 88.
and from which he would never take away his mercy, what sins or offenses
soever they committed. Which promise we see now fulfilled, in Christ his
church, raised out of that family. What should I recite many like examples?
Christ gives a general note hereof, when he calls the workmen and paieth to
each man his wages, so duly: Mat. 20. Apo. 22.
as also when he says of himself; Behold, I come quickly, and my reward is
with me. By which places is evident, that God suffers no labor in his service
to be lost or unpaid. And albeit (as after in place conveneent shall be showed)
he paieth also, and (that abundantly) in this life: yet (as by those two
examples appears) he deferreth his chief pay, unto his coming in the end of
the day, that is, after this life, in The resurrection of the just: Luc. 14.
as himself says in another place.

3 Of this payment then reserved for Gods servants in the life to come, we are
now to consider; what, and what manner a thing it is, and whether it be worth
so much labor and travel, as the service of God requires or no. And first of
al, Mat. 25. 2. Tim. 4. 2. Pet. 1. Luc. 14.
if we will believe the holy scripture, calling it a kingdom, an heavenly
kingdom, an eternal kingdom, a most blessed kingdom: we must needs confess
it to be a marvelous great reward? For that worldly princes do not use to give
kingdoms to their servants for recompense of their labors. And if they did, or
were able to do it: yet could it be neither heavenly nor eternal, nor a blessed
kingdom. Secondly, if we credit that which S. Paul says of it; 1. Cor. 2.
Esai. 64.
That neither eye has seen, nor ear heard, nor heart of man conceived. How
great a matter it is: then must we yet admit a greater opinion thereof, for that
we have seen many woonderful things in our dais; we have heard more
woonderful; we may conceive most woonderful, and almost infinite. How then shall
we come to understand the greatness and valu of this reward? Surely no tongue
created, either of man or Angel, can express the same: no imagination
conceive; no understanding comprehend it, Apoc. 2.20.
Christ himself has said; Nemo scit, nisi qui accipit: No man knows it, but
he that enioieth it. And therefore he calls it Hidden manna, in the same
place. Notwithstanding, as it is reported of a learned Geometrician, that
finding the length of Hercules foot, upon the hill Olympus, drew out his whole
body, by the proportion of that one part: so we by some thing set down in
scripture, and by some other circumstances agreeing thereunto, may frame a
conjecture of the matter, though it come far behind the thing it self.

4 I have showed before how the scripture calls it an heavenly, an
everlasting, and a most blessed kingdom: whereby is signified, that al must be
kings that are admitted thither. To like effect it is called in other places, A
crown of glory, a throne of majesty, a paradise, Apo. 2. and 3. Mat. 16. Luc.
10.
or place of pleasure, a life everlasting. Saint John the Evangelist being in
his banishment, by special privilege, made privy to some knowledge and feling
thereof, as well for his own comfort, as for ours, takes in hand to describe it,
by comparison of a city: affirming, that the whole city was of pure gold, Ap.
21. and 22
The description of paradise.
with a great and high wall of the precious stone, called Iaspis. This wall had
also twelve foundations, made of twelve distinct precious stones, which he
there names: also twelve gates made of twelve rich stones, called Margarits;
and every gate was an entire margarit. The streets of the city were paved with
gold, interlaid also with pearls and precious stones. The light of the city
was the cleernes and shining of Christ himself, sitting in the midst
thereof: from whose seat proceeded a river of water, as clear as cristal, to
refresh the city: and on both sides of the banks, there grew the tree of life,
giving out continual and perpetual fruit: there was no night in that city, nor
any defiled thing entered there: but they which are within shall reign (says
he) for ever and ever.

5 By this description of the most rich and precious things that this world
has, S. John would give us to understand the infinite valu, glory, and
majesty of this felicity, prepared for us in heaven: though (as I have noted
before) it being the princely inheritance of our Savior Christ, Heb. 1. Mat.
13.
the kingdom of his father, the eternal habitation of the holy Trinity
prepared before al worlds, to set out the glory, and express the power of him
that has no end or measure, either in power or glory: we may very well think
with Saint Paul, that neither tongue can declare it, nor heart imagine it.

6 When God shall take upon him to do a thing for the uttermost declaration (in
a certain sort) of his power, wisdom, and majesty: imagine you, what a thing
it will be. It pleased him at a certain time, The creation of Angels.
to make certain creatures to serve him in his presence, and to be witnesses of
his glory: and thereupon with a Great excellency of gifts may be ascribed unto
them: but not perfection.
perfection, so strange and woonderful, as makes man's understanding astonished
to think of it. For as for their number they were almost infinite, passing the
number of all the creatures of this inferior world, as diverse learned men, and
some ancient fathers do think: though Daniel (according to the fashion of the
scripture) do put a certain number for an uncertain, Dan. 1.
when he says of Angels; A thousand thousands did minister unto him (that is,
unto God) and ten thousand times an hundred thousand, Psa. 113.
did stand about him to assist. And for their perfection of nature, it is such
(being, as the scripture says, spirits, and like burning fire) as they far
surpas al inferior creatures, in natural knowledge, power, and the like. What
an infinite majesty does this argu in the creator?

7 After this, The creation of the world, to express the power of God.
when many of these Angels were fallen: it pleased God to create another
creature, far inferior to this, for to We may not well restrein the purpose of
God only to this: besides that, it may be dowted likewise, by what warrant that
opinion does stand.
fill up the places of such as had fallen: and thereupon created man of a piece
of clay, as you know, appointing as the hundred part thereof, is not employed by
man, but only remains to show the full hand, and strong arm of the creator.
And all this (as I said) was done in an instant, with one word only: and that
for the use of a small time, in respect of the eternity to come. What then shall
we imagine that the habitation prepared for that eternity shall be? If the
cottage of his meanest servant (and that made only for a time, to bear off as
it were a shower of rain) be so princely, so gorgeous, so magnificent, so full
of majesty, as we see this world is: what must we think that the kings palace
it self is, appointed for all eternity; for him and his frinds, to reign
together? We must needs think it to be as great, as the power and wisdom of
the maker could reach unto, to perform: and that is, incomparable, and above al
measure infinite. The great king Assuerus, Ester. 1.
which reigned in Asia over an hundred twenty and seven provinces, to discover
his power and riches to his subjects, made a feast (as the scripture says) in
his city of Susa, to al princes, states, and potentates, of his dominions, for
an hundred and fourscore days together. Esai. 25.
Esaias the prophet says, that our God and Lord of hosts, will make a solemn
banquet to al his people upon the hill and mount of heaven, and that an harvest
banquet of fat meats, and pure wines. And this banquet shall be so solemn, Luc. 12.
as the very Son of God himself chief Lord of the feast, shall be content to
gird himself, and to serve in the same, as by his own words he promises. What
manner of banquet then shall this be? How magnificent? How full of majesty?
Especially seeing it has not only to endure a hundred and fourscore dais (as
that of Assuerus did) but more than a hundred and fourscore millions of ages:
not served by men (as Assuerus feast was) but by Angels and the very Son of
God himself: not to open the power and riches of a hundred twenty and seven
provinces, but of God himself, King of kings, and Lord of lords, whose power
and riches are without end, and greater than al his creatures together can
conceive? How glorious a banquet shall this be then? How triumphant a joy of this
festival day? O miserable and foolish children of men, that are born to so rare
and singular a dignity, and yet can not be brought to consider, love, or
esteem of the same!

8 Other such considerations there be to show the greatness of this felicity:
as that, The pleasures and commodities of this life.
if God has given so many pleasures and comfortable gifts in this life (as we
see are in the world) being a place notwithstanding of banishment, a place of
sinners, a vale of misery, and the time of repenting, weeping, and wailing:
what will he do in the life to come, to the just, to his frinds, in the time of
joy, Apo. 19.
and marriage of his Son? In soliloquijs animae ad Deum.
This was a most forcible consideration with good Saint Augustine, who in the
secret speech of his soul with God, said thus: O Lord if thou for this vile
body of ours, give us so great and innumerable benefits, from the firmament,
from the air, from the earth, from the sea: by light, by darkness, by heat, by
shadow: by dews, by showers, by winds, by rains: by birds, by fishes, by
beasts, by trees: by multitude of herbs, and variety of plants, and by the
ministry of al thy creatures. O sweet Lord what manner of things, how great,
how good, and how innumerable are those which thou have prepared in our
heavenly country, where we shall see thee face to face? If thou do so great
things for us in our prison: what will thou give us in our palace? If thou
give so many things in this world, to good and evil men together: what have
thou laid up for only good men in the world to com? If thine enemies and
frinds together are so well provided for in this life: what shall thy only frinds
receive in the life to come? If there be so great solaces in these dais of
tears: what joy shall there be in that day of marriage? Apo. 19.
If our jail contein so great matters: what shall our country and kingdom do?
Psalm 30.
O my Lord and God, thou art a great God; And great is the multitude of thy
magnificence and sweetness. And as there is no end of thy greatness, nor number
of thy wisdom, nor measure of thy benignity: so is there neither end, number,
nor measure of thy rewards, toward them that love and fight for thee. Hitherto
Saint Augustine.

9 Another way to conjecture of this felicity is, How much God honoreth man.
to consider the great promises which God makes in the scriptures, to honor
and glorify man in the life to come; 1. Reg. 2. Psa. 138.
Whosoever shall honor me (says God) I will glorify him. And the prophet David
as it were complains joifullie, that Gods frinds were so much honored by him.
Which he might with much more cause have said, if he had lived in the new
testament, and had heard that promise of Christ whereof I spoke before, that his
servants should sit down and banquet, Luc. 12.
and that himself would serve and minister unto them in the kingdom of his
father. What understanding can conceive, how great this honor shall be? But yet
in some part it may be gessed, by that he says, Mat. 19. Luc. 22.
that they shall sit in judgment with him: and (as Saint Paul adds) shall be
judges not only of men, but also of Angels. 1. Cor. 6.
It may also be conjectured by the exceeding great honor, which God at certain
times has done to his servants, even in this life. Mat. 10.
Wherein notwithstanding they are placed to be despised, and not to be honored.
What great honor was it that he did to Abraham in the sight of so many kings of
the earth, as of Pharao, Abimelech, Genesis 12.14.20. Exodus 5.6.7.8.
Melchisedech, and the like? What honor was that he did to Moises and Aaron in
the face of Pharao and al his court, by the woonderful signs that they
wrought? What excessive honor was that he did to holy Iosue, Iosu. 10.
when in the sight of al his army, he stayed the sun and moon in the midst of
the firmament, at Iosue his appointment, obeing therein (as the scripture says)
to the voice of a man? What honor was that he did to Esaias in the sight of king
Ezechias, Esai. 38.
when he made the sun to go bak ten degrees in the heavens? What honor was that
he did to Helias in the sight of wicked Achab, 3. Re. 17.
when he yielded the heavens into his hands, and permitted him to say, that
neither rain, nor dew should fall upon the ground (for certain years) but by the
words of his mouth only? What honor was that he did to Elizeus in the sight of
Naaman the noble Syrian, 4. Reg. 5.
whom he cured only by his word from the leprosy: and his bones after his
death, 4. Re. 13.
raised (by only touching) the dead to life? Finally (not to allege mo
examples herein) what singular honor was that, he gave to all the Apostles of
his Son, that as many as ever they laid hands on, Acts. 5. Acts. 19.
were healed from al infirmities, as Saint Luke says? Nay (which is yet more)
the very girdles and napkins of Saint Paul did the same effect; and yet more
than that also, as many as came within the only shadow of Saint Peter were
healed from their diseases. Act. 5.
Is not this marveilous honor, even in this life? Was there ever monarch,
prince, or potentate of the world, which could vaunt of such points of honor?
And if Christ did this, even in this world to his servants, John. 18.
whereof notwithstanding he says his kingdom was not: what honor shall we think
he has reserved for the world to come, 2. Tim. 4. Apoc. 4.
where his kingdom shall be, and where al his servants shall be crowned as kings
with him?

10 Another declaration yet of this matter is laid down by Divines for opening
of the greatness of this beatitude in heaven: The three places whereto a man is
appointed.
and that is, the consideration of three places, whereto man by his creation is
appointed. The first is his mothers womb, the second this present world, the
third is Coelum Empireum, which is, the place of bliss in the life to come.
Now in these three places, we It is rather a conjecture, tha^ grounded upon any
sufficient warrant, to set down so just a proportion herin.
must hold the proportion besides. And as much horror as a man would have, to
turn into his mothers womb again: so much would a glorified soul have, to
return into this world again. The nine months also of life in the mothers womb,
are not so little in respect of man's life in the world, as is the longest life
upon earth, in respect of the eternal in heaven. Nor the blindness, ignorance,
and other miseries of the child in his mothers womb, are any way comparable to
the blindness, ignorance, and other miseries of this life, in respect of the
light, clear knowledge, and other felicities of the life to come. So that by
this also, some conjecture may be made of the matter which we have in hand.

Two parts of felicity in heaven.
11 But yet to consider the thing more in particular, it is to be noted, that
this glory of heaven shall have two parts: the one belonging to the soul; the
other belonging to the body. That which belongs to the soul, consists in
the vision of God, as shall be showed after: that which belongs to the body,
That which concerns the body.
consists in the change and glorification of our flesh, after the general
resurrection, that is, whereby this corruptible body of ours, shall put on
incorruption (as Saint Paul says) and of mortal, 1. Cor. 15.
become immortal. All this flesh (I say) of ours, that now is so combersom, Sap.
9. Ephesians. 4.
and greeveth the mind; that now is so infested with so many inconveniences;
subject to so many mutations; vexed with so many diseases; defiled with so many
corruptions; replenished with so infinite miseries and calamities, shall then be
made glorious, and most perfect to endure for ever, without mutation, and to
reign with the soul, world without end. For it shall be delivered from this
lumpish hevines, wherewith it is pestered in this life: from al diseases
likewise and pains of this life, and from al trobles and incombrances belonging
to the same, as sin, eating, drinking, sleeping, and such like. And it shall be
set in a most flourishing estate of health, never deceaveable again. So
flourishing, that our Savior Christ says; Mat. 15.
that At that day shall the just shine as the sun in the kingdom of their
father. A marvelous saying of Christ, and in humane sense almost incredible,
that our putrified bodies should shine and become as clear as the sun. Whereas
in the contrary part, the bodies of the damned shall be as blak and uglie, as
filth it self. So likewise all the senses together, finding then their proper
objects, in much more excellency than ever they could in this world (as shall
be showed after) even every part, sense, member, and joint, shall be
replenished with singular comfort, as the same shall be tormented in the damned.
I will here allege Anselmus his words; for that they express lively this
matter. All the glorified body (says he) shall be filled with abundance of al
kind of pleasure, the eyes, Cap. 57.
the ears, the nose, the mouth, the hands, the throat, the lungs, the heart,
the stomak, the bak, the bones, the marrow, the entrals, themselves, and every
part thereof shall be replenished with such unspeakable sweetness and pleasure,
that truly it may be said, that The whole man is made to drink of the river of
Gods divine pleasures, Psalm. 35.
and made dronken with the abundance of Gods house. Besides al which, it has
perpetuity; whereby it is made sure now, never to die, or alter from his
felicity, according to the saying of scripture, that The just shall live for
ever. Which is one of the cheifest prerogatives of a glorified body; Sap. 5.
for that by this, al care and fear is taken away, al danger of hurt and
noiance remooved from us.

That which concerns the soul.
12 But now to come to that point of this felicity, which pertains to the
soul, as the principal part, it is to be understood, that albeit there be many
things that do concur in this felicity, for the accomplishment and perfection
of happiness: yet the fountain of al is but one only thing, called by divines;
Visio Dei beatifica: The sight of God that makes us happy? Haec sola est
summum bonum nostrum, says Saint Augustine: This only sight of God, is our
happiness. Aug. 1. de Tri. ca. 13.
Which Christ also affirms, when he says to his father; This is life
everlasting, John. 17.
that men know the true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. Saint Paul
also puts our felicity, 1. Cor. 13.
In seeing God face to face. And S. John, In seeing God, as he is. And the
reason of this is, for that all the pleasures and contentations in the world,
being only sparkles and parcels sent out from God: they are al contained much
more perfectly and excellently in God himself, than they are in their own
natures created: as also all the perfections of his creatures are more fully in
him, than in themselves. Whereof it follows, that whosoever is admitted to the
vision and presence of God, he has all the goodness and perfection of creatures
in the world united together, and presented unto him at once. So that
whatsoever deliteth either body or soul, there he enjoieth it wholly knit up
together as it were in one bundle, and with the presence thereof, is ravished in all parts both of mind and body: as he cannot imagine, think, or wish for any
joy whatsoever, but there he finds it in his perfection: there he finds al
knowledge, al wisdom, al beauty, al riches, al nobility, al goodness, al
delight, and whatsoever beside either deserves love and admiration, or works
pleasure or contentation. All the powers of the mind shall be filled with this
sight, presence, and fruition of God: all the senses of our body shall be
satisfied: God shall be the universal felicity of al his saints, containing in
himself al particular felicities, without end, number, or measure. He shall be
a glass, to our eyes; musik, to our ears; honey, to our mouths; most sweet and
pleasant balm, to our smell; he shall be light, to our understanding;
contentation, to our will; continuation of eternity to our memory. In him shall
we enjoy all the variety of times, that delight us here; all the beauty of
creatures that allure us here; all the plesures and joies that content us here.
Hug. lib. 4. de anima, cap. 15.
In this vision of God (says one Doctor) we shall know; we shall love; we shall
rejoice; we shall praise. We shall know the very secrets and judgments of God,
which are a depth without bottom. Also the causes, Knowledge.
natures, beginnings, ofsprings, and ends of al creatures. Psalm. 35.
We shall love incomparably, Love.
both God (for the infinite causes of love that we see in him) and our
companions as much as our selves, for that we see them as much loved of God as
our selves: and that also for the same, for which we are loved. Whereof insueth,
that our joy shall be without measure: both for that we shall have a particular
joy for every thing we love in God (which are infinite) and also for that, The
greatness of joy in heaven.
we shall rejoice at the felicity of every one of our companions, as much as
at our own, and by that means we shall have so many distinct felicities, as we
shall have distinct companions in our felicity: which being without number, it
is no marvel though Christ said; Mat. 25.
Go into the joy of the Lord. And not, let the Lords joy enter into thee: for
that no one heart created can receive the fulness and greatness of this joy.
Heerof it follows lastly, that we shall praise God without end or wearines,
with all our heart; with all our strength; with all our powers; with all our parts:
according as the scripture says; Happy are they that live in thy house (O
Lord) for they shall praise thee eternally without end. Psalm. 83.


13 Of this most blessed vision of God, Tra. 4. in ep. Ioh.
the holy father Saint Austen writes thus; Happy are the clean of heart: Mat.
5.
for they shall see God (says our Savior) then is there a vision of God (deer
brethren) which makes us happy: a vision (I say) which neither eye has seen
in this world, nor ear has heard, nor heart conceived. A vision, that passes
all the beauty of earthly things, of gold, of silver, of woods, of fields, of
sea, of air, of sun, of moon, of stars, of Angels: for that al these things
have their beauty from thence; 1. Cor. 3.
We shall see him face to face (says the Apostle) And we shall know him, as we
are known. Aug. c. 36. soliloq.
We shall know the power of the Father: we shall know the wisdom of the Son, 1.
Cor. 13.
we shall know the goodness of the holy Ghost: we shall know the indivisible
nature of the most blessed Trinity. And this seeing of the face of God* is the
joy of angels, and al saints in heaven. This is the reward of life everlasting;
this is the glory of blessed spirits; their everlasting pleasure; their crown
of honor; their game of felicity; their rich rest; their beautiful place;
their inward and outward joy; their divine paradise; their heavenly Jerusalem;
their felicity of life; their fulness of bliss; their eternal joy; their peace
of God, that passes al understanding. Psalm. 4.
This sight of God, is the full beatitude, the total glorification of man, to
see him (I say) that made both heaven and earth, to see him that made thee,
that redeemed thee, that glorified thee. For in seeing him, thou shall possess
him; in possessing him, thou shall love him; in loving him, thou shall praise
him. For he is the inheritance of his people; he is the possession of their
felicity; he is the reward of their expectation. I will be thy great reward
(says he) to Abraham. Genesis 15.
O Lord, thou art great, and therefore no marvel if thou be a great reward. The
sight and fruition of thee therefore is al our hire, al our reward, al our joy
and felicity, that we expect: seeing thou have said, that This is life
everlasting, John. 17.
to see and know thee our true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent.

14 Having now declared the two general parts of heavenly felicity, the one
appertaining to our soul, the other to our body: it is not hard to esteem,
what excess of joy, both of them joined together shall work, at that happy day
of our glorification. O joy above al joies, Cae. 35. soli loquiorum.
passing al joy, and without which there is no joy, when shall I enter into thee
(says Saint Austen) when shall I enjoy thee to see my GOD that dwells in
thee? Phil. 4.
O everlasting kingdom; O kingdom of al eternities; O light without end; O
peace of God that passes al understanding, in which the souls of saints do
rest with thee; And everlasting joy is upon their heads, Esai. 51. Esai. 35.
they possess joy and exultation: and al pain and sorrow is fled from them. O
how glorious a kingdom is thine (O Lord) wherein al saints do reign with thee;
Adorned with light, Psa. 103. Psalm. 20.
as with apparel; and having crowns of precious stones on their heads? O
kingdom of everlasting bliss, where thou, O Lord, the hope of al saints art,
and the diadem of their perpetual glory, rejoising them on every side, with
thy blessed sight. In this kingdom of thine, there is infinite joy, and mirth
without sadness; health, without sorrow; life, without labor; light, without
darkness; felicity, without abatement; al goodness, without any evil. Where youth
florisheth that never waxes old: life, that knows no end: beauty that never
fades: love, that never cools: health, that never diminishes: joy, that
never cease. Where sorrow is never felt; complaint, is never heard; matter of
sadness, is never seen; nor evil success is overfeared. For that they possess
thee (O Lord) which art the perfection of their felicity.

15 If we would enter into these considerations, as this holy man, and other
his like did: no dowt but we should more be inflamed with the love of this
felicity, prepared for us, than we are: and consequently should strive more to
gain it than we do. A comfortable consideration.
And to the end thou may conceive some more feeling in the matter (gentle
reader) consider a little with me, what a joiful day shall that be at thy house,
when having lived in the fear of God, and atchived in his service the end of
thy peregrination, thou shall come (by the means of death) to pass from
misery and labor to immortality: and in that passage (when other men begin
to fear) thou shall lift up thy head in hope, according as Christ promises,
for that the time of thy salvation comes on. Luc. 21.
Tell me, what a day shall that be, when thy soul, stepping forth of prison, and
conducted to the tabernacle of heaven, shall be received there, with the
honorable companies and troops of that place? With all those blessed spirits
mentioned in scripture, Ephesians. 1. Colos. 1. 1. The. 1. Esai. 6.
as principalities, powers, virtues, dominations, thrones, Angels, Archangels,
Cherubins, and Seraphins: also with the holy Apostles and disciples of Christ,
Patriarchs, Prophets, Martyrs, Innocents, Confessors, and Saints of God? Al
which shall triumph now at thy coronation and glorification. Luc. 15.
This must needs be warily taken: otherwise, with the comfort that is sought
thereby, there may be danger of error also.
recital and declaration of al thy good works, and travels suffered for the
love and service of God? When there shall be laid down in that honorable
consistory, al thy virtuous deeds, all the labors that thou have taken in thy
calling; al thy alms; al thy prayers; al thy fasting; al thy innocence of
life; al thy patience in injuries; al thy constancy in adversities; al thy
temperance in meats; all the virtues of thy whole life? When al (I say) shall be
recounted there, al commended, al rewarded: shall thou not see now the valor
and profit of virtuous life? Shall thou not confess, that gainful and
honorable is the service of God? Shall thou not now be glad, and bless the
hour, wherein first thou resolvest thy self to leave the service of the world,
to serve God? Shall thou not think thy self beholding to him or her, that
persuaded thee unto it? Yes verily.

16 But yet (more than this) when as being so near thy passage here, The joy of
security.
thou shall consider into what a port and haven of security, thou art come,
and shall look bak upon the dangers which thou have passed, and wherein other
men are yet in hazard: thy cause of joy shall greatly be increased. For thou
shall see evidentlie how infinite times thou were to perish in that journey, if
God had not held his special hand over thee. Thou shall see the dangers wherein
other men are; the death and damnation wherinto many of thy frinds and
acquaintance have fallen; the eternal pains of hell incurred by many, that used
to laugh, and be merry with thee in the world. Al which shall augment the
felicity of this thy blessed estate. And now for thy self, thou may be
secure, thou art out of al danger for ever and ever. Ios. 21.22.
There is no more need now of fear, of watch, of labor, or of care. Thou may
lay down al armor now, better than the children of Israel might have done, Genesis
3. Sap. 17.
when they had gotten the land of promise? For there is no more enemy to assail
thee; there is no more wily serpent to beguile thee: al is peace; al is rest;
al is joy; al is security. Good Saint Paul has no more need now to labor in
the ministry of the word, 1. Cor. 9.
neither yet to fast, to watch, or to punish his body: Good old Ierom, Ierom
ep. 22. ad Eust.
may now cease to afflict himself both night and day, Apo. 19.
for the conquering of his spiritual enemy. Thy only exercise must be now to
rejoice, to triumph, to sing Halleluias to the lamb, which has brought thee to
this felicity, and will keep thee in the same, world without end. Mat. 2.
What a comfort will it be to see that lamb sitting on his seat of state? If the
wise men of the east, came so far off, and so rejoiced to see him in the
manger: what will it be to see him sitting in his glory? If Saint John Baptist
did leap at his presence in his mothers belly: Luc. 1.
what shall his presence do in this his roial and eternal kingdom? It passes
al other glory that saints have in heaven (says Saint Austen) to be admitted
to the inestimable sight of Christ his face, Sermon. 37. de sanctis.
and to receive the beams of glory, from the brightness of his majesty. And if
we were to suffer torments every day, yea to tolerate the very pains of hell
for a time, thereby to gain the sight of Christ, and to be joined in glory to
the number of his saints: it were nothing in respect of the reward. O that we
made such account of this matter, as this holy and learned man did: we would
not live as we do, nor leese the same for such trifles as most men do.

17 But to go forward yet further in this consideration: imagine besides all this, Meeting with our frinds in heaven.
what a joy it shall be unto thy soul at that day, to meet with all her godly
frinds in heaven, with There be diverse of this mind: but seeing that the
knowledge of father, and mother, and such like is earthly knowledge; and al
earthly knowledge shall then be abolished: I see not how it may be warranted
that we shall then have remembrance or knowledge of any such; saving only as
they are members of one body, and not as our father, kinsman, or frind.
father, with mother, with brothers, with sisters: with wife, Cyp. lib. de
mortalitate.
notes well Saint Cyprian) shall be unspeakable. Ad to this, the daily feasting,
and inestimable triumph, which shall be there, at the arrival of new brethren
and sisters coming thither from time to time, with the spoils of their
enemies, conquered and vanquished in this world. O what a comfortable sight will
it be to see those seats of Angels fallen, filled up again with men and women
from day to day! To see the crowns of glory set upon their heads, and that in
variety, according to the variety of their conquests. One 2. Tim. 4. Apoc.
2.3.4.
for martyrdom or confession, against the persecutor: another for chastity,
against the flesh: another for poverty or humility, against the world:
another for many conquests together, against the devil. There the glorious
company of Apostles (says holy Cyprian) there the number of rejoising
prophets, Lib. de mortalitate.
there the innumerable multitude of martyrs shall receive the crowns of their
deaths and sufferings. There triumphing virgins, which have overcom
concupiscence with the strength of continency: there, the good almers, which
have liberally fed the poor, and (keeping Gods commandments) have transferred
their earthly riches to the storehouse of heaven, shall receive their du and
peculiar reward. O how shall virtue show her self at this day? How shall good
deeds content their doers? And among al other joies and contentations, this
shall not be the least, to see the poor souls that come thither on the sudden
from the miseries of this life, how they (I say) shall remain astonished, and as
it were, beside themselves, at the sudden mutation, and excessive honor done
unto them. If a poor man, A comparison.
that were out of his way, wandering alone upon the mountains in the midst of a
dark and tempestuous night, far from company, destitute of money, beaten with
rain, terrified with thunder, stif with cold, wearied out with labor, almost
famished with hunger and thirst, and near brought to despair with multitude of
miseries, should upon the sudden, in the twinkling of an eye, be placed in a
goodly large and rich palace, furnished with all kind of clear lights, warm
fire, sweet smells, dainty meats, soft beds, pleasant musik, fine apparel, and
honorable company: al prepared for him, and attending his coming, to serve
him, to honor him, and to anoint and crown him a king for ever: what would
this poor man do? How would he look? What could he say? Surely I think he
could say nothing, but rather would weep in silence for joy, his heart being
not able to contain the sudden and exceeding greatness thereof.

18 Well then, so shall it be, and much more with these twice happy souls, that
come to heaven. For never was there cold shadow so pleasant in a hot burning
sunnie day; nor the welspring to the poor traveller in his greatest thirst of
the summer; nor the repose of an easy bed to the wearied servant after his
labor at night: as shall be this rest of heaven to an afflicted soul which
comes thither. O that we could conceave this, that we could imprint this in
our hearts (deer brother) would we follow vanities as we do? Would we neglect
this matter as we do? Surely our coldness in seeking after these joies does
proceed of the small opinion we do conceive of them. For if we made such account
and estimate of this jewel, The great account that saints made of heaven.
as other merchants before us (more skilful, and wiser than our selves) have
done: we would bid for it as they did, or at leastwise would not let it pass
so negligently, which they sought after so carefully. The Apostle says of
Christ himself; Heb. 12.
Proposito sibi gaudio sustinuit crucem: He laieng before his eyes the ioies of
heaven, sustained the cross. A great estimation of the matter, which he would
buy at so deer a rate. But what counsel gives he to other men about the same?
Surely none other, but to Go and sell all that ever they have, Mat. 13.
to purchase this treasure. Saint Paul of himself, what says he? Verelie,
Phil. 3.
that He esteemed all the world as dung: in respect of the purchasing of this
jewel. Saint Paul's scholar Ignatius, Ierom in catalogo.
what bids he? Hear his own words. Fire, galows, beasts, breaking of my
bones, quartering of my members, crushing of my body, all the torments of the
devil together, let them come upon me, so I may enjoy this treasure of heaven.
Ser. 31. de sanctis.
Saint Austen that learned bishop, what offers he? You have now heard before,
that he would be content to suffer torments every day, yea the very torments
of hell it self to gain this joy? Good Lord, how far did these holy saints
differ from us? How contrary were their judgments to ours in these matters?
Who will now marvel of the wisdom of the world, 1. Cor. 1.
judged folly by God, and of the wisdom of God, judged folly by the world? Oh
children of men (says the prophet) why do ye love vanity, 2. and 3. Psalm. 4.
and seek after a lie? Why do you embrace straw, and contemn gold? Straw (I
say) and most vile chaf, and such as finally will set your own house on fire,
and be your ruin and eternal perdition?

19 But now to draw toward an end in this matter (though there be no end in
the thing it self) let the Christian consider whereto he is born, and whereof he
is in possibility, if he will. Whereto a Christian is born by baptism.
He is born heir apparent to the kingdom of heaven, a kingdom without end,
Gal. 3. and 4. Ephesians. 1. and 5. Colos. 3. Titus. 3. Romans 8. Iaco. 2. Heb. 19.
a kingdom without measure, a kingdom of bliss, the kingdom of God
himself: he is born to be joint heir with Jesus Christ the Son of God, to
reign with him: to triumph with him: to sit in judgment of majesty with him:
to judge the very Angels of heaven with him. What more glory can be thought
upon, except it were to become God himself? All the joies, all the riches, all the glory, 1. Pe. 1.3. 2. Pet. 3. Apo. 1. Mat. 19. Luc. 22. 1. Cor. 6.
that heaven contains shall be powered out upon him. And to make this honor yet
more, the glorious lamb that sits on the throne of majesty, with his eyes
like fire, his feet like burning copper, and al his face more shining than
precious stone: from whose seat there proceeds thunder and lightning without
end: and at whose feet the four and twenty elders lay down their crowns: Ap.
1. and 4. Luc. 12.
this lamb (I say) shall rise and honor him with his own service. Who will not
esteem of this roial inheritance? Especially seeing that now we have so good
opportunity to the obteining thereof, by the benefit of our redemption, and
grace purchased to us therein.

20 Tell me now (gentle reader) why will thou not accept of this his offer? Why
will thou not account of this his kingdom? Why will thou not buy this glory
of him for so little a labor as he requires; Apo. 3.
Suadeo tibi emere a me aurum ignitum probatum, vt locuples fias (says Christ)
I counsel thee to buy pure and tried gold of me, to the end thou may be rich.
Why will thou not follow this counsel (deer brother) especially of a merchant
that means not to deceive thee? Nothing greeveth this our Savior more, than
that men will seek with such pains to buy straw in Egypt, Exodus 5.
whereas he would sell them fine gold at a lower price: and that they will
purchase puddle water, with more labor, than he would require for ten times as
much price liquor out of the very fountain it self. Iere. 2. Apo. 21.
There is not the wickedst man in the world; but takes more travel in gaining
of hell (as after shall be showed) than the most painful servant of God in
obteining of heaven.

21 Follow thou not their folly then (deer brother) for thou shall see them
suffer greevously for it one day, The vanity of worldly men.
when thy heart shall be full glad thou have no part among them. Let them go now
and bestow their time in vanity, in pleasures, in delites of the world. Let
them build palaces, purchase dignities, ad pieces and patches of ground
together: let them hunt after honors, and build castles in the air: the day
will come (if thou believe Christ himself) wherein thou shall have small cause to
envy their felicity. Luc. 6. Luc. 12. Mat. 26.
If they talk basely of the glory and riches of saints in heaven, not
esteeming them indeed, in respect of their own, or contemning them, for that
carnal plesures are not rekoned therein: make little account of their words, 1.
Cor. 2. Ep. Iud. A similitude.
for that The sensual man understands not the things which are of God. If
horses were promised by their masters, a good banquet, they could imagine
nothing else but provender and water, to be their best cheer, for that they
have no knowledge of daintier dishes: so these men accustomed to the puddle of
their fleshly pleasures, can mount with their mind no higher than the same. But
I have showed thee before (gentle reader) some wais and considerations, to
conceive greater matters, albeit as I have advertised thee often, we must
confess still, with Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 2.
that no humane heart can conceive the least part thereof: for which cause, also
it is not unlike, 2. Co. 12.
that Saint Paul himself was forbidden to utter the things which he had seen
and heard, in his miraculous assumption unto the third heaven.

22 To conclude then, this game and gole is set up for them that will run, as
Saint Paul notes: 1. Cor. 6. Phil. 3. 2. Ti. 2.1. Titus. 6. Heb. 12. Mat.
7.19.25.
and no man is crowned in this glory, but such only as will fight, as the same
Apostle teaches. It is not every one that says to Christ Lord Lord, that shall
enter into the kingdom of heaven: but they only which do the will of Christ
his father in heaven. Though this kingdom of Christ be set out to al: yet
every man shall not come to reign with Christ; Romans 8. Mat. 11. Mat. 7. and 19.
John. 14. Luc. 14.
but such only, as shall be content to suffer with Christ. Thou art therefore to
sit down, and consider according to thy Saviors counsel, what thou will do,
whether thou have so much spiritual money, as is sufficient to build this
tower; and make this war or no: that is, whether thou have so much good will and
holy manhood in thee, as to bestow the pains of suffering with Christ (if it
be rather to be called pains than pleasure) that so thou may reign with him
in his kingdom. This is the question, this is the very whole issue of the
matter, and hitherto has appertained whatsoever has been spoken in this book
before, either of thy particular end, or of the majesty, bounty, and justice
of God; and of the account he will demand of thee; also of the punishment or
reward laid up for thee. All this (I say) was meant by me to this only end, that
thou measuring the one part, and the other) should finaly resolve what thou
would do, and not to pass over thy time in careless negligence, as many do,
never spieng their own error, until it be too late to amend it.

23 For the love of God then (deer brother) and for the love thou bear to
thine own soul, shake off this dangerous security, which flesh and blood is
wont to lul men in: and make some earnest resolution, for looking to thy soul
for the life to come. Remember often that worthy sentence; Hoc momentum, A
saying to be remembered.
unde pendet aeternitas. This life is a moment of time, whereof al eternity of
life or death, to come, depends. If it be a moment, and a moment of so great
importance: how is it passed over by wordly men, with so little care as it is.

24 I might have alleged here infinite other reasons and considerations to
move men unto this resolution, whereof I have talked: and surely no measure of
volume were sufficient to contein so much as might be said in this matter. For
that all the creatures under heaven, yea and in heaven it self, as also in hell:
al (I say) from the first to the last, are arguments and persuasions unto this
point: al are books and sermons, al do preach and cry (some by their
punishment; some by their glory; some by their beutie; and al by their creation)
that we ought without delay, to make this resolution: and, that al is vanity;
al is folly; al is iniquity; al is misery, beside the only service of our
maker and redeemer. But yet notwithstanding (as I have said) I thought good
only to choose out these few considerations before laid down, as chief and
principal among the rest, to work in any true Christian heart. And if these
cannot enter with thee (good reader) little hope is there that any other would
do thee good. Wherefore here I end this first part, reserving a few things to
be said in the second, for remooving of some impediments, which our spiritual
adversary is wont to cast against this good work, as against the first step
to our salvation. Our Lord God and Savior Jesus Christ, which was content to
pay his own blood for the purchasing of this notable inheritance unto us, give
us his holy grace, to esteem of it as the great weight of the matter
requires, and not by negligence to leese our portions therein.

The end of the first part.
THE SECOND PART OF THIS BOOK.
CHAP. I. Of impediments that let men from this resolution: and first, of the
difficulty or hardness, which seems to many to be in virtuous life.
NOtwithstanding all the reasons and considerations before set down, for
inducing men to this necessary resolution of serving God: there want not many
Christians abroad in the world, Ep. Iud. Romans 1.
whose hearts either entangled with the pleasures of this life, or given over by
God to a reprobate sense, do yield no whit at al to this battery, that has
been made, but showing themselves more hard than adamant, do not only resist
and contemn, Pro. 18. and 20. Psa. 140.
but also do seek excuses for their sloth and wickedness, and do allege
reasons to their own perdition. Reasons I call them, according to the common
phrase, though indeed there be no one thing more against reason, than that a
man should become enemy to his own soul, Tob. 12. Pro. 29.
as the scripture affirms obstinate sinners to be. But yet (as I say) they
have their excuses: and the first and principal of al is, that virtuous life is
painful and hard, and therefore they cannot endure to follow the same:
especially such as have been brought up delicately, and never were acquainted
with such asperitie, as (they say) we require at their hands. And this is a
great, large, and universal impediment, which staieth infinite men from
imbrasing the means of their conversion, for which cause it is fully to be
answered in this place.

2 First then supposing that the way of virtue were so hard indeed, as the
enemy makes it seem: yet might I well say with Saint John Chrysostom, that
seeing the reward is so great, and infinite, Lib. de compunct. cordis.
as now we have declared: no labor should seem great for obteining of the same.
Hom. 16. ex So.
Again, I might say with holy S. Austen; That seeing we take daily so great
pain in this world, for avoiding of small inconveniences, as of siknes,
imprisonments, loss of goods, and the like: what pains should we refuse for
avoiding the eternity of hell fire set down before? The first of these
considerations Saint Paul used, Romans 8.
when he said; The sufferings of this life are not worthy of the glory which
shall be revealed in the next. The second Saint Peter used, when he said; 2.
Pet. 2.
Seeing the heavens must be dissolved, and Christ come to judgment to restore
to every man according to his works: what manner of men ought we to be, in
holy conversation? As who would say: No labor, no pains, no travel ought to
seem hard or great unto us, to the end we might avoid the terror of that day.
Saint Austen asks this question: what we think the rich glutton in hell would
do, Luc. 16.
if he were now in this life again? Would he take pains or no? Would he not
bestir himself, rather than turn into that place of torment again? I might ad
to this, the infinite pains that Christ took for us; the infinite benefits he
has bestowed upon us; the infinite sins we have committed against him; the
infinite examples of saints, that have trodden his path before us: in respect of
al which, we ought to make no bones at so little pains and labor, if it were
true that Gods service were so travelsome as many do esteem it.

3 But now in very deed the matter is nothing so, The way of virtue is not hard.
and this is but a subtle deceit of the enemy for our discouragement. The
testimony of Christ himself is clear in this point; Mat. 12.
Iugum meum suave est, and onus meum leve: My yoke is sweet, and my burden
light. And the deerly beloved disciple Saint John, who had best cause to know
his masters secret herein, says plainly; Mandata eius gravia non sunt: His
commandments are not greevous. What is the cause then, 1. Ioh. 5.
why so many men do conceive such a difficulty in this matter? Surely, The
cause of pretended difficulty.
one cause is (beside the subtlety of the devil, which is the cheifest) for
that men feel the disease of concupiscence in their bodies, but do not
consider the strength of the medicine given us against the same. Ibidem.
They cry with Saint Paul, that They find a law in their members repugning to
the law of their mind (which is the rebellion of concupiscence left in our
flesh by original sin:) but they confess not, or consider not with the same
Saint Paul; That the grace of God, by Jesus Christ, shall deliver them from the
same. 2. Cor. 12.
They remember not the comfortable saying of Christ to Saint Paul, in his
greatest temptations; Sufficit tibi gratia mea: My grace is sufficient to
strengthen thee against them al. 4. Reg. 6.
These men do as Helizeus his disciple did, who casting his eyes only upon his
enemies, that is, upon the huge army of the Sirians ready to assault him,
thought himself lost, and unpossible to stand in their sight, until by the
prayers of the holy prophet, he was permitted from God, to see the Angels that
stood there present to fight on his side, and then he well perceived that his
part was the stronger.

The force of grace, for the easing of virtuous life.
4 So these men, beholding only our miseries and infirmities of nature, whereby
daily tentations do rise against us: do account the battle painful, and the
victory unpossible, having not tasted indeed, nor ever prooved (through their
own negligence) the manifold helps of grace, and spiritual succors, which God
alwais sends to them, who are content (for his sake) to take this conflict in
hand. Saint Paul had well tasted that aid, which having rekoned up all the
hardest matters that could be, adds; Sed in his omnibus superamus propter eum
qui dilexit nos: But we overcome in all these combats, Romans 8.
by his assistance that loves us. And then falls he to that woonderful
protestation: that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor the like, should
separate him: and all this upon the confidence of spiritual aid from Christ,
Phil. 4.
whereby he sticks not to avouch; That he could do al things. David also had
prooved the force of this assistance, who said; I did run the way of thy
commandments, Psa. 118.
when thou did enlarge my heart. This enlargement of heart, was by spiritual
consolation of internal unction, whereby the heart drawn together by anguish, is
opened and enlarged when grace is powered in: even as a dry purse is softened
and enlarged by anointing it with oil. Which grace being present, David said,
he did not only walk the way of Gods commandments easily, but that he ran
them: even as a cart wheel which cries and complains, under a small burden
being dry, runs merrily and without noise, when a little oil is put unto it.
Which thing aptly expresses our state and condition: who without Gods help,
are able to do nothing, but with the aid thereof, are able to do whatsoever he
now requires of us.

5 And surely I would ask these men that imagine the way of Gods law to be so
hard and full of difficulty, how the prophet could say; I have taken pleasure
(O Lord) in the way of thy commandments as in all the riches of the world. Psa.
118.
And in another place; Psalm. 18.
That they were more pleasant and to be desired, than gold or precious stone,
and more sweeter than honey, or the honey comb? By which words he yields to
virtuous life, not only du estimation above al treasures in the world; but also
pleasure, delight, and sweetness: thereby to confound al those that abandon and
forsake the same, upon idle, pretensed, and fained difficulties. Ioh. 10. Romans
5. Heb. 6.
And if David could say thus much in the old law: how much more justly may we
say so now in the new, when grace is given more abundantly, as the scripture
says? And thou poor Christian which deceivest thy self with this
imagination: tell me, why came Christ into this world? Why labored he, and why
took he so much pains here? Why shed he his blood? Why prayed he to his father
so often for thee: Why appointed he the sacraments as conduits of grace? Why
sent he the holy Ghost into the world? What signifies this word Gospel or
good tidings? What means the word grace, and mercy brought with him? What
imports the comfortable name of Jesus? Mat. 1.
Is not all this to deliver us from sin? From sin past (I say) by his only
death: From sin to come, by the same death, and by the assistance of his holy
grace, bestowed on us more abundantly than before, by all these means? Was not
this one of the principal effects of Christ his coming, as the prophet noted;
That craggy wais should be made straight, Esai. 40. Esai. 11. and vide Ier.
ibid.
and hard wais plain? Was not this the cause why he endued his church with so
many blessed gifts of the holy Ghost, Amb. lib. 1. de sp. 5. c. 20.
and with diverse special graces, to make the yoke of his service sweet; the
exercise of good life, easy; Mat. 5. Luc. 6. Acts. 4. 2. Cor. 4.
the walking in his commandments, pleasant; in such sort, as men might now
sing in tribulations; have confidence in perils; security in afflictions; and
assurance of victory in all temptations? Is not this the beginning, middle, and
end of the Gospel? Were not these the promises of the prophets; the tidings of
the Evangelists; the preachings of the Apostles; the doctrine, belief, Esai.
10.
and practice of al Saints? And finally is not this Verbum abbreviatum: The
word of God abbreviated: wherein do consist all the riches and treasures of
Christianity?

6 And this grace is of such efficacy and force in the soul where it enters,
Of the force of grace.
that it alters the whole state thereof: making those things clear, which were
obscure before; those things easy, which were hard and difficult before. And
for this cause also it is said in scripture, to make a new spirit, and a new
heart. As where Ezechiel talking of this matter, says in the person of God; I
will give unto them a new heart, and will put a new spirit in their bowels, Eze.
11. and 36.
that they may walk in my precepts, and keep my commandments. Can any thing in
the world be spoken more plainly? Now for mortifieng and conquering of our
passions, which by rebellion do make the way of Gods commandments unpleasant.
Saint Paul testifies clearly, that abundant grace is given to us also by the
death of Christ, to do the same: Romans 6.
for he says; This we know that our old man is crucified also, to the end that
the body of sin may be destroyed, and we serve no more unto sin. By the old
man and the body of sin Saint Paul understands our rebellious appetite and
concupiscence, which is so crucified and destroyed by the most noble sacrifice
of Christ, as we may by the grace purchased us in that sacrifice, So prooveth
S. Aust. li. 2. de pecca. merit. cap. 6.
in some good measure resist and conquer this appetite, being freed so much as
we are, from the servitude of sin. And this is that noble and entire victory
(in this world begun, and to be finished in the world to come) which GOD
promised so long ago to every Christian soul by the means of Christ, when he
said: Esai. 41.
Be not afraid, for I am with thee; step not aside, for I thy God have
strengthened thee, and have assisted thee; and the right hand of my just (man)
has taken thy defense. Behold, all that fight against thee shall be confounded
and put to shame: thou shall seek thy rebels, and shall not find them: they
shall be as though they were not, for that I am thy Lord and God.

7 Lo here a full victory promised upon our rebels, by the help of the right
hand of Gods just man, that is upon our disordinate passions, by the aid of
grace from Jesus Christ. And albeit these rebels are not here promised to be
taken clean away, but only to be conquered and confounded: yet is it said; That
they shall be as though they were not. Whereby is signified, that they shall not
hinder us of our salvation, but rather advance and further the same. For as
wild beasts, which of nature are fearce, A similitude.
and would rather hurt than profit mankind; being maistered and tamed, become
very commodious and necessary for our uses: so these rebellious passions of
ours, which of themselves would utterly overthrow us, being once subdued and
mortified by the grace of God, do stand us in singular stead to the practice
and exercise of al kind of The use of passions moderated.
as A special point to be considered, for the rectifieng of one point of
philosophy: which is; that the soul does follow the temperature of the body.
And this do they hold, for that by experience it is commonly seen, that the
disposition of men is such, as the nature of their complexion does seem to
import. For commonly those that are sanguine, are pleasant; those that are
flegmatik, slow; those that are cholerik, earnest; and those that are
melancholy, solitary: and such like. And yet the truth is, that the soul does
not follow, but rather does use such temperature as the body has: and that
very well, and to good use, if the soul be good; but otherwise abuses it il.
For the complexions are indifferent: neither good, nor il of themselves; but as
they are used. But because that most men's souls are il (as we are al by
original corruption) therefore do most men abuse their complexions to il: as
blood, to wantonness; fleam, to slought; choler, to anger; and melancholy, to
secret practices of deceit, or naughtines. Whereas notwithstanding, those souls
that are good, do use them well: as blood, to be valiant, and cheerful in
goodness; fleam, to moderate their affections with sobriety; choler, to be
earnest in the glory of God; and melancholy, to study and contemplation.
Which point notwithstanding might easily be pardoned to philosophers (that hold
many things else as wrong as it) but that this one point of error with them, is
the cause of some others besides in weighty matter. For out of this have some
of our Divines taken their opinion, that the fountain of sin is originally in
the body, and from it derived to the soul: and were the rather induced to
think that the blessed Virgin was her self also conceived without sin, for that
otherwise they did not so plainly see, how Christ taking flesh of her, should
have the same in himself without stein of sin. And of themselves there be that
have dowted of the immortality of the soul, for that supposing the soul to
hang upon the temperature of the body, they did not see how it could be
immortal, when as the temperature and body it self are known to be mortal.
choler or anger, to the inkindeling of zeal; hatred, to the pursuing of sin:
an hautie mind, to the rejecting of the world; love to the embracing of al
great and heroical attempts, in consideration of the benefits received from
God. Beside this, the very conflict and combat it self, in subduing these
passions is left unto us for our great good: that is, for our patience,
humility, and victory in this life; and for our glory, and crown in the life
to come: as Saint Paul affirmed of himself, 2. Tim. 4.
and confirmed to al others, by his example.

8 Now then let the slothful Christian go Put his hands under his girdle, Prou.
26.
as the scripture says: and say; There is a lion in the way, Prou. 20.
and a lioness in the path ready to devour him, that he dare not go forth of
the doors. Let him say; It is cold, and therefore he dares not go to plow.
Prou. 24.
Let him say; It is uneasy to labor, and therefore he cannot purge his vineyard
of nettles and thistles, nor build any wall about the same. That is, let him say
his passions are strong, and therefore he can not conquer them: his body is
delicate, and therefore he dare not put it to travel: the way of virtuous life
is hard and uneasy, and therefore he cannot apply himself thereunto. Let him
say all this, and much more, which idle and slothful Christians do use to bring
for their excuse: let him allege it (I say) as much and as often as he will: it
is but an excuse, and a false excuse, and an excuse most dishonorable and
detractorie to the force of Christ his grace, purchased us by his bitter
passion: Mat. 11.
that now his yoke should be unpleasant, seeing he has made it sweet: that now
his burden should be heavy, seeing he has made it light: 1. Ioh. 5. John. 8.
that now his commandments should be greevous, seeing the holy Ghost
affirms the contrary: that now we should be in servitude of our passions,
seeing he has by his grace delivered us, and made us truly free. Romans 7.
If God be with us, Romans 8. Ps. 26.27.
who will be against us (says the Apostle.) God is my helper and defender
(says holy David) whom shall I fear, or at whom shall I tremble? If whole armies
should rise against me: yet will I always hope to have the victory. And what is
the reason? For that thou art with me (O Lord) thou fightest on my side: Psalm.
22.
thou assistest me with thy grace; by help whereof I shall have the victory:
though all the squadrons of my enemies, that is, of the flesh, the world, and
the devil, should rise against me at once: and I shall not only have the
victory, but also shall have it easily, and with pleasure and delight. For so
much signifies Saint John, in that (having said that the commandments of
Christ are not greevous) he infers presently, 1. Ioh. 5.
as the cause thereof; Quoniam omne quod natum est ex deo vincit mundum: For
that al which is born of God, conquereth the world. That is, this grace and
heavenly assistance sent us from God, does both conquer the world, with all
difficulties and temptations thereof: and also makes the commandments of God
easy, and virtuous life most pleasant and sweet.

An objection answered.
9 But it may be you will say Christ himself confesses it to be a yoke and a
burden: how then can it be so pleasant and easy as you make it. I answer, that
Christ adds, that it is a sweet yoke, and a light burden. Whereby your
objection is taken away: and also is signified further, that there is a burden
which greeveth not the bearer, but rather helps and refreshes the same: as
the burden of feathers upon a birds bak bears up the bird, and is nothing at
al greevous unto her. So also, though it be a yoke, yet is it a sweet yoke; a
comfortable yoke; a yoke more pleasant than honey, or honey comb, Psalm. 118.
as says the prophet. And why so? 1 We draw with Christ.
Because we draw therein, with a sweet companion, we draw with Christ: that is,
his grace at one end, and our The regenerate have an endeavor framed in them by
grace: but otherwise the natural children of Adam have none such of themselves
but only to evil.
endevor at the other. And because when Come you to me all that labor and are
heavy laden, and I will refresh you. Here you see that he mooveth us to this
yoke, only thereby to refresh and disburden us: Mat. 11.
to disburden us (I say) and to refresh us: and not any way to load or agreeve
us: to disburden us of the heavy lodings and yokes of this world: as from the
burden of care; the burden of melancholy; the burden of envy, hatred, and
malice; the burden of pride; the burden of ambition; the burden of covetousnes;
the burden of wickedness; and hell fire it self. From al these burdens and
miserable yokes, Christ would deliver us, by covering our neks only with his
yoke and burden, so lightened and sweetened by his holy grace, as the bearing
thereof is not travelsome, but most easy, pleasant, and comfortable, as has
been showed. 2 Love makes the way pleasant.


10 Another cause why this yoke is so sweet, this burden so light, and this way
of Gods commandments so pleasant to good men, is love: love (I mean) toward
God, whose commandments they are. For every man can tell, and has experienced
in himself, what a strong passion the passion of love is, and how it makes
easy the very greatest pains that are in this world. The force of love.
What makes the mother to take such pains in the bringing up of her child, but
only love? What causes the wife to sit so attentive at the bedside of her sik
husband, but only love? What mooveth the beasts and birds of the air, to spare
from their own food, and to endanger their own lives, for the feeding and
defending of their little ones, but only the force of love? Ser. 9. de verbis
Domini.
Saint Austen does prosecute this point at large by many other examples: as of
merchants, that refuse no adventure of sea, for love of gain: of hunters, that
refuse no season of evil weather, for love of game: of soldiers, that refuse no
danger of death, for love of the spoil. And he adds in the end: that if the
love of man can be so great toward creatures here, as to make labor easy, and
indeed to seem no labor, but rather pleasure: how much more shall the love of
good men toward God make al their labor comfortable, which they take in his
service?

11 This extreme love was the cause, The love of Christ to his saints: and of
his saints to him.
why all the pains and afflictions which Christ suffered for us, seemed nothing
unto him. And this love also was the cause, why all the travels and torments,
which many Christians have suffered for Christ, seemed nothing unto them.
Imprisonments, torments, loss of honor, goods, and life, seemed trifles to
diverse servants of God, in respect of this burning love. This love drove many
virgins, and tender children to offer themselves, in time of persecution, for
the love of him which in the cause was persecuted. This love caused holy
Apollonia of Alexandria, Eusebius. li. 6. cap. 34.
being brought to the fire to be burned for Christ, to slip out of the hands of
such as led her, and joifully to run into the fire of her self. This love
moved Ignatius, Ierom in catalogo.
the ancient martyr to say (being condemned to beasts, and fearing least they
would refuse his body, as they had done of diverse martyrs before) that he
would not permit them so to do, but would provoke and stir them to come upon
him, and to take his life from him, by tearing his body in pieces.

12 These are the effects then of fervent love, which makes even the things
that are most difficult and dreadful of themselves, to appeer sweet and
pleasant: Psa. 6. and 18. Matt. 11. 1. John. 5.
and much more the laws and commandments of God, which in themselves are most
just, reasonable, holy, and easy. Da amantem (says Saint Austen, speaking of
this matter) et sentit quod dico: Tract. 26. in Johan.
Si autem frigido loquor, nescit quid loquar: Give me a man that is in love
with God, and he feels this to be true, which I say: but if I talk to a cold
Christian, he understands not what I say. And this is the cause, why Christ
talking of the keeping of his commandments, repeateth so often this word love,
as the surest cause of keeping the same: for want whereof in the world, the
world keeps them not, as there he shows. If you love me, John. 14.
keep my commandments, says he. And again. He that has my commandments and
keeps them he is he, that loves me. Again; He which loves me, will keep my
commandments. In which last words, Mark this observation.
is to be noted, that to the lover he says His commandment in the But a
little before he uses the plural number in that case also. viz. Ioh. 14.15.
singular number, Romans 13.
for that to such an one al his commandments That love is the fulness of the
law: for that it comprehends al. But to him that loves not, Christ says his
commandments in the plural number: signifieng thereby, that they are both many,
and heavy to him: for that he wants love, which should make them easy.
Which Saint John also expresses, when he says; This is the love of God, when
we keep his commandments, 1. Ioh. 5.
and his commandments are not heavy. That is, they are not heavy to him which
has the love of God: otherwise no marvel though they be most heavy. For that
every thing seems heavy, which we do against our liking. And so by this also
(gentle reader) thou may guess, whether the love of God be in thee, or no.

13 And these are two means now, whereby the virtuous life of good men is made
easy in this world. There follow diverse others, 3 Peculiar light of
understanding
to the end that these negligent excusers may see, how unjust and untru this
excuse of theirs is, concerning the pretended hardness of virtuous living: which
in very deed is endued with infinite privileges of comfort, above the life of
wicked men, even in this world. And the next after the former, is a certain
special and peculiar light of understanding, pertaining to the just, and called
in scripture; Prou. 9.
Prudentia sanctorum: the wisdom of saints; which is nothing else, but a
certain sparkle of heavenly wisdom, bestowed by singular privilege upon the
virtuous in this life: whereby they receive most comfortable light, and
understanding in spiritual matters, especially touching their own salvation,
and things necessary thereunto. Of which the prophet David meant, when he said;
Notas mihi fecisti vias vitae: Psalm. 16.
Thou have made the wais of life known to me. Also when he said of himself;
Super senes intellexi: Psa. 118.
I have understood more than old men. And again in another place; Incerta and
occulta sapientiae tuae manifestasti mihi: Psalm. 50.
Thou have opened to me the unknown and hidden secrets of thy wisdom. This is
that light wherewith Saint John says, John. 1.
that Christ lighteneth his servants: as also that unction of the holy Ghost,
which the same Apostle teaches to be given to the godly, 1. Ioh. 2.
to instruct them in all things behooveful for their salvation. In like wise
this is that writing of Gods law in men's hearts, which he promises by the
prophet Jeremy: Ier. 31.
as also the instruction of men immediately from God himself, Esai. 54.
promised by the prophet Esaias. And finally, this is that sovereign
understanding in the law, commandments, and justifications of God, which holy
David so much desired, and so often demanded in that most divine psalm, which
begins; Psa. 118.
Blessed are the unspotted in the way: that is, in this life.

14 By this light of understanding, and supernatural knowledge and feeling from
the holy Ghost, in spiritual things, the virtuous are greatly helped in the
way of righteousness, for that they are made able to discern for their own
direction in matters that occur, according to the saying of S. Paul;
Spiritualis omnia iudicat: 1. Cor. 2.
A spiritual man judges of al things. Animalis autem homo non percipit quae
sunt spiritus Dei: But the carnal man conceives not the things which appertain
to the spirit of God. Does not this greatly discover the privilege of a
virtuous life? The joy, comfort, and consolation of the same; with the
exceeding great misery of the contrary part? For if two should walk together,
the one blind, and the other of perfect sight, which of them were like to be
weary first? Whose journey were like to be more painful? Does not a little
ground, weary out a blind man? Consider then in how wearisom darkness the
wicked do walk? Consider whether they be blind or no. 1. Cor. 2.
Saint Paul says in the place before alleged, that they cannot conceive any
spiritual knowledge: is not this a great darkness? Again, the prophet Esaias
describes their state further, when he says in the person of the wicked; We
have groped like blind men after the walls, Esai. 65.
and have stumbled at midday, even as if it had been in darkness. And in another
place the scripture describes the same, yet more effectuously, with the
painfulnes thereof, even from the mouths of the wicked themselves, in these
words; The light of justice has not shined unto us, Sap. 5.
and the sun of understanding has not appeered unto our eyes: we are wearied
out in the way of iniquity and perdition, etc. This is the talk of sinners in
hell. By which words appears, not only that wicked men do live in great
darkness; but also that this darkness is most painful unto them: and consequently
that the contrary light, is a great easement to the way of the virtuous.

15 Another principal matter, 4 Internal consolation.
which makes the way of virtue easy and pleasant to them that walk therein, is
a certain hidden and secret consolation, which GOD powers into the hearts of
them that serve him. I call it secret; for that it is known, but of such only as
have felt it: for which cause, Christ himself calls it; Hidden manna, Apoc.
2.
known only to them that receive it. And the prophet says of it; Great is the
multitude of thy sweetness (O Lord) which thou have hidden for them that fear
thee. Psalm. 30.
And again in another place; Psalm. 67.
Thou shall lay aside (O Lord) a special chosen rain or dew for thine
inheritance. And another prophet says in the person of God, talking of the
devout soul that serves him; I will lead her aside into a wilderness; Osee. 2.
and there I will talk unto her (...). By all which words of Wilderness,
separating, choice and hidden, is signified, that this is a secret privilege
bestowed only upon the virtuous, and that the carnal hearts of wicked men, have
no part or portion therein. But now, how great and inestimable the sweetness of
this heavenly consolation is, no tongue of man can express: but we may
conjecture by these words of David, who, talking of this celestial wine,
attributes to it such force, Ps. 35. and 64.
as to make al those dronken that taste of the same: that is, to take from them,
al sense and feeling of terrestrial matters, even as Saint Peter, having droonk
a little of it upon the mount Thabor, Mat. 17. Mark. 9. Luc. 9. Psalm. 35.
forgot himself presently, and talked as a man distracted, of building
tabernacles there, and resting in that place for ever. This is that Torrens
voluptatis, that sweet stream of pleasure, as the prophet calls it, Esai. 29.
which coming from the mountains of heaven, waters (by secret wais and
passages) the hearts and spirits of the godly, and makes them droonken with
the unspeakable joy, which it brings with it. This is a little taste in this
life of the very joies of heaven bestowed upon good men, to comfort them
withal, and to encourage them to go forward. For as merchants desirous to sell
their wares, A similitude.
are content to let you see and handle, and sometimes also to taste the same
thereby to induce you to buy: so God almighty, Apoc. 3.
willing (as it were) to sell us the joies of heaven, is content to impart a
certain taste before hand to such as he sees are willing to buy: thereby to make
them come off roundly with the price, and not to stik in paieng so much, and
more, as he requires. This is that exceeding joy and jubilee in the hearts of
just men, which the prophet means, when he says; The voice of exultation and
salvation is in the tabernacles of the just. And again; Blessed is that people
that knows iubilation: Psa. 117.
that is, that has experienced this extreme joy and pleasure of internal
consolation. S. Paul had tasted it when he wrote these words, amidst al his
labors for Christ; I am filled with consolation, I overflow or exceedingly
abound in all joy, 2. Cor. 7.
amidst our tribulations. What can be more effectually said or alleged, to
prove the service of God pleasant, than this? Surely (good reader) if thou
had tasted once, but one drop of this heavenly joy, thou would give the
whole world to have another of the same, or at the leastwise, not to leese that
one again.

The way to come to spiritual consolation.
16 But thou will ask me? Why thou being a Christian as well as other, have yet
never tasted of this consolation? To which I answer, that (as it has been
showed before) this is not meat for every mouth: but A chosen moisture laid
aside for Gods inheritance only. Psalm. 67.
This is wine of Gods own seller, Cant. 1.
laid up for his spouse; As the Canticle declares. That is, for the devout
soul dedicated unto Gods service. This is a teat of comfort, only for the child
to suk, and fill himself withal, Esai. 66.
as the prophet Esaias testifies. The soul that is drowned in sin and pleasures
of the world, cannot be partaker of this benefit: neither the heart replenished
with carnal cares and cogitations. For as Gods Ark, and the idol Dagon could
not stand together upon one altar: 1. Reg. 5. Ioh. 8.14.15.16. 1. Ioh. 2. Exo.
16.
so cannot Christ and the world stand together in one heart. God sent not the
pleasant Manna unto the people of Israel, as long as their flower and chibals
of Egypt lasted: so neither will he send this heavenly consolation unto thee,
until thou have rid thy self of the cogitations of vanity. He is a wise
merchant, though a liberal: he will not give a taste of his treasure, where he
knows there is no will to buy. Resolve thy self once indeed to serve God, and
thou shall then feel this joy that I talk of, as many thousands before thee
have done, and never yet any man was herein deceived. Moises first ran out of
Egypt, Exodus 2.
to the hills of Madian, before God appeered unto him: and so must thy soul go
out of worldly vanity, before she can look for these consolations. But thou
shall no sooner offer thy self thoroughly to Gods service, than thou shall
find intertainment above thy expectation. For that his love is more tender
indeed upon them that come newly to this service, than upon those which have
served him of old: as he shows plainly by the parable of the prodigal son:
Luc. 15.
whom he cherished with much more daliance and good cheer, Beginners chiefly
cherished with spiritual consolation.
than he did the elder brother, which had served him of long time. And the
causes hereof are two: the one, for the joy of the new gotten servant, as is
expressed by Saint Luke in the text: the other lest he finding no consolation
at the beginning, should turn bak to Egypt again: as God by a figure in the
children of Israel declares manifestly in these words; Exo. 13.
When Pharao had let go the people of Israel out of Egypt; God brought them not
by the country of the Philistines, which was the nearest way, thinking with
himself that it might repent them if they should see wars, streightway rise
against them, and so should return into Egypt again. Upon which two causes thou
may assure thy self of singular consolations and comforts in the service of
God (if thou would resolve thy self thereunto) as al other men have found
before thee: and by reason thereof have prooved the way not hard, Mat. 11.
as worldly men imagine it; but most easy, pleasant, and comfortable, as Christ
has promised.

5 The quiet of conscience.
17 After this privilege of internal consolation insueth another, making the
service of God pleasant, which is the testimony of a good conscience, whereof
Saint Paul made so great account, as he called it His glory. And the holy
Ghost says of it further, 2. Cor. 1.
by the mouth of the wise man; Pro. 15.
Secura men's quasi judge convivium: A secure mind, or a good conscience is a
perpetual feast. Of which we may infer, that the virtuous man having alwais
this secure mind, and peace of conscience, lives alwais in festival glory, and
glorious feasting. And how then, is this life hard or unpleasant, as you
imagine? In the contrary side, the wicked man having his conscience vexed with
the privitie of sin, is always tormented within it self: as we read that Cain
was, Genesis 4. 1. Mac. 6. Matt. 27. Acts. 1. Mark. 9.
having killed his brother Abel; and Antiochus, for his wickedness done to
Jerusalem; and Judas for his treason against his master: and Christ signifies
it generally of al naughty men, when he says; that They have a worm which
gnaweth their conscience within. The reason whereof the scripture opens in
another place, Sap. 7.
when it says; Al wickedness is full of fear, giving testimony of damnation
against it self: and therefore a troubled conscience always suspecteth cruel
matters. That is, suspecteth cruel things to be imminent over it self, as it
makes account to have deserved. But yet further, above al other, holy Job
most lively sets forth this miserable state of wicked men, in these words;
A wicked man is prooved all the dais of his life, Job. 15.
though the time be uncertain how long he shall play the tyrant: the sound of
terror is alwais in his ears, The trouble of an evil conscience.
and although it be in time of peace, yet he always suspecteth some treason
against him: he believes not that he can rise again from darkness, to light:
expecting on every side the sword to come upon him. When he sits down to
eat, he remembers that the day of darkness is ready at hand for him:
tribulation terrifieth him, and anguish environeth him, even as a king is
environed with soldiers, when he goes to war.

18 Is not this a marvelous description of a wicked conscience, uttered by the
holy Ghost himself? What can be imagined more miserable than this man, which
has such a boucherie, and slaughter house within his own heart? What fears,
what anguishes are here touched? S. Chrysostom discourses notably upon this
point; Hom. 8. ad Pop. Antiocheman.
Such is the custom of sinners (says he) that they suspect al things; dowt
their own shadows; they are afeard at every little noise; and they think every
man that comes toward them, to come against them. If men talk together, they
think they speak of their sins. Such a thing sin is, as it bewraieth it self,
though no man accuse it: it condemns it self, though no man bear witness
against it: it makes alwais the sinner fearful, as justice does the contrary.
Hear how the scripture does describe the sinners fear, and the just man's
liberty; Prou. 28.
The wicked man flies, though no man pursu him (says the scripture.) Why does
he fly if no man do pursu him? For that he has within his conscience an
accuser pursuing him, whom alwais he carries about him. And as he cannot fly
from himself; so can he not fly from his accuser within his conscience: but
whersoever he goes, he is pursued and whipped by the same, and his wound
incurable. But the just man is nothing so; Prou. 28.
The just man (says Solomon) is as confident as a lion. Hitherto are the words
of Saint Chrysostom.

6 The hope of vertous men.
19 Whereby, as also by the scriptures alleged, we take notice yet of another
prerogative of virtuous life, which is hope or confidence, the greatest
treasure, the richest jewel, that Christian men have left the^ in this life.
For by this we pass through al afflictions, al tribulations, Jacob. 1.
and adversities, most joifully, as S. James signifies. By this we say with
Saint Paul; We do glory in our tribulations, Romans 5.
knowing that tribulation works patience; and patience, proof; and proof,
hope; which confounds us not. This is our most strong and mighty comfort,
this is our sure ankor in all tempestuous times, as Saint Paul says; Heb. 6.
We have a most strong solace (says he) which do fly unto the hope proposed,
to lay hands on the same; which hope, we hold as a sure and firm armor of our
soul. This is that noble Galea salutis, Ephesians. 6. 1. The. 1.
the head-peece of salvation, as the same apostle calls it, which bears off
all the blows that this world can lay upon us. And finally, this is the only
rest set up in the heart of a virtuous man; that, come life, come death; come
health, come siknes; come wealth, come poverty; come prosperity, come
adversity: come never so tempestuous storms of persecution, he sits down
quietly, and says calmly with the prophet; My trust is in God, Psalm. 55.
and therefore I fear not what flesh can do unto me. Nay, further with holy Job
amidst al his miseries, he says; Job. 13.
Si occiderit me, in ipso sperabo: If God should kill me, yet would I trust in
him. And this is (as the scripture said before) to be as confident as a lion.
Whose property is to show most courage, when he is in greatest peril, and
nearest his death.

20 But now as the holy Ghost says; Psalm. 1.
Non sic impij, non sic. The wicked cannot say this: they have no part in this
confidence, no interest in this consolation; Quia spes impiorum peribit. Says
the scripture; Pro. 10.
The hope of wicked men is vain, and shall perish. And again; Pro. 11.
Praestolatio impiorum furor: The expectation of wicked men is fury. And yet
further; Spes impiorum abhominatio animae: The hope of wicked men is
abomination, Job. 11.
and not a comfort unto their soul. And the reason heerof is double. First, for
that in very deed (though they say the contrary in words) wicked men do not
put their hope and confidence in God: but in the world, and in their riches; in
their strength; frinds and authority; and finally in the Deceaving arm of man.
Even as the prophet expresses in their person, Iere. 17.
when he says; Esai. 28.
We have put a lie for our hope. That is, we have put our hope in things
transitory, which have deceived us; and this is yet more expressed by the
scripture, Sap. 5.
saying; The hope of wicked men is as chaf, which the wind blows away, and as
a bubble of water which a storm disperseth: and as a smoke, which the wind
blows abroad: and as the remembrance of a ghest that staieth but one day in
his In. By all which metaphors, the holy Ghost expresses unto us, both the
vanity of the things, wherein indeed the wicked do put their trust, and how the
same fails them after a little time, upon every small occasion of adversity
that falls out.

Isai. 30. and 36.
21 This is that also which God means, when he so stormeth and thundereth
against those which go into Egypt for help, and do put their confidence in the
strength of Pharao, accursing them for the same: and promising that it shall
turn to their own confusion: which is properly to be understood of al those,
which put their chief confidence in worldly helps: Ier. 17 48.
as al wicked men do, whatsoever they dissemble in words to the contrary. For
which cause also of dissimulation, they are called hypocrites by Job: for
whereas the wise man says; The hope of wicked men shall perish. Job says; Pro.
10 Job. 8.
The hope of hypocrites shall perish. Calling wicked men hypocrites, for that
they say, they put their hope in God, whereas indeed they put it in the world.
Which thing beside scripture, is evident also by experience. For with whom does
the wicked man consult in his affairs and dowts? With God principally, or with
the world? Whom does he seek to, in his afflictions? Whom does he call upon in
his siknes? From whom hops he comfort in his adversities? To whom yields he
thanks in his prosperities? When a worldly man takes in hand any work of
importance, does he first consult with God about the event thereof? Does he fall
down of his knees, and ask his aid? Does he refer it wholly and principally to
his honor? If he do not: how can he hope for aid therein at his hands? How can
he repair to him for assistance, in the dangers and lets that fall out about
the same? How can he have any confidence in him, which has no part at al in
that work? It is hypocrisy then (as Job truly says) for this man to affirm
that his confidence is in God: whereas indeed, it is in the world; it is in
Pharao; it is in Egypt; it is in the arm of man; it is in a lie. He builds
not his house with the wise man, upon a rok: but with the fool upon the sands:
and therefore (as Christ well assures him;) When the rain shall come, Matt. 7.
and fluds descend, and winds blow, and al together shall rush upon the house
(which shall be at the hour of death) then shall this house fall, and the fall of
it shall be great. Great, for the change that he shall see: great, for the great
horror which he shall conceive: great, for the great misery which he shall
suffer: great, for the unspeakable joies of heaven lost: great, for the eternal
pains of hell fallen into: great every way, assure thy self (deer brother) or
else the mouth of God would never have used this word great, and this is
sufficient for the first reason, why the hope of wicked men is vain: for that
indeed they put it not in God, but in the world.

Wicked men cannot hope in God.
22 The second reason is, for that albeit they should put their hope in God (yet
living wickedly) it is vain, and rather to be called presumption than hope. For
understanding whereof, it is to be noted; that as there are two kinds of faith
recounted in scripture (the one a dead faith without good works, that is which,
believes al you say of Christ, Iaco. 2. Matt. 7. 1. Co. 13. and 15. Romans 1.
Gal. 3. Ephesians. 2.
but yet observes not his commandments; the other, a lively, a justifieng
faith, which believes not only, but also works by charity, as Saint Paul's
words are. So are there two hopes following these two faiths: the one of the
good, proceeding of a good conscience, whereof I have spoken before; the other
of the wicked, resting in a guilty conscience, which is indeed no true hope,
but rather presumption. This Saint John prooveth plainly, 1. Ioh. 3.
when he says; Brethren, if our heart reprehend us not, then have we confidence
with God. That is, if our heart be not guilty of wicked life. And the words
immediately following do more express the same, which are these; Whenever we
ask we shall receive of him, for that we keep his commandments, and do those
things which are pleasing in his sight. The same confirms Saint Paul, when he
says, 1. Tim. 1.
that The end of Gods commandments is charity from a pure heart, and a good
conscience. Which words, Saint Austen expounding in diverse words, and in diverse
places of his works, prooveth at large, that without a good conscience, there
is no true hope that can be conceaved. Saint Austen lib. de doct. Chr. cap. 37.
Saint Paul (says he) adds (from a good conscience) Because of hope: for he
which has the scruple of an evil conscience, despaireth to attain that which
he believes. And again; Saint Austen in prefat. Psa. 31.
Every man's hope is in his own conscience, according as he feels him self to
love God. And again, in another book, the apostle puts a good conscience for
hope: for he only hops which has a good conscience: and he whom the guilt of
an evil conscience does prik, retireth bak from hope, and hops nothing but
his own damnation. I might here repeat a great many more privileges and
prerogatives of a virtuous life, which make the same easy, pleasant, and
comfortable, but that this chapter grows to be long: and therefore I will only
touch (as it were in passing by) two or three of the other points of the most
principal: which notwithstanding would require large discourses to declare the
same, according to their dignities. 7 Liberty of the soul.
And the first is the inestimable privilege of liberty and freedom, which the
virtuous do enjoy above the wicked, according as Christ promises in these
words. If you abide in my commandments, John. 8.
you shall be my scholars indeed, and you shall know the truth, and the truth
shall set your free. Which words Saint Paul as it were expounding, 2. Cor. 3.
says; Where the spirit of the Lord is, there is freedom. And this freedom
is meant, from the tyranny and thraldom of our corrupt sensuality and
concupiscence, whereunto the wicked are so in thraldom, as there was never
bondsman so in thraldom to a most cruel and merciless tyrant. This in part,
may be conceaved by this one example. If a man had married a rich, An example to
express the bondage of wicked men to their sensuality.
beautiful, and noble gentlewoman adorned with all gifts and graces, which may
be devised to be in a woman: and yet notwithstanding, should be so sotted and
entangled with the love of some soul and dishonest beggar, or servile maid of
his house, as for her sake to abandon the company and frindship of the said
wife: to spend his time in daliance and service of his base woman: to run, to
go, to stand at her appointment: to put al his living and revenues into her
hands, for her to consume and spoil at her pleasure: to deny her nothing, but
to wait and serve her at her bek: yea, and to compel his said wife to do the
same: would you not think this man's life miserable and most servile? And yet
surely, the servitude whereof we talk, is far greater, and more intolerable
than this. For no woman or other creature in the world, is, or can be of that
beauty or nobility, as the grace of Gods spirit is, to whom man by his
creation was espoused, which notwithstanding we see abandoned, contemned, and
rejected by him, for the love of sensuality her enemy, and a most deformed
creature in respect of reason: in whose love notwithstanding, or rather
servitude, we see wicked men so drowned, as they serve her day and night with all pains, perils, and expenses, and do constrain also the good motions of Gods
spirit to give place at every bek and commandment of this new mistres For
wherefore do they labor? Wherefore do they watch? Wherefore do they heap riches
together, but only to serve their sensuality, and her desires? Wherefore do
they beat their brains, but only to satisfy this cruel tyrant and her passions?

23 And if you will see indeed how cruel and pitiful this servitude is: The
misery of a man ruled by sensuality.
consider but some particular examples thereof. Take a man whom she overruleth
in any passion: as for example, in the lust of the flesh, and what pains takes
he for her? How does he labor, how does he sweat in this servitude? How mighty
and strong does he feel her tyranny? Remember the strength of Samson, the
wisdom of Solomon, 2. Re. 11. Iud. 14.
the sanctity of David overthrown by this tyranny. 3. Re. 11.
Jupiter, Mars, and Hercules, who for their valiant acts otherwise were
accounted gods of the painims: were they not overcome and made slaves by the
enchantment of this tyrant? And if you will yet further see of what strength she
is, and how cruelly she executes the same upon those that Christ has not
delivered from her bondage: consider (for examples sake in this kind) the
pitiful case of some disloial wife, who, though she know that by committing
adultery, she runs into a thousand dangers and inconveniences (as the loss
of Gods favor; the hatred of her husband; the danger of punishment; the offense
of her frinds; the utter dishonor of her person (if it be known, and finally
the ruin and peril of body and soul) yet to satisfy this tyrant, she will
venture to commit the sin, notwithstanding any dangers or perils whatsoever.

24 Neither is it only in this one point of carnal lust, but in all other,
wherein a man is in servitude to this tyrant, An ambitious man.
and her passions. Look upon an ambitious or vain glorious man: see how he
serves this mistress: with what care and diligence he attends her
commandments, that is, to follow after a little wind of men's mouths: to pursu
a little feather flieng before him in the air: you shall see that he omitteth no
one thing; no one time; no one circumstance for gaining thereof. He rises
betime; goes late to bed: trotteth by day; studieth by night: here he
flattereth; there he dissembleth: here he stowpeth; there he looks big: here
he makes frinds; there he preventeth enemies. And to this only end he
refers al his actions, and applies al his other matters: as, his order of
life; his company keeping; his suits of apparel; his house; his table; his
horses; his servants; his talk; his behavior; his jests; his looks; and his
very going in the street.

25 In like wise he that serves his lady in passion of covetousnes: A
covetous man.
what a miserable slaverie does he abide? His heart being so walled in prison
with money, as he must only think thereof, talk thereof, dream thereof, and imagine
only new wais to get the same, and nothing else. If you should see a Christian
man in slavery under the great Turk, tied in a galley by the leg with chains
there to serve by rowing for ever: you could not but take compassion of his
case. And what then shall we do of the misery of this man, who stands in
captivity to a more base creature than a Turk, or any other reasonable
creature that is, to a piece of metal, in whose prison he lies bound, not
only by the feet, in such sort as he may not go any where against the
commodity and commandment of the same: but also by the hands, by the mouth,
by the eyes, by the ears, and by the heart, so as he may neither do, speak,
see, hear, or think any thing, but the service of the same? Was there ever
servitude so great as this? Does not Christ say truly, John. 8. Romans 6. 2. Pet.
2.
now; Qui facit peccatum servus est peccati: He that does sin, is a slave unto
sin? Does not S. Peter say well; A quo quis superatus est, huius and servus est:
A man is slave to that, whereof he is conquered.

26 From this slaverie then are the virtuous delivered, by the power of Christ,
and his assistance: insomuch, as they rule over their passions in sensuality,
and are not ruled thereby. This God promised by the prophet Ezechiel, saying;
Eze. 34.
And they shall know, that I am their Lord, when I shall break the chains of
their yoke, and shall deliver them from the power of those that overruled them
before. And this benefit holy David acknowledged in himself, when he used
these most effectuous words to God; O Lord, I am thy servant, Psalm. 90.
I am thy servant, and the child of thy handmaid: thou have broken my bonds,
and I will sacrifice to thee a sacrifice of praise. This benefit also
acknowledges Saint Paul, when he says; that Our oldman was crucified, Romans 6.
to the end the body of sin might be destroyed, and we be no more in servitude
to sin: understanding by the old man, and the body of sin, our concupiscence,
mortified by the grace of Christ in the children of God.

Peace of mind.
27 After this privilege of freedom follows another of no less importance
than this, and that is, a certain heavenly peace, and tranquillity of mind,
according to the saying of the prophet; Factus est in pace locus eius: His
place is made in peace. Psalm. 75. (...)
And in another place; Pax multa diligentibus legem tuam: There is great peace
to them which love thy law. And on the contrary side, the prophet Esaias
repeateth this sentence often from God; Esa. 48.57.
Non est pax impijs dicit Dominus: The Lord says; There is no peace unto the
wicked. And another prophet says of the same men; Contrition and infelicitie
is in their wais, Psalm. 13.
and they have not known the way of peace. The reason of this difference has
been declared before in that, which I have noted of the diversity, of good and
evil men touching their passions. For the virtuous, having now (by the aid of
Christ his grace) subdued the greatest force of their said passions, do pass
on their life most sweetly and calmly, under the guide of his spirit, without
any perturbations that much troble them, in the greatest occurrents of this
life. But the wicked men, Romans 11.
not having mortified the said passions, are tossed and troubled with the same,
as with vehement and contrary winds. And therefore their state and condition is
compared by Esaias to a tempestuous sea, Esai. 57.
that never is quiet: and by Saint James, to a city or country, Iaco. 3.
where the inhabitants are at war and sedition among themselves. And the causes
heerof are two: first, for that the passions of concupiscence, Two causes of
disquietnes in wicked men.
being many and almost infinite in number, do lust after infinite things, and are
never satisfied, but are like those blood-suckers which the wise man speaks
of, that cry alwais Give, give, and never ho. As for example: Pro. 30.
when is the ambitious man satisfied with honor? Or the incontinent man, with
carnalitie? Or the covetous man with money? Never truly: and therefore, as that
mother cannot but be greatly afflicted, which should have many children crieng
at once for meat, she having no bread at al to break unto them: so the wicked
man, being greedily called upon, by almost infinite passions, to yield them
their desires, must needs be vexed and pitifully tormented; especially, being
not able to satisfy any one of their smalest demands.

28 Another cause of vexation is, for that these passions of disordinate
concupiscence, be oftentimes on contrary to the other, and do demand contrary
things, representing most lively the confusion of Babel: Genesis 11.
where one tongue spoke against another, and that in diverse, and contrary
languages. So we see oftentimes, that the desire of honor says; Spend here:
but the passion of avarice says; Hold thy hands. Lechery says; Venture here:
but pride says; No, it may turn to thy dishonor. Anger says; Revenge thy
self here: but ambition says; It is better to dissemble. And finally, here is
fulfilled that, Psalm. 54.
which the prophet says; Vidi iniquitatem, and contradictionem in civitate: I
have seen iniquity, and contradiction in the selfsame city. Iniquity, for
that all the demands of these passions are most unjust, in that they are against
the word of God. Contradiction, for that one cries against the other in their
demands. From al which miseries God has delivered the just, by giving them his
Peace, which passes al understanding, as the apostle says, Phil. 4. Io.
14.17. Mat. 10.
and which the world can never give, nor taste of, as Christ himself affirms.

29 And these many causes may be alleged now (besides many others, which I
pass over) to justify Christ's words, that his yoke is sweet and easy: to
wit, the assistance of grace; the love of God; the light of understanding from
the holy Ghost; the internal consolation of the mind; the quiet of conscience;
the confidence thereof proceeding; the liberty of soul and body; with the
sweet rest of our spirits, both toward God, toward our neighbor, and toward
our selves. By all which means, helps, privileges, and singular benefits, the
virtuous are assisted above the wicked, as has been showed: and their way made
easy, light, and pleasant. To which also we may ad as the last, but not the
least comfort, Expectation of reward.
the expectation of reward: that is, of eternal glory and felicity to the
virtuous; and everlasting damnation unto the wicked. O how great a matter is
this, to comfort the one, if their life were painful in godliness: and to
afflict the other, amidst al their great pleasure of sin! The laborer, when he
thinks on his good pay at night, An example.
is encouraged to go thorough, though it be painful to him. Two that should
pass together toward their country, the one to receive honor for the good
service done abroad; the other as prisoner to be arraigned of treasons,
committed in foreign dominions against his sovereign, could not be like merry
in their In upon the way, as it seems to me: and though he that stood in
danger, should sing, or make show of courage and innocence, and set a good
face upon the matter: yet the other might well think, that his heart had many a
cold pull within him: as no dowt but al wicked men have, when they think with
themselves of the life to come. If Joseph and Pharaos baker had known both
their distinct lots in prison (to wit, Genesis 40.41.43.
that on such a day one should be called forth to be made Lord of Egypt, and
the other to be hanged on a pair of gallows) they could hardly have been
equally merry: whiles they lived together in time of their imprisonment. The
like may be said, and much more truly, of virtuous and wicked men in this
world. For when the one does but think upon the day of death (which is to be
the day of their deliverance from this prison) their hearts cannot but leap for
very joy, considering what is to insu unto them after. But the other are
afflicted, and fall into melancholy, as often as mention or remembrance of death
is offered: for that they are sure that it brings with it their bane,
according as the scripture says; Pro. 12.
The wicked man being dead, there remains no more hope unto him.

30 Well then (deer brethen) if al these things be so, what should stay thee now
at length to make this resolution, which I exhort thee unto? Will thou yet say
(notwithstanding all this) Mat. 11.
word and promise of Christ, which assures thee the contrary: believe the
reasons before alleged, which do prove it evidently: believe the testimony of
them which have experienced it in themselves (as of king David, Saint Paul, and
Saint John the Evangelist, whose testimonies I have alleged before of their
own proof) believe many hundreds, which by the grace of God, are converted
daily in Christendom from vicious life, to the true service of God: al which do
protest themselves to have found more, than I have said, or can say in this
matter.

31 And for that thou may reply here, and say, that such men are not The
sou^dlier that the Gospel is any where received, the mo examples of sound
conversion are there to be found: and yet on the other side, it is not to be
denied, but that a kind of remorse and sorrowing (especially for the external,
or grosser offenses) is often to be found, not only among counterfeit Christians
but among the heathen also.
where thou art, to give this testimony of their experience: I can, and do
assure thee, upon my conscience before God, that I have talked with no small
number of such my self, to my singular comfort, in beholding the strong hand,
and exceeding bountifulnes of Gods sweetness toward them in this case. Oh (deer
brother) no tongue can express, what I have seen heerin: and yet saw I not the
least part of that which they felt. But yet this may I say, that those which
are known to be skilful, and to deal so sincerely withal, that others disburden
their consciences unto them for their comfort or counsel, are some part of
those, Psa. 106.
whereof the prophet says; That they work in multitudes of waters, and do see
the marvels of God in the depth. In the depth (I say) of men's consciences,
uttered with infinite multitudes of tears, when God touches the same, with
his holy grace. Believe me (good reader) for I speak in truth before our Lord
Jesus, I have seen so great and exceeding consolations, in diverse great sinners
after their conversion, as no heart can almost conceave: and the hearts which
received them, were hardly able to contein the same: so abundantly stilled down
the heavenly dew, from the most liberal and bountiful hand of God. And that
this may not seem strange unto thee, thou must know, that it is recorded of
one holy man called Effrem, that he had so mervelous great consolations after
his conversion, as he was often constrained to cry out to God; O Lord retire
thy hand from me a little, for that my heart is not able to receive so extreme
joy. Gosr. in vita Bern.
And the like is written of Saint Barnard: who for a certain time after his
conversion from the world, remained as it were deprived of his senses by the
excessive consolations he had from God.

32 But yet if all this cannot moove thee, but thou will still remain in thy
distrust, hear the testimony of one, whom I am sure thou will not discredit,
especially speaking of his own experience in himself. And this is the holy
martyr and doctor Saint Cyprian, Lib. ep. 1.
who writing of the very same matter to a secret frind of his, called Donatus,
confesses, that he was before his conversion of the same opinion that thou art
of: to wit, that it was impossible for him to change his manners, and to find
such comfort in a virtuous life as after he did: being accustomed before to al
kind of loose behavior. Therefore he begins his narration to his frind in
this sort; Accipe quod sentitur antequam discitur. Take that which is felt,
before it be learned: and so follows on with a large discourse, showing that
he prooved now by experience, which he could never believe before his
conversion, though God had promised the same. Lib. 6. conf. cap. 12.
The like writes Saint Austen of himself in his books of confession: showing
that his passions would needs persuade him before his conversion, that he
should never be able to abide the austeritie of a virtuous life, especially
touching the sins of the flesh (wherein he had lived wantonly, until that time)
it seemed impossible that he could ever abandon the same, and live chastely:
which notwithstanding he felt easy, pleasant, Lib. 8. conf.
and without difficulty afterward. For which he breaks into these words: My
God, Psalm. 34.
let me remember and confess thy mercies toward me: let my very bones
rejoice and say unto thee; Psa. 115.
O Lord, who is like unto thee? Thou have broken my chains and I will sacrifice
to thee a sacrifice of thankesgiving. These chains were the chains of
concupiscence, whereby he stood bounden in captivity before his conversion, as
he there confesses: but presently thereupon he was delivered from the same, by
the help of Gods most holy grace.

33 My counsel should be therefore (gentle reader) that seeing thou have so many
testimonies, examples, reasons, and promises of this matter, thou should at
least prove once by thine own experience, whether this thing be true or no:
especially seeing it is a matter of so great importance, and so worthy thy
trial: that is, concerning so near thy eternal salvation as it does. If a mean
fellow should come unto thee, and offer, for hazarding of one crown of gold, to
make thee a thousand by Alchimie, though thou should suspect him for a
cousoner: yet the hope of gain being so great, and the adventure of so small
loss; thou would go nigh for once to prove the matter. And how much more
should thou do it in this case, where by proof thou can leese nothing:
and if thou speed well, thou may gain as much as the everlasting joy of heaven
is worth.

34 But yet here by the way, I may not let pass to admonish thee of one thing,
which the ancient fathers and saints of God that have passed over this river
before thee (I mean the river dividing between Gods service and the world) do
affirm of their own experience: Resistance at the beginning.
and that is, that as soon as thou take this work or resolution in hand, thou
must expect assaults, combats, and open war within thy self, as Saint Cyprian,
Saint Austen, Saint Gregory, Cyp. li. 1. ca. 1 Aug. lib. 1. doct. c. 23. Greg.
l. Mor. 4. c. 24. li. 30. cap. 18. Bar. in. ps. 90 Cir. li. de ora. Or. hom. 3.
in Ex. and Leu. and 11. Iosue. Hi. in ps. 118
and Saint Barnard do affirm, and upon their own proof. This do Cyril, and
Origin show in diverse places at large. This does saint Hilary prove by reasons
and examples. This does the wise man forewarn thee of, willing thee; When thou
art to come to the service of God, to prepare thy mind unto temptation. And the
reason of this is, for that the devil possessing quietly thy soul before, lay
still, and sought only means to content the same, Eccl. 2.
by putting in new and new delites, and pleasures of the flesh. But when he
sees thou offerest to go from him: he begins straight to rage, and to moove
sedition within thee, and to toss up and down both heaven and earth, before he
will leese his kingdom in thy soul. This is evident by the example of him whom
Christ coming down from the hill, after his transfiguration, Mark. 9.
delivered from a deaf and dum spirit. For albeit the devil would seem neither
to hear nor speak, while he possessed that body quietly: yet when Christ
commanded him to go out, he both heard, Genesis 31.
and cried out, and did so tear and rent He was very greevous unto him before:
but he did not follow after him in hostile manner til he departed from him.
never persecused his son in law Jacob, until he would depart from him. And yet
more was this expressed in the doings of Pharao, who after once he perceaved
that the people of Israel meant to depart from his kingdom, never ceased
greevously to afflict them (as Moises testifies) until God utterly delivered
them out of his hands, with the ruin and destruction of al Egypt their enemies.
Exodus 5.
Which event the holy doctors and saints of the churh, The conversion of S.
Aust.
have expounded to be a plain figure of the deliverie

35 And now, if thou would have a lively example of all this that I have said
before, I could allege thee many: but for brevitie sake, one only of Saint
Austens conversion shall suffice, testified by himself in his books of
confession. It is a mavelous example, and contains many Yet some points of
the story at large are such, as that a man may as well dowt the readiness of
satan to illude and deceive: as behold to our comfort the goodness of God in his
conversion.
notable and comfortable points. And surely whosoever shall but read the whole
at large, especially in his sixth, seventh, and eight books of his confessions,
shall greatly be moved and instructed thereby. And I beseech the reader that
understands the Latin tongue, to view over, at least but certain chapters of
the eight book, where this Saints final conversion (after infinite combats) is
recounted. It were too long to repeat here, though indeed it be such matter as
no man need to be weary to hear it. There he shows how he was tossed and
troubled in this conflict between the flesh and the spirit, between God drawing
on the one side, and the world, the flesh, and the devil, Lib. 8. confess. cap.
1. and 2.
holding bak on the other part. He went to Simplicianus a learned old man, and
devout Christian: he went to S. Ambrose, bishop of Millan: and after his
conference with them, he was more trobled than before. He consulted with his
companions, Nebridius, and Alipius: but al would not ease him. Til at the
length a Christian courtier and captain, named Pontition, had by occasion This
kind of monastical or private life was very ancient, and such as the time and
estate of the church* required then: but that which after in place thereof
sprang up among us, was of later time, and being at the first far unlike to the
other, the longer it stood did notwithstanding still degenerate more and more
til at the length it grew intolerable.
a private and a solitary life in Egypt: as also others (he then heard) did
even in Millan it self, where then he was. Which when he had heard, then
withdrawing himself aside, he had a most terrible combat with himself.
Whereof he writes thus; What did I not say against my self in this conflict?
How did I beat and whip mine own soul, Cap. 7.
to make her follow thee (O Lord?) But she held bak, she refused and excused
her self: and when al her arguments were convicted, she remained trembling and
fearing as death to be restrained from her loose custom of sin. Whereby she
consumed her self even unto death. After this he went into a garden with
Alipius, his companion: and there cried out unto him; Quid hoc est? Cap. 8.
Quid patimur? Surgunt indocti and coelum rapiunt, and nos cum doctrinis
nostris, sine cord, ecce ubi volutamur in carne and sanguine. What is this?
(Alipius) what suffer we under the tyranny of sin? Unlearned men (such as
Anthony and others; for he was altogether unlearned) do take heaven by
violence: and we with all our learning, without hearts, behold how we lie
graveling in flesh and blood. And he goes forward in that place, showing the
woonderful and almost incredible tribulations that he had in this fight that
day. After this he went forth into an orchard: and there he had yet a greater
conflict. For there al his pleasures past represented themselves before his
eyes, saying; Demittes ne nos, Mark this gentle reader.
and a momento isto non erimus tecum ultra in aeternum, etc. What, will thou
depart from us? And shall we be with thee no more for ever, after this moment?
Shall it not be lawful for thee to do this or that, no more hereafter? And then
(says Saint Austen) O Lord, turn from the mind of thy servant, to think of
that, which they objected to my soul. What filth, what shameful pleasures did
they lay before mine eyes. Cap. 10.
At length he says, that after long and tedious combats, a marvelous tempest
of weeping came upon him: and being not able to resist, he ran away from
Alipius, and cast himself on the ground under a fig tree, and gave full scope
unto his eyes, which brought forth presently whole fluds of tears. Which after
they were a little past over, he began to speak to God in this sort; Et tu
Domine, Lib. 8. c. 12.
usquequo? Quam diu, quam diu, cras and cras? Quare non modo? Quare non hac
hora finis est turpitudinis meae? O Lord, how long will thou suffer me thus?
How long, how long shall I say, to-morow, to-morow? Why should I not do it now?
Why should there not be an end of my filthy life, even at this hour? And after
this follows his final and miraculous conversion, together with the
conversion of Alipius, his companion, which because it is set down breefly by
himself, I will recite his own words, which are as follows, immediately upon
those that went before.

36 I did talk this to GOD, and did weep most bitterly, with a deep contrition
of my heart: and behold, I heard a voice, S. Austens final conversion, by a
voice from heaven.
as if it had been of a boy or maid singing from some house by, and often
repeating; Take up and read, take up and read. And straightway I changed my
countenance, and began to think most earnestly with my self, whether children
were wont to sing any such thing, in any kind of game that they used: but I
never remember, that I had heard any such thing before. Wherefore repressing the
force of my tears: I rose, interpreting no other thing, but that this voice
came from heaven, to bid me open the book that I had with me (which was Saint
Paul's epistles) and to read the first chapter that I should find. S. Anthonies
conversion. Athanasius in vita Anthonij.
For I had heard before of Saint Anthony, how he was admonished to his
conversion, by hearing a sentence of the Gospel, which was read, when he by
occasion came into the church: Mat. 19.
and the sentence was; Go, and sell al thou have, and give to the poor: and
thou shall have a treasure in heaven: and come, and follow me. Which saying In
such things as are peculiar or proper to some (as this was) there can be no
general rule drawn unto others, that can stand by undowted warrant, without
some special calling besides: and so may it well be dowted, whether S. Anthony
had on that place sufficient groundwork of those his doings, unless he had
some special motion besides. It was otherwise with Saint Augustine, whose
conversion was not, but to such things as we are al bounden unto, and upon such
a place as speaks to al.
thee (O Lord.) Wherefore I went in haste to the place where Alipius sat, for
that I had left my book there when I departed: I snatched it up, and opened
it, and read in silence the first chapter that offered it self unto mine eyes:
and therein were these words; Not in banketings, Romans 13.
or in dronkennes: not in wantonness, and chamber works: not in contention and
emulation: but do you put on the Lord Jesus Christ: and do you not perform the
providence of the flesh in concupiscence. Further than this sentence I would
not read, neither was it needful. For presently with the end of this sentence,
as if the light of security had been powered into my heart, all the darkness of my
dowtfulnes fled away. Whereupon putting in my finger, or some other sign (which
now I remember not) upon the place, I closed the book, and with a quiet
countenance opened the whole matter to Alipius. And he by this means uttered
also that which now wrought in him (which I before knew not) he desired that he
might see what I had read: and I showed him. He marked it al, and went further
also than I had red. For it follows in Saint Paul (which I knew not; Romans 14.
) Take unto you him that is yet weak in faith. Which Alipius applied unto
himself, and opened his whole state of dowtfulnes unto me. But by this
admonition of Saint Paul, he was established, and was joined to me in my good
purpose: but yet calmly, and without any troublesome cunctation according to his
nature and manners, whereby he differed alwais greatly from me, in the better
part.

37 After this we went to my mother: Her name was Monica: a very holy woman as
he shows. li. 9. ca. 9.10.11.12.13.
we tell her the matter: she rejoiceth: we recite unto her the order of the
thing: she exulteth and triumphs, and blessed thee (O Lord, which art more
strong and liberal, than we can ask or understand) for that she saw now much
more granted to her from thee, touching me, than she was wont to ask with her
pitiful and lamentable sighs. For thou had so converted me now to thee, that
I neither sought for wife, nor any other hope at al of this world: living and
abiding in that Which was but a more careful endevor in the way of godliness,
such as was not used of the common sort. And so is this example of his, no
patronage to any of our latter monasteries or rules, that were laden with
loosenes and superstition: which notwithstanding some would gladly defend by
this rule of his.
rule of faith, in Lib. 9. c. 1.
Let my heart and tongue praise thee, and let my bones say to thee; O Lord, who
is like unto thee. Let them say it (O Lord) and do thou make answer (I beseech
thee) and say to my soul; I am thy salvation. Hitherto are Saint Austens words.

Annotations upon this conversion.
38 In this marvelous example of this famous man's conversion, there be diverse
things to be noted, both for our comfort, and also for our instruction. First
is to be noted the great conflict he had with his ghostly enemy before he
could get out of his possession and dominion. Which was so much the more (no
dowt) for that he was to be so great a pillar afterward in Gods church. And we
see, Alipius found not so great resistance: for the enemy saw there was much
less in him, to hurt his kingdom than in Austen. Which ought greatly to
animate them, that feel great resistance, Those that are to be best men, have
greatest conflict in their conversion.
and strong temptations against their vocation: assuring themselves, that this
is a sign of grace and favor, if they manfully go thorough. So was Saint Paul
called (as we read) most violently being stricken down to the ground, Acts. 9.
and made blind by Christ before his conversion: for that he was a chosen
vessel, to bear Christ's name unto the gentiles.

39 Secondly it is to be noted, that although this man had most strong passions
before his conversion, and that in the greatest, and most incurable diseases,
which commonly afflict worldly men: as in ambition, covetousnes, and sins of
the flesh, as himself before confesses: Lib. 6. c. 6. and 15.
which maladies possessed him so strongly indeed, as he thought unpossible
(before his conversion) ever to subdu and conquer the same: yet afterward he
prooved the contrary by the help of Gods omnipotent grace. Thirdly also is to
be noted, that he had not only a good victory over these passions, but also
found great sweetness in the way of virtuous life. Lib. 9. c. 6.
For a little after his conversion he writes thus; I could not When the people
of God did sing their psalms of thanksgiving and praises to God.
thy hymns and canticles, being vehemently stirred up with the voices of thy
church singing most sweetly? Those voices did run into mine ears, and thy
truth did melt into mine heart, and thence did boil out an affection of piety,
and made tears to run from me, and I was in most happy state with them.

S. Austens diligence in trieng out his vocation.
40 Fourthly is to be noted for our instruction and imitation, the behavior of
this man about his vocation. First in searching and trieng out the same by his
repair to Saint Ambrose, Simplicianus, and others: by reading the word of God,
frequenting of good company, and the like: which thou ought also (good
reader) to do, when thou feel thy self inwardly moved: and not ^olie dead
as many are wont, resisting openly the holy Ghost, with all good motions, and
not so much as once to give ear to the knocking of Christ, at the door of
their consciences. Moreover, Saint Austen as we see, refused not the means to
know his vocation, Apoc. 3.
but prayed, wept, and oftentimes retired himself alone from company to talk
with God in that matter. Which many of us will never do: but rather do detest
and fly al means that may bring us into those cogitations of our conversion.
Finally Saint Austen after he had once seen clearly the will and pleasure of
God: made no more stay of the matter, but brake of strongly from all the world
and vanities thereof: Lib. 9. c. 2.
gave over his Retorik lecture at Millan: left al hope of promotion in the
court, and betook himself to serve God thoroughly: and therefore no marvel if
he received so great consolation and advancement from God afterward, as to be
so worthy a member in his church. Which example is to be followed of al them
that desire to keep a good conscience, so far forth as each man's condition and
state of life permits.

41 And here by this occasion, Violence to be used at the beginning of our
conversion.
I may not let pass to advertise thee good reader, and also by Saint Austens
example to forewarn thee, that whosoever means to make this resolution
thoroughly, must use some violence at the beginning. For as fire if you rush in
upon it with force, is easily put out; but if you deal softly, putting in one
hand after another, you may rather hurt your self than extinguish the same: so
is it with our passions, who require manhood and courage for a time at the
beginning, which whosoever shall use, together with the other means thereunto
appertaining, he shall most certeinlie find that thing easy, which now he
thinks heavy, and that most sweet, which now he esteems so unsaverie. For
proof whereof, as also for conclusion of this chapter, I will allege a short
discourse out of Barnard: who after his fashion prooveth the same fitly out of
the scriptures. Christ says unto us; Take my yoke, you shall find rest. Barn.
in verba evangelij; Ecce nos reliquimus omnia, etc.
This is a marvelous noveltie: but it comes from him which makes al things
new. He that takes up a yoke finds rest: he that leaves al, finds an
hundred times so much. He knew well this (I mean that man The place being better
considered, it does not appear that David so said. Nevertheles, that which
Barnard does gather out of it does stand very well with those words of Christ
that therwithal he allegeth of the light burden and easy yoke.
said in his psalm; Does the seat of iniquity cleave to thee (O Lord) which
feignest a labor in thy commandments? Is not this a feigned labor (deer
brethren) in a commandment? I mean, a light burden, an easy yoke, an
anointed cross. So in old time he said to Abraham; Take thy son Isaac whom
thou love, and offer him unto me a sacrifice. This was a feigned labor in a
commandment: for Isaac being offered he was not killed, but sanctified thereby.
Thou therefore, if thou hear the voice of God within thy heart, willing thee to
offer up Isaac (which signifies joy or laughter) fear not to obey it
faithfully and constantly: whatsoever thy corrupt affection judges of the
matter, be thou secure. Not Isaac, but the ram shall die for it: thy joy shall
not perish, but thy stubburnes only, whose horns are entangled with thorns, and
cannot be in thee without the prickings of anxietie. Thy Lord does but tempt
thee as he did Abraham, Psalm. 93. Genesis 22.
to see what thou will do. Isaac (that is, thy joy in this life) shall not die,
as thou imaginest, but shall live: only he must be lifted up upon the wood, to
the end thy joy may be on high, and that thou may glory not in thine own
flesh, but only in the cross of thy Lord, by whom thy self also art
crucified: Gal. 3.
crucified (I say) but crucified to the world: for unto God thou live still,
and that much more than thou did before.

CHAP. II. Of the second impediment, which is persecution, affliction, and
tribulation, whereby many men are kept from the service of God.
Many there are in the world abroad, who either upon these consideratio^s
before laid down: or for that, they see some good men to live as merrily as
themselves, are content to yield thus much, that in very deed they esteem
virtuous life to be pleasant enough, to such as are once entered in thereunto:
and that in good sooth, for their own parts, they could be content to follow
the same, if they might do it with quiet and peace of al hands. But to request
them unto it in such time or place, or with such order and circumstances, as
tribulation, affliction, or persecution may fall upon them, for the same: they
think it a matter unreasonable, to be demanded, and themselves very excusable;
both before God and man, for refusing it. But this excuse is no better, than
the other going before, of the pretended difficulty: for that it stands upon
a false ground, as also upon an unjust illation, made upon that ground. The
ground is this, that a man may live virtuously, and serve God truly, with all
worldly ease, and without any affliction, tribulation, or persecution: which is
false. For that, albeit external contradictions, and persecutions be more in
one time than in another; more in this place, than in that: yet can there not
be any time or place without some, both external, and internal. Which although
(as I have showed before) in respect of the manifold helps and consolations
sent from God in counterpoize of the same, they seem not heavy nor unpleasant
unto the godly: yet are they in themselves both great and weighty, as would
appeer if they fell upon the wicked and impatient. Secondly, the illation made
upon this ground, is unjust: for that it alleges tribulation, as a sufficient
reason to abandon Gods service, which God himself has ordained for a mean to
the contrary effect: that is, to draw men thereby unto his service. Four points
to be handled in this chapter.
For better declaration whereof (the matter being of very great importance) I
will handle in this chapter, these four points. First, whither it be ordinary
for all that must be saved, to suffer some kind of persecution, tribulation, or
affliction. Secondly, what are the causes why God (so loving us as he does)
would chose and appoint so to deal with us here in this life. Thirdly, what
principal reasons of comfort, a man may have in tribulation. Fourthlie, what is
required at his hands in that state. Which four points, being declared, I dowt
not but great light shall appeer in this whole matter, which seems to flesh
and blood to be so full of darkness and improbabilities.

2 And touching the first, Whether al good men must suffer tribulation or no.
there needs little poofe: for that Christ himself says to his disciples,
and by them to al other his servants; In mundo pressuram sustinebitis: In the
world you shall sustain affliction. And in another place; John. 16.
In your patience shall you possess your souls? That is, by suffering
patiently in adversities: which Saint Paul yet utters more plainly when he
says; Al those that will live godly in Jesus Christ, shall suffer persecution.
If al, then none can be excepted. Luc. 11. 2. Tim. 3.
And to signify yet further the necessity of this matter, both Paul and
Barnabas also did teach (as Saint Luke reports) That we of necessity must
enter into the kingdom of God, Acts. 14.
by many tribulations. Using the word Oportet, which signifies a certain
necessity. And Christ himself yet more reveals this secret, when he says
to Saint John the Evangelist; That he chastises al those whom he loves. Which
words, Apoc. 3.
the apostle as it were expounding to the Hebrews, says; Flagellat omnem
filium quem recipit: He whippeth every child whom he receaveth. Heb. 12.
And the apostle urges this matter so far in that place, as he affirms
plainly, al those to be bastards, and no children of God, verse. 8.
which are not afflicted by him in this life. The same position Saint Paul
holds to Timothy; 2. Tim. 2.
Si sustinemus, and conregnabimus: If we suffer with Christ, we shall reign with
Christ; and no otherwise. Wherein also concurreth holy David, Psalm. 33.
when he says; Multae tribulationes iustorum: The just are appointed to many
tribulations.

3 The same might be prooved by many other means, Mat. 10.
as by that, Christ says; He came not to bring peace, but the sword into the
world. Also by that Saint Paul says; 2. Tim. 2.
That no man can be crowned except he fight lawfully. But how can we fight, if
we have no enemy to oppugn us? The same signifies Christ in the Apocalips,
cap. 2. and 3.
when he repeateth so often, that heaven is only for him that conquereth. The
very same is signified by the ship, Mat. 8.
wherinto Christ entered with his disciples, which was tossed and tumbled, as
if it would have been drowned: this (I say) by the ancient fathers exposition,
was a figure of the trobles and afflictions, that al those should suffer, which
do row in the same with Christ our savior. The same also is prooved by that
the life of man is called a warfare upon earth: Job. 7. Job. 5.
and by that he is appointed to labor and travel, while he is here: also by
that, his life is replenished with many miseries, Job. 13.
even by the appointment of God after man's fall. The same also is showed by
that, that God has appointed every man to pass through the pains of death,
before he come to joy: also, by the infinite contradictions and tribulations,
both within and without, left unto man in this life: as for example, within are
the rebellions of his concupiscence and other miseries of his mind, wherewith he
has continually to make war, if he will save his soul. Without, are the world,
and the devil, which do never cease to assalt him, now by fair means, and now
by fowl; now by flattery, and now by threat; now alluring by pleasure and
promotion, now terrifieng by affliction and persecution. Against al which the
good Christian has to resist manfully, or else he leeseth the crown of his
eternal salvation.

4 The very same also may be showed by the examples of all the most renowned
saints from the beginning: The example of saints.
who were not only assalted internally with the rebellion of their own flesh;
but also persecuted and afflicted outwardly: thereby to confirm more manifestly
this purpose of God. As we see in Abel, Genesis 4.
persecuted and slain by his own brother, as soon as ever he began to serve God:
also in Abraham, Genesis 22.
afflicted diversely after he was once chosen by God: and most of al by making
him yield to the killing of his own deer and only child. Of the same cup drank
al his children and posterity that succeeded him, in Gods favor: Judith. 8.
as Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, Moises, and all the prophets: of which Christ himself
gives testimony, Mat. 5.23. Luc. 13.
how their blood was shed most cruelly by the world. The affliction also of Job
is woonderful, seeing the scripture affirms it to have come upon him by Gods
special appointment, Job. 1.
he being a most just man. But yet more woonderful was the affliction of holy
Tobias, Tob. 2.
who among other calamities, was stricken blind by the falling down of swallows
dung into his eyes: Tob. 12.
of which the angel Raphel told him afterward; Because thou were a man
acceptable to God, it was of necessity that this tentation should prove thee.
Behold the necessity of afflictions to good men. I might ad to this the
example of David and others: but that the apostle gives a general testimony
of all the saints of the old testament, saying; That some were racked, Heb. 11.
some reproched, some whipped, some chained, some imprisoned: others were
stoned, cut in pieces, tempted, and flain with the sword: some went about in
hair-cloth, in skins of goats, in great need, pressed and afflicted: wandering
and hiding themselves in wildernesses, in hills, in caves, and holes under
ground, the world not being worthy of them. Of al which he pronounces this
comfortable sentence, to be noted of al men. Non suscipientes redemptionem; vt
meliorem invenirent resurrectionem: That is; God would not deliver them from
these afflictions in this life, to the end their resurrection and reward in the
life to come, might be more glorious. And this of the saints of the old
testament.

5 But now in the new testament, founded expressedly upon the cross, the
matter stands much more plain, and that with great reason. Luc. 24.
For if Christ could not go into this glory but by suffering, as the scripture
says: then by the most reasonable rule of Christ affirming, that The servant
has not privilege above his master. It must needs follow, Mat. 10. Luc. 6.
Mat. 10.
that al have to drink of Christ's cup, which are appointed to be partakers of
his glory. And for proof hereof; look upon the dearest frinds that ever Christ
had in this life, and see whether they had part thereof or no. Of his mother,
Simeon prophesied and told her at the beginning; Luc. 2.
That the sword of tribulation should pass her heart. Signifieng thereby, the
extreme afflictions that she felt afterward in the death of her son, and other
miseries heaped upon her. Of the apostles it is evident, that beside all the
labors, travels, needs, sufferings, persecutions, and calamities which were
infinite, and in man's sight in tolerable (if we believe S. Paul, 1. Cor. 4. 2.
Cor. 4.6.11.12. Acts. 20. Romans 8. John. 21.
recounting the same) beside all this (I say) God would not be satisfied, except
he had their blood also: and so we see that he suffered none of them to die
naturally, but only Saint John: albeit, if we consider what John also suffered
in so long a life as he lived, being banished by Domitian to Pathmos; Tert.
lib. de prescrip. heretic. Ierom. lib. cont. Ia. vin.
and at another time, thrust into a tun of hot oil at Rome (as Tertullian and
Saint Ierom do report) we shall see that his part was no less than others in
this cup of his master. I might rekon up here infinite other examples: but it
needs not. For it may suffice, that Christ has given this general rule in
the new testament; He that takes not up his cross and follows me, Mat. 10.
is not worthy of me. By which is resolved plainly, that there is no salvation
now to be had, but only for them that take up (that is, do bear willingly)
their proper crosses, and therewith do follow their captain, walking on with his
cross on his shoulders before them.

An objection answered.
6 But here some man may say: If this be so, that no man can be saved without a
cross, that is, without affliction, and tribulation, how do al those that live
in peaceable times and places, where no persecution is, no trouble, no
affliction, or tribulation? To which I answer: first, that if there were any
such time or place, the men living therein, should be in great danger; according
to the saying of the prophet; They are not in the labor of other men, nor yet
whipped and punished as others are: Psalm. 72.
and therefore pride possessed them, and they were covered with iniquity and
impiety: and their iniquity proceeded of their fatness, or abundance.
Secondly I answer; that there is no such time or place so void of tribulation,
but that there is alwais a cross to be found, for them that will take it up.
For either is there poverty, sickness, slander, enmity, injury,
contradiction, or some like affliction offered continually. For that, those men
never want in the world, whereof the prophet said; Psalm. 37.
These that do render evil for good, did detract from me, for that I followed
goodness. At the least wise, there never want those domestical enemies, of which
Christ speaks: I mean, Matt. 7.
either our kindred and carnal frinds, which commonly resist us, if we begin
once thoroughly to serve God: or else our own disordinate affections, which are
the most perilous enemies of al: for that they make us war upon our own ground.
Again, there never want the temptations of the world, and devil: the resisting
whereof is much more difficult in time of peace and wealth, Time of peace more
dangerous, than of persecution.
than in time of external affliction and persecution: for that these enemies
are stronger in flattery, than in force: which a godly father expresses by
this parable. The sun and wind (says he) agreed on a day to prove their
several strengths, A parable.
in taking a cloak from a waifairing man. And in the forenoon the wind used al
violence that he could to blow off the said cloak. But the more he blew, the
more fast held the travailer his cloak, and gathered it more closely about
him. At afternoon the sun sent forth his pleasant beams, and by little and
little so entered into this man, as he caused him to yield and put off, not
only his cloak, but also his cote. Whereby is meant (says this father) that the
allurements of pleasure are more strong and harder to be resisted, than the
violence of persecution. 2. Reg. 11.
The like is showed by the example of David, who resisted easily many assaults
of adversity: but yet fell dangerously in time of prosperity. Whereby
appears that virtuous men have no less war in time of peace, than in time of
persecution: and that never there wants occasion of bearing the cross, and
suffering affliction, to him that will accept of the same. And this may suffice
for this first point, to prove that every man must enter into heaven by
tribulation, as Saint Paul says.

The cause why God sends affliction to the godly.
7 Touching the second, why God would have this matter so: it were sufficient to
answer, that it pleased him best so, without seeking any further reason of his
meaning heerin: There was great reason in it, for that, seeing man had sinned by
man was the justice of God to be satisfied, which notwithstanding no man, but
he alone, could do. Whereby it may seem, that although God has given to this
our Author a very good gift in persuading to godliness of life (for which we
have to aesteem of him accordingly:) yet has he not given him therwithal so
full a knowledge of the mystery of our redemption in Christ. So it is less
marvel, that he is in matters of controversy further to seek, than otherwise
by his godly disposition, we may think that he should.
without al reason in our sight, to abase his Son so much as to send him hither
into this world, to suffer and die for us. Or if we will needs have a reason
heerof, this one might be sufficient for all: that seeing we look for so great a
glory as we do, we should labor a little first for the same, and so be made
somewhat worthy of Gods favor, and exaltation. But yet for that it has pleased
his divine majesty, not only to open unto us his will and determination for our
suffering in this life; but also diverse reasons of his most holy purpose and
pleasure therein, for our further encouragement and consolation which do suffer:
I will in this place repeat some of the same, for declaration of his exceeding
great love, and fatherly care toward us.

8 The first cause then, and the most principal, 1 Increase of glory.
is to increase thereby our glory in the life to come. For having appointed by
his eternal wisdom and justice, that none shall be crowned there, 2. Tim. 2.
Apoc. 2.
but such as endure (in some good measure) a fight in this world: the more and
greater combats that he gives (together with sufficient grace to overcome
therein) the greater crown of glory prepares he for us at our resurrection.
This cause touches the apostle in the words alleged of the saints of the old
testament, to wit, Heb. 11.
that they received no deliverance from their miseries in this world, to the
end they might find a better resurrection in the world to come. This also meant
Christ expressly when he said; Matt. 5.
Happy are they which suffer persecution, for theirs is the kingdom of
heaven: happy are you when men speak evil, and persecute you, etc. Rejoice and
be glad (I say) for that your reward is great in heaven. Hither also do
appertain al those promises; Of gaining life, Mat. 10. Mat. 19. Esai. 56.
by leesing life: of receiving a hundred for one, and the like. Heerhence do
proceed al those large promises to mortification, and newnes of life. In both
which are great conflicts against the flesh, world, and our own sensuality,
and cannot be performed but by sufferings and affliction. Finally, Saint Paul
declares this matter fully; when he says; That a little and short tribulation
in this life works a weight of glory above al measure in the hight of heaven.

2 Hate of the world.
9 The second cause why God appointed this, is to draw us thereby from the love
of the world, his professed enemy: as in the next chapter shall be showed at
large. This cause Saint Paul utters in these words; 1. Cor. 11.
We are punished of God, to the end we should not be damned with this world.
Even then, as a nurse, that to wean her child from the liking of her milk, does
anoint her teat with alloes, or some other such bitter thing: so our merciful
father, that would retire us from the love of worldly delites, whereby infinite
men do perish daily, uses to send tribulation: which of al other things has
most force to work that effect: as we see in the example of the prodigal son,
Luc. 15.
who could by no means be stayed from his pleasures, but only by affliction.

3 A medicin to cure our diseases.
10 Thirdly, God uses tribulation as a most present and sovereign medicin, to
heal us of many diseases, otherwise almost incurable. As first, of a certain
blindness, and careless negligence in our estate, contracted by wealth, and
prosperity. In which sense the scripture says; that Affliction gives
understanding. Eccl. 28. Pro. 29. John 12. (...) 4. (...).
And the wise man affirms, that The rod brings wisdom: as also the sight of
Toby was restored by the bitter gall of a fish. And we have clear examples in
Nabuchodonosor, Saul, Antiochus, and Manasses: al which came to see their own
faults by tribulation; which they would never have done in time of prosperity.
The like we read of the brethren of Joseph, who falling into some affliction in
Egypt, Genesis 42.
presently entered into their own conscience, and said; We suffer those things
woorthily, for that we sinned against our brother. And as tribulation brings
this light, whereby we see our own defects: so helps it greatly to remoove and
cure the same: wherein it may be well likened unto the rod of Moises. For as that
rod striking the hard rocks, Exo. 17. Deuteronomy. 8. Psa. 77.
brought forth water, as the scripture says: so, this rod of affliction
falling upon stony hearted sinners, mollifieth them to contrition, and
oftentimes brings forth the fluds of tears to repentance. In respect whereof,
Tobi. 3.
holy Toby says to God; In time of tribulation thou forgivest sin. Job. 23.
Pro. 17. Eccl. 2. Esai. 1. Ierem. 9.
And for like effect, it is compared also to a file of iron, which takes away
the rust of the soul: also to a purgation that drives out corrupt humors: and
finally to a goldsmiths fire, which consumes away the reffuse metals, and
fineth the gold to his perfection. I will try thee by fire to the quik (says
God to a sinner by Esaias the prophet) and I will take away al thy tin, and
reffuse metal. And again by Jeremy; I will melt them; and try them by fire.
This he meant of the fire of tribulation, whose property is (according as the
scripture says) to purge and fine the soul, as fire purges and fineth gold in
the furnace. Sap. 3. Zac. 13.
For besides the purging and remooving of greater sins, by consideration, and
contrition (which tribulation works, as has been showed:) it purges also the
rust of infinite evil passions, appetites, and humors in man: as the humor of
pride, of vain glory, of sloth, of choler, of delicate nisenes, and a thousand
mo, which prosperity ingendereth in us. This God declares by the prophet
Ezechiel, saying of a rustie soul; Eze. 24.
Put her naked upon the hot coals, and let her heat there, until her brass be
melted from her, and until her corruption be burned out, and her rust consumed.
There has been much labor and sweat taken about her, and yet her overmuch
rust is not gone out of her. Job. 33.
This also signifies holy Job, when having said, that God instructs a man by
discipline (or correction) to the end he may turn him from the things that he
has done, and deliver him from pride: (which is understood of his sinful acts)
he adds a little after, verse. 25.
the manner of this purgation, saying; His flesh being consumed by punishments,
let him return again to the dais of his youth. That is, al his fleshly humors
and passions, being now consumed by punishments and tribulations, let him begin
to live again in such purity of soul, as he did at the beginning of his youth,
before he had contracted these evil humors and diseases.

4 A preservative.
11 Neither only is tribulation a strong medicin to heal sin: and to purge away
the reffuse metals in us of brass, Eze. 22.
tin, iron, lead, and dross, as God by Ezechiel says: but also a most
excellent preservative against sin for the time to come: according as good king
David said; Psalm. 17.
Thy discipline (O Lord) has corrected me for evermore. That is, it has made
me wary, and watchful, not to commit sin again, according as the scripture
says in another place; Agreevous infirmity or affliction makes the fool
sober. Eccl. 31.
For which cause the prophet Jeremy calls tribulation; Virgam vigilantem: A
watchful rod. Ierem. 1.
That is, as Saint Ierom expounds it, a rod that makes a man watchful. The
same signified God, when he said by Ose the prophet; Osee. 2.
I will hedge in thy way with thorns. That is, I will so close thy life on every
side with the remembrance and fear of affliction, that thou shall not dare to
tread awry, lest thou tread upon a thorn. Al which, good David expresses of
himself in these words; Psalm. 18.
Before I was humbled and brought low by affliction, I did sin and offend thee
(O Lord) but after that time, I have kept thy commandments.

12 Of this also appears another cause, 5 A prevention of punishment.
why God afflicts his elect in this life: and that is, to prevent his justice
upon them, in the world to come. Touching which, Saint Barnard says thus;
Sermon. 55. in Cantic.
Oh would to God some man would now beforehand, provide for my head abundance
of waters, and to mine eyes a fountain of tears: for so happily the burning
fire should take no hold, where running tears had cleansed before. And the
reason of this is, (as that holy man himself notes after) for that God has
said by Naum the prophet; Naum. 1.
I have afflicted thee once, and I will not afflict thee again: there shall not
come from me a double tribulation.

6 To prove us.
13 Sixtlie, God sends tribulation upon his servants, to prove them thereby,
whether they be faithful and constant or no: That is, to make themselves and
other men see and confess, how faithful or unfaithful they are. This after a
sort was figured, when Isaac would grope and touch his son Jacob, Genesis 27.
before he would bless him. And this the scripture expresses plainly, when
talking of the tribulations laid upon Abraham. It adds; Tentavit Deus
Abraham: Genesis 22.
God tempted Abraham. By these means to prove him. And Moises said to the
people of Israel; Deuteronomy. 8.
Thou shall remember how thy God led thee forty years about the desert to
afflict thee, and tempt thee: to the end it might appeer what was in thy heart:
whether thou would keep his commandments or no. And again, a few chapters
after; Your God and Lord does tempt you to the end it may be manifest whether
you love him or no, Deu. 13.
with all your heart, and with all your soul. In which sense, also the scripture
says of Ezechias, after many praises given unto him; That God left him for a
time to be tempted, 2. Par. 32.
that the thoughts of his heart might thereby be made manifest. And that this is
Gods fashion toward al good men, king David shows in the person of al, Psalm.
63.
when he says; Thou have prooved us (O Lord) thou have examined us by fire:
thou have laid tribulation upon our baks, and have brought men upon our heads.
And yet how well he liked of this matter, he signifies, when he calls for
more thereof in another place, saying; Psalm. 25.
Try me (O Lord) and tempt me: burn my reins and heart within me. That is, try
me by the way of tribulation and persecution, search out the secrets of my heart
and reins: let the world see, whether I will stick to thee in adversity or no.
Thus said that holy prophet, well knowing that, which in another place the
holy Ghost utters; Eccl. 2.
that As the furnace tries the potters vessels, so tribulation tries men. For
as the sound vessels only do hold when they come to the furnace, and those
which are crased do break in pieces: so in time of tribulation and persecution,
the virtuous only stand to it, and the counterfeit bewray themselves: according
to the saying of Christ; In tempore tentationis recedunt; Luc. 8.
They depart from me in time of temptation.

14 The seventh reason, 7 To make men run to God.
why God lays tribulation upon the virtuous, is, thereby to make them run unto
him for aid and help: even as the mother, to make her child more to love her,
and to run unto her, procures the same to be made afraid and terrified by
others. This, God expresses plainly by the prophet Ose, saying of those that
he loved; I will draw them unto me, in the ropes of Adam, in the chains of love,
Ose. 11.
and will seem unto them as though I raised a yoke upon their iaw bones. By the
ropes of Adam, he means affliction, whereby he drew Adam to know himself: as
also appears by that he adds of the heavy yoke of tribulation, which he
will lay upon the heads and faces of his servants, as chains of love, thereby to
draw them unto him. This chain had drawn David unto him, when he said; O Lord,
Psalm. 31.
thou art my refuge from the tribulation of sinners. Esai. 26.
As also those whereof Esaias says; They sought thee out (O Lord) in their
affliction. Also those of whom David said; Infirmities were multiplied upon
them, Psalm. 15.
and after that, they made haste to come. And God says generally of al good
men; Ose. 6.
They will rise betimes in the morning, and come to me in their tribulation.
Wherefore holy king David, desiring to do certain men good, and to win them to
God, says in one of his psalms; Fill their faces (O Lord) with shame and
confusion, Psalm. 82.
and then will they seek unto thy name. And this is true (as I said) in the elect
and chosen servants of God: but in the reprobate, this rope draws not; this
yoke holds not; neither does this chain of love win them unto God. Whereof God
himself complains, Ierem. 2.
saying; In vain have I stricken your children; for they have not received my
discipline. Ierem. 5.
And again the prophet Jeremy says of them to God; Thou have crushed them,
and they have refused to receive thy discipline: they have hardened their faces
even as a rok, and will not return to thee. Behold, they have rent the yoke, and
broken the chains.

15 Of this now ensues an eight reason, 8 To manifest Gods power and love in
delivering.
why God brings his servants into affliction: to wit, thereby to show his
power and love in delivering them. For as in this world a princely mind
desires nothing more, than to have occasion whereby to show his ability and
good will unto his deer frind: so God, which has al occasions in his own hands,
and passes al his creatures together in greatness of love, and nobility of
mind, works purposely diverse occasions and opportunities, whereby to show and
exercise the same. So he brought the three children into the burning furnace,
thereby to show his power and love in delivering them. Dan. 3.6.13. Job. 1.2.
Genesis 31. Tob. 2.12.
So he brought Daniel, into the lions den; Susanna, unto the point of death;
Job, into extreme misery; Joseph, into prison; Toby, unto blindness: thereby to
show his power and love in their deliverance. For this cause also did Christ
suffer the ship to be almost drowned, Matt. 8. Mat. 14.
before he would awake: and Saint Peter to be almost under water, before he
would take him by the hand.

16 And of this one reason, 9 The joy of deliverance.
many other reasons and most comfortable causes do appeer of Gods dealing
heerin. As first, that we being delivered from our afflictions, might take more
joy and delight thereof, than if we had never suffered the same. For as water is
more grateful to the waifaring man, after a long drith; and a calm more
pleasant unto passengers after a troublesome tempest: so is our deliverie more
sweet after persecution or tribulation: according as the scripture says;
Speciosa misericordia Dei in tempore tribulationis: Eccl. 35.
The mercy of God is beautiful and pleasant in time of tribulation. This
signified also Christ, John. 16.
when he said; Your sorrow shall be turned into joy: that is, you shall rejoice,
that ever you were sorrowful. This had David prooved, Psalm. 22.
when he said; Thy rod (O Lord) and thy staff have comforted me: that is, I
take great comfort that ever I was chastised with them. And again; According to
the multitude of my sorrows, thy consolations have made ioiful my mind: Psalm.
93.
that is, for every sorrow that I received in time of affliction, I receive now
a consolation after my deliverance. And again, in another place; I will exult
and rejoice in thy mercy, O Lord. And wherefore (good king) will thou so
rejoice? It follows immediately; Psalm. 30.
For that thou have respected mine abasement, and have delivered my soul from
the necessity wherein she was, and have not left me in the hands of mine
enemy. This then is one most gracious meaning of our loving and merciful
father, in afflicting us for a time; to the end, our joy may be the greater
after our deliverance, as no dowt but it was, in all those whom I have named
before, delivered by Gods mercy* I mean, Abraham, Joseph, Daniel, Sidrach,
Misach and Abdenago; Susanna, Job, Tobias, Peter, and the rest: who took more
joy after their deliverance, than if they had never been in affliction at al.
When Judith had delivered Bethulia, and returned thither with Holofernes head:
Iudit. 6.14.15.
there was more hearty joy in that city, than ever there would have been, if
it had not been in distress. Acts. 12.
When S. Peter was delivered out of prison by the angel: there was more joy for
his deliverance in the church, than could have been, if he had never been in
prison at al.

17 Out of this great joy resulteth another effect of our tribulation, 10
Thanks giving for our deliverance.
much pleasant to God, and comfortable to our selves: and that is, a most
hearty and earnest thanksgiving to God for our deliverance: such as the prophet
used, when he said, after his deliverance; Psalm. 58.
I for my part will sing of thy strength, and will exalt thy mercy betimes in the
morning, for that thou have been my aider and refuge, in the day of my
tribulation. Such hearty thanks and praise did the children of Israel yield to
God for their deliverance, when they were passed over the red sea in that
notable song of theirs, which begins; Exo. 15. 1. Reg. 2. Iudic. 5. Iudit.
12.
Cantemus Domino. And is registered by Moises in Exodus. From like hearty affect
came also those songs of Anna, Debora, and Judith, moved thereunto by the
remembrance of their affliction past. And finally, this is one of the cheifest
things that God esteems and desires at our hands: as he testifies by the
prophet, saying; Call upon me in the day of tribulation: I will deliver thee, and
thou shall honor me. Psalm. 49.


11 Emboldening us in Gods service.
18 Besides al these, God has yet further reasons of laieng persecution upon
us: as for example; for that by suffering, and perceiving indeed Gods
assistance and consolation therein, we come to be so hardy, bold, and constant
in his service, as nothing afterward can dismay us: Exodus 4.
even as Moises, though he were first afeard of the serpent made of his rod,
and fled away from it: yet, after by Gods commandment he had once taken it by
the tail, he feared it no more. This the prophet David expresses notably,
Psalm. 45.
when he says; God has been our refuge, and strength, and helper in our great
tribulations: and therefore we will not fear, if the whole earth should be
trouble, and the mountains cast into the midst of the sea. What greater
confidence can be imagined than this?

12 The exercise of all the virtues.
19 Again, by persecution and affliction God brings his children to the
exercise of many of those virtues that do belong to a Christian man, and to
enter into some reasonable possession of them. Faith.
As for example; Faith is exercised in time of tribulation, in considering the
causes of Gods exercising of us, and believing most assuredly the promises he
has made for our deliverance. Hope.
Hope is exercised in conceiving and assuring hirselfe of the reward promised
to them that suffer patience. Charity.
Charity is exercised in considering the love of Christ suffering for us, and
thereby provokes the afflicted to suffer again with him. Obedience.
Obedience is exercised in conforming our wills to the will of Christ. Patience
in bearing quietly. Patience. Humility.
Humility in abasing our selves in the sight of God. And so likewise al other
virtues, belonging to a good Christian, are stirred up, and established in man
by tribulation, according to the saying of S. Peter; God shall make perfect,
confirm, 1. Pet. 5.
and establish those, which have suffered a little for his name.

20 Finally, Gods meaning is, 13 To make us like unto Christ.
by laieng persecution and affliction upon us, to make us perfect Christians:
that is, like unto Christ our captain, whom the prophet calls; Virum dolorum,
and scientem infirmitatem: A man of sorrows, Esai. 53.
and one that had tasted of al manner of infirmities. Thereby to receive the more
glory at his return to heaven, and to make more glorious al those that will
take his part therein. To speak in one word: Crucified Christians.
God would make us by tribulation crucified Christians: which is the most
honorable title that can be given unto a creature: crucified (I say) and
mortified to the vanities of this world; to the flesh; and to our own
concupiscence and carnal desires: but quik and full of al lively spirit, to
virtue, godliness and devotion. This is the heavenly meaning of our sovereign
Lord and God, in sending us persecution, tribulation, and affliction: in
respect whereof holy Job dowteth not to say; Job. 5.
Blessed is the man that is afflicted by God. And Christ himself yet more
expressly; Happy are they which suffer persecution. Mat. 5.
If they are happy and blessed thereby: then are the worldly greatly awry,
which so much abhor the sufferance thereof: then is GOD but unthankfully dealt
withal by many of his children, who repine at this happiness bestowed upon them:
whereas indeed they should accept it with joy and thanksgiving. For proof and
better declaration whereof; I will enter now into the third point of this
chapter, to examine what reasons and causes there be, to induce us to this
joifulnes and contentation of tribulation.

21 And first, the reasons laid down already of Gods merciful, The third part
of this chapter, why tribulations should be received ioifully.
and fatherly meaning in sending us affliction, might be sufficient for this
matter: that is, to comfort and content any Christian man or woman, who takes
delight in Gods holy providence toward them. For if God do send affliction
unto us, for the increase of our glory in the life to come; for drawing us
from infection of the world; for opening our eyes, and curing our diseases; and
for preserving our souls from sin hereafter (as has been showed, who can be
justly displeased therewith, but such as are enemies unto their own good? We see
that for the obtaining of bodily health we are content, not only to admit many
bitter and unpleasant medicines: but also (if need require) to yield willingly
some part of our blood to be taken from us. And how much more should we do
this, to the end that we hazard not the eternal health and salvation of our
soul? But now further; if this medicin have so many mo commodities besides, as
have been declared: if it serve here for the punishment of our sin, du
otherwise at another place, in far greater quantity and rigor of justice: if
it make a trial of our estate, and do draw us to God: if it procure Gods love
toward us; yield matter of joy by our deliverance provoke us to thankfulness;
embolden and strengthen us: and finally, if it furnish us with all virtues, and
do make us like to Christ himself: then is there singular great cause, why we
should take comfort and consolation therein: for that, to come near and to be
like unto Christ, is the greatest dignity and preeminence in the world.
Lastly, if Gods eternal wisdom has so ordained and appointed, that this shall
be the badge and liverie of his Son; the high way to heaven, under the standard
of his cross: then ought we not to refuse this liverie; nor to fly this way,
but rather with good Peter and John to esteem it a great dignity, Acts. 5.
to be made worthy of the most blessed participation thereof. We see, that to
wear the colors of the prince, is thought a prerogative among courtiers in this
world: but to wear the robe or crown it self, were to great a dignity for any
inferior subject to receive. Yet Christ our Lord and king is content to impart
both of his with us. And how then ought we (I pray you) to accept thereof.

22 And now (as I have said) these reasons might be sufficient, to comfort and
make joiful al those that are called to suffer affliction and tribulation.
Special considerations of comfort in affliction.
But yet there want not some more particular considerations besides. Whereof the
first and most principal is, that this matter of persecution comes not by
chance or casualitie, or by any general direction from higher powers: but by
the special providence and peculiar disposition of God: as Christ shows at
large in Saint Mathews Gospel: Mat. 10.
that is, this heavenly medicin or potion is made unto us, by Gods own hand in
particular. Which Christ signifies, when he says; Shall I not drink the cup
which my father has given me? Ioh. 16.
That is, seeing my father has tempered a potion for me, shall I not drink it?
As who would say, it were too much ingratitude. Secondly, is to be noted, that
the very same hand of God, which tempered the cup for Christ his own Son, has
done the same also for us, according to Christ his saying; You shall drink of my
cup. Mat. 10.
That is, of the same cup which my father has tempered for me. Heerof it
follows; that, with what heart and love God tempered this cup unto his own
Son; with the same he has tempered it also to us: that is, altogether for our
good, and his glory. Thirdly, is to be noted, that this cup is tempered with
such special care (as Christ says) that what trouble or danger soever it seem
to work: Luc. 21. Mat. 10.
yet shall not one hair of our head perish by the same. Nay further is to be
noted, that which the prophet says; O Lord, Psalm. 79.
thou shall give us to drink in tears, in measure. That is, the cup of tears
and tribulation shall be so tempered in measure by our heavenly physician, as no
man shall have above his strength. The dose of aloes, and other bitter
ingredients shall be qualified with manna, and sufficient sweetness of heavenly
consolation; God is faithful (says Saint Paul) and will not suffer you to be
tempted above your ability. This is a singular point of comfort, 1. Cor. 10.
and ought alwais to be in our remembrance.

23 Beside this, we must consider that the appointing and tempering of this
cup, being now in the hands of Christ our Savior, by the full commission granted
him from his father: Mat. 28.
and he having learned by his own sufferings (as the apostle notifieth) what it
is to suffer in flesh and blood: Heb. 5.
we may be sure that he will not lay upon us more, than we can bear. For, as if
a man had a father or brother, a most skilful physician, and should receive a
purgation from them, tempered with their own hands, he might be sure it would
never hurt him; what rumbling soever it made in his belly for the time: so and
much more may we be assured of the potion of tribulation ministered us, by the
hand of Christ: Heb. 12.
though as the apostle says) it seem unto us unpleasant for a time. but above
al other comfortable cogitations, this is the greatest and most comfortable, to
consider, that he divides this cup only of love, as himself protests, and
the apostle prooveth: that is, he gives out portions of his cross (the
richest jewel that he makes account of) as worldly princes do their treasure,
Apoc. 3. Heb. 12.
unto none, Gods measure of tribulation goes according to the measure of his
love.
but unto chosen and picked frinds: and among them also, not equally to each
man, but to every one a measure, according to the measure of good will,
wherewith he loves him. This is evident by the examples before set down of his
dearest frinds, most of al afflicted in this life: that is, they received
greater portions of this treasure, for that his good will was greater toward
them. This also may be seen manifestly in the example of Saint Paul: of whom
after Christ had said to Ananias; Vas electionis est mihi: Acts. 9.
He is a chosen vessel unto me. He gives immediately the reason thereof; For I
will show unto him, what great things he must suffer for my name. Lo here: for
that he was a chosen vessel, therefore he must suffer great matters. Does not
the measure of suffering go then according to the measure of Gods love unto us?
Surely Saint Peter knew well how the matter went, 1. Pet. 2.
and therefore he writes thus; If you living well, do suffer with patience, this
is a grace (or privilege) before God. And again a little after; If you suffer
reproach in the name of Christ, 1. Pet. 4.
you are happy: for that the honor, and glory, and power of God, and of his
holy spirit, shall rest upon you.

24 Can there be any greater reward promised, or any more excellent dignity,
than to be made partaker of the honor, glory, and power of Christ? Is it
marvel now if Christ said; Happy are you when men revile and persecute you?
Mat. 5.
Is it marvel though he said; Gaudete in illa die, and exultate: Rejoice and
triumph ye at that day? Luc. 6.
Is it marvel though Saint Paul said; I take great pleasure, and do glory in
mine infirmities, or afflictions, in my reproaches, in my necessities, in my
persecutions, 2. Cor. 12.
in my distresses for Christ? Is it marvel if Peter and John, being reproched
and beaten at the judgment seat of the Jews, Acts. 5.
went away rejoicing that they were esteemed worthy to suffer contumely for
the name of Jesus? Is it marvel though Saint Paul accounted this such a high
privilege given to the Philippians, when he said; It is given to you, not only
to believe in Christ, Philip. 1.
but also to suffer for him, and to have the same combat, which you have seen
in me, and now hear of me? All this is no marvel (I say) seeing that suffering
with Christ, and bearing the cross with Christ, is as great preferment in the
court of heaven, as it should be in an earthly court, for the prince to take
off his own garment, and to lay it on the bak of one of his servants.

25 Of this now follows another consequent of singular consolation,
Tribulation a sign of predestination.
in time of affliction: and that is, that tribulation (especially when grace is
also given to bear it patiently) is a great conjecture of predestination to
eternal life (for, so much do al those arguments before touched insinuate:) as
also in the contrary part, to live in continual prosperity, is a dredful sign
of everlasting reprobation. This point is marvelously prooved by the apostle
unto the Hebrews, Heb. 12. Luc. 6. Luc. 16. Ps. 27. and 73. Psalm. 73. verse. 18.
and greatly urged. And Christ gives a plain signification in S. Luke, when he
says; Happy are you that weep now, for you shall laugh. And on the other side;
Woe unto you that laugh now, for And yet more vehemently than all this, does the
saying of Abraham to the rich man in hell (or rather Christ's words parabolically
attributed unto Abraham) confirm this matter: for he says to the rich man,
complaining of his torment; Remember child, that thou receivedst good in thy
life time. He does not say (as Saint Barnard well notes) Rapuisti, thou tookest
them by violence, but Recepisti, thou receivedst them. And yet this now is
objected against him as we see. David handles this matter in diverse places,
but purposely in two of his psalms, and that at large, and after long search
and much admiration, his conclusion of wicked men prospered above other in the
world is this; Veruntamen In this they vary from S. Ierom, who translateth
(according to the Hebrew) In lubrico posuisti eos: that is thou have set them
in slipperie places. So in this also the old translation follows not the
hebrew nor Ierom, but the Greek translation of the Seventy interpreters:
saving that it does omit Kaca, Mala: and so makes the sense obscure. But so
much as therein it swerveth from the purity of the text: so much does that which
heeron they build, want sufficient warrant in this place, which notwithstanding
(being soberly understood) is agreeable to the justice of God, and stands by
warrant of other places. In appendice Tom. 8 Hie. in eodem psalm.
propter dolos posuisti eis, deiecisti eos dum allevarentur. Thou have given
them prosperity (O Lord) to deceive them withal: and thou have indeed thrown
them down, by exalting them. That is, thou have thrown them down to the
sentence of damnation, in thy secret and inscrutable determination. Here the
comparison of Saint Gregory takes place: Com. in Job.
that as the oxen appointed to the slaughter, are let run a fatting at their
pleasure, and the other kept under daily labor of the yoke: so fares it with
evil and good men. In like manner, the tree that bears no fruit, is never
beaten (as we see) but only the fruitful: Mat. 3.7. Ep. Jude.
and yet the other (as Christ says) is reserved for the fire. The sik man that
is past al hope of life, is suffered by the physician to have whatsoever he
lusts after: but he whose health is not despaired, cannot have that liberty
granted. To conclude, the stones that must serve for the glorious temple of
Solomon were hewed, beaten, 3. Reg. 6.
and pollished without the church, at the quarrie side: for that no stroke of
hammer might be heard within the temple. Saint Peter says, 1. Pet. 2.
that the virtuous are chosen stones, to be placed in the spiritual building of
God in heaven, Apo. 21.
where there is no beating, no sorrow, no tribulation. Here then must we be
pollished, hewed, and made fit for that glorious temple: here (I say) in the
quarrie of this world: here must we be fined, here must we feel the blow of the
hammer, and be most glad when we hear or feel the same: for that it is a sign
of our election, to that most glorious house of Gods eternal mansion.

Tribulation brings the company of God himself.
26 Beside this matter of predestination and election, there is yet another
thing of no small comfort to the godly afflicted, founded on these words of
God; Psalm. 90.
Cum ipso sum in tribulatione: I am with him in tribulation. Whereby is promised
the company of God himself in affliction and persecution. This is a singular
motive (says S. Barnard) to stir men up withal to embrace tribulation, seeing
in this world for good company, men adventure to do any thing. Joseph was
carried captive into Egypt, and GOD went down with him (as the scripture
says:) yea more than that, he went into the dungeon, and was in chains with
him. Genesis 37.
Sidrach, Misac, and Abdenago were cast into a burning furnace, Sap. 10.
and presently there was a fourth came to bear them company, of whom
Nabuchodonosor says thus; Can. 3.
Did we not put three men only bound into the fire? And his servants answered;
Yea verily. But behold (says he) I see four men unbound walking in the midst
of the fire: and the shape of the fourth is like the Son of God. Christ
restored, as he passed by, a certain beggar unto his sight, which had been
blind from his nativitie. John. 9.
For which thing, the man being called in question, and speaking somewhat in
the praise of Christ, Note this example.
for the benefit received, he was cast out of the synagog by the Pharisees.
Whereof Christ hearing, sought him out presently, and comforting his heart
bestowed upon him the light of mind, much more of importance than that of the
body, given him before. By this and like examples, it appears, that a man is
no sooner in affliction and tribulation for justice sake, but streightway
Christ is at hand to bear him company: and if his eyes might be opened, as the
eyes of Elizeus his disciple was, 4. Reg. 16.
to see his companions, the troops of Angels (I mean) which attend upon their
Lord in this his visitation: no dowt but his heart would greatly be comforted
therewith.

27 But that which the eye cannot see, The assistance of Gods grace in
tribulation.
the soul feels: that is, she feels the assistance of Gods grace amidst the
depth of al tribulations. This he has promised again and again: this he has
sworn: and this he performs most faithfully to al those that suffer meekly
for his name. This Saint Paul most certainly assured himself of, when he said,
that he did glory in all his infirmities and tribulations, to the end that
Christ his virtue might dwell in him: that is, to the end that Christ should
assist him more abundantly with his grace; Cu^ enim infirmor, tunc potens sum:
For when I am in most infirmity, then am I most strong, says he: that is, the
more tribulations and afflictions are laid upon me, the stronger is the aid of
Christ's grace unto me. And therefore the same apostle writes thus of all the
apostles together; 2. Cor. 4.
We suffer tribulation in all things; but yet we are not distressed: we are
brought into perplexities; but yet we are not forsaken: we suffer persecution;
but yet we are not abandoned: we are flung down to the ground; but yet we
perish not. This then ought to be a most sure and secure staff in the hand of
al Christians afflicted; that, whatsoever befall unto them: yet the grace of God
will never fail to hold them up, and bear them out therein: for in this case most
true and certain is that saying of Saint Austen, Sermon. 88. de temp. and de not.
and gra. cap. 26.
so often repeated by him in his works; that God never forsakes any man,
except he be rejected and first forsaken by man.

28 For the last reason of comfort in affliction, I will join two things
together of great force and efficacy to this matter. The first whereof, is the
expectation of reward; the other is the shortness of time wherein we have to
suffer: both are touched by Saint Paul in one sentence, when he says; 2. Cor.
4.
That a little, and momentain tribulation in this world, works an eternal
weight of glory in the height of heaven. By momentain he shows the little
time we have to suffer: and by eternal weight of glory, he expresses the
greatness of the reward prepared in heaven for recompense of that suffering.
Christ also joineth both these comforts together, when he says; Apo. 22.
Behold, I come quikly, and my reward is with me. In that he promises to come
quikly, he signifies, that our tribulation shall not endure long: by that he
brings his reward with him, he assures us that he will not come empty
handed, but ready furnished, to recompense our labor thoroughly. And what
greater means of encouragement could he use than this? If a man did bear a
very heavy burden: yet if he were sure to be well paid for his labor, and that
he had but a little way to bear the same: he would strain himself greatly, to
go through to his wais end, rather than for sparing so short a labor, to leese
so large, and so present a reward. This is our Lords most merciful dealing, to
comfort us in our affliction, and to animate us to hold out manfully for a
time, though the poize seem heavy on our shoulders: the coming of our Lord is
even at hand, and the judge is before the gates, Iaco. 5. Mat. 11. Ap. 7.21.
Gal. 6.
who shall refresh us, and wipe away al our tears, and place us in his kingdom
to reap joy without fainting. And then shall we prove the saying of holy Saint
Paul to be true; that The sufferings of this world are not worthy of that glory
which shall be revealed in us. Romans 8.
And this may be sufficient for the reasons left us of comfort in tribulation
and affliction.

29 And thus having declared the first three points promised in this chapter: 4
The fourth part of this chapter.
there remains only to say a word or two of the fourth: that is, what we have
to do for our parts in time of persecution and affliction. And this might be
dispatched in saying only, that we have to conform our selves to the will and
meaning of God, uttered before in the causes of tribulation. But yet for more
ease and better remembrance of the same, I will briefly run over the principal
points thereof. First then we have to aspire to that (if we can) which Christ
counsels; Gaudete and exultate: Rejoice and triumph. 1 To rejoice in
tribulation: or at leastwise to have patience.
Or if we cannot arrive to this perfection: yet to do as the apostle wills;
Omne gaudium existimate cum in varias tentationes incideritis: Esteem it a
matter worthy of al joy, when we fall into diverse temptations. That is, if we
cannot rejoice at it indeed: yet to think it a matter in it self worthy of
rejoicement: Luc. 6. Iac. 1.
reprehending our selves, for that we cannot reach unto it. And if we cannot
come thus high neither (as indeed we ought to do) yet in any case to remember,
Heb. 10.
what in another place he says; Patientia vobis necessaria est, vt reportetis
promissionem: You must of necessity have patience, if you will receive Gods
promise of everlasting life.

2 To come to God by fervent prayer.
30 Secondly, we ought to do as the apostles did, when they were in the most
terrible tempest of the sea (Christ being with them, but asleep) that is, Mat.
8.
we must go and awake him: we must cry unto him with the prophet; Exurge, quare
obdormis Domine: Psat. 43.
O Lord arise, why do thou sleep in our misery? This wakening of Christ does
please him woonderfully if it be done, with that assured confidence, and of true
affectioned children, Mark. 4.
wherewith Saint Mark describes the apostles to have awakened Christ. For their
words were these; Master, does it not appertain unto you, that we perish here?
As who would say; Are not we your disciples and servants? Are not you our Lord
and master? Is not the cause yours? Is not al our trust and hope in you? How
chances it then, that you sleep, and suffer us to be thus tossed and tumbled,
as if we appertained nothing unto you? With this affection prayed Esaias, when he
said; Attend (O Lord) from heaven: Esai. 63.
look hither from the holy habitation of thy glory: where is thy zeal? Where
is thy fortitude? Where is the multitude of thy merciful bowels? Have they shut
themselves up now toward me? Thou art our father: Abraham has not known us,
and Israel has been ignorant of us: thou art our father (O Lord) turn thy
self about for thy servants sake, for love of the tribe of thine inheritance.
Thus I say we must call upon God: thus we must awake him, when he seems to
sleep in our miseries, with earnest, with devout, with continual prayer: alwais
having in our mind that most comfortable parable of Christ, wherein he says,
Luc. 11.
that if we should come to our neighbors door, and knock at midnight to borrow
some bread, when he were in bed with his children, and most loath to rise: yet
if we persevere in asking, and beating at his door still, though he were not our
frind, yet would he rise at length, and give us our demand, thereby at least to
be rid of our crieng. And how much more will God do this (says Christ) who both
loves us, and tendereth our case most mercifully.

An important note.
31 But yet here is one thing to be noted in this matter: and that is, that
Christ suffered the ship almost to be covered with waves (as the Evangelist
says, Mat. 8.
before he would awake, thereby to signify that the measure of temptations is
to be left only unto himself: it is sufficient for us to rest upon the
apostles words; He is faithful, 1. Cor. 10.
and therefore he will not suffer us to be tempted above our strength. We may not
examine or mistrust his doings: we may not inquire why does he this? Or why
suffers he that? Or how long will he permit these evils to reign? God is a
great God in all his doings: and when he sends tribulation, he sends a great
deal together, to the end he may show his great power, in delivering us, and
recompenseth it after, with as great measure of comfort. His temptations
oftentimes do go very deep, thereby to try the very hearts and reins of men. He
went far with Elias, when he caused him to fly into a mountain, and there most
desirous of death, to say; 3. Reg. 19.
They have killed al thy prophets (O Lord) and I am left alone, and now they
seek to kill me also. He went far with David, when he made him cry out; Psalm.
30.
Why do thou turn thy face away from me, O Lord? Why do thou forget my
poverty and tribulation? And in another place again, I said with my self in
the excess of my mind: I am cast out from the face of thine eyes, O Lord. God
went far with the apostles, when he enforced one of them to write; 2. Cor. 1.
We will not have you ignorant (brethren) of our tribulation in Asia, wherein we
were oppressed above al measure, and above al strength: insomuch as it lothed
us to live any longer. But yet above al others, he went furthest with his own
deer Son, when he constrained him to utter those pitiful, and most lamentable
words upon the cross; My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Who can now
complain of any proof or temptation whatsoever, laid upon him, Mat. 22. Psalm.
21.
seeing GOD would go so far with his own deer and only Son?

32 Heerof then insueth the third thing, necessary unto us in tribulation:
which is, 3 Magnanimity with a strong faith.
magnanimity, grounded upon a strong and invincible faith of Gods assistance,
and of our final deliverance, how long soever he delay the matter, and how
terrible soever the storm do seem for the time. This God requires at our
hands, as may be seen by the example of the disciples, who cried not; We
perish, before the waves had covered the ship, Mat. 8. Luc. 8.
as Saint Matthew writes: and yet Christ said unto them; Vbi est fides vestra:
Where is your faith? Saint Peter also was not afeard until he was almost under
water, as the same Evangelist records: and yet Christ reprehended him,
saying; Thou man of little faith, why did thou dowt? Mat. 14.
What then must we do in this case deer brother? Surely we must put on that
mighty faith of valiant king David, who upon the most assured trust he had of
Gods assistance, Psalm. 17.
said; In Deo meo transgrediar muru^: In the help of my God I will go through
the wall. Of which invincible faith Saint Paul was also, when he said; Phili. 4.
Omnia possum in eo qui me confortat: I can do al things in him that comfort
and strengthens me. Nothing is unpossible, nothing is too hard for me, by his
assistance. We must be (as the scripture says) Quasi Leo confidens absque
terrore: Pro. 28.
Like a bold and confident Lion, which is without terror. That is, we must not
be astonished at any tempest, any tribulation, any adversity. We must say with
the prophet David experienced in these matters; I will not fear many thousands
of people that should inviron or besiege me together. Psalm. 3.
Psalm. 21.
If I should walk amidst the shadow of death. I will not fear. If whole armies
should stand against me, yet my heart should not tremble. Psalm. 26.
My hope is in God, and therefore I will not fear what man can do unto me. Psa.
117.
God is my aider, and I will not fear what flesh can do unto me: God is my
helper and protector, and therefore I will despise and contemn mine enemies.
Psalm. 55.
And another prophet in like sense; Behold, God is my savior, Esai. 12.
and therefore will I deal confidently, and will not fear. These were the speeches
of holy prophets: of men that knew well what they said, and had often tasted of
affliction themselves: and therefore could say of their own experience how
infallible Gods assistance is therein.

33 To this supreme courage, magnanimity, and Christian fortitude, Christian
fortitude.
the scripture exhorts us, when it says; If the spirit of one that is in
authority, do rise against thee: Eccl. 10. Eccl. 4.
see thou yield not from thy place unto him. And again, another scripture
says; Strive for justice, even to the loss of thy life: and stand for equity
unto death it self: and God shall overthrow thine enemies for thee. And Christ
himself, yet more effectually recommendeth this matter in these words; Luc. 12.
I say unto you my frinds, be not afraid of them which kill the body, and
afterward have nothing else to do against you. And S. Peter adds further;
Neque conturbemini. that is; Do not only not fear them, 1. Pet. 3.
but (which is less) do not so much as be troubled for all that flesh and blood
can do against you.

34 Christ goes further in the Apocalips, and uses marvelous speeches to
intise us to this fortitude. For these are his words; Apoc. 2.
Those ten dais some think to have been the ten general persecutions within the
first 300. years after Christ.
He that has an ear to hear, let him hear what the spirit says unto the
churches. To him that shall conquer, I will give to eat of the tree of life,
which is in the paradise of my God. This says the first and the last: he that
was dead, and now is alive: I know thy tribulatition, and thy poverty: but
thou art rich indeed, and art blasphemed by those that say they are true
Israelites, But others rather think that ten does here signify many (as in
some other places of scripture) and dais, as they are broken of by the nights
that come betwixt, so to signify such times of trial as should now and then
have times of breathing likewise; that so the faithful may be refeshed, and
gather their strength against a fresh assalt ensuing.
ten days. But be faithful unto death, and I will give thee a crown of life. He
that has an ear to hear, let him hear what the spirit says unto the
churches: he that shall overcome, shall not be hurt by the second death. Cap. 3.
And he that shall overcome and keep my works unto the end: I will give unto him
authority over nations, even as I have received it from my father: and I will
give him besides, the morning star. He that shall overcome, shall be appareled in
white garments: and I will not blot his name out of the book of life, but will
confess his name before my father, and before his angels. Behold, I come
quikly: hold fast that thou have, lest another man receive thy crown. He that
shall conquer, I will make him a pillar in the temple of my God, and he shall
never go forth more: and I will write upon him the name of my God, and the name
of the city of my God, which is new Jerusalem. He that shall conquer, I will
give unto him to sit with me in my throne: even as I have conquered, and do sit
with my father in his throne.

35 Hitherto are the words of Christ to Saint John. And in the end of the same
book, after he had described the joies and glory of heaven at large, he
concludes thus; And he that sat on the throne said to me; Write these words,
for that they are most faithful and true. Qui vicerit possidebit haec, Cap. 21.
and ero illi Deus, and ille erit mihi filius: timidis autem, and incredulis,
etc. pars illorum erit in stagno ardenti, igne, and sulphur, quod est mors
secunda: He that shall conquer, shall possese all the ioies that I have here
spoken of: and I will be his God, and he shall be my son. But they which shall be
fearful to fight, or incredulous of these things that I have said: their
portion shall be in the lake burning with fire and brimstone, which is the
second death.

36 Here now we see both allurements, and threats; good, and evil; life, and
death; Eccl. 15.
the joies of heaven, and the burning lake, proposed unto us. We may stretch
out our hands unto which we will. If we fight and conquer (as by Gods grace we
may) then are we to enjoy the promises laid down before. If we show our selves
either unbeleeving in these promises, or fearful to take the fight in hand,
being offered unto us: then fall we into the danger of the contrary threats:
even as Saint John affirms in another place, that certain noble men did,
John. 12.
among the Jews, who believed in Christ, but yet durst not confess him, for
fear of persecution.

37 Here then must insu another virtue, in us, most necessary to al those that
are to suffer tribulation and affliction; and that is, A firm resolution.
a strong and firm resolution, to stand and go through, what opposition or
contradiction soever we find in the world, either of fawning flattery, or
persecuting cruelty. This the scripture teaches, crieng unto us; Esto firmus
in via Domini: Be firm, Eccl. 9.
and immooveable in the way of the Lord. And again; State in fide: viriliter
agite: Stand to your faith, and play you the men. 1. Co. 16.
And yet further; Confide in Deo, and mane in loco tuo: Trust in God and abide
firm in thy place. And finally; Eccl. 11.
Confortamini and non dissolvantur manus vestrae: 2. Par. 15.
Take courage unto you, and let not your hands be dissolved from the work you
have begun.

38 This resolution had the three children, Sidrach, Misach, and Abdenago, when
having heard the flattering speech, and infinite threats of cruel
Nabuchodonosor, they answered with a quiet spirit; Dan. 3.
O king, we may not be careful to answer you, to this long speech of yours. For
behold, our God is able (if he will) to deliver us from this furnace of fire,
which you threaten, and from all that you can do otherwise against us. But yet
if it should not please him so to do: yet you must know (Sir king) that we do
not worship your gods, nor yet adore your golden idol, which you have set up.

39 This resolution had Peter and John, who being so often brought before the
council, and both commanded, threatened, and beaten, to talk no more of Christ:
answered still; Obedire oportet Deo magis quam hominibus: Act. 4.5.
We must obey God, rather than men. The same had Saint Paul also, when being
requested with tears of the Christians in Caesarea, Acts. 21.
that he would forbear to go to Jerusalem, for that the holy Ghost had
revealed to many the trobles which expected him there: he answered; What mean
you to weep thus, and to afflict my heart? I am not only ready to be in bonds
for Christ's name in Jerusalem: but also to suffer death for the same. And in
his Epistle to the Romans, he yet further expresses this resolution of his,
Romans 8.
when he says; What then shall we say to these things? If God be with us, who
will be against us? Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Shall
tribulation? Shall distress? Shall hunger? Shall nakedness? Shall peril? Shall
persecution? Shall the sword? I am certain, that neither death, nor life, nor
angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come,
nor strength, nor height, nor depth, nor any creature else, shall be able to
separate us from the love of God, which is in Jesus Christ our Lord.

40 Finally, this was the resolution of all the holy martyrs and confessors,
and other servants of God: whereby they have withstood the temptations of the
devil, the allurements of flesh and blood, and all the persecutions of tyrants,
exacting things unlawful at their hands. I will allege one example out of the
Which book is not any part of canonical scripture: nevertheles this example may
well be true, for that such constancy is often found in the children of God.
second book of Maccabes, and that before the coming of Christ, but yet nigh
unto the same, and therefore no marvel (as the fathers do note) though it took
some heat of Christian fervor and constancy toward martyrdom. The example is
woonderful, for that in man's sight it was but for a It was a manifest breach of
the law of God: and so no small matter to them that knew it.
small matter required at

41 It came to pass that seven brethren were apprehended together in those
dais, and brought (with their mother) to the king Antiochus, 2. Mac. 7.
and there compelled with torments of whipping, and other instruments, to the
eating of swines flesh against the law. A marvelous constancy of the seven
Machabees and their mother.
At what time one of them (which was the eldest) said; What do thou seek? Or
what will thou learn out of us, O king? We are ready here rather to die, than
to break the ancient laws of our God. Whereat the king being greatly offended,
commanded the frieng pans and pots of brass to be made burning hot: which
being ready, he caused the first man's tongue to be cut of, with the tops of his
fingers, and toes, as also with the skin of his head, the mother and other
brothers looking on, and after that to be fried until he was dead. Which being
done, the second brother was brought to torment, and after his hair plukt off
from his head, together with the skin, they asked him whether he would yet eat
swines flesh or no, before he was put to the rest of his torments? Whereto he
answered; No: and thereupon was (after many torments) slain with the other. Who
being dead, the third was taken in hand, and being willed to put forth his
tongue: he held it forth quikly together with both his hands to be cut off,
saying confidently; A worthy saying.
I received both tongue and hands from heaven, and now I despise them both for
the law of God, for that I hope to receive them al of him again. And after they
had in this sort tormented and put to death six of the brethren, every one most
constantly protesting his faith, and the joy he had to die for Gods cause:
there remained only the youngest, whom Antiochus (being ashamed that he could
pervert never a one of the former) endeavored by all means possible to draw from
his purpose, by promising and swering, that he should be a rich and happy man,
and one of his cheef frinds, if he would yield. But when the youth was nothing
moved therewith: Antiochus called to him the mother, and exhorted her to save
her sons life, by persuading him to yield: which she faining to do, thereby to
have liberty to speak to her son: made a most vehement exhortation to him in
the Hebrew tongue, to stand to it, and to die for his conscience: which speech
being ended, the youth cried out with a loud voice, and uttered this noble
sentence worthy to be remembered; Quem sustinetis? Non obtempero praecepto
regis, sed praecepto legis: Whom do you stay for? I do not obey the
commandment of the king, but the commandment of the law of God. Whereupon both
he and his mother were presently (after many and sundry torments) put to death.

42 This then is the constant and immovable resolution which a Christian man
should have in all adversity of this life. Whereof Saint Ambrose says thus;
Lib. 8. off. 38.
Gratia preparandus est animus, exercenda men's, and stabilienda ad constantiam:
vt nullis perturbari animus possit terroribus, nullis frangi molestijs, nullis
supplicijs cedere. Our mind is to be prepared with grace, to be exercised, and
to be so established in constancy, as it may not be troubled with any terrors,
broken with any adversities, yield to any punishments or torments whatsoever.

How a man may come to an invincible resolution.
43 If you ask here how a man may come to this resolution: I answer, that Saint
Ambrose in the same place, puts two wais: the one is to remember the endless
and intolerable pains of hell, if we do it not; and the other is to think of
the unspeakable glory of heaven, if we do it, Whereto I will ad the third, which
with a noble heart, may prevail as much as either of them both: and that is, to
consider what others have suffered before us, especially Christ himself, and
that only of mere love and affection toward us. We see that in this world,
loving subjects do glory of nothing more, than of their dangers or hurts taken
in battle for their prince, though he never took blow for them again. What then
would they do, if their prince had been afflicted voluntarily for them, as
Christ has been for us. But if this great example of Christ seem unto thee too
high for to imitate: look upon some of thy brethren before thee, made of flesh
and blood as thou art: see what they have suffered before they could enter into
heaven: think not thy self hardly dealt withal, if thou be called to suffer a
little also.

2. Cor. 4.
44 Saint Paul writes of all the apostles together; The sufferings of the
apostles.
Even unto this hour we suffer hunger and thirst, and lak of apparel: we are
beaten with men's fists: we are vagabonds, not having where to stay: we labor
and work with our own hands: we are cursed, and we do bless: we are
persecuted, and we take it patiently: we are blasphemed, and we pray for them
that blaspheme us: we are made as it were the very outcasts and purgings of
this world, even unto this day: that is, though we be apostles, though we have
wrought so many miracles, and converted so many millions of people: yet even
unto this day are we thus used. And a little after, describing yet further
their lives, he says; 2. Cor. 6.
We show our selves as the ministers of God, in much patience; in tribulations;
in necessities; in distresses; in beatings; in imprisonments; in seditions; in
labors; in watches; in fastings; in chastity; in longanimitie; in sweetness of
behavior. 2. Cor. 11.
And of himself in particular, he says; In laboribus plurimis, etc. I am the
minister of God in many labors, in imprisonments more than the rest, in
beatings above measure, and oftentimes in death it self. The particular
sufferings of S. Paul.
Five times have I been beaten of the Jews, and at every time had forty
lashes lacking on: three times have I been whipped with rods: once I was stoned:
three times have I suffered shipwrak: a day and a night was I in the bottom of
the sea: oftentimes in journeies, in dangers of fluds: in dangers of thevees:
in dangers of Jews: in dangers of gentiles: in dangers of the city: in dangers
of wilderness: in dangers of sea: in dangers of false brethren: in labor and
travel: in much watching: in hunger and thirst: in much fasting: in cold and
lak of cloths: and beside al these external things, the matters that daily do
depend upon me, for my universal care of al churches.

45 By this we may see now, whether the apostles taught us more by words, than
they showed by example, about the necessity of suffering in this life. Christ
might have provided for them if he would, at leastwise things necessary to
their bodies, and not have suffered them to come into these extremities of
lacking cloths to their baks: meat to their mouths, and the like. He that gave
them authority to do so many other miracles, might have suffered them at lest
to have wrought sufficient maintenance for their bodies, which should be the
first miracle that worldly men would work, if they had such authority. Christ
might have said to Peter, when he sent him to take his tribute from out of the
fishes mouth: Take so much more, as will suffice your necessary expenses, Mat.
17.
as you travel the country: but he would not, nor yet diminish the great
afflictions which I have showed before, though he loved them as deerly, as ever
he loved his own soul. Al which was done (as Saint Peter interprets) to give
us example, 1. Pet. 2.
what to follow; what to look for; what to desire; what to comfort our selves
withal, in amidst the greatest of our tribulations.

46 The apostle uses this, Heb. 12.
as a principal consideration, when he writes thus to the Hebrews, A notable
exhortation of the apostle.
upon the recital of the sufferings of other saints before them; Wherefore we
also (brethren) having so great a multitude of witnesses (that have suffered
before us) let us lay off al burdens of sin hanging upon us) and let us run by
patience unto the battle offered us; fixing our eyes upon the author of our
faith, and fulfiller of the same, Jesus: who putting the joies of heaven before
his eyes, sustained patiently the cross; contemning the shame, and confusion
thereof: and therefore now sits at the right hand of the seat of God. Think
upon him (I say) which sustained such a contradiction against himself, at the
hands of sinners: and be not weary, nor faint in courage. For you have not yet
resisted against sin unto blood: and it seems you have forgotten that
comfortable saying, which speaks unto you as unto children; My son, Prou. 3.
do not contemn the discipline of the Lord, and be not weary when thou art
chastened of him. For whom God loves he chasteneth, and he whippeth every son
whom he receives. Persevere therefore in the correction laid upon you. Job. 5.
Apoc. 3.
God offers himself to you as to his children. For what child is there whom
the father corrects not? If you be out of correction (whereof al his children
are made partakers) then are you bastards, and not children. Al correction for
the present time when it is suffered, seems unpleasant and sorrowful: but yet
after, it brings forth most quiet fruit of justice unto them that are
exercised by it. Wherefore strengthen up your weary hands, and loosed knees:
make way to your feet, etc. That is, take courage unto you, and go forward
valiantly under the cross laid upon you. This was the exhortation of this
holy captain unto his country men, soldiers of Jesus Christ, the Jews.

Iac. 5.
47 Saint James the brother of our Lord uses another exhortation to al true
Catholics, The exhortation of S. James.
not much different from this in that his epistle, which he writes generally
to al. Be you therefore patient my brethren (says he) until the coming of the
Lord. Behold, the husbandman expects for a time the fruit of the earth so
precious unto him, bearing patiently until he may receive the same in his
season: be you therefore patient, and comfort your hearts, for that the coming
of the Lord will shortly draw near. Be not sad, and complain not one of
another. Behold, the judge is even at the gate. Take the prophets for an
example of labor and patience, which spoke unto us in the name of God. Behold,
we account them blessed which have suffered. You have heard of the sufferance
of Job, and you have seen the end of the Lord with him: you have seen (I say)
that the Lord is merciful and full of compassion.

48 I might here allege many things more out of the scripture to this purpose,
for that the scripture is most copious heerin: and in very deed, if it should
al be melted and powered out, it would yield us nothing else almost, but
touching the cross, and patient bearing of tribulation in this life. But I
must end, for that this chapter rises to be long, as the other before did: and
therefore I will only, for my conclusion, set down the confession, and most
excellent exhortation of old Mathathias unto his children in the time of the
cruel persecution of Antiochus against the Jews. Now (says he) is the time
that pride is in her strength: 1. Mac. 2.
now is the time of chastisement toward us: of eversion and indignation come.
Now therefore (O children) be you zealous in the law of God: yield up your lives
for the testament of your fathers: remember the works of your ancestors, what
they have done in their generations, and so shall you receive great glory, and
eternal name. Was not Abraham found faithful in time of temptation, Genesis 12.
and it was reputed unto him for justice. Joseph in time of his distress, Genesis
41.
kept Gods commandments, and was made Lord over al Egypt. Phinees our father,
Number. 25.
for his zeal toward the law of God, received the testament of an everlasting
preesthood. Iosu. 1.
Iosue for that he fulfilled Gods word, was made a captain over al Israel.
Judge. 14.
Caleb for that he testified in the church, received an inheritance. 2. Reg. 2.
David for his mercy obtained the seat of an eternal kingdom. 4. Reg. 1.
Elias for that he was zealous in zeal of the law, was taken up to heaven.
Ananias, Azarias, Dan. 3.
and Misael, through their belief, were delivered from the flame of the fire.
Daniel for his simplicity was delivered from the mouth of lions. Dan. 9.
And so do you run over, by cogitation, al generations, and you shall see that
al those that hope in God shall not be vanquished. And do you not fear the words
of a sinful man: for his glory is nothing else but dung and worms: to day he is
great and exalted, and to morrow he shall not be found: for he shall return unto
his earth again, and al his fond cogitations shall perish. Wherefore take courage
unto you (my children) and play the men in the law of God. For therein shall be
your honor and glory. Hitherto are the words of Mathathias, which shall
suffice, for the end of this chapter.

CHAP. III. Of the third impediment that lets men from resolution: which is,
the love of the world.
AS the two impediments remooved before, be indeed great stays to many men
from the resolution we talk of: so this that now I take in hand, is not only of
it self a strong impediment, but also a great cause and common ground (as it
were) to all the other impediments that be. For if a man could touch the very
pulse of al those, who refuse, or neglect, or defer this resolution: he should
find the foundation thereof to be the love of this world, whatsoever other
excuse they pretend besides. The noble men of Iewrie, pretended, fear to be the
cause why they could not resolve, to confess Christ openly: but Saint John
that felt their pulse, utters the true cause to have been; For that they loved
the glory of men, John. 12.
more than the glory of God. Demas that forsook Saint Paul in his bands, even a
little before his death, pretended another cause of his departure to
Thessalonica, but Saint Paul says it was; Quia diligebat hoc seculum: 2. Tim.
4.
For that he loved this world. So that this is a general and universal
impediment, and more indeed dispersed, than outwardly appears: for that it
brings forth diverse other excuses, thereby to cover her self in many men.

Mat. 13. Marc. 4. Luc. 8.
2 This may be confirmed by that most excellent parable of Christ, recorded by
three Evangelists, of the three sorts of men which are to be damned, and the
three causes of their damnation: whereof the third and last, and most general
(including as it were both the rest) is, the love of this world. For the first
sort of men, are compared to a high way, where al seed of life that is sown,
either withers presently, or else is eaten up by the birds of the air: that
is (as Christ expounds it) by the devil in careless men, The exposition of
the parable of the seed.
that contemn whatsoever is said unto them: as infidels, and al other obstinate
and contemptuous people. The second sort are compared to rocky grounds, in
which for lak of deep root, the seed continues not: whereby are signified,
light and unconstant men, that now chop in, and now run out: now are fervent,
and by and by key-cold again: and so in time of temptation, they are gone. The
third sort are compared to a field, where the seed grows up, but yet there
are so many thorns on the same (which Christ expounds to be the cares,
troubles, miseries, and deceveable vanities of this life) as the good corn is
choked up; and brings forth no fruit. By which last words our savior
signifies, that whersoever the doctrine of Christ grows up, and yet brings
not forth du fruit: that is, whersoever it is received and embraced (as it is
among al Christians) and yet brings not forth good life: there the cause is,
for that it is choked with the vanities of this world.

3 This is a parable of marvelous great importance, as may appeer, both for
that Christ, The importance of this parable.
after the recital thereof, cried out with a loud voice; He that has ears to
hear, let him hear: Mat. 13.
as also for that he expounded it himself in secret only to his disciples: and
principally, for that before the exposition thereof, he uses such a solemn
preface, saying; To you it is given to know the mysteries of the kingdom of
heaven, but to others not: for that they seeing do not see, and hearing do not
hear, nor understand. Whereby Christ signifies, that the understanding of this
parable, among others, is of singular importance, for conceiving the true
mysteries of the kingdom of heaven: and that many are blind, which seem to
see; and many deaf and ignorant, that seem to hear and know: for that they
understand not well the mysteries of this parable. For which cause also, Christ
makes this conclusion before he begins to expound the parable; Happy are
your eyes that see, and blessed are your ears that hear. After which words, he
begins his exposition, with this admonition; Vos ergo audite parabolam: Do
you therefore hear and understand this parable.

4 And for that this parable does contain and touch so much indeed, as may, or
needs be said, for remooving of this great and dangerous impediment of
worldly love: I mean to stay my self only upon the explication thereof in this
place, and will declare the force and truth of certain words here uttered by
Christ of the world and worldly pleasures: and for some order and methods sake,
I will draw al to these six points following. First, how, and in what sense The
parts of this chapter.
and of no valu (as Christ here signifies) and consequently, ought not to be
an impediment, to let us from so great a matter, as the kingdom of heaven, and
the serving of God is. Spinae, that is, pricking thorns, as Christ says,
though they seem to worldly men to be most sweet and aerumnae, that is,
miseries and afflictions, as also Christ's words Quomodo suffocant; how they
strangle

5 And touching the first, I do not see how it may be better prooved, 1 The
first part: how all the world is vanity.
that all the pleasures and goodly shows of this world are vanities, as Christ
here says: than to allege the testimony of one, which has prooved them al:
that is, of one which speaks not of speculation, but of his own proof and
practice: and this is king Solomon; 2. Par. 9.
of whom the scripture reports woonderful matters, The worldly prosperity of
king Solomon.
touching his peace, prosperity, riches, and glory, in this world: as that all the kings of the earth desired to see his face, for his wisdom and renowned
felicity: that all the princes living besides, were not like him in wealth:
that he had six hundred, sixty and six talents of gold (which is an infinite
sum) brought him in yearly, besides al other that he had from the kings of
Arabia, and other princes: that silver was as plentiful with him as heaps of
stones, and not esteemed, for the great store, and abundance he had thereof:
that his plate and jewels had no end: that his seat of majesty, with stools,
lions to bear it up, and other furniture, was of gold, passing al other kingly
seats in the world: that his precious apparel, and armor was infinite: that he
had all the kings, from the river of the Philistians, unto Egypt, to serve him:
that he had forty thousand horses in his stables to ride, and twelve thousand
chariots, with horses and other furniture ready to them, for his use: that he
had two hundred spears of gold, born before him, and six hundred crowns of
gold, bestowed in every spear; 3. Reg. 4.
as also three hundred buklers, 30. Cori similae, and 60. Cori farinae: and
every corus is For 21. I think he meant but 11. for a Coras according to
Josephus is rekoned to be 738. of our gallons: which make of our measure 11.
quarters, four bushels, one pek. So 900. being taken out of the total sum, the
residu that remains does agree well to this account: for it makes 1037.
quarters, six bushels, two peks. But of this kind of measure the judgment of
the learned does vary much, and it would ask a long discourse to beat out the
more likely opinion, by conference of places and measures together. By the
account of Saint Ierom it comes far short: that is, but to 232. quarters, six
bushels, and a half.
21. quarters and od.
and three hundred crowns of gold, bestowed in the gilding of every bukler:
that he spent every day in his house, a thousand, nine hundred, thirty and
seven quarters of meal, and flower; thirty oxen; with an hundred wethers; 3.
Reg. 11. Eccles. 1.
beside al other flesh: that he had seven hundred wives, as queens, and three
hundred Vanitas vanitatum, and omnia vanitas: Vanity of vanities, and al is
vanity. By vanity of vanities, meaning (as Saint Ierom interprets) the
greatness of this vanity, above al other vanities that may be devised.

6 Neither only does Solomon affirm this thing, Salomons saying of himself.
but does prove it also by examples of himself. I have been king of Israel in
Jerusalem (says he) and I purposed with my self, Eccl. 1.
to seek out by wisdom al things: and I have seen, that al under the sun, are
mere vanities, and affliction of spirit. I said in my heart, I will go and abound
in delites, and in every pleasure that may be had? And I saw that this was also
vanity. I took great works in hand, builded houses to my self, planted
vineyards, made orchards and gardens, and beset them with all kind of trees: I
made me fish ponds to water my trees: I possessed servants and handmaids, and
had a great family, great herds of cattle, above any that ever were before me
in Jerusalem: I gathered together gold and silver, the riches of kings and
provinces: I appointed to my self singers, both men and women, which are the
delites of the children of men: fine cups also to drink wine withal: and
whatsoever my eyes did desire, I denied it not unto them: neither did I let my
heart from using any pleasure, to delight it self in these things which I
prepared. And when I turned my self to all that my hands had made, and to all the labors, wherein I had taken such pains and sweat: I saw in them al, vanity,
and affliction of the mind.

7 This is the testimony of Solomon, upon his own proof in these matters: and
if he had spoken it upon his wisdom only (being such as it was:) we ought to
believe him; but much more, seeing he affirms it of his own experience. But
yet, if any man be not moved with this: let us bring yet another witness out of
the new testament, and such a one, as was privy to the opinion of Christ
heerin: that is, Saint John the evangelist, whose words are these; Do not love
the world, 1. Ioh. 2.
nor those things that are in the world: if any man love the world, the love of
God the father, is not in him. For that, al which is in the world, is either
concupiscence of the flesh, or concupiscence of the eyes, or pride of life. In
which words, S. John beside his threat against such as love and follow the
world, reduces all the vanities thereof, unto three general points or branches:
Three general points of worldly vanities.
that is, to concupiscence of the flesh (wherein he comprehends al carnal
pleasures) to concupiscence of the eyes (wherein he contains al matters of
riches:) and to pride of life, whereby he signifies the humor, and disease of
worldly ambition. These then are the three general and principal vanities of
this life, wherein worldly men do weary out themselves: ambition, covetousnes,
and carnal pleasure: whereunto al other vanities are addressed, as to their
superiors. And therefore it shall not be amiss to consider of these three, in
this place.

8 And first to ambition or pride of life, belongs vainglorie: Vain glory.
that is, a certain disordinate desire to be well thought of, well spoken of,
praised, and glorified of men: and this is as great a vanity (though it be
common to many) as if a man should run up and down the streets, after a
feather, flieng in the air, tossed hither and thither, with the blasts of
infinite men's mouths. For as this man might weary out himself before he gat
the thing which he followed, and yet when he had it, he had gotten but a
feather: so a vain glorious man may labor a good while, before he attain to the
praise which he desires; and when he has it, it is not worth three chips,
being but the breath of a few men's mouths, that alters upon every light
occasion, and now makes him great, now little, now nothing at al. Christ
himself may be an example of this: who was tossed to and fro in the speech of
men: some said he was a Samaritan, and had the devil: Mat. 27. John. 8.
other said he was a prophet: other said he could not be a prophet, or of God;
for that he kept not the sabbath day: others asked, if he were not of God, how
he could do so many miracles? So that there was a schism or division among
them, about this matter, John. 9.
as Saint John affirms. Finally, they received him into Jerusalem, with
triumph of Hosanna, Mat. 21. Mar. 11. Mat. 27. Luc. 23.
casting their apparel under his feet. But the friday next ensuing, they cried
Crucifige against him, and preferred the life of Barrabas, a wicked murderer,
before him.

9 Now my frind, if they dealt thus with Christ, which was a better man, than
ever thou will be: and did more glorious miracles, than ever thou will do, to
purchase thee name and honor with the people: why do thou so labor, and beat
thy self about this vanity of vain glory? Why do thou cast thy travels
into the wind of men's mouths? Why do thou put thy riches in the lips of
mutable men, where every flatterer may rob thee of them? Have thou no better a
chest to lok them up in? Saint Paul was of another mind, when he said; I esteem
little to be judged of you, 1. Cor. 4.
or of the day of man: and he had reason surely. For what cares he that
runs at tilt, if the ignorant people give sentence against him, so the
judges give it with him? If the blind man, in the way to Jericho, Luc. 18.
had depended of the liking and approbation of the goers by, he had never
received the benefit of his sight: for that, they dissuaded him from running,
and crieng so vehemently after Christ. It is a miserable thing for a man to be
a windmil, which makes no meal, but according as the blast endures. If the
gale be strong, he surgeth about lustily; but if the wind slake: he relenteth
presently. So praise the vainglorious man, and ye make him run: if he feel not
the gale blow, he is out of heart: he is like the Babylonians, who, with a
little sweet musik were made to adore any thing whatsoever. Dan. 3.


Pro. 27.
10 The scripture says most truly; As silver is tried in the fire by blowing to
it: so is a man tried in the mouth of him that praises. For as silver, if it
be good, takes no hurt thereby: but if it be evil, it goes al into fume: so a
vain man, by praise and commendation. How many have we seen puffed up with men's
praises, and almost put beside themselves, for joy thereof: and yet afterward
brought down, with a contrary wind, and driven full near to desperation by
contempt? Psalm. 9.
How many do we see daily (as the prophet did in his dais) commended in their
sins, and blessed in their wickedness? How many palpable and intolerable
flatteries do we hear both used, and accepted daily, and no man cries with
good king David; Away with this oil, and ointment of sinners, let it not come
upon my head? Psa. 140.
Is not all this vanity? Is it not madness, as the scripture calls it? Psalm.
39.
The glorious angels in heaven seek no honor unto themselves, but al unto God:
and thou poor worm of the earth desire to be glorified? The four and twenty
elders in the Apocalips took off their crowns, and cast them at the feet of the
lamb: Apoc. 4.
and thou would pluk forty from the lamb to thy self, if thou could. O
fond creature! How truly says the prophet; Homo vanitati similis factus est: A
man is made like unto vanity. That is, Psa. 143.
like unto his own vanity: as light as the very vanities themselves, which he
follows. And yet the wise man more expressly; In vanitate sua appenditur
peccator: Eccl. 23.
The sinner is weighed in his vanity. That is, by the vanity, which he
follows, is seen how light and vain a sinner is.

11 The second vanity that belongs to ambition, is desire of worldly honor,
dignity, Worldly honor and promotion.
and promotion. And this is a great matter in the sight of a worldly man: this
is a jewel of rare price, and worthy to be bought, even with any labor,
travel, or peril whatsoever. The love of this, let the great men, that were
Christians in Iewrie, John. 11.
from confessing of Christ openly. The love of this, let Pilat from
delivering Jesus, John. 19.
according as in conscience he saw he was bound. The love of this let
Agrippa, and Festus, from making themselves Christians, albeit they esteemed
Paul's doctrine to be true. Acts. 26.
The love of this lets infinite men daily from embracing the means of their
salvation. But (alas) these men do not see the vanity heerof. Saint Paul says
not without just cause; Nolite esse pueri sensibus: 1. Cor. 14.
Be you not children in understanding. It is the fashion of children, to esteem
more of a painted babble, than of a rich jewel. And such is the painted dignity
of this world: gotten with much labor; maintained with great expenses; and lost
with intolerable grief, and sorrow. For better conceiving whereof, ponder a
little with thy self (gentle reader) any state of dignity that thou would
desire: and think how many have had that before thee. Remember how they mounted
up, and how they descended down again: and imagine with thy self, which was
greater, either the joy in getting, or the sorrow in leesing it. Where are now
al these emperors, these kings, these princes, and prelates, which rejoiced so
much once, at their own advancement? Where are they now, I say? Who talks or
thinks of them? Are they not forgotten, and cast into their graves long ago?
And do not men boldly walk over their heads now, whose faces might not be
looked on without fear, in this world? What then have their dignities done them
good?

12 It is a woonderful thing to consider the vanity of this worldly honor. The
vanity of worldly honor.
It is like a man's own shadow, which the more a man runs after, the more it
flies: and when he flies from it, it follows him again: and the only way to
catch it, is to fall down to the ground upon it. So we see, that those men which
desire honor in this world, are now forgotten: and those which most fled from
it, and cast themselves lowest of al men, by humility, are now most of al
honored: honored (I say) most, even by the world it self, whose enemies they
were, while they lived. For who is honored more now, who is more commended and
remembered, than Saint Paul, and his like, which so much despised worldly honor
in this life, according to the saying of the prophet; Psa. 138.
Thy frinds (O Lord) are too too much honored. Most vain then is the pursuit of
this worldly honor, and promotion: seeing it neither contenteth the mind, nor
continues with the possessor, nor is void of great dangers, both in this life,
and in the life to come, according to the saying of scripture; Most severe
judgment shall be used upon those that are over others: Sap. 6.
the mean man shall obtain mercy; but the great and strong shall suffer torments
strongly.

Worldly nobility.
13 The third vanity that belongs to ambition, or pride of life, is nobility
of flesh and blood: a great perle in the eye of the world: but indeed in it
self, and in the sight of God, a mere trifle and vanity. Which holy Job well
understood, Job. 17.
when he wrote these words; I said unto rottennes, thou art my father: and unto
worms, you are my mother and sisters. He that will behold the gentry of his
ancestors: let him look into their graves, and see whether Job says truly or
no. True nobility was never begun, but by virtue: and therefore, as it is a
testimony of virtue to the predecessors: so is it another of virtue unto the
successors. And he which holds the name thereof by descent, without virtue, is
a mere monster, in respect of his ancestors: for that he breaks the limits of
the nature of nobility. Of which sort of men, God says by one prophet; Ose. 9.
They are made abominable, even as the things which they love: their glory is
from their nativitie, from the belly, and from their conception.

14 It is a miserable vanity to go beg credit of dead men, when as we deserve
none our selves: to seek up old titles of honor from our ancestors, we being
utterly incapable thereof, by our own base manners and behavior. Christ clearly
confounded this vanity; when being descended himself of the greatest
nobility, that ever was in this world: and besides that, being also the son of
God: yet called he himself ordinarily, the son of man: that is, the son of the
virgin Marie (for otherwise he was no son of man) and further than this also,
Mat. 8.20.24.26. John. 10.
called himself a shepherd, which in the world is a name of contempt. He
sought not up this and that old title of honor, to furnish his style withal, as
our men do. Neither when he had to make a king first in Israel, did he seek out
the ancientest blood: but took Saul, 1. Reg. 9. 1. Re. 16.
of the basest tribe of al Israel: and after him David the poorest shepherd of
al his brethren. And when he came into the world: he sought not out the noblest
men to make princes of the earth; that is, to make apostles: but took of the
poorest, Mat. 4. Psalm. 44. 1. Cor. 1.
and simplest, thereby to confound (as one of them says) the foolish vanity of
this world; in making so great account of the preeminence of a little flesh and
blood, in this life.

15 The fourth vanity that belongs to ambition, or pride of life, is worldly
wisdom, The vanity of worldly wisdom.
whereof the apostle says; The wisdom of this world is folly with God. If it be
folly, 1. Cor. 3.
then great vanity (no dowt) to delight so in it, as men do. It is a strange
thing to see, how contrary the judgments of God are to the judgments of men.
The people of Israel would needs have a king (as I have said) and they thought
God would have given them presently some great mighty prince to rule over
them: but he chose out a poor fellow, that sought asses about the country. After
that, 1. Reg. 9.
when God would displace this man again for his sin: he sent Samuel to anoint
one of Isai his sons: and being come to the house, ^. Reg. 16.
Isai brought forth his eldest son, Eliab, a lusty tall fellow, thinking him
indeed most fit to govern: but God answered; Respect not his countenance, nor
his tallnes of personage: for I have rejected him: neither do I judge according
to the countenance of man. After that, Isai brought in his second son Abinadab:
and after him Samma, and so the rest, until he had showed him seven of his
sons. Al which being refused by Samuel, they marveled, and said, there was no
mo left but only a little red headed boy, that kept the sheep, called David:
which Samuel caused to be sent for. And as soon as he came in sight: God said to
Samuel, this is the man that I have chosen.

16 When the Messiah was promised unto the Jews to to be a king: they imagined
presently, according to their worldly wisdom, that he should be some great
prince: and therefore they refused Christ, that came in poverty. James and John
being yet but carnal, seeing the Samaritans contemptuously to refuse Christ's
disciples sent to them, and knowing what Christ was, thought streightway that
he must in revenge have called down fire from heaven to consume them: but
Christ rebuked them, Luc. 9.
saying; You know not of what spirit you are. The apostles preaching the
cross, and necessity of suffering, to the wise gentiles, and philosophers, 1.
Cor. 1.
were thought presently fools for their labors. Festus the emperors
lieftenant, hearing Paul to speak so much of abandoning the world, and
following Christ, said, he was mad. Acts. 36.
Finally, this is the fashion of al worldly wise men: to condemn the wisdom of
Christ, and of his saints. For so the holy scripture reports of their own
confession, being now in place of torment; Sap. 5.
Nos insensati vitam illorum aestimabamus insaniam: We fond men, esteemed the
lives of saints as madness. Wherefore, this is also great vanity (as I have
said) to make such account of worldly wisdom: which is not only folly, but
also madness, by the testimony of the holy Ghost himself.

17 Who would not think, but that the wise men of this world, were the fittest
to be chosen to do Christ service in his church? Yet Saint Paul says; Non
multi sapientes, 1. Cor. 1.
secundum carnem: God has not chosen many wise men according to the flesh. Who
would not think, but that a worldly wise man might easily also make a wise
Christian? Yet Saint Paul says no: except first he become a fool; Stultus
fiat, 1. Cor. 3.
vt sit sapiens: If any man seem wise among you, let him become a fool, to the
end he may be made wise. Vain then, and of no account is the wisdom of this
world, except it be subject to the wisdom of God.

18 The first vanity belonging to pride of life, is corporal beauty: The
vanity of beauty.
whereof the wise man says; Vain is beauty, Pro. 31.
and deceivable is the grace of countenance. Whereof also king David understood
properly, Psa. 118.
when he said; Turn away my eyes (O Lord) that they behold not vanity. This is
a singular great vanity, dangerous and deceitful; but yet greatly esteemed of
the children of men: Psalm. 4.
whose property is; To love vanity: as the prophet says. Beauty is compared
by holy men, to a painted snake, which is fair without, and full of deadly
poison within. If a man did consider what infinite ruins, and destructions have
come, by our light giving credit thereunto: he would beware of it. And if he
remembered what foul dross lies under a fair skin: he would little be in love
therewith, says one father. God has imparted certain sparks of beauty unto
his creatures: thereby to draw us to the consideration, and love of his own
beauty; whereof the other is but a shadow: even as a man finding a little issu
of water, may seek out the fountain thereby: or happening upon a small vain of
gold, may thereby come to the whole mine it self. But we like babes, delight
ourselves only with the fair cover of the book, and never do consider what is
written therein. In all fair creatures, A lesson to be read in the beauty of al
creatures.
that man does behold, he ought to read this, says one father; that If GOD
could make a piece of earth so fair and lovely, with imparting unto it some
little spark of his beauty: how infinite fair is he himself, and how worthy
of al love and admiration? And how happy shall we be, when we shall come to
enjoy his beautiful presence, whereof now al creatures do take their beauty.

19 If we would exercise our selves in these manner of cogitations: we might
easily keep our hearts pure and unspotted before God, in beholding the beauty
of his creatures. But for that we use not this passage from the creature to the
creator; but rest only in the eternal appeerance of a deceitful face: letting
go the bridle to foul cogitations, and setting wilfully on fire our own
co^cupiscences; hence it is, that infinite men do perish daily by occasion of
this fond vanity. I call it fond, for that every child may descrie the deceit
and vanity thereof. The vanity of beauty.
For take the fairest face in the world, wherewith infinite foolish men fall in
love, upon the sight: and raze it over but with a little scrach, and all the
matter of love is gone: let there come but an agu, and all this goodly beauty
is destroyed: let the soul depart but one half hour from the body, and this
loving face is uglie to look on: let it lie but two dais in the grave, and
those which were so hot in love with it before, will scarce abide to behold it,
or come near it. And if none of those things happen unto it: yet quikly comes
on old age, which riveleth the skin, draws in the eyes, sets out the
teeth, and so disfigureth the whole visage, as it becomes more contemptible
now, than it was beautiful and alluring before. And what then can be more
vanity than this? What more madness, than either to take pride of it, if I see
it my self: or to endanger my soul for it, if I see it in others?

The vanity of apparel.
20 The sixth vanity belonging to pride of life, is the glory of fine apparel:
against which the wise man says; Eccl. 11.
In vestitu ne glorieris vnquam: See thou never take glory in apparel. Of al
vanities this is the greatest, which we see so common among men of this world.
If Adam had never fallen: we had never used apparel: for that apparel was
devised to cover our shame of nakedness, and other infirmities contracted by
that fall. Wherefore, we that take pride and glory in apparel, do as much as if
a beggar should glory and take pride of the old clouts that do cover his
sores. Saint Paul said unto a bishop; If we have wherwithal to cover our
selves, 1. Tim. 6.
let us be content. And Christ touched deeply the danger of nice apparel, when
he commended so much S. John Baptist for his austere attire: Mat. 3.11. Luc. 7.
adding for the contradictorie; Qui mollibus vestiuntur in domibus regum sunt:
They which are apparelled in soft and delicate apparel are in kings courts. In
kings courts of this world, but not in the kings court of heaven. For which
cause in the description of the rich man damned, this is not omitted by Christ;
Luc. 16.
That he was apparelled in purple and silk.

21 It is a woonderful thing to consider the different proceeding of God and
the world heerin. God was the first that ever made apparel in the world: Genesis 3.
and he made it for the most noble of al our ancestors, in paradise: and yet he
made it but of beasts skins. And Saint Paul testifies of the noblest saints of
the old testament, Heb. 12.
that they were covered only with goats skins, and with hairs of camels. What
vanity is it then for us, to be so curious in apparel, and to take such pride
therein, as we do? We rob and spoil al creatures almost in the world, to cover
our baks, and to adorn our bodies withal. From one, we take his wool: from
another, The extreme vanity and poverty of man.
his skin: from another, his fur: and from some other, their very excrements; as
the silk, which is nothing else, but the excrements of woorms. Nor content with
this, we come to fishes, and do beg of them certain pearls to hang about us. We
go down into the ground for gold and silver: and turn up the sands of the sea,
for precious stones: and having borrowed all this of other creatures, we jet up
and down, provoking men to look upon us: as if all this now were our own. When
the stone shines upon our finger, we will seem (forsooth) thereby to shine. When
the silver and silks do glister on our baks, we look big, as if all that beauty
came from us. And so (as the prophet says) we pass over our dais in vanity,
Psalm. 77.
and do not perceive our own extreme folly.

22 The second general branch, which Saint John appoints unto the vanity of
this life, 2
is concupiscence of the eyes: Concupiscence of the eyes.
whereunto the ancient fathers have referred al vanities of riches and wealth of
this world. Of this Saint Paul writes to Timothy; Give commandment to the
rich men of this world, 1. Tim. 6.
not to be high minded, nor to put hope in the uncertaintie of their riches.
The reason of which speech is uttered by the scripture in another place, when
it says; Riches shall not profit a man in the day of revenge. Pro. 11.
That is, at the day of death and judgment: which thing, the rich men of this
world, do confess themselves, though too late, when they cry; Divitiarum
iactantia quid nobis contulit? Sap. 5.
What has the braverie of our riches profited us? The vanity and peril of
worldly wealth.
Al which evidently declares the great vanity of worldly riches, which can do
the possessor no good at al, when he has most need of their help. Psalm. 75.
Rich men have slept their sleep (says the prophet) and have found nothing in
their hands: that is, rich men have passed over this life, as men do pass over
a sleep, imagining themselves to have golden mountains, and treasures: and when
they awake (at the day of their death) they find themselves to have nothing in
their hands. In respect whereof, the prophet Baruch asks this question; Where
are they now, which heaped together gold and silver, Cap. 3.
and which made no end of their scraping together? And he answers himself
immediately; Exterminati sunt, and ad inferos descenderunt: They are now rooted
out, and are gone down unto hell. To like effect says Saint James; Iac. 5.
Now go to, you rich men: weep, and howl in your miseries, that come upon you:
your riches are rotten, and your gold and silver is rustie: and the rust thereof
shall be in testimony against you: it shall feed on your flesh as fire: you have
hoorded up wrath for your selves in the last day.

23 If wealth of this world be not only so vain, but also so perilous as here
is affirmed: what vanity then is it for men to set their minds upon it, as
they do? Saint Paul says of himself; that He esteemed it al but as doong. And
he had great reason surely to say so, Phil. 3.
seeing indeed they are but doong: that is, the very excrements of the earth,
and found only in the most barren places thereof: Job. 28.
as they can tell which have seen their mines. What a base matter is this then
for a man to tie his love unto? God commanded in the old law, Levi. 11.
that whatsoever did go with his breast upon the ground, should be unto us in
abomination. How much more then a reasonable man, that has glewed his heart
and soul unto a piece of earth? We came in naked unto this world, Cap. 1.
and naked we must go forth again, says Job. The mil-wheel stirs much
about, and beats it self from day to day, and yet at the years end it is in
the same place, as it was in the beginning: so rich men, let them toil and
labor what they can, yet at their death must they be as poor, as at the first
day wherein they were born. Job. 27.
When the rich man dies (says Job) he shall take nothing with him, but shall
close up his eyes, and find nothing. Poverty shall lay hands upon him, and a
tempest shall oppress him in the night: a burning wind shall take him away, and
a whirl wind shall snatch him from his place: it shall rush upon him, and shall
not spare him: it shall bind his hands upon him, and shall hiss over him. For
that it sees his place whither he must go.

24 The prophet David in like wise forewarneth us of the same, in these words;
Be not afraid when thou see a man made rich, and the glory of his house
multiplied. For when he dies, he shall take nothing with him, nor shall his
glory descend to the place whither he goes: he shall pass into the progenies
of his ancestors (that is, he shall go to the place where they are, who has
lived as he has don) and world without end he shall see no more light.

25 All this and much more is spoken by the holy Ghost, to signify the
dangerous vanity of worldly wealth: and the folly of those men, who labor so
much to procure the same, with the eternal peril of their souls, as the
scripture assures us. If so many physicians, as I have here alleged
scriptures, should agree together, that such, or such meats were venomous and
perilsom: I think few would give the adventure to eat them, though otherwise in
taste they appeered sweet and pleasant. How then comes it to pass, that so
many earnest admonitions of God himself, cannot stay us from the love of this
dangerous vanity? Nolite cor apponere, says God by the prophet: that is; Lay
not your heart unto the love of riches. Psalm. 61. Eccl. 31.
Qui diligit aurum non iustificabitur, says the wise man: He that loves gold
shall never be justified. I am angry greatly upon rich nations, says God by
Zachary. Cap. 1. Mat. 19.
Christ says; Amen dico vobis, quia dives difficile intrabit in regnum
caelorum: Truly I say unto you, that a rich man shall hardly get into the
kingdom of heaven. And again; Woe be to you rich men, Luc. 6.
for that you have received your consolation in this life. Finally, Saint Paul
says generally of al, and to al; 1. Tim. 6.
They which will be rich, do fall into temptation, and into the snare of the
devil, and into many unprofitable and hurtful desires, which do drown men in
destruction and perdition.

26 Can any thing in the world be spoken more effectually, to dissuade from the
love of riches, than this? Must not here now the covetous men, either deny
God, or co^demn themselves in their own consciences. Let them go, and excuse
themselves, by the pretense of wife and children, as they are wont, saying;
They mean nothing else, but to provide for their sufficiency. Does Christ, or
Saint Paul admit this excusation? Ought we so much to love wife, The pretense
of wife and children refused.
or children, or other kindred, as to endanger our souls for the same? What
comfort may it be to an afflicted father in hell, to remember, that by his
means, his wife and children do live wealthily in earth? All this is vanity
(deer brother) and mere deceit of our spiritual enemy. For within one moment
after we are dead, we shall care no more for wife, children, father, mother, or
brother, in this matter, than we shall for a mere stranger: and one penie given
in alms while we lived (for Gods sake) shall comfort us more at that day, than
thousands of pounds bestowed upon our kin, for the natural love we bare unto
our own flesh and blood: the which, I would to Christ worldly men did
consider. And then (no dowt) they would never take such care for kindred, as
they do: especially upon their deathbeds: whence presently they are to depart
to that place, where flesh and blood holds no more privilege: nor riches have
any power to deliver; but only such, as were well bestowed in the service of
God, or given to the poor for his names sake. And this shall be sufficient for
this point of riches.

3 Of the vanity of worldly pleasure.
27 The third branch of worldly vanities is called by Saint John, concupiscence
of the flesh: which contains al pleasures and carnal recreations; as
banketing, laughing, plaieng, and the like, wherewith our flesh is much delited
in this world. And albeit in this kind, there is a certain measure to be
allowed unto the godly, for the convenient maintenance of their health (as also
in riches it is not to be reprehended) yet, that al these worldly solaces, are
not only vain, but also dangerous, in that excess and abundance, as worldly
men seek and use them, appears plainly by these words of Christ; John. 16.
Woe be unto you which now do laugh for you shall weep. Woe be unto you that now
live in fill, and sacietie: for the time shall com, when you shall suffer hunger.
And again, in Saint John's Gospel, speaking to his apostles, and by them to al
other, he says; You shall weep and pule: but the world shall rejoice. John. 16.
Making it a sign distinctive between the good and the bad: that the one shall
mourn in this life, and the other rejoice, and make themselves merry.

28 The very same does Job confirm, both of the one, and the other sort: for
of worldlings he says; Job. 21.
That they solace themselves with all kind of musik, and do pass over their
days in pleasure, and in a very moment, do go down into hell. But of the godly
he says in his own person; Job. 3.
That they sigh before they eat their bread. And in another place; That they
fear al their works, Job. 9.
knowing that God spares not him which offends. The reason whereof the wise
man yet further expresses, saying; That the works of good men are in the hands
of God: Eccl. 9.
and no man knows (by outward things) whether love or hatred, at Gods hands:
but al is kept uncertain for the time to come. And old Tobias insinuates yet
another cause, when he says; Tob. 5.
What joy can I have or receive, seeing I sit here in darkness? Speaking
literally of his corporal blindness, but yet leaving it also to be understood of
spiritual and internal darkness.

29 These are then the causes (beside external affliction, Why good men are sad
in this life.
which God often sends) why the godly do live more sad and fearful in this
life, 1. Cor. 2. 2. Cor. 7. Phil. 2. Job. 3. John. 16.
than wicked men do, according to the counsel of Saint Paul: and why also they
sigh often and weep, as Job and Christ do affirm: for that they remember often
the justice of God: their own frailty in sinning: the secret judgment Calling
and justifieng, are very plain and infallible tokens thereof. Romans 8.30. And so
far is it not uncertain unto the faithful.
uncertain to us: the vale of misery and desolation, wherein they live here:
which made even the apostles to groan, Romans 8. Ephesians. 4. Mat. 24. 2. Cor. 5. and
7.
as Saint Paul says, though they had less cause thereof than we. In respect
whereof we are willed to pass over this life in carefulnes, watchfulnes, fear,
and trembling, and in respect whereof also, the wise man says; Eccl. 7.
It is better to go to the house of sorrow, than to the house of feasting. And
again; Where sadness is, there is the heart of wise men: but where mirth is,
there is the heart of fools. Finally, in respect of this, the scripture says;
Beatus homo qui semper est pavidus: Pro. 28.
Happy is the man which alwais is fearful. Which is nothing else, but that
which the holy Ghost commands every man, by Micheas the prophet; Mich. 6.
Sollicitum ambulare cum Deo: To walk careful and diligent with God; thinking
upon his commandments; how we keep and observe the same; how we resist, and
mortify our members upon earth, and the like. Which cogitations, if they might
have place with us, would cut off a great deal of those worldly pastimes,
wherewith the careless sort of sinners are overwhelmed: I mean of those good
fellowships of eatings, drinkings, laughings, singings, disputings, and other
such vanities that distract us most.

30 Heerof Christ gave us a most notable advertisement, in that he wept often:
as at his nativitie; at the resuscitation of Lazarus; John. 10. Luc. 19.
upon Jerusalem; and upon the cross. But he is never read to have laughed in all
his life. Heerof also is our own nativitie and death a signification: which
being both in Gods hands, are appointed unto us, with sorrow and grief, as we
see. But the middle part thereof, that is, our life, being left in our own hands
(by Gods appointment) we pass it over with vain delites, never thinking whence
we came, nor whither we go.

31 A wise traveler passing by his In, A similitude.
though he see pleasant meats offered him: yet he forbeareth, upon
consideration of the price, and the journey he has to make: and takes in
nothing, but so much as he knows well, how to discharge the next morning at
his departure: but a fool lays hands on every delicate bait that is presented
to his sight, and plaieth the prince, for a night or two. But when it comes
to the rekoning: he wishes that he had lived, only with bread and drink,
rather than to be so troubled as he is for the payment. The custom of many
churches yet is, to fast the even of every feast, and then to make merry the
next day, that is, upon the festival day it self: which may represent unto us,
the abstinent life of good men in this world, and the mirth that they have in
the world to come. But the fashion of the world is contrary: that is, to eat
and drink merrily first, at the tavern: and after, to let the host bring in his
rekoning. They eat, drink, and laugh: and the host scoreth up al in the mean
space. And when the time comes, that they must pay: many an heart is sad, that
was pleasant before.

32 This the scripture affirms also, of the pleasures of this world; Prou. 14.
Risus dolor miscebitur, and extrema gaudij luctus occupat: Laughter shall be
mingled with sorrow, and mourning shall insu at the hinder end of mirth. The
devil that plaieth the host, in this world, and will serve you with what delight
or pleasure you desire, writes up al in his book: and at the day of your
departure, (that is, at your death) will he bring the whole rekoning, and charge
you with it al: and then shall follow that, which GOD promises to worldlings,
Amos. 2. Tob. 2.
by the prophet Amos; Your mirth shall be turned into mourning and lamentation.
Yea, and more than this, if you be not able to discharge the rekoning: you may
chance to hear that other dreadful sentence of Christ, in the Apocalips; Apoc.
18.
Quantum in delicijs fuit, tantum date illi tormentum: Look how much he has
been in his delites, so much torment do you lay upon him.

33 Wherefore, to conclude this point, and therwithal this first part, touching
vanities: truly may we say with the prophet David, of a worldly minded man;
Vniversa vanitas omnis homo vivens: Psalm. 38.
The life of such men contains al kind of vanity. That is, vanity in
ambition; vanity in riches; vanity in pleasures; vanity in all things which
they most esteem. And therefore I may well end with the words of God, by the
prophet Esaias; Vae vobis, Esai. 59.
qui trahitis iniquitatem in funiculis vanitatis: Woe be unto you, which do draw
wickedness in the ropes of vanity. These ropes are those vanities of vain
glory, promotion, The ropes of vain glory.
dignity, nobility, beauty, riches, delites, and other before touched: which
always draw with them some iniquity and sin. For which cause, David says
unto God; Psalm. 3.
Thou hate (O Lord) observers of superfluous vanities. And lastly, for this
cause the holy Ghost pronounces generally of al men; Psalm. 39.
Beatus vir qui non respexit in vanitates, and insanias falsas: Blessed is that
man, which has not respected vanities, and the false madness of this world.

34 Now come I then to the second part proposed in this chapter: 2 How worldly
vanities are also deceits.
to show how this world, with the commodities thereof, are not only vanities,
but also deceits (as Christ terms them) for that indeed, Mat. 13.
they perform not unto their followers, those idle vanities which they do
promise. Wherein the world may be compared to that wretched and ungrateful
deceiver Laban: Genesis 29.
who made poor Jacob to serve him seven years for fair Rachel, False promises
of the world.
and in the end deceived him with foul Lia. What false promises does the world
make daily? To one it promises long life and health: and cutteth him off in
the midst of his days. To another it promises great wealth, and promotion:
and after long service, performs no part thereof. To another it promises
great honor by large expenses: but underhand it casts him into contempt by
beggerie. To another it assures great advancement by marriage: but yet never
gives him ability to come to his desire. Go you over the whole world: behold
countries; view provinces; look into cities; harken at the doors and windows
of private houses; of princes palaces; of secret chambers: and you shall see,
and hear nothing, but lamentable complaints: one, for that he has lost;
another for that he has not won; a third, for that he is not satisfied; ten
thousand for that they are deceived.

The false promise of renowm.
35 Can there be a greater deceit (for examples sake) than to promise renowm,
and memory, as the world does to her followers: and yet to forget them as soon
as they are dead? Who does remember now one of forty thousand jollie fellows
in this world, captains, soldiers, counselors, dukes, earls, princes, prelates,
and emperors: kings, and queens; lords, and ladies? Who remembers them I say?
Who once thinks or speaks of them now? Has not their memory perished with
their sound, Psalm. 9.
as the prophet says? Did not Job promise truly, Job. 13. Psalm. 1.
that Their remembrance should be as ashes trodden under foot? And David that
They should be as dust blown with the wind? Diverse men there have been ere
this, that have been very mean in common account: and yet because they have
labored to be unknow to the world, therefore the rather the world both
remembers, and honoreth now the memory of them. But many a king and emperor
have strived and labored al their life, to be known in the world, and yet are
now forgotten. So that the world is like in this point (as one says) unto a
covetous and forgetful host, A comparison.
who if he see his old ghest come by in beggarly estate, al his money being
spent: he makes semblance not to know him. And if the ghest marvel thereat, and
say, that he has come often that way, and spent much money in the house: the
other answers; it may be so, for there pass this way so many, as we use not
to keep account thereof. But what is the way to make this host to remember you
(says this Author.) The way is to use him ill as you pass by: beat him well,
or do some other notable injury unto him, and he will remember you, as long as
he lives, and many times will talk of you, when you are far off from him.

36 Infinite are the deceits, What the deceits of the world are.
and dissimulations of the world. It seems goodly, fair, and gorgeous, in
outward show: but when it comes to handling, it is nothing but a fether: when
it comes to sight, it is nothing but a shadow: when it comes to weight; it
is nothing but smoke: when it comes to opening, it is nothing but an image of
plaster work, full of old rags and patches within. To know the miseries of the
world, you must go a little out from it. For, as they which walk in a mist, A
similitude.
do no see it so well, as they which stand upon an hill from it: so fares it, in
discerning the world: whose property is, to blind them that come to it, to the
end they may not see their own estate: even as a raven, first of al strikes
out the poor sheeps eye, and so brings to pass, that she may not see the
way to escape from his tyranny.

37 After the world has once bereft the worldling of his spiritual sight, that
he can judge no longer, between good and evil; vanity, and verity; then, it
rocketh him asleep, at ease and pleasure; it binds him sweetly; it deceives
him pleasantly; it tormenteth him in great peace and rest: it has a proud
spirit straightwais, Mat. 4.
to place him in the pinnacle of greedy ambition, and therhence, to show him all the dignities, and preferments of the world: it has twenty false merchants,
to show him in the dark, the first and former ends, of fair and precious
cloths. (But he may not look into the whole pieces, nor carry them to the
light.) It has four hundred false prophets to flatter him as Achab had, 3.
Reg. 22.
which must keep him from the hearing of Micheas his counsel: that is, from the
remorse of his own conscience, which tells him truth: it has a thousand
cunning fishers, to lay before him pleasant baits, but al furnished with
dangerous hooks within: it has infinite strumpets of Babylon, to offer him
drink in golden cups, but al mingled with most deadly poison: it has in every
door an alluring Iahel, Apo. 17. Iudic. 4.
to intise him into the milk of pleasures and delites, but al have their
hammers and nails in their hands, to murder him in the brain, when he falls
asleep. It has in every corner, a flattering Ioab, 2. Reg. 20.
to embrace with one arm, and kill with the other. A false Judas, to give a
kiss, and therewith to betray. Luc. 22.
Finally, it has all the deceits, all the dissimulations, all the flatteries, all the treasons, that possibly may be devised. It hates them, that love it:
deceives them, that trust it: afflicts them, that serve it: reprocheth them,
that honor it: damneth them, that follow it: and most of al forgets them,
that labor and travel most of al for it. And to be brief in this matter, do
you what you can for this world, and love it, and adore it, as much as you will:
yet in the end you shall find it a right Nabal: who after many benefits received
from David, yet when David came to have need of him, he answered; Who is David?
Or who is the son of Isai, that I should know him? 1. Reg. 25.
Upon great cause then said the prophet David; O you children of men, Psalm. 4.
how long will you be so dull hearted? Why do you love vanity, and seek after a
lie? He calls the world not a lier, but a lie it self: for the exceeding
great fraud and deceit, which it uses.

38 The third name or property that Christ ascribes unto the pleasures and
riches of the world, 3 How pleasures of the world are thorns.
is, that they are thorns: of which Saint Gregory writes thus; Who ever would
have believed me, if I had called riches thorns, as Christ here does, seeing
thorns do prik, and riches are so pleasant? Hom. 15. in evang.
And yet surely they are thorns; for that, with the priks of their careful But
the words of Christ declare, that it is another thing that he did specially
respect therein: that is, the choking or destroieng of such corn as was sown
among them; and the utter extinguishing, or great hindering of al good motions
of the spirit of God, in all those that are worldly minded.
naked body, tossed and tombled among many thorns, cannot be but much rent
and torn, and made bloody with the pricks thereof: so a worldly man's soul
beaten with the cares and cogitations of this life, cannot but be vexed with
restles pricking of the same, and wounded also with many temptations of sin,
which do occur. This does Solomon (in the places before alleged) signify,
when he does not only call the riches and pleasures of this world; Ecc. 1.2.3.4
Vanity of vanities, that is, the greatest vanity of al other vanities: but
also Affliction of spirit: giving us to understand, that where these vanities
are, and the love of them once entered: there is no more the peace of God,
which passes al understanding: Phil. 4.
there is no longer rest, or quiet of mind: but war of desires; vexation of
thoughts; tribulation of fears; pricking of cares; unquietnes of soul: which is
indeed a most miserable and pitiful affliction of spirit.

39 And the reason heerof is, A comparison.
that as a clok can never stand still from running, so long as the peazes do
hang thereat: so a worldly man, having infinite cares, cogitations, and
anxieties hanging upon his mind, as peazes upon the clok, can never have rest,
or repose day or night, but is enforced to beat his brains, when other men
sleep, for the compassing of those trifles, wherewith he is incombred. Oh, how
many rich men in the world do feel to be true, that I now say? How many
ambitious men do prove it daily, and yet will not deliver themselves out of the
same?

40 Of all the plaegs sent unto Egypt, Exodus 8.
that of the flies was one of the most troublesome, and fastidious. For, they
never suffered men to rest; but the more they were beaten off, the more they
came upon them. So, of all the miseries, and vexations, that God lays upon
worldlings, this is not the lest, to be tormented with the cares of that, which
they esteem their greatest felicity: and cannot beat them off, by any means
they can devise. They rush upon them in the morning, as soon as they awake;
they accompany them in the day; they forsake them not at night; they follow
them to bed; they let them from their sleep; they afflict them in their dreams:
and finally, they are like to those importune and unmerciful tyrans, which God
threateneth to wicked men, by Jeremy the prophet; Iere. 16.
Qui nocte ac die non dabunt requiem: Which shall give them no rest, either by
day or night: and the cause heerof, which God alleges in the same chapter,
is; Quia abstuli pacem meam a populo isto (dicit Dominus) misericordiam, and
miserationes: for that I have taken away my peace from this kind of people
(says God) I have taken away my mercy, and commiserations: a very heavy
sentence to al them, that lie under the yoke, and bondage of these miserable
vanities.

Esai. 59.
41 But yet the prophet Esaias has a much more terrible description of these men's
estate; They put their trust in things of nothing, and do talk vanities: they
conceive labor, and bring forth iniquity: they break the eggs of serpents, and
weave the webs of spiders: he that shall eat their eggs shall die: and that which
is hatched thence, shall be a cocatrice: their webs shall not make cloth, to
cover them: for that, their works are unprofitable: and the work of iniquity
is in their hands. The explication of the words of Esaias.
These are the words of Esaias, declaring unto us by most significant
similitudes, how dangerous thorns the riches and pleasures of this world are.
And first he says; They put their hope in things of nothing, and do talk
vanities: to signify, that he means of the vanities, and vain men of this
world: who commonly do talk of the things which they love best, and wherein they
place their gretest affiance. Secondly he says; They conceive labor, and bring
forth iniquity. Alluding heerin, to the childbirth of women, who first do
conceive in their womb; and after a great deal of travel, do bring forth their
infant: so worldly men, after a great time of travel, and labor in vanities, do
bring forth no other fruit, than sin and iniquity. For that is the effect of
those vanities, as he speaks in the same chapter, crieng out to such kind of
men; Woe be unto you, which do draw iniquity in the ropes of vanity.

42 But yet to express this matter more forcibly, he uses two other
similitudes, saying; They break the eggs of serpents, and do weave the webs of
spiders. Signifieng by the one, the vanity of these worldly cares: and by the
other, the danger thereof. The spider we see, takes great pains and labor many
dais together, to weave her self a web: and in the end, when al is done,
comes a puff of wind, or some other little matter, and breaks al in pieces.
Even as he in the Gospel, which had taken great travel and care, Luc. 12.
in heaping riches together in plucking down his old barns, building up of new:
and when he was come to say to his soul; Now be merry. That night his soul was
taken from him, and al his labor lost. Therefore Esaias says in this place, that
The webs of these weavers shall not make them cloth to cover them withal: for
that their works are unprofitable.

43 The other comparison contains matter of great danger and fear. For as the
bird that sits upon the eggs of serpents, by breaking and hatching them,
brings forth a perilous brood, to her own destruction: so those that sit
abroode upon these vanities of the world (says Esaias) do hatch at last their
own destruction. The reason whereof is (as he says) For that the work of
iniquity is in their hand. Still harping upon this string, that a man cannot
love and follow these vanities, or entangle himself with their ropes (as his
phrase is) but that he must indeed draw on much iniquity therewith: that is, he
most mingle much sin and offense of God with the same: which effect of sin,
because it kills the soul, that consents unto it: therefore Esaias compares
it unto the brood of serpents, that kills the bird which brings them
forth to the world. And finally Moises uses the like similitudes, when he
says, Deu. 32.
of vain and wicked men; Their vineyard is the vineyard of Sodomites, their
grape is the grape of gall, and their clusters of grapes are most bitter: their
wine is the gall of dragons, and the poison of cotatrices uncurable. By which
dreadful and loathsome comparisons, he would give us to understand, that the
sweet pleasures of this world are indeed deceits, and will prove themselves,
one day, most bitter and dangerous.

44 The fourth point that we have to consider, is, how this word aerumna, that
is, 4 The fourth part, how the world is misery.
misery and calamity, may be verified of the world, and the felicity thereof.
Which thing, though it may appeer sufficiently by that, which has been said
before: yet will I (for promise sake) discuss it a little further in this
place, by some particulars. And among many miseries which I might here recount;
the first, and one of the greatest, is, Brevitie.
the brevitie and uncertaintie of al worldly prosperity. Oh, how great a
misery is this unto a worldly man, that would have his pleasures, constant and
perpetual; O death, how bitter is thy remembrance (says the wise man) unto a
man that has peace in his riches? Eccl. 41.
We have seen many men advanced, and not endured two months in their
prosperity: we have heard of diverse married in great joy, and have not lived
six days in their felicity: we have read of strange matters in this kind; and
we see with our eyes no few examples daily. What a grief was it (think you) to
Alexander the great, 1. Mac. 1.
that having subdued in twelve years, the most part of all the world, should be
then enforced to die, when he was most desirous to live: and when he was to
take most joy, and comfort of his victories? What a sorrow was it to the rich
man in the Gospel, to hear upon the sudden; Luc. 12.
Hac nocte: Even this night thou must die? What a misery will this be to many
worldlings, when it comes? Who now build palaces; purchase lands; heap up
riches; procure dignities; make marriages; join kindreds, as though there were
never an end of these matters? What a doleful day, will this be to them (I say)
when they must forgo al these things, which they so much love? When they must
be turned off, as princes mules are wont to be, at the journeis end: that is,
their treasure taken from them, and their gauld backs only left unto
themselves? A comparison.
For as we see these mules of princes go, all the day long, laden with treasure,
and covered with fair cloths, but at night shaken off, into a sorry stable,
much bruised and gauled, with the carriage of those treasures: so rich men that
pass through this world, laden with gold, and silver; and do gaul greatly
their souls in carriage thereof, are despoiled of their burden at the day of
death; and are turned off, with their wounded consciences, to the loathsome
stable of hell and damnation.

45 Another misery joined to the prosperity of this world, Coffeehouse.
is the greevous counterpeaze of discontentments, that every worldly pleasure
has with it. Run over every pleasure in this life, and see what sauce it has
adjoined? Ask them that have had most proof thereof, whether they remain
contented, or no? The possession of riches is accompanied with so many fears,
and cares, as has been showed: the advancement of honors is subject to al
miserable servitude that It self is not so called: but it is said, that those
that marry should have tribulation in the flesh: which is in respect of the
cares and molestations that commonly hang (or specially at that time, as the
case stood with them) on the married estate.
pleasure of the flesh, though it be lawful and honest; yet is it called by
Saint Paul Tribulation of the flesh: 1. Cor. 7.28.
but if it be with sin, ten thousand times more is it environed with all kind of
miseries.

46 Who can reckon up the calamities of our body? So many diseases; Miseries
of body.
so many infirmities; so many Whereas chance and fortune are used of us in much
like sense, though the sense and meaning of those that are instructed in the
faith be good, referring al to the providence of God: yet seeing that Saint
Augustine long since was sorry, that he had so much used such words (as
appears, Retr. 1. c. 1.) it were good that we also should more warily decline
such words, as others have so profanely abused. And better were it a great
deal to say, that such things are of the hand of God.
Of mind.
now with anger; now with sorrow; now with envy; now with fury? Who can
recount the adversities, and miseries, that come by our goods? Of goods.
Who can number the hurts and discontentations, that daily insu upon us, Of
neighbors.
from our neighbors? One calls us into law for our goods: another pursues us
for our life: a third, by slander impugneth our good name: one afflicts us by
hatred; another by envy; another by flattery; another by deceit; another by
revenge; another by false witness; another by open arms. There are not so many
dais, nor hours in our lives, as there are miseries and contrarieties in the
same. And further than this, the evil has this prerogative above the good, in
our life; that one defect only overwhelmeth and drowneth a great number of good
things together: as if a man had all the felicities heaped together, which this
world could yield, and yet had but one tooth out of tune: all the other
pleasures would not make him merry. Heerof you have a clear example in Aman,
chief counceller of king Assuerus: who, Hester. 5.
for that, Mardocheus the Jew did not rise to him when he went by, nor did
honor him, as other men did: he said to his wife and frinds, that al his other
felicities were nothing, in respect of this one affliction.

The misery of blindness.
47 Ad now to this misery of darkness and blindness, wherein worldly men live (as
in part I have touched before) most fitly prefigured by the palpable darkness of
Egypt, Exo. 10.
wherein no man could see his neighbor; no man could see his work; no man could
see his way: such is the darkness wherein worldly men walk. They have eyes, Mat.
13.
but they see not, says Christ: that is, though they have eyes to see the
matters of this world: yet they are blind, for that they see not the things
they should see indeed. The children of this world are wiser in their
generation, Luc. 16.
than the children of light. But that is only in matters of this world, in
matters of darkness, not in matters of light, whereof they are no children: For
that the carnal, 1. Cor. 2.
man understands not the things which are of God. Walk over the world, and
you shall find men as sharp eied as egles in things of the earth: but the same
men as blind as beetles in matters of heaven. Thereof ensu those lamentable
effects, that we see daily of man's laws so carefully respected, and Gods
commandments so contemptuously rejected: of earthly goods sought for, and
heavenly goods not thought upon: of so much travel taken for the body, and so
little care used for the soul. Finally, if you will see in what great blindness
the world does live, remember that Saint Paul coming from a worlding to be a
good Christian, Acts. 9.
had scales taken from his eyes by Ananias, which covered his sight before,
when he was in his pride, and ruff of the world.

48 Beside al these miseries, Temptations and dangers.
there is yet another misery, greater in some respect, than the former; and
that is, the infinite number of temptations, of snares, of intisements in the
world, whereby men are drawn to perdition daily. Athanasius writes of Saint
Anthony the hermit, that God revealed unto him, one day, Athan. in vita
Anthonij.
the state of the world, and he saw it al hanged full of nets in every corner,
and devils sitting by, to watch the same. The prophet David to signify the
very same thing; that is, the infinite multitude of snares in this world,
says; God shall reign snares upon sinners. Psalm. 10.
That is, God shall permit wicked men to fall into snares: which are as plentiful
in the world, as are the drops of rain, which fall down from heaven. Every thing
almost is a deadly snare, unto a carnal, and loose hearted man. Every sight that
he sees; every word that he hears; every thought that he conceives: his
youth; his age; his frinds; his enemies; his honor; his disgrace; his riches;
his poverty; his company keeping; his prosperity; his adversity; his meat
that he eats; his apparel that he wears: al are snares, to draw him to
destruction, that is not watchful.

49 Of this then, and of the blindness declared before, Facility of sinning.
does follow the last, and greatest misery of al, which can be in this life:
and that is; the facility whereby worldly men do run into sin. For truly says
the scripture; Miseros facit populos peccatum: Prou. 14.
Sin is the thing that makes people miserable. And yet, how easily men of the
world do commit sin, and how little scruple they make of the matter, Job
signifies, when talking of such a man, he says; Bibit quasi aquam
iniquitatem: Job. 15.
He suppeth up sin, as it were water. That is, with as great facility,
custom, and ease, passes he down any kind of sin, that is offered him, as a
man drinks water, when he is a thirst. He that will not believe the saying of
Job: let him prove a little, by his own experience, whether the matter be so or
no: let him walk out in to the streets, behold the doings of men, view their
behavior, consider what is done in shops; in hals; in consistories; in
judgment seats; in palaces; and in common meeting places abroad: what lieng;
what slandering; what deceiving there is. He shall find, that of al things,
whereof men take any account, nothing is so little accounted of, as to sin. The
sinful state of the world.
He shall see justice sold; verity wrested; shame lost; and equity despised.
He shall see the innocent condemned; the guilty delivered; the wicked advanced;
the virtuous opressed. He shall see many theves flourish; many usurers bear great
sway; many murderers and extortioners reverenced and honored; many fools put in
authority; and diverse, which have nothing in them but the form of men, by
reason of money to be placed in great dignities, for the government of others.
He shall hear at every man's mouth, almost, vanity, pride, detraction, envy,
deceit, dissimulation, wantonness, dissolution, lieng, swearing, perjurie, and
blaspheming. Finally, he shall see the most part of men, to govern themselves
absolutely, even as beasts do, by the motion of their passions, not by law of
justice, reason, religion, or virtue. 5 The fifth part of this chapter.


50 Of this does insu the fifth point that Christ touches in his parable, and
which I promised here to handle: to wit, that the love of this world choketh
up, and strangleth every man, whom it possesses, from al celestial and
spiritual life; for that it fills him with a plain contrary spirit, to the
spirit of God. The apostle says; Romans 8.
Si quis spiritum Christi non habet, hic non est eius? If any man has not the
spirit of Christ, this fellow belongs not unto him. Now, how contrary the
spirit of Christ, and the spirit of the world is, may appeer by the fruits of
Christ's spirit rekoned up by Saint Paul unto the Galathians: to wit; Gal. 5.
Charity, which is the root and mother of al good works: The effects of the
spirit of Christ.
Joy, in serving God: Peace, or tranquillity of mind in the storms of this
world: Patience, in adversity: Longanimitie, in expecting our reward: Bonitie,
in hurting no man: Benignity, in sweet behavior: Gentleness, in occasion given
of anger: Faithfulness, in performing our promises: Modesty, without
arrogancy: Continency, from al kind of wickedness: Chastity, in conserving a
pure mind in a clean and unspotted body. Gal. 5.
Against these men (says Saint Paul) there is no law. The effects of the
spirit of this world.
And in the very same chapter he expresses the spirit of the world by the
contrary effects, saying; The works of flesh are manifest, which are,
fornication, uncleannes, wantonness, lechery, idolatry, poisonings, enmities,
contentions, emulations, wrath, strife, dissension, sects, envy, murder,
droonkennes, gluttony, and the like: of which I foretell you, as I have told
you before, that those men which do such things shall never obtain the kingdom
of heaven.

51 Here now may every man judge of the spirit of the world, and the spirit of
Christ: Two rules of S. Paul to know our spirit.
and (applieng it to himself) may conjecture whether he holds of the one, or
of the other. Saint Paul gives two pretty short rules in the very same place
to try the same. The first is; They which are of Christ, have crucified their
flesh, Gal. 5.
with the vices, and concupiscences thereof. That is, they have so mortified
their own bodies, as they strive against all the vices and sins repeated before,
and yield not to serve the concupiscences or temptations thereof. The second
rule is; If we live in spirit, then let us walk in spirit. That is, our walking
and behavior is a sign whether we be alive or dead. For if our walking be
spiritual, such as I have declared before by those fruits thereof: then do we
live and have life in spirit: but if our works be carnal, such as S. Paul now
has described: then are we carnal and dead in spirit, neither have we any
thing to do with Christ, or portion in the kingdom of heaven. And for that all the world is full of those carnal works, and brings forth no fruits indeed of
Christ's spirit, nor permits them to grow up or prosper within her: thence is
it, that the scripture alwais puts Christ, Christ and the world enemies.
John. 14.
and the world for opposite and open enemies.

52 Christ himself says, that The world cannot receive the spirit of truth.
And again, in the same Evangelist he says; that Neither he, Ioh. 15.17.
nor any of his are of the world, though they live in the world. And yet
further, in his most vehement prayer unto his father; John. 17.
Pater just, mundus te non cognovit: Just father, the world has not known
thee. For which cause S. John writes; John. 2.
If any man love the world, the love of the father is not in him. And yet
further Saint James, Iaco. 4.
that Whosoever but desires to be frind of this world, is thereby made an
enemy to God. What will worldly men say to this? Saint Paul affirms plainly,
1. Cor. 11.
that this world is to be damned. And Christ insinuates the same in Saint
John's Gospel: John. 12.
but most of al, in that wonderful fact of his, when praieng to his father, for
other matters, he excepteth the world by name; John. 17.
Non pro mundo rogo, says he: I do not ask mercy, and pardon for the world;
but for those which thou have given me out of the world. Oh, what a dreadful
exception is this, made by the savior of the world; John. 1. Luc. 23.
by the lamb, that takes away al sins; by him that asked pardon, even for his
tormentors, and crucifiers, to except now the world by name from his mercy? Oh
that worldly men would consider but this one point only: they would not (I
think) live so void of fear as they do.

53 Can any man marvel now why Saint Paul cries so carefully to us; Romans 12.
Nolite conformari huic saeculo: Conform not your selves to this world? And
again; Titus. 2.
That we should renounce utterly al worldly desires? Can any marvel why Saint
John, which was most privy, above al others, to Christ's holy meaning heerin,
says to us in such earnest sort: Nolite diligere mundum, 1. Ioh. 2.
neque ea quae in mundo sunt: Do not love the world, nor any thing that is in
the world. If we may neither love it, nor so much as conform our selves unto
it, under so great pains (as are before rehearsed) of the enmity of God and
eternal damnation: what shall become of those men that do not only conform
themselves unto it, and the vanities thereof: but also do follow it; seek after
it; rest in it; and do bestow al their labors, and travels upon it.

54 If you ask me the cause why Christ so hates and abhors this world: Why
Christ hates the world.
Saint John tells you; Quia mundus totus in maligno positus est: For that all the whole world is set on naughtines; 1. Ioh. 5.
for that it has a spirit contrary to the spirit of Christ, as has been
showed; for that it teaches pride, vain glory, ambition, envy, revenge,
malice, with pleasures of the flesh, and al kind of vanities: and Christ on the
contrary side, humility, meeknes, pardoning of enemies, abstinence,
chastity, sufferance, mortification, bearing the cross, with contempt of al
earthly pleasures: for that it persecuteth the good, and advances the evil:
for that it rooteth out virtue, and planteth al vice: and finally, for that it
shuts the doors against Christ when he knocks, Apoc. 3.
and strangleth the heart that once it possesses.

55 Wherefore to conclude this part, seeing this world is such a thing as it is:
A description of the world.
so vain, so deceitful, so troublesome, so dangerous: seeing it is a professed
enemy to Christ, excommunicated and damned to the pit of hell: seeing it is (as
one father says) an ark of travel; a school of vanities; a feat of deceit; a
labirinth of error: seeing it is nothing else but a barren wilderness; a stony
feeld; a dirtie stie; a tempestuous sea: seeing it is a grove full of thorns; a
meadow full of scorpions; a flourishing garden without fruit; a cave full of
poisoned and deadly basilisks: seeing it is finally (as I have showed) a
fountain of miseries; a river of tears; a feined fable; a delectable frenzy:
seeing (as Saint Austen says) the joy of this world has nothing else but false
delight; Au. ep. 39.
true asperitie; certain sorrow; uncertain pleasure; travelsom labor; fearful
rest; greevous misery; vain hope of felicity: seeing it has nothing in it
(as saint Chrysostom says) but tears, Hom. 22. ad pop. Antioc.
shame, repentance, reproach, sadness, negligences, labors, terrors, siknes, sin,
and death it self: seeing the worlds repose is full of anguish; his security
without foundation; his fear without cause; his travels without fruit; his
sorrow without profit; his desires without success; his hope without reward;
his mirth without continuance; his miseries without remedies: seeing these and
a thousand evils more are in it, and no one good thing can be had from it: who
will be deceived with this visard, or allured with this vanity hereafter? Who
will be stayed from the noble service of God by the love of so fond a trifle as
is the world? And this, to a reasonable man may be sufficient, to declare the
insufficiency of this third impediment.

56 But yet for the satisfieng of my promise in the beginning of this chapter:
The last part of this chapter, how we may avoid the evil of the world.
I have to ad a word or two in this place, how we may avoid the danger of this
world; and also use it unto our gain and commodity. And for the first to avoid
the dangers, seeing there are so many snares and traps, as has been declared:
there is no other way but only to use the refuge of birds, in avoiding the
dangerous snares of fowlers: that is, to mount up into the air, and so to fly
over them al. Frustra iacitur rete ante oculos pennatorum, says the wise man:
Prou. 1.
that is, The net is laid in vain before the eyes of such as have wings, and
can fly. The spies of Hiericho, though many snares were laid for them by
their enemies: yet they escaped al, for that they walked by hills says the
scripture: Hom. 1. in Iosue.
whereunto Origin alluding, says; that There is no way to Though the matter be
good: yet hardly does it stand by these places.
but to walk upon hills, and to imitate David, that said; Levavi oculos meos ad
montes, unde veniet auxiliu^ mihi: I lifted up mine eyes unto the hills, whence
al mine aid and assistance came, for avoiding the snares of this world. And
then shall we say with the same David; Anima nostra sicut passer erepta est de
laqueo venantium: Psa. 120. Psa. 123.
Our soul is delivered as a sparrow from the snare of the fowlers. We must say
with Saint Paul; Phil. 3.
Our conversation is in heaven. And then shall we little fear al these deceits,
and dangers upon earth. For as the fowler has no hope to catch the bird,
except he can allure her to pitch and come down, by some means: so has the
devil, no way to entangle us, but to say as he did to Christ; Mitte te deorsum:
Throw thy self down: Mat. 4.
that is, pitch down upon the baits, which I have laid: eat and devour them:
enamor thy self with them: tie thine appetite unto them, and the like.

57 Which gross and open temptation he that will avoid, by contemning the
allurement of these baits: by flieng over them; by placing his love and
cogitations in the mountains of heavenly joies and eternity: he shall easily
escape al dangers and perils. King David was past them al, Psalm. 72.
when he said to God; What is there for me in heaven, or what do I desire
besides thee upon earth? My flesh and my heart have fainted for desire of thee.
Thou art the God of my heart, and my portion (O Lord) for ever.

58 Saint Paul also was past over these dangers, Gal. 6. Phil. 3. 2. Cor. 10.
when he said; that Now he was crucified to the world, and the world unto him:
and that He esteemed all the wealth of this world as mere doong: and that albeit
he lived in flesh, yet lived he not according to the flesh. Which glorious
example if we would follow, in contemning and despising the vanities of this
world, and fixing our minds, in the noble riches of Gods kingdom to come: the
snares of the devil would prevail nothing at al against us in this life.

59 Touching the second point: How to use worldly wealth to our advantage.
how to use the riches and commodities of this world to our advantage: Christ
has laid down plainly the means; Facite vobis amicos de Mammona iniquitatis:
Make unto you frinds of the riches of iniquity. Luc. 16.
The rich glutton might have escaped his torments, and have made himself an
happy man by help of worldly wealth, if he would: and so might many a
thousand which now live, and will go to hell for the same. Luc. 16.
Oh that men would take warning, and be wise whiles they have time. Saint Paul
says; Gal. 4. 2. Cor. 9.
Deceive not your selves: look what a man sows, and that shall he reap. What
a plentiful harvest then might rich men provide themselves, if they would:
which have such store of seed, and so much ground offered them daily to sow it
in? Why do they not remember that sweet harvest song; Mat. 25.
Come ye blessed of my father, enter into the kingdom prepared for you: for I
was hungry, and you fed me: I was thirsty, and you gave me to drink: I was
naked, and you appareled me. Or if they do not care for this: why do they not
fear at least the blak Sanctus that must be chaunted to them for the contrary;
Agite nunc divites, plorate, Iaco. 5.
ululantes in miserijs vestris quae advenient vobis: Go to now you rich men,
weep, and howl in your miseries, that shall come upon you?

Dam. in hist. Barlaam and Josapha^^. 1 A parable.
60 The holy father John Damascen reports a parable of Barlaam the hermit,
to our purpose. There was (says he) a certain city, or commonwealth, which
used to choose themselves a king from among the poorest sort of the people, and
to advance him to great honor, wealth, and pleasures for a time: but after a
while, when they were weary of him, their fashion was to rise against him, and
to despoile him of al his felicity, yea, the very cloths of his bak, and so to
banish him naked into an island of a far country: where bringing nothing with
him, he should live in great misery, and be put to great slaverie for ever.
Which practice one king at a certain time considering, by good advise (for all
the other, though they knew that fashion, yet through negligence, and pleasures
of their present felicity cared not for it) took resolute order with himself
how to prevent this misery: which was by this means; He saved every day great
sums of money from his superfluities, and idle expenses, and so, secretly made
over before hand a great treasure unto that island, whereunto he was in danger
daily to be sent. And when the time came that indeed they deposed him from his
kingdom, and turned him away naked, as they had done the other before: he went
to the island with joy and confidence, where his treasure lay, and was received
there with exceeding great triumph, and placed presently in greater glory than
ever he was before.

61 This parable (drawing somewhat near to that which Christ put of the evil
steward, The application of this parable.
teaches as much as at this present needs to be said in this point. For the
city or common wealth is this present world, which advances to authority,
poor men: that is, such as come naked into this life, and upon the sudden when
they look least for it, does it pull them down again and turns them naked into
their graves, and so sends them into another world: where bringing no
treasure with them, they are like to find little favor, and rather eternal
misery. The wise king that prevented this calamity, is he, which in this life
(according to the counsel of Christ) does seek to lay up treasure in heaven,
against the day of his death, Luc. 12.
when he must be banished hence naked, as all the princes of that city were. At
which time if their good deeds do follow them (as God promises) then shall they
be happy men; Apo. 14. Mat. 25.
and placed in much more glory than ever this world was able to give them. But
if they come without oil in their lamps: then is there nothing for them to
expect; but Nescio vos: I know not you. And when they are known; Ite maledicti
in ignem eternum: Mat. 25.
Go you accursed into fire everlasting.

CHAP. IIII. Of the fourth impediment: which is, too much presuming of the
mercy of GOD.
THere are a certain kind of people in the world, who will not take the pains to
think of, or to allege any of the said impediments before; but have a shorter
way for all, and more plausible, as it seems to them: and that is, to lay the
whole matter upon the bak of Christ himself, and to answer what soever you can
say against them, with this only sentence; God is merciful. Of these men may
Christ complain with the prophet, saying; Supra dorsum meum fabricaverunt
peccatores, Psa. 128.
prolongaverunt iniquitatem: Sinners have built upon my bak, Building on Gods
bak.
they have prolonged their iniquity. By which Though it stand not on the
natural sense of this place: yet is it that in effect, which is rebuked, Romans
6.1.
in hope of Gods mercy, is to build our sins on his bak. But what follows?
Will God bear it? No verily: for the next words ensuing are; Dominus iustus,
concidet cervices peccatorum: God is just, he will cut in sunder the neks of
sinners. Here are two cooling cards, for the two warm imaginations before. Mean
you (Sir) to prolong your iniquity, for that God is merciful? Remember also,
that he is just, says the prophet. Are ye gotten up, upon the bak of God, to
make your nest of sin there? Take heed: for he will fetch you down again, and
break your nek downward, except ye repent: for that indeed there is no one
thing which may be so injurious to God, as to make him the foundation of our
sinful life, which lost his own life for the extinguishing of sin.

2 But you will say; And is not God then merciful? How God is both merciful and
just.
Yes truly (deer brother) he is most merciful, and there is neither end, nor
measure of his mercy. He is even mercy it self: it is his nature and
essence: and he can no more leave to be merciful, than he can leave to be God.
But yet (as the prophet here says) he is just also. We must not so remember
his mercy, as we forget his justice. Dulcis and rectus Dominus: Our Lord is
sweet, but yet upright and just too, says David: and in the same place; Psalm.
24.
All the wais of the Lord are mercy and truth. Ser. 52. parvorum.
Which words holy Barnard expounding in a certain sermon of his, says thus;
There be two feet of the Lord, whereby he walks his wais: that is, The two
feet of God.
mercy, and truth; and God fasteneth both these feet upon the hearts of them,
which turn unto him. And every sinner that will truly convert himself, must lay
hand fast on both these feet. For if he should lay hands on mercy only,
letting pass truth and justice: he would perish by presumption. And on the
other side, if he should apprehend justice only, without mercy: he would perish
by desperation. To the end therefore that he may be saved: he must humbly fall
down and kiss both these feet: that in respect of Gods justice he may retain
fear: and in respect of his mercy, Sermon. 6. in Cant.
he may conceive hope. And in another place; Happy is that soul, upon which
our Lord Jesus Christ has placed both his feet. I will not sing unto thee
judgment alone, nor yet mercy alone (my God;) but I will sing unto thee, Psa.
101. Psa. 148.
with the prophet David, mercy and judgment joined together. And I will never
forget these justifications of thine.

Tract. 33. in John.
3 Saint Austen handles this point most excellently in diverse places of his
works. Let them mark (says he) which love so much mercy and gentleness in our
Lord: let them mark (I say) and fear also his truth. For (as the prophet says)
God is both sweet and just. Psalm. 24.
Do thou love that he is sweet? Fear also that he is just. As a sweet Lord,
he said; I have held my peace at your sins: but as a just Lord, he adds; And
think you that I will hold my peace still? Psa. 102.
God is merciful, and full of mercies, say you: it is most certain: yea ad unto
it, that He bears long. But yet fear that, which comes in the verses end;
Et verax: that is, He is also true and just. Two dangers of sinners.
There be two things, whereby sinners do stand in danger: the one, in hoping too
much (which is presumption:) the other, in hoping too little, which is
desperation. Who is deceived by hoping too much? He which says unto himself;
God is a good God; a merciful God: and therefore I will do what pleases me. And
why so? Because God is a merciful God; a good God; a gentle God. These men run
into danger by hoping too much. Who are in danger by despair? Those, which
seeing their sins greevous, and thinking it now unpossible to be pardoned, say
within themselves; Well, we are once to be damned: why do not we then,
whatsoever pleases us best in this life? These men are murdered by
desperation; the other by hope. What therefore does God for gaining of both
these men? To him which is in danger by hope, he says; Do not say with thy
self; The mercy of God is great, Eccl. 5.
he will be merciful to the multitude of my sins: for the face of his wrath is
upon sinners. To him that is in danger by desperation, he says; Eze. 18.
At what time soever a sinner shall turn himself to me, I will forget his
iniquities. Thus far S. Austen, beside much more which he adds in the same
place, touching the great peril and folly of those, which upon vain hope of
Gods mercy do persevere in their evil life.

4 It is a very evil consequent, and most unjust kind of reasoning, to say;
That for so much as God is merciful and long suffering, therefore will I abuse his
mercy, and continu in my wickedness. The scripture teaches us not to reason
so, but rather quite contrary; God is merciful, and expects my conversion,
and the longer he expects, the more greevous will be his punishment when it
comes, if I neglect this patience. And therefore I ought presently to accept
of his mercy. So reasons S. Paul, which says; Romans 2.
Do thou contemn the riches of his long suffering, and gentleness? Do thou
not know that the patience of God toward thee, is used to bring thee to
repentance? But thou through the hardness of thy heart and irrepentant mind do
hoord up to thy self wrath, in the day of vengeance, at the revelation of Gods
just judgment. In which words Saint Paul signifies, that the longer that God
suffers us with patience in our wickedness, the greater heap of vengeance does
he gather against us, if we persist obstinate in the same. Whereto Saint Austen
adds another consideration of great dread and fear: Tract. 33. in Joan.
and that is; If he offer thee grace (says he) to day: thou know not
whether he will do it to morrow or no. If he give thee life and memory this
week: thou know not whether thou shall enjoy it the next week or no.

Gods goodness nothing helps those that persevere in sin.
5 The holy prophet beginning his seventith and second psalm of the dangerous
prosperity of worldly men, uses these words of admiration; How good a God,
is the God of Israel unto them that be of a right heart! Psalm. 72.
And yet in all that psalm, he does nothing else but show the heavy justice of
God toward the wicked, even when he gives them most prosperities and worldly
wealth: and his conclusion is; Behold (O Lord) they shall perish which depart
from thee: thou have destroyed al those that have broken their faith of wedlok
with thee. By which is signified, that, how good soever God be unto the just:
yet that pertains nothing to the relief of the wicked, who are to receive
just vengeance at his hands, amidst the greatest mercies, bestowed upon the
godly. Psalm. 33.
The eyes of the Lord are upon the just (says the same prophet) and his ears
are bent to hear their prayers: but the face of the Lord is upon them that do
evil, to destroy their memory from out the earth.

6 It was an old practice of deceiving prophets, resisted strongly by the
prophets of God, to cry; Peace, peace, unto wicked men: Ier. 6.8.
when indeed there was nothing toward them but danger, sword, and destruction,
as the true prophets foretold, and as the event prooved. Eze. 13.
Wherefore, the prophet David gives us a notable and sure rule, to govern our
hope and confidence withal; Sacrificate sacrificium iustitiae, and sperate in
Domino: Do you sacrifice unto God the sacrifice of righteousness, and then trust
in him. Wherewith Saint John agrees, when he says; If our heart or conscience
do not reprehend us for wicked life: then have we confidence with God: 1. Ioh.
3.
as who would say; If our conscience be guilty of lewd and wicked life, and we
resolved to dwell and continu therein: then in vain have we confidence in the
mercies of God, unto whose just judgment we stand subject for our wickedness.

The severitie of Gods punishment upon sin.
7 It is most woonderful and dreadful to consider, how God has used himself
toward his best beloved in this world, upon offense given by occasion of sin:
how easily he has changed countenance; how soon he has broken off frindship;
how straightly he has taken account; and how severely he has punished. The
Angels that he created with so great care and love, The Angels.
and to whom he imparted so singular privileges, of al kind of perfections, as
he made them almost very gods (in a certain manner) committed but only one sin
of pride, Esai. 14.
against his majesty, and that only in thought, as Divines do hold: and yet
presently, all that good will and favor was changed into justice: and that also
so severe, as they were thrown down to eternal torments, 2. Pet. 2. Ep. Iud.
without redemption, chained for ever, to abide the rigor of hell fire and
intolerable darkness.

Adam and Eve.
8 After this, God made himself another new frind of flesh and blood, which was
our father Adam in paradise; where God conversed with him, so frindly and
familiarly, as is most woonderful to consider: he called him; he talked with
him; he made al creatures in the world subject unto him: he brought them al
before him, to the end that he, and not God, should give them their names: he
made a mate and companion for him: he blessed them both: and finally, showed al
possible tokens of love, that might be. But what insued? Adam committed but one
sin: and that, at the intisement of another: and that also a sin not of so
very great importance (as it may seem to man's reason) being but the eating of
the tree forbidden, and yet the matter was no sooner done, but al frindship was
broken between God and him: he was thrust out of paradise, condemned to
perpetual misery, and al his posterity to eternal damnation, together with
himself, if he had not repented. And how severely this greevous sentence is
executed, may sufficiently appeer by this, that infinite millions of people,
even the whole race of mankind, is for it, cast down unto the unspeakable
torments of hell: excepting those few, that since are ransomed by the coming
down of Gods own son, the second person in Trinity, into this flesh; and by
his intolerable sufferings, and death in the same. Moises and Aaron.


9 The two miracles of the world; Moises and Aaron were of singular authority
and favor with God: Number. 20.27.33. Deuteronomy. 10.32.34.
insomuch as they could obtain great things at his hands for other men: and yet
when they offended God once themselves, at the waters of contradictio^ in the
desert of Sin, for that they dowted somewhat of the miracle promised to them
from God, and thereby did dishonor his majesty before the people, as he says:
they were presently rebuked most sharply for the same: and though they repented
heartily that offense; and so, obtained remission of the fault or guilt: yet was
there laid upon them a greevous chastisement for the same: and that was, that
they should not enter themselves into the land of promise: but should die when
they came within the sight thereof. And albeit they entreated God most earnestly
for the release of this penance: yet could they never obtain the same at his
hands: but alwais he answered them; Seeing you have dishonored me before the
people, you shall die for it, and shall not enter into the land of promise.

10 In what special great favor was Saul with God, Saul.
when he chose him to be the first king of the people: 1. Reg. 10. and 11. Acts.
13.
caused Samuel the prophet so much to honor him; and to anoint him prince upon
Gods own inheritance, as he calls it? When he commended him so much, and took
such tender care over him? And yet afterward, for that he brake Gods
commandment, 1. Reg. 13.15.16.
in reserving certain spoils of war, which he should have destroyed: yea,
though he reserved them to honor God withal, as he pretended: yet was he
presently cast off by God; degraded of his dignity; given over to the hands of
an evil spirit; 1. Reg. 16. 1. Reg. 31.
brought to infinite miseries (though he shifted out for a time) and finally,
so forsaken and abandoned by God, 1. Par. 10.
as he slew himself: 2. Sam. 21.6
his sons were crucified or hanged on a cross by his enemies; and al his
family and lineage extinguished for ever.

David.
11 David was the chosen and deer frind of God, 2. Reg. 12.
and honored with the title of One that was according to Gods own heart. But
yet, Psalm. 34.68.108.101. Psalm. 29.
as soon as he had sinned: the prophet Nathan was sent to denounce Gods heavy
displeasure and punishment upon him. And so it insued, notwithstanding In this
the sense is rather to be regarded: than the words to be streitly urged.
eating of ashes, and the like. By which is evident, that how great Gods mercy
is to them that fear him: so great is his justice to them that offend him.

12 The scripture has infinite examples of this matter, Genesis 4. Genesis 8. Genesis
19. Number. 16. Leui. 10.
as the rejection of Cain and his posterity straight upon his murder: the
pitiful drowning of the whole world in the time of Noe: the dreadful consuming
of Sodom and Wherein also we may see what those may look for that worship God
with men's traditions, or otherwise than he has appointed.
other fire on the altar, than was appointed them: the most terrible striking
dead of Ananias and Saphira, for retaining some part of their own goods, by
deceit, from the apostles: with many mo such examples, Acts. 5.
which the scripture does recount.

The heavines of Gods hand.
13 And for the greevousnes of Gods justice, and heavines of his hand, when it
lights upon us, though it may appeer sufficiently by all these examples before
alleged, wherein the particular punishments (as you see) are most rigorous: yet
will I repeat one act of God more, out of the scripture, which expresses the
same in woonderful manner. It is well known that Benjamin among all the twelve
sons of Jacob, Genesis 42.43.
was the dearest unto his father, as appears in the book of Genesis, and
therefore also greatly respected by God: and his tribe placed in the best part
of all the land of promise, upon the division thereof, Iosu. 18.
having Jerusalem, Jericho, and other the best cities within it. Yet
notwithstanding for one only sin committed by certain private men in the city
of Gabaa, upon the wife of a levite, God punished the whole tribe in this
order, Iudi. 19.20.
as the scripture recounteth. He caused all the other eleven tribes to rise
against them: and first, to come to the house of God in Silo, to ask his
advise, and follow his direction in this war against their brethren. And thence
having by Gods appointment entered battle twice with the tribe of Benjamin, the
third day God gave them so great a victory, as they slew all the living
creatures, within the compass of that tribe, except only six hundred men that
escaped away into the desert: the rest were slain, both man, woman, children,
and infants, together with all the beasts, and cattle, and all the cities,
villages, and houses burnt with fire. And all this, for one sin committed, only
at one time, with one woman.

14 And who will not then confess with Moises, that God is a just God, a great
God, Deu. 10.
and a terririble God? Who will not confess with Saint Paul; It is horrible to
fall into the hands of the living God? Heb. 10.
Who will not say with holy David; A iudicijs tuis timui: Psa. 118.
I have feared at the remembrance of thy judgments. If God would not spare the
destroieng of a whole tribe for on sin only; if he would not pardon Chore,
Dathan, and Abiron for once; the sons of Aaron for once; Ananias, and Saphyra,
for once; if he would not forgive Esau, though afterward he sought the blessing
with tears as the apostle says; if he would not remit the punishment of one
fault to Moises and Aaron, Heb. 12.
though they asked it with great instance; if he would not forgive one proud
cogitation, unto the angels; nor once eating of the tree forbidden unto Adam,
without infinite punishment; nor would pass over the cup of affliction from
his own Son, though he asked it thrice upon his knees, Mat. 26.
with the sweat of blood: what reason have thou to think that he will let pass
so many sins of thine unpunished? What cause have thou to induce thy
imagination, that he will deal extraordinarily with thee, and break the course
of his justice for thy sake? Art thou better than those whom I have named? Have
thou any privilege from God above them?

Great and strange effects of Gods justice.
15 If thou would consider the great and strange effects of Gods justice,
which we see daily executed in the world: thou should have little cause to
persuade thy self so favorably, or rather to flatter thy self so dangerously,
as thou do. We see that, notwithstanding Gods mercy, yea, notwithstanding
the death and passion of Christ our savior, for saving of the whole world: yet
so many infinite millions to be damned daily, by the justice of God: so many
infidels, heathens, Jews, and Turks, that remain in the darkness of their own
ignorance: and among Christians, so many that hold not their profession truly,
or otherwise are il livers therein, as that Christ truly said, Mat. 7.20.
that few were they that should be saved: albeit his death was paid for all; if
they made not themselves unwoorthy thereof. And before the coming of our savior
much more we see, that all the world went a-wry to damnation for many thousand
years together; excepting a few Jews, which were the people of God. And yet
among them also, the greater part (it seems) were not saved; as may be
conjectured by the speeches of the prophets from time to time; and specially by
the saiengs of Christ to the Pharisees, and other rulers thereof. Now then, if
God for the satisfieng of his justice, could let so many millions perish
through their own sins, as he does also now daily permit, without any prejudice
or impechment to his mercy: why, may not he also damn thee, for thy sins,
notwithstanding his mercy, seeing thou do not only commit them without fear,
but also do confidently persist in the same?

16 But here some man may say; If this be so, Whether Gods mercy be greater
than his justice.
that God is so severe in punishment of every sin: and that he damneth so
many thousands for one that he saves: how is it true; that The mercies of God
are Spread forth over al his works: as both Augustine and Ierom do read; In
omnia, or In Vniversa opera eius. Tom. 8.11. on behalf of his children. For
even they also have their works so unperfect, and their faith so weak, that but
in the depth of the mercy of God, they cannot in any wise be saved: no, not
the best that ever was. But concerning that he does so resolutely set down so
many thousands to be damned for one that is saved, it is somewhat more, than the
word it self does warrant; or the proportion of the mercy of God (compared
with his justice) may seem to bear. And seeing that this whole treatise in
these four next sections, viz. 16.19. is grounded upon a wrong text, therefore
it is to be read so much more warily: and no further to be accounted of, than
it may be found to have the word of God to warrant the same.
above al his other works (as the scripture says) and that it passes and
exalts it self above his judgments? Psa. 144. Iac. 2.
For if the number of the damned do exceed so much the number of Mat. 7.20.
how, notwithstanding all this, the mercy of God does exceed his other works.

17 And first, his mercy may be said to exceed, for that al our salvation is
of his mercy, and our damnation from our selves, as from the first and
principal causes thereof, according to the saying of God, Ose. 13.
by the prophet; Perditio tua Israel: tantum modo in me auxilium tuum: Thy only
perdition is from thy self (O Israel) and thy assistance to do good, is only
from me. So that, as we must acknowledge Gods grace and mercy for the author of
every good thought, and act that we do, and consequently ascribe al our
salvation unto him: so none of our evil acts (for which we are damned) do
proceed from him; but only from our selves, and so he is no cause at al of our
damnation: and in this does his mercy exceed his justice.

2
18 Secondly, his mercy does exceed, in that he desires al men to be saved, 1.
Tim. 2.
as Saint Paul teaches, and himself protests, when he says; Eze. 18.
I will not the death of a sinner, but rather that he turn from his wickedness
and live. And again, by the prophet Jeremy, he complains greevously that men
will not accept of his mercy offered; Iere. 3.
Turn from your wicked wais (says he) why will ye die, you house of Israel? By
which appears, that he offers his mercy most willingly and freely to al,
but uses his justice only upon necessity (as it were) constrained thereunto by
our obstinate behavior. This Christ signifies more plainly, when he says to
Jerusalem; O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Mat. 25.
which killest the prophets: and stonest them to death, that are sent unto
thee: how often would I have gathered thy children together, as the hen
clocketh her chickins underneath her wings, but thou would not? Behold thy
house (for this cause) shall be made desert, and left without children. Here you
see the mercy of God often offered unto the Jews: but, for that they refused
it, he was enforced (in a certain manner) to pronounce this heavy sentence of
destruction and desolation upon them: which he fulfilled within forty, or
fifty years after, by the hands of Vespasian, emperor of Rome, Josephus de
bello Iud. lib. 1. cap. 1.2 3.
and Titus his son: who utterly discomfited the city of Jerusalem, and whole
nation of Jews, whom we see dispersed over the world at this day; in bondage,
both of body and soul. Which work of Gods justice though it be most terrible:
yet was his mercy greater to them, as appears by Christ words, if they had
not rejected the

19 Thirdly, his mercy exceeds his As before: not as though the meaning should
be, that God were more merciful, than just, holy, wise, or such like.
justice, even toward the damned themselves: in that he used many means to
save them in this life, by calling upon them, and assisting them with his grace
to do good: by mooving them inwardly with infinite good inspirations: by
alluring them outwardly, with exhortations, promises, examples of other; as
also by siknes, adversities, and other gentle corrections: by giving them space
to repent, with occasions, opportunities, and excitations unto the same: by
threatening them eternal death, if they repent not. Al which things being
effects of mercy, and goodness toward them: they must needs confess amidst
their greatest fury, and torments, that his judgments are true, and justified
in themselves, and no wais to be compared with the greatness of his mercies.

20 By this then we see that to be true, which the prophet says; Psalm. 83.
Misericordiam and veritatem diligit Dominus: God loves mercy and truth. And
again; Psalm. 84.
Mercy and truth have met together: justice and peace have kissed themselves.
We see the reason why the same prophet protests of himself; Psa. 100.
I will sing unto thee mercy and judgment (O Lord) not mercy alone, nor
judgment alone; but mercy and judgment together: that is, I will not so
presume of thy mercy, as I will not fear thy judgment: nor will I so fear thy
judgment, as I will ever despair of thy mercy. The fear of Gods judgment is
alwais to be joined with our confidence in Gods mercy: yea in very saints
themselves, as David says. But what fear? That fear truly, which the scripture
describes, Psalm. 33. Eccl. 1. Prou. 1. Eccl. 7. Eccl. 15. Eccl. 7. Eccl. 2.
when it says; The fear of the Lord expels sin; the fear of God, hates al
evil; he that fears God, neglects nothing; he that fears God, will turn
and look into his own heart; he that fears God, will do good works. They which
fear God, will not be incredulous to that which he says: but will keep his wais,
and seek out the things that are pleasant unto him: they will prepare their
hearts, and sanctify their souls in his sight.

21 This is the description of true fear of God, The praise of true fear.
set down by the scripture. This is the description of that fear, which is so
much commended and commanded in every part and parcel of Gods word: of that
fear (I say) which is called; Fons vitae; radix prudentiae; corona; Pro. 14.
and plenitudo sapientiae; gloria and gloriatio; beatum donum: that is; The
fountain of life; the root of prudence; Ecc. 1.2.15.
the crown and fulness of wisdom; the glory and gloriation of a Christian man;
a happy gift. Of him that has this fear, the scripture says; Psa. 112.
Happy is the man which fears the Lord, for he will place his mind upon his
commandments. And again; The man that fears God shall be happy at the last
end, Eccl. 1.
and shall be blessed at the day of his death. Finally, of such as have this
fear, the scripture says, that God is their foundation: God has prepared
great multitude of sweetness for them: God has purchased them an inheritance:
Psalm. 24. Psalm. 30. Psalm. 60. Psalm. 62. Psa. 144.
God is as merciful to them, as the father is merciful unto his children. And
(to conclude) Voluntatem timentium se faciet: God will do the will of those that
fear him with this fear.

22 This holy fear had good Job, when he said to God; I feared al my works.
Job. 9.
And he yields the reason thereof; For I know that thou sparest not him that
offends thee. This fear lacked the other of whom the prophet says; The
sinner has exaspered God, by saying, that God will not take account of his
doings, Psalm. 9.
in the multitude of wrath. Thy judgments (O Lord) are remooved from his
sight. And again, Wherefore has the man stirred up God against himself, by
saying; God will not take account of my doings? It is a great wickedness (no
dowt) and a great exasperation of God against us, to take the one half of Gods
nature from him, which is; to make him merciful without justice: and to live
so, as though God would not take account of our life: whereas he has protested
most earnestly the contrary, saying, that he is an hard and a sore man, which
will not be content to receive his own again, Mat. 25. Luc. 16.
but also will have usurie: that he will have a rekoning of al his goods lent us:
Mat. 7. Luc. 13.
that he will have fruit for all his labors bestowed upon us: and finally, that
he will have account for every word that we have spoken. Mat. 12.


Mat. 27. Mar. 15. John. 2.
23 Christ in the three score and eight psalm, which in sundry places of the
Gospel he interprets to be written of himself, among other dreadful curses,
which he sets down, against the reprobate, he has these; Let their eyes be
dazeled in such sort, as they may not see: power out thy wrath (my father) upon
them: let the fury of thy vengeance take hand fast on them: ad iniquity upon
their iniquity: and let him not enter into thy righteousness: let them be
blotted out of the book of life: and let them not be enrolled together with the
just. Here (lo) we see, that the greatest curse, which God can lay upon us,
next before our blotting out of the book of life, it is to suffer us to be so
blinded, as to ad iniquity upon iniquity, D. Thomas secunda secundae. q. 14.
art. 1.2.3.
and not to enter into consideration of his justice. For which cause also, this
confident kind of sinning upon hope of Gods mercy, is accounted by divines,
for the first Those six that Thomas there names, are desperation, presumption,
impoenitencie, wilfulnes, impugning of the known truth, and envieng of the
grace that is given to another. Al which may indeed be easily found to go
against the spirit of God. But that they may be accounted to be that same, that
in the scripture is called sin against the holy Ghost, and excluded al hope of
pardon, that is not so easily to be granted; for that the properties thereunto
assigned do not seem to be so fully found in any of these. A wilful resisting
of the known truth, not of infirmity, for fear, or favor, but of mere malice
for hatred of it, even only for that it is the truth, may seem to come much
nearer unto it, than (al things considered) those others do. Neither does he
set them down absolutely to be six several sorts of that sin, but in that sense
that himself does there limit.
six greevous sins against the holy Ghost, which our Savior in the gospel,
signifies to be so hardly pardoned unto men by his father: and the reason why
they call this a sin against the holy Ghost, is, Why presumption is a sin
against the holy Ghost.
for that it rejects wilfully one of the principal means left by the holy
Ghost, to retire us from sin, which is the fear and respect of Gods justice
upon sinners.

24 Wherefore, to conclude this matter of presumption: me think, we may use the
same kind of argument touching the fear of Gods justice, Romans 13.
as Saint Paul uses to the Romans of the fear of Gods ministers, which are
temporal princes: would thou nor fear the power of a temporal prince, says
he? Do well then: and thou shall not only not fear, but also receive laud and
praise therefore. But if thou do evil, then fear. For he bears not the sword
without a cause. In like sort may we say to those good felows, which make God
so merciful, as no man ought to fear his justice. Would ye not fear (my
brethren) the justice of God in punishment? Live virtuously then: and you shall
be as void of fear, as lions are, says the wise man; Pro. 28. 2. Ioh. 4.
For that perfect charity expels fear. But if you live wickedly: then have
you cause to fear: For God called not himself a just judge for nothing. 2.
Tim. 4.


25 If the matter had been so secure, as many men by flattery do persuade
themselves it is: Saint Peter would never have said unto Christians now
baptized; 1. Pet. 1.
Walk you in fear, during the time of this your earthly habitation. Nor S. Paul
to the same men; Phil. 2.
Woork your own salvation in fear and trembling. An objection answered.
But here some men will ask, how then does the same apostle in another place
say; 2. Tim. 1.
That God has not given us the spirit of fear, but of virtue, love, and
sobriety? To which I answer; That our spirit is not a spirit of servile fear:
that is, to live in fear, only for dread of punishment, without love: Servile
fear, and the fear of children.
but a spirit of love joined with fear of children, whereby they fear to offend
their father, not only in respect of his punishment, but principally for his
goodness toward them, and benefits bestowed upon them. This Saint Paul
declares plainly to the Romans, putting the difference between servile fear,
and the fear of children; Romans 8.
You have not received again the spirit of servitude (says he) in fear, but
the spirit of adoption of children, whereby we cry to God, Abba father. He says
here to the Romans: you have not received again the spirit of servitude in
fear, How the fear of gentiles was servile.
for that their former spirit (being gentiles) was only in servile fear: for
that they honored and adored their idols, not for any love they bare unto them,
being so infinite as they were, and such notable lewdnes reported of them (I
mean of Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and the like) but only for fear of hurt from
them, if they did not serve and adore the same.

26 Saint Peter also in one sentence expounds all this matter. For having
said; Timorem eorum ne timueritis: Fear not their fear. 1. Pet. 3.
Diverse so take it: but it seems rather (in my judgment) that such as
expound it, as if the apostle forbad them to fear those adversaries of theirs,
do come somewhat nearer to the sense of the place.
Meaning of the servile fear of wicked men: he adds Dominum autem Christum
sanctificate in cordibus vestris and cum modestia, and timore, conscientiam
habentes bonam. That is; Do you sanctify the Lord Jesus Christ in your hearts:
having a good conscience with modesty and fear. So that the spirit of servile
fear, which is grounded only upon respect of punishment, is forbidden us: but
the loving fear of children is commanded. And yet also about this, are there
two things to be noted.

27 The first, that albeit the spirit of servile fear be forbidden us
(especially when we are now entered into the service of God) yet is it most
profitable for sinners, Two things to be noted.
and such as yet but begin to serve God: for that it mooveth them Truth it is,
that such fear serves well to such a purpose. But the fear that in this place
is spoken of, seems by the circumstances of the place, not to be the servile,
but the childlike fear. As also another sense of this place may stand likewise,
viz. that to fear the Lord is the first, or principal part, or greatest point
of al wisdom. For that whosoever fears the Lord, shall so govern his wais,
and have al things fall out so well, that all the wisdom in all the world besides,
can never be able so to forecast for all events. For the Lord himself takes
upon him the protection and government of those that fear him: on whose behalf
he makes al things to fall out to the best.
it is called by the wise man; Prou. 1.
The beginning of wisdom. And therefore both Jonas to the Ninivites; Ion. 13.
and S. John Baptist to the Jews; Mat. 3.
and all the prophets to sinners, have used to stir up this fear, by threatening
the dangers and punishments, which were imminent to them, if they repented not.
But yet afterward, when men are converted to God, and do go forward in his
service: they change every day this servile fear into love, until they arrive
at last unto that state, whereof Saint John says; 1. Ioh. 4.
That perfect love, or charity expels fear. Tract. 9. in epist. 1. Ioh.
Whereupon S. Austen says, that Fear is the servant sent before to prepare
place in our hearts, for his mistress, which is charity: who being once
entered in, and perfectly placed: fear goes out again, and gives place unto
the same. But where this fear never enters at al, there is it impossible for
charity ever to come and dwell, says this holy father.

28 The second thing to be noted is, that albeit this fear of punishment be not
in very perfect men, or at lestwise, is less in them, than in others, as Saint
John teaches: yet being joined with Then is it not that servile fear.
love and reverence (as it ought to Fear you him; Luc. 12.
which after he has slain the body, has power also to send both body and
soul unto hell fire: Mat. 10.
this I say unto you, fear him. The same does Saint Paul to the Corinthians,
who were good Christians, laieng down first the justice of God, and thereupon
persuading them to fear; 2. Cor. 5.
Al we (says he) must be presented before the tribunal seat of Christ, to
receive each man his proper deserts, according as he has done, good or evil in
this life. And for that we know this: we do persuade the fear of the Lord unto
men. Nay (that which is more) Saint Paul testifies, that notwithstanding al
his favors received from God: he retained yet himself this fear of Gods
justice, as appears by those words of his; I do chastise my body, and do
bring it into servitude, 1. Cor. 9.
least it should come to pass, that when I have preached to other, I become a
reprobate my self.

The conclusion.
29 Now (my frind) if Saint Paul stood in aw of the justice of God
notwithstanding his apostleship: 1. Cor. 4.
and that he was guilty to himself of no one sin or offense, as (in one case)
he protests: what ought thou to be, whose conscience remains guilty of
so many misdeeds, and wickedness. Ephesians. 5.
This know you (says Saint Paul) that no fornicator, unclean person, covetous
man, or the like, can have inheritance in the kingdom of Christ. And
immediately after, as though this had not been sufficient, he adds, for
preventing the folly of sinners, which flatter themselves; Let no man deceive
you, with vain words, for the wrath of God comes for these things, upon the
children of unbeleefe. Be not you therefore partakers of them. As if he should
say: those that flatter you and say; Tush, God is merciful, and will pardon
easily al these and like sins: these men deceive you (says Saint Paul) for
that the wrath and vengeance of God lights upon the children of unbeleefe,
for these matters: that is, upon those which will not believe Gods justice, nor
his threats against sin: but presuming of his mercy do persevere in the same,
until upon the sudden Gods wrath do rush upon them: and then it is too late to
amend. Wherefore (says he) if you be wise: be not partakers of their folly: but
amend your lives presently, while you have time. And this admonition of Saint
Paul, shall be sufficient to end this chapter: against al those that refuse, or
defer their resolution of amendment, upon vain hope of Gods pardon or
tolleration.

CHAP. V. Of the fifth impediment: which is, delay of resolution from time to
time, upon hope to do it better, or with more ease afterward.
THE reasons hitherto alleged, might seem (I think) sufficient to a
reasonable man, for prooving the necessity of this resolution, we talk of: and
for remooving the impediments that let the same. Pro. 18.
But yet, for that (as the wise man says) he which is minded to break with his
frind, seeks occasions how to do it with some color and show. There be many
in the world, who having no other excuse of their breaking and holding off from
God, do seek to cover it with this pretense, that they mean, by his grace, to
amend al in time: and this time is driven off from day to day, until God, in
whose hands only the moments of time are, do shut them out of al time, and do
send them to pains eternal without time, for that they abused the singular
benefit of time in this world.

2 This is one of the greatest and most dangerous deceits, and yet the most
ordinary and universal, that the enemy of mankind does use toward the
children of Adam: and I dare say boldly, that mo do perish by this deceit, than
by all his other guiles and subtilties besides. The cause why the devil
persuadeth us to delay.
He well knows the force of this snare above al others, and therefore urges it
so much unto every man. He considers, better than we do, the importance of
delay, in a matter so weighty, as is our conversion, and salvation: he is not
ignorant how one sin draws on another; how he that is not fit to day, will be
less fit to morrow; how custom grows into nature; how old diseases are
hardly cured; how God withdraws his grace; how his justice is ready to
punish every sin; how by delay we exasperate the same, and heap vengeance on
our own heads, as Saint Paul says. Romans 2.
He is privy to the uncertaintie and perils of our life: to the dangerous
chances we pass through: to the impediments that will come daily more and more,
to let our conversion. All this he knows, and well considers, and for that
cause persuadeth so many to delay as he does. For being not able any longer to
blind the understanding of many Christians, but that they must needs see
clearly, the necessity, and utilitie of this resolution; and that all the
impediments in the world are but trifles, and mere deceits, which keep bak
from the same: he runs to this only refuge, that is, to persuade men, that
they defer a little, and that in time to come they shall have better occasion
and opportunity to do it, than presently they have.

Lib. 8. conf. cap. 7.18.
3 This Saint Austen prooved in his conversion, as himself writes. For that
after he was persuaded, that no salvation could be unto him, but by change and
amendment of his life: yet the enemy held him, for a time, in delay, saying
unto him; Yet a little stay: yet defer for a time: thereby (as he says) to bind
him more fast in the custom of sin, until, by the omnipotent power of Gods
grace, and his own most earnest endevor, he brake violently from him, crieng to
God; Why shall I longer say tomorrow, tomorrow? Why shall I not do it even at
this instant? And so he did, even in his very youth, living afterward a most
holy and severe Christian life.

The causes which make our conversion harder by delay.
4 But if we will discover yet further, the greatness and peril of this deceit:
let us consider the causes that may let our resolution and conversion at this
present: and we shall see them al increased, and strengthened by delay: and
consequently the matter made more hard and difficult, for the time to come,
than now it is. us? Secondly, the longer we persist in our sinful

5 Well then, put all this together (my frind) and consider indifferently within
thy self, whether it be more likely, that thou shall rather make this
resolution hereafter, than now. Hereafter (I say) when, by longer custom of
sin, the habit shall be more fastened in thee: the devil more in possession upon
thee: Gods help further off from thee: thy mind more infected: thy judgment
more weakened: thy good desires extinguished: thy passions confirmed: thy body
corrupted: thy strength diminished: and al thy whole Commonwealth more
perverted.

The same showed by comparisons.
6 We see by experience, that a ship which leaketh, is more easily empited at
the beginning, than afterward. We see, that a ruinous palace, the longer it is
let run, the more charge and labor it will require in the repairing. We see,
that if a man drive in a nail with a hammer, the mo blows he gives to it, the
more hard it is to pluk it out again. How then think thou to commit sin upon
sin, and by perseverance therein, to find the redress more easy hereafter, An
example
than now? That were much like as if a good fellow, that having made to
himself a great burden to carry, should assay it on his bak; and for that, it
sat uneasy, and pressed him much, should cast it down again, and put a great
deal more unto it, and then begin to lift it again: but when he felt it more
heavy than before, he should fall into a great rage, and ad twice as much more
to it, thereby to make it lighter. For so do the children of the world: who
finding it somewhat unpleasant to resist one or two vices in the beginning, do
defer their conversion, and do ad twenty, or forty mo unto them, thinking to
find the matter more easy afterward.

7 Saint Austen expounding the miracle of our savior, Tract. 49. in Ich.
in raising Lazarus from death to life, which had been dead now four dais, as
the evangelist says: John. 11. Mat. 9. Luc. 7.
examineth the cause why Christ wept, and cried, and troubled himself in
spirit before the doing of his act, whereas he raised others with greater
facility: and out of it, gives this lesson to us: that as Lazarus was dead
four dais, and also buried, so are there four degrees of a sinner: the first,
in voluntary delectation of sin; the second, in consent; the third, in
fulfilling it by work; the fourth, in continuance or custom thereof: wherein,
whosoever is once buried (says this holy father) he is hardly raised to life
again, without a great miracle of God, and many tears of his own part.

8 The reason heerof is, that which the wise man says; Languor prolixior
gravat medicum: Eccl. 10.
An old siknes does trouble the physician: Brevem autem languorem praecidit
medicus. But the physician cutteth off quikly a new or fresh disease, which
has endured but a little time. The very bones of an old wicked man shall be
replenished with the vices of his youth (says Job) and they shall sleep with
him in the dust, when he goes to the grave. Job. 20.
We read that Moises in part of punishment to the people, Exo. 32.
that had sinned in adoring the golden calfe, broke the same in pieces, and
made them drink it. So, the vices, wherein we delited during our youth, are so
dispersed, by custom in our bodies and bones: that when old age does come on,
we can not rid them at our pleasure without great difficulty and pain. What
folly then is it, to defer our amendment unto our old age, when we shall have
more impediments and difficulties, by a great deal, then we have now?

9 If it seem hard to thee to amend thy life now: painfully to be occupied in
thy calling, and withal (for thy better help) to fast, to pray, and to take
upon thee other exercises, which the word of God prescribes to sinners to
their conversion: how will thou do it in thine old age? When thy body shall
have more need of cherishing, than of painful exercise? If thou find it
unpleasant to resist thy sins now, and to root them out, after the continuance
of two, three, or four years: what will it be after twenty years more adjoined
unto them? How mad a man would thou esteem him, A comparison.
that traveling on the way, and having great choice of lusty strong horses,
should let them al go empty, and lay al his carriage upon some one poor and
lean beast, that could scarce bear it self, or much less stand under so many
bags cast up on it? And surely no less unreasonable is that man, who passing
over idly the lusty dais and times of his life, reserveth all the labor and
travel unto feeble old age.

Ingratitude.
10 But to let pass the folly of this deceit, tell me (good Christian) what
ingratitude and unrighteousnes is this toward God, having received so many
benefits from him already, and expecting so great a pay, as the kingdom of
heaven is after: to appoint out notwithstanding, the least and last, and woorst
part of thy life unto his service: and that whereof thou art most uncertain,
whether it shall ever be, or never; or whether God will accept it, when it
comes? He is accursed by the prophet, which having whole and sound cattle,
Mala. 1.
does offer unto God the lame, or halting part thereof. How much more shall thou
be accursed, that having so many dais of youth, strength, and vigor, do
appoint unto Gods service, only thy limping old age? Deu. 25.
In the law it was forbidden; under a most severe threat, for any man to have
two measures in his house for his neighbor: one greater, to his frind, and
another lesser, for other men. And yet thou art not ashamed, to use two
measures of thy life, most unequal, in prejudice of thy Lord and God: whereby
thou alottest to him, a little, short, maimed, and uncertain time: and unto his
enemy the greatest, the fairest, the surest part thereof.

11 O deer brother, what reason is there, why God should thus be used at thy
hands? What law, justice, or equity is there, that after thou have served the
world, flesh, and devil, al thy youth, and best dais: in the end to come, and
clap thy old bones, defiled and worn out with sin, in the dish of God? His
enemies to have the best, and he the leavings? His enemies the wine, and he the
lees and dregs? Do thou not remember, that he will have the fat and best part
offered to him? Do thou not think of the punishment of those, Levi. 3. Number.
18. Malac. 1.
which offered the woorst part of their substance to God? Follow the counsel
then of the holy Ghost, if thou be wise, which warns thee in these words; Be
mindful of thy creator in the dais of thy youth, Eccl. 5.
before the time of affliction come on, and before those years draw near, of
which thou shall say, they please me not.

12 How many have thou seen cut off in the midst of their dais, whiles they
purposed in time to come, to change their life? How many have come to old age
it self, and yet then have felt less will of amendment, than before? How many
have driven off even unto the very hour of death, and then lest of al have
remembered their own state? But have died, as dum and senseles beasts, according
to the saying of Saint Gregory; Sermon. 1.10. de sanctis.
The sinner has also this affliction laid upon him, that when he comes to
die, he forgets himself, which in his life time did forget God? O how many
examples are there seen heerof daily? How many worldly men, that have lived in
sensuality: how many great sinners, that have passed their life in wickedness,
do end and die, as if they went into some place insensible, where no account,
no rekoning should be demanded: they take such care in their testaments for
flesh and blood, and commodities of this world, as if they should live still, or
should have their part of these vanities, when they are gone. In truth, to
speak as the matter is, they die as if there were no immortality of the soul:
and that, in very deed, is their inward persuasion.

13 But suppose now, that all this were not so, The loss of time.
and that a man might as easily, commodiouslie, yea, and as surely also,
convert himself in old age, as in youth, and that the matter were also
acceptable enough to God: yet tell me, what great time is their lost in this
delay? What great treasure of godliness is there omitted, which might have been
gotten by labor in Gods service? A comparison.
If whiles the captain and other soldiers did enter a rich city, to take the
spoil, one soldier should say, I will stay and come in the next day after, when
all the spoil is gone: would not you think him both a coward, and also most
unwise? So it is, that Christ our savior, and al his good soldiers, took the
spoil of this life; enriched themselves with their labors in time; carried the
same with them as bills of exchange, to the bank of heaven; and there received
pay of eternal glory. And is it not great folly and perversenes in us to pass
over this life in so fruitles affairs? Now is the time of fight for the
obteining of our crown: now is the day of spoil to seize on our booty: now is
the market, to bie the kingdom of heaven: now is the time of running to get
the game and price: now is the day of sowing, to provide us corn for the
harvest that comes on. If you omit this time, there is no more crown; no more
booty; no more kingdom; no more price; no more harvest to be looked for. For
as the scripture assures us; Pro. 20.
He that for sloth will not sow in the winter, shall beg in the summer, and no
man shall give unto him.

14 But if this consideration of gain cannot moove thee (gentle reader) as in
deed it ought to do, being of such importance as it is, and irrevocable when it
is once past: The obligation and charge by delay.
yet weigh with thy self, what obligation and charge thou drawest on thee, by
every day which thou deferrest thy conversion, and live in sin. Thou
makestech day knots, which thou must once undo again: thou heapest that
together, which thou must once disperse again: thou eatest and drinkest that
hourly, which thou must once vomit up again: I mean, if the best fall out unto
thee, that is, if thou do repent in time, and God do accept thereof (for
otherwise woe be unto thee, Romans 8.
for that thou hoordest (as S. Paul says) wrath and vengeance on thine own
head) but supposing that thou receive grace hereafter to repent, which refusest
it now: yet (I say) thou have to weep, for that thou laughest at now: thou
have to be heartily sorry, for that wherein thou delitest now: thou have to curse
the day, wherein thou ever gave consent to sin, or else thy repentance will do
thee no good. This thou know now, and this thou beleevest now, or else thou
art no Christian. How then art thou so mad, as to offend God now, both
willingly, and deliberately, of whom thou know that thou must once ask
pardon with tears. If thou think he will pardon thee, what ingratitude is it to
offend so good a Lord? If thou think he will not pardon thee, what folly can be
more, than to offend a prince without hope of pardon?

15 Make thine account now as thou will: if thou never do repent and change thy
life; then every sin thou committest, and every day that thou live therein,
is increase of wrath and vengeance upon thee in hell, Romans 2.
as Saint Paul proves. If thou do, by Gods mercy, hereafter repent and turn
(for this is not in thy hands) then must thou one day lament, and bewail, and
be heartily sorry for this delay, which now thou make. So that, by how much
the more thou prolongest, and increasest thy sin: so much greater will be thy
pain and sorrow in thine amendment. Lib. de la. and li. 5. ep. 5. ad cor.
Alto vulneri diligens and longa adhibenda est medicina (says Saint Cyprian;)
A diligent and long medicin is to be used to a deep sore. Our body that has
lived in many delites, must be afflicted (says Saint Ierom: Ep. 27. ad Eustoch.
) our laughing must be recompensed with long weeping. Finally, Ad virg. lap
sam. c. 8.
Saint Ambrose agreeing thereunto, says; Grandi plagae alta and prolixa opus
est medicina: Unto a great wound, a deep and long medicin is needful.

15 Mark here (deer brother) that the labor of thine amendment must be very
great; and that it cannot be avoided. What madness is it then for thee, now to
enlarge the wound, knowing that the medicin must afterward be so painful? What
cruelty can be more against thy self, than to drive in thorns into thine own
flesh, which thou must after pull out again with so many tears? Would thou
drink that cup of poisoned liquor, for a little pleasure in the taste, which
would cast thee soon after into a burning fever; torment thy bowels within
thee; and either dispatch thy life, or put thee in great jeoperdie?

16 But here I know thy refuge will be, as it is to al them, whereof the prophet
says; Mentita est iniquitas sibi: Psalm. 26.
Iniquity has flattered and lied unto her self: thy refuge (I say) will be to
allege the example of the good thief, The example of the thief saved on the
cross discussed.
saved even at the last hour upon the cross, and carried to paradise that same
day with Christ, without any further toil of amendment. This example is
greatly noted and urged by all those which defer their conversion, as surely it
is, and ought to be of great comfort to every man, which finds himself now
at the last cast, and therefore commonly tempted by the enemy to despair of
Gods mercy, which in no case he ought to do. For the same God which saved that
great sinner at that last hour, can also (and will) save al them that heartily
turn unto him, even at the last hour. But (alas) many men do flatter and
deceive themselves, with misunderstanding, or rather misusing of this example.

17 For we must understand (as Saint Austen well notes) that this was but one
particular act of Christ, which makes no general rule: even as we see, that a
temporal prince pardons sometime a malefactor, when he is come to the very
place of execution: yet were it not for every malefactor to trust thereupon. For
that, this is but an extraordinary act of the prince his favor, and neither
showed nor promised to The blessed virgin likewise, and other godly women were
by: but said nothing (that we read of) in his defense: a plain breach of the
first, fifth, sixth, and ninth commandments.
the apostles themselves, either dowted, or lost their faith of his Godhead.
Beside all this, the confession of this thief was at such a time, as he could
neither be baptized, nor have further time of amendment. And we hold, that at
a man's first conversion there is required nothing else, but to believe, and to
be baptized. But it shall not be amiss to put to Saint Austens very words upon
this matter. For thus he writes.

18 It is a remediles peril, Sermon. 120. de tem.
when a man gives himself over so much to vices, as he forgets that he must
give account thereof to God: and the reason why I am of this opinion is, for
that it is a great punishment of sin, to have lost the fear and memory of the
judgment to come, etc. But (deerly beloved) left the new felicity of the
believing thief on the cross, do make any of you too secure, and remiss:
least peradventure some of you say in his heart, my guilty conscience shall not
trouble nor torment me: my naughty life shall not make me very sad; for that I
see even in a moment al sin forgive^ unto the thief: we must consider first in
that thief not only the shortness of his belief, and confession, but his
devotion, and the occasion of The blessed virgin, S. John, and others, as
before: and this staggering must needs be sin.
stagger. Secondly, show me the faith of that thief in thy self, and then
promise to thy self his felicity. The devil does put into thy head this
security, to the end he may bring thee to perdition. And it is unpossible to
number al them, which have perished by the shadow of this deceitful hope. He
deceives himself, and makes but a jest of his own damnation, which thinks
that Gods mercy at the last day shall help, or releeve him. It is hateful
before God, when a man upon confidence of repentance in his old age, does sin
the more freely. The happy thief whereof we have spoken, happy (I say) not
for that he laid snares in the way, but for that he took hold of the way it
self in Christ, laieng hands on the pray of life: and after a strange manner,
making a booty of his own death: he (I say) neither did defer the time of his
salvation wittingly, neither did he deceitfully put the remedy of his state in
the last moment of his life: neither did he desperately reserve the hope of his
redemption unto the hour of his death: neither had he any knolege either of
religion, or of Christ before that time. For if he had, it may be, he would not
have been the last among the apostles in number, which was made the former in
kingdom.

19 By these words of Saint Austen we are admonished (as you see) that this
particular fact of Christ makes no general rule of remission to al men: not
for that Christ is not alwais ready to receive the penitent as he promises:
but, for that every man has not the time or grace to repent, as he should, at
that hour, according as has been declared before. The general way that God
proposes to al, The general way.
is that which Saint Paul says; 2. Cor. 11.
Finis secundum opera ipsorum: The end of evil men is according to their works.
Look how they live, and so they die. To that effect says the prophet; Once God
spoke, and I heard these two things from his mouth: Psalm. 61.
power belongs to God; and mercy unto thee (O Lord) for that thou will
render to every man according to his works. The wise man makes this plain,
saying; The way of sinners is paved with stones, and their end is hell, Eccl. 21.
darkness, and punishments. Finally, Saint Paul makes this general and
peremptory conclusion; Be not deceived: God is not mocked, Gal. 6.
look what a man sows, and that shall he reap. He that sows in flesh, shall
reap corruption: he that sows in spirit, shall reap life everlasting. In which
words, he does not only lay down unto us the general rule whereto we must trust:
but also says further, that to persuade our selves the contrary thereof, were
to mok and abuse God, which has laid down this law unto us.

That the conversion made at the first day is very dowtful.
20 Notwithstanding (as I have said) this barreth not the mercy of God from
using a privilege to some at the very last cast. But yet miserable is that man,
which places the ankor of his eternal wealth or woe, upon so ticklesome a point
as this is. I call it ticklesome, for that, al divines, which have written of
this matter, do speak very dowtfully of the conversion of a man at the last
end. And although they do not absolutely condemn it in all, but do leave it as
uncertain unto Gods secret judgment: yet do they incline to the negative part:
and do allege four reasons, for which, that conversion is to be dowted, as
insufficient for a man's salvation.

The first reason.
21 The first reason is, for that the extreme fear, and pains of death, being
(as the philosopher says) the most terrible, of al terrible things, do not
permit a man, so to gather his spirits and senses, at that time, as is required
for the treating of so weighty a matter with God, as is our conversion, and
salvation. And if we see often, that a very good man cannot fix his mind
earnestly upon heavenly cogitations, at such time as he is troubled with the
passions of cholik, or other sharp diseases: how much less in the anguishes of
death can a worldly man do the same, being unacquainted with that exercise; and
laden with the guilt of many, and great sins; and cloied with the love both of
his body, and things belonging thereunto?

22 The second reason is, The second reason.
for that the conversion, which a man makes at the last day, is not (for the
most part) voluntary, but upon necessity, and for fear: such as was the
repentance of Simei, who having greevously offended king David, in time of his
affliction: afterward when he saw him in prosperity again, 2. Reg. 16.
and himself in danger of punishment: he came and fell down before him, 2. Reg.
19.
and asked him forgivenes with tears. But yet David well perceived the matter
how it stood: and therefore though he spared him for that day, wherein he would
not trouble the mirth with execution of justice, yet after he gave order that
he should be used according to his deserts. 3. Reg. 2.


23 The third reason is, The third reason.
for that the custom of sin, which has continued all the life long, is seldom
remooved upon the instant, being grown into nature it self, as it were, for
which cause God says to evil men, by the prophet Jeremy; If an Ethiopian can
change his blak skin, Iere. 13.
or a leopard his spots, that are on his bak: then can you also do well, having
learned al dais of your life to do evil.

24 The fourth cause, The fourth reason.
for that the acts of virtue themselves cannot be of so great valu with God, in
that instant, as if they had been done in time of health before. For what great
matter is it (for example sake) to pardon thine enemies at that time, when thou
can hurt them no more? To give thy goods away, when thou can use them no
more? To abandon thy concubine, when thou can keep her no longer? To leave
off to sin, when sin must leave thee? Al these things are good and holy, and
to be done by him, which is in that last state: but yet, they are of no such
valu, as otherwise they would be, by reason of this circumstance of time, which
I have showed. B. * A fifth reason might be taken of experience: for that we see
often times, that such as repent after that manner, if they recover again, they
are afterward as bad as they were before, and sometimes much worse: which
(without quaestion) was not true repentance in them.

25 These are reasons why there is such dowt made of this last conversion: not
for any want on Gods part, but on theirs, which are to do that great act. Mark
well (says one again) what I say: and (it may be) it shall be needful to expound
my meaning more plainly, least any man mistake me. What say I then? That a man
which repents not, but at the end shall be damned? I do not say so. What then?
Do I say he shall be saved? No. What then do I say? I say, I know not: I say, I
presume not; I promise not; I know not. Will thou deliver thy self forth of
this dowt? Will thou escape this dangerous, and uncertain point? Repent then
whiles thou art whole. For if thou repent while thou art in health, whenever
the last day shall come upon thee, thou art safe. And why art thou safe? For
that thou did repent in that time, wherein thou might have sinned. But if
thou will repent, then when thou can sin no longer: thou leavest not sin, but
sin leaves thee.

26 And here now would I have the careful Christian to consider (with me) but
this one comparison that I will make. If those which do show a kind of
repentance at the last day, do pass hence notwithstanding in such dangerous
dowtfulnes: what shall we think of al those which lak either time, or ability,
or will, or grace to repent at al, at that hour? What shall we say of al those,
which are cut off before? Which die suddenly? Which are stricken senseles, or
frentik, as we see many are? What shall we say of those, which are abandoned by
God, and left unto vice, even unto the last breath in their body? I have
showed before out of Saint Paul, 2. Cor. 11.
that ordinarily sinners die according as they live. So it is as it were a
privilege for a wicked man, to have his repentance to be begun, when he is to
die. And then, if his repentance (when it does come) be so dowtful, what a
pitiful case are al others in? I mean the more part, which repent not at al:
but die as they lived, and are forsaken of God in that extremity, according as
he promises, when he says; For that I have called you, Prou. 1. Iere. 35.
and you have refused to come; for that I held out my hand, and none of you
would vouchsafe to look toward: I will laugh also at your destruction, when
anguish and calamity comes on you. You shall call upon me, and I will not hear:
you shall rise betimes in the morning to see me, but you shall not find me.

27 When a worldling does see that the brightness of his honor, vainglorie, and
worldly pomp is consumed: when the heat of concupiscence, of carnal love, of
delicate pleasures is quenched: when the beautiful summer day of this life is
ended, and the boisterous winter night of death draws on: then will he turn
unto God; then will he repent; then will he resolve himself, and make his
conversion. When he can live no longer, he will promise any pains: what hearing
or studieng of the word of God you will; what toil or labor in his vocation you
will; what prayer you will; what fasting you will; what alms deeds you can desire;
what austeritie you can imagine, he will promise it (I say) upon a condition that
he might have life again: upon condition that the day might be prolonged unto
him: though if God should grant him his request (as many times he does) he
would perform no one point thereof: but be as careless, as he were before. When
such shall cry, with sighs, and groans as pearsing as a sword, and yet shall not
be heard, what comfort then will they hope for to find? For whither will they
turn themselves in this distress? Unto their worldly wealth, power, or riches?
Alas, they are gone: and the scripture says; Riches shall not profit in the day
of revenge. Pro. 11.
Will they turn unto their carnal frinds? But what comfort can they give,
besides only weeping, and comfortles moorning? Will they ask help of the
saints, to pray for them in this instant? Then must they remember what is
written; The saints shall rejoice in glory, Psa. 149.
and exultation shall be in their mouths, and two edged swords in their hands
to take revenge upon nations, and increpations upon people: to bind kings in
fetters, and noble men in manacles of iron: to execute upon them the prescript
judgment of God: and this is the glory of al his saints. Their only refuge
then must be unto God, who indeed is the only refuge of al: but yet in this
case, the prophet says here; that He shall not hear them: Prou. 1.
but rather contemn and laugh at their misery. Not that he is contrary to his
promise of receiving a sinner; Psalm. 58.
At what time soever he repents, and turns from his sin. But, for that this
turning at the last day is not commonly true repentance, and conversion, for the
causes before rehearsed.

28 To conclude then this matter of delay, what wise men is there in the world,
who reading this, will not fear the deferring of his conversion, though it were
but for one day? Who does know whether this shall be the last day, or no, that
ever God will call him in? God says; I called, and you refused to come: I held
out my hand, and you would not look toward me: and therefore will I forsake you
in your extremity. Prou. 1.
He does not say, how many times, or how long he did call, and hold out his
hand. God says; I stand at the door, and knok: but he says not how often he
does that, or how many knoks he gives. Again, he said of wicked Iezabel, the
feined prophetess in the Apocalypse; Apoc. 2.
I have given her time to repent, and she would not, and therefore shall she
perish: but he says not, how long this time of repentance endures. We read of
woonderful examples heerin. Herod.
Herod the father had a call given him, and that a loud one, when John Baptist
was sent unto him, and when his heart was so far touched, as he willingly heard
him, and so followed his counsel in many things, as one Evangelist notes:
Marc. 6.
but yet, because he deferred the matter, and took not time, when it was
offered: he was cast off again, and his last doings made worse than his
former. Herod Tetrak, Herod the second.
the son had a call also, when he felt that desire to see Christ, Luc. 11. Luc.
23. Mat. 14.
and some miracle done by him: but, for that he answered not unto the call, it
did him no good, but rather much hurt. What a great knok had Pilate given him
at his heart, Pilate.
if he had been so gracious as to have opened the door presently, Mat. 27.
when he was made to understand the innocence of Christ: as appears by
washing his hands in testimony thereof, and his wife also sent him an
admonition about the same? No less knok had king Agrippa at his door, Agrippa.
when he cried out at the hearing of Saint Paul; O Paul, Acts. 26.
thou persuadest me a little to be a Christian. But because he deferred the
matter, this motion passed away again.

29 Twice happy had Pharao been, Pharao.
if he had resolved himself presently, upon that motion that he felt, when he
cried to Moises; Exodus 9. Acts. 24.
I have sinned, and God is just. But by delay he became worse than ever he was
before. Saint Luke reports how Felix the governor of Iewrie for the Romans,
Felix.
conferred secretly oftentimes with Saint Paul, that was prisoner: and heard of
him the faith in Christ: wherewith he was greatly moved, especially at on
time, when Paul disputed of Gods justice, and the day of judgment, whereat
Felix trembled: but yet he deferred this resolution, willing Paul to depart,
and to come again another time: and so the matter by delation came to no
effect. How many men do perish daily: some cut off by death; some left by God,
and given over to a reprobate sense: which might have found grace, if they had
not deferred their conversion, from day to day, but had made their resolution
presently when they felt God to call within their hearts. The dangers of passing
the day of our vocation.


30 God is most bountiful to knok and call: but yet, he binds himself to no
time or space, but comes and goes at his pleasure: and they which take not
their times when they are offered, are excuselesse before his justice, and do
not know whether ever it shall be offered them again, or no: for that, this
thing is only in the will and knowledge of God alone, who takes mercy where it
pleases him best, Exo. 33.
and is bound to none. And when the prefixed time of calling is once past: Romans
9.
woe be unto that party; for a thousand worlds will not purchase it again.
Christ shows woonderfully the importance of this matter: when entering into
Jerusalem amidst al his mirth, and glory of receiving, he could not choose but
weep upon that city, Luc. 21.
crieng out with tears; O Jerusalem, if thou knew also these things which
appertain to thy peace, even in this thy day: but now these things are hidden
from thee. As if he had said, if thou knew (Jerusalem) as well as I do, what
mercy is offered thee even this day, thou would not do as thou do: but
would presently accept thereof: but now this secret judgment of my father is
hidden from thee: and therefore thou make little account thereof, until thy
destruction shall come suddenly upon thee: as soon after it did.

31 By this now may be considered the great reason of the wise man's
exhortation; For-slow not to turn to God: Eccl. 5.
nor do not defer it from day to day: for his wrath will come upon thee at the
sudden: and in time of revenge it will destroy thee. It may be seen also upon
what great cause the Apostle exhorts the Hebrews so vehemently; Heb. 3.
Dum cognominantur body: To accept of grace even whiles that very day endured:
and not to let pass the occasion offered. Which every man applieng to
himself, should follow, in obeing the motions of Gods spirit within him; and
accepting of Gods vocation without delay: considering what a greevous sin it is
to resist the holy Ghost. Acts. 7.
Every man ought (I say) when he feels a good motion in his heart, to think
with himself: now God knocks at my door, Apoc. 3.
if I open presently, he will enter, and dwell within me. But if I defer it until
to morrow, I know not whether he will knok again or no. Every man ought to
remember still that saying of the prophet, touching Gods spirit; Psalm. 94.
Hodie si vocem eius audieritis, nolite obdurare corda vestra: If you hear his
voice calling on you to day, do not harden your hearts, but presently yield unto
him.

32 Alas (deer brother) what hope of gain have thou by this perilous dilation
which thou make? Thine account is increased thereby, as I have showed; thy
debt of amendment is made more greevous; thine enemy more strong; thy self
more feeble; thy difficulties of conversion multiplied: what have thou then to
withhold thee one day from resolution? the gaining of a little time in vanity.
But I have prooved to thee before, how this time is not gained but lost,
Godliness the only gain of time.
being spent without fruit of godliness, which is indeed the only true gain of
time. If it seem pleasant to thee for the present: yet remember what the
prophet says; Deu. 32.
Iuxta est dies perditionis, and adesse festinant tempora: The day of perdition
is at hand, and the times of destruction make have to come on. Which day being
once come, I marvel what hope thou will conceive. Do thou think to cry
Peccavi? Exodus 9.
It shall be well truly if thou can do it: but yet thou know that Pharao did
so, and gat nothing by it. Do thou intend to make a good testament and to be
liberal in alms deeds, at that time? This as the case may be, is very
commendable: but yet thou must remember also, that the virgins which filled
their lamps, Mat. 25.
at the very instant, were shut out, and utterly rejected by Christ. Do thou
think to weep and moorn, and to moove thy judge with tears at that instant?
First, this is not in thy hands to do at thy pleasures; and yet thou must
consider also, that Esau failed, though he sought it with tears, Heb. 12.
as the apostle well notes. Do thou mean to have many good purposes, to make
great promises, and vows in that distress? Call to mind the case of Antiochus
in his extremities: 2. Mac. 9.
what promises of good deeds, what vows of virtuous life made he to God, upon
condition he might escape, and yet prevailed he nothing thereby. All this is
spoken, not to put them in despair, which are now in those last calamities: but
to dissuade others from falling into the same: assuring thee (gentle reader)
that the prophet said not without a cause; Seek unto God while he may be found:
Esai. 55.
call upon him while he is near at hand. Now is the time acceptable, now is the
day of salvation, 2. Cor. 6.
says Saint Paul. Now is God to be found, and neeer at hand to embrace al them
that truly turn unto him, and make firm resolution of virtuous life hereafter.
If we defer this time: we have no warrant that he will either call us, or receive
us hereafter: but rather many threats to the contrary, as has been showed.
Wherefore I will end with this one sentence of S. Austen; Tract. 33. in Ioh.
that He is both a careless, and a most graceles man, which knowing all this will
venture notwithstanding the eternity of his salvation and damnation, upon the
dowtful event of his final repentance.

CHAP. VI. Of three other impediments that hinder men from resolution: which
are, sloth, negligence, and hardness of heart.
BEsides al impediments, which hitherto have bin named, there are yet diverse
others to be found: if any man could examine the particular consciences of al
such as do not resolve. But these three here mentioned, and to be handeled in
this chapter, are so publik and known: as I may not pass them over, without
discovering the same; for that, many times men are evil affected, and know not
their own diseases: the only declaration whereof (to such as are desirous of
their own health) is sufficient to avoid the danger of the siknes.

Of sloth.
2 First then the impediment of sloth is a great and ordinary let of resolution
to many men: but especially in idle and delicate people, whose life has been
in all ease and rest, and therefore do persuade themselves that they can take no
pains, nor abide any hardness, though never so fain they would. Of which Saint
Paul says, 1. Cor. 6.
that Nise people shall not inherit the kingdom of heaven. These men will
confess to be true, as much and more than is said to before: and that they
would also gladly put the same in execution, but that they cannot. Their bodies
may not bear it: they can take no pains in their several callings: and in the
general they cannot fast; they cannot watch; they cannot pray. They cannot
leave their disports, recreations, and merry companions: they should die
presently (as they say) with melancholy, if they did it: yet in their hearts
they desire (forsooth that they could do the same, which seeing they cannot, no
dowt (say they) God will accept our good desires. But let them harken a little
what the scripture says heerof; Pro. 21.
Desires do kill the slothful man (says Solomon) his hands will not fall to any
work: all the day long he coveteth and desires: but he that is just, will do,
and will not cease. Mat. 25.
Take the slothful and unprofitable servant (says Christ) and fling him into
utter darkness, where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. And when he passed
by the way and found a fig tree with leaves without fruit, he gave it presently
an everlasting curse. Mat. 21.


3 Of this fountain of sloth do proceed many effects that hinder the slothful
from resolution. Four effects of sloth.
1 Drowsines.
And the first is a certain heavines and sleepie drowsines, toward al goodness,
according as the scripture says; Pro. 19. Ephesians. 5. Mar. 13. Mat. 24. and 25.
Pigredo mittit soporem: Sloth does bring drowsines. For which cause S. Paul
says; Surge qui dormis: Arise thou that art asleep. And Christ cries out so
often; Videte, vigilate: Look about you, and watch. You shall see many men in
the world, with whom if you talk of a cow, or a calfe, or a fat ox, of a piece
of ground, or the like; they can both hear and talk willingly and freshly: but
if you reason with them of their salvation, and their inheritance in the
kingdom of heaven; they answer not at al; but will hear, as if they were in a
dream. Of these men then says the wise man; How long will thou sleep, O
slothful fellow? When will thou rise out of thy dream? Pro. 6. and 24
A little yet will thou sleep; a little longer will thou slumber; a little will thou close thy hands together and take rest: and so poverty shall hasten upon
thee as a running post, and beggerie as an armed man shall take and possess
thee.

4 The second effect of sloth is fond fear, of pains, 2 Fear.
and labor, and casting of dowts where none be, according as the scripture
says; Pigrum deijcit timor: Pro. 19.
Fear discourageth the slothful man. Psalm. 52.
And the prophet says of the like; They shake for fear, where there is no
fear. These men do frame unto themselves strange imaginations of the service of
God, and dangerous events, if they should follow the same. One says; If I
should give much; it would without dowt make me a beggar. Another says; If I
should still employ my self to painful labor, it would kill me ere long. A third
says; If I should humble my self as is required, every body would tread me
under their feet. And yet all this is nothing else but sloth, as the scripture
testifies in these words; Dicit piger, Pro. 22.
leo est foris in medio platearum, occidendus sum: The slothful man says
sitting still in his house; There is a lion without: if I should go out of
doors to labor, I should certainly be slain in the midst of the streets.

5 A third effect of sloth is, Pusillanimitie.
pusillanimitie and faintnes of heart, whereby the slothful man is overthrown,
and discouraged by every little contrariety or difficulty, which he finds
in virtue, Eccl. 22.
or which he imagines to find therein. Which the wise man The vulgar
translation so reads: but now it is found, that therein it misseth the sense
of the text in both these places here alleged. And yet the matter it self is
true, though it have no warrant hence.
signifies when In lapide luteo lapidatus est piger: The slothful man is
stoned to death with a stone of dirt: that is, he is overthrown with a
difficulty of no importance. Again; De stercore boum lapidatus est piger: The
slothful man is stoned dead with the doong of oxen: which commonly is of matter
so soft, as it can hurt no man.

6 A fourth effect of sloth is idle lazines: Lazines.
which we see in many men that will talk and consult of this and that, about
their amendment, but will execute nothing. Which is most fitly expressed by the
holy Ghost in these words; Sicut ostium vertitur in cardine suo, Pro. 26.
it a piger in lectulo suo: As a door is tossed in and out, upon his hindges,
so is a slothful man lieng lazily upon his bed. And again; Vult, and non vult
piger: Pro. 13.
A slothful man will, and will not. That is, he turns himself to and fro in
his bed, and between willing and nilling he does nothing. And yet further in
another place, the scripture describes this lazines, saying; Pro. 19.
The slothful man puts his hands under his girdle, and will not vouchsafe to
lift them up to his mouth, for that it is painful.

7 Al these and many mo are the effects of sloth: but these four especially,
have I thought good to touch in this place: for that they let and hinder
greatly this resolution which we talk of, for he that lives in a slumber, and
will not hear, or attend to any thing that is said of the life to come, and
beside this, imagines fearful matters in the same; and thirdly, is thrown down
by every little blok, that he finds in the way; and lastly is so lazy, as he
can bear no labor at al: this man (I say) is past hope to be gained, to any
such purpose as we speak for.

8 To remoove therefore this impediment, this sort of men ought to lay before
their eyes, Means to remoove sloth.
the labors of Christ, and of his saints, the exhortations they used to other
men, to take like pains: the threats made in scripture against them which labor
not: the condition of our present warfare, that requires travel: the crown
prepared for it: and the misery ensuing upon idle and lazy people. And
finally, if they cannot bear the labor of virtuous life, which indeed is
accompanied with so many consolations, as it may not rightfully be called a
labor: how will they abide the labor and torments of the life to come, which
must be both intolerable and everlasting?

9 Saint Paul says of himself and others, 1. The. 3.
to the Thessalonians; We did not eat our bread of free cost, when we were with
you: but did work in labor, and wearines both day and night: thereby to give you
an example of imitation: denouncing further unto you; that If any man would not
work* he should not eat. Christ in his parable still reprehended greevously
those that stood idle, saying; Quid hic statis tota die otiosi: Mat. 20.
Why do you stand here all the day idle, and doing nothing? John. 15.
I am a vine (says Christ) and my father is an husbandman: every branch that
bears not fruit in me, my father will cut off, and cast into the fire. And in
another place; Cut down the unprofitable tree: Luc. 13.
why does it stand here, and occupy up the ground for nothing? And again; The
kingdom of heaven is subject to force: Mat. 11.
and men do gain it by violence, and labor. For which cause the wise man also
says; Eccl. 9.
Whatsoever thy hand can do in this life, do it instantly: for after it, there
is neither time, nor reason, nor wisdom, or knowledge that we can employ. And
again, the same wise man says; Pro. 10.
The lazy hand works beggerie to it self, but the laborsom and valiant hand
heapeth up great riches. And yet further to the same effect; Pro. 20.
The slothful man will not sow in the winter, for that it is cold: and therefore
he shall beg in the summer, and no man shall take pity of him.

10 All this pertains to show, how that this life is a time of labor, and not
of idleness: and appointed unto us for the attaining of heaven: it is the market
wherein we must bie: the battle wherein we must fight, and obtain our crown: the
winter wherein we must sow: the day of labor, wherein we must sweat, and get our
penny. And he that passes over lazily this day (as the most part of men do)
must suffer eternal poverty, and need in the life to come: as in the first
part of this book more at large has been declared. Cap. 3.
Wherefore, the wise man (or rather the holy Ghost by his mouth) gives each one
of us, a most vehement admonition, and exhortation in these words; Run about:
Pro. 6.
make haste: stir up thy frind: give no sleep unto thine eyes: let not thine
eye lids slumber: they skip out as a do from the hands of him that held her:
and as a bird out of the hands of the fowler. Go unto the emmet (thou slothful
man) and consider her doings, and learn to be wise: she having no guide,
teacher, or captain, provideth meat for her self in the summer, and gathers
together in the harvest, that which may serve her to feed upon in the winter.
By which words we are admonished in what order we ought to behave our selves in
this life, and how diligent and careful we should be in doing of al good works
(as S. Paul also teaches) considering that as the emmet laboreth most
earnestly in the harvest time to lay up for the winter to come; Colos. 1. Romans
12. Gal. 6.
so we should for the next world: and that slothfulnes to this effect, is the
greatest and most dangerous let that may be. For, as the emmet should die in
the winter most certainly for hunger, if she should live idly in the summer:
so without al dowt they are to suffer extreme need and misery in the world to
come, who now for sloth do omit to labor.

11 The second impediment is called by me in the title of this chapter
negligence. Of negligence.
But I do understand thereby a further matter than commonly this word imports.
For I do comprehend under the name of negligence al careless, and dissolute
people, which take to heart nothing that pertains to God or godliness, but only
attend to worldly affairs, making their salvation the least part of their
cogitations. And under this kind of negligence, is contained both Epicurism (as
Saint Paul noted in some Christians of his dais, Epicurism, or life of Epicures.
who began only to attend to eat and drink, and to make their bellies their
God, Phil. 3. Romans 16.
as many of our Christians now do) and also a secret kind of Atheism, or
denieng of God: that is, of denieng him in life, and behavior, as Saint Paul
expounds it. Titus. 1.
For albeit these men in words do confess God, and profess themselves to be
as good Christians as the rest: yet secretly indeed they do not believe God; as
their life and doings do declare. Which thing Ecclesiasticus discovers
plainly, when he says; Eccl. 2.
Vae dissolutis cord, qui non credunt Deo: Woe be unto the dissolute, and
careless in heart, which do not believe God. That is, though they profess that
they believe and trust in him: yet by their dissolute and careless doings, they
testify that in their hearts they believe him not: for that they have neither
care nor cogitation of matters pertaining to him.

12 These kind of men are those which the scripture notes and detesteth for
plowing with an ox, Of careless Atheists.
and an ass together: for sowing their ground with mingled seed: Deu. 22.
for wearing apparel of linsie woolsey, that is made of flax and wool
together. These are they of whom Christ says in the Revelations; I would thou
were either cold or hot. But for that thou art lukewarm, and neither cold nor
hot; Apoc. 3.
therefore will I begin to vomit thee out of my mouth. These are they which can
accord al religions together, and take up al controversies by only saying, that
either they are differences of small importance; or else that they appertain
only to learned men to think upon, and not unto them. These are they, which can
apply themselves to any company, to any time, to any princes pleasure, for
matters of life to come. These men forbid al talk of spirit, religion, or
devotion in their presence: only they will have men, eat, drink, and be merry
with them: tell news of the court, and affairs abroad: sing, dance, laugh, and
play at cards: and so pass over this life in less consideration of God, than
the very heathens did. And has not the scripture reason then, in saying that
these men in their hearts and works are Atheists? Yes surely. And it may be
prooved by many rules of Christ. As for example: this is one rule set down by
himself. By their fruits ye shall know them. For such as the tree is within,
Luc. 6.
such is the fruit which that tree sends footh. Again; The mouth speaks
from the abundance of the heart. and consequently, Mat. 12.
seeing their talk is nothing but of worldly vanities: it is a sign there is
nothing in their heart, but that. And then it follows also by a third rule;
Where the treasure is, there is the heart. And so, Mat. 6.
seeing their hearts are only set upon the world: the world is their only
treasure, and not God. And consequently, they prefer that before God, as indeed
Atheists do.

13 This impediment reaches far, and wide at this day: The chief cause of
Atheism at this day.
and infinite are the men which are entangled therewith: and the cause thereof
esspecally is inordinate love of the world: which brings men to hate God, and
to conceive enmity against him, as the apostle says: and therefore no marvel,
1. Ioh. 2.
though indeed they neither believe, nor delight in him. And of al other men,
these are the hardest to be reclaimed, and brought to any resolution of
amendment: for that they are insensible: and beside that, do also fly al
means, whereby they be cured. For as there were small hope to be conceived of
that patient, which being grievously sik, A comparison.
should neither feel his disease; nor believe that he were distempered; nor
abide to hear of physik, or physicians; nor accept of any counsel that should
be offered; nor admit any talk or consultation about his curing: so these men
are in more dangerous estate than any other; for that they know not their own
danger, but persuading themselves to be more wise than their neighbors, do
remoove from their cogitations al things, whereby their health might be procured.

The way to cure careless men.
14 The only way to do these men good (if there be any way at al) is to make
them know that they are sik, and in great danger: which in our case may be done
best (as it seems to me) by giving them to understand, how far they are off,
from any one piece of true Christianity, and consequently from al hope of
salvation that may be had thereby. God requires at our hands, that We should
love him, and serve him; Deuteronomy. 6. Mat. 22. Luc. 10.
With all our heart, with all our soul, and with all our strength. These are the
prescript words of God, set down both in the old and new law. And how far (I
pray thee) are these men off from this, which employ not the half of their
heart, nor the half of their soul; nor the half of their strength in Gods
service; nay, nor the least part thereof. God requires at our hands, that we
should make his laws and precepts our study, Deuteronomy. 6. and 11. John. 1.
and cogitations: that we should think on them continually, and meditate upon
them both day and night, at home, and abroad; early, and late; when we go to
bed, and when we rise in the morning: this is his commandment, and there is no
dispensation therein. But how far are those men from this, which bestow not the
third part of their thoughts upon this matter, no not the hundred part, nor
scarce once in a year do talk thereof? Can these men say they are Christians, or
that they believe in God?

15 Christ making the estimate of things in this life, pronounced this
sentence; Luc. 10.
Vnum est necessarium: one only thing is necessary. Or of necessity in this
world, meaning the diligent and careful service of God. These men find many
things necessary beside this one thing; and this nothing necessary at al. How
far do they differ then in judgment from Christ? Christ's apostle says, 1.
Ioh. 2.
that a Christian Must neither love the world, nor any thing in the world.
These men love nothing else, but that which is of the world. He says; that
Whosoever is a frind to the world, is an enemy to Christ. These men are
enemies to whosoever is not a frind to the world. How then can these men hold
of Christ? Christ says; We should pray still. Luc. 18.
These men pray never. Christ's apostle says; Ephesians. 5.
that Covetousnes, uncleannes, or security, should not be so much as once
named among Christians. These men have no other talk but such. Finally, Luc.
21. Mat. 24. Mich. 6. Romans 11. Romans 12. Mat. 10.
the whole course, and canon of scripture runs, that Christians should be;
Attenti, vigilantes, solliciti, instantes, ferventes, perseverantes sine
intermissione. that is, Attent, vigilant, careful, instant, fervent, and
perseverant without intermission in the service of God. But these men have no
one of these points, nor any degree of any one of these points; but every one
the clean contrary. For they are neither attent to those things which
appertain unto God, nor vigilant, nor solicitous, nor careful; and much less
instant and fervent; and least of al perseverant without intermission: for that
they never begin. But on the contrary side, they are careless, negligent,
lumpish, remiss, key-cold, perverse, contemning and despising, yea loathing,
and abhorring al matters that appertain to the mortifieng of themselves, and
true service of God. What part have these men then in the lot and portion of
Christians, beside only the bare name, which profits nothing?

16 And this is sufficient to show how great and dangerous an impediment this
careless, senseles, and supine negligence is, to the resolution whereof we
entreat. For if Christ require to the perfection of this resolution, that
whosoever once espieth out the treasure hidden in the field (that is, Mat. 13.
the kingdom of heaven, and the right way to come to it) he should presently
go and sell all that he has, and bie the field; that is, he should prefer the
pursuit of this kingdom of heaven, before all the commodities of this life,
whatsoever; and rather venture them al, than to omit this treasure: if Christ
(I say) require this, as he does, when will these men ever be brought to this
point, which will not give the least part of their goods to purchase that field;
nor go forth of door to treat the bieng thereof; nor will so much as think, or
talk of the same; nor allow of him, which shall offer the means and wais to
compass it?

17 Wherefore, whosoever finds himself in this disease, I would counsel him
to read some chapters of the first part of this book: Page 34. and 46.
especially the third, and fourth, treating of the causes, for which we were
sent into this world: as also the fifth, of the account, which we must yield to
God, of our time here spent: and he shall thereby understand (I dowt not) the
error, and danger he stands in, by this damnable negligence wherein he
sleeps, attending only to those things, which are mere vanities, and for
which he came not into this world: and passing over other matters, without care
or cogitation, which only are of importance, and to have been studied, and
thought upon by him.

18 The third and last impediment that I purpose to handle in this book, Of
hardness of heart.
is a certain affection, or evil disposition in some men, called by the
scriptures, hardness of heart, or in other words, obstinacy of mind. Whereby a
man is settled in resolution, never to yield from the state of sin wherein he
lives, whatsoever shall, or may be said against the same. And I have reserved
this impediment, for the last place in this book, for that it is the last, and
woorst of al other impediments discovered before, containing all the evil in it
self, that any of the other before rehearsed have: and adding besides, a most
wilful, and malicious resolution of sin, quite contrary to that resolution,
which we so much endeavor to induce men unto.

Two degrees of hardness of heart.
19 This hardness of heart has diverse degrees in diverse men, and in some much
more greevous than in others. For some are arrived to that high and chief
obduration, which I named before, in such sort, as albeit they well know that
they are amiss; yet for some worldly respect or other, they will not yield, nor
change their course. Mat. 27.
Such was the obduration It seemed to be of weakness rather, tha^ of such
obduration as was in Pharao, or is spoken of here.
Pilate, though he knew that he condemned Christ wrongfully: yet, not to leese
the favor of the Jews, or incur displeasure with his prince, he proceeded and
gave sentence against him. This also was the obduration of Pharao, who though
he saw the miracles of Moises, and Aaron, and felt the strong hand of God upon
his kingdom: yet, not to seem to be overcome by such simple people as they
were: nor that men should think he would be enforced by any mean to relent,
Exo. 6.7.8.
he persevered still in his wilful wickedness, until his last, and utter
destruction came upon him. Acts. 26.27.
This hardness of heart was also In these two also it seems rather to have been
ignorance, than obduration. But the example is notably found in the Preests,
Scribes, and Pharisees: who ever opposed themselves against the preaching of
Christ; and at the length put him to death.
Agrippa, and Felix governor of Iewrie: who, though in their own conscience
they thought that Saint Paul spoke truth unto them: yet, not to hazard their
credit in the world, they continued still, and perished in their own vanities.
And commonly this obduration is in all persecutors of virtue, Persecutors.
and virtuous men, and especially of those that profess the truth: whom though
they see evidently to be innocent, and to have the word of God, and equity on
their side; yet to maintain their estate, credit, and favor in the world, they
persist, without either mercy or release, until God cut them off, in the midst
of their malice, and furious cogitations.

20 Others there are, A second degree of obduration.
who have not this obduration in so high a degree, as to persist in wickedness,
directly against their own knowledge; but yet they have it in another sort* for
that they are settled in firm purpose to follow the trade, which already they
have begun; and will not understand the dangers thereof: but do seek rather
means to persuade themselves, and quiet their consciences therein: and nothing
is so offensive unto them, as to hear any thing against the same. Of these men
holy Job says; Dixerunt Deo, recede a nobis, Job. 21.
and scientiam viarum tuarum nolumus: They say to God, depart from us, we will
not have the knowledge of thy wais. And the prophet David yet more expressly;
Their fury is like the fury of serpents, Psalm. 57.
like unto cocatrices that stop their ears, and will not hear the voice of the
inchanter. By this inchanter he means the holy Ghost, which seeks by all
means possible to charm thee from the bewitching wherein they stand, called by
the wise man Fascinatio nugacitatis: Sap. 4.
The bewitching of vanity. Zach. 7.
But (as the prophet says) they will not hear, they turn their baks, they stop
their ears, to the end they may not understand: they put their hearts as an
adamant stone, least they should hear Gods law, and be converted.

The hard hearted Jews.
21 The nation of Jews is peculiarly noted to have been alwais given to this
great sin, as Saint Steeven witnesses, Acts. 7.
when he said unto their own faces; You stifnecked Jews, you have alwais
resisted the holy Ghost. Meaning thereby (as Christ declares more at large)
that they resisted the prophets, and saints of God, in whom the holy Ghost
spoke unto them from time to time, Mat. 5. Luc. 11.13.
for amendment of their life: and for that through the light of knowledge
which they had by hearing of Gods law, they could not in truth, or show condemn
the things, which were said, or avoid the just reprehensions used toward them:
and yet resolved with themselves, not to obey or change the custom of their
proceedings: therefore fell they in fine, to persecute sharply their
reprehendors: whereof the only cause was hardness of heart; Induraverunt facies
suas supra petram and noluerunt reverti: Iere. 5.
says God by the mouth of Jeremy; They have hardened their faces above the
hardness of a rok, and they will not turn to me. And in another place of the same
prophet he complains greevously of this perversenes; Iere. 8.
Quare ergo aversus est populus iste in Jerusalem, aversione contentiosa? And
why then is this people in Jerusalem revolted from me, by so contentious and
perverse an alienation, as they will not hear me any more, etc? And yet again in
another place; Eze. 18.
Quare moriemini domus Israel: Why will you die, you house of Israel? Why will
you damn your selves? Why are you so obstinate as not to hear: so perverse as
not to learn: so cruel to your selves, as you will not know the dangers wherein
you live; nor understand the misery that hangs over you?

22 Do thou not imagine (deer brother) that God uses this kind of speech not
only to the Jews, but also to many thousand Christians, and perhaps also unto
thy self many times every day: for that thou refusest his good motions and
other means sent from him, to draw thee to his service, thou being resolved not
to yield thereunto, but to follow thy pursuit, whatsoever persuasions shall come
to the contrary? Alas, how many Christians be there, who say to God daily (as
they did whom I named before) Depart from us, Job. 21.
we will not have the knowledge of thy wais? How many be there, which abhor to
hear good counsel? Fear and tremble to read good books? Fly and detest the
frequentation of godly company, least by such occasions they might be touched
in conscience, converted, and saved? How many be there, which say with those
most miserable hard hearted men, whereof the prophet speaks; Esai. 28.
Percussimus foedus cum morte, and cum inferno fecimus pactum: We have stricken
a league with death, and have made a bargain with hell it self. Which is as
much to say, as if they had said; Trouble us not, molest us not with thy
persuasions: spend not thy words and labor in vain: talk unto others who are
not yet settled: let them take heaven that it will; we for our parts are
resolved; we are at a point; we have made a bargain that must be performed, yea
though it be with hell, and death everlasting.

The description of an hard heart.
23 It is a woonderful fury, the obduration of an hard heart: and not without
cause compared by the prophet (as I showed before) to the wilful fury and rage
of serpents. Psalm. 75.
And another place of scripture describes it thus; Durus es, and nervus
ferreus cervix tua, and frons tua aerea: Esai. 48.
Thou art hard hearted, and thy nek is a sinow of iron, and thy forhead is of
brass. What can be more vehemently spoken to express the hardness of this
metal? Lib. 1. de consid. ad Eug. c. 2.
But yet Saint Barnard expresses it more at large in these words; Quid ergo
cor durum: And what is then a hard heart? And he answers immediately; A hard
heart is that, which is neither cut by compunction; nor softened by godliness;
nor moved with prayers; nor yields to threatening; nor is any thing helped,
but rather hardened, by chastening. An hard heart is that which is ungrateful to
Gods benefits; disobedient to his counsels; made cruel by his judgments;
dissolute by his allurements; unshamefast to filthiness; fearles to perils;
uncourteous in humane affairs; rechles in matters pertaining to God; forgetful
of things past; negligent in things present; improvident for things to come.

24 By this description of Saint Barnard it appears, that an hard heart, The
explication of S. Barnards words.
is almost a desperate and remediles disease, where it falls. For what will
you do (says this good father) to amend it? If you lay the greevousnes of sin
before him: he is not touched with compunction. If you allege him all the
reasons in the world, why we ought to serve God, and why we ought not to
offend, and dishonor him: he is not mollified by this consideration of piety.
If you would request him and beseech him with tears, even on your knees: he is
not moved. If you threaten Gods wrath against him: he yields nothing
thereunto. If God scourge him in deed: he waxes furious, and becomes much
more hard than before. If God bestow benefits on him: he is ungrateful. If he
counsel him for his salvation: he obeieth not. If you tell him of Gods secret,
and severe judgments: it drives him to desperation, and to more cruelty. If
you allure him with Gods mercy: it makes him dissolute. If you tell him of his
own filthiness, he blusheth not. If you admonish him of his perils: he fears
not. If he deal in matters toward men: he is proud and uncurteous. If he deal
in matters toward God: he is rash, light, and contemptuous. Finally, he
forgets whatsoever has passed before him toward other men, either in
reward of godliness, or in punishment of sinners. For the time present, he
neglects it, nor makes any account of using it to his benefit. And of things
to come, either of bliss, or misery, he is utterly unprovident: nor will
esteem thereof, lay you them never so often, or vehemently before his face. And
what way is there then to do this man good?

The danger of an hard heart.
25 Not without great cause surely did the wise man pray so heartily to God;
Animae irreverenti, and infrenatae ne tradas me: Deliver me not over (O Lord)
unto a shameless and unruly soul. Eccl. 23.
That is, unto a hard, and obstinate heart. Whereof he gives the reason in
another place, of the same book; Eccl. 3.
Cor enim durum habebit male in novissimo: For that an hard heart shall be in an
evil case at the last day. Oh that al hard hearted people would note this reason
of scripture! But S. Barnard goes on, and opens the terror heerof more
fully, when he says; Li. 1. de consul. c. 1.
Nemo duri cordis salutem unquam adeptus est, nisi quem forte miserans Deus
abstulit ab eo (iuxta prophetam) cor lapideum, Eze. 36.
and dedit cor carneum: There was never yet hard hearted man saved, except God
by his mercy did take away his stony heart, and give him a heart of flesh,
according to the prophet. By which words Saint Barnard signifies, and prooveth
out of the prophet, Two kinds of hearts in men with their properties.
that there are two kinds of hearts in men, the one a fleshly heart, which
bleedeth if you but prik it: that is, it falls to contrition, repentance, and
tears, upon never so small a chek for sin. The other is a stony heart, which if
you beat and buffet never so much with hammers, you may as soon break it in
pieces, as either bend it, or make it to bleed. And of these two hearts in this
life depends al our misery, or felicity for the life to come. For as God
when he would take vengeance of Pharao, had no more greevous way to do it, than
to say; Indurabo cor Pharaonis: I will harden the heart of Pharao. Exo. 4.7.14
That is (as Saint Austen expounds) I will take away my grace, Au. 1.18. super
Exodus and sermon. 88. de temp.
and so permit him to harden his own heart: so when he would show mercy to
Israel, he had no more forcible means to express the same, than to say; I will
take away the stony heart out of your flesh, Eze. 36.
and give you a fleshie heart in steed thereof. That is, I will take away your
hard heart, and give you a soft heart, that will be moved, when it is spoken to.
And of al other blessings, and benefits, which God does bestow upon mortal men
in this life, this soft and tender heart is one of the greatest: I mean such an
heart as is soon moved to repentance; soon checked and controlled; soon
pearsed; soon made to bleed; soon stirred to amendment. And on the contrary
part, there can be no greater curse, or malediction laid upon a Christian, than
to have an hard and obstinate heart, which heapeth every day vengeance unto it
self, and his master also. Saint Paul says it is compared by the apostle
unto the ground, Heb. 6.
which no store of rain can make fruitful, though it fall never so often upon
the same: and therefore he pronounces rherof; Reprobae est, maledicto proxima,
cuius consummatio in combustionem. That is, It is reprobate and next door to
malediction, whose end or consummation must be fire and burning.

26 Which thing being so, no marvel though the holy scripture do dehort us so
carefully from this obduration and hardness of heart, as from the most dangerous,
and desperate disease, that possible may fall upon the Christian, being indeed
(as the apostle signifies) the next door to reprobation it self. Heb. 6.
S. Paul therefore cries; Ephesians. 4. 1. The. 5.
Nolite contristari, nolite extinguere spiritum Dei: Do you not make sad, do
you not extinguish the spirit of God, by obduration, by resisting and impugning
the same. Heb. 3.
Again; Non obduretvr quis ex vobis fallacia peccati: Let no man be hard hearted
among you through the deceit of sin. The prophet David also cries; Psalm. 94.
Hodie si vocem eius audieritis, nolite obdurare corda vestra: Even this day,
if you hear the voice of God calling you to repentance, see you harden not your
hearts against him. Al which earnest speeches, used by Gods holy spirit, do
give us to understand, how carefully we have to fly this most pestilent
infection of an hard heart: which almighty God by his mercy give us grace to
do, and indu us with a tender heart toward the full obedience of his divine
majesty: such a soft heart (I say) as the wise man desired, when he said to
God; Da servo tuo cor docile: 3. Reg. 3.
Give unto me thy servant (O Lord) an heart that is docible, and tractable to be
instructed: such an heart as God himself describes to be in all them whom he
loves, saying; Esai. 66.
Ad quem respiciam, nisi ad pauperculum, and contritum cord, and timentem
sermones meos? To whom will I have regard, or show my favor, but unto the poor
and humble of heart, unto the contrite spirit, and to such as trembles at my
speeches?

27 Behold (deer brother) what an heart God requires at thy hands? A little
poor and humble heart: (for so much imports the diminitive Pauperculus:) also
a contrite heart for thine offenses past; and an heart that trembles at every
word that comes to thee from God, by his ministers. How then will thou not
fear at so many words, and whole discourses as have been used before, for
thine awakening; for opening thy peril; for stirring thee to amendment? How
will thou not fear the threats, and judgments of this great Lord for thy sin?
How will thou dare to proceed any further in his displeasure? How will thou
defer this resolution any longer? Surely the lest part of that which has been
said, might suffice to moove a tender heart, an humble, and contrite spirit, to
present resolution and earnest amendment of life. But if al together cannot
moove thee to do the same: I can say no more, but that thou have a very hard
heart indeed: which I beseech our heavenly father to soften for thy salvation,
with the precious hot blood of his only son, our Savior, who was content to
shed it for that effect, upon the cross.

The conclusion of this whole book. Page 12.
28 And thus now having said so much as time permitted me, concerning the first
general part required at our hands for our salvation: that is, concerning
resolution, appointed As may appeer in my preface to the reader.
division in the beginning, to be the subject or matter of this first book, I
will end here: deferring for a time the performance of my purpose for the other
two books, Which was, for that either time, or health, or liberty did not
permit
upon the causes, and reasons set down in an advertisement Phil. 2.
and will supply by other wais, the two principal parts following: that is,
both right beginning, and constant perseverance, whereunto my other two books
promised, are appointed. It will not be hard for him that were once reformed, to
find helpers and instructors ynow, the holy Ghost in this case being alwais at
hand: there want not good books, and better men (God be glorified for it) in
our own country at this day, which are well able to guide a zealous spirit in
the right way to virtue (and yet as I have promised before, so mean I (by Gods
most holy help and assistance) to send thee (gentle reader) as my time and
ability will permit, the other two books also: especially, if it shall please
his divine majesty to comfort me thereunto, with the gain, or good of any one
soul by this which is already done: that is, if I shall conceive or hope, that
any one soul, so deerly purchased by the precious blood of the son of God, shall
be moved to resolution by any thing that is here said: that is, shall be
reclaimed from the bondage of sin, and restored to the service of our maker and
redeemer: which is the only end of my writing, as his majesty best knows.

29 And surely (gentle reader) though I must confess that much more might be
said for this point of resolution, that is here touched by me, or than any man
can well utter in any competent kind of book or volume: yet am I of opinion,
that either these reasons here alleged are sufficient, or else nothing will
suffice, The effect of that which has been said in this book.
for the conquering of our obstinacy, and beating down of our rebellious
disobedience in this point. Here thou may see the principal arguments
inducing thee to the service of God, and detestation of vice. In the first part.
Here thou may see the cause and end why thou wast created; the occasion of
thy coming hither; the things required at thy hands in particular; the account
that will be demanded of thee; his goodness toward thee; his watchfulnes over
thee; his desire to win thee; his reward if thou do well; his infinite
punishment, if thou do evil; his callings; his baits; his allurements to save
thee. And on the contrary part, In the second part.
here are discovered unto thee the vanities and deceits of those impedime^ts,
hindrances, or excuses, which any way might let, stay or discourage thy
resolution; the feigned difficulties of virtuous life are remooved; the
conceited fears of Gods service are taken away; the allureing flatteries of
worldly vanity are opened; the foolish presumption upon Gods mercy; the
danger of delay; the dissimulation of sloth; the desperate peril of careless and
stony hearts are declared. What then will thou desire more to moove thee? What
further argument will thou expect to draw thee from vice and wickedness, that all this is?

30 If all this stir thee not, what will stir thee, (gentle reader) if when thou
have read this, thou lay down thy book again, and walk on thy careless life as
quietly as before; what hope (I beseech thee) may there be conceived of thy
salvation? Will thou go to heaven, living as thou do? It is impossible. As
soon thou may drive God out of heaven, as get thither thy self in this kind
of life. What then? Will thou forgo heaven, and yet escape hell too? This is
less possible, whatsoever the Atheists of this world do persuade thee. Will thou defer the matter, and think of it hereafter? I have told thee my opinion
heerof before. Thou shall never have more ability to do it, than now, and (it
may be) never half so much again. If thou refuse it now: I may greatly fear,
that thou will be refused hereafter thy self. There is no way then so good
(deer brother) as to do it presently whiles it is offered. Break from that
tyrant which deteineth thee in servitude: shake off his chains; cut a sunder
his bonds; run violently to Christ; which stands ready to embrace thee, with
his arms open on the cross. Make joiful all the angels and court of heaven with
thy conversion; Luc. 15.
strike once the stroke with God again; make a manly resolution; say with the
old courageous soldier of Jesus Christ, Saint Ierom; If my father stood weeping
on his knees before me, and my mother hanging on my nek behind me; A notable
saying of S. Ierom.
and al my brethren, sisters, children, kinsfolks howling on every side to
retain me in sinful life with them; I would sling off my mother to the ground;
despise al my kindred; run over my father, and tread him under my feet, thereby
to run to Christ when he calls me.

31 Oh that we had such hearts as this servant of God had; such courage, such
manhood, such fervent love to our master. Who would lie one day in such
slaverie as we do? Who would eat husks with the prodigal son among swine,
seeing he may return home, and be so honorably received and entertained by his
old father; have so good cheer; and banketting; and hear so great melody, joy,
and triumph for his return? Luc. 15.
I say no more heerin (deer brother) than thou art assured of, by the word and
promise of Gods own mouth; from which can proceed neither falsehood nor deceit.
Return then I beseech thee; lay hand fast on his promise, who will not fail
thee; run to him now he calls, whiles thou have time; and esteem not all this
world worth a straw in respect of this one act; for so shall thou be a most
happy, and thrice happy man, and shall bless hereafter the hour and moment
that ever thou made this blessed resolution. And I for my part (I trust) shall
not be void of some portion of thy felicity. At leastwise I dowt not, but thy
holy conversion shall treat for me with our common father, who is the God of
mercies, for remission of my many sins, and that I may serve, and honor him
together with thee, all the dais of my life; which ought to be both our
petitions; and therefore in both our names, I beseech his divine majesty to
grant it to us: for ever and ever, Amen.

The end of this book of Resolution.
A TREATISE TENDING TO PACIFICATION: BY LABOring those that are our adversaries
in the cause of RELIGION, to receive the GOSPEL, and to join with us in
profession thereof.

By Edm. Bunny.

Hosea. 3: 4, 5. The children of Israel shall sit a great while without king,
without prince, without sacrifice, without image, without Ephod, and without
Teraphim. But afterward the children of Israel shall be converted, and seek the
Lord their God, and David their king: and in the latter dais they shall worship
the Lord, and his loving kindness.

A Table declaring the effect and method of the Treatise following.
This Treatise following consisth of two principal parts. In the former of
which there is set down matter to move them: that is, First, on our parts it is
declared, that if we should turn unto them, The benefit that we should get
thereby, would be very little. Section. 1. The inconvenience very great: First,
in matters concerning religion. Sect. 2. Then, concerning our civil estate.
Sect. 3.

Then, on their parts it is declared likewise, that if they should ioin in
profession with us, The benefit that they should get thereby, were great First in
matters of religion. Sect. 4. Then as touching their civil estate. Sect. 5.
The inconveniences very small: concerning which, First it is declared, what
they are. Sect. 6. Then, of how small importance they are, which is declared,
First, in them al generally. Sect. 7. Then more specially in the doctrine of
justification. Sect. 8.



In the latter such lets are remooved as are wont to hinder: of which there be
two special sorts: Some that are of less importance. Of which likewise there
are Some that chiefly respect their person: which also are two. One, that
proceeds from regard of their credit: which so they think should be
overthrown. Sect. 9. The other arises from their bodily punishment: wherein
they think we deal hardly with them. Sect. 10.
One, that does somewhat respect their cause likewise: which is, that our
translations of the holy scriptures are now (in their judgment) found to be so
far from the truth of the text, that it seems to them, that we have not the
word of God among us, to direct us in this our profession, as heertofore it was
thought that we had. Concerning which, First, there is a brief recital of
those points of doctrine, for which we are charged to have translated so
corruptly. Sect. 11. Then is declared, how it may very easily appeer, that the
matter is not so great, as they pretend First, by consideration of certain
general points to them al belonging. Sec. 12 Then by a more special treatise of
every one apart by it self. Sect. 13.


One, that is of special force with many, and most of al hinders those that
stay upon conscience in deed: which is, that if they should ioin with us, they
fear that thereby they should depart from the Church. Concerning which, First,
the hardness of the matter is unfolded. Which is done by showing First, how they
are deceived: which is, for that they do not rightly conceive, Either what the
Church is. Sect. 14. Or what it is to depart from it. Sec. 15.
Then, how the error may be amended: which is, by right understanding, What the
Church is. Sect. 16. What it is to depart from the same. Se. 17.

Then the Resolution thereof is gathered: which is, that of departing altogether
from the Church, there ought to be at al no quaestion among us; but only who
are the truer members of that Church that we al are of. In which point, so long
as the quaestion is but betwixt us and them, the advantage is wholly and only
ours. Sect. 18.




The Treatise tending to Pacification.
TO persuade or move others to the truth of Religion, that being as by yet
prejudice deceived, cannot persuade themselves to be so short thereof as they
are, has been, and ever must be in all ages so needful an argument, as that
many do gladly bestow their labor therein. Of which, as other ages have ever
given sufficient testimony; so this of ours does most plentifully witness the
same: being so much more fruitful and abundant therein, as it has pleased God
to bless it with so rare and singular a light of the truth, as (to our
knowledge) he never yet bestowed on others. Therefore among us also there are,
and those very many, that have taken this argument in hand, and have done so
well therein, that God is glorified, the church is increased, and themselves have
gotten a reverend aestimation among the people of God thereby. So comes it to
pass, that whatsoever I shall do therein, according to the small talent that God
of his goodness has bestowed on me, may seem to be needless, and as it were to
come out of season, when the church is so well stored already, with such
persuasion; and others long since, seem to themselves half cloied therewith.
Nevertheless, seeing that now I was purposed to get forth this book of
Resolution that goes before, which so treats of godliness of life, that (in a
manner) it makes no mention of knowledge or faith (as also it appears that
the author himself was (in some things) of a contrary judgment to us therein)
I thought the case it self to be such, as that it behooved me to say somewhat
thereof, as before in the preface I have declared. The principal parts of this
Treatise.
The effect whereof is no more but this; first, to show that there is very
reason why they should join in profession with us: and then to declare in what
sort to remoove such things as most do hinder the weaker sort. The reason why
they ought to join in profession with us, is for that it becomes and
behooveth the church of God (in many respects) to be at unity in it self; and
yet the case so stands in this matter, that we are not able in our profession
to yield unto them; but they very well may, and of duty ought to accord unto
us. It becomes and behooveth the church of God to be at unity in it self,
for so many good and substantial causes, that it needs no confirmation at al:
insomuch that it shall not be needful to bestow any labor in the prooving of it.
The other is not so fully concluded of al; and yet notwithstanding we dowt not,
but we have sufficient groundwork to be persuaded therein as we are. Why we may
not ioin with them.
The reason why we may not yield unto them, is for that there can be no other
account made of the matter, but that the benefit we should get thereby, would be
very little; and the inconvenience that comes withal, marvelous great. What
is the benefit that we might seem to get by their profession.
The benefit that we should get thereby, seems to rest but only in a certain
persuasion, that we should be in better case, than now we are. For whether we
should be so or not, that must needs (as yet) lie in question betwixt us. But
this is very true in deed, that if we were of their profession, then should we
be with them persuaded, that our estate were so much the better. And our estate
would then seem to be bettered, both for the certainty of our salvation in the
world to come: and in some things that do concern this present life. What
benefit we should have toward our salvation.
For as touching our salvation, we should account our selves more sure of it,
because that then we should imagine our selves to have, the mediation and help
of angels, and saints in heaven; and the benefit of our own and other men's
merits on earth: whereas by the profession that now we are of, we so rest in
Jesus Christ alone, that we seek for no help by any of those. And if Jesus
Christ be not only sufficient to work our salvation (which themselves do never
deny) but also sufficient in himself, not going out of his own person for any
part of his sufficiency, but keeping only to his own merits and mediation,
having no respect at al to the mediation or merits of any others (which also I
think very few of them will deny, though when they have granted it, they are
fain sometime to borrow it again, to establish the doctrine of those other
helps) what special advantage is it to us, for to have any mo besides, when we
have enough and enough only in him? For although it were not il to mingle any
other with him (which at this present we will not urge) yet if be but more than
needs, it can be no special benefit to us. He that has well dined already,
can very little be helped by more plenty of meat, be it never so good, and
otherwise welcome unto the taste. Now that Christ is sufficient, even in
himself, without the help of any other, if it be not in the scripture so
plainly set down, and so derived through al antiquity in the judgment of any,
but that still they will hold it needful to seek unto others so far as before
they were wont to do: neither will we labor at this present to make it plainer.
What benefit we should have in matters concerning this praesent life.
The things that do belong to this praesent life, wherein it might seem our
estate might be bettered, are of two special sorts; whereof some concern our
inward; and one other concerns our outward government. First of inward
comfort.
Our inward comfort may seem might be increased under that profession, two
principal wais. First, that then we need not fear the excommunication or curse
of the bishop of Rome, under which we are now, and long have been; then, for
that they have a more copious representation (as they take it) of heavenly
comforts than we; for that in sacraments, and ceremonies they far exceed us;
and have that use of images also, whereas we have none at al. First, therefore
concerning the Popes curse, we do not find it now to be of that force, that
heertofore we thought it to be; neither by the word of God; neither by
experience it self. And if we have little cause to fear it, and then
(proportionably) fear it as little; surely it were no great pleasure to any of
us, to be delivered from the hurt thereof, that does not hurt us; nor from the
fear of that, whereof we stand in no fear at al. As for the spiritual censure of
the church, rightly proceeding against any, we know it is to be feared indeed,
of those whom it touches. But we are long since persuaded, that we can so
distinguish betwixt these two, that we need not take the one for the other.
Then as touching those further representations of spiritual comfort (such as
they are) which they (I grant) have mo than we, we find no such substance in
any of them (neither in that they have both sacraments, and ceremonies mo than
we; neither in that themselves alone have all the images, and we are utterly
void of any) but that we may think our selves to be well already, with those
that we have, although of one sort we have none at al: and can further hope
likewise, that if themselves had no mo than we, their inward comfort should be
so much the greater. For if in the examination of them, it should fall out, that
they have no sufficient groundwork in the word of God (as we are sure, that
they have there no warrant at al) then are they but very cold, and desperate
comforts, and never yield any sound comfort at al. For though we are not in any
dowt, but that they are in other respects very il, as they are used by them:
yet now we say no more but this, that (al things considered) we find so little
comfort in them, that we need not think the want to be great, now that we are
without them; nor, that it were any great benefit, for to obtain them. Then of
outward government.
The benefit that in outward government we should get thereby, is no more than
this, that so we should be under the government of the bishop of Rome; which
how good it should prove, I am not able certainly to say. But if first we
should esteem thereof by reason, we may very well dowt, that no one man were
able to govern us well, that should rule all the world besides; notwithstanding
all the under-magistrates that could be appointed: and that although some one
man could do it, by his rare and singular wisdom (which notwithstanding were
such a thing, as never was yet) yet that it were in no wise convenient for so
many, and all the whole to hang upon one; and such an one too, as might sometime
be so weak a man to bear such a burden, as that many others under his
government, might be found much stronger than he. Then, if we come unto
experience, and lay before us in what sort he governed us before, when as he
had us under his government; or in what sort he governs yet, those that abide
under his obedience; whether any thing may be said more hardly or not, as yet I
say not; but surely thus much we may be bold to abide by, that in comparison of
the government under which we are now, it were no very singular benefit to be
helped bak to that other again. So for ought that yet appears, we cannot see,
that any great benefit could come unto us, if we should turn to their
profession.

What inconvenience might come in thereby.
2 What inconvenience might come thereby, is a thing very hard to be fully
gathered, being so great, and so diverse withal, as in our judgment it seems
to be. Where first of al we cannot like that we should be so much deprived of
the scriptures themselves, as under them we were: partly by the laws that they
made against such as should read them, otherwise than themselves thought good;
and partly, for that they do so much inhibite al translations in our vulgar
tongue. Which one thing only we take to boad very much il, and whatsoever after
insueth, to come almost only of it. For the inconveniences, that we are
persuaded would come in thereby, would be, as we take it, many and great; some
in matters of religion; others, as touching our civil estate here in this
life. Inconveniences in matters of religion.
In matters of religion; first, we dowt that our selves should be much thereby
corrupted, and be occasion to many others, to fall to the same corruption
likewise: then also, that on the consciences of many, there should be laid over
greevous burdens. Our selves might be corrupted by their profession, two
principal wais: in the aestimation of Gods goodness to us: and in the
performance; of our duty to him. The goodness of God toward us, is infinite;
but now we have to enter no further into the consideration thereof, than to this
present purpose does appertain. And that is only in these two things; first, in
the work of our redemption; then, in his providence toward us in other
matters. How it were dangerous in the work of our redemption to be of that
profession with them
In the work of our redemption, Christ has both satisfied for us to the
justice of God; and therwithal himself directs us, toward the attaining
thereof. In both these points we dowt very much, that by joining with them in
their profession, we should be found blasphemous to God, and very hurtful to
our own souls health; first, in joining (and that no further, than their selves
do) either the sufferings, or else the good works, of any of the saints, in
heaven or on earth, with the sufferings, and merits of Christ; then by helping
our selves unto it, by the mediation of angels, or saints, or by the doctrines
of men on earth, only so far as themselves do it; and not seeking the same
alone by the mediation of Christ, and by the written word of God. For we take
the satisfaction of Christ, his mediation, and word to be such, as that, no
other satisfaction, mediation, or word can be found, any thing meet to be so
far matched withal. Again, we find not, that the work of redemption that is
wrought in Christ, is available to the salvation of any, but only of those,
that so cleave unto it, that they utterly renounce al other helps whatsoever
they are. In the former therefore, we see not how it may be avoided, but that
needs we must be found to have done great dishonor to Christ; in the other we
are persuaded that we should clean overthrow our own salvation. Concerning the
providence of God toward us in other matters, How in the doctrine of Gods
providence.
their profession (we fear) would lead us somewhat aside; and teach us to
attribute many of those things that fall out among us, to some other than God
alone, sometimes unto creatures, as the angels, and saints in heaven, or to the
power of man on earth; and sometimes to a fiction of man's devise, as fate or
fortune. And although we willingly grant, that in diverse of these they use such
limitation withal, that it seems they would be loath for to go over-far
therein; yet, going but so far as they do in their common profession, we see not
how we could avoid it, but that if we should join with them therein, we should
be far amiss persuaded in that comfortable doctrine of Gods most gracious
providence toward us. How in performance of our duty to God.
In the performance of our duty likewise, we do not perceive, but that we
should be very far wide from that which in truth we ought to do. For whereas God
only has made us, redeemed us, and given us whatsoever we have, and therefore
we owe al unto him, and that by Jesus Christ our Lord: their profession
notwithstanding is, to yield their thanks and service again (in diverse cases)
to some angel, or saint, as though that from them, or by their good means they
had received the things which they have. Whereas notwithstanding to make any
other mediators in such respect, though it be not with Christ betwixt God and
us, but only under Christ betwixt him and us, is either directly against, or
without the warrant of the word of God. Then also, although they do not direct
our duty, nor any part thereof to any other than God; yet they teach us to do
unto him diverse things that we find not in the written word. Wherein although
they can assure us that the church has so ordained, yet we see no sufficient
warrant therein; when as themselves will not deny, but that the greatest
multitude of the people of God in all ages, have been sometime deceived; and the
written word both precisely charge us to do nothing to God but what he
appoints, and besides accurseth al those that set us a work in any thing
else. Those others that might be corrupted by us, are al those, How others
might be corrupted by us.
that by our example should take occasion to do likewise: either such as
presently live besides us; or the generation that after follows. For we know
by experience of times, that of those that live together, one does cast his eye
to another, every nation unto the people that does dwell about them, and make
the doings of others a rule for them to walk by; and the same in the service of
God, as much (almost) as in any thing else. Children likewise, and the race
that succeeds others, do readily follow, as their forefathers have gone
before them; for the most part little regarding, whether it be right or wrong;
but sufficiently contenting themselves, if they walk but so as their ancestors
have done before. If we therefore should give an il example to any of these,
either in leading them to do such things in the service of God as were
offensive to him; or else no more, but teaching them, in like sort to venture,
in so weighty a matter: how should we be able to excuse our selves, but that
we have given them just cause of offense, in laieng such a stumbling stone in
the way, that we see they are disposed to walk? And though by the grace and
goodness of God, they would be more wary, and not stumble thereat; yet were our
fault nothing the less, and for to be aesteemed no less than murder before
him: as Christ himself we know pronounces an heavy sentence against al those,
byw hom there comes offense to any; that It were much better for him, that a
millstone were hanged about his nek and he cast into the bottom of the sea, than
to offend the lest of the^ all that beleve in him. Those heavy burdens that I
spoke of, What burdens heerby are laid on the consciences of men.
which they lay on the consciences of many, are of two sorts; some that
appertain generally to al; Traditions.
and others that appertain properly to some. Those that appertain generally to
al, are first those heaps of traditions and ceremonies which they have
abundantly laid upon al men, calling them the traditions of the church, and
teach, that al are bound of conscience, inviolably to keep and observe them
every one. Of which sort, though some be sorted unto certain principal feasts
and times of the year; yet others there are that so commonly hant every week,
and almost every day; and are so plentifully powered out, throughout our whole
life, almost in all things that we are to take in hand, that it is not possible
for any to walk uprightly therein, nor ever sufficiently to attend the greater
things of the law of God. Auricular confession.
Then also it is an heavy burden, that al men are bound, so to confess as
they require, both for that they must disclose unto them the very secrets of
their hearts; and are bound to rekon up al their sins, so far as possibly they
can remember; else that they are excluded from al hope of forgivenes. Whereof,
the one is very greevous, and abhorring the nature of the best men that are;
the other more, then any man can at any time find, that he has done fully
indeed; both which are unknown to the word of God (and therefore needles) and
yield no way of forgivenes at al; but only a way to torment the parties, and
for themselves to practice upon. These that are more proper to some, are cast
upon them diversely: sometimes upon some special occasion; sometimes by reason of
that kind of life, that the parties are entered into. Of the first I note but
one: that is, the burden that they lay upon those, which have confessed their
sins unto them. Which commonly they call poenance, Poenance.
and ever lightly has one of these faults: either that the poenance it self
is wrong (being for the most part, either rigorous, or frivolous; or else that
the parties are taught to seek out forgivenes therein. Of that which is cast
upon others, by reason of the trade of life, that they are entered into, I note
these two principal branches? Rules of their observants.
First those observances, that they bind their regulars to; then the vow of
single life, whereunto they bind their whole clergy, and certain others near
to that order. The former of which (omitting to speak of the woorst of it)
yields naught else but a fruitless labor, such as God never accepts for
any part of his service at al, and yet often times very tedious, and painful in
it self, if they follow their rule indeed, and coast not over some nearer way:
the other is full of fowl pollutions without, and intolerable burnings within,
such as al forced virginity has ever yielded.

3 But in matters of religion (it may be) the controversies seem so dowtful,
What inconveniences would come in thereby as touching our civil estate.
that we cannot charge them with any such inconvenience on their side, but that
in their judgment they think themselves able to turn it over to us again, as
easily as we did lay it to their charge before. And we also will be content, to
set by religion for a season, and al matters of faith whatsoever, as if in that
respect there were no inconvenience at al to be feared; and now consider those
things alone, that do concern our civil estate heerin this life; not
persuading our selves to the contrary, but that diverse there are, that would
be content to join with them in matters of religion, if thereby they should
bring to themselves no inconvenience in this. For diverse indeed do not so much
respect religion, or look not so narrowly to the diversity of these
professions, but that they can be reasonably well content with either, if in
other things: they have their minds contented. Be it therefore, that whatsoever
their profession be, yet shall they have many of those that now are with us to
join with them, if in this point there be found no lawful impediment, or matter
to stay them. But here, even at the first, appears a mighty let: which is,
that no man (we think) can be of that profession, unless he be under that
government too. Could their church, and court be sundered; could their religion
and regiment be parted, the one from the other; then indeed I think that (with
many) much might be done; but when as these go so close together, that no man
can profess the one, but that he must be under the other, that goes (as we
take it) somewhat hard with many, that otherwise would find no scruple at al.
And two things there be, wherein we think we have very good cause to find our
selves greeved in that respect; one, that they extend the authority thereof, so
far forth as they are wont to do; the other, that they will seem to do it upon
such ground as they praetend. They stretch out their authority we think over
far; Abuse of their authority against sovereign magistrates.
first, against al those that are in sovereign authority in their own several
countries or kingdoms; then against al other inferior persons generally. With
princes, and those that are in highest place in their several states, we think
they are a great deal to bold, both in abasing them so much as they do* and
that they do so much intermeddle in the government of themselves, and their
people. They abase them (we think) over far; when as they advance themselves
above them: and make those that are the Lords anointed, to do over servile
obeisance unto them. How much higher than kings and princes, and the greatest
states of Christendom besides, the bishops of Rome have claimed to be, and
according (when opportunity has served) have taken upon them, is a thing so
very manifest, that I need not to stay thereupon; especially when as the
remembrance thereof is such, as I think many of themselves are loath to hear of,
and so might be somewhat irksom unto them. Again how far they have made the
greatest potentates that are* not so much to submit as to cast down (in most
servile, and abject manner) themselves before them, so often as they were fain to
seek unto them, is likewise so commonly known, and so bitter withal, that they
do not much urge us to call the same to remembrance again. Abuse of their
authority with others.

At home.


In matters of government they meddle too far, sometimes at home; but especially
and chiefly abroad. At home they meddle too far in matters of government, when
as they take upon them more, than appertains to the office of a bishop,
overruling the states of Italy as they think good; inhibiting them to do
otherwise than stands with their pleasure; and injoining them to do, as they
praescribe. Abroad.
Abroad we think they intermeddle to far, not only when they deal in civil
causes; but whenever they meddle with ecclesiastical also by the way of
authority, taking upon them to command. But now to keep only to that, whereby
they trouble our civil estate, we do think they are over greevous, and that
beyond al aequitie and right, both to those that willingly take in good part
whatsoever the Pope does unto them; and to those likewise, that sometimes use
their own liberty. For as for those that remain in full obedience unto him,
Over his frinds.
both he frames them to govern as pleases him; and besides that he erecteth
his own seat above theirs, that so there may be a ready way, still to appeal
from them unto him, and to do in their states whatsoever else he thinks good.
Against those that withdraw themselves from his government.
As for those that more freely use their own authority, with them often times
has he dealt more roughly; accursing their persons; interdicting their land;
and arming their own subjects against them. With inferior persons, yea and with all generally, Trailing them forth into chargeable and dangerous iourneies.
the Pope (as we take it) deals too hardly, when either he traileth them so
far from home, in very cumbersome, chargeable, and dangerous journeis, either
in the way of poenance, to the holy land, to Saint Peter's in Rome, or to some
such like; or to follow their suits in law before him as in many cases he did,
and yet does; or else at home does impose upon them those greevous exactions
that he is accustomed to do, Greevous exactions.
utterly beyond al measure, and mean; or in those places that are for pastors,
to set Italians to reap the commodity that comes thereby, Outlandish pastors.
that never so much as come at their charge, or, being of a strange language
themselves, can do no good when they come there, unless it be to practice for
him. Upon what ground they do these things.
Concerning the groundwork whereupon they will seem to build their doings in all
such cases, that do we find (in our judgment) so very weak, that although it
be grief enough to be so pinched by that usurpation, as within fresh
remembrance we were; yet is this no small increase of the same, that they will
needs go about to bear us down, that the grounds that they stand on, are very
sound, substantial, and firm. For (by their patience) what may we think? May
any suppose, that they themselves are so persuaded? Italian heads (indeed we
find) are of deep devise; but it would greeve the simplest of al, to be so
very plainly ^lluded, in so weighty matters. For their grounds they praetend
these two things; that such authority should of right appertain to the bishop
of Rome; and that accordingly he has been in possession of it. That it should
belong unto him, sometimes they allege some reason for it; but for the most
part, authority only. Their reason is, that it is expedient, and very needful
it should so be. But first they should have considered, whether it had been
possible, or not, for the whole world to be kept under the sovereign authority
of any one. Their authorities they bring, partly out of the word of God: but
chiefly out of certain councels, and fathers. For their possessions they
allege Constantines gift; and certain practices of their own, that have been
since of latter time. Al which things are so very well known, that I need not
but point unto them. But are these so firm, and substantial groundworks, as
they would seem to think that they are? Let them be of what valu they can be;
we can hardly be persuaded, but that many of those that did first allege any
of these, did it for that they were disposed to abuse the simplicity of many
others. So we see the force of this inconveniencie, to be very sore: and we
find no cause to condescend thereunto; but rather, that we are very fowly
abused, in those causes that are alleged. And then, what reasons have they so
forcible to persuade any, to be of their church, when as therwithal they must
needs be under their court likewise, which is so irksome and greevous a thing.
Unless we may hope that they would be content, to allow us to be of their
profession, and yet notwithstanding free from their government. Of which (I
think) we may very well dowt, for that as yet we do not see them to grant that
liberty to any other. Insomuch, that as it was said of Herod, after that his
own child also was slain, in that slaughter of other infants that he procured,
that it was better to be his pig, than his child; so may it (we think) in this
respect as truly be said, that it is better to be none of the Popes frinds, to
enjoy this freedom that now we have; than with his frinds to have it denied,
and to be in such bondage thereby as they are.

4 If now we come to our own profession, What benefit they should have by our
profession.
I trust that it may soon appeer, to be the better in many respects: insomuch
that if they would condescend unto us, the benefit that they should reap
thereby, should be very great; the inconvenience, but very little. And to follow
the same order, that before I have done in the other, first as touching the
scriptures, themselves may see, The use of scripture.
that we go not about to hold them from any: but our selves do turn them into
our own vulgar tongue. Neither do we tie them unto any one translation; but send
them to the fountain, and first original: and doing therein our selves so well as
we can (every one as he is able) embrace and reverence the labors of others,
whom we see to be learned indeed, and faithfully to labor therein. So we impart
the scriptures to al* and labor to make them fully known in every point, to
the uttermost that we are able. We keep more praecisely to the written word
than our adversaries do.
Then concerning those principal matters, that out of these scriptures we
deliver to others: first, thus much may be said generally, that whosoever shall
join themselves to us, may therein account themselves the safer; for that it
cannot be denied, but that we keep more praecisely, than our adversaries do,
to the written word. To come to particulars: first, as touching matters of
religion, it is very clear, In the work of our redemption.
that we cleave to none other work of redemption, but only to that, which God
has wrought in Jesus Christ: and so we cleave unto it alone; that we seek no
help at al of angel, or saint in heaven; of our own, or other men's merits on
earth. If then there be any advantage at al, to those that do more truly cleave
to Christ alone, for the whole work of their redemption: and then it be evident
withal, that those which do so cleave thereunto, as that they seek to none
other at al, do it more truly than those that somewhat seek unto others:
whatsoever advantage is thereby to be had, it must needs be nearer to us, than
it is unto them. And if any there can be found, that do more abandon al other
means in heaven and earth than we do, we must pronounce against our selves,
that in that respect they also are nearer to his advantage than we. But betwixt
our adversaries and us, there is such ods in this matter, but that it may very
soon be found, whereunto the advantage does rather incline. In the doctrine of
Gods providence.
So likewise in the doctrine of Gods providence, because we are taught by the
word of God, that he only does al things himself alone; and that there is none
other but he; that al others are not at al, but only in him; that of him, and
by him, and in him are al things: therefore it cannot but be the sure side, for
to ascribe al unto God, whatsoever is done here in the world; and nothing at al
to destiny, or chance, or to any creature in heaven or earth. For as for that,
which is indeed the strongest that they have against this point of doctrine,
that so we should seem to hold, that God were some author of sin: we hold it
not, neither can it follow thereupon. We know that God is very well able to
clear himself: and we our selves (in some good measure) do see, how he may
very easily do it: distinguishing betwixt the deed it self, which is ever
good, and of God; and the quality thereof, which sometimes is infected by Satan
with evil. Concerning the worship du unto God, In the worship of God.
admit that such worship might also be given to others than God, without
offense to his majesty: and unto him in the way of worship, such things as we
think would please him well: yet is it the surer way by far, seeing we have (as
yet) no express word of God to give such honor to any other, we should not do
it; and seeing we have the word of God very directly, to do nothing to him, but
that which himself by his word requires, we should in like sort do nothing to
him, but whatsoever we see in the scriptures required, til we see some other
besides, to be the undowted word of God likewise, and to require those things
that we would be doing to him. And this latter, not only to avoid the offense
of Gods majesty: but also to avoid the mispending of our time in such works,
as are needles, or at least uncertain, while we might occupy our selves in
such, as we know to be sound indeed. In all which, the cleerer that we keep our
selves out of danger, Safer from giving offense to others.
the less shall we endanger others. For neither can those that live besides us,
take of us any evil example in that respect: neither do we leave, to the
generation that is to come, any offense at al by those our doings. But on the
other side, we have taught them by our example, to be very careful, in all such
matters, and to keep their profession from al corruption, and stein of this
world. Which surely is a singular comfort to the heart of man: who calling to
mind how he has lived, may justly rejoice, if he plainly find that he has
been so careful of the glory of God, and of the salvation of himself and
others, that in those matters he has ever indevored to avoid al offense; and
to leave unto al, a good example to do the like. Freer from those burdens.
Last of al concerning those burdens that they are wont so plentifully to lay
on the consciences of others, our Christian profession does rid us from those,
and al such like. For first as touching those traditions and observations that
they lay on al generally, seeing the word of God does therefore acquit us of al
other affairs, to the end, that we should better attend his service: we in like
sort, that would gladly do our service to God, should therefore count it a
special benefit to be delivered from al such business and works of others, as
any way may incumber our labor therein. Their confession.
Confession is a thing very incident to all that are true believers indeed: but
(so far as the word of God requires) it is only unto God, in such things as
are only betwixt God and us; and not to any other, but only when as either on
our parts we need counsel, or else on the behalf of others we need to take
away the offense, either done to the whole congregation, or else to any several
person. Otherwise to be found to reckon up our sins to another, and to reckon
them al, or else to be allowed no hope of forgivenes: neither is that by the
word of God required; and it is so discomfortable besides, that we may be
heartily glad to be rid, both of the cumber, Their poenance.
and vanity of it. Their poenance was often times very hard, very dangerous unto
our lives, or very chargeable unto our estate; and yet could never yield any
sound comfort at al: and therefore it is the greater benefit, for to be rid of
so heavy, and fruitles a burden. Their observances and forced chastity.
As for those that remain, the rules of their several orders, and the
inforcement of single life to the clergy, the one of them was so needles a
labor, the other an occasion to so great iniquity, that we may justly account
it a special blessing for to be delivered from them. In the place of al which,
if we have that, which in every kind is more agreeable to the word of God,
then have we a double advantage thereby: both for that we are delivered from
that which is wrong; and are restored (at least somewhat nearer) unto our
ancient right again. And surely (we think) we cannot be charged, but that we do
allow al those works, traditions, and ceremonies, that are by the written word
to us commended. If in other things we use the liberty that God has given us,
although that therein we may be charged, in diverse things, not so much to
aesteem of certain traditions of the church, as themselves do, or would think
that we should: yet notwithstanding, those things are of such nature, as that
seeing God has left us our liberty in them, it may thereby seem, both that we
are excusable therein, and that God would have no bodies conscience clogged
withal. So our profession yeldeth this benefit, which theirs does not, that the
ancient faith is kept more pure from other mixtures: and the consciences of men
more freed, from the venturous ordinances of humane wisdom.

5 In those things that concern their civil estate here in this life, What
benefit they might have by our profession, as touching their civil estate.
we think their advantage should be so manifest, as that themselves might very
easily epsy the same, and willingly acknowledge it, as occasion is offered. And
this do we think, they might epsy first in their own experience now; and then
by good reasons besides. Which they may see in their own experience.
The experience of these dais does plainly witness, that God is marvelous
gracious to those that profess the Gospel, and labor to reform their
wanderings thereby: especially in this country of ours, which has now injoied
these many years, the most peaceable and the most blessed time, that ever it
can be found to have had since that the land was first inhabited. And no matter
at al, though many of them that are our adversaries, are in wilful banishment
abroad, or else restrained of some part of their liberty at home. For though
themselves be not partakers of any such special blessedness: yet notwithstanding
they might if they would (as others of their fellows are) reserving their
consciences to themselves, and conforming their outward demeanor no further,
than is needful for the common tranquillity of al, and as themselves might
lawfully do (as well as their fellows) without impeachment to the substance of
their profession. And were not their frinds partakers of it, and that in large
and plentiful manner, neither could those that are of the Seminaries abroad, nor
those that are in prison at home, live so delicately, and have things at
pleasure so much as they have: much less be made the richer thereby. Insomuch
that even in their exile, and imprisonment too, the beams of this sun that now
I speak of, do reach unto them so plentifully, that they are very warm thereby;
and may not deny, that in the greatest misery that they have, they find very
good, and large tokens, that this land is blessed indeed. Then also by diverse
good reasons.
The reasons that I speak of, are especially two; one of them grounded on the
goodness of God; the other on the nature of that kind of government that we have
among us. First of the goodness of God.
Concerning the former, it is known well enough, that God is ever prone of
himself, to do good unto those, that seek the advancement of his glory. And
howsoever it be with others, that either are enemies, or but sorry frinds to
the Gospel; yet shall it surely go well with those, that sincerely are bent to
advance the same. Howsoever it be with the residu of the children of Israel;
yet the tribe of Judah shall not be wrapped in the like confusion with others;
but ever be more safely praeserved, and more comfortably governed, until the
coming of Christ himself. In other places may we see the people groaning under
their burdens; al on heaps, and clean out of order; yea; and very often, their
cities destroyed, the people slain, the country laid wast, and the princes
themselves utterly shaken out of their thrones. But (God be thanked) there is a
better, and a more comfortable show in this age of ours, among al those that
profess the Gospel: while others are exceedingly troubled in the depth of the
sea, these are in safe and quiet harbor. Let the kingdom of God, and the
righteousness thereof be chiefly regarded; and al things else will insu thereupon,
to the full contentation of our hearts desire. Then of the nature of our manner of
government.
In the nature of the government that is among us, we find two principal
things; that we are governed by one of our own nation; and that we are governed
at home in our own country. For that we are governed by one of our own nation.
For in that that one of our own nation is ever in sovereign authority amongst
us, it is a special benefit to us in these two points: first that such are
wont to govern, among their natural subjects, a great deal more mildly, and
more favorably than either others would do, or themselves either in other
places. Provinces or foreign parts of kingdoms, are ever kept more hardly
under, than those that are in the inward parts thereof, if the princes be of
one, and the self same nation with the people themselves. For princes that are
far distant from some parts of their kingdoms, are not well able to hold those
parts in full subjection, but only by rough and hard dealing. So comes it to
pass that they suffer none of themselves to be in any special authority among
them; and besides that, restrain their liberties; dry them with exactions; and
do (upon every small occasion) very sore executions on them. Of al which we had
experience, under the bishop of Rome his government here. Then also whereas it
is the manner of princes to impose paiments upon their subjects, as often times it
is needful to do, to the common use of them al; it is no hard matter with
subjects; willingly to part with such paiments, so long as they go not out of
the realm to the maintenance of foreign power, but are employed, to the honor,
and defense, of themselves at home. Whereas if our treasure were carried forth,
and then employed against our selves (as heertofore very often has been seen) it
were no marvel if the people were very loath to make those paiments; when as
even now the remembrance of such unreasonable exactions before, does make the
justest paiments that are somewhat irksome sometimes unto the people, on whom
they are laid. For that we are governed at home in our own country.
In that we are governed at home in our own country, that also is a singular
benefit; whereas otherwise by appeals, and in diverse other cases, many were
fain to go unto Rome to follow their suits. In which one thing there were two
discommodities that are very great: one to the hinderance of justice; the other
to the discommoditie of the parties besides. Justice must needs be hindered
thereby, for that there could be (so far off) no sufficient knowledge of the
matter in many cases; and very hard, safely to carry the proceedings of the
courts here, or whatsoever other records were needful besides. Again, needs
must it be to a further discommoditie of the parties, both because it could not
be, but both a dangerous, and a chargeable journey for themselves, and such as
they should need to have with them; and very hurtful unto their own private
affairs at home, by means of their so long absence abroad.

What is the inconvenience that they should have by our profession.
6 The inconvenience that thereby they should sustain, was (as I said) but very
little; and surely it is so little indeed, that hardly it may be thought any at
al. But whatsoever it is, it is meet, that it be set down, that so the
judgment of the whole, may better proceed. Whatsoever inconvenience therefore it
is, that may come unto them thereby, either it touches (as I do take it) the
cause it self, or else their person. If it touch the cause, it is either
appertaining to religion; or else unto their civil estate. No such variety of
helps with us (as they have among themselves) in matters of religion.
In religion, the truth is, that they shall not have in our profession that
variety of wais, or helps, that otherwise they suppose that they have in their
own. For with us they should have no help at al in the martyrdom,
bloodshedding, or suffering of any saint, or of their own, to satisfy the
justice of GOD for their sins; nor the good works that themselves or others
have wrought, for to merit the kingdom of God. For these things should they
have with us, no help at al? But only the sufferings, and merits of Christ. If
they think this same would be some derogation to the sufferings and merits of
saints; and a great discouragement unto al sorts, either to suffer, or to do
good works; whatsoever I could say thereunto, to show that they need not so to
gather, yet at this praesent I say no more but this; that whether this be any
inconvenience, or not, such as it is, they should indeed light upon it, if they
joined with us. So likewise in diverse other matters that hang thereupon, and are
as necessary helps thereunto, they would have some want both in heaven, and
earth, of that which now they suppose with themselves that they have. For in
heaven they should have none at al, either to help them, but only God; or to be
a mediator for them to God, but only Christ; and as for any betwixt them and
Christ, the truth is, that we should allow them none. In earth likewise needs
must they leese a great part of their direction, and comfort. For with us they
should have no other direction, either of the heathen, or of the fathers of the
church, whether it were but one by himself, or mo together; but only the
written word of GOD, absolutely, or without limitation; and the wisdom or
learning of all the rest, only so far as may be grounded on the written word.
And whatsoever comfort they have in their sacraments (having at lest five mo
than we) or else in any of their repraesentations of comfortable things, wherein
they do very much exceed, both in their images, and many ceremonies besides;
that (I say) must they be content to part withal, if they will be of our
profession; and therwithal content themselves, with the two sacraments only;
with few of their ceremonies; and with none of their images at al. In such
things as belong to their civil estate, What inconvenience they should have in
their civil estate.
the inconveniences that are, do either touch al generally; or else some one
sort of them more than others. That which touches al generally, is (to my
knowledge) no more but this, that so they might seem to be in danger, not to be
governed well, when as so they should not have any one on earth, No one head
over al.
to hold altogether in one. And indeed, if it be needful, to have al countries,
kingdoms, and nations to be holden together in one, by some one man here on
earth, that should be sovereign over al others; then it cannot be denied, but
that in our profession, that inconvenience needs must they have. That which
touches some sorts of them more than others, is diverse; some that goes
against their credit; and some that hinders much of their profit. No such
credit to themselves with the common sort.
The credit of many of them would indeed be touched, for that they should not
be able by our profession, to win that credit with the common multitude, as
they may be able by theirs; and that in two principal points. First, their
vowing of single life, and excluding al others that would not, both from their
preesthood, and from diverse functions besides of special credit. For by this
they might both have greater opinion of holiness with many; and be in better
account of housekeeping besides, as not having, as no wife, so likewise no
children, nor concubine neither, whereon to bestow such things as they had. And
it is very true, that so doing, and that in such sort as many of them did use
it, they might keep better houses a great deal, for because that that way they
were often times at much less charges, than those that are married can attain
unto; both because that diverse of them, neither had any children indeed, nor
kept any concubines, but did their endeavor truly to observe their vow; the
residu, that had either concubines at the least, or else both concubines and
children too, yet were they not at such charges with them, as marriage
requires, neither yet would they for that by their more glorious
housekeeping, they saw that they had a ready way, thereby to stop many of those
mouths, that otherwwise for incontinencie would be open against them. The
other is, that they were so diligent in outward ceremonies and observations:
some of them making a great show of holiness toward God; others, of some
terrible streightnes of life. Both which do indeed breed a great aestimation
among the common people, and are of such force, that sometimes they have made
not only John Baptist, but the Pharisees also, to be of better account than
Christ, because he used his liberty and freedom in such cases; and lived (for
such outward matters) more like to the common sort, than they. Concerning the
profit that many of them have thereby, it is very true, it would decay; as namely
with those that are either officers, or artificers that belong thereunto; or but
in prison (for their conscience sake as they call it) upon the advantage. For
indeed it cannot be denied, but that many of them do live thereby; as
massing-priests, confessors, friars, singing men, organists, waxchandlers,
image-makers, belfounders, and such like; and a great number of officers
besides. Al which should be to seek (at least in respect of their former way of
advantage) if that they should turn unto us. Their person I take to be touched
only in this; that of many they should be taken for inconstant, and such as had
lightly turned from their former profession; and it should be laid to their
charge by some, that if they were right now, then were they wrong before, and
so consequently had deceived many that hoong upon them. Which indeed could not
be avoided (would they never so fain) if any of them should turn unto us. And
so we deny not, but that al these inconveniences, such as they are would hang
upon such alteration of their profession.

7 But because I said they were little, That those aforesaid inconveniences are
very little, or none at al.

No inconvenience, to be excluded al other helps.


or none at al, it shall be good now to run over them breefly again, and to see
how it may appeer, that they need not to stand in fear of any of these. And
first as touching those that do hang on religion it self, we take it to be no
inconvenience at al, to be excluded al other helps: and nothing dowt, but that
by the sufferings and merits of Christ, we shall find the justice of God fully
satisfied, both to the avoiding of everlasting judgment, and to the obtaining
of life aeternal. No disgrace to the honor of saints, to set them by in the
work of our redemption.
Neither do we think that it can be found to be any disgrace at al to the
sufferings and merits of saints, to set them aside in the work of our
redemption: when as notwhithstanding we do aesteem of them still, both as
notable ornaments in the church of Christ; and as worthy examples for us to
follow. So likewise, that we stand in no account of help by any of them, when
as we account of al sufficiency in God alone, by Jesus Christ, we do not see,
how there can be any want thereby: and having therein a delicate feast, we cannot
in any wise have any stomak, to the scraps and crusts of a beggars poke, be the
man himself never so honest, or his poke and his scraps never so clean. And as
for any other mediator betwixt God and us, we are sure enough, that we safely
hold, that neither do we need any other: neither is there any other in heaven
or earth, in such sort qualified, as that he can be in any wise meet, to such a
purpose; nor so minded, as that he would. As for any betwixt Christ and us, we
think it great dishonor unto him, after that being very God, he has so far
abased himself as to be man for our sakes, and in that his manhood suffered
for us such things as he has: now to call his goodness toward us into any such
dowt, as to conceive that it should be needful, or at the least that it were
not amise, to have some mediator to him. And if it be not for any need or dowt
of his goodness; but only of reverence: that reverence (think we) is no
reverence at al; but a faithless starting aside, proceeding from a conscience
that being guilty, nevertheles cannot repent, and thereupon steppeth aside from
the praesence of him whom it fears. Their direction also that should wholly
rest upon the written word alone, we take it to be so very sufficient toward
that purpose for which we need it, that we need none other besides: being
already by the authority of the word it self so plainly given to understand,
that the scriptures only are sufficient to teach al truth, and to convince al
error: to rebuke al vice, and to instruct in all godliness: that a Christian may
be perfected thereby, and fully praepared to every good work. The comfort that
they have in those other helps that we have not, The comfort they have in those
other helps, little or none.
is in our judgment so very small, that it will be an easy loss to go without
it. The Apostle says, that in those things that we have already, we may
soundly rejoice; and that our joy therein may be such, as that it can receive no
increase by any other. And then in such plenty and fulness of it, how may we
find, that so small things as those may any thing eeke? What comfort is it to
match those five sacraments of theirs in such account, with the other two, that
the Lord did so expressly ordain, to be in so common use with us? And when they
have that aestimation given them, what new thing have we then by them that we
had not before? Their superfluous ceremonies, and al their images may go
together, as never brought in at the first by the word of God, but long after
by the foolish wisdom of man: the former of them (we think) a great deal more
burdenous, than commodious unto them; the other not only burdenous, but
offensive too, to themselves, and others; an evident corruption of the truth;
and a just provocation of the wrath of God. If in such cases the heart shall have
any sound comfort, it must rise out of some woorthier fountains, than either
the wisdom of flesh and blood; or else, better warranted repraesentations,
than images are. Concerning their civil estate here in this world; No great
want that we have not one general head.
first we cannot condescend to think, that there is any need at al, for to have
any one to be a general, and universal head over al. The Apostle in diverse
several places, showing how plentifully God had left his church furnished with
diverse functions, to keep al in unity of faith, and to bring to perfection
the church of Christ, so to consummate his mystical body, makes no mention of
any such: which notwithstanding might in no wise have been omitted, if there
had been any such ordained of God. Besides that, we know it is impossible. And
then our opinion is, they shall have with us no want, to miss of that, which
never men had, and is impossible on earth to be found. How far their credit and
profit should be impaired.
But as for those other things that follow (their credit, and profit, which
before they had) therein I grant, that needs must they come to some want indeed.
For if they abandon their forced chastity, and use the lawful means of
marriage; if they lay down their glorious ceremonies, and other observances of
unprofitable hardness; and whatsoever compendious practices before they used, to
bring in their commodity unto them: there is no quaestion, but that among the
common sort, they should leese a great part of that aestimation and profit,
that now they have very long enjoied. But it is no great matter, what others
think of us, so that with God, and good men we have that credit that is
convenient; and we ought not to count all that a loss, whatsoever we cannot get
howsoever; nor much stik to miss of that, which before we have wrongfully had.
As for marriage we know that the children of the world do so uncleanly behave
themselves both in their whooredoms, and in marriage also, that it is no marvel
if they cannot think that the use of marriage, and the administration of holy
things, may go together, so long as having some reverence of the one, they
measure the other, by their own most shamful abuse. But the ordinance of God is
sufficient to stop the mouths of al such, when they have said the woorst that
they can. And as for housekeeping, if being married and having children for
whom to provide, they be not able to bestow upon others so much as otherwise
they might, that need to be no grief unto them. Let every man do as he is
able, and before God he shall be discharged. The stream that issues by many
branches, must needs be less in every one, than if al joined together. So that
we walk as we are called, it is enough; there can be no more required of any.
As for outward worshippings, and voluntary streightnes in needles matters, it
is no sound credit that they get unto any. God is worshipped in spirit and
truth; and such only they are in whom he delights. Whereunto if outward
ceremonies be added, such as are needful, then are they for the other, welcome
withal: if otherwise they come, they are abominable unto him, and never can
his soul conceive any delight at al in them. Streightnes is good, and a
profitable labor, so long as it is employed in those things, that are
commanded; but if it be but our own devise, it is of no account with God. For
in such sort it is that many do strive, and yet are not able to enter in. And
then, what gain we, to be in glory among men; and to be abandoned of God?
Their gain coming in, so as it does, they need not think any loss at al, to
be without it. Judas loved the money well that he had gotten; but when he
perceived how he came by it, by betraieng his master, and consenting to shed
innocent blood, he then could have no joy to keep it; and made no account of
any loss, to throw it away. Their poor estate would yield unto them, a richer
joy, and peace of mind, than all the treasures that by such means they were
ever able to gather together. Better a great deal, to feed on the coursest
bread that we use; than on the finest manchet that is, after that once we find
it to be very full of gravel. Last of al, though it were a shame for them to
turn; yet were it none at al, but only with those, that are graceless people;
and very dangerous in so weighty a matter as this, to hold on our way, after
that once we find we are wrong. And why should the mire that lies in the
streets, be so careful to be gilded over with gold? Why should wretched and
sinful man be so desirous, never to let down his own aestimation? So God be
glorified, let us not care, what becomes of us. When as al glory belongs
to him, there is none at al belonging to us. As an ornament, that is for a
noble personage, will not become a meaner person; so glory likewise, that is
only for God, can never become the children of men. But if needs they will be in
some aestimation, can they have greater, than by acknowledging their former
wanderings, so much as needs to the glory of God, and to the helping up of
others again, who by them were occasioned to stu^ble before? So,
notwithstanding these inconveniences, which it seems they should fall into:
yet the matter being better examined, it would soon appeer, that there is no
such inconvenience in the matter, as at the first might be feared to be.
Nevertheless whether they be inconveniences or not, that do I leave unto them
to think of. Those they are, whatsoever they are; be they of what valu they
can. Such as they are, let them be for me; I wish them no greater, neither do I
labor to make them less, than in truth they are. And so consequently, if our
profession be compared together, this is the variety that they do yield, and
in these points rests (whatsoever it is) all the ods that is betwixt us. Which
being so, then it is no hard matter to judge, whether of them it is, wherein we
may better settle our selves.

Of justification by faith only, without works: no inconvenience at al to hold
it.
8 As for that one point, of having good works concurring in our justification
(of which I thought good, for certain causes, more specially to treat by it
self) it shall be good, a little more specially to consider, both what is the
effect of the doctrine it self: and what is to be thought of that same place
of Saint James, that seems to go so much against our opinion therein. Unto the
effect of the doctrine it self it does appertain, The effect of the doctrine
it self.
first to consider what kind of works they must be, that may have any thing to
do toward the justifieng of any: and then as touching the obteining of true
righteousness to us, both where we may find it, and by what means it may be
ours. The works therefore that may be available to justify any in the sight of
God, must needs be such as are in themselves a full, perfect, and absolute
righteousness: for that otherwise they cannot stand in the justice of God. And
absolute righteousness can never be, but where every deed, word, and thought is
very good; and that, in so high degree as is required: nor so neither, unles
there be a continual tract of works, words, and thoughts, al our whole life
without intermission. Other righteousness though we have never so good, yet if
it lak any one jot of this, it will not serve us to this purpose. For the law
requires, both that such things should be done with all the heart, with all the
soul, and with all our strength: and that they never depart out of our hearts, all the dais of our life. And that solemn diffinitive sentence of the law
compriseth both very breefly, when it says, that Every one is accused, that
continues not in all things that are written in the book of the law, to do
them. If now we would know where to find this absolute righteousness, the truth
is, that sometimes it seems that it might be found among men: and yet is no
where to be found indeed to our use, but only in Christ. It may seem to be
found among men, both for that the law requires such things at our hands: and
because that some there have been of special commendation for these matters.
Howbeit, the law does not require such things at our hands, as though that now
we were able to do them: but to show that once we were able, and therwithal,
how far we are fallen from our first integrity; and that God, that once made
us able, may justly require at our hands the performance thereof. And as for the
best men that ever were, there is no quaestion but al were sinners, and that
very often they daily offended. Besides al which, their good deeds also (but
few to speak of) were so imperfect, for want of true sincerity and zeal (which
never are found since the fall of Adam, in any of the children of men) that if
God should deal in his justice only, and not in the depth of his mercy withal,
not one of those works could ever be accepted of him. Hence is it, that the
children of God acknowledge their uncleannes in all their wais, not only in such
things as commonly go under the name of sin; but in all their holiness, and
righteousness besides: too high a point, for the children of the world to attain
unto. In Christ we find most absolute righteousness perfectly wrought, insomuch
that there was never found any il in him, either proceeding forth by his
deeds, or words; or at any time lurking in his secret thoughts; and whatsoever
he did or said, was ever most godly; whereunto the inward disposition of his
heart, and al his thoughts did ever accord. And so must it needs be, for that he
was both God and man. For so comes it to pass, that the infinite excellencies
of his Godhead, could not have sufficient issu in his manhood to show forth
themselves to the full; but after they had thoroughly filled al his manhood with all perfection, and all the organs, and powers thereof, needs must there be
immeasurable abundance left besides; al which does witness, his manhood first to
be thoroughly filled. So not only it might be, but also of necessity it must
be, and can be no other, but that he loved God with all his heart, with all his
soul, and with all his strength; and his neighbor as himself; that al his
deeds, words, and thoughts, were ever good, and the same in most absolute
manner, to the uttermost pitch, that the capacity of manhood was able to bear.
How to procure righteousness to our selves, to make it ours, is now to be seen.
Where first if we come to that righteousness that is of man, either of our
selves, or others, we shall never be able to do any good. For first as touching
our selves, whereas we are not able to fulfill the law, there is not in us any
righteousness at al to be had. If we could fulfill the whole law, (never
offending in deed, word, nor thought; but ever having al our deeds, words and
thoughts, fully answering to that holiness, and righteousness that God requires)
then might we stand in the favor of God, by our own good works, without any
help at al by Christ; and that by the virtue of the former covenant, commonly
called the old Testament. But if we miss any point of this, though we do our
best endeavor, yet are we nothing helped thereby in this matter; because that God
has not covenanted to accept us as righteous, for doing our endeavor therein;
but only, by fulfilling the whole law in every point, to the uttermost jot.
Neither can he in his justice accept of any other righteousness, but that which
is perfect; no more than the law will adjudge any sum a just payment, be it
never so much, though infinite thousands, so long as there wants any one penie
of that which is covenant. Then, if we seek unto others, those that now are
saints in heaven, to have the help of their righteousness, to make us righteous,
neither have they any such as the law requires, but are for that matter as
short as we; neither did God at any time make any such covenant with any of us,
that their righteousness should stand us in any such steed. Now therefore to come
unto Christ, in him only is that righteousness to be had, that can serve our
turn; and we have it in him, by none other means but only by faith. For whereas
God has made his other covenant in him (which he calls the new, and the
last, because he never means to make any mo besides) that whereas we cannot be
justified before him, by any righteousness of our own, unless we were able to
fulfill the law, and he therefore has taken this order, that his Son should do
it for us, to the end that all that take hold thereof, or rest upon him, should
have his holiness and righteousness theirs; hence comes it, both that such as
rest in him, by the virtue of his latter covenant have his righteousness theirs;
and that they are not other wais justified, but only by taking hold on him by
faith. For neither has God made this righteousness of Christ so common to al,
that unbeleevers may have the benefit of it as well as the faithful; neither
has he by this latter covenant declared himself to be of purpose to justify
us, by the good works or merits of any, but only of Christ. In other things
(without al quaestion) there is a special use, of our own good works, and of
the good examples that the blessed saints have given us; but in this our
justification with God, there is no use of them at al. How the place of S.
James may be answered.
Now therefore concerning the place of Saint James, that seems to attribute
our justification partly to our own works, and not only to faith in Christ, it
is evident, that he does not treat of this our first justification; but only
exhorts to holiness of life; and so consequently, whatsoever he says there,
it is not to be heerunto applied. Whereas therefore the apostle Saint Paul,
concludes his disputation of that matter, that We are justified by faith,
without the deeds of the law. And Saint James in like manner concludes his,
that Of works a man is justified, and not of faith only. Although it may seem,
at the first sight, that these two are directly contrary one to the other, yet
the circumstances of the places, and the intent and meaning of either of the
Apostles, being considered, it is found very plainly, that they are not
contrary, but only diverse; that is, one of them does not deny that which is
affirmed by the other, both speaking of one thing; but having two several or
diverse matters in hand, each of them holds on his own several way. For Saint
Paul is in hand with a point of doctrine, to show wherein our first
justification consists before God; and Saint James is in hand with a point of
exhortation to godliness of life, and to that end shows that our faith is but
vain, unless that it be (in some good measure) fruitful by works. Whereas
therefore although they both speak of faith and justification, yet the one does
not mean either that faith, or that justification that the other means; hence
may it sufficiently appeer, without any further discourse of the matter, that
the one of them is not against the other. If Saint James had been of purpose to
have showed, how we are justified before God, he would have showed no other
way, but only by faith in Christ Jesus: as in the chapter before he ascribes
the estate that we have in Christ not unto works, but to the free mercy of
God. So on the other side, if Saint Paul had purposed to exhort to newnes of
life, he would there have told us, as elsewhere he did, that though we had al
faith, and had not love, yet al were nothing. So for the doctrine of
justification likewise, I trust there is no such absurdity held by us, that
any may have any just cause to fear to join with us therein.

9 Those things that hinder, Of such things as hinder.
are some of them of less importance, and lightly hinder not, but those that
are of the weaker sort: and one other there is of more special force with them,
that I take to be the greatest stay that hinders those, that take it to be a
matter of conscience indeed. Those lesser hindrances likewise are diverse. For
some respect their persons especially: and one other there is, that somewhat
respects the cause likewise. Those that do most properly respect their
persons, are especially two: one that proceeds from regard of their credit,
which was somewhat touched before, as one of the inconveniences that heerby they
should have; the other that concerns certain hardness that by bodily
punishment they suppose themselves to be put unto, Discredit, especially to
those that have otherwise professed.
untouched as yet. And the discredit that they dowt would fall upon them, is
partly with all generally: but especially with those with whom they have so long
held together. For with all generally it is like to be some disgrace unto them,
for that they have al so professed; and some of them besides have accordingly
taught: but yet no such, as of right may hold them still in the course that now
they are in. For as touching their profession, it is very incident to the
nature of man to be deceived, especially in the truth of religion. Howsoever we
have a reasonable good sight in other things: yet in this, the best of us al
are far to seek, for any thing that we have in our selves to help us withal.
Neither are we only to seek heerin; but also prone to conceive best liking of
that which is wrong. But besides their own natural weakness and inclination,
they may well remember, that the former dais were such, and their own proper
education withal, that whosoever is of any reasonable consideration, will easily
pardon (for the former time) such wanderings unto them. For both those things
are very forcible to lead us away with them, whersoever there is not the
special grace of Gods holy spirit, both for to teach us a better course, and
to lead us therein. So with men, who are al of the selfsame mould, and have al
had our parts of that other infection besides, it is a very pardonable matter,
in religion to have held that course that they did: pardonable I say in respect
of our own natural impotencie, and inclination; and of those dais of ignorance
that were before, together with our education then, framed according to that
praesent time. But if we come to these dais of ours, then is the case altered
much. For now it has pleased the goodness of God, both to give them a more
plentiful knowledge of his will and pleasure; and to offer unto them a readier
direction by his holy spirit: that so they may both see, and walk the way to
his kingdom, so much the better. Which diversity of times and graces
considered, they may easily resolve themselves, that it is no discredit unto
them, to alter the course of their former ignorance, when as now, their eyes
being opened, they have found a better. In the night it is no shame at al, to
go awry: in the day time it is a fowl and stark shame indeed, to hold on that
course, and not to break it off with speed. Concerning those, Discredit to
those that have otherwise taught.
that besides their own profession, have also taught the same unto others, it
cannot be denied, but that they have done so much the more hurt: and that their
auditorie and disciples before, may charge them with great alteration now, if
so they should alter their former course. Nevertheles, neither were their
former doings to be denied their reasonable excuse, with all those that are
indifferent: neither can they now continu on their course, but that needs they
must therwithal impeach their credit, much more than if they had altered, with all that have attained unto the knowledge of the truth. For their former labors
are the rather to be born withal, for that being then persuaded that they were
right, it was their parts indeed to commend unto others, that which themselves
did think to be needful. But that now it is rather for their credit, to alter
their course (besides that other before recited, which they have common with
the rest) hence also may they gather, for that finding now, that they have done
much hurt before, it stands them upon for to amend the same so soon as they
can. The wound they have made, it were meet that themselves should heal again.
Which if they should forsake to do, howsoever it would stand with their credit,
or not, it were very like for to procure them an heavy judgment in the end.
For the errors that they should so leave uncorrected, could not but infect
many others; and likely enough so to grow on to the end of the world: by which
time, it is not to say what heaps of iniquity might come thereby. For all which
they must needs stand chargeable, before the judgment seat of God, unless
while they live here among us, they seek to amend al their errors delivered
before. In which respect Augustine has left them in his own example, a point
of great wisdom, diligently retracting, or calling bak again, whatsoever
points of doctrine he found, that he had unadvisedly delivered before; and yet
notwithstanding, as it seems, and himself in the praeface confesses,
thought no shame with it at al; as indeed it was a very good testimony of his
inward sincerity; and so consequently, as much to his true and just
commendation, as any thing else that ever he did. If it be said that in him
there was some further cause, for to retract much of that which he wrote
before, both because he wrote very young; and before he was baptized in the
faith of Christ: true it is indeed that so he wrote; but not so with all, as
leaves to them any such advantage. For the quaestion is not, whether Saint
Augustine or they had more need to retract some of their opinions; but whether
it be meet that those should do it, that have taught unto others that, which
now they find to be wrong. And though it were, yet I dowt much, whether upon
sufficient advisement any of them would so far urge the ods betwixt them
(either his youth to their years; or his imperfection before his baptism, to
their ripenes now) but that they would with good will acknowledge, rather that
it were their parts, if they have taught any erroneous points of doctrine, with
him to retract them, than to make any such allegation, that they need not do it
so much as he. Those with whom they have held hands so long together, Discredit
with some more specially.
are either the bishop of Rome, or his frinds abroad, for their advantage; or
else of their own countrymen at home, that are grown to so great misliking of
the praesent state. If it be the bishop and his adhaerents, it is but for their
own advantage, that they conceive that opinion of them, so to make up their
losses again by the help of them, when opportunity should serve them unto it.
And the more that their aestimation savoreth of it, the more quietly may they
be able to bear the loss thereof. If they be of our discontented countrymen at
home, the loss also is so much the less, for that none such will not mislike
of them, but so far as themselves are infected with the enchanted cup of
foreign power; and then, the more they are infected therewith, the less worth
is the best aestimation they are able to give. Again, whatsoever aestimation is
lost, either with foreign power abroad, or with hollow hearts at home; the same
will be much more requited with the gracious favor of their natural princes; and
with the true heart of faithful subjects; and that so much the more in abundance
of recompense, as it is of greater price or valu, to be well thought on by
natural princes, and faithful subjects, than of foreign usurpers, and close
aides whersoever.

10 The hardness that they account themselves to be put unto, The hard dealing
that they suppose is used against them.
to the utter aliening of their minds from us and our profession, rests
especially in these two points: first, that diverse of them are straightly
handled; then, that certain points of their religion (as they term it) are now
made treason. They account themselves to be straightly handled, both in the
fining of recusants; and that certain of that profession are put to death.
Concerning both which they would not deny, but that the punishment were
moderate enough, both in the one, and in the other, if either they could find
that they were so heinous offenders, as we do conceive, and charge them to be:
or else but remember, what dealings themselves have used to us, and yet do upon
less occasion. What it is that is used toward them.
As touching the former they will not deny, but that princes have authority by
the word of God, both to fine, and to put to death, as need requires. They
know that such as worship any strange God, or but intise others thereto; or
stubbornly despise the word of God, are by the sentence of Gods own mouth,
accounted worthy to die the death; and though it may be, themselves do not
see, that, by aequitie thereof, they are in the danger of his justice for those;
yet we are out of dowt that they are, and, but that we do already know, that
the blindness of man is very great, we could not but wonder that they do not
see it. Nevertheles, such is the mildnes of her majesty; and such is the
peaceablenes of these dais of the Gospel; and so cold are we (the most of us
al) on behalf of the glory God, that none are executed for any of those;
though the selfsame laws that they used against us, be forcible against them;
and, if need were, might soon be enlarged. So notwithstanding that which is
done of that kind, we think there might be done much more than there is; and
yet, that no body had any just cause to find fault therewith. That certain
points of their religion are now made treason, that so they cannot suffer as in
cause of religion, but of high treason, it ought not to be so greevous unto
them, if they consider well, either the very nature of those points that are
made treason; or but the manner of our proceeding therein. For some points of
their profession are of the nature, as that they are rank treason indeed, to all the states that are in the world; and that have they proper unto themselves, of
all the religions that are professed on the face of the earth. And this treason
of theirs that we speak of, rests especially in these two points; that the
bishop of Rome has power to depose the princes and potentates of the earth,
and to place in their rooms whomsoever he will; and that subjects ought not to
remain in allegiance to any whom he deposes, but to put on armor against
them. Which we take to be as rank a treason, as wicked an haeresie, and as open
a way to al confusion, as any that ever was heard of before. Neither does it
help them any thing, if he were indeed as they would have it, the vicar general
of Christ on the earth: for that thereby he might do no more (keeping within the
bounds of his master) but only lay their sin to their charge, and utterly
exclude them from hope of salvation: princes if they governed il; and subjects
likewise, if they went with their princes against their obedience and duty to
God. But as for deposing the one, or loosing the other from their allegiance,
in those points we are sure, that they are not only misliked of us, but of many
others besides, that other wais are well willers of theirs. In the manner of
proceeding that in this point is used against them, there are two points
likewise to be noted. For first as touching the law it self, it is in effect
but certain ancient statutes that were made long since, revived again; and not
sought unto, til that by many naughty practices, and some rebellions, open
forces, and slaughters contrived, we were of necessity rather constrained,
than easily induced, to take that order; and that for the praeservation of the
whole, both in religion, and civil tranquillity. Then also it is very well
known, that although they have been never so faulty therein, and so have justly
deserved to die: yet if they can be sorry for their practicing, and utterly
renounce and abandon the same, they stand not in such danger of death by their
former demerits, as in the hope and way of life, by their new repentance, if it
appeer to be unfeined, as well as their guiltines sufficiently prooved. The
dealings that they use toward us, What it is that they used toward us.
is first the rigor that they put us unto, when time did serve them (and yet
do, where they are able) in that they raised up persecution against us in the
cause of religion: then also their disloial and unnatural practices now, to
recover their former usurpation again. In that persecution of theirs against
us, we think they then dealt, and yet do, over-hardly with us, for that the
cause being no greater than it was, yet notwithstanding their punishment was
exceeding greevous. The cause we think was not so great, for that commonly they
persecuted us for nothing else, but either for some tradition of their own: or
else for some thing that went against the earthly estate of the church of Rome,
either in the commodity that they supposed to be du unto it; or in the
superiority that they had obtained. Howbeit, neither of these (being better
considered) will be as we take it warrant enough for the^ to touch us so near as
they did. Their punishment was very extreme, both in that they did to our
persons, by imprisonment, torments, and cruel death: and in that they made the
cause haeresie, and so overwhelmed us with the greatest reproach that could be
devised. Whereas notwithstanding, neither the traditions that the church
appoints, and whereof there may sometimes be had a very good use; nor the
profit or superiority of their prelacie, are of that importance, that they may
make them matter of death, nor haeretiks those that speak against them. When
they saw it come to that point, even common charity (me think) should have
obtained thus much of them, that neither they would have urged their own
traditions so far, nor stood so stiff to their profit or honor, but that the
life of those their brethren might have obtained some mitigation: especially,
when as the substance of christianity may stand without them, as in ancient
time it is known to have done, for many hundred years together. The practices
that they use against us now, are so well known unto al, and so greevous (I
think) to the greater and better part of themselves to hear of, that for so much
as we do not use to greeve those whom we would persuade, it is not needful here
to display them: although we take them so far to exceed in that kind, as that
lightly they cannot be over-matched, with any such like of the former ages. But
it shall be sufficient for them to consider but this one point only, whether
those practices of theirs be not so contrary to the civil state, as that they
cannot stand together; but that the establishing of the one, must needs be the
overthrow of the other. If it be so (which I think they will quikly find) then
may themselves also be able to gather, that such execution as now is done on
certain of them, is not only just, but needful also; and such as in no wise
might be omitted, til themselves do grow to better advisement. That our
translations seem so corrupt unto them, as that they cannot think that we have
the word of God among us.


11 That other hinderance of the lesser sort, that does somewhat respect the
cause in variance betwixt us, is for that they will seem to suppose (though
indeed it otherwise seems, that many of them are not so persuaded: for which
cause I have put this, but among their lesser hindrances) that, how much
soever we praetend to have the word of God to direct us in all our doings, yet,
by the means of wrong translations, we have it nothing at al indeed: and
therefore that it may stand with great probability, that so much as we swerve
from our adversaries in those our doings, so much also should it seem that we
swerve from the word of God it self. And this heertofore they have but seldom,
and more faintly alleged: but now of late, they have avouched it with greater
confidence, upon the hope of sufficient ground that they have conceived, by
those quarreling labors of master Martin, and certain others of the Seminary
at Remes about the translation of the new testament that they have put forth
in the English tongue. Wherein, how injurious they are unto us, and how far they
have overslipped themselves, although it do already sufficiently appeer, both
in the weakness of their own doings; and in the labors of others therein (as also
we trust, that so it will yet further appeer, every day more than other:) yet to
help forward the weaker (and those that are not able to judge of the toongs) by
an easier way, I would wish them to be somewhat better advised, what is the
advantage they seem to have gotten thereby, if the case so stood that we had
been overseen in our translations, in all those things that they lay to our
charge; and that they had therein attained unto the truer sense of the text. For
though so it were, yet notwithstanding if we come to the matter, that is, to
consider how weighty those points of religion are, that they would seem to
have gained thereby, although at the first they carry with them a glorious
show: yet in truth their advantage would so also fall out to be very small, both
in respect of those places themselves, and in respect of all the residu that
they leave unto us untouched by them. For if in those very places wherein they
think they have special advantage against our translations, in the substance of
the matter, notwithstanding they gain little thereby; then howsoever our
translators have overslipped themselves; yet do our adversaries get thereby no
sound advantage, in respect of the cause that they do defend. So likewise if
those places wherein they find fault with us, be very few in respect of the
rest that they leave untouched, then do they both justify our fidelity in
translating of them: and not only make themselves and their doctrines liable
unto the trial of them; but also bar themselves for ever to lay to our charge,
in so absolute manner as they do, that we have not the scriptures among us. For
unless they can show, that such as we have in such sort translated, as that
themselves do find no fault therewith, do not contain the effect and substance
of the Christian faith (which as yet I think, not one of them al did ever
allege, or lean unto for his warrant therein) it is not for them to lay to our
charge (though in all those points we had been deceived) that we have not the
word of God among us, so far as it is needful, for our full instruction in the
faith and doctrine of Christ. Therefore to let pass whether we have rightly
translated or not, let us a little enter into the consideration of the matter
it self, and see what advantage themselves may hope to have gotten thereby.
Which course if we take, What it is, that they lay to our charge therein.
then do we find that in their discovery they do charge us two principal
wais: first, with diverse things more specially by name, in the first twenty
chapters; then with a pak of others together (as matters belike of less
importance) in two of the last. We are charged by name, first of al with our
inward meaning that of purpose we translate the holy scriptures falsely, in
favor of the haeresies, that they suppose us to hold, in the first chapter:
then with our open and plain dealings, correspondent (as they say) to so il a
meaning, in all the rest, unto the end of the twentieth chapter. And hitherto the
method is good, and the order plain: and therefore have I set these things down,
as they stand there. In that which follows, it seems that it was not the
authors purpose to digest them into a method, but only to make recital of them,
as they came to hand. Nevertheles, that to us both it may appeer more plainly;
what they, or we have gained, or lost by our translations, in the pith or
substance of religion; it shall be good for both parts, to lay them forth in
some plain and easy method. Those doings of ours therefore that they charge us
withal, do almost al concern our translations: but in some points they charge
us, for to force the text is self. In our translations they find some faults
that concern the words alone: and some that concern the matter too. That which
concerns words only, is, that we turn the ecclesiastical use of them, into
their original, but yet profane signification. Unto which the fourth chapter
wholly, and a good part of the sixth, are allotted. As that we call schism,
division; heresy, sect; catholic, general; priest, elder; preesthood,
eldership; idols, images; church, congregation; sacrament (in some places)
secret; bishop, overseer; baptism, washing; and some others. That which
concerns the matter rather, is, that so we translate, as tends chiefly to
the overthrow or discredit of diverse points of their profession: and partly to
the maintenance of some of our own. Those points of their profession, that we,
as they say, go about to overthrow, do most of al concern matters of doctrine;
but some of them tend to the direction of some part of our life here. Those
that concern matters of doctrine, are of two sorts. For in some they may seem
to seek the advancement of religion only: in others, to advance the power, and
excellency that is in man. Those that concern the mere advancement of religion
only, partly concern Christ himself: and partly, a few other holy things.
Those that concern Christ himself, are about his descending into hell, and are
but two: one, that we seem to impugn that article of the common Creed; the
other, that we seem to disallow of one special work that they suppose was done
thereby, that is, the bringing out of the fathers, which were as they think, in
Limbo patrum, which we by our translations seem to discredit, both which are
handled in the seventh chapter. Those holy things that I speak of are partly
sacraments indeed; and partly certain other ordinances, which they would have
to be of that account. In those that are sacraments indeed, they chiefly
mislike in the one, that we partly take it clean away; and partly deprive it of
the efficacy thereof, making it worse, or no better than those of the old law:
in the other, that we take away the blessing, and do not acknowledge the real
praesence that they imagine. Whereof the former of these is in the fourteenth,
the other in the seventeenth chapters. In those other holy ordinances, which
are, poenance, confession, orders, and matrimony, the fault that they find
with us, is chiefly this, that in our translations, we do not allow them the
name and dignity of sacraments; and in some points vary from them, even in
the very nature of them: as appears in the 13.14.15. and 16. chapters. Those
that tend to the advancement of the power and excellency, that is in man,
further than we can think convenient to go with them, partly concern the
righteousness of man generally; and partly some things that are more proper to
the church alone. Unto the righteousness of man generally it does appertain,
that first, as touching man, they hold, both that in him there is freedom of
will, as in the tenth chapter; and that he is able, both to merit favor, as in
the ninth; and to satisfy for sins, as in the thirteenth chapter: then, as
touching God, that it is seemly for his justice likewise, to reward those works
of man for the woorthines of them, as appears in the eight chapter. Those
that concern the church, do partly concern the whole together: and partly one
special function in the same. Those that concern the whole together are but
two: one, that by other words we so open the name of the church, that thereby we
seem to go against it, chapter the fifth: the other that we allow not of that
authority, that they do think it should have in ordeining, or giving credit to
certain traditions, as delivered from the Apostles, as in the second chapter.
Those that concern that one special function, do concern the office it self;
and a certain power thereunto belonging. The office it self would they have to
be a mighty preesthood in all respects, as in the sixth chapter. And therefore
are they urgent to have, both the terms accordingly given, as the name of
priest, to the person, chapter the sixth; and of sacrifice to the deed, chapter
the seventeenth: and to have altars left them whereon to offer, as in the
seventeenth chapter likewise. That one kind of power to this office belonging,
is to help out of purgatory, which we seem over much to discredit, when as
those places whereon they build, we so translate, as though they meant no such
thing: which matter is handled in the seventh chapter. Those that tend to the
direction of some part of our life here, are but two: one concerning
worshipping: the other concerning marriage. Concerning worshipping, they
contend but for the parties, whom they would have worshipped: and for the manner
of worship that they would have given unto them. The parties are, first the
saints; and among them especially the blessed virgin, then also images: whereof,
this is handled in the third chapter, that other in the eighteenth. The manner
of worship, which they would have given unto these, they apportion forth by
distinguishing betwixt two kinds of worship, whereof the one they call Dulia, the
other Latria, both set down in the nineteenth chapter. Concerning marriage, it
is no more, but that they allow, neither preests, nor other votaries, to
marry: and mislike of our translations, for that they leave it free unto them,
as appears in the fifteenth chapter. For the maintenance of our own opinions,
that which they do lay to our charge, is but very little, and rests only in
these two points: first, that we labor to establish putative justice (as they
term it) against the true inhaerent justice, as they imagine, chapter eleven;
then, that in like sort we seek to establish (as it pleases them to term it)
special faith, vain security, and only faith, chapter twelfe. Concerning the
text it self, they charge us with adding thereunto in some few places, as may
be seen in the twentieth chapter. Those others that in the titles are wrapped up
together without naming of any one of the^, are these: first certain other
trecheries as they term them, both haeretical, and worth the observation,
chapter the one and twentieth; then also certain other faults that are, as they
say, Iudaical, profane, mere vanities, follies, and novelties, chapter two and
twentieth. But these two latter charges are not of any such importance, but that
if we could agree in the other, I think we should not long have any great
disagreement in these.

12 So are these the principal faults, How little cause they have, to find such
fault with our translations.
as touching the matter, that our translations are charged withal, according as
the principal author himself in his discovery has gathered them. Wherein
although it must needs be, that diverse particular points are in the book it
self, that cannot well be specified in so brief a collection of the whole:
yet, both these are enough to condemn whatsoever translations are so false as
these praetend; and, if these will not serve, those other by-matters that are
left behind, are much more unable, and never need to come to the muster. And
therefore I thought it best, to rip no further into the particulars, leaving
that course to the answerers only: but rather to make the whole trial (that I
do mean) by those very points, that themselves have thought worthy the place
of best account for this matter. And first I must needs protest thus much, that
how greevous soever the things are, that they lay to our charge in these our
labors: yet for my part, I can now more quietly bear it (and think that others
do so besides) for that themselves begin to translate (howsoever) the
scriptures likewise. For though they have not done it, without their
affections, but so favorably as they could on their own behalf; and with such
limitation besides, as laboreth to chase men away overmuch from the reading of
it; and lastly, not without great bitterness against our translations, and us,
and against the truth it self: yet, notwithstanding all this, and whatsoever
else might be laid thereunto, now that themselves do also translate, let them
find fault so much as they will. We shall better find out the matter betwixt us:
and their own doings, for the most of ours, shall witness with us. Hitherto it
was thought by diverse, that we might have been charged with great matters
indeed: now they begin themselves to epsy, that there is little else against
us, but quarrel of words. Now as touching the things they lay to our charge,
and first as touching our purpose, or inward meaning, in translating so as we
have translated, it is good for every one to judge the best in all such causes:
and not to be over-hastie, in so secret matters to give forth our judgment,
when as none other, but God alone, can thoroughly know the bottom thereof. As
for us, notwithstanding that we are undowtedly persuaded, that in these
matters, those our adversaries are very wrong: yet do we make no dowt at al,
but that diverse of them mean very well, and do not wilfully go about to
suppress, or yet to resist the open truth. The same persuasion if it may
please them to conceive of us, we think that they may safely do it: and that it
is not to be thought any more, than both the truth, and charity too, do justly
require. It were meet that displeasure were on al parts laid aside: for the
wrath of man can never accomplish that which is right. Concerning the matter,
two things there are that I wish to be considered of them: whether those points
for whose sakes they account our translations so faulty, be not as yet in
controversy betwixt us; and, whether these points are of such importance, as
that if we should be faulty therein, they might then account the residu of the
scriptures by us translated, to be no part of the word of God. That they are in
controversy betwixt us, it is so evident, that I need not busy my self to
declare it: saving only that one point, of Christ's descending into hell. For as
touching it, there is no quaestion at al betwixt us, whether he did descend or
not, so far as is sufficient for to deliver us thence: but only as touching
that manner of his descending, which they have set down, without sufficient
warrant of the word of God (as we do take it) not refusing the trial thereof by
any sound translation whatsoever. As for the rest, there is no quaestion, but
that as yet they are in quaestion betwixt us: and that we are in conscience
persuaded, that our selves have gotten the surer side, both in the points that
are in controversy; and in the truth of the text it self. If it be so, then
must they needs first know thus much, that they leave the way as open to us, to
lay to their charge, that in dissenting from us in their translations, they do
it to maintain their own opinions: as it is unto them, so to aesteem and judge
of us. During which time of controversy betwixt us, if needs they will so
resolutely overruled the case to their advantage, though to some of their own
fellows they may seem to have done stoutly, and well: yet so many as are
indifferent, would rather like, that first they would obtain the principal
matters, before that ever they invade as their own, those other advantages that
hang thereupon. Then also, themselves will not deny, but that it is the duty of
every one, to take so good heed as they can that they give no offense; neither
to the Jew, nor to the Gentile, nor especially to the church of God: and, if it
be the duty of al, then is it the duty of translators also; especially those,
that have to translate the word of God. For the more needful that any thing is
to the use of man, the more must it be of al frequented: and the more that it
is frequented of al, the more hurt does come, if there be any danger. Fire and
water, are so needful, that we cannot be without them: and therefore there
comes much hurt thereby, when they are not warily handled. The word of life is
much more needful: unto the fountain of living waters, all the children of God
daily resort, to draw to their use as need requires. If therefore there should
be any danger therein, either in the thing it self, by other corruption mingled
withal; or for that there is not sufficient provision made about it, for those
that should resort thereunto: it cannot be avoided, but that much hurt must come
thereby. So our translators are not to be blamed, if having their choice, they
forbear those words, out of which the deceived may suk the maintenance of
their wrong opinions: and use such others, as cannot so easily be mistaken by
any. Sure we are of this, that the holy Ghost uses no such speech, as may
justly give offense unto any: and that none can interpret the holy scriptures
aright, but by the selfsame spirit, by which they were written at the first.
Which spirit, whosoever follows, he can never find in his heart, wittingly to
lend forth his pen, to that which may tend to advance any error or il: and if
he could, yet should he find no help in the text (being rightly taken) to bear
him out. Insomuch, that so long as these controversies are undecided, or at
least, until they shall find more substantial grounds to establish their
conceived opinions, than to our knowledge they have any as yet, we cannot but
think, that whatsoever want of supportation there is to those opinions, the
same is rather in the text it self, than in our translations. Concerning the
other, that is, the validity of those points of religion, or whether they be
of that force, or necessity rather, that for their sakes so hard a censure may
proceed against us, that we have not among us the true word of God: I would wish
them to consider withal, that holding so much, as themselves do know, and will
grant that we do, it will be very hard to devise, how the same might be brought
to pass, unles both we had the word among us, and highly did aesteem of the
same. Them selves I trust think no otherwise of us, but that we are persuaded,
that we fully hold together with them, whatsoever is catholic: if it be so, the
matter is not so very great, if we vary somewhat in these. Though a man want
an arm, or a leg; yet notwithstanding he may be a man. Let every one take heed
to his head: if it be wanting, the rest is nothing, though there want not a
joint besides. And could but some of them be (yet at the last) as indifferent,
as many of them have long been greevous against us; could they now be so
ready to take in good part what we have done well, as long as they have been to
take to the woorst, whatsoever left them any such advantage: I cannot see, how
it should come to pass, but that laieng that greater part, which themselves
acknowledge we have translated well, unto that less wherein they suppose we have
done il, they might see our well doing so far to exceed that which is il, that
they need not think it so great a matter (the truth of the text sufficiently
saved) more quietly to put up at our hands the one for the other: especially
when they themselves come in to translate so late as they do; and have the
benefit of our former labors. For such (of al others) it does not become to
come in so late with such controlling, that should have been with the foremost
at the work themselves, to have seen to the orderly proceeding of it. The
stronger cause we think should have following the greater effect. And so,
notwithstanstanding all the corruptions, that diverse of them lay to our charge,
not after a niggish, but in liberal manner: yet nevertheles, so many as shall
more advisedly consider the force of that charge, shall not (we think) find any
great cause to stand in dowt the rather for it, whether we have the truth of
Gods word among us, or not.

That these are not so clear on their parts, that for their sakes only we are
to be denied to have the word among us.
13 As for any more special treatise of these matters, as it belongs not to
the course that I have taken: so is it likewise, both a needles thing in it
self, being so often, and so thoroughly done already by many others; and such
as is rather to be left to those that are to deal in the work it self, than to
be by a scanter handling encumbered by me. Nevertheles, if it please them, with
any indifferency to consider of them, what great cause have they, either to
mislike so much as they do, of that which we do hold therein; or so inexorably
to urge their opinions to us? A man would think, that there were some passing
ods: else, that they would never be so earnest in it. Lymbus patrum.
That which they hold of Lymbus patrum, is it so consonant to the word of God,
or else but so constant in it self, that they may look to draw al men with
them, to be of the same opinion therein? Was it ever yet taken to be so perilous
a point of doctrine, for a Christian man so to build upon the satisfaction that
Christ made on the cross to the justice of God, that he might in no wise
account it to be in force for those that died in the faith before, as well as
for those that after succeeded: especially when as we are plainly taught, that
he was yesterday, and today, and the same for ever; that he is the lamb slain
from the beginning of the world; that there is no condemnation to any of those
that are in Christ; that God is not a God of the dead, but of the living; that
by the sufferings of Jesus Christ the fathers also of old were releeved, and by
his stripes, made whole; and many others such like as these? The sun being
gotten to the height of the heavens, or shrunk downward toward the midst of
the afternoon, or gotten almost to the very setting, does it not yet
notwithstanding give a clear light unto the east, and to al other coasts of the
world besides? And shall not the death and suffering of Christ, though it were
long after the world began, be available likewise to those that are gone
before, that lived and died in the faith of Christ? An atonement we know there
was before, for that God dealt often times so favorably with man: and the same
was grounded only in Christ. And what reason can there be given, why they make
it to stand with the justice of God, that before the time of that satisfaction
actually made, he should have any favor toward them here in this life, as well
as to us: and yet deprive them of that fruition of it after this life, which
they grant unto us? And if their Lymbus be so uncertain, what need they then to
that end urge any such descending of Christ? Christ's descending into hell.
That in such sort he descended into hell, as is fully sufficient in the justice
of God, both to acquit the fathers before, that otherwise should have come
thither, and to be a discharge unto us that afterward live, it is a thing that
is fully believed of us al: if they will go further, and set down with
themselves, in what manner also he did it, further than the scripture does
warrant, can they not determine therein for themselves, unless they carry al
others likewise into the same adventure with them? Real praesence.
As touching their doctrine of the real praesence, knowing that already we do
believe, that the faithful receiver, receives not any bare sign, but, together
with the outward sign, whole Christ, God and man, his sufferings and merits;
may not this be accounted sufficient, unless we go further, to have his
praesence in the very manner that they have imagined: which notwithstanding was
not agreed on among themselves, but very lately? The fathers before the
incarnation of Christ could not otherwise receive him; as also themselves grant
that they did not: and yet notwithstanding was that sufficient for their
salvation. And, so long as they show no further reason than they do, why such a
kind of receiving of Christ might well be available to their salvation, and not
unto ours (especially when as otherwise we find but one communion of saints,
as well in profession, as in state of salvation) why may they not be content to
admit, that this kind of receiving which we profess, is so much as they need
to require of us, or else that it failed in the fathers also that were before
the incarnation of Christ? Their other sacraments.
As for their other sacraments as they term them, admit they might be
vouchsafed that honor in some account among them for unities sake, if needles
they would have them so to be called: yet what reason is it, that they should
so overrule the judgments of others likewise, as to account so basely of them,
unless in such needles and by-matters, they do in althings agree with them?
Freedom of will, Freedom of will and merit of works.
and merit of works, were indeed jolly matters to puff us up higher in our own
aestimation: but we can be proud enough without them. Sufficient for us it
ought to be, that we may be saved: let us leave the glory thereof wholly to God,
and take no part thereof to our selves. Since the fall, there is not in man any
inclination at al unto good that is of that kind, saving only in those that
are regenerate: and that which is in them, is not ever continual, but sometimes
very rare, and weak likewise; and ever is the special working of God in us. And
though our works that are done in faith and love, have reward promised unto
them, and so consequently by promise du: yet are the best of them, on our
parts, or so much thereof as is ours, so unperfect and weak, that by right they
could (otherwise than by merciful acceptance) deserve nothing at al. And when
we are sure we have most absolute redemption, fully and wholly in the merits of
Christ, what need we trouble our selves further to search out, whether that we
may not think, that our good works have in some sense merited also? Traditions.
Traditions so far as they do not swarve from the written word, or are to
aedifieng, we do not mislike: otherwise we think we have already so much to do
that is expressly commanded unto us, that we think they hinder us much in the
service of God, Their preesthood and sacrifice.
that incumber us with more. The preesthood and sacrifice of Jesus Christ we
account to be of that sufficiency in themselves, and so proper to him alone,
that we cannot yet be persuaded, either that we need, or that we may, set up
any other: but that we must needs bewray either our great ignorance in the one,
or that we have a very slender, and over-base an account of the other.
Otherwise, if these will not serve, needs must we be more out of hope to get any
good, by those that are brought in by them. Howbeit, his preesthood continues
forever; and his sacrifice once made, is a full satisfaction for all: so that we
need never be careful for any thing else to be joined withal. As for their
purgatory, Purgatory.
and the silly helps that they have allotted thereunto, we can neither stand in
fear of the one: nor, if we should be distressed by it, can hope of any relief
of the other. Of their purgatory we cannot stand in fear, both because the
scripture does not tell us of any such place; and besides that, it lappeth up al
forgivenes of sins, and remembrance thereof (to al believers) in the death and
sufferings of Christ; and that in so full and comfortable manner, that it leaves
to us no dread at al of any such torments to be afterward suffered for sin by
any of us: and because it is so evident to all the world, that it was at the
first an heathenish opinion among the gentiles, before they came to the
knowledge of Christ; and has been since used in the church of Rome as a
compendious way to get in money, and that beyond al measure and mean. The helps
that they use to releeve the souls that they suppose to be afflicted therein,
can do little good, both because that nothing can be any satisfaction for sin
to the justice of God, but only the death and sufferings of Christ: and because
that those helps of theirs (besides that they are very weak in themselves) are
not ordained of God to be the means to apply the same unto any; but only the
faith of the parties themselves, wrought in them by the holy Ghost.
Worshipping of saints and images.
In their worshipping of saints and images, there is some ods: howbeit we
cannot find the better of them both (their worshipping of saints I mean) to be
any better than plain idolatry: so often at least as it goes beyond that honor,
which in the second table and fifth commandment is appointed to fathers and
mothers; and reaches unto the worship which in the first table, and in the
first and second commandments, is before taken up unto God. As also we think
themselves should perceive, that, if they do it as a duty that they ow unto
them; or as a thing that saints do like of; or to get some benefit at their
hands: in all these points they do but wast and leese their labor, for that they
ow them no such duty; neither do they like, that they should offer them any
such, nor yet can help them in those things that they crave at their hands. And
as for their images, neither are they blessed of God, to yield any such fruit
as they require at their hands; neither should we so maintain the dignity of
our creation, being ordained to repraesent the person of God, to al these his
creatures, if we should so servilely abase our selves to stoks and stones, when
as the Lord has made us the head over them, not them over us. Marriage of
preests.
Concerning the marriage of those that are of the clergy, seeing that both the
scripture allows of it in all estates and degrees whatsoever, and that God in
his wisdom ordained the same: and seeing that the practice of al antiquity
has had it in continual use: it is a thing (we think) more plain, than that we
may allow any controversy thereof to be made. If this will not serve, let them
but turn bak their eyes to themselves, and but make an indifferent search how
fowl and manifold pollution has broken forth among them, since the time that
they have abandoned marriage from their orders: and, that one thing (we think)
will be sufficient to teach them, that heerin they were far overshot, and have
found it true in themselves by experience (that which before they might have
learned at the mouth of the Lord) that generally it is not good, for any estate
of men to live unmarried; when as thereby they so quikly brought al their orders
so fowl out of order. Inhaerent, putative justice: only faith.
As for their inhaerent justice, and that (with some distempered affections, as
it seems) they charge us to allow of none other, but that which is putative,
and only faith, the substance of this matter being before specially touched, it
is not needful here to say any more thereof. So these are (in effect) those
great matters, for whose sakes we are charged to have translated so corruptly:
and so consequently (in the judgment of some) that we have not the word of God
at al among us. Whereunto would they ad but this little correction, that for
these matters we have it not to their good liking, thereunto could we be content
to yield: and therwithal think, that we still must want al authority of
scripture for the^. Otherwise they have sufficiently found (even in the ruins
of their own usurpation and doctrines) that we have the scriptures among us: as
also not many of themselves do charge us, but only for these, and for a few
such others besides, of such like, or less importance.

Of departing from the church.
14 That other hinderance that is of more special force with them al generally,
is that they have a certain persuasion, that they can not join with us in our
profession, but that so they should depart from the catholic church. Which
thing indeed is of such importance, that if it were true, it were not for any
that loved his own salvation, or the glory of God, to join with us in our
religion. For there is but one church, as also there is but one faith: and
whosoever they are that depart from either of both, they cannot be of sound
religion, whatsoever it is they do profess. Therefore to examine this matter a
little, first we may do well to search out, what it is that makes them to
think, that, if they should reform their profession so far forth as we have
done, they should then depart from the catholic church, and so consequently
deprive themselves of aeternal life: then, how the same opinion of theirs may
be amended. Concerning the former, What it is that makes the^ to think that we
are departed from the church.
me think that the principal cause of this their persuasion is, for that they
do not rightly gather, neither what the church it self is: nor yet what it is
to depart from the same. And then, if the groundwork it self be wrong, it is
no marvel if the building that be set thereupon, be awrie likewise. What they
imagine to be the church.
The former of them is, that in the aestimation of the church, they take not
unto them a right trial, to teach them which is the church indeed. For the
levels that they commonly use, are especially two: one taken out of the first
foundation of it; the other, the success that since it has had, to this
praesent time wherein we live. Out of the foundation of their church, they go
about to establish the certainty of it, by two conveiances: one, from Christ,
unto Peter; the other, from Peter unto them. For first they imagine that Christ
made Peter the chief of al, and his general substitute here on earth: that he
should be, under him, the head of his church, and have the feeding of all that
are his. Out of this they gather, that those only are the church, that
acknowledge Peter next under Christ, to be their chief and principal head.
Then do they conceive, that Peter was disposed to leave this primacy with the
church of Rome, and to those that should be the bishops thereof: and that for
that cause he left other places, and came unto Rome, and was bishop there five
and twenty years. And thereupon they think they may safely gather, that
whosoever is not under the church of Rome, he also is none of the church of
God. These conveiances do we take to be of very little force: and so
consequently, no matter of substance to assure us of the truth of this matter.
For first that Peter had any such praerogative or primacie, we find it not set
down by Christ himself, or by any of his Apostles: which notwithstanding must
needs have been done without quaestion, if it had been true, being, as it was,
of such importance. Then, as touching any assigment over from him to the church
of Rome, and to those that should be the bishops thereof, neither do we find (by
undowted authority) that he ever did it: nor, if he had at any time done it,
yet that he had liberty so to do; and that God would ratify his assigment.
But I mean not to enter into that discourse, sufficiently handled by many
others: neither is it needful, when as our adversaries themselves do of late so
much mislike that part of their groundwork, that none of them al (of any
account) can find in their hearts, to build so much as their own credit thereon.
The other, which stands in the success that their church has had, How they
ground upon the success that they have had.
is indeed of greater force to such a purpose: but yet notwithstanding, such as
being rightly considered, yields no assurance to the matter that we have in
hand. The success which the church of Rome has had, rests in two principal
points: in continuance; and consent of others. By continuance I mean, that it
has not fallen bak again to Paganism, or heathenish vanity; neither yet stepped
aside to the sect of Mahomet, as the Turks, and many others have done: but
ever continued after a sort in the profession of the faith, since the time that
by the Apostles it was delivered unto them. Which surely is a very special
blessing of God: an evident work of the holy Ghost: and a very good cause, why
al those that wish well to the Gospel of Christ, should have the ancient church
of Rome so much the more in reverence for it. So comes it to pass, that they
have not only had, after a sort, a continual succession of bishops, and
teachers: but also have in some manner praeserved, and hitherto maintained both
the word, and the sacraments, that Christ himself did leave unto us. The
consent also that they have had, has been very great: yet not ever alike, but
sometime more, than at some other. So long as it kept the faith undefiled; and
was earnestly bent to advance the kingdom of Christ; and would in no wise
break, but carefully maintained the unity of the church: so long they had the
consent of all that dwelt about them, or by any means could have any dealing
with them. And that, not altogether for the antiquity, and dignity of the
city (because it had been of great continuance; in a flourishing estate; and
was now the imperial seat:) but also, even for the sincerity of the faith, and
for diverse excellent gifts, that God had powered upon that church in plentiful
manner. But after that (the former zeal being abated) it began to fall in love
with earthly things, and to break the peace of the church to advance it self,
then began many to let down their former good liking of it: all the East
churches generally; and many of the better sort in the West likewise.
Nevertheles, even then also, the greatest part of al Europe, and some others
elsewhere besides, did cleave unto it: partly of themselves, for the former
dignity of the place, or for that they perceived not how they began to slide
away from the sincerity of their profession; but especially, because of the
great power that the church of Rome did after obtain, from which they saw not
how to withdraw themselves, without some praesent displeasure, or danger. Hence
comes it, that they have had their doings allowed, and their opinions
confirmed not only by many several persons of best account: but also by
Provincials abroad, and by general Councels at home: themselves, or their
frinds, in these latter ages, ever bearing the sway in them both. So that
indeed the church of Rome has had such success in these parts of the world
among us, that (to our knowledge) there has not been the like for earthly
pomp any where else. Yet notwithstanding, this also is over weak, whereupon to
set that building of theirs: needs must it have a faster ground, else can it
never be able to stand. Although therefore, that in their own opinion their
church has had a special foundation; and although it has had indeed such
success since, as themselves do still imagine: yet notwithstanding, when they
point us unto the church, and undertake to show us undowted tokens thereof, then
we allow not that they should think to put us over only to this, and show us
no better tokens than these. We do not deny them to be of the church: but we
allow not the bounds of the church to be so taken in; nor these things to stand
for sufficient proof, that any such praeeminence belongs to them.

That they conceive amiss of us, when they imagine that we are departed from
the church.
15 The other point that seems to yield some part of the groundwork of that
persuasion, is for because that they do conceive, that to be a departure from
the church, which is none indeed, after that once the truth is tried.
Concerning which matter, it shall be good to consider these two things; how this
kind of persuasion does grow, and what inconvenience this one point of
mistaking does breed in the end. How this kind of persuasion grows.
This persuasion grows most of al by the means of our adversaries: then also,
by some of our selves too. Those adversaries of ours, by whom it comes, are
lightly the most cunning, and most learned of them: who seeing themselves to
have some advantage, if they can win us to acknowledge, or others to believe,
that we are simply or in all things departed from them, and make another
peculiar church of our selves, earnestly labor, even at the first, to obtain
that advantage. Hence comes it, that both they do so busily urge that point,
and would have neither us, nor others, to make (at al) any quaestion of it: and
so readily apply to that sense whatsoever they find in our writings, that does
import a division betwixt us. Those on our part by whom it comes, are (most
of al) those that are most zealous: who being much moved with the manifest
corruption that the adversary part maintains, and with their unreasonable
thirst of innocent blood in the quarrel of religion, are by that occasion
carried so far sometime, that they do not ever speak and write in so sensed
manner, but that when they acknowledge that division that indeed is, and ought
to be, betwixt them and us (so long as they stand in such sort as they do) they
may seem to acknowledge that we are altogether divided: that we are a distinct
visible church from them; and they but a synagog, in no sense appertaining to
the visible church. Whereas notwithstanding by the whole course of al our
writings it is clear again, that we do not sunder our selves from them, nor
them from us, but only in those points that are in controversy betwixt us: and
for the rest, agree together, and acknowledge likewise, that in those we are
one. But because that whenever we speak of the division that is betwixt us,
we do not therwithal show, how far we agree, thereupon it seems to them that
we can easily be content, to be altogether abandoned from them, and to have no
society at al with such a people. So comes it to pass, that as they (upon
the advantage) disclame in us, and bear us in hand, that both they and we
cannot be the members of any one, and the selfsame church (as indeed in some
sense we cannot, and in that sense is by us acknowledged) so we likewise seem
unto diverse to be in that point of the selfsame mind with them, and as fully
to disclame in them as they do in us; and as absolutely to hold, that both
sorts of us cannot in any sense or construction be members of one, and the
selfsame body, especially of that which is ancient and true, and the catholic
or apostolik church, as notwithstanding we are generally. The inconvenience
that this mistaking does breed in the end, What inconvenience comes thereby.
is very great, and hurtful to the cause of religion: but some branches thereof
there be, which are common to both parties; and some that are proper to either.
Common to both are these two: the inward heart burning, and grief of mind that
is betwixt us, one toward another; and bitter contentions ensuing thereon,
whenever occasion is offered. And touching the former, we need go no further,
than to appeal, every one to his own conscience. For there shall we find, both
that we have an inward grief, one toward another: and that we think we may
(and ought) maintain the same in the cause of religion that we have in hand.
Our contentions are so apparent, and known unto al, that al Christendom, is
witness of them. Which also are for the most part so bitterly handled, as if in
religion we were utterly sundered, one from another, and had no point of faith
at al, that were common betwixt us: to the increase of variance, among our
selves; and to the great hinderance of many of those that are without, and
otherwise might be won to the Christian faith. Proper unto our adversaries it
is, that, if it do fall out in the end (as I trust it will anon appeer) that
there was no such cause in us as deserved, so to be abandoned from the church
of God: then abides an heavy judgment for them, that have been so bold as to
set down, that we are not of the church of Christ; and therwithal, for to power
forth, whatsoever curses they had, against us. And no marvel, if they stand in
such danger in the judgments of God, when as (being so) they sin very
greevously both against God, and against their neighbor. Against God, for that
they fight against his truth; and abuse the place of justice, that he has
given them: against their neighbor, for that so they discourage, and terrify
many of the weak ones that are among us; and among themselves, are the only
cause, that many of the simpler sort that belong unto them, are persuaded that
we are none of the church, and behave themselves accordingly toward us. Then
also, if it should be so (as we hope it will appeer) that we have a better title
to be of the church, than they themselves have: then would their subtlety and
fearcenes return to them again, and conclude upon themselves, that if we do not
belong to the church, much less do they. Proper unto us are two others
likewise, if we at any time suffer them to make such an absolute division
betwixt us. For so comes it to pass, first, that by consenting so far with
them in this error, we also must stand chargeable before God, for whatsoever il
fruits do spring of the same: ratably at the least, so far as the proportion of
our fault requires. Then also, we bring our selves to needles trouble, for
that it is great probability with them, that so we make our selves answerable
for to find out a distinct and a several church from them, from which we
descend, which has continued from the Apostles age to this praesent: else,
that needs we must acknowledge, that our church is sprung up of late; or, at
least, since theirs. Wherein, although they could never be able, either to
condemn us, or else but to justify themselves: yet is it more than we need to
give them; and more, than (we think) they use well, when they have it. Therefore
to conclude both these points, as I said before, so say I again, that it is no
marvel if diverse of them think, that joining with us they should utterly depart
from the church, so long as they do wander so far, both in determining what the
church is, and what it is to depart from the same.

16 For amendment whereof, A surer way how to find out, who are of the church.
it must needs be a good and a ready way, more truly to learn what the church
is indeed: and what is the undowted departing from it. Concerning the former,
it shall be needful, not only to consider what the church is in the whole: but
also what it is in the several parts, that is, who are the true members thereof.
Concerning the whole, there is a way, which if we take, we shall never be able,
plainly to find out, the thing that we seek: and yet notwithstanding determine
therein the very truth. Again, there is a way, which if we take, we shall quikly
find, that which is not only true in it self; but also carries such a light
with it, as that easily we shall be able to perceive, the truth of the thing
that we have in hand. A way that will not serve our turn sufficiently.
The former of these is, when as we go about to compass those things, that are
beyond our reach, and cannot come under our capacity. As namely, when we labor
to find out the church, in heaven, either in the secret election of God; or in
the glory, whereunto it shall come in the end: or on earth, by the largenes of
the bounds which it has, being spread al over the face of the earth. For though
it be very true, that that indeed is the true church, which is chosen from the
beginning, and which shall be glorified in the end: yet are not we able, by
either of those to find out, who they are. For we cannot look into the secret
purpose of God; nor, in the end it self, epsy the end before it come: we must
either have better tokens than these, or else can we do no good at al. So
likewise the earth is so very large, that we are not able to reach forth our
knowledge unto the outmost bounds thereof: and so consequently can never see,
what faith it is that is there professed, nor so much as whether there be any
people at al, that there inhabit. If therefore we should take such a course, as
that we could not (in our conscience) set down with our selves, that we knew
the church, until we could get the view of the whole: then could we never
resolve our selves, but must needs remain uncertain so long as we live. And in
this, our adversaries have (as it seems at the first) a just occasion
ministered unto them, to turn aside their adhaerents eyes to the church of Rome,
being such, as for neernes and evident show that it has, may easily come under
our knowledge; and, for that many others hang thereupon, carries a special
credit withal. Howbeit, although they have rightly espied the inconvenience on
the one side: yet have they not sufficiently helped the same on the other. They
see in deed what is the disease: but the medicin that they give for the same,
will not serve. Therefore now concerning that other way that will serve our turn,
The other way, that will plainly show forth what the church is.
we have the direction already given, as in many other places of scripture
besides, so namely, by a special place of Christ himself, at his last going up
to Jerusalem, a little before the time that he suffered. At what time being
disposed, to leave that point decided unto them, before he should leave them,
he first asked his disciples, what opinion others had of him: and, when that
came short, what was their own persuasion of him. Whereunto when Peter answered
in the name of himself and the rest, that they believed that he was the
Christ, the son of the living God, he plainly declared, that that was the true
profession indeed: that it was not an opinion, or conceit of man's wisdom; but
was given unto them from his father in heaven: that it was the rok, and plot of
ground, whereupon he would build his church: that against it the power of hell
should never praevail: and that by it they should open and shut the kingdom of
heaven to all the world; setting at liberty from the danger of hell those that
believed, and binding up al others to aeternal perdition. In which place we
have to consider, what is the faith that is so commended: and what commendation
is given unto it. But because to the praesent purpose that we have in hand, we
need but the former of these two: therefore in the other we need to consider no
more but this now, that there is so special commendation given unto it, as that
it cannot be, but that whosoever are of the same, they must needs be of the
church indeed. The faith it self that is there professed, rests in two
principal points: one, that he was the Christ; the other, that he was the son
of the living God. Of which two, the latter is, with so full consent, received
of al, and so clear from al manner of dowt among us, and every point thereunto
belonging, that it again may for this time be set aside, though otherwise in it
self, it be as needful as the other. And so to find out what is the sense of
the former of them, that is, that he was the Christ, it is as much to say, that
he was the anointed, or that very savior, which before was promised unto them.
In which his anointing there are two things to be considered, that he was
appointed, and made able, to be our savior: and so consequently, appointed, and
made able, to be our priest; our prophet; and king. Our priest, to make a full
atonement, betwixt God and us, to the purchasing of aeternal redemption in
him; and to the attainment of the same: our prophet to teach us, whatsoever is
expedient for us to know: and our king, under whom we have to live, until by
his government he shall bring us thither. Out of which we may safely set down,
and that by the authority of Christ himself, who they are that may be
accounted the church of God: that is, the universal assembly of those, that
profess the Son of the virgin Marie, to be the promised savior; by God
himself, both ordained and enabled to save, so many as do believe in him. Or,
if we go more specially to work, those that rest in Jesus Christ alone, for the
whole work of their salvation: in his preesthood, for the full satisfaction of
the justice of God, both to escape hell, and to come unto heaven; in his
doctrine and scepter, to bring us unto it. So comes it to pass, that
whersoever there be any countries or nations, that do profess this faith in
Christ, those must we needs acknowledge for to belong to the church of Christ:
as on the other side, whosoever they are, that have not this faith, that those
are none of the church of Christ, whatsoever thing else they can praetend. So
that the church, of which we speak at this praesent, is that universal
assembly or gathering together of al those, whether congregations, or several
persons, in any part of all the world, that believe in Christ, or profess the
same that we call christianity or the Christian faith. Concerning the members,
it may sufficiently appeer by this that is said already, who they are that do
appertain to that account: whether they be whole congregations, or several
persons that come in quaestion. For whosoever they are that profess according
to the pattern aforesaid, those must needs be very good members: and those that
swerve from it, whether more, or less, are in like sort to be accounted, to be
in the like proportion departed from the sincerity of the better sort. So that
in any wise we must take heed, that in this account we measure not the goodness
of any member, either in the secret election of God, for that it is unknown
unto us; or in the framing of the conversation to outward sobriety, or holiness
of life, wherein we may be very soon guiled: but only that we now seek out,
those that are visible members alone, measuring the woorthines of every
member, by the profession before set down, until that once having found out the
truer members of the church, we then examine among themselves, who they are,
that more sincerely answer their holy calling.

How to find out, what it is to depart from the church.
17 Having so found out what it is to be of the church, and who are the visible
members thereof, now may we with less labor epsy, what it is to depart from
the same: especially, if we take heed of this, that we use no other tokens for
to teach us, when we are wrong, than only that same whereby we have learned when
we are right. For as a sea mark on the shore, or a beakon upon the hill, does by
one, and the selfsame labor teach them both: so the same likewise that before
is set down, is sufficient to declare unto al, that do walk by direction
thereof, who they are that are right; and who on the other side do wander amiss
out of the way. We have therefore, first to resolve our selves, that for this
matter, we will take our aim thereat: then to seek out by direction thereof, who
they are that depart from the church. That we should so resolve our selves, we
have as good reason as can be desired: for that otherwise we may be deceived;
but never if we take our aim by this. The reason, How we may therein be deceived.
that otherwise we may be deceived, is, for that al things else whereby others
do commonly judge what is the course that they hold, are nothing else but
either points of less importance, if they do belong unto this: or else are of
some other kind, either directly contrary to it, or diverse from it. If it be
of the former, that is, appertaining indeed to sound religion, and yet
nevertheles not so material, or very needful, but that christianity may stand
without it: then, if any man depart from it, although that therein he do
withdraw himself from the truth; yet may not that be accounted any departing
away from the church, so long as he keeps unto the substance of
christianity. As for example the truth is, that of all that were born of women,
Christ only was without sin: and yet, for our sin that he sustained, and for
which he had to satisfy the justice of God, he was heartily touched with the
horror of death. Nevertheles, if any there be that cannot be as yet persuaded,
but needs he must think it more honorable for the blessed virgin (yea and for
Christ himself, that took flesh of her) to have been without sin, and
thereupon for his part do rather think, that by special praerogative she also
was praeserved from original corruption; or else do but dowt it to be somewhat
reprochful to Christ, that being, as he was the son of God, he should be so
much afraid of death: although that heerin he do indeed depart from the truth
in those two points, or at least in his weakness come short thereof, yet because
that neither of them is so much of the substance of religion, but that
christianity may be acknowledged, where nothing else but these or such like
are wanting, therefore may we not by any aequitie account any such to be out of
the church, that holding al things else besides, only sticks in some of
these. So likewise, if any should depart from that which has been for a long
time received, and yet is either against the truth of religion, as the
worshipping of images; or but more than the scripture teaches, as the altering
of the sabbath, to another day than was wont to be observed: as in the former
he were so much the rather of the church of God; so in the latter, he were not
to be condemned as no member thereof, holding al things else sincerely. For
though our selves do like the altering of the sabbath new, from that which was
observed of the Jews, unto the day of Christ's resurrection: yet must we needs
grant with all, that it was somewhat more than needed, and that if it had stood
as it did, it had not been against the Christian faith, which is so much the
rather to be noted, for that not only diverse of the ancient fathers in times
past have been, but we also at this praesent in like sort are, a great deal too
hasty to condemn in such cases, all that do not fully accord in all points with
us. In these cases therefore, or any such like, whosoever will condemn al those
to be none of the church, that are not fully persuaded as we are therein: he
might soon condemn many such as might after be found to be the children of
God, when himself and his fellows should be excluded; and besides that, in the
mean season commit, an uncharitable part toward those his brethren, and that
which might grow to an il example for others to follow. The reason that we
cannot in any wise be deceived, How we may be able soundly to judge in this
matter.
if we cleave to the other, hangs on two principal points: the one, that
there is no other way to the kingdom of God; the other, that it is the only
faith that is common to al, that unto this kingdom do appertain. That there is
no other way than Christ alone, it is in it self so very clear, that it
needs no further help. Out of it likewise must the other very necessarily
arise, that seeing there is none other way but it alone, therefore so many as
belong thereunto must needs be of the same profession. In which respect, that
which is the substance of this profession, Catholic.
by diverse of the fathers of old, has bin termed catholic, and yet is so
called to this praesent day. For howsoever Christian churches have at al times
varied in certain by-matters concerning their profession; yet that which is the
very substance indeed, have they ever professed together, so long as themselves
abode in Christ: and thereupon acknowledged each other for catholics,
notwithstanding the diversity that in those other points they still maintained.
As also we see in the law of arms, that howsoever countries and kingdoms are
divided among themselves; yet therein do they agree together: notwithstanding
the diversity of government, or laws; and notwithstanding the mortal enmity,
that otherwise may be betwixt them. For even so is it in the church of God:
very much divided, in many matters of less importance; but in the substance of
Christian religion, which we term the catholic faith, agreeing together. And as
it is in men, and al other creatures that God has made, that generally al are
like unto the kind of which they are; but otherwise varieng among themselves:
even so is it in this likewise, all that are Christians holding together that
which is the common faith of al, the material and essential points of Christian
religion; and yet very often greatly divided in other matters thereunto
appertaining, but not of the very substance indeed. Seeing therefore that the
substance of Christian religion, and the very effect of the whole, is to rest
in Christ alone, for the whole work of our redemption (in his preesthood, for
our atonement; in his doctrine, for all our wisdom; and in his kingdom, for
our obedience) whosoever they are that hold the same, they hold without
quaestion the catholic faith: whosoever they are, that diminish of this, or put
to any other, they dowtles do that, which has not ever been in the church of
God, nor whersoever it has been spread, and so conseqvently, that which in
neither of these respects, nor in any other, can truly be aesteemed catholic.
For whatsoever it is, that is catholic indeed, it must needs have the
testimony of al ages, and of al Christian churches: which only agrees to that
which is taught by the written word. And whatsoever is not such, that also (to
abide by) is not catholic.

Who they are that depart from the church: not we, but they rather, so far as
there is any such thing betwixt us.
18 Now to find out, who they are that depart from the church (but so that we
incumber our selves no further, than to the praesent business that we have in
hand, does appertain) the quaestion stands betwixt the adhaerents of the
church of Rome, on the one side; and us on the other: they plainly affirming,
that we are departed from the church: we denieng it, and not only claiming to
have a lawful interest therein, but also pleading a continual possession, that
we never were, nor yet are departed, nor excluded from it. For the plainer
demonstration whereof, we are to justify; that, of departing from the church,
there ought to be no quaestion at al among us: but only, of the members thereof,
who they are, that more truly answer unto their calling. No departing from the
church in either of us.
For we both acknowledge the holy Trinity, and three persons therein, of aequal
glory; and those three to be but one, and the selfsame God: we both
acknowledge, Jesus Christ to be the only begotten son of God; and to be man of
the virgin Marie: we both acknowledge, him to be the promised savior; and that
there is no redemption in any, but only by him: the canonical scriptures we
both acknowledge, to be the undowted word of God; and likewise observe those
two sacraments, that God ordained to be in perpetual use among us: we both
acknowledge, that it behooveth Christians to mortify the flesh, and to walk in
holiness of life, that one day we shall be raised up again, and stand at the
judgment seat of Christ; and, so many as have done well, shall go to fruition
of everlasting joies, but all the rest to everlasting pains. So that, as
touching the profession of the faith generally, both sorts of us do so far
agree, that neither of us may justly account the other, to be none of the
church of God. And therefore as it was very il done, of those that first urged
such a separation; so likewise those that seemed so easily to accept thereof, as
though that both sorts of us could not be of one, and the selfsame church
generally, did unadvisedly likewise. For whersoever this co^munitie of
profession is, there whosoever make such division, they are not able to
justify their doings therein, because that so they make an utter separation,
whereas notwithstanding in general profession they are reasonably well united
together, But in sincerity of religion, a manifest departure is found in them.
and are not sundered, but in some special matters of controversy. But now if
we come to the consideration of the several members heerunto appertaining
(whether they be whole congregations, as national churches, or but ordinary
parishes; or whether they be but particular persons) therein may we be bold to
determine, that both are not right; but that one part, whosoever it light on,
must needs be wrong. For though by their outward profession generally, we are
both sorts to be accounted of the church: yet in such diversity as is betwixt
us, we cannot both sorts, be true members of the same. If they be right, then we
are wrong: if we be right, then they are wrong. Such is the diversity that is
betwixt us, and of so material and needful points, though both sorts be of the
catholic church: yet is it not possible, Why in them.
for both sorts to be catholic members of the same. Whether of us therefore it
is, that is wrong, is now to be seen. Where first as touching them, we cannot
account them to be catholic members, for two principal causes. First because
that they do profess and maintain diverse opinions, that very directly go
against the Christian faith that generally they do otherwise hold. For they do
not content themselves only with Christ, nor with his word, nor with his
sacraments, or at the least not so fully as we: but set them up other mediators
in heaven; other doctrines, and sacraments on earth. And though it may be they
will say, that they have not done these things in such sort, or not in such
measure as we would seem to charge them withal; yet can they not deny, but
that they have done it, and do it still, more than we: and then, if the
quaestion lie betwixt them, and us, whether are the truer members, needs must
we in that respect, praevail against them. The force and power of his
anointing they impeach very much, when as they do not content themselves with
him alone, whom the father appointed, and made able to serve our turn. Then
also, because they do so earnestly impugn the truth of religion in diverse
points: and so bitterly persecute the persons of those, that either profess
religion sincerely; or join not with them in all their corruptions, and
usurpations. For so doing, we can make no other account of them, but that they
have suffered themselves to be made the members of antichrist, or man of sin,
that sits in the church of God, and insolently confounds al at his
pleasure. Concerning our selves, Why not in us.
they will not charge us, but that we rest in Christ alone, for the whole work
of our redemption: seeking none other to be mediators, or to help forth, with
the atonement betwixt God and us; coveting none other doctrines, than those
that himself has delivered unto us; neither yet giving over our obedience to
other observations, than such as the written word does teach us. But the chief
thing they charge us withal, is for that we receive not more, than Christ, and
his Apostles in the written word has delivered unto us: as the supremacy of
the church of Rome; worshipping of images; their miraculous praesence of Christ
in the sacrament; ordeining our service to the common people in a tongue that
they do not understand; prayer to saints, and for the dead; and many others
such like as these. Concerning which, the truth is, that we do not receive
them: and the reason is, because they are not catholic; but devised, or crept
in of latter time, and not professed in all ages, nor of al Christian churches
generally. In which one point they do unto us a very great, and a double
injury: both for that they deny us the name of catholics, that nevertheles
receive the catholic faith, both in the whole, and in every point; and for that
they take that name to themselves, who mingle with the catholic faith, many
inventions of their own devise, and sufficiently hold not much of the truth,
that they do profess. But when we do constantly hold all the holy scriptures
without exception; and al such sums of the Christian faith, as have been
gathered by the fathers of old, and now are authentik in the church among us
(as that which is called the Apostles creed, the Nicene likewise, and that
other of Athanasius) and whatsoever the churches agreed on together among
themselves in the four first general councels; and last of al, whatsoever at
any time since, has been ordained by the church of Rome, or whomsoever else,
that is not contrary to the holy scriptures: and they on the other side, have
mingled together with the catholic faith, with the truth and substance of
religion, which in all ages, and in all churches has been professed, many other
novelties besides, utterly unknown, not only to the scriptures, but also to the
fathers of old, and yet notwithstanding hold many of these, as fast as they do
any thing else: let any indifferent man be judge, whether they or we be better
catholics; and then, if it please him, whether they are meet so resolutely to
judge of others, that are so far overshot themselves. So for this matter we
resolve our selves, that we are no several church from them, nor they from us;
and therefore, that there is no departing at al out of the church, for any to
depart from them unto us, nor from us unto them. All the difference that is
betwixt us, is concerning the truer members, whether they, or we, may be found
more worthy of that account. In which point of controversy we dowt not for to
praevail against them: and as for the other, we allow no such quaestion to
stand betwixt us.

The conclusion.
19 Whereas therefore the case so stands betwixt us, that it were no benefit or
advantage to us in any respect, to join with them in their profession, but mo
wais than one great inconvenience, and they on the other side by joining with
us should reap great benefits, and have no inco^venience withal; whereas also
such things as have hitherto hindered many, by better advisement may soon be
found, to be of no such force to stay the^: what could there be on behalf of
the common cause more seemly, and in respect of their own benefit more
circu^spectly done, than so to tender the unity and peace of the church, and
their own salvation withal, as that they would no longer stand out against the
truth but lay down their affections now, and willingly submit themselves to the
kingdom of Christ? The example of others.
The magicians of Egypt, being set on by the king, willingly did (for a
certain time) what they were able, against Moses and Aaron, to the discredit
both of their persons, and of the just cause that they had in hand: but
afterward, being touched somewhat nearer, they persisted not then, but yielded
themselves, and gave glory to God. If any of these have been set on, to do as
they do, it will not acquit the cost in the end: if they have done it of their
own accord, it is not like to escape unpunished, if they see not unto it
betime. The Ephramites were of the people of God, and yet revolted away from
the law, though still they held (after a sort) the profession thereof: and having
so done, they so continued a long time after, as a wanton, untamed, and unrulie
heifer; notwithstanding all the most earnest warnings, that GOD by his prophets
did give unto them. But yet is it recorded of them, that at the length they
turned again, smiting upon the thigh, and acknowledging that they had committed
very shameful things. If with Ephraim they have so erred and stepped aside,
pity it were, but they should be as ready, with him to repent and turn
again: especially, seeing that they have greater provocation now, than ever had
Ephraim before. The Jews that put their savior to death, and utterly renounced
whatsoever salvation was offered by him, did notwithstanding yield from among
them very shortly after, three thousand persons at once, that diligently
inquired of the Apostles what they should do, and immediately thereupon were
baptized likewise. And it is not to be denied, but that many thousands of these
also are already come in: but yet is it pity (if it might be amended) that
any one of them al, should so far have crucified the Lord again, and yet be so
long before that he do repent him of it. S. Thomas an Apostle himself,
nevertheles dowted very much for a time, of the resurrection of Jesus Christ:
and would in no wise believe, the others affirming the same, but upon very hard
conditions, and such as agreed not with the nature of his resurrection. For
needs would he find the badges of mortality, in his glorified and immortal
body: or else he would in no wise believe. But when Christ condescended
thereto, and for the time, by special dispensation, allowed those badges of his
mortal nature, in his immortal body now, reteining for the time his wounds: he
quikly forsook his unbeleefe, and forthwith acknowledged him to be as he was,
his Lord and God. These also believe not that the Gospel of Christ is risen
again: they suppose it is either manifest haeresie, or, at least, but some
newfangled doctrine: the ancient, Christian, and catholic faith, they can in no
wise think that it is. The conditions also that they require, are as hard as
the others (for many of them:) such as are very seldom found in the most
glorious truth of Christ, but commonly haunt the corruption of faith, and those
beggarly rudiments of the world, the doctrines of men. But whereas God has so
disposed and ordered this matter, that they may find it sufficiently witnessed
by such things as are in credit with them, Antiquity, and Universality;
Fathers, and Councels: the harder dealing that it is, still notwithstanding to
resist this resurrection of Christ, in the Gospel restored unto us, and so
plentifully as it is confirmed; the more is it to be wished, that our
unbeleeving Thomasses also would in some good time take up, and at length
acknowledge their former unbeleefe, and glorify God in this day of his
gracious visitation. Which if they do not, What hurt it is if they do it not.
but, notwithstanding all the callings of God still persist in their own
stubbornes against the word, or but in their light aestimation of it: though
therein they may so content their own pleasure, yet the issu of it being better
considered, what good things they leese, and what il they get, both in this
world now, and after in the world to come, it will be no hard matter to find,
that the pleasure they have now thereof, will not countervail their loss in the
end. For if we go no further, First in this world.
but only to this, that thereby they hinder themselves of much good knowledge;
and of a very comfortable freedom of spirit to serve the Lord, which as yet
they never had, and now by the Gospel is offered unto them: what benefit is
there in all the way that they have chosen, to recompense their losses only in
these? When light and grace in so special manner is offered unto us, the goodness
of God does not only therein tender it self to serve our turn, but gives us
also to understand, that we stand in special need thereof, though our selves do
not see it. And then, what folly is it, to remain in darkness, when we may have
light: and in the bondage of sin, when we are offered to be enlarged, and set
at liberty? What oversight likewise, so much to dwell in the opinion of our own
sufficiency for those matters, that we epsy not our selves to want those
needful graces, when from the Lord himself we are so plainly told that we do?
To want these things is a greater loss, than to want whatsoever is in the
world besides: but, not to take them when they are offered, and so to want them
in the midst of plenty, is not only a bare loss in it self; but such as
calls for of others a just reproach, and nourishes up in their own hearts a
gnawing worm, that, when once her teeth are grown, will give them no rest, but
vex them still with irksom thoughts, for that having had so many, and so fair
opportunities, yet notwithstanding have missed them al. Where these things
want, how is it possible that GOD should be glorified? And then to what purpose
is it they live? Nay, how can it in any wise be avoided, but that God must be
very much dishonored, and very highly offended by such? And then how much
better had it been for them, never to have lived at al? Is it so easily granted
of al, that to be cast into a dungeon, and there to be in continual darkness, in
filthy corners, with noisome vermin; or to be in greevous thraldom by
captivity or bondage, under cruel and violent tyrants, is indeed a very
greevous and miserable estate: and yet can it be so hardly believed of these,
that, to abide still in their palpable darkness, when now they may have light
enough: and to remain in the filth and slaverie of sin, from which they may in
like sort be delivered, is not so lothsom and greevous as it? Are the senses of
the outward man so quik in the one; and does the inward so little perceive the
like in the other? Whether they perceive it or not, it must notwithstanding
needs be true, that whersoever such graces of God are so little regarded, there
are they for the most part withheld from those despisers: and where they are
withheld, or kept bak from them, there is nothing clean or sound, but
altogether polluted and il, in the sight of God and man. So do they miss of
that, which would have made them very good instruments in the church of God,
to the glory of God; to the aedifieng of others in the way of godliness; and to
their own aeternal comfort: and they procure by the judgments of God, to be
given over to a reprobate sense, for so little regarding their visitation; and
thereby to become in the end, altogether closed up in their ignorance, and
indurate in sin, or powered forth to al naughtines, and that with greedines,
and without any feeling. In the world to come what immeasurable glory and joy
they miss, Then also in the world to come.
what confusion and torments they fall into, it is not for any tongue to
express, nor heart to conceive. And the woonted judgments of God do plainly
declare, that in this life he gives some taste of his wrath in the world to
come. The unthankful Jews that long before had been the people of God, were
notwithstanding at length cast off, and utterly given over, as to great
loosenes, so likewise to the depth of distress, because they had so little
regard to the word of life, that was offered unto them. As also the whole world
before, was (by a strange and mighty judgment) utterly consumed, man, woman,
and child, rich and poor, bond and free (eight persons only excepted) for that
they harkened not unto Noah, that called them to repentance again. Of which
sort since many others might be alleged, this matter is so abundantly witnessed
unto us, that no man may dowt, but to see it once performed indeed, that it
shall be easier for Sodom and Gomor in the day of judgment, than for those that
so plainly refuse the word of life offered unto them. And it is no marvel,
though being so patient in other things, yet notwithstanding he cannot but
punish this, in the children of unbeleefe, in most sharp and rigorous manner.
The greatest kindness that ever he showed to the children of men, bestowing on
them his only son, to be so lightly esteemed as it is, and to be had in so
great contempt as it is with many: how can it but boade some marvelous
judgment that is to come upon the offenders, and such severitie, as in
proportion may something answer so great iniquity?

20 But thou O Lord, A prayer for them.
most merciful father, art he alone, that is able to help in this distress. As
for us, we have eyes, and see not: Our weakness acknowledged.
we are chained up in the snares of death, and cannot get out: and being, as we
are, but flesh and blood, we are not able to understand those things, that do
appertain to the kingdom of God. We are in much like case, as Adam our
progenitor was, when as yet but his body only was made, and had not yet a
living soul breathed into him: at which time though he had eyes, yet was he not
able by them to see; though he had ears, yet was he not able with them to
hear; though he had an heart, yet was he not able by it to understand; and
though he had al other parts of his body, yet had he not the use of one of
them al, because that yet he wanted that living soul, that could rightly use
them. Or in much like case as Lazarus was, the fourth day dead and laid in his
grave, chained up fast in the power of death, having no ability at al to come
forth, or to help out himself, until he was called forth by the word of thy
power, and withal had power given him to come. Or as Nicodemus, not yet
regenerate, or born again: who, though otherwise he were learned, and wise, yet
did he not see (any thing at al) such things as belong unto thy kingdom,
neither yet was able until he was born again from above. A way made unto
petition
But as we are (in truth) thus far to acknowledge the want that is in us, and
to take the confusion thereof to our selves, as the proper, and only portion,
that is du unto us: so do we again to our comfort remember, that thou art able,
to make our blind eyes to see; and to give us power to come forth unto thee;
and to make us able to understand whatsoever belongs to our peace. And this
do we find not only in thy holy word; but also in thy mighty works: finding
it plain by long experience, that thou often have wrought, and daily do work
such things as these, where it pleases thee. When as thereby it comes to
pass, that ever thou have had, have at this praesent, and ever shall have a
seed of those that glorify thee, and in some measure study to advance thy
honor on earth. The petition it self.
First therefore giving unto thee al possible thanks for all those thy servants
whom thou have lightened with the knowledge of thy truth, and brought into the
way of life (which either have been heertofore, and now are past their
pilgrimage here, and triumphing with thee in the heavens; or else do live at
this praesent, whersoever they are in all the world, desiring also to be with
thee, and to see the glory of thy kingdom) we most humbly beseech thee to
gather together to that assembly, al those thy servants that yet are to come
in, and wander as yet in their own natural blindness, until it please thee to
visit them with thy grace from above. O most gracious and merciful father, hold
on that course with the children of the new Adam now, that thou did with the
first Adam before. As thou have given them eyes and hearts, and al other parts
of the outward man, in that they are born the natural children of men; so we
beseech thee to breath into them the living spirit: that so their eyes indeed
may see, and their hearts understand, not only the things of this world, but
also whatsoever is expedient for them to know, belonging to the world to come;
and that all the powers both of their bodies and souls together, may (in some
good measure) serve to such use, as is seemly and meet for those that do
appertain unto thee, whom by adoption thou have vouchsafed to make thy
children. And thou aeternal and everlasting son of the father, who by the word
of thy power quickenest whomsoever thou will, al those which thy heavenly
father has given thee, and never suffer one of those to miscarrie; we
beseech thee to loase al those that are thine, from the snares of sin and power
of satan: that they may effectually hear thy voice, and be therwithal so
quikned by thee, that being set at liberty from the snares they were in, and
lieng bound in the grave no longer, they come forth at thy call, and do the
service. Thou also most glorious and mighty spirit, the fountain of al our
regeneration, by whom unles we be born again, we can never see the kingdom of
God, and by whom we are sealed to the day of redemption (so many as are by
aeternal election thereunto ordained) we humbly beseech thee, that as thou
know who they are that are thine, and in what time they are to be called: so
it would please thee, so to work in them by thy power, as that whosoever are
yet but the natural children of Adam decayed, and yet (in the secret purpose of
the Godhead) do appertain to the kingdom of God, may when the time of their
refreshing does come, be so renewed and framed by thee, that they also may
plainly understand the doctrine thou teach, profess the same, and frame
their lives in some good measure agreeable to it; and therein to their comfort
find, that they also are sealed to aeternal life. O blessed Trinity, it is
not in us, to reform our selves. For both the enemy is stronger than we; and
still detaineth us under his power: and we likewise, have no desire to be freed
from him; and besides that, have a natural loathing of the way of life. But
unto thee O Lord, it belongs, and to thee alone. Thou art able, both to
deliver us from the bondage that we are in; and to make us both to covet and to
love to come to the freedom of thy children, and to spend the rest of our
days therein. We pray not, in this respect, for the world (though otherwise we
beseech thee still to continu thy wonted goodness to it likewise, and to all the
children of men) but as thou have more specially ordained those whom thou have
chosen out of the world, to be a peculiar people to thee, to have now the
knowledge and fear of thee, and after to see thy glory in heaven; so we humbly
desire that now thou will so effectually call them in thy good time, and
sanctify them here in this life, that after (by the course that thou have
ordained) they may likewise come to life everlasting. Seeing that the son is to
be had in honor of al, and it is not well with the members, until they be joined
unto their head, in both these respects, we beseech thee make haste to unite
them together: that the son may have to sanctify him, and to speak of his holy
name; and that his members here on earth, may so far enjoy the peace and
comfort, that in him thou have provided for them. Grant this we beseech thee
most merciful father, thorough Jesus Christ thy son our Lord: to whom, with
thee, and the holy Ghost, as of right appertains, be ascribed al power,
thanks, and glory, for ever, and ever, Amen.

FINIS.

