EPIGRAMS.

by H. P.

Mortui non mordent.



Imprinted at London by R. B. and are to be soulde by John Helm at his shop
in S. Dunstans Church-yarde, 1608.

Ad Candidum Lectorem.
Dives Arabs aurum, gemmas dat laetior orbis,
Et queis confines Indus et Americus:
Terra benigna quibus Thesauros diuite vena
Effundit; larga dant opulenta manu.
At storilis Gens ista mea est, fulgentis Eoi
Lumina, quam solis nulla bear solent.
Quae tamen indigno concessit Jupiter almus,
(Nulla licet tanto Iudice digna), dabit.
To the vngentilized Censurer.
IF my ill-tuned Rimes content the wise,
Whose deeper judgments I desire to please:
Let not the ruder sort be so precise,
That (Critticke seeming) cannot censure these.
I write not to the rusticke rablement,
Nor fawn upon the curious kind of men,
But hold it more then bootlesse labor spent
To beg their poor applause: nor care I then
If such repine, whose envy cannot hurt,
Though like a raging sea they foame their dirt.
EPIGRAMS.
1 Et manibus pedibusque leuis.
LAys of lighter metal is composed
Then has her lightness till of late disclosed,
For lighting where she little comfort feels,
Her fingers there prove lighter then her heels.
2 Sic vos non vobis vellera fertis oues.
Heard you with what surpassing rich array,
Rutellus ruffled on S. Georges day?
It Was pity, more then spite it should be known,
That none of all those garments were his own:
So that in stead of what report did scatter,
He simply was non-suted on the matter.
3 Virescit vulnere Venus.
Susan's well sped, and wears a velvet hood,
Why not? more like, her breeding has been good:
It Is reason she should rise once in her life,
That fell so often before she was a wife
4 Qui quondam Lixa, Lanista.
It Is said that Whittington was raised of naught,
And by a Cathath many wonders wrought:
But Fortune (not his Cat) makes it appear,
He may dispend a thousand marks a year.
5 Sic ars diluditur art.
Mark but the semblance of Fucatas face,
How to the life her picture does excel:
For lovely feature, sweet and comely grace,
(Surely the Painter has done wondrous well):
But here is the doubt, (both faces made by Art)
Which you would choose to be of best desert.
6 Quam Partus Ventrem sequitur.
Ralph has an Office in reuertion bought,
But rues the time that yet no wit has wrought:
Content thee (Ralph) for wealth to let it pass,
Thou art no worse fool then thy father was.
7 Qualis vita, finis ita.
Leno lies sick and to the Doctor sends,
who bids him look for what he least intends:
And being often to make his will requested,
Refuses, saying, he will die detested.
8 Grata superueniet quae non sperabitur hora.
Persuade not Romulus to take a wife,
That is to wedlock sworn an enemy:
And ever vows to lead a single life,
Which he accounts most honest purity.
Besides a thousand reasons that constraines him,
Amongst the rest it is known whose wife maintains him.
9 Iuueni quid curua senectus?
Silla has got a wife that is wondrous old,
It Is true: he wooed her only for her gold:
I hope her maids are young and serve for hire,
Which is as much as Silla does desire.
11 Quisquis sibi quaerit Egenus.
This observation seems (quoth Fisco) strange,
Why marcha^ts walk in Paul's and knights th'excha^ge:
Belike the one seeks those their debts should pay,
Whiles the other goes to crave a longer day.
12 Spoliatis arma supersunt.
Graund Captain Cosmo lives of coin bereft,
Whose Page was wont his purse and coin to carry:
Now neither Page, purse, coin, nor ought is left,
Save what he is forc'r to pawn at th'ordinary.
Thus squint-eyde fortune partial in her gifts,
Puts men of note sometimes to needy shifts.
13 Nec vultus indicat illum.
Dicke in a raging deep discourtisie,
Called a lawyer Mere Necessity
The more knave he? admit he had no law,
Must he be flouted at by every daw?
14 Plus Moechus omnis amat.
Peace, weep no more (sweet Sisse) and all is well,
Say I had found thee false think thou i will tell?
No by this iron and steel, (which plainly shows it,)
An honest Wit-all is no Gull that knows it.
15 Latet anguis in herba.
Hilus has hid himself this year and more,
Not in respect of fear to show his face:
But for herashly in his humor swore,
The Sessions House should no more sift his case:
Would you the truth more plainly understand,
He has been twice before burnt in the hand.
16 Habet et musca splenem.
Mopsus maintains that banckruptship less mooues him,
Then such a slave as for his wives sake loves him:
Though well the weazill woteth to his grief,
He cannot live without her friends relief.
17 Fallentem fama fesellit.
Priscus gave out he went to Prester John,
Presuming to have purchased three for one:
But see what luck his travails did beguile,
Priscus has taken the diet all this while.
18 Sictandem vincit inermis.
Fell-foughten Furio has now met his match,
And is severely sent unto the gayle,
For blurting at Mas-Constable and his watch,
Who bids away with him, admits no bail:
As who shall know he is now the kings Peacemaker
That was the last year but a kennell-raker.
61 -- habet sua Castra Cupido.
Faedus has got his neighbors wife with child,
And yet has not her husbands bed defiled:
For why, the plot within Moore-fields was wrought,
From whence a place was for that purpose sought.
20 Sapiat qui vendit oportet.
Ianus does jesting use Equinocation
Alluding it, as doubtful words of Art,
To hide the couller of his occupation,
But to the devil he bears an honest heart.
21 Est mollis flamma medullas.
Cucullus has disguised his former feature,
And like Pithagoras transformed shape,
Is now (me thinks) become another creature,
Half french, half english, (pox on such an Ape
That imitates all fashions far and near)
Though against the hair he buies them never so deer.
22 Parturiunt Montes Murem.
Dego will draw and stoutly stand unto it,
Upon the utmost of his words brauado:
But being urged on equal terms to do it,
He basely pockets up the bastynado.
23. Non omnia possumus omnes
Who says Alcides has more beard then wit?
Whose place and countenance controlleth it:
Pish 'twas not meant he should more understand,
Then might concern him to subscribe his hand.
24 Nimium ne creed colori.
Battus believed for a simple truth,
That yonder gilt-spur spruce and velvet youth
Was some great personage or worthy wight,
Until one told him he was but a knight,
A knight (quoth Battus) vaith I chud a zworne,
He had at least been zum good gen-man borne.
25 Qui, modo Rusticus, olim.
Po-lo peckes up a pretty prolling trade,
That has him prouder then his master made:
But yet when all is done, the world mistakes him,
For not his money, but the Tailor makes him.
26 Furor arma ministrat.
Magus has studied long to break a jest
Upon these rimes he does so much detest,
And can you blame him? well he may be chiding
That has so often spurgald been with riding.
27 Qui fuit ante Pedes.
The case is alterd with Mercutio,
Since his preferment to that noble man:
What erst he has been, boots not now to know,
Those times are cha^g'd with him, what is the^ was tha^
I dare presume Mercutio does forget,
That ever he a Bill in Paul's did set.
28 Mortalia cuncta caduca.
Stella the star that whilome shinde so bright,
Is now eclipsed and has lost her light:
'Twas pity (Stella) that thy stars were such,
Better for thee they had not shinde so much.
29 Hic laqueos tendit qui laqueo moritur.
Who ever held Mendoza half so wise,
To have attempted such an enterprise?
As had not Tyburne soon prevented it,
Mendoza would have learnd but too much wit.
30 Nocet empta dolor voluptas.
What cause had Liuia to leave the City,
Where she so florisht until now of late,
Oh there is a fault escapt (the more's the pity),
Which the Churchwardens would not tolerate,
And yet the year before, they could dispense,
Taking no knowledge of the like offense.
31 Fas est, quod Foemina fingit.
Maddam Ventoza can no longer frollicke,
For she is troubled with a sore wind-chollicke,
Which to the standers by may less appear,
Because her fyesting-Curre is still so near.
32 Quam been notus amor.
Should Spruso leave the wearing of his muffe,
His golden nightcap and his double ruff:
Yet, manning still one mistrisse, makes him noted
Whether to love or lust he is more devoted.
33 Castus erat vultu, monstrat quem facta Cynaedum.
Know you not Criticus, our Cities mule,
That haunts the harbors of iniquity?
Yet like a Beadle of disorderd rule,
Lasheth at lust to cloak his villainy:
Critic it is not your looks (I can assure you)
Shall fear the Surgeon that of late did cure you.
34 Trahit sua quemque voluptas.
Wat wills you know how much he skorneth it,
To be a pick-purse of another wit:
But in a pocket bids you understand,
He has a borrowing, deep, and diuing hand.
35 Quid non speramus amantes.
Pierce was espoused ere he went a wooing,
What should such fools as he belong a doing?
His wife (the wiser) thought to save that pain,
By getting her a cloak fit for the rain.
36 Faeminae ludificantur viros.
Luce had a secret longing to go see
Her child at nurse: for that she dreamt it was sick,
And would by no means pacified be,
Till she had seen her youngest little Dicke:
Full little knows her husband (silly groom)
Who by this match ere midnight takes his room.
37 Omnibus hoc vitium.
Pru that had patience to have borne with any,
And loved plain dealing, (witness all that knows her,)
Is now undone by bearing one too many,
So that you see plain-dealing overthrows her.
38 Senibus voluisse satis.
AEsop must yield when Rodope will ride,
And take no knowledge where, nor who is her guide,
Yet could the wizard wish her still in sight,
Since she at Braynford log'd this other night.
39 Turpe est hoc foenore, lucrum.
Lanus has lived this last vacation
Upon his wives bare Charge without all reason
Who since she knew at first her occupation
Nere saw worse takings in a Lenten season:
Fie Lanus rather should thou her beshrow
That would so many burdens undergo.
40 Linguam vis nulla domabit.
Muns skill in horses does so much excel,
As no man living breaks them half so well
But see, one silly shrow controls his Art:
And worse then all those horses, breaks his heart.
41 Roganti dabitur.
Marcus stood musing maugre all his might,
Where he should go to lodge this other night:
At length the Marshall unawares comes on him,
And volens nolens thrusts a bed upon him.
42 -- Ortus nouus vrbe Britannus.
Who braues it now as does young Hystrio,
Walking in Paul's like to some Potentate,
Richly replenisht from the top toth' toe,
As if he were derived from high estate?
Alas there is not a man but may discrie,
His begging trade and bastard faculty.
43 Hoc aliquid nihil.
Guido has gained very goodly suits,
That of his labors are the only fruits:
I mean no other suits then those he wears,
Which how to compass is that Guido fears.
44 Sat saltem sic habeatur.
Some say this rabblement of new-made knights,
Makes Coaches dear, and chandlers sell their lights:
But scarce a Seruingman the more is fed,
For foot-boyes only bring their Sirs to bed.
45 Sequitur inuidia famam.
Two Madams once were striving for the wall,
Each standing much on terms of worthiness,
The one but young (howbeit rich withal)
The other ancient, though of substance less
Said, soft and fair, till time has taken fruition,
Your Ladyship is of the last edition.
46 Sic nunquam cessat quo perdat perdere lusor.
Ask Ficus how his luck at Dicing goes,
Like to the Tide (says he) it ebbes and flows:
Then I suppose his chance cannot be good,
For all men know, it is longer ebb then flood.
46 Errantes errare licet.
Pandorus spends the day by telling news
Of such his trauails as will make you muse,
Nay Sir believe it, he will discourse at large.
How should he else be fed at others charge.
47 Dant otia iocum.
Young master Newcome late of thin's of Court
Has newly laid aside his Littleton
And for his pleasure deignes no other sport,
Then these vnsauored rimes to seize upon:
Which having read he coments on the weather,
How iump his law and learning met together.
48 Sequitur vestigia Matris.
Maud being moved at fourteen years to mary,
Wished (were she tall enough), she need not tarry:
I would her Sister but so wise had been
That had a Bastard ere she was fifteen.
49 Duibtat men's conscia recti.
Vulcanus wisely does himself persuade,
Some of these Epigrams by him were made:
But dares not tell you wherein for his life
Least men should play on him, as on his wife,
50 Quem suspicaueris, ipse.
Fuco is fled more for his credit sake,
Then to be burdened with so base a deed:
Would he think you such trifles undertake:
Having that kindred and so little need?
Damned might he be, that ever meant to do it
Had not his whore or something vrdgd him to it.
51 Confuetudo est altera natura.
Mat in the mood of his distemp'rature,
Swears he must fight to keep his hands in ure.
For being weary of his theeuing trade:
What should he do but exercise his blade?
52 Ingenio pollet cui vim natura negauit.
If Nanus had but common gifts of nature,
And no arts cunning to his cubit-stature:
He never could with Ladies come so near,
Nor get his victuals gratis all the year.
53 Non caret effectu quod voluere duo.
Constant Renaldo who can but commend thee.
That still one mistrisse in Reuersion seruest?
She could do little, if not least befriend thee,
With gleaning license for so long a harvest:
Gleaning said I? nay more, to mow her corn,
And catch the Hare, whiles others blow the horn*
54 Volucrem sic decipit Auceps.
Hydrus the horse-courser (that cunning mate)
Does with the buyers thus Equivocate:
Claps on his hand and prays he might not thrive,
If that his Gelding be not under five.
55 Perdat qui caveat Emptor.
Nor less meant Promus when that vow he made,
Then to give ore his cousening Tapsters trade:
Who checked for short and frothy measure, swore,
He never would from thence forth fill pot more.
56 Quod mora tardat abest.
See how Silenus walks accomplished,
With due performance of his fathers Page,
Looks back of purpose to be honored,
And on each slight occasion gins to rage:
You villain, dog, where has your stay been such,
Quoth he, The Broker would not lend so much.
57 -- Latuit been qui male vixit.
Francisco flies, not daring once come near,
Making the infection to be most his fear:
But his Arch-creditor that least believes him,
Knows it is his debts more then the deu'll that drives him.
58 Indomitae tandem veniunt ad aratra Inuenca.
Lesbia the fair that would be wood of none
Has since been wone by many more then one
And like a flower (whose coullour soon does fade)
With often wearing proves a hackney Jade.
59 Probitas laudatur et alget.
Say that Caryna keep a vitling house
I hope it is for no vulgar base or mean resort
That only will a Cast of Canns carowse,
Or at some game at Cards but idely sport
It Is known her weekly risings and downe-fallings,
Equals her state with some of higher callings.
60 Sequitur post gaudia luctus.
Aye me (quoth Amy) who would ere have thought
So great a mischiese should arise of naught,
Which had she known ere she began to swell:
Each yard of pleasure should have proved an ell.
61 Tremuit sub pondere Cymba.
Had not Formosa very foul ill luck
Who stooping simply but a rose to pluck,
Made to the hearers that so loudly known,
Which never yet report before had blown?
62 Pulchra Semyramidis facies imitata Sepulchrum.
Fine Mistress Foetida perfumes her self
With sweetest odours that she can devise,
More dear and precious then all worldly pelf,
That naught avails when her bewty dies:
But this despair is very death in thinking
That one so fair should have a breath so stinking.
63 Post dulcia finis amarus.
What grief it was Grace had no better fortune,
But that Bridewel must her disgrace importune:
And which is worse, if worse it might perplex her;
The Beadle comes behind her back to vex her.
64 Par pari reserre decet.
Caluus (to blame) runs in his Laundresse score
And will not pay her scarcely once a year:
But then his shame is twice so much the more
For she has truly paid him to a hair.
65 Non omnibus Omphida dormit.
What reason is it Omphida should yield
To any man that is but a stranger to her?
Thinks he at first assault to win the field?
Tutlet him do his worst that worst can do her,
Had there but color been for such intent,
She could allow your weakest argument.
66 Natural expellere durum.
Parcus not sparing cost sweres heel begin,
To enter Commons, in some Chancery Inn,
And will no longer once a day be fed:
Thatstill before went supperles to bed.
67 Coitum, non oscula laudat.
When Kester courted Kate but for a kiss,
She coyly told him that he aimd amiss:
Thou may believe her (Kester) what she said:
For half the parish knows she is no maid.
68 Tunc tua res agitur etc.
A iellious Merchant that a Saylor met,
asked him the reason why he meant to mary
Knowing what ill their absence might beget,
That still at sea constrained are to tarry?
Sir (quoth the Saylor) make you that so strange,
It Is done the time whiles you but walk the'xchange.
69 Impar aetas, imparesque mores.
It could not be (me thinks) imagined
That Iulia should have lost her maydenhead
Being so young but that her self first told it,
to whom and where she this last lent had sold it.
70 Timidos fortuna repellit.
When Miles the seruingman my Lady kissed
She knew him not (though scarcely could resist
So sweet a youth and well apparelled)
Had not the Dunce himself discovered:
For this (quoth he), my master bad me say --
Which hearing made her frown and fling away:
Why thus it is, when fools must make it known,
They come on others business, not their own.
71 Si nihil attuleris, ibis etc.
Planus an honest Swain, but monylesse,
Besought a lawyer to be good unto him:
Who either (gratis) must his cause redress,
Or promise what he never meant to do him,
Being asked why he careless lingered it,
Made this reply, ex nihilo nihil fit.
72 Similis doctrina libello.
Craesus of all things loves not to buy
So many books of such diversity:
Your Almanacke (says he) yields all the sense,
Of times best profit and experience.
73 Frustra, qui sero consulit.
Ask not Vincentio now when things are past,
Why he so often sported with his Punck,
Or wherefore so much has been spent in wast,
(As good you told it to a man that's drunck)
Let it suffice he has consumed it all,
And (as you see) walks like the Prodigal.
74 Non patitur res seria iocu^.
TIB took an oath that Tomisin was no maid,
Who angry bad bear record what she said,
As good have published it with trumpets blown,
As call for witness in a case so known.
76 Semel and semper.
Celso but newly wedded does repent,
and means to be diuorc't incontinent
Alas (poor Celso) knewst thou not before,
She was, and is and will be still a ( --)
77 Mole ruit sua.
Questo that quaint and brisk Italian
when first his trade for merchandise began,
Would so much undertake more then his own.
(I think of purpose to be overthrown,)
For when it was thought his fullness did abound,
Even then he brake for seauenty thousand pound.
78 Satis est ditescere fama.
Clitus with Clients is well customed,
That has the laws but little studied:
No matter Clitus, so they bring thee fees)
how ill the Case, and thy advise agrees.
79 Incidit in Syllam cupiens vitare charibdim.
Marcellus museth how to spend that day,
Wherein it likes him not to see a play:
But then he falls into some place (I doubt,)
And stays so long till he be fired out.
80 Male parta male dilabuntur.
Old Colins son is newly come to age,
And may dispend five hundred marks a year,
But wants the wit to hold his heritage,
Which has been ever yet his Uncles fear:
For that his Father got it by extortion:
And therefore ill to be a woodcocks, portion.
81 Quid queat esse diu?
Signior Fantasmos never such pleasure found
In any thing, as in a deep mouthed hound:
Small was that pleasure, when upon one day,
He lost his hair, and hunted all away.
82 Sors vniuersa rotat.
Sam swore an oath that those late Lotteries,
were mere deceits, and idle mockeries:
For of a hundred, if he two did pluck,
The standers-by would say it was Cuckolds luck.
83 Olim haec meminisse iuuabit.
Grunto lies groaning of a grievous gout,
And would give thousands to be soundly cured:
But all the cunning that his coin finds out,
Cannot expel his pains so long endured:
Oh Grunto thou have lived so vnrepenting
As scarce two helles suffices thy tormenting.
84 Ignoti nulla cupido.
Castus of all sins makes most conscience,
That men should thus with chastity dispense:
She that weds him, must have his maidenhead,
At least may chance to bring a fool to bed.
85 Sero sapiunt Phryges.
Festus who feasted long on delicates,
Now such fantastic fulsome diet hates:
Is it not reason he should spare at last,
That has consumed more then all in waste?
86 Labor improbus omnia vincit.
Now yea and nay quoth mistress Temperance
You are to blame to be so vainly given,
Cannot your eyes upon a woman glaunce,
But they must covet? sooth you should be shriuen:
Fie that you will swear so rashly by your troth,
Think you I Will do it were not to save your oath?
87 Fouent periuria furtum.
Piso has stolen a silver boul in jest,
For which (suspected only) not confessed:
Rather then Piso will restore the boull,
Bouldly aduentureth to damn his soul.
88 Ne Suitor vltra Crepidam.
Philippus flouteth at such ragged rimes,
That much distasting, tax not these his times:
Indeed I judge him much more better seen,
In other trades that he has trained been.
89 Aliud simulat aliud agit.
Young Mistress Joyce her husband does solicit,
To hire a garden-house near to the fields:
Which with her gossip she might weekly visit,
(For something must she have that comfort yields)
I fear this Bower for common recreation,
Will prove a place of private occupation.
90 Similes habent labra lactucas.
Dick Swash (or Swaggering Dick) through Fleetstreet reeles
With Sis and Bettrice waiting at his heels,
To one that would have taken the wall, he swore,
zounds do not see my punck and Paramout?
91 Cito parata Venus.
Let Mistress Su be stirring never so soon
She Will not be ready until afternoon,
Nor scarcely then: for why this summer season,
The least Thing makes her sweat beyond all reason.
92 Maxima Tobacchi, mayor vis nulla veneni.
Cuthbert our Cobbler can no more forbear,
To take Tobacco, then to live unknown:
He drinks all whiffes at least, and learnes to swear
By Heavens: his oaths and humors are his own.
But adding hereunto a pot or more,
He stands to nothing which he spoke before.
93 Enecat amplexu nimio sic Simia foetum.
Call Dauus knave, he straight way draws his sword,
And makes you prove as much or eat your word,
But if you call him honest Rogue or Jew,
He hugges you then for giving him his dew.
94 Mala crescunt deteriora.
Soto is lately gone to Sturbridge fair,
Whose little takings makes him half despair:
Twere good some friend of his would tell the Mome
His wife has had takings enough at home.
95 Vwlle placere sat est.
Mistrisse Parnella hold's it requisite
To keep more maids at home then need requires
As Well to please her husbands appetite,
As for a broad she like exchange desires.
Thus do they absent best content each other:
That else should be but Baudes to one another.
96 Vilescit dives auarus.
Rusus is wondrous rich, but what of that?
He lives obscurely like a water-Rat:
And his apparel, which he seldom buys,
Are such as Houns-dich and Long-lane supplies.
97 Nocet empta dolor voluptas.
Sisley and Kate are gone to frollick it,
Late in the evening with their Tom and Kit,
What luck had they to buy their sport so dear,
That in the morning must have whipping cheer.
98 AEger, cui chara libertas.
Briseo that gallant yongster keeps his bed,
As faining to be sick, but wot you why?
Not of an ague, nor an aching head,
No burning fever, or French malady:
Tush, none of these can half so much molest him,
As yonder flat-cap fool that would arest him.
99 Quae placuit Domino nupta est Ancilla sodali.
Madam Rugosa knows not where to find,
One chamber-mayde often to please her mind:
But yet my Lord so likes their comely car'adge,
As he prefers them to his men in mar'adge.
100 Quam sumus ergo pares.
Damon his Dick had not these three years seen,
But rather thinks he has concealed been:
Was it not strange that they so iump should meet,
Both at a bawdy house in Turnebull street?
101 Non est iocosapudica.
Mistress Finetta, for her ready wit,
Is much admired and beloved of many:
But this one fault of hers confounds it,
She will deride, and jesting scoff at any.
Which by an ill accustomed use comes on her,
Yet there is one that plays as much upon her.
102 Diuitijs durant firmae pereuntibus Arts.
Silus has sold his Crimson satin suit,
And needs would learn to play upon the Lute,
It Is well done (Silus) for such suits soon wast,
Whereas thy skill in Lutes will ever last:
103 Asperius nihil est humili cum surgat in altum.
The world is well amended with Sir Hugh,
Since from the time he was a Shepherd swain,
And little dreamed then (I may tell you)
He should be made one of the knightly train:
But (for his substance answers not his will)
As good have dreamt, or been a Shepherd still.
104 Multorum vulnera vincunt.
Much moves not Mal: but let the queen be moved,
Heel swear she is hot that has her next approved.
105 Frustra sapit qui sibi non sapit.
Zant hus that wise and cunning Sophister,
Lies now in Limbo for a small offense:
Who when he came before the officer,
Had not one word of wit to free him thence:
Why thus it fares, when he should best dispute,
The Devil or some ill planet strikes him mute.
106 Aurum volat ocyus Eur^.
Mounsier Flemingo, fraught with Angels store,
Would see fair London, never seen before:
Where (lodging with his mistres but one night,)
Had (ere he parted) put them all to flight.
107 Humilis prostrata quadrante.
Fine Mistress Delia defies the man,
That proffers less to her then golden fees:
What think you her some common Curtizan,
That will her credit or her custom leese?
In faith sir no: But ere you shall go hence,
She will for once accept of eighteen pence.
108 Ingentes vastant coniugia gazas.
Musco, that always kept with policy,
What he had scraped since his infancy:
Scarce one year wedded (for he needs would marry)
Has taken Ludgate to his Sanctuary.
109 Cucullus non facit Monachum.
Siluanus is become so pure and holy
As he accounts all mirth but idle folly,
Ask him wherefore, he gives you ghostly reason,
But then his whore comes never out of season.
110 O infelicaes quos fata sequntur iniqua.
Pontus is posting hitherwards apace,
To dine with diverse that in Fleetstreet meets him.
But see the lucklesse chance of such a cafe,
As Soon as he alights the Sergeant greets him,
So that the burden he should have de fraid,
Was wholly now upon his Hostess laid.
111 Vsus promptos facit.
This makes Menalcas muze above the rest,
To see how qnaint my Lady is adrest:
For from the girdle upwards (durst he swear,)
She does the shape of very man appear.
112 Musae spernuntur egenae.
Faunus for feats of fencing bears the Bell.
For skill in music on each instrument,
For dancing, caruing, and discoursing well
With other sundry gifts more excellent*
But striving still to make his credit stronger,
The Tailor will not trust him any longer.
113 Sic transit gloria mundi.
I Pray Sir, did you note on Sunday last,
How richly Rubin was apparrelled?
Well may he be compared to a blast,
or liked to one that is metamorphosed.
For the next morning ere the day did dawne,
All that he wore, and more, was laid to pawn.
114 Nocte latent mendae.
What means Rosamond to walk so late,
When no man can discern her face or feature:
(But by her habit may preiudicate,
She is some fair, or rather famous Creature:)
Oh good Sir understand thatin the dark,
One man of twenty may mistake the mark.
115 Creed quod habes and habes.
Lorellos wife is lately brought to bed,
(as luck would have it, of a goodly boy,
The hopeful issue of her maiden head,
And only Jewel of the fathers joy:
Then who would doubt the time or once but note it
When it is as like him as himself had got it
118 Crescit amor precio.
How like you Darkis in her deepest Ruff?
Seems she not now as propper as the best?
You think you may command her, marry muffe?
She scorns the motion, fough, that were a jest:
Because she sold her wares so cheap of late,
Must they be always prised at one rate?
119 Fronti nulla fides.
Gallus that greatest Roost-cock in the rout,
Swells now as big as Bacchus did with Wine:
Like to a Hulke, he bears himself about,
And bristles as a Boar or Porpentine.
It Is not his locks that makes him look so big,
For all men knows he wears a periwig.
120 Fortuna multis nimium dedit.
Now fie upon thee Coward Nemius,
That often have pulled thy Ladies slippers on:
Yet still were bashful, not so venturous
As once so much her leg to look upon.
Were I thy father and thou heir to me,
I should for certain disinherit thee.
121 Degeneres animos timor arguit.
Mounsier Montanus is no little man,
Of vnapprooued valor to his foe:
Persuade, or woo him with what words you can,
Heel be revenged all the world must know.
But when he found one with his wife in bed,
For fear or shame he durst not show his head.
122 Cri^^ibus coelare studet sua crimina Maechus.
When Cacus was accused of a rape,
For stealing secretly to his maids bed:
He hardly could the doom of law escape,
Had he not thus the matter colored,
That took his oath (nor did he swear amiss,)
He went not into her bed, for 'twas his.
123 Redit orbis in orbem.
Young Codrus Landlord to his fathers rents,
Which happy time (long looked for) did expire,
Addresseth him with those habiliments,
As least beseemes the son of such a Sire.
And thus he gallants it some year and more,
Until his Tenants thrust him out of door.
124 Male parta peribunt.
Brutus, that brave and complete Caualier,
Who thus of late in Fleetstreet flourished:
Thought then no pleasure or expense too dear:
But see how soon the case is altered:
As that constrained to forsake the street,
He now betakes himself unto the Fleet.
125 Noctes atque dies patet atri Ianua Ditis.
The times are waxen dead with Dalila,
Who since the Term has felt but little sturring,
Then was she sought-to more then Helena,
When Galla^ts gallopt with their Coaches hurring:
But now she speaks with all that please to call,
Lo thus her trade does Termely rise and fall.
126 Sine fuco pulchra venustas.
Mistress Morinda is more coy then wise,
But fair she is, and that most richly fair:
Her husband bears it out (let that suffice)
And all defects is able to repair.
But yet I wonder they should so excel,
That have been bankrout, all the world can tell.
127 Negat ofcula gratarogata.
Priscilla proves most dainty of a kiss,
When she entreated, wooed, and courted is:
Lord how she simpring sits, and minceth it!
In very deed Sir, she will not eat a bit.
As full of manners as of modesty,
True, if her virtue be hypocrisy.
128 Prodit se lumine Luscus.
Luscus that once lay with his Mistress maid,
And (fearing much to have the matter known)
Went to his fellow, whom he friendly praide,
To counsel him as were the case his own:
He that (more cunning) knew what should be done,
Took this advantage for his better speed,
To finish that which the other had begun:
But then alas she proved with child indeed:
And made the Woodcock (who did first bewray it)
Stand to the reckning, that could better pay it.
129 Se fugit Adulter a custam.
Nisa, who from her window glaunst her eyes,
Saw Mopsus come, as fast as foot could trot:
For joy whereof, upon her bed she lies,
As who should think, she slept and saw him not.
It Was very strange, unless she meant herein,
Her eyes should not be open to her sin.
130 Ostendit hadera vinum.
A scoffing mate, passing along Cheap Side,
Incontinent a gallant Less espied:
Whose tempting breasts (as to the sale laid out,)
Incites this youngster thus to gin to flout,
Lady (quoth he) is this flesh to be sold?
No Lord (quoth she) for silver nor for gold,
But wherefore ask you? (and there made a stop)
To buy (quoth he) if not, shut up your shop.
131 Caelum non animum mutat, quae trans mare curr^,
Nay fie how strange you make it mistress Jane,
Will you not know your quondam tried friends?
Remember since you lodged in Cart-her lane
Shall former kindness merit no amends?
I say no more: well may you change your name:
But once a whore, you should be still the same.
114 Spernit gens rustica Musas.
What tell you me of Porcus Pesant Groom,
That scrapeth up together so much thrift,
Which he obscures within some desert room,
And basely lives unknown by any shift.
His looks are Characters of his descent,
Sprung from the loins of some mechanic Sire,
That never knew what civil vsagement,
But to be only rich does still aspire:
Spur such a one in ought but in his trade,
And you shall see how soon he will prove a Jade.
115 Nemo omni parts Beatus.
It Is plainly known that our young knight Sir Adam.
had his beginning from an ancient name.
Who (though not rich) may make his wife a Mada^
that brings her dowry to maintain the same.
Say that the Herrald cannot blaze him forth:
Must knight-ship therefore be of no more worth?
134 Pari Iugo dulcis tractus.
When Caecus had been wedded now three days,
And all his neighbors bad, God give him joy.
This strange conclusion with his wife assayes,
Why till her marriage day she proou'd so coy:
(Quoth he) we man and wife in manner were,
a month before: then could we have repented?
Alas (quoth she) had I not cause to fear,
How you might conster it, had I consented?
Fore God (quoth lie) it was well thou did not yield.
For doubtless then my purpose was to leave thee.
Oh Sir (quoth she) I once was so beguild,
And thought the next man should not so deceive me
Now out alas (quoth he) thou breedst my woe:
Why man (quoth she) I speak but quid pro que,
135 I ndor est sua damna refer.
Peter has lost his purse but will conceal it,
Least she that stole it, to his shame-reueale it.
139 Quos ego? sed motos praestat etc.
Flaccus gives out (because the world shall know it)
How bitter shortly he intends to write
Threatening therein to firk his fellow Poet,
Against whom he bears such revenging spite:
But soft (quoth Flaccus) should I say he is poor?
Oh no: least others talk as much of me,
Or shall I tell him that he loves a whore?
Tush therein likewise we both iump agree.
Faith, Flaccus doubtless will his spleen recall:
As good be friends and never write at all.
140 Dives quis stultus habetur?
It Is true that Simon (simple though you think him)
Knows how to execute his fathers trade,
Which (no disprayse) may with that substance linck him,
As quickly shall amend what nature made,
Do not your most fools thrive exceeding well,
That have but wit enough to buy and sell?
138 Cupit meretrix pudibunda videri.
Who brutes it, Mistress Parnell is no maid,
and will not answer such discourtesie:
She scorns the very worst that can be said,
And stands so much on her virginity.
As flatly to their teeth she does retort it,
Presuming none so vile that will report it.
139 Impar Impares odit.
Sotus hates wisemen, for himself is none:
And fools he hates because himself is one.
140 De^^rare est periurare.
Dacus has damned himself on due regard,
From Tauernes, plays, Tobacco, and from wine,
Swearing hele live like John of Paul's church yaard,
At least will sometimes with Duke Humfrye dine.
Twere well done (Dacus) had thou power to do it.
But Dice and Drabs (I fear) will hold thee to it.
141 Frustra times qui sperat nihil.
Tush hang it: have at all (says Curio)
Comes not deuze ace, as soon as six and three?
Who would not rather half his lands forgo,
Then be out dared by such a one as he.
Damn me I Will venture all upon a cast,
Were not as good turn Rogue at first as last.
142 Poculo iunguntur Amici.
A health (says Lucas) to his loves bright eye,
Which not to pledge, were much indignity.
You cannot do him greater courtesy,
Then to be drunk and damned for company.
143 Clero struit impia frauds,
When Rose had reck'ned her full time at large,
She then bethinketh whom to nominate,
That might partake with her ensuing charge,
At length with wisdom more considerate,
She gesseth none among all the rest so fit,
As is the parish priest to father it.
143 Sapiat, qui Dives, oportes.
It Is known how well I live, says Romeo,
And whom I list I Will love, or will despise:
Indeed it is reason good it should be so,
For they that wealthy are, musts needs be wise:
But truly to describe and set thee forth,
Thou ow'st thy belly more then thou art worth.
144 Natura paucis contenta.
Mecus is now become a frugall Sire,
That spends no more then nature does require:
And yet his wife will prove a Traveler,
Although but once a year he lie with her.
145 Nil gratum, ratione carens.
Paulus a Pamphlet does in prose present,
Unto his Lord (The fruits of idle time:)
Who far more careless, then therewith content
Wished it were converted into rhyme,
Which done and brought him at an other season,
Said, now'tis rhyme, before nor rhyme nor reason.
146 Haesitat in dubijs ars stupefacta malis.
Vrbanus that committed an offense
With a young country less (poor silly fool)
To salve his credit, soon conueyes her hence,
Unto a Garden-house, or vaulting-schoole.
Where now (unloaded of that lucklesse ill,)
And all dispatched (save the household charge:)
The goodman-Bawd, or Pander, (which you will)
Brings him no Ticket but a bil at large.
Item for Pipkins pap and other things,
Amounting all to twenty mark or more:
And this alowd into his ears he rings,
pay Sir (quoth he) for shame discharge your score,
Vrbanus loath to be proclaimed a gull,
Was willing to compound in any wise:
But yet not tendering his demand at full,
Said he had seen the Lions once or twice.
The Lions (answers he,? that may be true,
But think you thence to meritany praise?
Each Lobcock may those Lions daily view,
Have you not seen the Dragons in your days?
No (quoth Vrbanus) that I must confess,
Then (said the Pander) you must pay no less.
147 Meretrix inimica quieti-
Philo is wondrous jealous of his wife,
And urges terms of shrewd suspicion:
But knows not him the cause of this his strife,
Yet will he yield to no condition.
For more he vexed is that knows it not,
Then if you horn him to his face God wot.
148 Vinitur ex rapto etc.
Lieftenant Lentulus lives discontent,
And much repineth at the want of wars:
For when his credit, coin, and all is spent,
What should he do, but idly curse the stars?
Content thee Lentulus with thine estate,
That were not idle when thou sto'lst the plate.
149 Turpe se^ilis amor.
Old doting Claudus does in have desire,
With beauteous young Penelope to wed,
Whose frozen appetite is set on fire,
Until the match be thoroughly finished.
Indeed as good dispatch, as make delay,
That must be horned on his wedding day.
150 Laesus amor in surorem vertitur.
Where has Sir John so long been resident,
Leaving his pensive Lady all amort?
Who will not say (woe worth the time misspent)
For grief where of she has no list to sport.
But leave her not again in such a plight,
Least (out of mind) she prove more out of sight,
151 Nullus ad amissas ibit amicus opes.
Heard you not yet of Captain Ferdinand,
That was so wont to swagger and carowse?
He lodges now no longer in the Strand,
But is removed thence to such a house:
Where all his best acquaintance that he knows,
Will not redeem the one half of what he owes,
152 Ingenium natura dedit queis non dedit vti.
Nay see if Momus yet can cease to flout,
How should he choose? his mere conceits are such:
It Is good sir: I Will not say you are a lout,
But may not one presume to think as much?
I fear when we have both done all we can,
The best will scarce prove good Gramarian.
153 Patria est vbicunque.
Brave minded Medon can no more endure,
To live in England then to brook the lie:
Tut your temptations cannot him allure,
He scorns them as an idle mockery-
Urge him no more, I tell you twill but grieve him.
For here his means no longer may relieve him.
154 Hoc tibi sort datum.
Nay (good Sir) give us leave at least to know you,
Was not your father once a man of trade?
You now are rich: I know, who may. beshrow you,
That for your sake, were younger brothers made,
Hark in your ear, it is not the wealth you have,
Can shield you from the scandal of a --
155 Alea nil moderabile suadet.
When Milo means to spare, then spends he most:
Let him but come where sport or gaming is,
His humor cannot hold till all be lost,
And never thinks he has done amiss.
For thus resolved, Milo cares not whether
He pay the one half, or lie for all together.
156 Velle placere sat est.
Fie, would you offer Winifride that wrong,
Thus to attempt her Virgin chastity?
Well wotteth she, you cannot love her long,
And (which is worse) the world may it epsy.
Which is the thing that makes us look into it
Or else (you know) how easy twer to do it:
157 Et genus et pr^auos iactant ignobile vulgus,
Sir, can you tell where young Pandorus lives,
That was surnamed here the Prodigal?
He that so much for his silke-Stockings gives,
Till naught is left him to buy boots withal.
Oh blame him not to make what show he can:
How should he else be thought a Gentleman.
158 Auro cedit honos.
Bindo has lost his Bess^ (...) ^nowes not where,
And (frantic) seeks her all the street throughout:
Take courage Bindo, and be of good cheer,
Tomorrow shall thou find her, there is no doubt.
Tomorrow came: deserved she to be shent,
That brought him home enough to pay his rent?
159 Magni constabit parlla voluptas.
Hand off sir Sauce-box, she is no meat for Grooms
Or common wights of base-borne parentage
Alas, your lean expense fits Alehouse rooms,
That with Maid-Malkin holds equipage,
Because Sir Tristram late entreated me,
You therefore think to do as much as he.
160 Sapiunt quaecunque probantur.
^e make our Epigrams, as men taste Cheese,
which has his relish in the last farewell:
(...) as the purest liquor has his leeze,
(...) may you harshly end the tale you tell,
The Tail (of all things) some men aim at most,
Those that had rather fast, may kiss the post
And there is an end.
THus have I waded through a worthless task,
Whereto (I trust) there is no exceptions taken:
For (meant to none) I answer such as ask,
it is like apparel made in Birchin Lane:
If any please to suite themselves and wear it,
The blame's not mine but theires that needs will bear
Abijcis ista ferus? moritur mea Musa dolendo:
Accipis ista libens? Illa quod optat habet.

