A Funeral Sermon, both Godly, Learned and comfortable, Preached at S. Mary's
in Cambridge, Anno 1551. at the burial of the Reverend Doctor, and faithful
Pastor of the Church of Christ, Martin Bucer. By Matthew Parker Doctor in
Divinity, and since, Archbishop of Canterburye.

Printed at London, by Thomas Purfoote, and are to be sold at his shop without
Newe-gate, over against S. Sepulchers Church.

To my very friends, M. James Tailor and M. Ranulph Barlow.
YOUR manifold courtesies toward me, together also with the Reverend account,
that you ever made of that late worthy Archbishop, the Author hereof, moved me
to translate and dedicate unto you, this his godly and learned Sermon. Receive
it therefore even for the Authors sake: embrace it for the matter therein
comprised: and let it remain as a token of the unfeigned goodwill of your old
schoolefellow: and as a seal to confirm that league which at home in our
childhood, 30. years ago, we entered into, in our native country of
Chesshire, under that our grave, learned, zealous and painful Schoolemaister,
M. John Brownesworde. Fare ye well.

At little Ilford in Essex the 24. of February. 1587. Your assured well willer.
Thomas Newton.

The text
Wisd. 4. Verse. 7. Although the righteous be prevented by death, yet shall he
be in rest.

10. He pleased God and was beloved of him, so that whereas he lived among
sinners, he translated him.

14. For his soul pleased God: therefore hasted he to take him away from
wickedness.

15. Yet the people see, and understand not, and consider no such things in
their it hearts, how that grace and mercy is upon his Saints, and his
providence over the Elect.

16. Thus the righteous that is dead, condemns the ungodly which are living:
and the youth that is soon brought to an end; the long life of the
unrighteous.

17. For they see the end of the wise, but they understand not what God has
devised for him, and wherefore the Lord has preserved him in safety.

18. They see him and despise him, but the Lord will laugh them to scorn.

19. So that they shall fall hereafter without honor and shall have a shame
among the dead for evermore.



THE cause of this our present assembly (brethren in the Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ most dearly beloved) is alredye unto you so well known, yt I
shall not need thereupon to use many words: but on the other side, the
special points hereby offered to our considerations, and again, the just
cause that we (even we Cambridge-men) have to weep and wail, I fear that a
great sorce, through want of skill, feel not, and many more, (blindely ledd
with a certain peevish rancour and festured malice) thoroughly consider not.

To mourn and weep for the death of a good and godly man, so far forth as
concerns him, we are flatly forbidden both by reason and also by nature: I
mean, that reason which is right, and that nature which is sinceare, not
corrupted. Yea, it is directly against the rules both of Charity and Faith.
For, if Heathen Philosophers, (not knowing god aright, and void of that hope
which we daily have before our eyes, and which, so many of us as live in
Christ, do earnestly thirst after, and daily long for) deemed by reason, that
death was not to be bewailed: and if they could agree among themselves in
opinion, that nature might lawfully call for, and redemaund that, whereof she
had granted to us, the use, but for a while: what an absurd thing were it, if
we in this so great light of the Gospel, being so undoubtedly persuaded of
such sure and manifest promises of most blessed state after this life by the
benefit of our Redeemer, should not as well as they, think it to stand with
reason and equity? Yea, worthilye were we to be reproved, if we should but
only match them, and not rather far surmount them in this point, and by faith
understand how that we are so far from having any cause of sorrowing, that we
rather ought more then can be uttered, to rejoice for them, and to congratulate
cheir felicity, whereunto we hope also to come our selves, and for the same
ought daily to pray.

Now, Lone enuieth not.
I pray you, what Jove, or what charity is this, to envy our friends blessed
hap, and to be sorry for their felicity and welfare? To be agreeued and to
lament for their glorious exchange is as though we repined, that after many
dangerous storms and blustering tempests in the Sea of this world, they be at
length gotten to a quiet har borough and safely arrived at the haven of rest: or
that after a sharp conflict and long continued war, they be now at length
safely returned home, with victory over their enemies.

What love can this be, to be sorye that our friend having been long pyned
with grievous and languishing diseases to have now recovered his former health?
or to fret and grieve to hear that he whom we say we love, is enlarged and
delivered out of most loathsome prison, where he had long line in hunger and
cold, fettered and chayned? Is there any man, that can with any color of
reason say, that he loves his friend, being heir to some great lands, if he
mourn and be sorry that the time now approaches, wherein his friend shall
possess and receive some huge sum of money and sewe out his liuerey for the
peaceable enjoying of his great revenues and enheritance? It is (I say)
against godly love and against sinceare affection, to bewail our friends, when
they leave the miseries of this wretched life, and go to possess a place of
rest and bliss, that shall continue for ever.

Moreover, it agrees not with the rules of faith, for a christian man to
bewail the dead. For, who can deny that to be against faith, which is flatly
forbidden by the scriptures? And how can that be said to agree with the rule
of faith, which the scriptures most euidentlye prove to be done by those that
have no hope? There is such an indeuisible agreement between Faith and Hope,
Faith and hope inseparable companions.
that the one is never severed from the other, but wheresoever the one is, the
other is also, and where the one lacks, yt other wants likewise. Sorrow ye
not (says the blessed apostle Paul) over the^ that are a sleep, 1. These. 4.
13.
as others do which have no hope. etc. Yea such kind of sorrow is most plainly
by ye scriptures forbidden. Eccle. 22. 11.
Make small weeping for the dead (says the wiseman) for he is at rest. If a
man do but lightly and superficially consider ye words of this scripture, and
do not diligently search the bottom and ground of the true meaning and sense
thereof, he may (perhaps) think that it is thereby permitted yea and after a
sort commanded and enjoined to a man to mourn and bewail the dead, so that
he do it moderatly

But it shall plainly appear to be otherwise, if a man will diligently
consider the cause which the Wiseman there alleges, namelye, because he is
at rest. In which words, he lays down before our eyes, the very cause,
for the which we should rather rejoice and be glad. And therefore in this word
(a little) he has consyderation unto our weakness and infirmytie, in
respect whereof he yealdeth somewhat unto our frayltie, and tollerateth some
small sorrow and little mourning: howebeit, if the wiseman had any hopefully
to persuade and effectuallye to obtain that which he was the willinger of, no
doubt, he would rather have counseled and advised us, utterly to put away
and entirely to lay aside all sorrow.

Which thing we ought (doubtless) to do, if we could in all our actions
have that regard and always keep that even hand, which we should do if our
nature were not so weak and naught: or if the world were not pestered with
envious spighters and quarellours, wranglers in every corner, that will not
stick to call us stonyharted creatures, and such as have no spark of human
nature in us, if they see that we make no lamentation for the death of our
friends. Construing the matter many times to the worst, and sinesterlye thereby
gathering, that we do rather rejoice in respect of some worldly gain or
commodity thereby growing to us. Whereas we by the rule of faith only, and in
respect of that everlasting blessedness which our friends have attained, do
show our selves therein constantly stayed in conscience for the departure of
our brethren, and altogether renouncing such womannish wayling, and childish
infirmity.

And true it is, that Jeremy, (being a witness in this case of far more
credit and authority,) allows nothing at all to this our frail infirmity,
but in most plain words flatly and in a generalitye forbids all weeping and
mourning for ye dead. Ier. 22. 10.
Weep not (says he) for the dead, and be not moved for them. For, he had a
greater consideration of the blessed life whereinto they were entered: and he
wisely weighed that the sooner, they finished the course and end the race of
this life, the sooner they come to enjoy their desired rest and blisfull state:
and therefore he would not at any hand nozzle and feed a man in folly, by
allowing or yelding any thing to him in this so vain frailty. This did he see
in the spirit: and the very same is likewise by the same spirit revealed unto
John, with commandment also unto him, to write it for an everlasting memory,
as a voice not uttered by the world or in the world, after the measure of our
human frailty and weakness, but as a sentence descended from heaven,
delivering a just consideration of the state and condition of those that be
hence departed: which voice did plainly deliver these words: Reave. 14. 13.
Blessed are the dead, which dye in the Lord. May this word (Blessed) being
pronounced by the mouth of God himself, be thought to be miserable, mournful
or lamentable? Neither does the Spirit deliver and utter these words
absolutely without any other addition, but withal he alleges the cause: For
they henceforth (says the Spirit,) rest from their labors: and moreover,
Their works follow them.

Let us now therefore ponder and consider: diligently the words of the Wise man,
whereof mention was made a little before, viz. Because he is at rest. Also of an
other wise man: Wised. 3. 2.
The souls of the righteous are in the hands of God, and they are in peace.
Furthermore let us hereunto add the words of the Apostle S. Paul: ^ These. 4.
14.
If we believe that Jesus is dead and is risen again; even so them which sleep
in Jesus, will God bring with him. Let us consider what these words do
signify and mean, Blessed are they that dye in the Lord, etc. And we shall
easily perceive in what sense we ought to take this (Little) which the wise man
uses: yea we shall quickly see, what he would rather have advised and uttered,
if he had not otherwise regarded and respected our weakness. Therefore I say,
when we have respect and consideration of the party that is dead and departed,
it is both unseemly and wicked to use any howling or blubbering for him,
unless we desire to be accounted creatures endued rather with beastly nature
then furnished with the use of reason: to be deemed Heathen people rather then
true Christians: envious caitiues then well meaning friends: void of hope and
faith, not understanding our happy estate, and persons doubtful and uncertain
of their salvation, rather then constant believers undoubtedly embracing and
crediting ye infallible word of God, thereby as by a rule directing all and
every our actions, thoughts and affections, and valiantly subduing and entirely
triumphing over our imbecility and weakness.

But howsoever some texts of scripture seem to confirm this opinion, and to
prove and allow some small mourning, and again, some utterly and altogether
forbid weping and lamenting, as we have before declared: So in an other sense
we are not only allowed to mourn, but also are admonished and directly
commanded so to do. My son, power forth tears over the dead, Eccle. 38. 16.
and begin to mourn as if thou had suffered great harm thy self. Here,
the same wise man that a little aforesaid, Make small weeping for the dead,
seems in this place to enjoin us to weep, not a little, nor for a while:
but to continue lamentations, and to power forth tears for a long season. God
forbid that we should think so holy a man, (invested with the title of a
wiseman) should in one and the selfsame book disagree with himself in
opinions and sentences, (albeit they be set down in several Chapters) and to
enjoin and command things contrary and repugnant one to an other. We must
therefore assay and tire, whether we can find out his very meaning.

But if he himself do expound and interpret his own words, we may then
boldly and safely without danger stick to his judgment. In this very
sentence, where he thus writes. Make small weeping for the dead, for he is at
rest, Eccle. 22. 11.
he also says, Weep for the dead, for he has lost the light. To make him
therefore to agree with himself, this must needs be his meaning: that, as in
respect of the party deceased, it is not lawful to weep and lament, for that,
he enjoys bliss, and is at rest: so, on the other side, namely in respect
of our selves, that are berest the company, sight and comfort of his virtuous
manners, godly life and excellent learning, we have most just and urgent cause
not only to lament and be sorry, but even for a long space to continue the
same our grief and moan, as having received some great loss and hinderance
unrecoverable. And the brighter and clearer that the light was, when it gave
shine, and the neeedefuller and expedienter that the same was for our behoof
and benefit, so much the more cause and matter is there ministered to our
lamentation and mourning, by the wofuller consideration of the loss received.

Such a kind of light is there now quenched in this famous and reverend
Doctor, renowned as well for his exquisite knowledge and learning, as also for
his right christian manners and virtuous life: all which appeared in him most
excellentlye, even at the time of his death and departure. What a burning and
shining lamp showed he himself in the Church of Christ, the space of many
years? And although Envy do leare and pry askewe and can not well abide the
sight of the sun: yet cannot his very enemies without great shame and
infamy reproach him, or iustlye open their mouths against him, when as they
shall see such persons to give testimonye to his virtues, which have been
daily conversant with him, and have diligently observed and marked the
continual care and vehemente study, which he took to further and advance
such causes, as his trade of life and function required.

What manner of salt he showed himself in the mild delivery of his sound
doctrine, uttered as well by lively voice, as also otherwise testified and
recorded by his most learned works, and printed books: again, what exquisi^
learning and (as I may say, almost singular) harborowghed in his breast, how
pithie and sententious how deep and weighty his arguments were, wherewithal
he notably seasoned religion, and the same, (being in these later ages of the
world pitifully many ways mangled and dismembered) revived and resorted to her
right auncienty and former strength and authority: although herein spightfull
malice and cankered envy will not lose her old wount, The nature and
property of Envy, toward worthy and excellent men.
but still show her self in her colors, what disposition she ever carries
toward all such as in any singular gift excel others, yet shall our posterity in
time to come know and find, how just cause there is why they should esteem
Envy, as Envy: and highlye regard learning and virtue according to their due
worthynes and dignity.

But before I enter into the examination, Virtuous life and singular learning
in B^cer.
and discourse of these two rare and singular virtues in him, wherewith god had
wonderfullye beautified and enriched him, and made him admirable, and reverend
in the world, I would especially wish us Vniuersity-men, for whose comfort
and consolation, Almighty God in his great mercy and gracious favor toward
this University, (being greatly decayed and almost utterly fallen down to
the ground,) ordained this worthy instrument in his Church, tosoiourne and
dwell now in the ripeness both of his life and doctrine here among us) with a
great deal the more care, and circumspect diligence to consider the fearful
judgments of almighty god, who in this purpose of his divine will, has
translated and so soon taken him away from us.

Whereby it is most certain that we have just cause to bewail his death, and
heavily to take his departure from us: howebeit not for his sake, but for our
own: and greatly to fear and dread ye further wrath and punishment of god his
heavy displeasure: a taste whereof we here now feel, in yt he has quenched
this so notable and necessary a light among us. The stroke and feeling whereof
ought effectually to drive us to an humble and open confession of our wicked
and detestable life, and prostratly with an earnest repentance to crave pardon
of the same at his merciful hands: beseeching him to forgive us our grievous
offenses, and to have compassion on us. Otherwise, it is to be feared, least
some worse thing will ensue and follow afterward, God forbid, yt we which here
profess the true and sinceare word of God, should be so blockish so dull and
senseless, that we should not (even herein) perceive the grievous
displeasure of God, enkindled and conceived against us: or that we should so
pitifully be over seen in our own cases, or so far to be our own foes and
backfriends, that these things should not any whit at all move us.

Then, might that justly be objected and laid to our charge, which the prophet
Jeremy twitted ye men of his time withal, for their malicious and manifest
contempt of God, and the careless regard that they made of his scourges and
punishments: Ierem. 5. 3.
Lord, thou have stricken them, but they have not sorrowed: thou have consumed
them, but they have refused to receive correction: they have made their faces
harder then a stone, and have refused to return.

Should not we blush and be ashamed after so many admonitions, to be like unto
those stifnecked Jews, and rebellious persons, which said unto the Prophets
of God, Esai. 30. ^^
prophecy not and to the seers, see not, neither speak unto us right things:
but speak flattering things unto us: prophecy errors. Depart out of the
way: go aside out of the path: cause the holy one of Israel to cease from us.
And if our peevish wilfulnes, impudency and hardness do thus continue with
increase among us, are we not worthy to hear this dreadful and heavy
sentence pronounced against us. Matt. 23. 38.
Behold your habitation shall be left unto you desolate: Behold the days shall
come upon thee, that thine enemies shall cast a trench about thee, Luc. ^9. 43.
and compass thee round, and keep thee in on every side, and shall make thee
even with the ground, and thy children which are in thee: and they shall not
leave in thee a stone upon a stone, because thou knew not the time of thy
visitation. God be merciful unto us, and bless us, Psalm. 67. 1.
and show us the light of his countinance, and be merciful unto us. etc.

The very consideration of this one kind of God his punishment and
correction, to wit, the taking away by death, of those excellent members
of the Church, on whom depends the singular benifite of the flock, and
comfortable stay of the people, affords and ministers unto us (as by the
scriptures we may plainelye perceive) manifest arguments and profitable
lessons to draw us, in this evidence token of Gods displeasure, to lament our
sins, and to amend our wicked lives. It is enough (I say) to move us to look
better to our selves, to fear afterclaps, and to be inwardly most heartily
sorry for our churlish behavior and extreme ingratitude toward so gracious a
God.

One example fitly seruinge to this purpose, I will offer here unto your
considerations. Call to your remembrance that rebellious, obstinate, murmuring,
mutinous and stifenecked people of Israel, over who^ god set that excellent
man Moses, to be their Captain and Governor. And that I may omit and not
speak of the huge heap of their manifold leawdnes and wicked disobediences:
to omit also ye sundry punishments wherewith God many times afflicted them: to
omit, how and how often their leader and Governor Moses was pressed and ready by
prayer and intercession to reconcile God unto them and to turn away his
plagues from them: for whose sake and at whose suite their misdeedes were often
forgiven, and their offenses pardoned: how worthy a Governor he was, how notabe
a stay, and what a shining light he showed himself unto them, the whole course
of his dealinges, the whole race of his life, and the whole manner of his
proceedings, during the time of his rule and government does sufficiently
declare. And yet against him being so worthy and so noble a Prince, and
appointed of god to them for their great comfort, and singular commodity, did
Corah, Dathan and Abiram maliciously conspire, Number. 16. 3.
and him rebelliouslye despise, shaking of the yoke of obedience, and most
unnaturally forsaking him, or rather their own profits and commodities which
by him they bountifully enjoyed.

But how seuerelye, how strangely and dreadfullye did the Lord God revenge
that their so mutynous revolt and undutiful contumacie? Did not the earth open
her mouth, and swallowe them up, with their tabernacles, and familyes and all
them that were with them, so that they and all that they had, went down
alive into the pit with all their train and goods. This dreadful and
terrible example notwithstanding, when as yet they seditiously persisted in
their treacherous mutiny and peeuishe frowardness against the same Moses
their Prince and Governor, the Lord (for an everlasting terror to al murmuring
Malcontents, against so worthy a man given to them (if they could have
accordingly so considered it,) for the inestimable benefit and comfort both of
them and their whole company,) sent a plague among them, whereof there dyed in
one day fourteen thousand and seven hundred.

God so strongly and terribly reue^ged this their sedition and consperacy,
chiefly and especially thereby to bring the^ to ye acknowledgme^t of that
singular benefit, which they inioyed by having so good and godly a magistrate
over the^ as Moses was: meaning by such a kind of punishment to make them more
thankful, and better contented with this benefit. But when almighty God saw
that all these punishments would not serve to bring them to amendment, nor to
stur them up to their dutiful thankefullnesse, and obedient behavior; after
many assaies and ways practiced and wrought for their recovery, he was at
length driven in his heavy indignation to betake himself to an other course,
and to proceed further. And what course was that: Forsooth, for their sins and
wickedness, he shortened the life of Moses, and would not, that by him they
should be brought into the land of promise. Moses therefore dyed, before they
had set one foot therein. But how profitable had it been for them; if he had
remained alive, considering his grave wisdom, and ripe judgment, wherein by
reason of his great practice and long experience he singularlye excelled? How
fit a man had he been, by reason of his Sanctytye and holiness of life,
and of his virtuous dealinges and godly cogitations to turn away the wrath
of GOD, iustlye conceived against them: What an help, furtherance, and
direction, moreover might he have been to them, after they had been once
entered and come into the Land, touching their Sacrifices, Rytes and
Ceremonies, which he either by word of mouth, or by traditions written, had
left among them.

How necessary in all respects was this reverend Doctor Martin Bucer, to the
Church of Christ, being a man so notablye furnished and so exquisitely enclyned
to the advancement of the glory and true religion of God? And yet
notwithstanding, God has taken him away from among us: the light that was in
him, he has quenched: and would not that we should be shrouded any longer
under his wings, or privileged under his shadow: reputing us people most
unworthy, to be so much as the least partakers of such surpassing benefits.

And if (as it is indeed) the greater greater the sin is, the greater
punishment is there unto due, and the sharper smart it deserves: then shall it
be no hard matter to judge, among what sort of punishment this is now to be
reckened, that this time so good a pastor is taken away from us, so brighte a
lamp quenched, and such a light put out, as while we enjoyed, we safely
walked thoroughe the dangerous and dark paths of this life. Let us
diligently waighe and effectuallye consider these things (dearly beloved) and
beeinge herein in like sort punished by the hand of God, as the Isralites were,
let us learn to acknoweledge the wrath of God, and receive it as an
undoubted sign that he is angry and displeased with us.

We have heertofore showed our selves waiward, churlish, and unthankful by
murmuring both against God, and also against this man his Servant. Now,
even this day we feel (as Israel did) the heavy wrath and revenging hand of
God for the same, and may perceive how yt he evidently punishes us therefore.
We have been heretofore ungrateful, and repyning for the light that we
received from this excellent and worthy Doctor: now is it therefore put out and
quenched. It is said, that he lived here among thankelesse, crabbed, and
froward sinners: now therefore is he taken away from them. As for himself
he liude still: but so, that he lives in joy and bliss with God, and is
hence dispatched and freed from the toylesome greiues, and wretched troubles of
this life, and from those paynefull labors which he here willinglye suffered
and patyentelye endured for our beehoofe and benefytte, but now is he at rest
with GOD, to his own beehoofe, comfort and commodytye. GOD looueth him in
that he hasted so soon to call him away out of the company of wicked
Sinners. But he is angrye with us, in that he thinks us inworthye any longer
to enjoy such a precious pillar.

If these things being thus duly and diligently considered can nothing at all
move us (wherewith (notwithstanding) I know, that every godly person is and
will be not a little touched) yet is there greater cause to draw us, heavily
and sorowfully to take this misfortune: not in such sort lamenting and
sorowing, for him that is dead (as has been said before) as though death had
done to him any harm, but in applying and translating the whole cause of our
sorrow and grief unto our own selves, according to that saying of our Lord
and Savior Christ, who would not have the Hierosolimitanes to mourn for him,
but for themselves and their children. Luc. 23. 28.
Daughters of Jerusalem (says he) weep not for me, but weep for your selves
and for your children. And he there yeldeth a reason why they should weep
for them selves and their children. For (says he) if they do this to the
green tree, what shall be done to the dry? Ver. 31.


Let every one of us now here present note well this sentence, and look well to
himself: let every one of us (I say) think well of this matter, and upon
this occasion here presently offered by the death and departure of this grave
and reverend Father, let him be moved to fear. For, if by the secret and
hidden (but yet just) judgment of almighty god we see and hear such heavy
sentence pronounced against his own family and haushold, that he threateneth
to abridge their life, and shorten their days, how near at hand is the end
of them which believe not the Gospel? If his life were shortened, whom while
he here lived, the Lord so entirelye loved, being the beauty of his house,
and in the building, repayring and every way garnishinge whereof, he showed
himself a most dyligent and paynefull builder, and a most wise and cunning
master workman: if (I say) his days were cut short, to the end he might
rest from his vehemente toil and zealous study, which he had toward the
promoting and aduauncing the lords building: how comes it to pass, that we,
(we I say) u^nful caitiues do promise to our selves long life, and think
here to live many years, spendding and bestowing the same (as some do) in
idleness, vanitye and loytring: Whereby it must needs come to pass, and
necessarily follow, that they cannot be said to live ouerwise, then by the
spoils of the goods and Patrimonye of Christ crucified.

Some there be, that devise all the ways they can, and seek all means
possible, to the uttermost of their ability to deface the beautye and glory of
this building, to undermine the walls and overthrow the foundation thereof,
that all the wild beasts of the wood, may freely enter, to devour; spoil,
rob and most cruellye to make havoc of all.

If this green Tree which yielded plentiful store of fruit in due season, and
which was planted by the rivers side, and moystened with the liuelye waters of
the Fountain of life, and which brought forth such continual, heavenly and
durable fruict, to the glory of God, and for our consolation, to be imitated,
was (notwithstanding his flourishing and fruitful increase) plucked up by the
roots: what shall be the end of us, (think we) being dead, dry and wythered
Fig trees, without either blossom or fruit, Matt. 21. 19.
unworthy any longer to occupye the ground, Mar. 11. 13.
or to set one foot upon the earth? He was (without doubt) a most florishinge
green tree, yelding forth most excellent fruit, and therefore is not utterly
and altogether cut down, but only transplanted and removed out of his
place, to be set in a pleasaunter and wholesommer soil. But what may we
judge of our selves, that bring forth in our life nothing but brambles and
thistles: and yet are continually and daily moystened and watered with the
deawe of the heavenly grace and word of God: Why should not we tremble, and
with compunction of heart greatly fear, least we be utterly cut down with the
Axe of Gods judgment; Matt. 3. 10.
and by divine sentence thrown into the fire. Luc. 3. 9.
Understand ye unwise among the people: Psalm. 94. 8.
and be wise at length ye fools. O consider this, ye that forget God, least he
tear you in pieces, and there be none that can deliver you. Say not within
your selves. Psalm. 50. 22.
We have Abraham to our Father, Matt. 3. 9.
For I say unto you, that every tree which brings not forth good fruit, is
hewne down and cast into the fire. Fear ye the dreadful and terrible words
of the Lord, who says, Mat. 21. 43.
The kingdom of God shall be taken from you and shall be given to a Nation that
shall bring forth the fruits thereof. Remember thy self therefore O Cambridge and
look well about thee: consider thine estate, seeing that unto thee, God has
sent his Prophets, Wisemen and Scribes from the far distant places of the
world: Least there come upon thee all the just blood that has been shed upon
the earth. Luke 11. 50.
Repent, repent, thou that killest the Prophets, and with slanderous words
stonest them that are sent unto thee. But mark ye and hear what does there in
that place immediately follow: Behold, your house is left unto you desolate.
Luke 13. 34. 35.
Amend therefore your ways and your works: and trust not in lying words,
Ierem. 7. 3.
saying, The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, this is the Temple
of the Lord. For, behold, the Lord comes with thousands of his saints, to
give judgment against all men, and to rebuke all the ungodly among them, Jude.
14.
of al their wicked deeds which they have ungodly committed, and of al their
cruel speakings, which wicked sinners have spoken against him. Luke. 8. 8
He that has ears to hear, let him hear.

Exhortation to Prayer.
THat therefore the veil of ignorance may be removed from our hearts, and the
dazeling dimnes of spite and envy banished from our eyes: that we may deeply
weigh and with humble confession of our sins effectually consider this heavy
stroke and punishment here offered unto us by God upon this present occasion:
that all bitterness of words, al boasting, wrath, cursed speaking railing and
backbiting with all malice rancor and hartburning may be put away from among
us: let us humbly prostrat our selves before our gracious God and heavenly
father meekly and devoutly by earnest prayer craving at his merciful hands
the assistance of his holy spirit, and that he will of his infinite goodness
forgive us out sins and pardon our offenses.

In which prayers I do commend unto you the state of the Catholic Church being
the blessed communion of the saint of God, the the same may flourish and go
forward in yt knowledge of his divine will, du^y^ully agnising and confessing
his holy name and sincere religion, and thankfully receiving and embrasing the
graces and gifts of Christ, her Spouse and head and that she may persist and
continue to the end, in the undoubted faith of our Lord and Savior. Pray ye
also for all those, yt through error and misbeleefe are found to be out of this
church, and for such as through hypocritical dissimulation ar reck^ned to be
of ye true church, being (indeed) the Synagog of Satan, yt they and we with
one mind and consent may willingly hear and ioyfullye embrace the voice of
our high Shepherd Christ, and that we may become one Sheepefold and one
flock, with one mouth and one heart glorifying God the father of our lord Jesus
Christ. Pray ye also particularly for this church of England and Ireland, and
for ye supreme head of both the same, next and immediately under Christ, our
most excellent and gracious Sovereign, King Edward the sixth, etc. Finally let
us give humble thanks unto almightye God, for our brethren and sisters, which
are departed out of this vale of misery, marked with the Seal of Faith. And
last of all, let us pray for our selves, that even as the Fathers of the old
Testament earnestly desired and zealously continued still looking and expecting
for the first coming of our Savior Christ in the flesh, that they might be
^artakers of that abundant blessing, which ^^ey assuredly and undoubtedly knew
that he ^ould bring with him: and after he was exhibited to the world, had a
longing desire to be hold him with their bodily eyes: So likewise that we now
under the new Testament may live soberly, godly and honestly in this world,
earnestly waiting for his second coming: and that we greedily thirsting (with
our brethren already deceassed) for the full redemption of our bodies, to be
united to his glorious body, may be joined in fellowship with Abraham, Isaac,
Jacob, etc. Among whom I do reckon and pronounce this excellent and reverend
Doctor Martin Bucer to be: for whom let us heartily and in full assurance
thereof, thank almighty God, for so guiding him with his heavenly spirit,
that in holiness and sanctity he has thus begun his rest: that he remained
and continued constant and immovable to the last gasp, in pure and incorrupt
doctrine grounded upon the infallible word of God and founded upon the faith
of the Apostles and the Catholic church of Christ; constantly confirming his
profession, both in life and manners agreeable to the same. For, by warrant of
the mercies and promise of almighty God, I do boldly pronounce that he is now
in Abraham's bosom, and enjoys most happy bliss, rest and felicity, with all the holy company of the elect children of God. And thus for him and in his
name do I affirm: I know that he shall rise again at the resurrection in the
last day with a most assured and certain knowledge, such (I say) as comes
of faith: I know, that for so much as our Savior Christ says of himself, yt
he is the resurrection and the life: and that, whosoever believes in him,
although he were dead, yet lives: and again, that every one which lives
and believes in him, shall not die for ever: I know, (I say) and by that
undoubted trust and warrant which I have in the word of God, and by that
testimony which he constantly made of his faith, life, conversation, and
constant confession of Christ's name, even till the very last point of his
life, that although he be dissolved for a time, in respect of his body, yet in
spirit he lives with god, and at the last day in the joyful resurrection of
the just shall again be conjoined, and shall enjoy the presence of God, and
reign with him both in body and soul for evermore.

FINIS.

