DORCAS: OR, A PERFECT PATTERN OF A TRUE DISCIPLE.

A Sermon Preached by Bartholomew Parsons B. of Divinity and Rector of
Ludgershall in the County of Wilts.

Ioh. 15.8. Herein is my Father glorified, that ye bear much fruit, so shall
ye be my Disciples.

Prove. 31.20. She stretches out her hand to the poor, yea she reaches
forth her hands to the needy.

OXFORD, Printed by William Turner Printer to the famous University. 1631.

TO THE HONORED, MY LOVING FRIEND St FRANCIS PILE BARONET.
WORTHY SIR,
HOly Job being about to vttter a divine meditation concerning the future
resurrection, cries out, Oh that my words were written now, Oh that they were
printed in a Book. Job. 19.23. And you of late being the Principal Auditor,
where according to the gift given to me, J uttered this following Meditation,
conceived upon an excellent pattern in my Text, both of good works in
general, and of Almsdeeds in special, the best of works, which shall be
remembered and rewarded at the last resurrection before and above all other
works, walked in the same Spirit with that righteous man, in desiring that
these same words might be written unto you, and not vanish away in the hour
and air wherein they were uttered: J have therefore transcribed this copy, and
do willingly and deservedly Dedicate to your self this piece of my labors.
And so much the rather J present it to you, because as face answers to face
in water, Prove. 27.19. so both your self and your worthy Lady answer fully to
this face of charity and almes-doing represented here to you in this Disciple
Dorcas, in the sowing plentifully and solemnly at the set times weekly, the
seed of your alms at your gates to the poor round about yuo: which J write
not out of any flattery: (from which both by nature and conscience J am
averse,) but as Paul said of the Macedonians in alike case 2. Cor. 8.1.3. to
bear witness of the grace of God bestowed on you both, who are met together
in another Cornelius and Dorcas abounding in this work of the Lord. As you
have therefore worthily begun; so happily go on in sowing the seed of your
alms plentiously, that you may reap plentiously in the day of the Lord. For
though you seem to the world to cast your bread upon the waters, where it is
lost, yet after many days you shall find it again, even in the great day of
the Lord. The poor may say unto thee, that I in receiving of Alms give no
less unto thee, then thou in bestowing them give unto me. For if there were
not some to receive thine Alms, thou could not give earth and receive
heaven, as St Austin says. And in the mean season, God that is rich to all,
will so bless your basket and your store, that always having sufficiency in
all things, you may still abound in this work. For as St Chrysostom says,
Almes-doing makes not any man poor, but enricheth him, for it is promised,
give, and it shall be given you: and again, that thou mai'st be rich, give thy
goods liberally: that thou mai'st gather, scatter: follow the sower, sow in
blessings, that thou mai'st reap in blessings: in his 53. and 68. Homily to
the people of Antioch.

Now the God of Heaven bless You, and your worthy Lady, not only with the
blessings of Heaven above, and Earth beneath, but also with all Spiritual
blessings in Christ Jesus; that when you have finished your course happily in
this world you may reign eternally in the World to come; So wishes

Your Servant in our Master Christ Jesus BARTHOL. PARSONS.
From my house at Collingborne April 1. 1631.
Acts 9.36. Now there was at Ioppa a certain Disciple, named Tabitha, which
by interpretation is called Dorcas: This woman was full of good works, and
almes-deedes which she did.


TO that question of King Lemuel, [Solomon] in that Prophecy taught him by a
woman [his mother] who can find a virtuous woman, Prove. 31.10. arguing and
intimating die rarity of good women; we may return here an inventa est, and
cry out with that passionate exclamation of Archimedes, a famous Mathematician,
when he had found out a Mathematical experiment, (...); I have found; I have
found; ecce hic, behold here is one; and so much the sooner have we found,
with Iaacob, because the Lord our God has brought one to our hands, Genesis
27.10. beautified and beatified with all graces accompanying salvation in
woman, Faith, and Charity, and Holiness with sobriety. 1. Tim. 2.15. For that
we might not count her an alien, but one of the household of faith, she is a
Disciple; (and Disciples and Christians are termini convertibiles, of
equivalent signification Act. 11.26) one that was not ashamed of Christ and his
words, Luke 9.26. that we may be assured that she professed not to know
Christ, and deny him in her works, Tit. 1.16. She is a good tree; bringing
forth good fruits, Mat. 7. joining virtue with her faith, 2. Pet. 1.5. and
showing her faith by her good works, or that only some good was found in her,
as in Ieroboams son, 1 Kings 14.13. some gleaning grapes as the shaking of an
Olive tree, Isa 17.6. She is full of good works, defective and behind in no
gift, 1. Cor. 1.7. or that she served God only in holiness in the works of
piety, and not in righteousness in the works of charity, (as too many put
asunder those things which God has joined together) she distributeth to the
necessities of the Saints, does almsdeeds; and as she abounds in every
thing, so in this gift also, 2. Cor. 8.7. sows the seed of her alms
plentiously, is full of almes-deedes which she did. But that by my ordering of
things here, I may further your remembering of them, (as ordo est matter
memoriae, order is the mother of memory) observe I pray you in this narration a
twofold description of this virtuous woman; 1. by her civil condition, There
was at Ioppa a certain Disciple named Tabitha, which by interpretation is
called Dorcas, 2. by her religious disposition, this woman was full of good
works and almes-deedes which she did. In her civil state and condition we
have 1. her place of habitation, Ioppa, 2 her name, either propounded, named
Tabitha, or expounded, which by interpretation is called Dorcas. In her
religious disposition, we have 1. her profession a Disciple, 2. her expression
of it, either generally in good works, amplified by the measure and extent,
full of good works; or specially in almsdeeds, being of the same size full
of almsdeeds which she did.

Concerning her civil state and condition, her habitation and denomination,
being but the outward skin and rine of the Text, in respect of the pith within:
I will not according to the proverb haerere in cortice, stick in the bark.
Only in transitu, in our passage hear and bear a word or two of the
propounding and expounding of her name, for if we strike this rock the waters
will gush out, Exodus 17.6 she was named Tabitha, which by interpretation is
called Dorcas. Names in Scriptures are imposed either upon some special
accident, or intent and purpose. Upon some special accident, as Isaacks name
of laughter, because Sarah laughed at the promised of him, Genesis 18.13. Jacobs
of supplanting; because he took his brother by the heel in the birth of them,
Genesis 25 26. and Pharez his name signifying breach, or division; because he made
a breach in the birth, coming forth before his brother that offered first,
Genesis 38.29. Upon some special intent, either for memorial of benefits
received, as Ishmaell the hearing of God, because God heard Abraham's prayer for
a son, Genesis 16.15. as Solomon, Iedidiah loved of the Lord, because God loved
him, 2. Sam. 12.24. Or of some duties to be done, as Judah has his name of
praises, because the Lord was to be praised for him, Genesis 29.35. as James and
John called by Christ Boanerges sons of thunder, because they should thunder
in their doctrine, and lighten in their lives, Mark 3.17. and that name above
all names Jesus a Savior, because he should save his people from their sins,
Matt. 1.25. And here happily the name Tabitha in Syriacke, and in the Hebrew
Tsibjah, or as some will have it Thabia, (Bullinger in locum) arising of root
nabat signifying to see, (as in the interpretation of it in the Greek Dorcas
is (...) of seeing) was given her accidentally of the sharpness of her sight,
wherein the Roe-bucke excels, (as Pliny says) and of which St Hierome has
a saying, oculos caprearum talpa contemnit, the blind moule despises the eyes
of the Roe-bucke. Sure I am that she was sharp sighted in looking on things
eternal, 2. Cor. 4.18, that the eyes of the mind were enlightened to know what
was the hope of her calling, and what the riches of the glory of Gods
inheritance in the Saints, Ephesians. 1.18. that with Simeon the eyes of her inward
man saw the Lords Christ, Luke 2.16 and that they were happy in seeing his day,
Luke 10.

Now in that Spirit speaking here to the Churches, would interpret this Hebrew
or Syriacke name in the Greek tongue, wherein it writes; Tabitha by Dorcas or
Roe-bucke: our learning herein is, that all things in the Church must be done
to edification, 1. Cor 14.26. and that whatsoever is spoken in a strange tongue
must be interpreted that the Church may receive edifying 1. Cor. 14.5. and this
is the way of God in the sanctuary. Emanuell a strange word in the greek
tongue, is interpreted God with us, Matt. 1. So Rabbi is interpreted Master;
Messiah, the Christ; Cephas, a stone; all one chapter Job. 1. so Boanerges, the
sons of thunder, Mar. 3.17. Barnabas, tke son of consolation, Acts 4.
Abba, Father, Romans 8.15. Now if the wisdom of the spirit would interpret
names to us whereof we may be ignorant, without forfetting the freehold of
eternal life, much more would it have the whole Scriptures ( which were
written for our learning, Romans 15.4. and are able to make us wise unto
salvation. 2. Tim. 3.16.) interpreted and expounded unto us in a known tongue,
for edification, exhortation, and comfort. Qui in modico fidelis, and in majori
fidelis. He that is faithful in a little matter, will be faithful in a
greater, Luke 16.10. If a name must be spoken to us in our own tongue, much
more must the (...), Act. 2.11. the great mysteries of godliness, in a
language that we understand. And of that I dare be bold to say, that from the
beginning it was so. The doctrine of S. John did not so vanish away, as the
Philosophers did: (says Chrysostom in 1. Homily on John) but the Syrians,
Egyptians, Indians, Persians, Aethiopians, and innumerable other nations
translating them into their language, of barbarous men, learned the heavenly
Philosophy. So Augustine in his 2. book of Christian doctrine, chap. 5. says,
that the divine Scripture proceeding from one language, being spread abroad
far and wide by the diverse tongues of Interpreters, was made known to the
Gentiles for their salvation. And Theodoret most plainly in his first book of
curing the maladies of the Grecians, The Hebrew books were not only turned
into the Greek language, but also into the Roman, Egyptian, Persian, Indian,
Armenian, Scythian, and even the Gothicke language; and that I may speak once
for all, into all the languages which the Gentiles use unto this day. Can we
praise the Papists then in condemning and abhorring as impossible and
unprofitable the turning of the divine oracles into our mother tongue, (which
was their old Tenent) or if they be interpreted and translated, either in their
forbidding that in the public and common use of the Church they should be
read or sung in the vulgar tongues: ( so does the Counsel of Trent in the 22.
Session chapt. 8. and the 9. Canon:) or else in affecting such obscurity, and
filling their translation with so many words borrowed from the Hebrew,
Syriacke, Greek, and Latin, that it may be said of their translation as the
Philosopher said of his books, that they were edita and non edita, published
and not published. Of this kind are their Archisynagogue, azimes, depositum,
dydrachme, dominicall, evangelize, holocausts, hosts, Neophyte, paraclete,
parasceve, prepuce, repropitiate, resuscitate, sabbatisme, and such like,
whereof an English man may cry out, how can I understand unless I had the gift
of tongues? If I know not the meaning of the voice, I shall be unto him that
speaks Barbarian, and he shall be a Barbarian to me, 1. Cor. 14 11. But
here is not my rest, I pass therefore from her civil state and condition to
her religious disposition first in her profession being a Disciple.

A certain Disciple, The original is (...) feminine according to her sex, a
Disciplesse, a she Disciple, as Anna is called a Prophetess, Luke 2.36.
Excellent and honorable are the styles and titles given in holy writ to the
professors of religion, importing the dignity and duty of their calling. They
are named the Church, the elect of God, of their calling and chooing out of the
world: Saints, of their sanctification, sons of God, of their adoption;
vessels of mercy, and honor, of their present forgiveness of their sins and
future glory: believers, faithful men of their faith and profession: brethren,
household of faith, of their union and society amongst themselves: devout men,
of their religion, Disciples of Christ Jesus the author and finisher of our
faith, Heb. 12.2. But the name Disciple, is the most ancient, the most
frequent in the new Testament given to all the faithful, the Apostles not
excepted, who are called the twelve Disciples, Matt. 10.2. Now the Scripture in
the Evangelist does not only call those twelve his Disciples, but all those
that believing in him, were by his teaching instructed to the kingdom of
heaven, says Augustine in his 2. book of the consent of the Evangelists,
Chap. 17. To be a Disciple then, is to hear and learn of God by the ministry
of the Gospel, the way of peace, the mysteries of Godliness. And Tabitha has
this name here, because with Mary she sat at Jesus feet and heard his words,
Luke 10.39. with Lydia she attended to those things which were spoken of Gods
Ministers, Act. 16.14, I commend then the imitation hereof, not only to her
sex, but to all the Saints, all that will call on the name of the Lord, to
learn of her to be scholars in Christ's school, to sit at the beautiful
feet of them that preach the Gospel of peace, and bring glad tidings of good
things, Romans 10.15. For all must learn of them that prophecy, 1. Cor. 14.31.
of such Epaphrasses as are faithful Ministers of God for them, Col. 1.7. all
must obey (...) be persuaded and taught of them that have the oversight of
them, and suffer the word of exhortation, Heb. 13.17.22. all must receive the
word ingraffed with meekness, Iam. 1.21. hear the Prophets that are raised
up unto them. Deuteronomy. 18.15. hear and receive them as an Angel of God, yea as
Christ Jesus himself, Luke 10.16. Gal. 4.14. Let us so hear the Gospel (
Austin in his 30 tract upon John) as we would hear the Lord himself if he
were present now, for that precious thing which sounded out of the Lords mouth
was both written for us, and is reserved for us, and is rehearsed to us: and
again, that which is to be learned by a man, let a Christian learn without
any pride, let us not tempt him in whom we have believed, least being deceived
by such subtilties and frowardness of our common enemy, we should refuse to
go into the Church to hear and learn the Gospel, or to read a book, or to
hear a man read and preach. And in his book of Catechizing the rude, chapt.
12. he would have men such cheerful hearers, that if our preaching at any
time be colder then usually it is, it might be quickened and kindled by their
unusual hearing and attending. But in these late and worser days, if we
survay this weak sex, we may every where find silly women ever learning,
and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth, 2. Tim. 3. never worthy
of the name of Disciples, or else so far in the other extreme, that in stead
of Disciples, they will be Doctors, presume to teach, 1. Tim. 2. according to
that of Hierome in an epistle to Paulinus, the babbling old woman will teach the
scripture before she has learned it, or else so far from all holy learning
in Christ's school, that with the Scribes and Pharisees they will neither enter
into the kingdom of heaven, nor suffer others, Matt. 23.13. but with their
grandmother Eve are tempters of others to ill, Genesis 3. with Iesabell are
stirrers of others to work wickedness, 1. Kings 21.25. with Jobs wife are
perswaders to profaneness, Job. 2. with Solomon's wives are inticers to
idolatry, 1. Kings. 11.4. with Herodias movers to murder, Matt. 14. with the
harlot allures to lust, Prove. 7.18. with Michall despisers of religious zeal
in others, 2. Sam. 6. and with those complained of by Paul, 1. Tim. 5.13. such
as learn to be idle, wandering about from house to house, and not only idle,
but tatlers also, and busiebodies speaking things which they ought not. But
scarcely any where can we find those women that learn in silence, 1. Tim. 2.
that with the honorable Dames of Berea receive the word with all readiness of
mind, and search the Scriptures whether those things are so, Act. 17.11.12.
and with Damaris there, verse 34 cleave unto Paul's preaching: that with the
women, and Mary the mother of Jesus continue with the Apostles in the exercise
of religion, act. 1.14. and with Mary Magdalen, Ioanna, and Susanna, are with
Christ, whilst he is preaching and showing the glad tidings of the kingdom
of heaven, Luke. 8.1.2. Nay if we run too and fro, through the streets of
our Jerusalem, and see, and know, and seek in the broad places thereof, Ier.
5.1. where can we find any Disciples unless such as Paul found at Ephesus,
that have Learned nothing, so ignorant that they cannot tell whether there be
an holy Ghost or no, Act. 19.2.3 any such tractable scholars as Cornelius,
with his words in their mouths, to Christ's ministers, we are here as in the
presence of God, to hear the things that are commanded you of God, Act. 10.33.
any that press upon them to hear the word of God, as those did, Luke 5.1.
Diogenes coming into Antisthenes school, and being often rejected by him, yet
stuck there still, and when on a time Antisthenes offered to strike him with
his staff, he bowed his head and said, Beat me if thou will, but thou shall
find no staff so hard wherewith thou shall drive me away, so long as thou
speak any thing. According to which effect, Augustine on John says, If thou
can teach me that I know not, I ought not only to endure thee patiently in
words, but also beating me with stripes But now though we speak the hidden
wisdom of God, in a mystery able to make man wise unto salvation, and not the
perishing wisdom of this world (as the old Philosophers did) we have need
of rods and staves to drive men to us, to compel them to come in, that Gods
house may be full of Disciples. Every where we may find Despisers sooner then
Disciples, prophainers rather then professors, good companions rather then
good Christians, brethren in evil rather then holy brethren, children of the
Devil rather then sons of God; and the Synagogues of Satan rather then the
household of Faith: yea the very names of Disciple, brother, believer,
professor, Saint, faithful, (which should be our crown and our joy) are
laughed to scorn by miscreants which yet would be good Christians. But let
them be assured that if they be ashamed to be Christ's Disciples here, to learn
and know him, that he will be ashamed of them hereafter Luke 9.26. that he
will not then know them for any of his.

We see that this woman has begun to run well, to witness a good
confession, let her ride on prosperously as the Psalmist speaks, Psaml. 45.4.
for she lacks yet one thing comprehending in it many things to make her a
complete Christian, she must not only profess well, but also express it,
not only have her ears opened to learn Christ's will, mine ears have thou
opened, but her heart and hand ready to do it, I delight to do thy will, thy
law is within my heart Psalm. 40.6.8. for Christianum facit vita and professio,
as Austine says, life and profession together make a Christian. Let us mark
then how these meet and kiss each other in her, for her profession she is a
Disciple, for her profit, she is generally fruitful in good works. Now
concerning good works here mentioned, Pilate in the spirit of scoffing or
curiosity asked our Savior, what is the truth? John 18.38. but we in the
spirit of meekness may well ask here, what good works are? Good works then
(as I have learned at the feet of a Gamaliel of ours, Zanchy on the 1. chap.
of the Philip. verse 11.) are works and actions as well inward as outward:
whether they be thoughts in the mind, and elections in the will, or words
uttered by the tongue, or deeds which may be done by a righteous man as he is
righteous, in any part of his soul or body. For as an actual sin is any
thing said, or done, or thought against the law of God, so a good work, (and
as St John calls it in his 1. epist. cap. 3.) righteousness is any thing
spoken, or thought, or done according to the Law of God. The holy Ghost for our
better direction and for distinction, does sometimes tripartite good works
into 1. sobriety in the use of outward things, as meat, drink, apparel and
the like: 2. righteousness in our dealings with men: 3. Godliness in our
duties to God; that we should live soberly, righteously, and godly in this
present world, Tit. 2.12. sometimes he does more briefly bipartite them into
holiness, in the duties of the first table that concern Gods worship; and
righteousness, in the duties of the second Table, that respect our neighbors
good, that we might serve him in holiness and righteousness all the days of
our life, Luke 2.75. And so does our Savior into the first and great
commandment which is, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and
with all thy soul, and with all thy mind; and the second is like to it, which
is, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. Matt. 22.37.38.39.40. Now this
being written for our learning, we must learn of this Disciple, this learner
in in Christ's school, to join with our profession practice, with our hearing
doing, with our faith virtue 2. Pet. 1.5. with our show of godliness the power
of it in our lives. 2. Tim. 3.5. with our knowledge of God the service of him.
1. Chr. 28 9. with our professing to know God a manifesting of it in our works
2. Tim. 3.5. with our calling of Abraham father a doing of the works of
Abraham, John 8.39. The professors of the Gospel must have their conversation
as becomes the Gospel of Christ, Phil. 1.27. Walk worthy of the vocation
wherewith they are called; Ephesians. 4.1. and worthy of the Lord unto all
pleasing, Col. 1.10. and adorn themselves with good works, 1. Tim. 2.10. This
is a faithful saying, and these things I will that thou affirm constantly,
that they which have believed in God, might be careful to maintain good
works, Tit. 3.8. Men learn the trades of this world to practice them, and the
mysteries of godliness are taught us that we may turn words into works, as
Bernard says in his tract of ordering our lives. It profits not to have
learned what we should do, and not to do it, (says Hierome in an epistle)
it is better not to know a thing, then to learn it with danger: and Augustine
and in his 2. homily on the revelation: As it booteth not for a great tree to
be green, and yield no fruit, so it profits not to be called a Christian,
and not to have Christian works: and the same father in his book of 83
questions, and 76 question says, that the words of the Apostle, I suppose that
a man is justified by faith without the works of the law, are not so to be
understood, that when a man has received faith, we should call him just,
though he live ill. But in this point we that glory in God Romans 2.17. and are
called Christians, are so bad scholars that if my head were waters, and mine
eyes a fountain of tears, I could not sufficiently bewail our wants of
fruits answerable to our profession; we make our boast of Gods law amongst
us, but through our breaking of it, we dishonor God, and cause his name to be
blaspheemed, Romans 2.23.24. with the Jews Ier. 7. we cry templum Domini, the
Temple of the Lord, God is amongst us, and we are his temple, but we amend not
our ways: we come and stand before God in his house, as a nation that would do
righteously, but when we are gone, we do all abominations, steal, murder,
commit adultery, swear rashly and falsely, drink till we are drunk, give
others drink till they are drunk also, and run to all excess of riot. We
are indeed baptized unto Moses, Gods Ministers whom he has sent to baptize,
and eat the same spiritual meat, and drink the same spiritual drink, but
please not God in our lives and conversations, 1. Cor. 10.2.3.4.5. with Simon
Magus we have a kind of temporary belief, but our hearts are not right in
the sight of God, but we are in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of
iniquity, Act. 8.13.21.23. we have Jacobs voice, smooth and blessed words, but
Esaus hands, rough and cursed deeds; with the fig tree we have the leaves of
an outward profession, but want the fruits of an holy conversation; with Judas
we are numbered amongst Christ's Disciples, sit at table with him, but betray
him as soon as we are gone out; we hear but we do not, with out mouths
and bodily presence we shevve much love, but our hearts run after
covetousness, Ezec. 33.31. and all kind of wickedness. In a word, we have
much knowledge, no charity, a dead faith, a faith of Devils, but no works;
Christ's greatest friends and they of his own household are his greatest
enemies, being as Bernard complains in his time, all friends, and all enemies;
all necessaries, and all adversaries; all near, and yet all such as seek
their own. Videtur bone Jesus (as Hugo complains in his time) O good Jesus the
whole company of Christians seems to have conspired against thee, and they
which are first in thy Church, are first in persecuting of thee. Woe, woe unto
us for our ill lives, shall our outward profession, our dead and devilish
faith save us without good works? Mark we that faithful saying of St
Austine in his book of faith to Peter the Deacon, cap. 40. Believe it for a
truth and doubt not of it, that not all which are baptized within the
Catholic Church shall receive eternal life, but they who after baptism
received live well: for as infidels, heretics, and schismatickes shall not
have the kingdom of heaven, so vicious Catholics shall not possess it. Next
we have her good works amplified by the extent,

Full of good worke] she was filled with the fruits of righteousness, Phil.
1.11. like those water pottes at the wedding, that were full to the brimme Ioh.
2. and she gave to God and man good measure, pressed down, shaken together
and running over Luke 8.36. what we hear then and see in her we must do, we
must be ready to every good work, Tit. 3. fruitful in every good work, Col.
1.10. walking with Zachary and Elizabeth in all the commandments of God
without reproof, Luke 1. and abounding always in the work of the Lord, 1.
Cor. 15.58. what the young man boasted of vaine-gloriously, we must strive
after sincerely, all these have I kept from my youth vpwardes. Mar. 10.20.

For God loves a fullness of all things, an abounding in every good gift, 2.
Cor. 8. a fullness of knowledge, Col. 1.9. a fullness of obedience, Phil. 1.11.
a fullness of faith, and for that purpose gives to his a fullness of the holy
Ghost, Stephen full of faith, and of the holy Ghost, Act. 6.5. Away then with
those depthes of Satan, when men think that they may borrow a point of God,
and with that young man, Mark 10. fail in one thing or other, and with Herod,
Mar. 6. keep their minion Herodias, some darling sin or other, so long as
they do many good things. Let not then the usurer flatter himself with an
opinion that God will be merciful unto him in his usury (as Naaman prayed that
God would be merciful unto him in the point of bowing in the idols temple 2.
Kings. 5.) nor the adulterer in his adultery, nor the blaspemer in his
swearing, nor the drunkard in his swilling, nor the slanderer in his evil
speaking, nor the lover of pleasures in his immoderate and unlawful pastimes,
nor any man in his taking liberty to commit and continue in any known sin.
Our obedience to God must be universal, like to that which the Reubenites,
Gadites, and half tribe of Manasseh profess and promise to Ioshuah, all that
thou command us will we do, whithersoever thou sendest us, will we go, in
all things as we obeyed Moses, so will we obey thee, los. 1.16.17. We must
then with the Apostle pray that the God of peace would make us perfect in every
good work to do his will, Heb. 13.20.21.

And Almes-deedes which she did: But the holy Ghost here transit a thesi ad
hypothesin, passes from the general to the special, from her fullness in
good works in general, to her fullness in one good work specially, and that
is in almsdeeds. It may be said, what need this wast of words? if she were
full of all good works, then consequently of almes-deedes, if she abounded in
every grace, then in this also, for Genus est inseparabile a suis speciebus,
the general and the special cannot be separated one from another; It is true,
the one cannot be without the other, but very frequently in scripture, where
we find religion and good works mentioned, we shall see giving of alms
attend upon the^ as an elder daughter upon the mother. Cornelius being
commended for a devout man, and one that feared God, this point is presently
added, he gave muchalmes to the people, Act. 10.2. the Apostle requiring in a
widow to be chose^ for the service of the Church, that she should be well
reported of for good works, presently hitteth upon this special, if she have
lodged strangers, if she have washed the Saints feet, if she have relieved the
afflicted, 1. Tim. 5.10. and calling upon the Hebrews that they should not
forget to do good, in the next place he adds and to communicate, Heb. 13.16.
either joining the special to the general, communicating to doing of good, or
by both words signifying one thing, because distributing to the necessities of
our brethren is magna pars bonorum operum, a great and principal part of good
works; it is (as Demosthenes said pronunciation was in Rhetoric) primum,
secundum, and tertium in benefaciendo; the first, second and third point in
doing of good. Yea consider how great a good work alms doing is, seeing it
shall be mentioned when all our other works shall be omitted: Come ye blessed
of my Father etc. for I was hungry, and ye fed me, I was thirsty, and ye
gave me drink Matt. 25.34.35. tacet Deus etc. God concealeth all the other
good deeds of the righteous, and only vouchsafes to remember their alms, he
concealeth also all the evil deeds of ungodly men, and only thinks meet
to rebuke their barrenness in alms. Augustine in his 28. Homily. and Peter
Chrysologus in his 14. Sermon, In the kingdom of heaven before all, in the
asse^bly of the^ that rise, God mentions not that Abel suffered, that Noah
preserved the world, that Abraham kept the faith, that Moses gave the law, that
Peter ascended up to the cross of Jesus with his heels upwards, but only
speaks of that which the pore eats: and seeing our riches so lost (as the
world thinks) shall be found, when all the treasures that we lay up closely
shall be lost, for as Gregory says, by keeping earthly things we loose them,
but by giving of them we preserve them: and as Peter Chrysologus, whatsoever
thou give to the poor, thou shall have it, whatsoever thou give not to the
poor, another shall have it. The point to be pressed to us hence, is as plain
as Abacuckes vision, Hab. 2.2. he may run that reads and observes it. It
is that every Disciple of the household of faith must pro suo modulo, according
to his measure, abound in this grace of distributing, the rich must be rich in
good works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate, 1. Tim. 6.17. They
must cast great gifts into Christ's treasury, the meaner sort must not be
wanting in their mites, Mar. 12. and every one according to his ability must
relieve his brethren, for so they proportion it at Antioch, Act. 11.29. yea and
in case of necessity sometimes beyond his ability, 2. Cor. 8.3. But who is such
a stranger in our Israel, that he knows not these things? I may say of this
point as Luther said of that verse of the 15. Ps: he that has not given his
money upon usury. Iste versus non indiget expositione, sed impletione, this
verse needs no expounding but fulfilling. Instruction in this righteousness
we need not but rather correction for our being behind in this work of the
Lord. Amongst us that are called Christians, there are many professors, few
practisers, and those few that seem ready to other good works, are backward
enough to this. I will not say with the Apostle 1. Cor. 15. I speak it to our
shame, that little of this fruit grows upon many of those trees, that seem
not only to have been long planted, but also much to flourish in the Courts
of Gods house, that this sure mark of sound religion is almost worn out
amongst many, who yet primos se volunt esse in religione would be ringleaders
in religion, but I will take up those words of Naaman, 2. Kings 5. God be
merciful unto us in this point, and double them with him, God be merciful
unto us in this point, for want of showing our pure and undefiled religion
before God by the works of mercy toward our brethren, for failing in this
fruit of our faith, and proof of our being true worshippers of God, caeteris
rebus pietatem colimus, in other matters we show our selves very godly, we can
go up to Gods temple, stand before him in his house, make many prayers unto
him, show much love with our mouths, but when it comes to this hand-loue,
then our hearts go after covetousness, Ezekiel. 33.31, we love that the bread of
life should dwell plenteously amongst us, but very sparingly deal our bread to
the hungry, we can continue in breaking of bread at Gods table, but care not
for breaking our bread to his people, we can sing lustily with a good courage,
but not give cheerfully, which God loves, we can perhaps fast, and afflict
our souls, (but that is not in much use with us) but we cannot refresh the
bowels of Gods poor people, we rather make them fast, and afflict their
souls; in a word, we are forwarder to show our religion and love to Gods name
any way then this way. The old people of the Jews were very strict in all
other fruits of their religion, they sought God daily, and delighted to know
his ways, as a nation that did righteously, and forsook not the ordinances of
their God, they asked of God the ordinances of justice, they took delight in
approaching to God, they fasted, they afflicted their souls: and thought these
such high points of piety that they quarrelled with God for not regarding of
them. Wherefore have we fasted, say they, and thou see not? wherefore have
we afflicted our soul, and thou take no knowledge? but all this religion and
devotion was in vain without the works of Charity. Is not this the fast that
I have chosen? to loose the bands of wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens,
and to let the oppressed go free, and that ye break every yoke? Is it not to
deal thy bread to the hungry, and that thou bring the poor that are cast out
to thine house, when thou see the naked that thou cover him, and that thou
hide not thy self from thine own flesh? Isa 58.2.3.5.6.7. That of St Basile
in an Homily against the unmerciful rich men of his time, is very appliable to
ours; I have known them that have fasted, that have prayed, that have sighed
and groaned, and in a word have exercised and practiced all the works of piety
that would cost them nothing, but would not bestow one halfe-penny on the
poor, what profit had they of all their other virtue? It was excellently said
of Leo in his sermon de apparit. the virtue of mercy is so great, that without
it, the rest though they be present cannot profit: for although a man be
faithful, and chaste, and sober, and adorned with other excellent gifts, yet if
he be not merciful, he shall not obtain mercy. But on every side we may find
Iudasses that care not for the poor, nay care not so much as for a show of
caring for the poor, which was in him, this ointment might have been sold for
three hundred pence, and given to the poor, John 12.5.6. Churlish Nabals, that
being moved to a work of mercy can roar out, shall I take my bread, and my
water, and my flesh that I have killed for my shearers, and give it to men whom
I know not whence they be? 1. Sam. 25.11. Their hearts even in this respect
are stony, insensible of others miseries, the bowels of compassion are shut up
in the^ as strately as the gates of Jericho were Ios. 7.1. their eyes are evil
and cannot endure to see another eat of their morsels, their hands are
withered like the man's in the Gospel, Luke 6. so that they cannot open and
stretch them out to their poor brother. Let Lazarus lie, and cry, and dye at
their gates, they will pity him less then their dogs; with Cain they will
be no keepers of their brethren, Genesis 4. Let Gods ministers serve at the Altar,
and cry with the children of the Prophets mors est in olla death is in the
pot, 2. Kings 4.40. for their poor maintenance, they will not receive them,
nor give them a cup of cold water in the name of a Prophet. The Lord has
need of them, Matt. 21.3. is no plea with them to make them part with an Ass,
or the foale of an Ass, or the hoof of an Ass for Gods service. Let them
have enough in store for themselves, lie upon their beds of Ivory, stretch
themselves upon their coaches, eat the lambs out of the flock, and the
calves out of the midst of the stall, drink wine in boules, and anoint
themselves with chief ointment, and they will not grieve for the affliction of
Joseph, Am. 6.4.5.6. they will have no compassion on the multitude that have
nothing to eat, Mar. 8.2. Lord lay not this sin of unmercifulness to the
charge of this age of ours, and stir us up in our places, and according to
our powers, to show mercy here, that we may find it in the great day of the
Lord JESUS. Amen.

FINIS.

