CVRES FOR THE ITCH.

Characters. Epigrams. Epitaphs.
By H. P.

Scalpat qui tangitur.
LONDON, Printed for Thomas Jones, at the sign of the Black Raven in the
Strand. 1626.

To the courteous Reader.
IT is now almost two years expired when (living in the Country that long
Vacation) I wrote these Epigrams, and Epitaphs adioining, which then, nor since
I would consent (nor was it fit indeed they should be published) till now on
times more prosperous opportunity. These Characters besides (though first here
mentioned) were now of later times by me composed, which not so fully
perfected, as was meant, I did not think should have past the press. If any
thing howeuer may prove acceptable, I shall a little seem more glad, being so
much less discredited by these vain hours of mine misspent, which should
have been (you will say) on better exercises. You cannot possibly dislike the
one, more then I willing would reform the other. Si tantum detur mihi libera
potestas and occasio: Mean while submitting to your favorable Censures, I
humbly rest,

Yours to be commanded, H. P.

To the Criticke-seeming Censurer.
THou may be courteous for ought I know, without the least of carping or
deprauing, let thy wits excellence or worths best estimate be what it will:
Marry Sir, then might it be asked me why I should thou thee, or any Gentleman of
those indowments, My answer briefly (though not worth the answering) is, that
thy betters have much more endured, and daily do accept without exceptions.
But to the business, Here Is a new Book, or rather new Brood (as a man may
call it) of some unusual odd inventions, hastily hatched without observance of
time, rule, or reckoning, and therefore little know I yet what may become of
them; nor dare I promise more on their behalfes, then that they either may
starve through poverty, or desperately lie upon the parish for want of shelter,
so far unlikely will it be (I know) to find the owners or fathers out, who
questionless will quite disclaim them to be their Bastards though nere so
iumpe a like in qualities as can or may be possibly required. But to leave
Metaphors, I know I shall be fowly censured, and that by none so much, as
those, that are or have been of mine own acquaintaine, I mean not such as are
judicious (whom I love and reverence) but other sort of prouder vpstarts that
would be wiser then their ancestors, because a little bolstered up since their
forgetful base beginnings. I should but vex my self, and ill detain you with
the report of things so frivolous, which ceasing so much as but to think upon,
If any man shall question me; Quorsum haec inania scripsi, it is ten to one I
answer not directy, more then thus, that what is done and past cannot be recald:
Therefore in brief, without least complements (as I said before) whatsoever to
others may prove distasteful, shall unto me be twice as odious, and there is an
end.

Characters.
BY H. P.

LONDON, Printed for Tho: Jones.

Characters.
A Ballad-maker
IS a kind of Owl or Batt that flies in the night, and dares not his
deformities should appear by day: He Is one that from first shameless
desperate become of late to be more impudent* sets this last rest up for his
latest refuge. His Primum mobile of ragged ancestry sprang from the patchings
of some paltry Poet; Whence learning how to rhyme unreasonably, makes this the
maine-Mast of his occupation. His choicest plots or grounds to work upon, are
drawn most commonly from thieves and murderers, or such notorious malefactors,
as puts him in great hope to purchase forty pence. His highest ambition he
aims at, is, to be entitled, The Times intelligencer, or Nuncius of News at
the second hand. The Punckes late Ballad of the new Bridewell was his chief
Masterpiece that purchased him perhaps a cobblers pair of boots over and above
his usual bargaining He spends most past of his time in's bed, partly for
saving charge of botching, but chiefly devising what were best to write on,
when no one calls on him for what is to pay: Omnia mea mecum, etc. may very
rightly be verified in him that has no riches more then what he wears, and
comes to him commonly by deed of gift. The Alewife is inforst to trust him
weekly, and that without all hope of having ought unless some Pallad chance
to be composed upon some dismal or doleful accident as may be sung to the
tune of welladay. If any thing happen to help besides, it must accrue from the
next Sessions* provided there be some to travel westward, on whom he is to make
that recantation as if himself were the Theme he writes on. No massacre or
murder comes to him amiss, but brings sufficient matter for invention. Wherein
he shows himself so nimble, that if any witch be by chance condemned, he will
have a ballad out in print before such time as she goes to Tyburne: wherein all
her confession and the manner of her death shall be described by way of
Prophecy, witness the famous witch of Edmonton, condemned at Newgate about
four years past. No Printer deals with him that loves his credit, but must
be thereunto induced for want of work, and then the Press begins to sweat
when monstrous news comes Trundling in the way; His greatest volume done in
Folio is to be purchased but for two brass tokens, which either you may please
to light Tobacco with or sacrifice to A-iax for purgation. In brief, the sum
of all his practices is but to shift him sometime in clean linen, that he
appear not louzie to posterity, and so I leave him.

A Tapster
IS another Mephostophilus, or visible spirit, that's daily diuing into Vauts
and Cellars; the custom of whose clamor is to cry anon, and restless post him
to and from the Spiggot: He Is one whose races first deriuatiue grew from the
dregs but of some Brewers Dray-man, who for his liquors larger utterance binds
him apprentice to an Inkeeper, where quickly learning to chalk two for one, as
also how to fill with nicke and froth, becomes a Drawer for the Devils own
drinking. He Is a sworn wellcomer of all sorts of Drunkards that sit and call
for it at their costs and perils. His Cullionship oft-times becomes a Creditor
that either must be forced to trust his betters, or cheat his Master if they pay
not for it. Your Puncke or Oyster-wench (excepted only) may score it at all
times upon bare trust, which he is contented to take out in drudgery. Your
Country Tapsters are of other kind, sworn often brothers unto Ostlers, and so
consenting to each others secrets, as that to robberies they often prove
Accessories. He nere could teach himself more how to pray then that salt meat
be ever in request, and may not want stale Beer to serve his customers, which
must not so much quench as kindle thirst: and to that knauish end the Brewer
and he well know that Rosin is a good ingredient. He Is naturally addicted to a
blew tuckt Apron with a black pouch thereto appendant, the chiefest Ensign of
his occupation. His greatest providence (caring else for naught) is to have
store of of Bottles against the Spring, which standing in their ranks like
Muskateires, may soon discharge upon the word Give fire: Nothing affrights him
like the Brewers Clarke whose coming with his Tallies proves more terrible
then is a Sergeant to a younger brother. If once he come to draw but for
himself, or may be trusted for some half a brewing, there is not a peasant on
the earth so proud. Hence he aspiring, hopes to get a wife (no matter of what
calling or condition) that soon may purchase him a house for victualling: His
last of Ladders step proves then an Host: and further comes to be a common
Bail for such as are his daily benefactors, that use to drink and call in by
the dozens. In brief, had he but wit to his unworthiness, he would become
more knave then could be corrigible, and so continue till his last of
breathing.

A Drunkard
IS a liquid public Notorie, thath makes Indentures without clause or
covenant. One whom stout carriage has so lowly humbled as he no more looks
into others risings then would least downefalls should be seen in him. He Is no
concealer of long harbourd secrets, but thereof soon discharges himself, and
hardly can be held to prove a Traitor. He oft-times seems a man much
penitent, witness the foremarkes of the clothes he wears, being the tears
both of the Tankard and himself together. He scorns on the other side your pale
faced Envy or any thing that's done in hugger-mugger, but will have perfect
color for what he deals in. He Is a most hardy and approved soldier that
takes a nappe as soundly on the boards, or (for a need in wide and open
fields,) as on your softest beds of Down, not dreaming least of Cushion, Cap
or Pillow: He sleeps not long in malice or revenge, but merely will forget
those wrongs next morning which could not be endured the night before. He Is an
undoubted good Astronomer that watches often more by night then day, and bids
the morning Star good morrow before the Lark or least of light appear.
Moreover he assumes himself a trauellor of farthest Regions with th'Antipodes,
where it is night with them being day with us. He still maintains the old
Dutch Proverb, That strongest liquor cures all diseases: No best of Physic
cares he a fig for, no Doctors deals with, or Apothecarie, so well has
Nature and due custom taught him to purge at all times without Pill or potion.
He troubles not himself with state affairs which would disturb him of his
liberty, but loves to doffe it without care securely: He Is never so valerous as
when is cups are mustering daring the^ to fight with Pompey or great Otho, and
drink Carowses to the Queen of Sparta* The Baker is of all men least
beholding to him, that for expense of half a piece in liquor vtters him not
one farthing worth of bread. The Vintner is his Guardian ouerseer, that keeps
him oft-times till the reckoning be cast up, and rather craves his room then is
company. If you will speak with him in sober sadness, your coming must be
early in a morning, he being soon after gone to drink a match. Porters and
watchmen are his home conductors, that either pick his pockets by the way, or
will be sure of something ere they leave him. If in his drunken rage he kills a
man, he is the next day not only sorry for it, but must be hanged for further
satisfaction being sober: and there is the cloze of it.

A rectified young man
IS a precious Diamond, or rare orient Pearl richly set in gold: Its that
(...). So true a lover of learning and goodness as proves him a pattern to
posterity. His general observance had of others virtues, confirms all
absolute in him without reproof: he sucked not overmuch his mothers milk, nor
was he weaned long before his time, you need not question ought his parentage,
which cannot but approve that saying verified, Such as the tree is, such must
be the fruit. His modest gesture shows him what he is, without beholding to
the book of Heraldie. He loves manners better far then money, and not
affecting turbulent promotions, chooses a quiet life his best of happiness.
He Is never so idle as in company, and not so busied as by being alone; his
thoughts are seldom set on had-I-wist of business rash or inconsiderate, but
with advice directs all his action: he suites himself with such associates
as are coherent with his disposition, neither too lofty or ambitious, nor
basely minded, and yet truly generous; His garments are not shaped so to the
fashion, as comeliness in him becomes them; he is not too lavish nor
penurious, not over silent or contentious; but moderate, twixt both, without
extremes. The Church and Sermons are his chief delights, which makes him
mortified ere his time of marriage: his solace sometimes next to Divinity, may
be to look on honest poetry, which makes him of best scholars best
respected: he accounts that sin, which savors not of truth, or from a
conscience that's the least corrupted. His settled thoughts and constant
resolutions will not be soon removed upon perswasio^s of things that may be
not the same they seem. The love of goodness keeps him still in hope of that
which may in process bring perfection. All that he aims at is a good report
of such a virtuous life and conversation as may record him unto after ages; his
latest thoughts of long deliberating may be in time to match with such a wife
as shall add honor to his former credit, and set up so his rest in that
felicity which may assure him rest eternally.

A young Nouices new younger wife
IS a Codling in July that comes not to be ripe before September, howeuer
sooner plucked for wantonness more then of taste or relish it affords. Its the
same Thing in her minority which we call a woman, who no sooner entering into
the year of teene, but then begins to bloome and burnish much like the
Strawberry the first fruit that's gathered. Time has not taught her yet the
dues of Matrimony: but well she woteth, and has often heard it, the sum or
portion which her father gives her, (besides the legacy her Grandsire left her)
is able keep two maids at least. She scorneth now the thought but of a Rod,
having that safeguard which shall stand twixt her and it for such defense. She
seeks imprimis how to suit her self as may accommodate with the times and
fashions, therefore makes choice of such a Tailor as best can tell how to put
her to charges. The next is, what best likes her ap^etite that has been
queazy from her infancy, and fears much her new come kitchen maid will never
please her in the buying or dressing. She knows not how to chide her man
without laughing, having been so childishly familiar with servants before her
marriage. The most she wants, are those terms to gossip it, being thereto
nere accompanied with her Mother, and that which grieves her, is not to have
been at woman's labor, no not so much as her eldest sisters, not knowing how
soon she may (inexpert) be thereto occasioned: her shoemaker vexes her
beyond the rest, who makes her foot seem so unfashionable or ouer-pinching as
is not possible to be endured. If her new husband grant not what she asks
him, twenty to one but she falls a weeping, or will not arise the next day to
dinner. She hates that woman of what sort soever, that wears a Beaner or a
Ruff so curious as may compare with hers for comeliness. No neighbor suffers
she to approach her bedchamber; not that it lies so sluttish and unhandsome,
as for she has not yet a casting-bottle, and a wrought Cushion-cloath which
still her Husband forgets to buy her. Her care is next to have her Picture
drawn, could she but meet that cunning Painter who drew my Lady being great
with child. Her chiefest solace is to sit at door, and that on Sundays
commonly after Euensong, when being in her best and handsomest habit, she may
be gazed on like a May Game. She longs a month before she proves with child,
that so ouercloyd with choicest dainties, she has now a foolish mind to feed
on spratts. There Is nothing could content or pacify her after the cat had killed
her Sparrow, until she had a Parraquito bought her, which liked her not a
month till she was weary of. Her second choice she hopes, shall prove a
Gentleman. If this content her not which now she has, or things fadge
otherwise then are expected, let them thank her father for it, that made the
match, and there is an end.

A common Fiddler
IS an inevitable squeaking slave of time, one that intrudes into any company
under pretext of that old motto, will it please you Gentlemen to hear any
Music; he is such a mercenarie Rascal as makes a man induced to expense, and
pays more for his ear then for his mouth; he never draws in anger, but for
profit: and that most commonly of meat, drink and money: only in dark
mornings may it fall out otherwise; that's forced to stand in doubtful
expectation, and strike up cheerfully at all adventures, and perhaps in a
shower of rain which dampes his sheep guts. The most he aymeth at is after
feasts and weddings, where he may be sure to fill his pockets, howere he sail
of further coins reward. The next to that, is after Fayres and feastings,
where he presumes it is impossible he should meet with all repulses. His
most ambition is after songs and clothes, with so much money as will buy new
Fidles-strings. An old blew coat at the second turning sets up his treble in
the highest strain, that titles then himself some Lords Retayner. His total
means amounts but to five marks, which he has miseraby been scraping all
his lifetime, and cannot purchase yet a Cloak for Holy days. If any man
chance to break his Instrument, he brings straight his action of the Case
being his Fidle case is without action; his best of profit comes most times
from Drunkards, and such as are lasciuiously inclined, whom he provoke with
more lewd temptation, Should he be blind, and after use his trade, it must
assume howere a larger privilege, only dies a Rogue by the Statute, and
there is his vltimum.

A Broker
IS a refractorie kind of Devil on Earth, merely composed without a
Conscience, and deals in only such things desperate as either come by way of
relaps, or otherwise happen at the second hand; He Is as it were the sincke or
common shore to all, or most of those commodities, which for necessity have
forced been morgaged, or forfeited merely without redemption. His first
original of base beginning grew from the corruption of some cutthroat usurer,
who matcheth many times his younger daughter with the first issue male of such
a Sire. The horse-courser and he are scarce distinguished which of the twain
proves the truest lurcher for buying cheapest and selling dearest, only the one
bids, See what you lack, whiles the other cheats you with unknown diseases.
His greatest profit comes most times from Thieves, and much is benefited by
Bawdes and Ba^nkroutes; only the Hangman holds him to hard bargains, that's
forced to buy or barter at his pleasure: Honesty and he are ever vnreciprocall,
and stand more remote to either, then Hounsditch from Longlane; or Tyburne
almost from Turnbullstreet. The darkest shop makes his gains the cleerer,
which he obscures with sundry properties for such case provided. He Is seldom
seen abroad unless at Outcries, where he forestalles all sorts of buyers on
that old watchword of No man better. He makes it thirteen months to every
year, when any come to pay him interest, and takes the forfeit but of one
days failing him. There Is nothing terrifies him like a Monopoly, thinking
some presently are come to beg him for his quadruble extorting usury: He
lives not commonly full out his time, for that his Master Mammon can no longer
spare him, nor makes he any will to vex his conscience with giving or
bequeathing that so suddenly, which has been scraped up with so long
extremity. And therefore, to keep decorum, he dies detestable. In brief, no
sooner is the caitiffe coffined (which is the most can be afforded him) but
down so soon falls all his moueables, as there is no mention left of such a
miscreant.

A Iouiall good fellow
IS such a kind frolic Coxcombrian, as scorning least the guilt of
Couetuousnes, may easily be drawn to dye a Beggar. He Is one whose parents
scraped up by the ounce, that he spe^ds and spatters by the pound. The name of
usury is to him so odious as rather then be touched with taking interest, heel
sooner be content to lose the principal. The saying of old is verified in him.
What pity it is he has it not: and again, He Is no man's foe but his own. The
fountain of good fellowship consists in him, that rather then to part with
boon company will freely condescend to stay til midnight, spending as much as
the house dares trust him. He Is none of those that takes care for to morrow,
but bids in such case things be as they may. The Tailor makes his clothes at
all adventures, that being so scittish and fantastical, will not stand still
whiles he is taking measure. Nothing distasts him more then breach of promise,
as not to meet in such a place in Fishstreet, all business and occasions set
apart. Give him but least of warning ouer-night, and he is yours next day wholly
to command. There cannot be a greater injury to his invincible resolution as
but to tender least toward the reckoning, which he has vowed and sworn will
see discharged, and for my part may he never guilty be of perjury. He seldom
wears out any thing he buys, but gives or lends it often without return, and
that's it makes the Laundresse lose his linen. He Is bound for any man will but
entreat him, and never thinks out till the time's expired. His most of care is
how to grow more lean, that has so long been puffed us with Canary, as there is
no help out but he must take Physic. These sitting, long at supper kills
his disgesture, and with his taking so much Tobacco the very kitchin-maid
begins to loath him. His manner was of late to ride and take the air, but now
has sold his horse to save that charge: besides, he has so often been bidden
Godfather, as now must pausing first bethink himself. The last that follows
(being the Hell of all) are those vndreamt of scuruy executions have laid in
the Poultry Compter; where we leave him.

A Humorist
IS he that harbors those conceits within him, which nothing better then a
cudgel can beat out; he is of so different opposed opinion* as would
appropriate himself peculiar beyond the tract of vulgar dispositions; Custom
creates in him that habit which now is grown to such a height, as may be
termed another nature. Give him the reins, he will gallop out of breath, or do
but check or cross him nere so little, and you may carry him as well to Bedlam;
He Is of that quaint society and behavior, as not enduring to stay long in
company, leaves you abruptly, without taking leave: he finds not half so soon
the cause of quarrel, as thereto proves occasioned without a cause. The more
you seek or offer to entreat him, the more inexorable he shows himself, and
yields no reason, but his rascal humor; his manner is to sing sometimes at
meat, because he would not be thought melancholy for want of money, and does
that which commonly he is most forbidden; his outward carriage makes him much
observed, either fantastical and most perverse, or so demurely casting down
his head as if he were to study the Black Art. He cannot endure a long Grace,
he loves not to eat of any thing that is carved unto him, nor can endure to sit
long at dinner, but must have needs Tobacco spite of Company. The want of money
makes him then most mad, especially being denied longer trust at the Ordinary.
He challenges any man into the field that shall refuse to pledge his Mistress
health, although he means to be first drunk. He flings a Trencher forthwith
at the face of him or them shall offer any music, bidding them pack away for
Roguish Fiddlers. His obstinacies heat grown more implacable, dares call that
woman Whore that's not his mother. His maine of actions are without example, nor
will be persuaded by prescription of wisest, most, or worthiest whatsoever.
Keep him in darkness eight and forty hours without releife of food, or
sustenance, you somewhat may perhaps assuage his humor, but never shall
reclaim him if you would hang him.

A malepart young vpstart
IS a Mushrom grown within compass but of one nights breeding, and may be
likened to that painted butterfly that flitters but a month in Summer, and
stays not long at whatsoere he lights on; he is that first rare and forwardest
fruit you call a Ieniting, which ripes and rots soon both together: much
differing from your lasting-Apple-Iohn. His thoughts are always upon
presentactions, not looking least on what is past, and scorns to think any
thing to come. Much bashfulnesse in him is long since vanished, and now has
boldness made him more then impudent. He merely has forgot his kennell
offspring, and will no more be pestred with intrusions of them that worthier
might contemn his company; his mothers cockering made him first a wanton, since
when, conceited with his own perfections, becomes more malepert then
unreprovable. Time nere could teach him how to keep decorum being so lately
spun as it were and wouen, not stretched as upon the tenter-hooks, so little
trial has he had of waterings as ten to one, but heel shrink him in wetting:
the tailor much has help him in the making, adding to his Ioynes that onward
luster as thereby would be thought another Absolon: he is strong persuaded every
wench is in love with him, especially having on his best apparel; and wants
no addition but a beard. All that he aims at is to be arrogant, not caring
for best counsel or advice. Last, he desires but money and good clothes, let
other matters happen as they may, and there is the period of his resolution.

A Scold
IS a much more heard of* then least desired to be seen or known she-kinde
of Serpent; the venomed sting of whose poisonous tongue, worse then the biting
of a Scorpion, proves more infectious far then can be cured; She Is of all
other creatures most vntameablest, and couets more the last word in scoulding,
then does a Combater the last stroke for victory. She lowdest lifts it
standing at her door, bidding with exclamation flat defiance to any one says
blackes her eye. She dares appear before any Justice, nor is least daunted
with the sight of Counstable, nor at worst threatenings of a Cuckingstoole.
There Is nothing mads or moves her more to outrage, then but the very naming of a
wispe, or if you sing or whistle when she is scoulding. If any in the interim
chance to come within her reach, twenty to one she scratcheth him by the face:
or do but offer to hold her hands, she will presently begin to cry out murder.
There Is nothing pacifies her, but a cup of Sack, which taking in full measure
of digestion, she presently forgets all wrongs that's done her and thereupon
falls straight a weeping: do but entreat her with fair words, or flatter her,
she then confesses all her imperfections, and lays the guilt upon the whore
her maid. Her manner is to talk much in her sleep what wrongs she has
endured of that rogue her husband whose hap may be in time to dye a Martyr, and
so I leave them.

A good Wife
IS a world of happiness, that brings with it a Kingdom in conceit, and makes a
perfect adiunct in society; she is such a comfort as exceeds content, and
proves so precious as cannot be paralleld, yea more inestimable then may be
valued. She Is any good man's better second self, the very mirror of true
constant modesty, the careful huswife of frugalitie, and dearest object of
man's hearts felicity. She commands with mildness, rules with discretion,
lives in repute, and orders all things that are good or necessary; she is her
husbands solace, her Houses ornament, her childrens succor, and her servants
comfort. She Is (to be brief) the eye of wariness, the tongue of silence, the
hand of labor, and the heart of love: Her voice is music, her countenance
meekness; her mind virtuous, and her soul gracious. She Is a blessing given
from God to man, a sweet companion in his affliction, and joint copartner upon
all occasions; she is (to conclude) earths chiefest Paragon, and will be when
she dies heavens dearest creature.

A self conceited parcell-witty-old Dotard.
HE pretends not only to be quondam learned, but also in present a grave
scribbling Clerk: and when he discribeth himself, he dares to add the
title of the ablest writer in Europe, though he have nothinks he deserves more
then others can give him, or himself desires. He carries a Philosophycall
gravity and austerity, affecting chiefly the garb of Diogenes, whom he
imitates as well in high conceit as low estate, and therefore hates nothing more
then the name of Elemosinary or Beadesman, though charity be his only
freehold. No strappado will make him confess what title he has to the meat he
eats, for which he pleads the merit of the man, and holds that to be his own
because he eats it. Though both years and affectation breed in him a grave
look, yet is he not so gray as greasy, especially when his satin dublet
has borne the affronts of all weathers for 8, or 9. months, and then it is so
varnished that no drop of rain will stick upon it. So austere he is, that he
will alienate his bed to lie upon the ground, and so thrifty that he will wear
his stockings re'nuersed, the feet of them raced or cooped and advanced in
chief to the knee for the service they have done him in the hoof, and at last
he honorably entombes them in the dunghill. He so defieth the curiosity of the
times, that he will rather be known by black linen then by blew starch, and
so abhors the shreds of old Indentures, that he will not suffer his Tailor
to take measure of him, to whom he gives in charge only one prouiso that his
dublet do not pinch him in the crop, and so hinder his nutrition which is the
chief faculty he takes care of. He is of those sublimated speculations that
he can better express his thoughts by his brow then his tongue, and can give
no more account of his meditations, then the Sybills could of their Prophesies
when the mad fit was over. He will voluntarily tell of his old travels, what
respect he has found among great men, what preferments he has run through,
or might have had, but will not be called to account by demanding questions,
especially if they tend to examine of what profession he is. He has some
remains of quondam learning, which like old ruins of time, others delight to
behold, among whom he loves to be abused in jest, lest he should be contemned
in earnest, he thinks no reproach greater, then when he has been baffled to
confess who hurt him; and therefore then swears he remembers nothing. If any
of his aquaintance ask him whether he hold himself to be wit-wrackt, he
plainly answers that he has not so much wit as to judge of his own wits, but
says, that he strongly suspecteth himself, and that not without cause: the
treble string of his fancy being so weak that it will crack with the weight of
a new hat; which therefore he the oftener puts off upon pretense of punctual
courtesy, which he affects so complementally as if he had held a trencher at
the table of Cardinal St. George at Rome. His chief exercise is stretching
his old Calves in long walks, whither he knows not, nor cares, so he may
seem contemplative by walking alone if you meet him: and ask whither he goes,
he says, his Journey lies as the Gadd-fly bites him. In winter he will often
walk in Cuerpo, in the snow or rain, sollacing himself with the hope of
fair weather, and otherwhile within doors: his best employment and posture is
to lie upon Chushions against a fire basting himself til his complexion smell
like Newgate or the inside of a Clownes Eele-skin sheath, or of an old
extinguisher. In summer his greatest work within doors is to do execution
upon fleas by set number ten being his stint (according to the number of his
blankets) which to exceed he counts murder: and without doors to enterlace
his walks with stations or rather sessions under hedges among his brethren
Mendicants, whose company he is so loath to leave, that he comes home short
to half meals, and then eats post to overtake his company. If the whimsey
take him to see Westminster, for business he has none, he would the rather
wear out six pence in shooe-leather, by trudging about, then spend two pence
with a skuller to strike over the gayner way. Though the world owe him much for
his ancient deserts, yet will he living nor dead owe the world any thing, and
therefore that no man may pull his Executor by the sleeue, he compounds before
hand for the charges of his burial. No man can tell how to take measure of him
for a monument, otherwise (in imitation of his own providence) I would before
hand have made an Epitaph on him, for which though I should deserve thanks
some, yet I expect none, well knowing that he repayeth no thanks for any
courtesy, but rather expects as much from every donor, for his own
acceptance of the last benefit. And so I leave him to others admiration.

FINIS.
EPIGRAMS.
Aegrotans, nolens.
COuld Bond the Scrivener find no time to come
To Sr. John Opus, but on's physic day,
When he should take a purge? Hang him base scum,
Is that a time when men their debts should pay?
Go tell the Scoundrell from Sr John again
His Worship leaves off purging none knows when.
Ferendo fortior.
GAlla twice married, is become much stronger;
And in her labors like to hold out longer,
Who by this new match makes the proverb full,
She that has borne a Calfe, bears now a Bull.
Foelix donec.
WHile Turnus feasted, not a guest durst fail him
But being arested, not a guest durst bail him.
Fiat necesse.
SExtus has sold his Coach and horses four,
Which needs must unto Need be thought th'induction
For of expense there proved none other power,
Besides, it was that first drew him to destruction.
Verbum, summis.
YOung Lelio left but sixpence in advance,
That was to feast it at the Golden Fleece:
Comes to the Bar with brauing countenance,
Saying, Sir Drawer, can thou change a piece?
Or -- since for silver we are not so strong,
Scor't up: I Will send it by my man - Tom Long.
Verbosus scabiosus.
MArcus would needs maintain, Store was no sore
That had his fingers fraught with scabs great store
To whom (quoth one) This proves you sir a liar,
For too much store makes you a scuruy Squire.
Sublata causa, etc.
WHy studies Siluester no more the Laws?
Tisthoght Duck-lane has taken away ye cause
Peccans errans.
MOnseur Patricius is to Venice gone,
What to do there think you? faith look upon
The Walls and Buildings: not for any fear,
Unless you will vrge't it was to save hanging here.
Filia Grammaticalis.
NO more need Pontus pawn his gown or cloak
His wives best linen, or her wedding ring;
Unless the Devil has still the same forespoake,
As an ordained inevitable thing.
For why? his daughter, past her Moods and Tenses*
(Coming to Possum) pays for all expenses.
Grauida, intacta.
BIndo still beats his Maids beyond excess,
All but this last and late-come little Besse,
Of whom it is wondered much how Bindo dealt*
That she with child, his weight yet never felt.
Equitans-ambulans.
WHy wears Wat one boot up, another down?
Cause th'ones to ride whiles the other stays in town.
Dubious decipiens.
IAnus must jesting still equivocate,
Which he alludes as doubtful terms of art,
Being a custom he has got of late,
But to the Devil he bears an honest heart.
Armatus, animosus.
WHen Lanus lights by chance upon some cheat,
And has his pockets lined with least of chink
His stomach then endures no common meat,
Or possibly digests your sodden drink,
Till forced again remove toward the fields,
Finds no such victuals as his Alehouse yields.
Deridens deridendus.
IF Lollus leave not those his flowts and frumps,
Which have so often been worn even to the stumps.
Let it not vex him if revenge be such,
That others play upon his wife as much.
Calvus incastus.
NOt chaste nor secret Calvus? well take heed
Thou prove not last a bald-pate knave indeed.
Pulchra quae vtilia.
MErcutio maruels what men mean, to buy
So many books of such diversity;
When Almanacks (says he) yields all the sense
Of times best profit, and experience.
Facies, forum.
PVt case Penelope be poor descended,
Where find you such another more compares
For comeliness, or is the like befriended,
With Knights and Gallants that bespeak her wares?
Show me that Sempster if you ere have seen her,
Has had like takings for a young-beginner.
Charum Diuersorium.
CReta lets lodgings, but at such a rate
As may maintain Mal, Su, Bess, Dol, and Kate,
Whom purposely she keeps in such a plight,
As may content best comers in at night.
Verba vana.
PRu could content you, as fit time affords,
But to deal plain, she will not be paid with words.
Inaequale Connubium.
PAulus is wedded to a wench, as pretty
As he himself is generous and witty:
But here is the ods, she will trade, so will not he,
And that is it makes them so much disagree.
Meretrix moesta.
PArnel complains not half so much of wants,
As spiteful dealings late in public known,
By Bridewell Beadles: slaves and Sycophants,
That durst so vex her, using but her own;
When thousands more have trod awry the shoo,
Alas poor whore, what would you have her do?
Maritus mitior.
KInd Kester carrying Kate his wife behind him,
To post-salute her would often backwards wind him:
Whereby the cockscombe might be thought more kind,
That he before should kiss her so behind.
Visumignotum.
THat Cambro's wife's with child, her belly shows it,
But who was it got it? pray ask those yt knows it
Peccans culpans.
HOw bitter spoke sir Tristram the other day,
To George his man that went (he thought) aftray
Alleging, no such objects could so woo him:
True, for he has the gowt, his drab comes to him.
Signa supersunt.
PRiscus gives out he hence to Prague is gone,
Upon a wager of aduentrous chance:
But Priscus lurkes (more shame to think upon)
With Kate his old comrague in Petty France:
Yet of his travels means at large relate,
At least is sure to bring certificate.
Femina fumus.
SIl for his wives sake much Tobacco sels,
That still employes her self in nothing else:
For though the smoke yields near so bad a smother
Men loathing yet the one, may love the other.
Serio at non.
DOl with much dalliance must and will dispense,
Dealing on matters deeper consequence.
Invita Senectus.
OLd Dromo bids adieu to day delights.
Grown much decrepid; fitter far for nights:
Who forced must now his worn out limbs retire,
And volens-nolens feed but on desire.
Ebria fragilior.
WHo says Carina lives incontinent,
Or proves the least to such a business bent:
Because she lodgings lets to Gentlemen
That may be jesting with her now and then?
Be it defiance to his very face,
Shall touch Carina in such kind of case.
Indeed if drunk a man will question that,
A woman then may do she knows not what.
Duplex dubium.
SIslie's with child she is sure, but knows not whether
By her late husband, or this man, or neither.
Birlady wench thou had need both doubt and fear,
For twixt them both the business did appear.
Idonius Capistro.
BRutus denies his birth and parentage,
Grown up a gallant just at hanging age.
Debita desperata.
QVestus has taken up more this last vacation,
In Mercers shops, then all his means amounts
Who being asked to pay, and in what fashion,
All he can say, is, Put it in accounts.
Chara Coniux.
NIcholas that purchased for his new wife Nan
A little Dog, a Squirrell, and a Fan,
Contents her not, but must have (seinvito)
A Muffe, a Munky, and a Parakito:
Which to defray, the fool perforce is drawn,
Although he lay the silver spoone to pawn.
Breuius Dulcius.
DAcus endures not any long discourse,
which his impatience would too much enforce
The end or cloze aims he at, good or ill,
All but the Tavern and his Tailors bill.
Luxuria praecipua.
KIt cares not though his treachery be known,
So you will but let his letchery alone.
Nesutor vltra.
GOrgonius brags what wonders he would do,
Were but his purse half answerable to
His noble thoughts: Pish, prithee fool it less,
And follow on the trade thou do profess.
Mouens mobilis.
WHat art thou like (my Lidea) or whereto
Shall I compare thee, as I feign would do:
Unto a Swan? a Lilly? or a Rose?
No, Lidea scorns to be compared to those:
I Will tell thee Lidea (so thou will not frown)
Just to an Houre-glasse that is still up and down.
Egenus Poeta.
TAssus writes verses upon great men's praise,
And in that exercise spends most his days:
For whom you will ask? That would be understood.
Faith for whos'ere gives money to buy food.
Ius, iniuria.
CRassus of lands holds lawful now possession:
True, got by law, but lost by much oppression.
Fortior, formidabilis.
QVimetuit odit, does the proverb go.
Which might of Caius careful be debated,
If any durst but tell the Caitiffe so:
Pish hang him he will be feared, though nere so hated.
Chara, vilis.
PRiscilla sprung from pitch of highest top,
Scorning your proud late gallants to converse with,
Now lowly keeps a poor Tobacco shop,
For foot-boyes, grooms, and cullions to co^merse with
But you must note she is poor and grown in years,
As by the rules of ragged times appears.
Aegrotants fortior.
CAntus our Cobbler being lately sick,
One meeting him, desired to understand
The cause of his disease: quoth he, a cricke
Has pained me, but am now o'th mending hand.
Eques solis.
BErnard for boots with London cobblers barters,
Which stand in stead of stockins, shoos, and garters
Obligatus alligatus.
DAy break, and break of day, all one should be,
But it is not so with Ferdinand we see:
Who chancing thus of late to break his day,
Was all the cause why he in Ludgate lay.
Deteriora malis.
DIcke truly swore he was not drunk this week,
Chalkt not one penny upon any score,
Played not a game at Tables, Bowls, or Gleek,
No not a foot stepped from his chamber door:
Long of that scuruy Laundresse, so to deal,
As having but one shirt, she that must steal.
Viatores infoelitiores.
SCruto that skilfull-seeming man in arts,
And Traveler, twice all those countries bin in,
Would any creature judge one of his parts
So lousy should become for want of linen?
Dolor intimus.
NOt hauk, nor hound* nor horse, those letters hhh
But ache it self it is Brutus bones attaches.
Propriora meliora.
MEchus that means to pocket up no wrongs,
But money, and what else to him belongs,
May pocket up these Rimes, and be no fool,
They nearer him concern then A-iax stool.
Pignus secretum.
Mistress Mordina whispered in mine ear,
About a business she was loath to utter,
Unless to silence it I first would swear,
And therewithal in some assurance put her.
It Was but to lend her so much, like a Noddy,
For which she ventrous would have pawnd her body
Viuis viuens.
PRoud Dorothea take it not in scorn,
Thou Art like a Biere that on men's backs is born;
Only this difference thou may enforce,
The Biere bears those are dead, thou the quick corse.
Additio perditio.
FRom Mal but merry, men but mirth derive,
For trix it is makes her prove demonstratiue.
Fallacior cautior.
DArcas has dealt on promises so often
As she will no more the cunningst cozener close with,
Till it appear there be a license brought,
Witness the fourth big belly that she goes with.
Rosa, Spina.
ADmit Fardella for her face and feature
Be so unparalleled esteemed a creature,
She Is yet for all those attributes no more
Then an attractiue fine wel-fauour'd --:
And that too many can too feeling tell,
Since she too lately lodged in Clarkenwell.
Splendida spoliis.
CLim clad of late in Petticoats of woollen,
Is now with silks and sattins grown more sullen,
Who being asked how such might purchased be,
Faith only for the taking up (quoth she.)
Plagis mitior.
KAtherine that grew so cursed and fit for no man,
With beating soon became a gentlewoman.
Aspirans desperans.
BEtter vnknighted (had sir Giles first thought it)
The^ thus prove bankrupt who so dearly bought it,
But that his old black Gillian ere she died
Must needs forsooth in have be Ladifi'd.
Iuvenis tonsus.
THat Petrus proves so bald, and yet so young,
What one who sees him may but wonder at it,
Knowing how late his hair was thick and long:
Tut, come, it is quickly questioned whence he got it,
Not by the Barbers rasor, nor his knife,
But very near, it was by the Barbers wife.
Antiqua ignota.
IEnkin must needs prove Gentleman, and why?
By ancient rules fetched from Antiquity:
True; if so ancient as we do not know,
Ienkins gentility must needs be so.
Ocreatus esuriens.
OF Ben that braues it in white boots, it is mutterd
He feeds at home on Carret roots vnbutterd.
Pecunia praevalens.
HAnd off Sir Sauce-box: Think you Mrs Phips
Allows such Lobs as you to touch her lips?
But then its questioned further, If you bring her
Some Legem pone, that is another thing sir.
Mortua, mutata.
SVrdus this point will still insist upon,
Though Ioane his wife and he hate one another;
Yet ought they howsoere be both as one,
For that such matters married men should smother:
Until she dead shall with the Devil remain,
Then must they be no longer one but twain.
Esuriens avidus.
LEt kitchen Kate prove nere so foul or common
All Is one to Clogo, if she be a woman:
Who standing least on fashions finicall,
Falls to his business like a Natural.
Par, pari.
SIr Miles his men's heads breaks for ought amiss,
But then it is Quid pro quo; his maids break his.
Emens cogens.
WHy blame you Jacques of so just a deed,
As to provide for matters necessary?
He did not buy his breeches without need,
For true it was, he could no longer tarry.
Pristina obliuiscens.
PRetus aspired to office, thinks no more
On those abhorred country Carts and Plowes,
No not upon the best of weeds he wore
But the other day: his place more worth allows.
What cares he who repines, or be agrieu'd,
Things are not now as when Andrea lived.
Conscientia testis.
WHat makes Anthonio deem himself undone,
Being quest'ned since his office first begun:
But that a conscience tells him, Quae sumuntur
Tam male parta, male dilabuntur.
Genitoris nesciens.
TOm asks no fathers blessing, if you note him,
And wiser he unless he knew who got him.
Non Aquila Muscas, etc.
A Bucksome Lady of the last Edition,
Wooed by her Seruingman, his suit denies,
Bidding him know (with humble more submission)
That soaring Eagles scorn to catch at flies.
Credenti satis.
YOung Gallatea matched with old St John,
A goodly, sweet, and lovely babe has brought him,
Which makes so many muse so much upon,
That for these twelve years have unable thought him
Surely there is then some other supportation,
Or merely must be done by inspiration.
Credens suadens.
MAd jealous Mopsus, a man seen in arts,
Was told by one, his Wife had worthy parts,
To which he more outrageous makes reply,
How should this Rascal such her parts desery?
Spectatores deteriores.
GRace scorns to grieve at worst disgrace that is told her,
Since it is her grace more graceless grooms behold her.
Nuda veritas.
A Question seemed of late to be propounded,
Why Jews his loins with lether were begirt
The answer may you guess might soon be grounded
From naked truth, which was, he had no shirt.
Notus ignotus.
BEhold yond Grasshopper clad all in green,
Hat, cloak, and suit alike: for love sake stop
Till he may more perspicuously be seen:
Pox hang him Gull, has taken a Cobblers shop:
And now remembering such a foist that rambles,
His mother keeps a Tripehouse near the Shambles*
Clament perditores.
IAnus has studied long to break a jest
Upon these rimes, he does so much detest,
And can you blame him? well he may be chiding,
That has so oft-times spur-galld bin with riding.
Dicta praedicta.
BAttus breaks jests on any thing that is spoken,
Provided always they before are broken.
Vxor imperans.
GRand Sulmo swears he will not commanded be
By any mortal of what ere degree,
And yet his little Nan that scorns to ask it,
Makes the great lubber stoop and pin the basket.
Daemonum certamen.
A Broaker and an Usurer contended,
Which in's profession was the most befriended
And for experience, more to have it tried,
A Scriuener must the difference decide:
To whom quoth he, you like the Fox and Cub,
One shall be Mammon, the other Beelzebub.
Verbum sat.
PRoximius from his heart protests it,
Without long phrase or tedious repetition,
He would more knave become had he more wit,
So that the case needs no more exposition.
Volens nolens.
Will with prouiso wills you testify,
Has made his Will, but has no will to die.
Dulce quod vtile.
WHo writes for Stationers in any vain,
That brings not therewith present store of gain,
Let it of matters whatsoere contain,
Is sure to have but labor for his pain.
Ictus sapit.
WHen Lucius came of late unto the place
Where Lidea was, with who^ in times of yore
He some hot dealings had: with fearful face
Steps him in have aside behind the door,
And being asked wherefore he came no nyer,
Oh sirs (quoth he) the burnt child dreads the fire.
Mutuans dissimulans.
DIck crafty borrowes to no other end,
But for he will not ought to others lend,
That else might ask him: It Is some wisdom Dick
How ere accounted but a knauish trick.
Ignota condonata.
HOdge would you knew how honest he is grown
Only desires excuse for scapes unknown.
Haedera vinum.
CLaudus the Vintner for his wives sake sels
Great store of Wine, and all provision else:
Which to her guests she dearly does afford,
And yet contents them both at bed and board.
Vindictum muliebre.
SToop foul-mouthed Malcus, and be whipped a while
Art not ashamed to call thy mistress whore?
And wilt not such presumption reconcile,
But vex her with thy vileness more and more?
Well: look she hire not them shall in the dark
Pay thee in private with a public mark.
Vidua aurata.
GAllus has got a widow wondrous old,
The reason is, he wooed her for her gold:
Knowing her maids are young, and serve for hire,
Which is as much as Gallus does desire.
Coacta fiducia.
PErfidious Milo lives on trust: it is true;
Of them would hang him could they it eschew
Parcus prodigus.
HOw comes it Calvus living long by use,
Should now in's latter days prove so profuse?
Oh sir, he got it in the times of evil,
And now as frank affords it to the Devil.
Posteriora chariora.
KIt meeting Kate, calls mouingly to mind,
He had not kissed her these three months or more
And therefore hoped the long remain behind
Might now be had, as kept for him in store:
Yes, (answers Kate) may that your stomach ease,
As much behind at all times as you please.
Foelix infoelicibus.
WHat makes Menalchas to become so proud?
Nothing that seems by honest course allowed
Then must it needs be Vice did him advance,
And only happy is but by mischance.
Varietas, iniquitas.
MAt will not marry: true, cause tied to none,
He may have we^ches new, when the old are gone
Quid fatuis?
DAltus demands to whom I durst commend,
Or would devise to dedicate my Book,
Being for Epigrams so poorly penned:
My answer must be, Prithee (Dolt) go look.
Signum saltem.
Mark yet how Mopsus at my Verses mewes,
See how again his rotten teeth he shows:
O let him (if you love me) flout his fill,
He knows how to distinguish bad from ill:
And though not trained up in Schools has been,
Yet keeps of books a cart-load to be seen.
Indicans-amans.
THat Lambo loves good liquor, who denies it,
Or will the least in such defense oppose;
But then you will yield I hope, he deerly buys it,
Witness the color of his ruby nose.
Ebrius oblitus.
FVcus was foxt last night, but it is concealed,
And would not for his Office it were revealed.
Omnia pariter.
RAlph reads a line or two, and then cries mew,
Deeming all else according to those few:
Thou might have thought, (and proved a wiser lad)
(As Joan her puddings boght) some good, some bad
Nil magnis invidia.
HOw comes it Caius lives so en^ved at?
Cause started up (you will say) to such estate,
And but so little learned. Well, what of that,
Has he not therefore a more reaching pate?
Yes, and may truly tell them that repine,
Caius made Haycocks whiles the Sun did shine.
Vt cecidit surgit.
NOw Martha married is, she will brave it out,
Though never so needy known to all about.
And reason good she rise once in her life,
That fell so often before she was a wife.
Tacens cogitans.
WHo calls Rebecca whore, shall do her wrong*
Cannot he hear and see, and hold his tongue
Anguis in herba.
WHat makes young Brutus keep his bed so long,
Not being sick? pish, come you do him wrong,
To judge so rashly: it is a deeper cure
Then Doctors deal with, which he must endure.
Iactans timens.
FEll foughten Furio swaggers, swells, and swears,
He Will pull the stoutst and proudest by the ears:
But finding some unlooked for opposite,
Seems to admire what humor should incite
That which he near so much as dreamt: who he?
Not for a world (sir) in the least degree.
Votum violatum.
VOtus had vowed he would do nothing else
But what Necessity perforce compels:
And yet so drunk was next day wondered at:
Tell me, is there necessity in that?
Propria communis.
PRu proves a fair, but not a proper woman,
True, for how can she proper be that is common?
Sonans, non soluens.
It Was much that Mat in music so excelling,
Beyond report of skill by most men's telling,
Should amongst all those driblets not defraid,
Leave the poor pudding-wife so long unpaid.
Mercator scortator.
DEny't not ( Lalus) thou art a secret Letcher,
And with thy Trull have often bin seen to sport it
Hiring some Laundresse or old Nurse to fetch her
Unto thy Garden-house: tut nere retort it:
Not all the wares contained within thy shop,
Can half the mouths of thine accusers stop.
Hortus improbus.
GVido his garden-house toward the fields,
Little for pleasure, least for profit yields:
And yet to leaue't twill not his liking sort with,
Though but sometimes he begger-wenches sport with.
Verbera verbis.
COcus pays debts with words, and blows, and threats
For those that trust him not, he soundly beats.
Rectius peius.
WAT went not well the ready way to work,
That lost all is coin at Ticktack the other day,
(Having worse chance then ere had Jew or Turk,)
And yet went Wat the ready way to play.
Fortunae obediendum.
STrange it was that Ciuis thought so wo^drous witty,
So curious, quaint, and complementall nice,
Not to be paralleld throughout the City
For exquisite behavior and advice,
Should yet for all those choice perfections rare,
Prove himself bankrout ere he was aware.
Incertam mendacium.
SEptimius brags he hoarded has in store
Of bags of money well near half a score.
It Is sure of that uncertain quantity,
As without question a most certain lie.
Profunda Scientia.
SAL can by science deep profunditie
Force you cry fough: Ieronimo go by.
Aequalis concensus.
CAecus and's Choice, for change no time defers
Both separate, yet consenting each to either,
He mayds for his turn takes, she men for hers,
And so they iump, though seldom join together.
Volenti satis.
OLd Cambrios wife being newly brought abed
(As luck would have it) of a goodly Boy,
The hopeful Issue of her mayden-head,
And only Jewel of the fathers joy:
One standing by her, praised her Husbands skill,
Yes, true quoth she, the Man did his good will.
Incognita suadeant.
ANna protests she nere had Child but one,
And that by him contracted, should have bin
Her Husband had he lived: but dead and gone
She scorns be questiond by your proudst of kin.
Nupta dignior.
MAL has the mastery of her husband got.
True; much the sooner, cause she loves him not.
Optare frustra.
THere cannot prove to Claudius such a curse,
As still to find in's heart, and not in's purse:
But what the Destinies will have decreed,
Must be (says Claudius) were to hang for need.
Subito sentiens.
ROgerus tells me upon first of sight,
These Rymes of mine too sudden are composed
Who would have thought the fool had iumpt so right
Or could so sudden have the same disclosed?
Yes why not (pray) so sudden in his speeches,
As he late suddenly beraid his breeches?
A Cunabilis orta.
AMie has got an itch twice twelve years old,
Caught at the first she felt it from her mother,
Who if a man would hang her cannot hold,
So near they iump for filching like to other.
Formosa fragilis.
BEsse wins all outward praise can set her forth,
But closely trades: then what is all praises worth?
Fama infamia.
WAT has of women won a wondrous name,
How mean you? wo^drous in the worser sense?
Yes for he wooes them with that wondrous shame
In all his actions worth Sr Reverence.
Nomine, non re.
GRace I confess it, has a comely face,
Good hand and foot as answerable to it:
But what is all this, except she had more grace?
Oh you will say, it is Want that makes her do it.
True, want of grace indeed, the more her shame,
Graceless by nature: only Grace by name.
Indigens occultans.
WHy should the World and Will so disagree,
That he so closely sculks, and no man sees.
I cannot guess the cause, unless it be
Long of Long-lane, and want of wonted sees.
Vt parta perdita.
MArcellus proves a man of double means,
First raised by drunkards, the^ undone by queans
Front facies.
SVsan defies the slave says black's her eye,
And may she on the matter, for it is gray:
But Su's a Trull the Town can testify,
And will be whiles she lives who ere says nay.
Visum, manifestum.
SErvus esteemed his Mistress passing chaste,
And reason then had Servus so t'esteeme her:
But Servus since the business gins distaste,
And is persuaded he did much misdeeme her.
For what he sees, besides so often told it,
Makes him for truth believe she cannot hold it.
Nouerint vniuersi.
Jack scorns be jealous, should you nere so move him
Come to his house else any man and prove him:
Worthy says Jack cornuted will despair,
That knows his wives true carriage to a hair.
Vnus, duplex.
DOL brought abed seemed to her Husband loath
He should bid Godfathers and fathers both.
Tenebris ignotus.
SEcretus walking in unknown disguise,
By no means can endure the candlelight,
Not that it proves offensive to his eyes,
But loves unknown to drab it late at night.
Morans festinans.
QVintinius questionless was quite belyed,
That on the scores reported so did run,
When as (the business plainly verified)
It proves a year since most of them begun.
So that it must a Paradox bewray
Thus fast to run and yet so still to stay.
Leuis facilis.
TAs bin a Proverb old, That work proves light
Which in performance most of hands can do
But it is to Luce alluded not aright,
That makes light work and puts no hand thereto.
Vestitus peritus.
CLitus goes oft-times clad in suits of Scarlet,
That else no color had to play the Varlet.
Somnus decipiens.
DOd sweetly dreamt this other night had found
In gold and silver near an hundred pound,
But waking felt he was with fleas sore bitten,
And further smelt he had his shirt be --
Suum cuique.
A Strange contention being lately had,
Which kind of Music was the sweetst and best;
Some praised the sprightly sound, and some the sad,
Some like the Violls; and among the rest,
Some in the Bagpipes commendation spoke,
(Quoth one stood by) Give me a pipe of smoke.
Stabilis domina.
WHat need Bernardus fear of being banged
By that old Master, knowing well his dame
Who cares not greatly if the Hog were hanged,
Stands twixt them both though he nere so to blame
Castus stultus.
RVth matched with Ralph must have his maidenhead
At lest is sure to bring the fool to bed.
Vtcunque generosandum.
FIe on thee Fabius, one of thy fair means
And found a bed with filthy Oyster queanes?
Hangt, if thine appetite must needs so hunger,
thou might have proved more generous a munger.
Front differentia.
HOdge thou art an honest Trojan, so is Hugh,
Which equal seems to give no place to you,
Nay rich besides thou art Hodg, and so is Hugh,
Then where is the difference pray twixt him and you?
Hark, thou art a cuckold Hodg, so is not Hugh,
And there is the very odds twixt him and you.
Quater insaniuimus.
FRanciscus feasts it four times every year,
Upon the getting of his quarters fees,
Which bounteously he spends as does appear,
And three months after feeds on bread and cheese.
Laetior notior.
SIlus seems sad though there is no cause wherefore
For being merry would prove fool much more.
Emptum permanens.
WHat need had Gregory more to understand,
The^ should concern him to subscribe his had
So long's his grandsires plow at first had wrought it
And his dads money now so dearly bought it.
Imperans impotens.
MVch had Montanus need be wise, and fearing
In case of conscience what is fit to do,
That justice gives for peace and good abearing,
And nere yet learned the rules belongs thereto.
Yes; has the Statutes and those Precedents
Which men's objections many a one preuents.
Alit credulitas.
GAlfridus well preoccupates betimes,
I tax not him in any of my rimes:
And wiser he to live without suspicion,
Are there not Drunkards more of his condition?
Nasus indicans.
DAcus with Surgeons deals, but what of that?
Tax him who will, he will bear a nose that is flat.
Ingeniosa, lasciua.
KAte (I confess it) has a ready wit,
But such a fault as much confounds it:
For as she is jesting when the fit comes on her,
So suffers she men jest too much upon her.
Pulchra periculosa.
WHo sees Sabinas outside but will say,
She Is most exceeding modest, young and fair,
For naught those paintings do her looks bewray,
Or is discerned her eyebrows want of hair:
Much less describes her Alablaster skin,
How rotten and corrupt she is within.
Surgens prostrata.
ASk Lettice where she lies; she will say in Town,
But (Lettice) whereabouts? faith up and down
True: I beleeu't, for since thou knewst the town,
Thy dealings ever have been up and down.
Agilis inculpabilis.
PRiss dares pronounce her actions yet in prime,
Cannot approve her Bawd before her time.
Socius ad scaelera.
A Health says Lucas to his loves bright eye,
Which not to pledge were much indignity,
You cannot do him greater courtesy,
Then to be drunk and damned for company.
Quis ego, etc.
RVfus in rage the Pots flings down the stairs,
And threats to pull the drawer by the ears,
For giving such attendance: slave says he
Where Is thine observance: Ha? must such as we
Be no more waited on? go; bring to pay,
And keep my Rapier till I come this way.
Pudet sui.
WHat made brave Brusus shift his dwelling place
Where he so seemed to flourish but of late:
Hark in your ear: He dares not show his face,
Since he was burd'ned so for stealing Plate.
Secreta necessitas.
WHat makes F.G. wear still one pair of Hose.
Ask Banks the Broker; he the busi^es knows.
Dirigens Diabolus.
WHo sees proud Lucius mounted thus aloft,
But may admire how much the times have wrought
Only this mischief certain still remains,
Whiles Lucius rides, the Devil directs the raynes.
Novus ortus, etc.
From cart to court on cockhorse Caius vau^ts him
In that aspiring pomp as does surpass,
But here is the plaguie spite, his kindred haunts him,
And tells the kitchin-groomes whose son he was:
But what should that (proud Caius) need dismay thee
When better then thy self thou see obey thee?
Ignotus sibi.
FAstidius finds it, Nimis vltra posse,
How to distinguish of Teipsum nosce:
I do not marvel much it should be so,
For why the Coxcomb will himself not know.
Vt Pluma persona.
WHy wears Laurentius such a lofty fether?
Because he is proud and foolish both together.
Audax mendax.
NAnus would prove an Epigrammatist,
Who vaunting much on terms of had-I-wist,
Said (vncontroull'd) He more then I had wrote:
But I as bold, gave him the lie in's throat.
Spernendura vulgus.
WHat tell ye me of Epigrammicke toys,
(Says Signior Sotus) fitter stuff for boys:
So much he is vexed at any man's invention,
Which to his understanding makes no mention:
Who would be moved with those so poor disgraces
Grown from such grooms, not spitting in their faces
Inexorabilis vxor.
BEN cowardly to blame* his wife beseeches
She would but hold her hands, and take the breeches
Who scorning least his words to think upon,
The more he begs, the more she lays him on.
Postrema pessima.
CAcus in's cunning nere so proved o're-retcht,
As now at last, who must be halterstretcht.
Moriturus ante paraturus.
SIl cannot sleep at nights, and wot you why?
Not that he meditates on least good action,
But only knowing that the slave must dye,
Who to the world has made no satisfaction.
Tandem Diabolo.
TEll me Maximius, (prithee) why do live,
Still to enjoy this earthly habitation?
And nere cast up the account which thou must give
For such thy wealths abusiue usurpation?
What do thy Doctors longer seek to save thee,
But for thy money till the Devil must have thee.
Nil pocula.
DIcke in a day can purchase more with his pen,
Then Jane his wife by all those Gentlemen
That drink Tobacco in his house at large,
But that (says Dicke) will not the rent discharge.
Vt vixit morietur.
QVintus to make his will being late requested,
Refusde it, saying, He would die detested.
Dedicus durabile.
HAd Dru but drunk been vain t'had proved to write out
Being a subject of so poor a strain,
But Dru berayd himself, there grew the spite out
Such as he never could since make clean again.
Pestis ineuitabilis.
ZFut say, could Saltus more then pawn his sword
To Ralph the Cobbler for those russet shoes;
And yet the scoundrell would not take his word,
But must you see his reputation lose?
Nor was it that which half so much had shamde him,
Had not the rascal fore his Mistress namde him.
Obligatio terribilis.
MAt that stood musing on the Scriueners band
Thought with himself dooms day was never at hand,
Till entering on discourse of further reason
Knew then the times compeld him out of season.
Carne carnifici.
HVgo for Venison hot, the Side or Hanch,
Ventures his neck as soon as for a wench.
Timidus astutus.
SEE how submissiue Faunus greets his foe,
With cap and knee; would you the reason know
He has so often been knocked, as now he fears,
There Is no evasion for his Asses ears.
Expertus Mendicus.
It Is much that Nath, who can so well indite,
Can so exactly play upon the Lute,
Can so familiarly both talk and write,
And can in Latin pro et con dispute,
Should yet for all those Cans of skill so dear.
Not able purchase him one Can of Beer.
Al^a, vina, etc.
IF Signeor Gallus by his weekly gain,
Could house, and horse, and Hawk, and hound maintain
How should he now become so poor a scabb,
Surely by Dice, or drink, or Doll that Drabb.
Magnus minimis.
DAcus has been in's days a man of note,
Only for wenching, nothing else I wot.
Mutata casualia.
YOung Lanus loves to haunt such Ordinary
Where he has most been heretofore unknown
That on his back he some old cloak may carry
There to exchange for better then his own.
Elatus humilis.
WHy asks sir Jews where Mrs Lucresse lies?
Or wherefore she so often her lodging shifts,
But that he would be lewd? let it suffice,
Your men (sir Jews) too much perceive your drifts:
Who still are told (how ere your greatness swaggers)
That you too bold have bin to blame with beggars.
Debitum triennium.
GOod cause had Gluto for himself to say,
Shall not these glories last but for a day?
Whose weeds which at St Georges feast he wore,
Have not these three years escaped the Mercers score.
Ecce signum.
WOuld any man make question Phil's not fair,
Let him but look else on her yellow hair.
Constans, implacabilis.
PRay urge not Romulus to take a wife,
That has so vowed it, you will but vex him more,
Therefore desist, and move him not to strife,
That is (you see) so constant to his --
Videremur tamen.
CResus would seem to have his conscience clear
From touch or blemish of the worlds suspicion
But tell me (Cresus) how can that appear,
When all that see thee know thy lewd condition,
How true a villain from thine infancy
Thou have been, art, and so intendst to die.
Vere and Hyeme.
Often have I studied and much wondered what
Makes Frank (so feeding) look so lean withal;
Pox, now I think ont, it is no more but that
Old grief you wot of comes at Spring and fall.
Brevius gratius.
But that to write thus briefly I proposed, (closed
Thou had been ( Francus) more at large dis-
Communia vilia.
CAll Parnel punck, albeit the cause you show not,
Or instance thereto do alledg not any.
Thus answers she, pray tell me what I know not,
For this too often times has been told by many.
Veritas nuda.
RAchel translated in her Ruff of yellow,
To change that habit swears she will not endure it
Though never so flouted by each filthy fellow,
Not that her gettings can so well procure it:
But to speak freely against all taunts and checks,
Rachel indeed has no more Ruffes then necks.
Non redimens egens.
IOane to redeem the times perforce is drawn,
But cannot yet redeem her rags from pawn:
Which is the cause her gains no more arises,
But must needs yield to such poor petty prizes.
Intus occultum.
SVe cannot soundly be to love allured,
True, till in time she of the P. be cured.
Facies ignota.
WHy should not Rubin rich apparel wear,
That Is left more money then an Ass can bear*
Can any guess him by his outward guise,
But that he may be generous and wise?
Sciens nesciens.
COsmus by custom taunts each man,
And yet can naught of reason skan,
How can that be, when who knows least
Knows he should wise be that will jest:
Then thus, no further I allow,
That Cosmus knows, but knows not how.
Histrio-Poeta.
TVrnus has got an itch in Poetry,
And for that cause haunts Players company,
As cast-off-Chambermaids convert to Drabs,
So may his itch in time break out to scabs.
Capax incopabilis.
PRodus in's office proves no cunning Scribe,
Yet has he cunning learnt to take a bribe.
Certa dissimulans.
MOunsier Pieros wife trades all in French,
And coyly simpring cries Pardona moy.
As who should think she is sure no common we^ch
But a most true dissembler par mafoy.
Sperans vtcumque
PRu that by marriage meant herself t'aduance,
Is now compeld by that unlucky chance,
Left by her Lord who no amends would make,
To match thus as you see for fashion sake.
But time she doubts not will ere long procure it,
(As were she laid once) think you she will endure it?
Ignis et aqua.
TRollus Tobacco vows will never forsake,
Nor wenching, careless which for cost's the greater
The One for a cooler forced (says) needs must take,
The Other appears (it seems) too sore a heater.
Multorum nullus.
ROse in her reckoning has so over gone it,
As who^ to name she now no more thinks on it.
Vt Corvus Ovum.
PArvus that Pettilogger termed to be,
Not getting in a Term an honest fee,
Picks that dependence gratis from his Daughter,
Which she affords him by a trick that is taught her.
Expertus certus.
GRunto would prove a scurvy Divinator,
Able of times foreseeing dangers tell:
Who having been an ancient Fornicator,
With that too late infectious feeling Nell,
Is now resolved past help of cordial food,
No Doctors skill will henceforth do him good.
Astutus Vrbanus.
POnd paid not less then twenty to the pound,
that late thrice bankrout was. How may that be?
Yes, by a cunning fraud, no more was found
To give, but seven to each. The more knave he.
Dubium indubitatum
SAy Parnels children prove not one like the other,
The best is yet she is sure they had all one Mother.
Vivens mortuis.
WHat makes young Brutus bear so high his head
And on the sudden gallant it so brave?
Pray understand sir's father's newly dead,
Who has so long been wished for laid in's grave*
Inexorabilis inops.
Brave Captain Medon can no more endure
To live in England, then to brook the lie:
Pox of persuasions, can they him allure
From furthest parts, where he must live and dye?
Urge it no more I tell you, twill but grieve him,
For here no longer may his friends relieve him.
Necessi^^ti obediendum.
BEttrice defies him basest of condition,
Durst least but cross her humors disposition*
And that the Hold-my-staffe her husband knows,
Who Spaniell-like stoopes still at her dispose.
Clamans Asinus.
WHo says Tom Tipstaffe is no man of calling,
Can any Crier at Sessions be more bauling?
Vivens pictura.
LIncus the Painter limms unto the life,
All sorts of features, saving Ioane his wife*
Of whom (says Lincus) its not questioned,
Why she so living, should be limbd: but dead.
Sapiens natura.
SHould Planus know more terms or tricks of art,
Then have been still observed by imitation,
Bred as you see him bluntly, for his part,
According to the homespun country fashion:
Yet by your leave, although vnlearn'd in School,
Planus may pass for no such common --
Notum, frustra.
RVfus I Will ryme upon thee whiles I live,
And yet no notice to thy neighbors give;
That can decypher thee in other fashion
Then shall my Penn by ryming make relation.
Periens spernens.
ASk not why Priss no more with plumes adorns it,
She Is grown so poor a -- sir as she scorns it.
Dupliciter parta.
MArk but how vpstart young Mercutio iets it:
Would not a man much wonder how he gets it?
Faith by no cunning or inventions fraud.
His Mother's partly Broker, partly B --
Veritas coacta.
YOung Prodigus to blame rebuked his Page,
Because his tarying had so long been such.
Who boldly told the truth spite of his rage:
Which was, The Broker would not lend so much.
Wherein had Prodigus been more advised,
The standers by had not so much surmis'd.
Spe deterior.
SEE how the Fates against Spruso had compacted,
That to so rich a wife, but new contracted,
Must meet so iump that scuruy Execution,
Which since has proved his utter dissolution.
Sero revocabile.
IF Turnus now were free as erst from matching,
He nere would subject be to wives for scratching.
Coactus fur.
Mark for a word mistaking of but stand,
That should in stead thereof have said good morrow
Has (past all help) bin twice burnt in the hand,
Long of such will not le^d when Mark would borrow.
Tunica sempiterna.
KIT cannot yet his mourning cloak give ore,
Which he procured the last great Funeral:
And swore so long since he would wear no more,
On best entreats or terms conditional.
Pish, come you might those flowting jests for bear,
Knowing he has no other cloak to wear.
Perfidus odiosus.
HOw durst Iustinius of his Mistress blab,
That he has seen or known she played the drab
Worthy to fast, or pine through penury,
Could fare so well, and needs must roast-meat cry.
Certus furtis.
CLem would be praised for constancy in dealing,
A constant thief (it is true) only for stealing.
Sperando periens.
HOdg hyr'd him such a house, at such a rent,
As might against marriage much his state augment
But lingering Fates did so his hopes prevent,
As Hodg perforce must fly, for all was spent.
Vxor evertens.
WHat cause has Phaedra (says she) so to fear
The poor aspersions of the viler sort,
Admit her husband late a bankrout were,
Must she disparaged be by such report?
Yes certain ( Phaedra) for that half Cheap Side
Knows you procured it by your whorish pride.
Sitiens dissimulans.
DOd drinks not but at meals, and why do you think?
Not that he sparing is or loath to pay,
But merely and indeed for want of Chink,
Which is the cause makes Dod go dry away.
Domina praedominans.
ILL may Radulphus boast of rule or riches,
That lets his wife rule him, and wear the breeches.
Inexpectatum datum.
WHat should lean Trocus with fat Tom conte^d
Which to the flesh might least addicted be,
Who grown so gross may thus himself defend,
He seeks for that which freely's given to thee.
Pergens pendens.
RAlph grown outrageous, railes upon my rimes,
Which by no means his malice can endure,
But calls them scums, and riff-raffes of the times;
(Only to keep his poysnous tongue in ure)
Do Ralph, devise what worse thou can intend,
That done, go hang thy self, and there is an end.
Parcus profusus.
OLd doting Claudus that rich Miser known,
Made drunk one night, and iumbling but with Ioane,
Was forced not only to discharge the shot,
But keep the Bastard which the Gull nere got.
Calce ornatus.
WHy wears young Iockie such a jinling spur?
Oh sir, he deals with Iades that will not stur
Asinus transmarinas.
PRomus the Puritaine no longer fears
The worst of menacing his Asses ears:
For spite (says he) of threats or Epigram,
It Is but removing hence to Amsterdam.
Casus mutatus.
HOw dare you talk of Tassus whence he sprung
Admit perhaps descended from the dung,
Who knows not, or might know, what is then was than,
Tassus is now (you see) another man,
Able the proudest of those lads control,
That whilome durst affront him cheek by ioule.
Proficiat, etc.
IF jealous Cosmus will be such a child,
As causeless needs assume these lines unto him,
I can but show my self true reconciled,
Or else must wish that they much good may do him.
Instabilis stans.
MAT being drunken much his anger wreakes
On's wife; but stands to nothing that he speaks
Reus sine re.
WHy should poor Humphry walking but to (...)
With Collins daughter be condemned so,
As to be said was closely taken napping,
Who did but kiss her, and so let her go.
Tunc tua res agitur.
A Jealous Merchant, that a Sailer met,
Asked him the reason why he meant to marry,
Knowing what ill their absence might beget,
That long at Sea constrained are to tarry.
Sir (quoth the Sailor) make you that so strange?
Its done the time while you but walk The Exchange.
Fortiferendum.
SAy prithee ( Lusco) where did lodge last night?
Hark in thine ear, (Have I not hit it right.)
Come come, confess. Better then thou or I
Have on the Hay-loft often been forced to lie.
Ignotus Asinus.
NAnus at Noddy least in any sort
Desires to play, but loves to see the sport.
Vltimum capistrum.
BArtellus bragging how he lived by's wit,
And nere was yet for least offense committed,
Is now past hope, there is naught can him acquit,
But must at last be needs for Tiburne fitted.
Alius, altior.
WOuld you with Caius offer now confer
In such familiar sort as heretofore?
And not observe he is grown an Officer,
That looks for adoration ten times more?
Tut, what of pedigree, or turpe domo,
It Is not so now you see; nam ecce homo.
Filius matris.
WHat lets thee (Jonathan) thou should not be
As honest as thy father? Say, was he
So great a wencher? sure I take it not,
And yet he ambling, might thy mother trot.
Silons simplex.
WIll would seem wise, and many words let pass,
Speaking but little cause he is such an --
Videat taceat.
DRusus not deignes the least of retrospect
On these rude rimes, he does so much reject
Whether more strange I know not, or unkind,
But Drusus fears he here himself does find.
Infundo cineres.
Strange was it ( Mun) thy mother brought forth thee
Among all her children so deformed a creature,
For how indeed can it but wondered be,
That she so fair, thou should be of that feature:
The reason may be thus (if not too gross)
There was no metal left besides the dross.
Bonum pro male.
PArnel in public questioning my name,
Says in her anger she has done with me:
But I Will not be revenged so much for shame,
To tell the world what I have done with thee.
Empta nostra.
MAdam la Foy wears not those locks for naught
Ask at the shop else where the same she bought
Vt caput crimina.
OF thee Sir Miles too much cannot be said,
For meddling with black Besse the kitchen maid
No more those dealings are discernd of late,
Then is that periwig upon thy pate.
Dubiens decipiens.
WHy should young Lelio think I love him not,
Or with the least of jealousy suppose,
These Rymes of mine so rude and mis-begot,
Should like strong mustard take him by the nose:
Sure there is some matter in it which makes him doubt,
He such a stinckard should be so smelt out.
Vtcunque superbus.
PRoud Celso knows since his aspiring state,
That those who fear him most, do most him hate
Yet scorns to take it least for counter-checke,
Though change hereafter chance to break his neck.
Principia sordida.
BAssus of lands good store, and leases, farms,
whose mother milkpails bore ere he bore arms
Experto credendum.
HOw durst Capritius call his wedlock whore,
But that he speaks it plus quam per narratum,
Nam ipso test: what require you more,
Unless you would have it magis approbatum.
Tandem vlciscatur.
HOw durst you call in question mistress Maud,
Because her name a little was disgraced?
Put case her mother proved a kind of B.
Must that conclude her ere the more unchaste?
Well, luck (she doubts not) but may one day lend her
To find that flat-cap out which shall defend her.
Vt freta, fortuna.
ASk Dacus how his luck at dicing goes,
Like to the Tide (says he) it ebbs and flows;
Then I suppose the same cannot be good,
For all men knows it is longer ebb then flood.
Pecunia praevalens.
TEll Tom of Platoes worth, or Aristotle's?
Hanged, give him wealth enough, let wit stop botles
Ortus indicans.
Derive thy pedegre. ( Hugh) nere so high
From great Cadwallider, or Brutus son,
Thou can not blaze it from true Heraldry,
But wilt a Bastard prove when all is done.
Admiretur vulgus.
MAgus a man of artificial trade,
Most confident believes, and will auerre,
These Epigrams of mine are meant and made
By persons known, in each particular:
Come ( Magus) thou have borne a jealous head
Ere since thy wife was found with one a bed.
Eadem cupiens.
MAria means to match with such a mome,
As shall not tax her in the least behauour,
Neither for matters past, nor what is to come:
Provided, you are a queen ( Mal) by your favor.
Porcis proclivis.
PRiscilla proves to pigs flesh much inclined,
Doubtless descended from some hoggish kind.
Debitum consuetum.
TIb scorns be taxt for dearnesse in her trade,
That takes for hire but as your Hackney Jade,
Provided you depart ere candlelight,
Or pay her double, if you stay all night.
Vestigia matris.
THat Tom'sin's turned true trul who would believe
Or to those outward looks least credit give,
That not attaind to yet full fourteen years,
So duly drabs it, drinks, and don^^neers;
Acting her Mothers steps, as on a stage,
Who had a Bastard just about that age.
Patientia inimica.
PRu that had patience to have borne with any,
And loved plain dealing, witness al yt knows her
Is now undone, by braving one to many:
So that you see plaine-dealing ouer-throwes her.
Vt cornua crines.
MAt will maintain, that horns and hory hairs
come by haphazard, much more the^ by years
Inuita chasta.
MIldred from marriage means her self abjure;
For certain reasons she is ashamed to speak,
And which remediless she cannot cure,
Less able hold but needs perforce must I --
Verbum sat.
BE prouder still (young Spruso) spite of foes;
What? pull thy self already by the nose?
As if some fatal Oracle foretold,
Thou have too long been malepertly bold:
Well: take it then, and thankful go thy way,
Thou know well ( Spruso) what I worse could say
Eques Solis.
SIr Sol can dance, and turn, and stoutly eat,
But cannot fool half well to earne his meat,
Plead alms (Sir Sol) where thou may get a dinner
Or starve thy self, thou can not look more thinner
Trahens officina.
SArdinios wife Tobacco sells for fashion,
But keeps a house of other occupation.
Facile responsum.
LVscus that lately so much brawne did eat,
Was told by him that gave it; You friend mine
Know you what longs to such kind of meat?
Yes (sir) quoth he, a cup of Muscadine.
Stolidus stolidior.
A Book of Epigrams, and made by me?
Its some sweet stuff, dares William warrant ye
Who nere least meddles or will have to do
With what opinion leads him not unto:
But William seemed not well to understand,
When Is wife was purchased at the second hand.
Patiens armatus.
EGidius will prove patient spite of fortune,
Let worst of chance him nere so much importune
He Will be the same in losing as in winning,
A patient C -- from the first beginning.
Tandem manifestum.
KAth'rine that hid those candles out of sight,
Might well conceive they will come at length to light.
Veritas subverta.
LVke that a man on horseback met but late,
Would simply seem thus to equivocate,
And strong maintain against who contend should dare
It Was merely but a Tailor and a Mare.
Haec fabula non.
ACton Acteon-like keeps Hounds to hunt,
Not to be pulled down as Acteon was:
That were a business would appear too blunt,
By Poets feigned, but nere seen come to pass:
The One of Diana ancient stories tell,
The Other of Anne his wife is known too well.
Canis ad vomitum.
LAmpus that left his lowzy occupation,
And lives now (as you see) in other fashion:
Must yet resume his natures former habit,
Which either uses to be drunk, or drab it.
Ebria, prostrata.
FRancke at first motion no man's face endures,
But being drunk, she is then for ever yours.
Stabilis fiducia.
QVintus will needs be known a man of trust
That stands upon his credit firm and just.
Indeed I often have heard the Chandler talk,
How firm his credit stands upon the chalk.
Empta poenitentia.
Jack to his Iug in feeling passion swore,
He would approve her a polluted --
Whose tempting outward looks, and borrowed locks,
And inwardly defiled, given him the --
Thou lie (quoth Iug) it was what thy money bought
How dear so ere thou paidst, I gave thee naught.
Non omnibus dormiens.
SAy Mal be but a Chambermaid, what then?
Must she prove packhorse for all kind of men?
Yes more then time they think her as their own:
Alas her carriage has been too well known.
Fragilis, Lubrica.
SIb much disdaines the world should find her slip,
But ( Sib) it is known who had you on the hip.
Satis optasse.
OLd Limpus feign would live and see good days,
Fully attained to threescore years and ten,
Who though from wenching much his strength decays
Yet has he will as well as youngest men.
Sublimis prostratus.
MOunseur Lorenzo since his office lost,
Wherein of late he lived a great Comander,
Walks discontented like the angry ghost
Of proud Tarquinius, or Pope Alexander:
Whom Fates envying should so domineere,
Have flung down headlong with a full carere.
Quae data, nostra.
BRutus co^plain'd his wife did naught him bring
Or since her marriage gave him any thing:
To whom (quoth she) you are much to blame to braul,
Bring I not boys without your help at all?
Cito been.
SIr John at Mattins prays he might dispatch,
Who by true promise is to bowl a match.
Nocte latent mendae.
THat Susans ruffes and cuffes should so much cost,
Having but two poor lockram smockes at most,
Its much admired; but that the one in sight,
Obscures the other best by candlelight.
Caeca ad scaelera.
NIsa that from her window glaunst her eyes,
Saw Mopsus come as fast as foot could trot:
For joy whereof, upon her bed she lies,
(As who should think she slept and saw him not)
It Was strange (me thought) unless she meant herein
Her eyes should not be open to her sin.
Tandem solutus.
ASk swaggering Sulmo why no debts he will pay,
His answer is, Things must be as they may:
Let Bills or Nouerints sink (says he) or swim,
H'ell not his Laundresse pay: But she paid him.
Infirmis animosus.
POntus by no means from his coin departs,
Zfut will ye have of men more then their hearts?
Vxor superior.
When Nau finds Nicholas drunk she straight cornutes him,
Nor from her scolding in an hour can cease:
But if Nick call her Punk her words confutes him,
So that the Cockscomb's forced to hold his peace.
Antonius Philosophus.
OLd Clerco sues for pension of the State,
For it he pleads the wit he sometime had,
Who though he have a flawed riuen pate,
Yet will not I (as others) call him mad,
Nor pull his beard, nor use him like a sot,
This is the only cause he loves me not.
Longius pro lucro.
Go follow Lucius a far off thy Lord,
What though thy place be not to speak a word
Yet for a silent Pander proud may be,
His Lordship deignes to make that use of thee.
Equus peritior.
GIll by his Gelding drowning escaped perforce,
Who reason had to say, Gramarcy horse.
Primus vel proximus.
DIck's not in town when is wife is brought in bed
But might no doubt be when she first was sped
Vsus natura.
TRistram Tobacco takes in's bed till noone,
Then rising dines, drinks drunk, and falls to dice,
Swears he will not budge till all be lost or won:
Sees next a Play, or Kate his Cockatrice:
Sups at some Bawdy house, and Panders meets,
That picks his pockets, as he is homewards led:
Calls the^ a thousand rogues: reels through the streets,
Drinks more Tobacco, spues, and goes to bed.
Diues-scurra.
DRu dares good men deprave because he is rich,
Whether more fool or knave I know not with.
Sat fuisse.
Though Steel for strength has long since spent his prime
Yet was a man of metal in his time.
Mutatus, alius.
YOung Signior Spruso scorning late converse
With men of vulgar trade, or mean commerse,
Scorning to lodge but on a bed of Down,
Scorning your Innes of common country town,
Scorning but on best delicates to feed,
Yea scorning almost, any thing indeed:
Now poor and prostitute, you may believe him,
In Wood-street Co^pter, scorns no alms you will give him
Edens vomens.
CAcus that sups so duly at the Rose,
Casts up the reckning truly ere he goes.
Citius soluendum.
TRocus his Tenants will no more pay rent,
Till for their Wives he first give them content:
It Is reason Trocus without coin disbursing,
Get them with child and nere allow for nursing?
Suumcuique.
Hanged tell not me quoth Pontus what I owe,
Nor what I spend, nor what I mean to pay,
So little cares he what the vulgar know,
Or can reveal: Things must be as they may,
Let slanes infer the worst they can upon it,
His Dol's his Dol and there is the humor on it.
Infirmis experientia.
OLd Strato stands upon his tackling stout,
He can as well as erst he could hold out:
To whom quoth Ioane his wife, men laugh that win,
It Is known you cannot half so well hold in.
Magnus statura.
LVscus for largeness of his limbs and bone,
At grass time next grows up to twenty one,
In Zoylum.
ZOylus, I hear you take my Rimes in snuff,
Cry fie, it is Ribaldry, or some such stuff:
But Zoylus know, I scorn to deal with you.
He writes foul stuff, that treats of your base crew.
Cupiens culpare, nescit.
DOrus disdaines these Epigrams I make,
Saying they savor not of ought that is in them:
Nay, which is more then that, he will undertake
They are but stinking-stuffe ere you begin them:
And yet before (quoth he) they sauour'd not:
See how the buzzard talks he knows not what.
Vera filia Patris.
WHy strives young Galatea for the wall?
If needs you will know the cause (quoth. one) you shall:
Her Father was a Mason, and they say
It makes her Ladyship lean much that way.
Sero sapimus.
LVke that on Latin lately scorned to look,
Would now read English might he have his book
Iactans pediculosus.
MAtho from Sea has such a purchase brought,
As is not frequent, or of each man bought.
Which to divulgate Matho proves not nice.
Nothing else (damn him) but outlandish lice.
Adnioniti foeliciores.
MAtura weary of the Country life,
complains her husband nere to London brought her*
That has this twelve month proved his honest wife
And not consented scarce to one that fought her.
But bids him roundly herewith look vnto't
Be he a Tinker, next that comes shall do it.
Tonsores pauperiores.
CVtbert admires how Lawyers get so much,
And that his commings in should not be such,
Who has been known a poler and a shauer
These forty years, yet nere could prove a sauer.
Ferendo feruens.
MVch moves not Mal, but let the queen be moved
He Will find she is hot that has her next approved.
Fatales Poetae.
WItches and Poets coimbrace like fate
Reputed base, bare, poor, unfortunate,
In these respects I may my self intrude,
Among the Poets thickest multitude.
Materia pro forma.
LVcina has a love whose name is Goose,
A proper lad, well borne, and wondrous spruce,
She likes the man, but cannot brook his name.
If that be all (sweet Lucr) you are to blame,
The man you may commit into your hands,
For why the Babes he gets may prove all swans.
Admonita peior.
PRiss dares thus plainly to the world appeal,
Since women that deal plain are balladizd,
She Will with the world no longer plainly deal,
Or among plain dealing people be comprizd.
Triamala.
THe Whore, Tobacco and strong waters meet,
Like three grand Plagues almost in every street.
Vsus promptos facit.
Raechel at first would rail upon her man,
That scarce at first could bear himself before her:
Nor almost which way look or hold her Fan,
But now (thanks Fortune) finely can come over her.
Secreta nobis.
TAssus from Temple-Stayres by water goes
To Westminster, and back to Temple rows:
Belike he loves not trot too much the street,
Or surbait on the stones his tender feet:
Tut come, there is something in it must not be known
But Sir, beleeue't, The debt is not his own.
Plus Canis ictus amat.
CReta that closely could her secrets cover,
Feigned to be jealous of her loathed Spouse;
Which he believed (God wot) and more did love her
Presuming, London not her like allows.
Well, go thy ways (thought I) hold on thy trade,
Thart even the truest he whom God nere made.
Lauds cum labe.
Caius commends his Mistress many ways,
To be the mirror of admired praise:
Were not for two foul reasons that ensue,
She Is sometimes drunk, and plays the W.
Nequicquam verba.
WIll wooes his wench with words of Eloquence,
Praying he might her corpse enthalamize:
And of his love impart that influence,
Which with her liking best may simpathize.
She, who regardlesse at his speech does spurn,
Says; It Is not words of Art must serve her turn.
Tandem possimus.
ZAnthus was zealous bent, but could not please
His Lady Mistress, he so long had served:
Nor by his best attendance once, but ease
Or stay his stomach, if he should have starued.
Till forced with Famine, found her in that snare,
Which since to silence Zanthus takes his share.
Viuit et edat.
WHen Gluto goes to dine at th'Ordinarie,
To stay his stomach eats a crust and drinks:
Then calls for victuals, swears he cannot tarry,
Which till it comes, a month each minute thinks:
Then sits him down, and takes the highest place,
Puts salt on's Trencher, cuts a loaf in twain,
And nere remembers ought of saying Grace,
The sight of meat so captiuates his brain:
Whereto he lurching, so about him lays,
As must suffice him for at least two days.
Patientia Vindicta.
CVcullus evermore will carry sway
Over his wife in strangers company:
And on her lips his loathed fingers lay,
Which patient she puts up in policy:
But with herself resolved in secret vows,
To pay him next day soundly on the brows.
Caelat sua crimina Sanctis.
CVrta has now no color or invasion,
To meet or frolic as time late permitted,
Because her husband bars up all occasion,
That for such pleasures and advantage fitted:
Keeps her from going to her child at nurse,
Denies access unto her Garden-house:
For which she gives him many a bitter curse,
And swears, she not esteems his threats a Louse.
The best escape her cunning can devise,
Is once a week to Blacke-Fryers exercise.
Curanda praesentia.
LEttice that late was so resolved to marry,
On more advice will now this twelve month tarry
How should she sooner else indeed dispose
Of the young Bastard where withal she goes.
Mutuans Meretrix.
WHen Dol wants money she desires to borrow
No more then (damn her) she will repay tomorrow
Citius matura.
MAdge at fifteen a maid? should men abhor her
she vows and swears it, twere but fitting for her
Perditum tempus.
VIncent has wrung the wool of his invention,
And cannot find least liquid substance left,
That to succeeding hopes makes further mention,
So barren are his brains of sense bereft:
And which is worse, it was to have paid the score
For meat and drink he to so many owes,
That henceforth vows to credit him no more:
Then how to shift full little Vincent knows:
But must despairing, rail upon the Muses,
That of his time has made no better uses.
Vxor fortier.
WIll by the wars would seem a dominierer,
But An his wife has bin the Ancient-bearer
Merxconcelata.
COdrus at Christmas casts up his accounts,
What he has clearly got the year before,
But never notes what is wives receipts amounts,
Which valued would arise to ten times more.
Indeed his wares in open shop were sold,
Whiles she scarce hers in private durst unfold.
HOw much might men commend the worth of those,
That well could pen their Epigrams in prose,
For many Rimes roue often so far from reason,
As but of times consisting are, not season.
Ad Momum.
May thou nere read my lines, or hear them read,
Or see them (Momus) for I wish thee dead.
Coacta ferenda.
THese Rimes you see, unknown, composed, conceall'd,
Had nere by me been shown, disclosed, reueald,
Much less at latter Lammas past in print,
Had not some secret reason since been in it:
Which volens nolens caused me afterward
Shuffle again, and deal about the Cards.
EPITAPHS.
On M. Thomas Fitton, and his wife Winifred.
ON fat Tom Fitton, and his lean wife Win,
May thus be written, Here lies thick and thin.
On a fair young Maid.
BEhold here Time inters, who would not spare
those cornly corpse of hers, which worms must share
On Edward Alcocke.
CAuse of the dead naught must be said but good
It Is well for Ned that naught be understood.
On John Garret.
GOne is John Garret, who to all men's thinking,
For love to claret, killed himself with drinking.
On Mistress Bonner.
WHiles Mrs. Bonner, dressing was her head,
Death stole upon her, and so struck her dead.
On Thom. Cromwell.
HEre lies Tom. Cromwell, did much money spend
Loving a Bom well to his latest end.
On Gregory the Drawer.
GReg. laid in's grave, who ca^ but deep deplore it
That so much liquor gave, and scorned to score it
On Kate Hill.
HEre lies a Maid whom men called Katherin Hill
That true was said, died much against her will.
On a poor Fiddler.
DEad was that Fiddler found the fifth of June,
whose the^ sweet musicks found went out of tune.
On a rich Tanner.
HEre buried now you see our brother Tanner,
Whose skin must curried be in other manner.
On a Gardner.
THose fragrant Roses on thy coffin spread,
Thy corpse incloses with thee (living) dead.
On a Gallant.
WHo cloth of Tissue wore, here flat does lie,
Having no Issue, more then that in's thigh.
On a Cobbler.
SEe how pale death, which no man may withstand,
Has stopped his breath was on the mending hand.
On a Ioyner.
LO here from strife rests honest John our Ioyner,
Who all his life was never known purloener.
On a Player.
HE that on stages oft-times jesting played,
To after ages has now earnest paid,
On a proud rich man.
HE that so proud late lived, and spared no cost
In lockram shroud lies buried in the frost.
On a Traveler.
WHo traueld often from countries east and west,
Still gaining naught, now rich at length does rest.
On John West.
HEre lies John West, who wearied with a wife,
For quiet rest, desired to end his life.
On George Rust.
RVst laid in dust, see how his son is raised,
That lived on trust till now, the Lord be praisd.
On old Ralph.
OLd Ralph bereft of this life transitory,
The world has left, which made him wondrous sorry.
On a Porter.
THou from a Porters trade (bearing) we see,
Have other Porters made by bearing thee.
On a Waterman.
HEre sleeps Will Slater, who by deaths command,
Has left the water, to possess the land.
On a great personage.
LO here is his greatness laid, which whiles it stood
Was seldom seen or said did any good.
On a Tailor.
Cruel was Atropos to cut his threads,
Made garments fit for those, now turned to shreds.
On Dol Prowt.
HEre lies Dol Prowt, whose days (left death should wrong her,)
Were so worn out, as she could live no longer.
On Stephen Spooner.
DEath has time borrowed of our neighbor Spooner,
Whose wife much sorrowed that he died no sooner.
On John Long.
HEre sleeps I. Long, who lived till Newyears tide
Full fourscore strong, but then fell sick and died.
On a Bellows maker.
WHo so much breath to others daily sold,
For want of breath, no longer life can hold.
On a Welchman.
WHo living least espied his life should leese,
By mere Mathegglin died and tosted cheese
On a Tobacconist.
WHo much Tobacco puffed more then his part,
With smoke his lungs had stuffed, but had no heart.
On old John a Tree.
LEt all men passing by behold and see,
Here low does buried lie, old John a Tree.
On a mad man.
HE now in sadness laid is in his grave,
That late with madness did so rail and rave.
On a Iugler.
HE that so skillful could play fast and loose,
Killed himself wilful, eating so much Goose.
On Mal Keeme.
DEath it should seem with doom too much oredeeming,
Has taken Mal Keeme before her time of teeming.
On Mistress Bab.
DEath played the Scab, that had so soon enthrald
Fine mistress Bab, not knocking ere it called.
On a Sluggard.
SOmnus that slept his fill in time of need,
Prays you accept the will as for the deed.
In Samuelem.
SAm of a surfeit died: thought rich to be,
But how you would prove that tried, pray ask not me
On John Cooling, a Player.
DEath has too soon removed from us Io. Cooling
That was so well beloved, and lived by fooling.
In Thomam Speed.
MAd wenches bewail you, for dead is Tom Speed
Was nere wont to fail you at all times of need.
In Walterum Moon.
HEre lies Wat Moon, that great Tobacconist,
Who died too soon for lack of Had I wist.
In Mechum Io. Cartir.
DEath meant to play the Box on thee John Cartir
That from a sturdy Ox has made a martyr.
In Lodovicum.
SIr Jews that went from London to lead a country life,
Has made himself quite undone by burying of his wife
In Radulphum.
RAlph bids adue to pleasures good or ill,
But tells you true it is much against his will.
In Dorotheam Rich.
HEre rests young Dol Rich, that dainty drab,
Who troubled long with itch, died of the scab
On John Batts the Brewer.
BOld spiteful fates that in the pit durst tumble
Courteous John Batts, that brewd good Ale of Bumble.
On Christopher Fowler.
LEt all say what they can, it is known Kit Fowler
Was held an honest man, though no good bowler
On John Friend.
HOw ere by luck orethrown, it is like Jack Friend
Was no man's foe but's own, and there is an end.
In meipsum.
GOod neighbors if ye mark, my turn comes next on,
Who living long a Clarke, must dye a Sexton.
In Latronem.
HE that so stout was known made others stand
Himself has quite orethrown without command.
In Io. Owin.
WIth fame more famous shall thy fame nere dead,
Cause thee outlasting live eternized.
In eundem.
THose shortest sharpest lines best wit could me^tio^,
Were short co^par'd to thy more sharp invention.
In eundem.
WEll had these words bin added to thy Hearse,
What ere thou spak'st (like Ovid) was a verse
In D. Wake durum opulentum.
WAke with long watching is at length laid sleeping,
For loss of whom there needs but little weeping,
That nere was loved or known for good house keeping.
On a young man newly married.
THe world and thou art quickly gone about,
That but new entering in art entered out.
On a late made Lady.
ILL luck to live no longer Ladifi'd,
Who that day twelue-month wedded, that day died
On a Merchant.
WHo from accounts and recknings nere could rest
At length has summed up his Quietus est.
On a Lawyer.
HEre lies a Lawyer freed from strifes and iarres
Of King's Bench, Cha^cery, or Exchequer bars.
On a Potter.
HE that on clay his chiefest trust reposed,
Is now in clay, in stead of dust enclosed.
On a Captain.
WHo late in wars did dread no foes in field,
Now free of scars, his life in peace does yield.
On Sir Patricke an Irishman.
DEath on Sir Patricke played an Irish part,
That at's own weapon stabd him to the heart*
On a rich feeder.
SIrogites merito cuinam laus propria detur,
Here lies the man was late a Capon-eater.
On a rich Baker.
Our Baker's dead, and laid in earth,
Who lived by Bread in time of dearth.
On an Usurer*
THat all those goods and riches scrap't together
Should with himself depart, and knows not whither.
On a Wrestler.
DEath to this wrestler gives a cunning fall,
That tript his heels, and takes no hold at all.
On Dick Hawks.
DIck seemed of death so wondrous discontented,
As more of breath then any thing repented.
On a Tinker.
WHo (living) many a hole had tinkling stopped,
Now (dead) into a hole is stinking popt.
On a Miller.
DEath without warning waxt as bold as brief,
Killed two in one, a Miller and a Thief.
On a Butler.
Ungentle Death with spiteful spade to dig it
For Dicke, so quick and nimble at the spiggit.
On a Cook.
DEath through the pastry peeping in disguise,
Took poor Tom Cook from making of his pies.
On a Cutpurse.
DEath has that cutpurse seized on at Alhallowes
Who by good hap has so escaped the Gallows.
On a Scriuener.
MAy all men by these presents testify,
A lurching Scriuener here fast bound does lie
On a Saylor drowned.
THou that on Haddocks many one have fed,
May Haddocks feed upon thee now thou art dead
On a Poet.
HEre lies that Poet, buried in the night,
Whose purse, me^ know it, was exceeding light
VT tibi lecta placent, mea sic mihi scripta placebunt:
Indicio servit gratia nostra tuo.
Abjicis ista ferus? moritur mea Musa dolendo:
Accipis ista libens? Illa quod optat habet.
FINIS.

