Laquei ridiculosi: OR Springes for Woodcocks. Caveat Emptor.



LONDON: Printed for John Busby, and are to be sold at his shop in S. Dunstans
Church-yarde in Fleet street.

1613

Lectori benigno, Scienti, and ignoto.
DVo propemodum anni elapsi sunt, ex quo primum Epigramata haec (qualiacunque)
raptim and festinanter perfi^ebam: Quae cum Capellano sieve Officialitiam ^isa
(sicuti mos est) and approbata, ^unc equidem aut non omnino in lucem pro^irent:
partim quod secundum tempora and occasionem composita aptiora magis and
^ece^ntiora gustare videantur; and quod hisce studijs aut potius vanitatibus
minus iam dudum versatus, valedixissem. Sed number placuerit ei cum Typographo
citius agere, cui gratis (vt priora) lubenter contuli: aut alia (qu^ nescio)
impeditus occasion, eadem sine me edita iam sunt, and in publicum diuulgata:
Si tamen cuicunque fortasse placeant perlegenti, mihi etiam gratissimum fuerit
and perplacebunt, dummodo quae commissa sint errata, humaniter condonauerint,
aut quae omissa, non culpauerint imprudenter. At non sum nescius quam a^^ara
and virulenta quoru^dam sint ingenia, qui cum mellis nihil habeant, a^uleu^
tamen venu^atum gerunt, quo obuiu^ quemque vulnerent atque insectentur Hisce,
ego Absinthium and graueolentes her^as potius quam suauissimas rosas grati^ue
odoris Thymum (Hyblaeis Apibus degu^tandum) offerrem. Sed vt desistam pau^is;
Si qui de^ique laqueis istis (quem^dmodum appellantur) necesse and volenter
^iodo incidere certabunt, ita quod de me ^essime and immerito postea loquentur,
tali^s ego proxima tantummodo editione, ^lanculum (si coactus) responsionem
fa^am.

Hen: Parrot. Vni, sipossim posse placere, sat e^t.

Dives Arabs aurum, gemmas dat laetior orbis,
Et quaeis confines Indus and Americus:
At sterilis Gens ista mea est, fulgentis Eoi
Lumina, quam solis nulla bear solent.
Quae tamen indigno concessit Jupiter almus,
(Nulla licet tanto Iudice digna,) dabit.
To the Reader.
TO the Courteous, Generous, and Scolasticke Readers: I cannot stoop too
submissiue-low with that ^bseruance which to them belongs. But to the
illiterat and home-spun-Pea^ants, prove I as harsh and indigestable as is their
spite and ignorance vnre^roueable. I know I shall be fowly censured of some
Slauonians that scarce have any taste or feeling of invention; yet will be
meddling though they cry but Mew, whom to revenge were less expedient by how
much the labor in so base a business would prove impertine^t. If any one in the
reading hereof shall ought assume to his own particular* and say expressly it
is meant by him, ^ cannot help his incredulity, but rather wish his folly more
apparent* that men might note him as a publick^ Cockscombe.

For mine own part, I had long since bidden adue to these idle toys not
thinking my labors (done then^ should now again be brought unto the Press,
which is indeed without ^y priuitie. Wherefore, if any thing ^oeuer be escaped
or misplaced, it shall ^ot be imputed unto my fault, being ^ neither was nor
would be thereunto ^onsenting or assisting: Nor shall I ^eede be so obsequious,
seeing it was only done then to please my self; much less to use any long
Apol^gie, which were to erect a large Portall to a little Cottage. In brief,
^t is to me no otherwise then as a cast ^r game at Passage, that am indifferent
though I ^ling out at first: and therefore to conclude, as I seek to please
none, so look I for as little thanks, ^sse praise, and least reward: so
farewell.

To the vulgar Censurers.
IF my ill-tuned Rimes content the wise,
Whose deeper judgments I desire to please,
Let not the ruder sort be so precise,
That ( Critticke seeming) cannot censure these.
I write not to the rusticke Rabblement,
Nor fawn upon the curious kind of men,
But hold it more then bootlesse labor spent
To beg their poor applause; nor care I then
If such repine, whose envy cannot hurt,
Though like a raging Sea they foame their dirt.
FINIS.
MY honest friends that reads, I you bes^ec^
To make the best construction of each lett^
And not to blame my lavishness of speech,
In paying soundly where I am a debtor:
My word and credit else you should infringe,
Which was to catch the Woodcocke in a Spring
SPRINGES FOR VVoodcocks.
1
Crispati erines, Plumae, dant calcar amori.
WHy is young Anas thus with feathers dight?
And on his shoulder wears a dangling lock:
The one foretells he will sooner fly then fight;
The other shows he is wrapped in's mothers smock.
But wherefore wears he such a Iingling spur?
Oh, he deals often with lades that will not stur.
2
Pariiugo sociantur Asini.
COthurn^s thinks he has the rarest wit,
That any sel^e-conceit can glory in;
Do but applaud him, and you are as fit
Unto his purpose as an Ass to's skin:
Mark if to Paul's the Gallant be not gone,
You seldom there see one fool walk alone.
3
Consuetudo, lex.
TWo wooers for a vvench were each at strife,
Which should enjoy her to his wedded wife;
Quoth the one, she is mine, because I first her saw,
She Is mine, quoth the other, by Pye-corner law;
Where, sticking once a P^ick on what you buy
It Is then your own, which no man must deny.
4
Ingrata Gratia,
GRace, I confess* she has a comely face,
Good hand and foot, as answerable to it:
But what is all this except she had more grace?
Oh, you will say, it is want that makes her do it.
True: want of grace indeed; the more her shame,
Disgrace by nature, only Grace by name.
5
Quo mayor, peior.
Aetus, that late a great Divine did meet,
^ Would, jesting, needs presume his health to gree^,
^ho (not offended) told him he was well:
^o^d then, quoth Letus, see what lies men tell,
Last day I was abroad, where I did hear
Your Worship has been speechless all this year.
6
Magnis fortuna nocet.
TWo Knights in London (the Term being ended)
Would of a Scriuener borrow fifty pound:
^ho said, by him they could not be befriended
^lesse a Citizen with them were bound:
For, quoth the Scriuener, thus much understand,
The men we trust have either goods or Land.
7
Videantur quae non sunt.
SAltus goes booted to the dancing school,
As if from thence his meaning were to ride;
But Saltus says they keep his legs more cool,
And which for ease he better may abide:
Tut, that is a cold excuse. It rather seemed
Saltus silk stockings were not yet redeemed.
8
Vmbras non scelus metuit.
Mistress Marina starts to see a Frog,
A Naked Rapier, or a creeping Mouse;
To hear a Gun, a barking mastiue Dog,
Or smell Tobacco that de^iles her house,
To taste of Fish no man alive shall woe her,
Yet fears she not what flesh can do unto her*
9
Sal^em videretur.
A Welshman and an Englishman disputed,
Which of their lands maintained the greatest state;
^he Englishman the Welshman quite confuted,
^^t would the Welshman naught his brags abate,
^en Cooks (quoth he) in Wales one Wedding fees*
True, quoth the other, each man to^t^ his Cheese.
10
Latet aliquid intus.
Mistress Mallina waxes ill at ease,
And keeps her Bed, sick of a burning fever:
^t she is persuaded it is some worse disease,
and that the foolish Doctor does deceive her;
For why? she feels it shooting in her bones,
That griping puts her to most grievous groans.
11
Naturam expellere durum.
PRofus^ borrowes, but never pays again,
(A custom he has kepte'er since his Cradle)
Although you bind him in an Iron chain,
Can any man pay debts more then he is able?
Fore God, not he. Let Nouerints sink or swim,
He Will sooner deal with Kate, though she pay him.
12
Tempora praesagit Venus.
KAte, for a need, deals in Astronomy,
And can of times and things prognosticate;
For as they use upon their backs to lie,
And censure of the weathers changing state;
So she (her body laid) can prophecy
Whether it shall prove cold, hot, moist, or dry.
13
Sensus falluntur ^ept^.
VVAT told his wife she closely played the whore,
For, ipso facto, he himself espide it
from forth the keyhole of the chamber door:
^ut she regardles to his teeth denide it
Saying, Thou Rascal, wilt believe thine eyes
Before thy Wife, that in thy bosom lies?
14
Improbe Neptunum accusat qui bis naufragium fecit*
SVsan has sworn to deal no more on trust,
What shift so ever she be forced to make her;
^r such as promise most in heat of lust
^ill least perform (says Susan) but forsake her:
And can ye blame her then? judge those that know it,
^wice to be got with child and no man owe it?
15
Ingl^uiem seauitur fames.
CVrio would feed upon the daintiest fare,
That with the Court or Country might compare*
For what lets Curio that he need to care,
To frolic freely with the proud'st that dare.
But his excess was such in all things rare,
As he proou'd bankerout ere he was aware.
16
Omnis vicessitudo grata.
PArnell accounts it deepest policy,
To shift her lodging every month at least;
It Is strange you should demand the reason why,
Are not her Clyents thereby more increast;
Besides, her years and actions yet in prime,
That else might prove a Baude before her time.
17
Nunquam saturata libido.
^Vcas so long lies surfeiting in's Bed
As seldom it permits him rise to dinner
^ntill his lustful appetite be fed,
^hiles he is consorting with some femall sinner,
Whom hackney-like he hires from night till noone,
And turns her off his journey being done.
18
Spreta tamen viuunt.
^Ocunda is become an idle liver,
Supported by the bounties of so many
^s may be thought the fault is in the giver,
^hen pity twere she be releiu'd by any.
And yet you will say, if there were none to give,
How should such creatures as Iocunda live?
19
No^ omnia possumus omne^.
FVscus forgets since first he was a Clarke,
And (now I think on it) well he might do (...),
That had of learning but so little spark:
Should he remember what he did not know?
No matter ( Fuscus) half t'hexchequer knows thee,
That now so ancient shall not need to poze thee.
20
Sequitur vestigia matris.
It Is maruail'd much how Martha holds it out,
That Is thought to have so little commings in,
Pish, none that knows her duly makes that doubt:
Besides, she comes not of so base a kin,
For though her father were of Gentry wide,
She Is borne a mad wench by the mothers side.
21
Quantum mutatus ab illo.
^Edes grown proud, makes men admire thereat,
Whose baser breeding should (they think) not bear it,
^ay he on Cock-horse rides, how like you that?
^ut Pedes proverb is, win gold and wear it:
But Pedes you have seen them rise in have,
That through their pride have broake their necks at last.
22
Malum commune pri^atum inc^ndium.
HEllen of Tr^y, was held a wondrous Woman,
(If all things wondrous be which we admire)
^et never was she known so wondrous common,
though against her will, she caused that vvondrous fire:
But wondrous is our Hellens more mistrust,
That kindles thousands with her fire of lust.
23
Modo dives, pessimus vocetur.
PRauus th'Atturny proves himself to blame,
By taking, as it is said, excessive fees;
But his excuse is others do the same,
Which else for want of asking they should leese:
Tut, who is he but scandal may deprave,
That twice was vnder-Shreiue and yet no K.?
24
Sat, Si formosa Camilla.
CAmilla has a fair and pleasing face,
But it is as common as her conversation,
She like esteems your praise as her disgrace,
That with a pox bids farewell reputation;
For she will maintain the course she first began,
To swear, carowse, or lie with any man.
25
Vritur omnis Amor.
^ Wonder Petrus looks so paily on it,
Whose late resemblance seemed of sanguine hue?
^ou shall not need (Sir) question much upon it,
^is too well known how (with a pox) it grew:
It Was never yet sound with him since first he swore,
To love Rebecca that polluted --
26
Domi parcus, for as prodigus.
When Toruus seldom sups or dines abroad,
He seems more curious then the best at table,
and with the daintiest dishes lays on load,
^lthough it cost him more then is means is able:
Thus at one meal himself the Buzard robs,
That basely feeds at home on hearing-cobs
27
Nummorum impensas, non Veneris luxum fugit.
GA^fridus grown a flincher now of late,
Among his Comrages (as men he never knew)
Will henceforth (swears) those cursed courses hate;
And truly learn to lead his life anew,
For proof whereof and to avoid such cost,
He keeps him only to one Wench at most.
28
Ingenium, vent^is amor, et pocula laedunt.
Why should not Pr^cus have a pregnant wit,
That has so many proofs thereof professed,
I see no reason much should hinder it,
He Is rich enough, and fares of the best:
Drinckes as good liquor as is made of malt,
But with his meat he eats too little Salt.
29
Quis tantiemeret poenitentiam?
SImplex, a Citizen was guld of late,
Who sporting scarce a minute with his wench,
^ought his repentance at so dear a ra^e,
^s ere he could the Panders fury quench
Was forced through coward fear, to pay the shot,
Which might ensue that Simplex never got.
30
Quam sequimur deteriora.
^ Aurentius has of Ladies long been loved,
But he Adonis-like regards them not,
^or by their best inticements can be moved,
and yet an issue of his loins has got:
By whom think you? some beauteous Nymph at least:
To tell you true by Ioane his kitchin-Beast.
31
Vindicta vim sequitur.
KIt being kicked and spurned pursues the Law.
That doomed the damage at twice forty-pence,
Which when the party that had vvrong'd him savv*
Thought it was too great a fine for such offense,
Why then (quoth Kit) if I too much request,
Thou may at any time kick out the rest.
32
Sic Jupiter ^lim.
When Siluio seeks a broad for Venery,
He suits him ever in some strange disguise,
And like the Lapwing farthest off both fly,
That none his dwelling know in any wise:
Has he not reason to be close and fearing,
That justice gives for others good abearing?
33
Opinio mayor veritate.
What tell you Grosus now of Grammar rules,
That has a Chequer-clarke so long been bred,
^s good you question him of Mares, or Mules,
^s poze him in a thing he never read:
And yet your clyents stoop with cap and knee,
To some (God wot) as scuruey Clerks as he.
34
Turpe lucrum Veneris,
Will in a wilful humor needs would wed
A wench of wonder: but without a Stock,
those fame no sooner through the street was spread*
^ut thither straight our chiefest Gallants flock:
Put case she is poor: brings she not chapmen on?
I hope his Stock may serve to graft upon.
35
Fronti nulla fides.
CAntus, that woolward went, was wondered at,
Which he excused as done through mere cont^tio^
But who so simple ( Cantus) credits that?
It Is too well known thou art of worse condition:
And therefore if no linen thee begirt,
The naked truth will prove thou have no shirt.
36
Lucri bonus odor.
FAber, not fond or jealous of his wife,
(Though nere so fair) from no man's sight restrai^
For well he knows it would prove a hellish life,
Besides the want of that which often it gains her:
Taking no knowledge then they come for sin,
Says, Please ye enter Sirs? my Wif's within.
37
Magnis ^ors ausibus obstat.
MOunseir le Graund, is hence from London go^,
On urgent business that concerns him near,
and more disturbs him but to think upon,
^hen any sudden chance that came this year:
Which might have wrought his vt^er dissolution,
Had he not escaped that scuruy Execution.
38
Curiorum Bacchanalia.
^Aulinus poasteth every day to Powles,
But not to pray: that holds he out of fashion,
from whence returning, to some Tavern troules,
^here of his sins he makes more due relation:
And calling most to mind the Scriueners band,
He then bethinkes him Domes-day is at hand.
39
Voluisse satis, si non datur vltra.
BEhold yon Greene-goose in his hauking suite,
That Is booted still a month before he rides,
To urge the reason were but vain dispute,
There Is no man living knows all times and tides:
What can he more then pawn his scarf^e and swor^
And yet the Ostler will not take this word.
40
Quod amamus laudamus.
MArcus maintains it boldly with his pen,
And will approve it by Philosophy,
That greatest Clerks are not the wisest men,
(And therein shows you many reasons why:)
Amongst the rest not least considerate,
Brings his defense from Tom the Coryate.
41
Suum cuique pulchrum.
^Osthumus not the last of many more,
Asks why I writ in such an idle vain,
^eing there are of Epigrams such store,
^h, give me leave to tell thee once again,
That Epigrams, are fitted to the season
Of such as best know how to make rhyme reason.
42
Fama Mendax.
REport thou sometimes art ambicious,
At other times too sparing covetous,
^ut many times exceeding envious,
and out of time most devilish furious:
Of some or all of these I dare compound thee,
But for a liar have I ever found thee.
43
Quid non ^brieta^?
RVbin reports his Mistrisse is a Punck,
Which being told her, was no whit dismayed,
For sure as death (quoth she) the villain's drunck,
And in that ^aking knows not what he said:
It Was well excused: but often it comes to pass,
That true we find In Vino veritas.
44
Ex Nihilo nihil.
T'Wer wondrous, Niger should so long neglect
To take a Wife, either for wealth or wit,
But that it was known he had some close defect,
Which from his very rising hindered it:
For what to women most content should bring,
Was flatly found in him to prove no Thing.
45
Nescit modum rationis expers.
When late Bartellus wife began to breed,
She longed for Crabs, and Dagger-Puddingpyes;
^ext time on pickeld Oysters must she feed,
^ll which, and more, her careful husbands buys,
So often she longs for sundry dainty things,
As all is spent er' she her Bastard brings.
46
Non penna, sed vsus.
Caius accounts himself accursed of men,
Only because his Lady loves him not:
^ho (till he taught her) scarce could hold her pen,
and yet has since another Tutor got.
Caius it seems thy skill she did but cheapen,
And means to try him at another weapon.
47
Pari iugo ^ulcis tractus.
VVIL and his wife so well love one another,
As often their strife is which would first be dea^
Mean while (the better to partake with other)
Lie closely kissing all day long a bed:
For so their fancies both iumpe on the nick,
He calls her Cunny, she him little Prick.
48
Manus manum fric^t.
CAecus indebted, wants wherewith to pay,
Unto mine Host; but does therewith appeal
To his kind Hostise, craving longer day:
That with her ever yet did kindly deal,
For let her speak (quod Caecus) just and truly,
She cannot say, but I have paid her duly.
49
Opus and Vsus.
OPus for need consumed his wealth a pace,
And never would cease until he was undone;
^is brother Vsus lived in better case
^hen Opus did, although the eldest son;
It Was strange it^should be so; but here was it,
Opus had all the Land, Vsus the Wit,
50
Posse non velle, virum nobilitat.
FEstus could find in's heart to eat good cheer,
To wear rich garments, and converse with Ear^e^,
^o revel it with the best, and domineere
Amongst the choicest and most sweetest Girls.
But this (quoth Festus) feels to him curse,
To find in's heart, and cannot find in's purse.
51
Vulgaria sperno.
SOme marvel why these Epigrams I write,
To one proportions limit me confines;
As if I could no more nor less indite,
But just the measure of so many lines.
To answer such as therein think I err,
Spite of their spleen I will be singular.
52
Dulce lenimen, miseriarum.
RAueus restraind of liberty, lies by it,
But therewith is resolved to take no care:
For Raucus reckons not who ere epsy it,
So long as there are yet some chincks to share,
Let Fortune do the worst that she can do him,
If but his Doll, that dainty Duck come to him.
53
O tempora, O mores.
SAm says this new world differs from the old,
Who knows not that? there is no man can deny it:
^ictuals were nere so dear, nor love so cold,
The matter is, he wants where with to buy it.
But ( Sam) thou never yet could hear or see,
That beggars were more proud then now they be.
54
Regina paecunia quid non?
NVmmus subborn'd a Counselor on his part,
Against Innocence that knew not what to speak*
^ut free in Conscience had a cheerful heart:
And yet constrained, his mind at length did break
Unto him, saying, Sir, you play the Poet,
That know the truth, yet will not seem to know it.
55
Veniunt spectentur vt ipst.
When young Rogero goes to see a play,
His pleasure is you place him on the Stage,
The better to demonstrate his array,
And how he sits attended by his Page,
That only serves to fill those pipes with smoke,
For which he pawned has his riding Cloak.
56
Sic ar^ diluditur art.
A Sarieant that a Seruingman arrested,
Bad him bring Bail, or else to prison go,
Which, to procure on's word, the man requested,
And left his Ring as in deposito:
The Saricant having staid till Sun had set,
Was forced (as Fortune would) to pay the debt.
57
Naturam Ducern sequi^ur.
MEstus grown dull and dead through discontent:
But if his Trull, that sees him sotted, say,
^ow cheer you Sir? or is impatient
^f her dispatch, and swears she will not stay,
Oh, then he will rouse himself, and gins to fall
Unto his business, like a natural.
58
Rediculae admirationis facetum responsum.
LAnius that late a load of Calves did bring,
Upon his horse through Fleet street to his door,
Was of a Studient thought so strange a thing,
As if he nere had seen the like before:
When boldly Lanius (looking back) replide,
There Is many a Calfe (Sir) does on horseback ride.
59
Conscius ipse sibi, etc.
REader, perhaps thou think I aim at thee,
Yes, much: to mean a man I do not know?
Besides I hope thou never iniur'dst me,
Then t'wer unlikely (faith) it should be so:
But as by chance the blind-man takes the Hare,
So may I hit thee ere I am aware.
60
Male agens, odit lucem.
DOrus disdaines those verses he composed,
Should to the press or public view be broug^
Least greater matter be thereby disclosed,
Then ever yet before was done or thought:
Provided always you may see him drunck,
Spend, sport, or spue, with any Shoredich Punck.
61
Inuisibilis forma.
MIstrisse Madrill wears evermore her mask,
Which makes the people very much admire;
^^t none so saucy dares the reason ask,
^^r contradict it since it is her desire:
For painted pictures, must (you know the guise)
Be always curtain'd from the vulger eyes.
62
Mali corui, maelum ouum.
SQuinto that peasant, with his meager face,
Whose tongue is like unto an Adders tail,
^ust out of spleen these Epigrams disgrace,
And if you would hang him cannot choose but rail)
His reason is that old distemperd rage,
Who writing nere but once was hist from Stage.
63
Vsur^em damnat^ vim patitur.
CRaesus a Gallant, but of no great wit,
Inueighes against Usury and interest;
Main^ayning simply that it is unfit
Men's substance by such profit were increast:
But Craesus, talk no more, for I have known,
When you your self have put up three for one.
64
Canis ad vomitum,
(...) that each night goes duly drunck to bed,
Forgets to pray until her^^en is;
And has next morning druncke again and fed,
Then swears as fast at whatsoeres amiss,
So much he is mou'dat wagging of a hair,
As Dick dares damn himself fore morning pra^
65
Ictus Piscator sapit.
BRutus at length escaped the Surgions hands,
Begins to frolic as if all were well;
and would not for the worth of thrice his lands,
^ndure the brunt of such another hell;
But leaves this farewell for his Phisicks hire,
The child that is burnt, for ever dreads the fire.
66
Contemptae i^cent arts.
^Oung Valentinus writes as many hands
As any Clarke within the Town he dwells;
^e Latin, French, and Du^ch he understands,
multis alys more then much excels:
^here's no man knows how Fortune yet may lift him,
though at this time he wants a shirt to shift him.
67
Caecus amor, caeca libido.
SEcretus in the night a drabbing goes,
That lurking lives by daylight like the Owl;
But then his lustful lims upon her throws,
And nere looks on her, be she fair or foul,
Or lewd, or loathsome, lamed, diseased, or common
It only likes Secretus she is a woman.
68
Quorsum purgatio haec?
Cornelius thinks it best he take purgation,
As well t'expell those homours that abound,
As to beguile some others expectation,
That for his pleasure pleases not be found:
I doubt Cornelius then will purge so long,
As he will not leave himself a penny strong.
69
Tunica Pallio proprior.
TIburnus keeps a Tavern near the Fields,
Where Ba^chus filled with Nectar nightly sports,
And Venus pleased, with sweet persuasion yields;
Unseen of Vulcan when as Mars resorts,
But to iumpe plainly to the point indeed,
It Is thought his Wife best serves the turn at need.
70
Stultorum Sapientia.
COrinus waxen poor devised best
What Art or skill might next advantage bring,
So many proofs his cunning had professed,
As could be framed almost on any thing:
At length resolved, his Country he for sooke,
And of his travails wrote a fustian Book.
71
Non Brachia sed Nasus.
NIck being druncke one night disgraced his nose
Against the poast, he groping could not feel,
Nor how he hurt himself does yet suppose,
But that his head was lighter then his heel:)
But Nick, if I might censure of thy harms,
I think thy nose was longer then thine arms.
72
Faetido sic fla^u, turget superbia.
AS young Renaldo stood diuising best
To please his Lady with some pretty tale,
(Whose settled countenance there to addressed
And bashful blushing did him then appale)
He therewith coughing, chanced to let a fart,
Which ever since has dashed him out of heart.
73
Nec cast, nec caute.
VVlcanus vows to prosecute the law,
Against one that wronged his beloved Nell;
Whom for her part she never felt nor saw:
And how she lives that let her neighbors tell,
If she her carriage do not closely bear,
Though he, her husband, once a Bankerout were.
74
Infamia, fama.
SArdinia swaggers, but with good report.
Though she preserve a morsel for her friend,
The course she takes is of another sort;
Then does to Grooms or Wastcoat wenches tend;
For,(but her self excepted) she will be sworn,
The worst are Knights on Gentlewomen borne.
75
Nescis quo serus vesper vehat.
LIncus deuiseth as he lies in's bed,
What new apparel he were best to make him;
So many fashions flow within his head,
As much he fears the Tailor will mistake him:
But he mistook him not that by the way
Did for his old Suite lay him up that day.
76
Est mihi diua parens, etc.
OWinus wondreth since he came from Wales,
What the description of this I Will should be,
That nere had seen but Mountains, Hills, and Dales,
Yet would he boast, and stand on's Pedigree,
From Rice ^p Richard, sprung from Dick a Cow,
Be Cod was right good Gentleman: look ye now?
77
Nulli Thai negat.
LVcina likes not to be over coy
Amongst those friends that come in love to greet her
For mirth and Music ever was her joy,
And therein fails she none that dares but meet her:
So firm her fancies do on pleasures fix,
As she is wholly made of Merry-tricks.
78
Matrimonium meritrici Pallium.
MArcella does her daughter often advise,
She take example by her sisters fall,
Least worser danger should to her arise,
And may her credit in like question call,
Till she in marriage so her self advance,
As may support it whatsoever might chance.
79
Simul and semel.
CAntus both wood and wedded in one day,
(Nor was it wondrous, as the case required)
For she with child, no reason had to stay,
And he contented, liked what love desired:
Until he saw how soon her womb did rise,
Which she excused, was now the common guise.
80
Bacchus triumphans.
COcus that quondum kept both horse and man,
And could have taken what not? upon his word:
Now walks the Suburbs without Cloak or Wan,
And fares as Fortune pleases to aford;
More shame then pity it is, a man would think
So great a portion could be spent in drink?
81
Sequitur vestigia Matris.
^Idus too franckly brings his Wife abroad,
Amongst our Roysters of the deepest rank,
^ who should say she that awry has troad,
^ll play the same, but not a worser pranck,
Unless she iumpe so just her Mothers mould,
As like to her she will prove as often sold.
82
Monstrum intus and extra.
MOnsieur Mendoza wears a nose notorious,
Not like the luster of each Malmsey nose;
^t such whose splendour is more glorious,
^en richest Rubies, or the reddest Rose,
Briefly the tenor, if I must di ^elose,
Mendoza has indeed a monstrous nose.
83
Par pari, referrs decet.
OLd Menedemus that would never wed,
But made his wenches serve in stead of men,
Is now at length of such a morsellsped
As quits his quondams with a Card of ten;
For all those mungers did her most maintain,
She now pays home with twice as much again.
84
Quid cogit necessitas?
When Luscus late beheld a proper Less,
And of her dainties had desire to taste,
Not knowing how to bring his suit to pass,
He vowed to speed or hang himself in haste;
She, fearing Luscus would have don't indeed,
Yields, more to save his neck then serve his nee^.
85
Ingentes, tollunt aminos.
QVint^s by nature was so hot and fiery,
As on the least occasion straight would draw,
And run himself into a Proeminiri,
^ith resolution, in dispight of law,
Until the Gaile for twelve month taught him diet,
Where (purged of choler) Quintus now lives quiet.
86
Parturiunt montes, etc.
PEtrus will bring forth Epigrams hereafter,
But I delivered am: my pains are past.
^hen must his Muse be but my Muses daughter,
because (you see) mine gives the name of last:
But Petrus means t'inlarge his Book with blancks,
Fearing more labor, and more lines, then thanckes.
87
Furoris praecipitium.
Josephus has his learning quite forgot,
Yet, hence these Epigrams he headlong flings,
That by no means his fancy feeds not,
They are such brutish beastly baudy things,
Was It not well aimd at, on so short a sight?
Few of your fools do always iump so right.
88
Superbioe comes, inopia.
SVsan that whilome wore her gowns of satin,
And fared deliciously from day to day,
(Translated into French from out of Latin,)
Is fallen at length into that foul decay
As all the means and money she can win,
Will scarce procure the Spittle take her in.
89
Tempus ed^x rerum.
When Mistress Win did first her wastcoat wear,
She scarcely could that carriage then maintain,
^ now on float her self a lost does bear,
^h flaggs and top-sailes launching forth amain:
Whose force in hottest fight exceeds so far,
As dares encounter any man of War.
90
Asp^^um nimis condimentum.
MOunseir Albanus new invested is
With sundry suites and fashions passing fit,
^ never any came so near as this,
^ joy where of Albanus frollickes it,
Until the Tailors bill of Solui fias,
Diuerts his humor clean to another byas.
91
Tobacco, vinum, Venus.
FOcus grown fat, lives like an Epicure,
And studies daily how he shall be fed,
That can no more your walks in Powles endure,
But takes Tobacco as he lies in's bed:
Where belching (like a Boar) he calls for Sack*
And only keeps a Whore to scratch his back.
92
Mulus mulam fricat.
HOw comes it Mildred our next neighbors m^
That serves for wages scarce four marks a ye^
Should go so rich and gorgiously arai'd,
As to no little wonder may appear?
Oh, it is her Master deals so like a brother,
As one good turn deserves to quite another.
93
Quis Ebrius laudat temperantia^?
SEuerus likes not these unseasoned lines,
Of rude absurdities, times soul abuse
(...) all posterities, and their assigns,
^^at might have been (says he) to better use:
What senseless Gull, but reason may convince,
Or lade so dull but being kicked will wince?
94
Facies, non vxor amatur.
CAnutus known a man of substance plenty,
And grown a Grandsire to no mean a stock*
^ath wedded one supposed was under twenty,
whom poorly he received but in her smock:
That since for recompense a son has brought him,
So old and able who would ere have thought him?
95
Nobilitas ignota, ignobilis.
(...) boasts his Kin and Pedigree,
Are such as may compare with greatest Peers,
Nor can your Coat by half so ancient be;
Before the Conquest known for many years;
If that be ancient, which we do not not know,
Then I conclude, his Gentry may be so.
96
Summis negatum stare di^.
THarsus in Office bears himself as great
As (...) Bastard, who such labor won:
Or (...) himself that sat in (...) seat,
Or (...) said to rule the Sun:
But so presum^tuous he forgets his calling,
As with young Ica^us I fear his falling.
97
Nonre, sed nomine Sponsus.
LVcina languishing through long despair,
That since her marriage-day ner'bred young bones,
(And yet a Woman lusty, young, and fair,)
(...) now delivered of two Boys at once:
For which the Midwife praised her husbands skill,
Yes: true (quoth she) the man did his good will.
98
Vadas si inuideas.
MOmus, thy malice I have looked for long,
And made provision fit to entertain thee;
^ut if thou guerdon my good will with wrong
^hy coming I Will prevent, and much disdain thee.
My board for bitter foes no meat affords,
Thou therefore shall be forced to eat thy words.
99
Quam fallimur in certis?
IOcus in's humor wears out the day,
Counting it sin to take thought for to morrow,
And makes a jest when he should come to pay;
But pleads good earnest when he means to borrow.
Yet see how Iocus jests at length deceaues him,
That in the hole of Wood stre^t-Counter leaves him*
100
Inequales trahunt Iuu^ncae.
CVrta nere mourned her husband being dead,
Because she was too young, and wanted wit;
But Curta since (the second time) has sped,
With one as much too old, and more unfit,
Which (if you mark it) makes the prouerbef^
She that has borne a Calfe, now bears a Bull.
101
Ambitio faeminini generis.
MIstres Matressa hopes to be a Lady,
(Not as a dignity of late expected)
But from the time almost she was a Baby,
That has your richest Gentlemen rejected,
But yet not dubd in present, as she should be,
Proves in expectance still, my Lady would be.
102
Amor non est acceptor personarum.
IVlia has sworn to love her Seruingman,
On whom she dares before her husband smile;
And enterchange those greetings now and than
As may the times and his mistrust beguile,
For Iulia thinks it in conscience meet, (sweet
Who tastes the sour, should sometimes feel th^^
103
Vnus Diabolus dominatur intribus.
AScriuener and a Usurer contends
Against a Sarieant, which performs most:
The One says, he binds; the other his money lends
Then what (quoth they) remains that thou should
Yes (says the Sarieant) if you note it well, (boast?
I can conduct men living into Hell.
104
Sublata causa tollitur effectus.
MOunseur Riero has his wedlock lost,
That against his credit proves a strong inuectiue:
Some censure this, and that; but by the most
It Is found apparent that he was defective:
And therefore must he in a case so slender
Be forced perforce his right and claim surrender.
105
Aquila non capit muscas.
GRandus that great Colossus gins to learn him
The Rules that longs to a cunning Clarke:
But saucy he is to think my lines concern him,
Or any drunkard stumbling in the dark.
No Grandus, know, I write of greater men,
Thou art too base a subject for my Pen.
106
Praestat otiosum esse quam male agere.
Vcres lives lazely, and loves her ease,
Meddling with naught that toil or labor brings;
^ut to be idle less does Lucres please
^hen to be meddling with the meanest things,
Which she accounts but as a venial sin,
Having (alas) no other commings in.
107
Quot capita, tot sensus.
SOme much commends your Humors ordinary,
Others do more affect the lovely Greek;
But most extols our English Secretary,
No one can please all: all love not alike.
Give me that fellows wit, whose follies Rhyme,
Was bare-arst pictured on the back of Time.
108
Nititur in vetitum.
Ask Minos why he marries not, he will say
Because he will not live at Rack and Manger;
Whiles he may take a snatch, and so away
In common corners, as a common Ranger;
Twere no great matter if a man should name him*
Pish, bring him on the Stage you cannot shame hi^*
109
Vnusquisque suo sensu.
AS are my Epigrams no way precise,
Or curiously compact, but plain indeed;
So wish I not the Reader, ouerwise,
To wrest or censure where there is no need,
But if thou wilful wilt apply them to thee,
All that I say, is, much good may they do thee.
110
Aliud simulat, aliud agit.
^Roface (quoth Fuluio) fil's the the other quart,
Nay, since we are met, let us not budge till ten:
^hat's he that will not pledge me with a heart?
^ll this to any one dares say Amen,
But calling for a Iourden, steals away,
And leaves the reckoning for the rest to pay.
111
Serio, si Sero.
NO more carowsing Tomki^, if you love me;
When was there seen a civil woman drunk?
In any thing but this command or prove me:
Nay, then you would use me as a common Puncke.
Faith Sir, I scorn't: nor care I for your Wine,
Give me your money ere you have what is mine.
112
Ede, bibe, lude.
COme on, says Mounseur Rake-hill, what shall do^
Shal's kill a Sarieant, or go rob for treasure?
What has thy stomach most a mind unto?
We never shall younger purchase greater pleasure:
Live still, and lack? s'^ut, something we will intend,
They can but hang us for it and there is an end.
113
Moritur cum tempor^ mutant.
SVperbus looks no lower then the sky,
Yet is unskillful in Astronomy:
^is like he knows for certain he must die,
^ut would not see the place where he should lie:
Take heed Saperbus, may a number cry,
Thou be not damned for pride and villainy.
114
Nocturnae lu^ubrationes periculos^.
^Lora gains more by labor in the night,
Then can her husband purchase any way:
that would she not procure her if she might
^e so imployd' with business all the day?
That might be censured soon by him, or those
Who best the burdens of her labor knows.
115
Sequentur tandem deteriora.
Hanged, a pox on it (quoth Vincent) let it go,
It Is not the most that I have lost before,
He was a Rascal to abuse me so:
Spent I as much as he is worth and more
It Will not undo me: but (brave Vince) it will,
If you continue in this humor still.
116
Quod roget Natura ^iat.
MAtilda grown to age, full fourteen years,
Betroths her self against her Fathers will,
And less the threatenings of her mother fears
To join in wedlock, prove it good or ill:
Which to undo she scorneth with her heels,
So much she now the prick of conscience feels.
117
Sic ars diluditur absen^.
When Ralph returns each evening from a play,
He tells his wife he was at shop that while,
Which simply she believes and goes her way,
^hen laughes to see he could her so beguile
And come upon her: but if all be true,
There Is many ( Ralph) plays on her more then you.
118
Quisque sua vindicat.
MY Epigrams how ever poorly borne,
And at an instant hudled up in have,
^oe boldly yet the name of Bastard scorn,
that savor not of stolen or borrowed taste:
Many have fathered what they have not known,
My comfort only is, What Is mine is mine own.
119
Quaesola, magis errat.
YOung Mistress Rose to Pymlico is gone,
(A place I hope no City creature blames,)
But it is suspicious that she walks alone,
And not in troops amongst our London Dames:
Because the wicked terms it as a Bursse,
To meet and talk, but afterward do worse.
120
Facile obliuiscuntur maximi.
GAllanto falls in rage this other day,
Missing a suite he thought was stolen, or sold,
But presently remembered where it lay,
For by his Page it was peremptory told,
He knew before (which need no such vexation)
That that and more was pawnd the last vacation.
121
Audentes fortuna iuuat.
^Souldier once a Widow would have wooed,
But being poor and loath to be denied,
^st not impart how he affected stood,
^ich she as soon thus censured as espied:
You may be valiant (Sir) but seem unlusty,
That either have no weapon, or it is rusty.
122
Exclamat Sydera sero.
^Oung Master Pignus swears he less indures
To deal with Brokers then so many Devils,
^ich next to Baudes, and Panders him assures,
even as bad or rather worser evils:
That more inflict (says he) then sword, or dearth,
And therefore calls them very Devils on earth.
123
Forma, bonum fragile.
RVgosa waxen old has broke her glass,
And lives in hatred with her own complectio^
Remembering but the form it whilelome was,
Which when she looked on gave that sweet reflecti^^
But now despayring, thinks no crystal stone*
Can show good countenance that receives non^
124
Conscia men's quaeritur.
LYsanders wife nere joyed her hearts content,
Since now this second time she proved with chil^^
For well she knew the labor ill was spent,
That had her Husband secretly beguild:
But most to think (which is the worst she f^^
The worlds suspicion when it comes to years.
125
Amica omnibus, inimica nulli.
NEd with his first espoused never thriu'd,
The reason was her vnalluring feature,
^ut now at length with such a wench has wiu'd,
(...) is composed another kind of Creature:
Who faster then a man bespeaks her wares,
Deals all she can to free her Husbands car^s.
126
Fatinecessitas.
When Taurus plagues the people through his might,
He Will still allege the law shall bear him out;
though conscience knows it is neither just nor right,
^et threats by law to bring the same about:
But Taurus for a Cuckold's pointed at,
I wonder Taurus has no law for that?
127
In caud^ non in capite.
SIlla in rage has sworn to leave the law,
That will not half suffice to bear his charge,
Such takings in a Term he never saw,
And little reason has to spend at large,
Were not his wife of Clients better sped,
Silla had long ere this been dead, or fled.
128
Cynicus.
Nature has framed Fastidius like a Dog,
Of that unhuman shape, so true a Dog
As he is reputed for a very Dog,
Or rather one more biting then a Dog:
Who since by due he is so deemed a Dog,
It must ensue that he will dye a Dog.
129
Aliquid bonum propter vicinum bonum.
When Borus with his betters ^its at Board,
He vomits straight his humors bitterness,
and will exceptions take at every word:
^lthough it poison prove to more or less,
Who patient must perforce therewith partake,
Not for his own, but for his Phillis sake.
130
Tam notus vt nasus.
TOM takes it as a pride that I should name him
Within the Circuit of my Books precinct;
(...) intercepts me, with, I can not shame him,
^ if he knew my meaning by instinct:
For thus, hopes he, the more a man rayles on him,
The more he will in time bestow upon him.
131
Theatrum licentia.
COtta's become a Player, most men know,
And will no longer take such toyling pains;
For here is the spring (says he) whence pleasures flo^
And brings them damnable excessive gains,
That now are Cedars grown from shrubs and sprig^^
Since Greenes Tu-quoque and those Garlic ligs.
132
Sola meamecum porto.
SOme, that my lines have madded, make report,
What er' I write is all by imitation;
Others, of whose abuses I make sport,
Say, that I want more matters variation,
Or that from borrowed-wit I seek my fame,
Let them have patience, I Will pay each his shame.
133
Equitare i^ arundine longa.
^Oane loves not this jesting with edge-tooles,
That often were wont to hurt her unawares,
and therefore means to deal with none but fools
^^frich enough) how blunt, she never cares;
Though well it is known her iesting's too too evil,
For she is able conny-catch the Devil.
134
Maximus Ignotis.
GOrgonius brags what wonders he has wrought,
Tickling himself with self-conceit vainglory,
^sin what fray or skirmish he has fought:
^o strangers whom he meets he will preach a story,
But what thou art Gorgonius well I wot,
It Is best thou tell it them that know thee not.
135
Audi, cerne, tace.
FOrtune (it seems) respects not honesty,
Nor enuyes any man that does her scorn;
For Tassus seemed her honest friend to be,
And yet his Fortune is to wear the Horn,
Which kindly he puts up and will not blow it,
Because his foes, to spite him, shall not know it.
136
Contra vim durare noluit.
PArnella pines away with discontent,
And of misfortunes deeply does deplore her*
Deeming the powers no way indifferent,
Her younger sister should be match before her:
And herein will the case no longer smother,
For since she is no wife she will prove a mother.
137
Peccatum vetus, paenitentia nou^.
^Agus, with his wit, at length was ouer-reacht,
Who having won a Widows chastity,
(...) more her credit then his own impeacht,
^her with child through importunity,
But since supposing all things done and ceast,
^s forced to pay an hundred pounds at least.
138
O stulte hac nocte, etc.
^Varus wished his Coin and cou^^les store,
Might in a moment yield him so much more;
(...) saw behind him in a looking glass,
^worthlesse wish at length was come to pass:
^ut then came Death that did the Miser smother,
and gave him equal joy of the one as the other.
139
Stultus varietatis auidus.
ZOilus expects my verses more should vary,
To please the Readers ear with choice digress^^
Tut Zoilus, know, I am not mercenary,
Besides, it is no badge of my profession:
Yet few have writ more Epigrams then I.
Who says the contrary, I say, they lie.
140
Tandem sese ^urgit in al^um.
DIck swore he doubted not to mount ere long,
And be no more the man he whillome was,
For he would live or lie in prison strong,
Which to make good he quickly brought to pass^
That having rob the vestry at Al-hallowes,
Was forced within a fortnight mount the gallo^^
141
Non intus sed extra.
A Citizen (whose wife would sometimes sport)
Spying her tricks, first grieved, and then fell sick,
To whom his friends would oftentimes resort,
And ask him where his pain did ache or prick;
No where (quoth he) yet well I shall be never,
The pain I feel, is long of my bad liver.
142
Vt populus Nanus.
NAnus, though dwarfish, has a devilish wit,
Whose tongues the harbenger, that gets him diet,
and therewith strives all companies to fit,
Though what he wants, he will boast his gold shall buy it:
Ask how he lives, he will tell you straight (with oaths)
By tricks, Tobacco, strumpets, and good clothes.
143
Amalo ad peius.
MIlo with his swearing makes absurdities
Amongst the vulgar, seem as verities;
For that (thinks he) a man esteems his oath,
Whom otherwise to credit would be loath:
But now such is his chance whereat he is grieved,
The more he swears, the less he is belieu'd.
144
Quae vetera non curamtu.
MY Epigrams escaped the Printers hand,
Either on Stationers stal's regardles lie,
Or must on Posts, for penance, nailed stand,
That every one may gaze on, passing by;
Which to prevent, and therewith purchase pelf,
Tom Coriat sold the Books he made himself.
145
Non honos, sed onus.
A Knight that bought his Order, straight grew ill,
complaining much that he had caught mischance
^^isitions could not cure him with their skill,
^or he himself with all his strength advance:
He straind his back so stooping to the ground,
As he nere since could lift up twenty pound.
146
Dignum, quod merito.
^Ammon the Usurer has such a wife,
As lays it on, though he himself does starve;
(...) is resolved to live a Ladies life,
^^e whilst his pelf may her in pomp preserve:
Mammon, this curse pursues thy wealths abuse,
She spends for pleasure what thou gots by use.
147
Patris aegrotans.
DEgo grew sick because his Dad left giving,
And of consumption would have died outright*
Had not the Churl the sooner left his living.
Whereby Mas Dego since was dubbed a Knight.
Unhappy son, to draw such vital breath,
That Phoenix like live by thy fathers death?
148
Facile parta, facilius locata.
TWo Lawyers opposite in two men's cases,
Rayld at each other in most vehement sort;
With many bitter terms and foul disgraces,
As those that hard them, blushed at such report:
Next night they meeting, laughed at their past-ia^
And what they got, spent freely at the Bar.
149
A malo ad peius.
A Country Farmer had a friend at Court,
That for his Coin procured him to be Knighted
On whom his neighbors now gives worse report,
Saying, that since all housekeeping is slighted,
Therefore, in truth, they did him much unright,
To spoil so good a Clown for such a Knight.
150
Vt tempora, mores.
A Pander once appareld wondrous brave,
Was asked why Fortune fauor'd such a knave;
Who said, by Fortunes-wheele he did not clime,
Our riches comes (quoth he) by this bald time,
Wherein we free our selves from pains and care,
Living, like Barbers, by men's loss of hair.
151
Non Verbera, sed verba.
TWo Scholars late appointed for the field,
Must (which was weakest) to the other yield;
^he quarrel first began about a word,
which now should be decided by the sword:
But ere they drew, there fell that alteration,
As they grew friends again with disputation.
152
Vera filia matris.
A Gentle Virgin sprung of gentle blood,
Much on her birth and reputation stood,
Who proved so gentle to Gentillitie,
As she was got with child apparently:
For if men gently would put kindness on her,
She never would ungently put it from her.
153
In fundis Parsimonia.
Caius has vowed it for this year at least,
To sup no more in Tauernes at such charge,
But in his private Chamber means to feast,
And send for victuals by his men at large,
Tut, what should Caius in such cost excel,
When Eggs, and Butter will suffice as well?
154
Suum cuique pulchrum.
CVruus being asked why he such Roses wore,
Upon his durty Calue-skin-cobbled shoes?
and evermore in summer Sockes forbore?
His answer was, he could nor will, nor chose:
But Curnus know such Roses are unmeet,
To help the savor of thy stinking feet.
155
Post dulcia finis amarus.
IEnkin a Welchman that had suites in law,
Iournying to London chanced to steel a Cow,
For which (pox on her luck, as near man saw,)
Was burnt within the fist and know not how:
Being asked if well the laws with him did stand,
Was have her now (quoth Ienkin) in her hand.
156
Ignotae, nulla Cupido.
FLorella, fallen a year before her time,
(To salve the forfeit of her Maiden head
That must no longer for promotion clime)
Prostrates her self unto a Vintners bed,
Where Gallants knock each midnight at her do
To taste the Juice that had no Bush before.
157
Nemo nascitur Artifex.
^F these (quoth Potus) prove not things admired,
When poor Mechannick toyling Watermen,
^^all with Apolloes Muse be straight inspired,
^o leave their Sculls, and deal with Poets-pen:
Let Hercules be henceforth termed a Dwarf,
And Paules-Church-yard exchanged for Puddle-Whar^e.
158
Praui magis p^osunt.
^Ionus the Scriuener by procurements gets
More in a month then keeps him all the year,
^owing those Mountibanckes that money lets,
(...) forfeit-pledges (prove they near so dear:)
Let Baudes (quoth Pignur) beg, and Brokers fall,
It Is too well known, he gains the Devil and all.
159
Mala crescunt deteriora.
PHilo takes Physic every spring and fall,
Presuming thereby to prolong his life,
But never notes the danger therewithal
That comes by nigling with his neighbors wife,
Pox on it: but last year shaven to the chin,
Must now again this term anew begin?
160
Tandem saturata Cupido.
IEta that whilome Lady-like did let it,
Upon the wheel of Fortunes highest top:
And scorned to fear mischance (if Gold could let^
Now prostrate keeps a poor Tobacco-shop,
Where wonted pains to win the golden fleece;
Of each, is purchased but at pence a piece.
161
Foeminae ludificantur ^irs^.
^Inde Katheren to her husband kissed these word^,
Mine ownesweet Will, how well do I love thee?
^^rue (quoth Will) the world no such affords,
and that it is true I durst his warrant be:)
For nere heard I of Woman good or ill,
But always loved best her own sweet Will.
162
Timet, seipsum noscere.
^Acus does daily to his Doctor go,
As doubting if he be in health or no;
(...) when his friends salute him passing by,
(...) ask him how he does, in courtesy,
He will not answer thereunto precise,
Till from his Doctor he has taken advise.
163
Cignus per plumas A^ser.
PVt off thy Buskins ( Soph^eles the great,)
And Mortar tread with thy disdained shancks,
Thou think thy skill has done a wondrous feat,
For which the world should g^ue thee many thancks*
Alas, it seems thy feathers are but loose,
Plucked from a Swanne, and set upon a Goose.
164
Fingit quod Foemina vellet.
CLara half angry with my Bawdy song,
Straight told her husband she had done with (...)
Fie Clara, I should suffer much more wrong,
Ere I would tell what I have done with thee;
But Clara, should I speak my conscience plain^
I know thou would it were to do again.
165
Per linguam ^audam.
FRisca says feign she would be rid of me,
And in that scorn she takes a wondrous pride:
Frisca, hark hither what I Will say to thee,
Thou art too rank a Jade for me to ride:
And therefore prithee ( Frisca) do not rail,
For fear they venomed tongue disclose thy ()
166
Dupliciter beatus.
A Freeman once of London made a Knight,
Would in that Order still maintain his Trade,
and traffic as before, taking delight
^o say, his wealth would grow when Titles fade,
It Was wisely thought upon, so let it be,
Thy son shall brave it for himself and thee.
167
Sic surd^ canimus.
A Welshman was to an Italian told,
That could his language perfectly dispute,
Which he believed as Gospel uncontrolled,
And with Italian gins him straight salute,
The Other, admiring as a man dismayed,
Answered in Welsh he knew not what he said.
168
Conscia quae nota.
LExander called Carina Hackney-woman,
True: borne at Hackney; that was no disgrace:
Oh yes, she doubts you deemed her hackney-commo^
Alluding more her person then the place.
For why? her conscience tells her unrequired,
How like a Hackney she has long been hired.
169
Praestat latrare quam mordere.
OLd Chub for cheapnes chose to live in Commons,
But not to study more then Kitchins law;
(...) harkning when the Cook a manger summons,
and that is Chubs chiefest care, to cramb his maw,
Oh no, I lie: he keeps in cleanly case,
The Pumpe, the Privy, and the Pissing-plac^.
170
Dignior faemnia marito.
^Aius shifts not so often his Serving men
As does his wife exchange her Chamber-maid^,
^e one but notes him jealous now and then,
^'other (should seem) her secrets more vpbraids,
The poor effect whereof consists in this,
He but the shadow, she the substance is,
171
Senibus voluisse satis.
OLd Caecus that a young wench sought to win*
Protested he would prove an honest man,
Saving this one prouiso puts in,
You may not bar his feeling now and than;
For though his stomach does your flesh despise,
To sup the broth would Caecus yet suffice.
172
Quid non verba suadeant?
SExtus half salu'd his credit with a jest,
That at a reckoning this devise had got,
When he should come to draw amongst the rest
And saw each man had coin; himself had not,
His empty pocket feels, and gins to say,
By Jesus Syrs, here is not a Cross to pay.
173
Nemo ^isi per vultum notus.
CAcus constraind on sudden to untruss,
Turned up his podex in the open street
But hid his face: and to them answered thus
That passed by, and told him it was unmeet,
There Is none (quoth Cacu^) by mine arse that knows me,
How beastly else soever they suppose me.
174
Posteriora placant.
DRuso his Darkis had not kissed all day
Which he entreated she would bear in mind,
That longing at her lips prouok't him stay:
But therewith told her it was the more behind,
Till fit occasion might desire fulfill)
As much behind (quoth Darkis) as you will.
175
Sat, satis esse dives.
C^im, since his fathers death, is clean unapt,
To follow now his former course began,
That better Suits to be in Velvet wrapped,
And seems to brave it out with any man;
Why may not Clim such garments boldly wear?
Being left more money then an Ass can bear.
176
Aliquid in nubibus.
SCorus gives reckonings most irregulate,
For Sallats, thus: for Fruit and sweetmeats, so much*
But that is commonly when Mistress Kate
Sups in the Flower-d^-Luc^ with Sir John owe-much:
Who, if his credit be ^o longer took,
Will morgage him the Manor of Goe-looke.
177
Nil violentum perpet^um.
^Haedra transformed from being a Chambermaid,
Ruffled a while with Robes of richest price,
^ll of a Bastard she was lately laid,
^^d had foretold, her Lord did her entice,
But then she carelessly repulsed, and gone,
Fell for the Seruing-groomes to seize upon.
178
Formidat Stollidus vmbr^s.
^Oung Tregoose would by no meane^ seal that Bill
Which worse (says he) then Drabs or Dice enthrall men,
^edging this to be the only ill,
cause it was written, Be it known to all men,
For were (quoth Tregoose) to my Vather known,
He Will think me sure some Bastard, not his own.
179
Huic fronti fides.
CReta scorns any but her own complexion,
Wishing her spotles lives integrity,
Were but as free from faults and foul detection,
As is her face from filthy Mercury:
'Tshall nere be said but Creta for her part,
Dealt plainly upwards without tricks or art.
180
Prosunt modo, verbera verbis.
MVsco would always use to beat his maids,
Unless it were little Susan that came last,
Not caring which his service most vpbraids
With deeds of darkness that are done and past,
But here the question is how Susan dealt,
That she with Child his weight yet never felt.
181
Si hodie tibi, cras mihi.
A Scorn^full Dame invited over night,
To come and dine next morrow with a Knight,
Refused his sudden bidding with disdain,
To whom this message was returned again,
Since with so short time she could not dispense,
To pray her come as that day twelve month hence.
182
Vt populus mundus.
PLancus complains the world's still worse and worse,
Whether he means the people or his purse,
Or both in one, or one in both combines
But thus I think, he rather it defines,
Like as with people there is less conscience found
So yields his purse, of late, more lighter sound.
183
Occulta tandem prodiunt in lucem.
AS Curios Page lay sleeping in the Porch,
That had been watching the other night before,
A seruingman in th'intrim stole his Torch,
Which after missing made him much deplore:
To whom quoth some that saw him in such plight,
Peace boy, thy Torch (no doubt) will come to light;
184
Adte (Scabiose Poeta*)
SCalpo has got an itch in Poetry,
With which conceit does often his elbow scratch,
And sooner hopes to come in print hereby,
Then any young beginner of his match:
As cast-off Chamber-maides convert to Drabbes,
So may thy itch in time break out to scabes.
185
Ebrius plus vitium t^ahit.
CEstus must sometimes sollace with his Punck,
Which he accounts more needful then his meat,
^ nd holds it Physic to be often drunck,
^ both which mesteries he is so complete,
As seldom with the one he will dine or sup,
But will be sure to cast the other up.
186
Magnus persona, paruus Crumena.
GRandus grows great, yet lives he poor with all
How mean you then? he is fat and well set forth?
^rue: but it is strange his Incomes are so small,
^man of that huge show and seeming worth,
How could his belly half so big have been,
But that it shows he had great commings in?
187
Quos amat, ampleclitur.
FRanciscus loves to feast men at his table,
Sparing for naught that money can procure,
All which he thinks too little and unable,
Their least of loves or friendships to allure:
Yea Master Francis; use you so to do?
Prithee feast me and have my friendship to.
188
Bis monitus, armatus.
Mistress Mallina vows she will never mary,
Whiles some survive; that her am^nds should m^
Has she not reason to be wise and wary,
That would so great adventures undertake,
Thrice to be got with child by younger Broth^
That swore to wed her, and are matched with oth^
189
Clericus sine libro.
PRomus the Puritaine though clownish, knows,
Atricke of ten which he from Clerks has found,
^ho to the Tennant in possession goes,
^o prove him if for purchase he will compound:
And thus does Promus like a Tumbler toil,
Whiles greater Dogs expect to share the spoil.
190
Incerta, somnia.
^Orastes dreamt he was so fortified,
In spite of Fates, with favor and protection,
^s through the Streets he did in triumph ride,
and proudly rule the roast by his direction:
But waking since, with passions most extreme,
He Is vexed that all this while he did but dream.
192
Ad Th^mam Coriat. Nuper admirabilem.
VVOnder of writers (for so once thou were,)
What pity it is thy fame no longer lasted,
That such of note in travel and desert,
Like time-lesse Blossoms should so soon be blaste^
For thus far boldly may thy Book compare,
How ill so ever sure it was passing rare.
193
A^eundem.
What fame at first exceeding worths in (...)
Had thy late travels and adventures wroug^
Wherein thou simply did put down that vvoma^
Which to the Court a Devonshire white pot brough^
Hers for reward was quickly done and past,
Thine on Record will ever extant last.
193
To John of Powles-Church-yard.
Hail iocund John made all of Iouizance,
And midst the Garden of the Muses dwell,
^hou best deserves my verse should thee advance,
that with those curious complements excellest:
And Galla^^s gret'st with that abundant grace,
Vssh'ring thy flat-cap fore thy fleering face.
194
To the guilty Coxcome.
^Ease gald-backt Gull to question what or whence,
Or who I am that did these lines compose,
(...) thou not privately with shame dispense,
(...) needs must have it published to thy nose?
Will any fool suspect what no man thinks?
Know not a ^. the more it is stird it stincks?
195
Improbe quae parta, periunt.
GIgas that iourneth daily to and fro,
Among Courts and Clerks his causes to retai^
Will no advantage, time, or toil, foreslow,
To bring him damned and detestable gain:
All which and twice as much will not defray,
The charge that Gigas (with a pox) must pay.
196
Duplex pudor, Impudentia.
SCruto the Scriuener that had lost his ears,
Whereon his locks he much more pendant wea^
Has late the like or worser Cousnage wrought,
And to the Pillory again is brought,
Where now the Hangman (naught suspecting) (...)
Why sl^^e quoth Scruto, must I still find ears?
197
Quaere aliud diuerscri^m.
POntus in's journey traveling toward Lyn,
Grew wondrous weary and of force would Inn^,
Where he an Ostler calls, who cries, Anon,
But staid so long that Pontus would be gone:
With that he heard within one laugh, and say,
Prithee make haste the Cockney will not stay,
But Pontus cries again, and would not pass,
Until mine Host himself put up the Ass.
198
Si quae latent, peiora puta.
MVrus when first he married with a Whore,
Was truly termed a cloak to shield the rain,
But he his cloak since that time never wore,
Because the world should do him right again*
199
Men's hominis nouitatis a^ida.
YOung Prodigus new fashions still inuents,
And ought that ancient is will naught esteem,
What others fancies likes least him contents,
But all things needs will out of order deem;
Which is the urgent cause I understand
Why Prodigus did sell his fathers Land.
200
Ne Suitor vltra, etc.
A Cobbler and a Curate once disputed,
Before a Judge about the Kings Injunctions;
Wherein the Curate being still confuted,
One said, it were good if they two changed function^
Nay (quoth the Judge) I thereto should be loath*
But and you will we will make them Cobblers bot^
201
Magnis, minora a grata.
^Ewde Lalus, came to me six Crowns to borow,
And swore (God damn him) he would pay't to morrow,
^ew his word as current as his band,
(...) therefore gave him but three Crowns in hand,
^his I to part with, he to take was willing,
and thus he gaind, and I saved fifteen shilling.
202
Domina, non Sponsa perita.
Ou wished me to a wife fair, rich, and young,
That had the Lattin, French and Spanish tongue;
(...) thanks I told you, I desired none such,
(...), one language might be tongue too much,
(...) love not I the learned? yes as my life,
learned Mistress, not a learned wife.
203
Amicus incertus in re certa.
COquinus vowed all kindness that he could,
I should command and find him as I would,
No sooner thankt I him, but presently
He craved my help, which I could not deny:
But then he swore since I his friend so stood,
Sfoot he would dye the death to do me good,
It chanst I claimed his vow in time of need,
But to perform it he proou'd dead in deed,
204
Arts laudantur et algent.
PLancus the Poet lives but poor and bare,
Yet nere was known a man, of miccle spendin^
For Puddings still were wont to be his fare,
Tut, Bad beginnings may have better endings.
205
Sudor serui pascit dominum.
LArgus has Offices so great so many,
As he can scarce directly serve in any,
No matter Largus, thou look to the gains,
And take the profit who ere takes the pains:
Thy Clerks sufficient are to do thee grace,
That on thy Gate this Emblem well may place.
A Penman prostrate at an Idiots foot,
(This being the motto) Sir, my mam shall do it.
206
Vulgaris vt nomen.
PAruus whose purse at recknings nere appeared,
Caries a conscience blacker then his beard,
Which to the world does boldly testify,
(...) not so damned as yet he means to dye.
207
Signum ventris, Apetitus.
When trusty Tom his Master durst reprove,
That once a wench besides his wife did love*
He angry seeming at his bold report,
Requires him shortly after in this sort:
Calling to mind how much beyond all meat,
His man would most these butterd Parsnips ^ate,
He caused his Cook according to his wish,
To dress that only and no other dish;
Which Tom (suspecting naught) deuoures apace,
And never ceased to debate the case.
But fell upon them like a hungry Boar,
That had not fed himself a day before,
But n^xt meal, finds the like and falls aboard,
Eating what then his stomach could afford,
(...) now presuming of some other change,
(...) finding Parsnips still; thought then it was strange,
(...) once again (quoth Tom) I mean to eat them,
(...), to his Master (swears) he will repeat them:
(...) still that dish was dressed accordingly,
^^ich when as Tom the fourth time did epsy,
(...) to his Master goes to know the meaning,
(...) only this, and other meats restrayning,
(...) (qouth he) you asked me this last day,
(...) I for change of pasture went astray:
(...) Butterd Parsnips you so much desire,
(...) strange you then should other meats require,
Sir, (quoth Tom) I now pick out the sense,
(...) Parsnips teach me that experience.
208
Sic Demon Daemona fallit.
ZAnthus arrested, did the Sarieant pray
He might not straight unto the Counter go;
But thence persuades him in some Tavern stay
To send for Bail, and fees on him bestow:
Whereto the Sarieant freely condiscends,
And being come they call for Wine at large,
Which Zanthus seeing, does inuit his friends
That past along, to make the greater charge:
For naught he meant (nor could he ought defray,
Though seeming takes it to himself alone,)
But when the reckning came at length to pay,
Draw that have coin (quoth Zanthus) I have no^
^he Vintner vexed, swore he should not part
from thence that night, till he were satisfide*
^ary (quoth Zanthus) even with all my heart,
could desire I might with you abide*
^he Sariant daunted in this case to see him,
^as volens nolens forced discharge the shot,
^or being now grown late he thence must free him,
With coin or credit where he would or not,
But well young Z^nthus knew they would not fail him,
that did next morning from the Counter bail him*
211
Rarus, qui publicus olim.
OF all the Toms that ever yet were named,
Was never Tom like as Tom Coriat framed:
Tom Fool may go to school, but nere be taught
Speak Greek, with which our Tom is richly fraugh^
Tom Ass may pass, but yet for all his ^ares
No such rich Jewels as our Tom he wears:
Tom tell-troth is but froth, and truth to tell,
Of all Toms our Tom bears away the Bell.
212
Similis cum simili.
^OM went to th'Market where Tom met with Tom,
Tom asked Tom, What Tom^ how far'st thou Tom?
^ho Tom, I Tom? yes Tom (quoth Tom,) you Tom:
^ell God a-mercy Tom: how do you Tom?
^ayth nere so well (quoth Tom) since Tom was Tom,
And thus was the greeting past twixt Tom and Tom.
213
For As parcus, domi prodigus.
VVHiles Caius does remain beyond the seas,
And follows there some great important suit
(...) lands bears neither Oats, nor Beans, nor Peaz,
(...) yet his wife bears full and fair grown fruit;
His Lands wants occupiers to manure them,
But she has store enough, and can procure them.
214
Postrema grauiora.
INcul^us comes to Town to learn new fashions,
And will no more these rusticke imitations,
But not resolved as yet what course to affect,
Entreats some stranger-friend would him direct*
Who first my Gull to Birchin-lane does carry,
To suit himself: from thence to th'Ordinary,
Where, after many a pledge with full carouse,
He needs must visit next a Baudy^house,
B^t there Incultus began anew to quaffe,
And ever since was forced to leave his staff.
215
Timidus gloriosus.
^Orbeare t'attempt my patience if you love me,
For I shall draw upon my dearest friends:
he least occasion on the earth will move me,
and then it will be too late to seek amends.
^ill you be quiet whiles I warning give?
that? yet again provoke me to this gear?
^rike but once more, as surely as I live
^e be thy Priest though it cost me nere so dear;
(...), now remember you have drawn my blood,
^elpe me, some honest man, or I shall sown,
^eigh ho, he will never do me so much good:
^eare witness Gentlemen, he struck me down,
which to revenge (oh that my blood would cease)
^rue as I live I Will bind him to the peace.
216
Fronti^ulla fides.
VO^us has vowed to do me many favors,
And by no means I must him gratify,
But all his oaths and protestations ^auors
Of naught but perjured vile hypocr^sie:
Well, for this trick lle nere have more to do
With one so wicked and a Wit-all too.
217
Dura^d^ sordida surgunt.
When Nut brown Nancy newly made a Brid^
(That used before to feed her fathe^s swine
Should more (sir reverence luck) be Ladifi^
And all remembrance of what is past resign:
Thereto preferred, alas poor pigges quoth she,
Now I am gone, who must your mistress be?
218
Cedant arma Nummis.
^H spare you Sir, you offer great disgrace
To wish me sell my Rapier? fie, it were base:
^arshall Gentleman of my profession
(...) should be prostitute to such condition?
^ooner part from forth the house I dwell
(...) leave my pleasure I esteem so well:
Rapier is my hearts sole excellence,
lives chief propagation and defense:
^ blade Sir, I Will besworne is such a one
^arther came from hence then Prester-Iohn,
^et if it needs will please you look upon it,
would but borrow some small silver on it.
219
Clericus sine libro.
When Crassus in his Office was instal'd
For sums of money, which he yet does ow^
A Clyent by the name of Clarke him called,
As he next day to Westminster did go,
Which Crassus hearing, whispers thus in's ear,
Sir, you now mistake, and much do err,
That henceforth must the name of Clark forbear,
And know, I am become an Officer,
Alas, quoth he, I did not so much mark,
Good Master Officer that are no Clarke.
220
Durum telum necessitas.
COquus with hunger, pennylesse constrained,
To call for meat and Wine three shillings cost,
^ad suddenly this project entertaind,
(...) stead of What Is to pay, to call mine host;
^ho, being come, entreats him discuss,
that price the law allots for shedding blood,
^hereto mine Host directly answers thus,
^was always forty pence, he understood,
So then (quoth Coquus) to requi^e your pains,
Pray break my head, and give me what r^maines.
221
Amalo ad p^ius.
IN elders time, as ancient custom was,
Men swore in weighty causes by the Mass;
But when the Mass went down (as others note)
Their oaths were by the cross of this same groat:
But then the cross was likewise held in scorn,
And by their faith their common oath was sworn,
Last having sworn away all Faith and troth
God damn me, now is used their common oath.
And thus by custom kept from times gradation,
They loose Mass, Cross, and Faith, to find damnation
222
Habet and Rosa spinam.
A Cater that of late some Wild-foule bought,
Incontinent unto his Master brought;
^ho smelling at them near about the rump
^ayd out, thou knave these savor of the pump;
^is man that was a rude and saucy loute
^ounds, answers, Sir, swell you them thereabout?
Smell your fair Lady there, and by your favor,
You Will find a foul if not a fulsome savor.
223
Omnia probato, quod bonum est teneto.
MY Epigrams dispatched, abroad I send them,
To good and bad, that but a look will lend the
If any prove so kind that can befriend them,
When they shall hear or know it was I that pend the
Even so* if otherwise, I Will not defend them,
Much less (which were a shame) I should comm^th
Then Reader (if thou will) I prithee rend them*
224
V^ Case^s Li^er.
^Eywood affirms, and proves in some degrees,
That one may well compare a Book to Cheese:
every Market some buy Cheese to feed on,
every Mart some men buy Books to read on,
sorts eat Cheese, but wherefore? there is the question,
(...) poor for food, the rich for good disgestion:
sorts read Books, but why? will you discern,
(...) Fool to laugh, the wiser sort to learn:
(...) sight and sent of Cheese to some is hateful,
(...) sight and sense of Books to some ungrateful:
No Cheese there is that ever pleased all feeders,
No Book there is that ever pleased all Readers.
Liber Secundus.
1
Dulce, quod v^ile.
AN honest Vicar riding by the way
(Not knowing better how to spend the day;)
(...) sing unto himself Geneua Psalms.
blindman hearing him straight begged his alms,
(...) whom (quoth he) with coin I cannot part,
(...) God thee bless (good man) with all my heart:
Oh, said the blind man, greater is our loss,
When such as you do bless without a cross.
3
Sequitur inuidia famam.
TWo Madams once were striving for the wall,
Both standing on their terms of worthiness:
The one but young (howbeit rich withal)
The other ancient, though of substance less,
Said, soft and fair, till time has taken fruition,
Your Ladyship is of the last edition.
4
Quo se vertat, nescit.
CVcullus has disguised his former feature,
And like Pythagoras transformed shape,
Is now (me thinks) become another creature,
Half French, half English (pox on such an Ape)
That imitates all fashions far and near,
Though against the hair he buys them never (...)
5
Credit colori,
BAitus believed for a simple truth,
That yonder gilt-spurre spruce and velvet youth,
Was some great personage, or worthy wight,
^ntill one told him he was but a knight.
A knaight (quoth Battus) vaith I chud a zworne,
A hod not been less then zome Gen-man borne.
6
locabunda, ludibund^.
Mistress Finetta for her ready wit,
Is much admired, and beloved of many:
But this one fault of hers confounds it,
She jesting will deride and scoff at any:
Which by an ill accustomed use comes on her,
And yet there is one that plays as much upon her.
7
Sequitur fortuna nefanda.
CRaicus through craft redeemed his credit cracked,
That forced to leave his bankerout occupation,
Closed with a widow e're he was contract,
Whose riches once more raised his reputation.
That now midst fortunes floating to the brim,
Craicus keeps strumpets, whiles his wife keeps hi^
8
Non omnibus dormit.
SAy that Carina keeps a vitling house,
I hope it is for no vulgar men of mean resort,
That basely will a cast of Cannes carouse,
Or at some game at Cards but idly sport:
It Is known her weekly risings and downe-falling
Equals her state with some of higher callings.
9
Multum principia suaden^
When Kate with Country Clyents courted is,
She seems more coy then any new beginner,
^iuing, as if she knew not how to kiss,
ever saw the man that yet could win her:
But all to draw the Gulles more eager on,
that shares her gains with Tinkers being are gone.
10
Mag^is non est mo^andum.
E^ how Silenus walks accomplished,
With due performance of his fathers Page,
^kes back of purpose to be honored,
^ on each slight occasion gins to rage,
^ou villain, Dog, where has your stay been such?
Quoth he, the Broker would not lend so much.
11
Fingit Adultera castam.
NIsa, who from her window glaunc'd her eyes,
Saw Mopsus come as fast as foot could trot:
For joy whereof, upon her bed she lies,
As who should think she slept and saw him not.
It Was very strange, unless she meant herein,
Her eyes should not be open to her sin.
12
Filius terrae.
LVcas that has been long concealed of late,
Upon the penance of some purchased blame,
Lives now at Court in most heroicke state,
(But you must note it is by another name:)
Call him not Lucas now, least you disclose him,
Nor ask whose son he is, for then you pose hi^
13
Turpe est cum foenore lucrum.
Anus has lived this last vacation,
Upon his wives bare charge without all reason,
^o since she knew at first her occupation,
^e saw worse takings in a Lenton season.
A man would think thou should her more beshrow,
That did so many burdens undergo.
14
Criminibus celare studet sua crimina Maechus.
When Cacus was accufed of a Rape,
For stealing secretly to his maids bed,
hardly could the doom of law escape,
^ he not thus the matter colored:
That took his oath (nor did he swear amiss)
He went not into her bed, (for it was his.)
15
Non videmus manticae quod in tergo est.
NAso could wish the people would forbear,
To scandalize his more then honest N^n:
Who for this twelve month will expressly swear
He has not found her false with any man:
If otherwise she do, he knows not what,
Why should poor Nafo be so pointed at?
16
Luditur ^rte.
Mark but the semblance of Fucatas face,
How to the life her picture does excel,
For lovely feature, sweet and comely grace,
(Surely the Painter has done wondrous well:)
But here is the doubt (both faces made by art)
Which you would choose to be the better part.
17
Sp^liatis arma supersunt.
GRand Captain Quid, of coin is quite bereft,
Whose Page was wont his purse and coin to carry,
^ow neither Page, Purse, Coin, nor ought is left,
^ue what he is forced to pawn at the ordinary.
^ Thus squint-eyed Fortune partial in her gifts,
^ Puts men of note oft-times to needy shifts.
18
Duo i^nguntur in v^u^.
Why was young Lancel^t, Lynsey-wolsey named,
Whose Ancestors were of one Lineage framed?
^t that it was known Wa^ling and fridaystreet,
one conjunction coplatiue did meet.
19
Anguis in he^ba.
HIlus has hid himself this year and more,
Not in respect of fear to show his face,
But for he rashly in his humor swore,
The Sessions House should no more sift his case:
But if you will needs the reason understand,
He has been burned already in the hand.
20
Labor impr^bus omnia vincit.
CLogo will needs be knighted for his lands,
Got by the labors of his fathers hands,
And hopes to prove a Gentleman of noate,
For he has bought himself a painted coat.
21
Magni constabi^ parua vo^upt^^,
HAnd off sir Saucebox, she is no meat for groom^*
Or common wights of b^se borne parentage:
as, your lean expense fits Alehouse rooms,
^at with Maid-malkin holds equipage:
Because sir Tristram late intrcated me,
You therefore think to do as much as he.
22
Quantum mutatus ab illo.
Would any deem M^^^sses now the man,
That whilome was not worth a wooden can^
^^ubtlesse the Dunce in some thing does surpass,
his red Nose is still the same it was.
23
Quifuit a^te P^des.
THe case is altered with Mercutio,
Since his preferment to that Noble man,
What er'st he has been, boots not now to know,
Those times are changed you see, what is then wasth
I dare presume Mercutio does forget,
That ever he a Bill in Paul's did set.
24
Omnibus hoc vitium.
PRu that had patience to have borne with any,
And loved plaine-dealing (witness all that kn^^
Is now undone by bearing one too many,
So that you see plain dealing overthrows her*
25
V^rijs mutata figuris.
Ettis length has left her old profession,
^And closely coucheth in a Sempsters shop,
^ich may the burden of her late transgression,
^h less suspect support and underprop:
To such as knows her not, she and her wares,
For perfect pureness with the Exchange compares*
26
Plus quam prudentia nummus.
Among our later knights, sir Thomas knew it,
^ By common practice more then cunning wooing,
^t being rich enough he could not rue it,
^icke should take him with his Doll a doing.
27
Hoc omnibus datur.
CVt^bert our Cobbler can no more forbear,
To take Tobacco, then to live unknown:
He drinks all whiffes at least, and learnes to swear
By Heavens; his oaths and humors are his own:
But adding hereunto a pot or more,
He stands to nothing which he spoke before.
28
Premit altum cord.
VVleanus guil^y, does himself persuade,
Some of these Epigrams by him were made:
But dares not tell you wherein for his life,
Least men should play on him, as on his wife.
29
Velle placere s^t est.
Mistress Parnella holds it requisite
To keep more maids at home then need requires
well to please her husbands appetite,
for abroad she like exchange desires:
For thus they ab^ent best content each other,
That else should be but baudes to one another.
30
Pocule i^^^gnutur ^mici.
A Health, says Lucas, to his loves bright eye,
Which not to pledge were much indignity:
^u cannot do him greater curresie,
^en to be drunk and damned for company.
31
Redit orbis in or^em.
Young Codrus, Land lord to his fathers rents,
Which happy time (long looked for) did expire
Addresseth him with those habiliments,
As least bescemes the son of such a Sire:
And thus he gallants it some year and more,
Until his Tenants thrust him out of door.
32
Oculus Adulter.
OF all the pleasures that our London yields,
Caluus commends the walks about Moore-(...)
There Is many reasons that prouokes him to it,
He must be looking though he cannot do it,
33
Mutauit fortuna genus.
RVfus was reckoned once a man of might,
That would severely domineere and swagger,
^ring the stoutest of the Guard in fight
^ single Rapier, or at Sword and Dagger:
Who would not muse that such a great commander
Should be translated to a lousie Pander?
34
Vi^escit vulnere Venus.
^ Vsan's well sped, and wears a velvet hood,
As who shall know her breeding has been good:
(...) rcason she should rise once in her life,
^^at fell so often before she was a wife.
37
Voluptat is prae^ium dolor.
What cause had Liuia to leave the City,
Where she so flourish't until now of late?
Oh, there is a fault escaped (the mores the pi^^
Which the Churchwardens will not tolerate:
And yet the year before they could dispense,
Taking no knowledge of the like offense.
38
Et manibus p^dibusque leuis.
LAys of lighter metal is composed,
Then has her lightness till of late disclosed,
For lighting where she light acceptance feels,
Her fingers there prove lighter then her heels.
39
Faeminae ludsficantur viros.
LVce had a secret longing to go see
Her child at nurse, for that she dreamed it was sick;
and would by no means pacified be,
^ill she had seen her pretty little Dicke:
Full little knows her husband (silly groom)
Who by this match e're midnight takes his room.
40
Fallentem fema ^efellet.
^Riscus gave out he went to Pr^ster-Iohn,
Presuming to have purchased three for one;
^t that it was known, which did him sore beguile,
^iscus had taken the dyct all the while.
41
Dominatus seruilis.
FEll foughten Furio has now met his match,
And is severely sent unto the gaile,
For blurting at Mas Constable and his watch:
Who bids away with him, admits no bail:
As who shall know he is now the Kings peace-make
Although the last year was but Kennell-raker.
42
Par pari.
BAl^us (too blame) runs in his Laundresse score*
And will not pay her scarcely once a year,
But then his shame is twice so much the more,
For she has paid him truly to a hair.
43
Sic vos non vobis ^ellera fer^is ones.
HEard you in what surpassing rich array,
Young Roger ruff^ed on S. Georges day?
It Was pity more then spite it should be known,
That none of all those garments were his own,
So that in stead of what report did scatter,
He simply was non-suted on the matter.
44
Praestat videri que esse.
CLitus with Clients is well customed,
That has the Laws but little studied,
(...) matter Clitus so they bring their ^ees*
^ow ill the case and thy advise agrees.
45 --
ortus nouu^ vrbe Bri^tannus.
Who braues it now as does young Histrio*
Walking in Paul's like to some Potentate,
Richly replenisht from the top to^'h toe;
As if he were derived from high estate:
Alas, there is not a man but may descry,
His begging trade, and bastard faculty.
46
Iuueni, quid curua senectus?
SIlla has got a wife that is wondrous old,
But 't is well known he wooed her for her gold:
I hope her maids are young, and serve for hire,
And that is as much as Silla does desire.
47
Castus erat vul^^, etc.
KNow you not Criticus our Cities Mule,
That haunts the harbors of iniquity?
^er like a Beadle of disordred rule,
^asheth at lust, to cloak his villainy:
Cruicke, 't is not your looks (I dare assure you)
Can fear the surgeon that of late did cure you*
48
Plus Maechus omnis amat,
^Eace, weep no more (sweet S^) and all is well,
say I had found thee false, thinks thou I Will tell?
^o by this iron and steel, which plainly shows it,
(...) honest Wit all is no Gull that knows it.
49
Fugit huc i^risque pe^itu^.
TObi^ has every term great suites in hand,
But sits at home like lohn indifferent;
His wife has law enough to understand,
What by Ioint-tenant and In-^^^le is meant,
Have not our Clerks with fees been feign to woe her
And for bare knowledge put their cases to her?
50
Omnes querunt sua.
THis observation seems (quoth F^sco) strange,
Why merchants walk in pa^les, and knights the exchange
Belike the one seeks those their debts should pay,
While^ the other goes to crave a longer day.
51
Quicquid oritur inoritur.
ZOnus our neighbor, and his spouse are parted,
True demonstration of her whoorish hate,
(...) could she not have been so stony-hearted,
^o leave her husband for a straggling mate:
But then the statute ( Zonus) sets thee free,
Thou did not banish her, she fled from thee.
52
Qnam partus ventrem sequitur.
RAlph has an office in reuersion bought,
But rues the time that yet no wi^ has wrought*
^ntent thee ( Ralph) for wealth to let it pass,
^ou art no worse fool then thy father was.
53
Non omnibus dormit.
What reason is it Omphida should yield
To any man that is but a stranger to her?
Thinks he at first assault to win the field?
Tut let him do his worst, that worst can do her:
Had there but color been for such intent,
She might allow your weakest argument,
54
Mors vt vita ita.
LEno lies sick, and to the Doctor sends,
Who bids him look for what he least intends
And being often to make his will requested.
Away (says Leno) I will dye detested.
55
Tunc tua res agitur, etc.
A Jealous Merchant that a Saylor met,
Ask't him the reason why he meant to marry,
Knowing what ill their absence might beget,
That still at sea constrained are to tarry?
Sir (quoth the Saylor) think you that so strange?
It Is done the time whiles you but walk the exchange.
56
Ingeniosa Venus.
Foed^s has got his neighbors wife with child,
And yet has not her husbands bed defiled,
For why the plot within Moore-fields was wrought,
From whence a place was for that purpose sought.
57
Sine crimine nemo.
GVido has goodly lodgings, which he lets
To Knights and Ladies, of the better sort,
Nor cares he how little gains he gets,
So they be honest, and of good report:
But maugre all the means that may be try'de,
Guido's brave house will still be baudifide.
58
Nec vultus indicat virum.
DIcke in a raging deep discurtesie,
Called an Attorney mere necessity.
The more knave he, admit he had no law,
Must he be flouted at by every daw?
59
Iugum suaue patientia.
MInos a man of much impatience,
Proves himself Cuckold in his own defense;
and further doubts of greater danger fearing,
^tends to prosecute the good abearing:
His reason is, because he would seem loath
To be cornuted, and bumbasted both.
60
Sat saltem sic habeatur.
RAlph says, this rabblement of new made Knights.
Makes Coaches dear, and Chandlers sell their lights,
^t scarce a Seruingman the more is fed,
(...) Foote-boyes only bring their Sirs to bed.
61
Dant otia ludum.
YOung Master Newcome, late of th'Ins of Court,
Has newly laid aside his Littleton,
And for his pleasure deignes no other sport,
Then these vnsauoured rimes to seize upon:
Which having read, he comments on the weather,
How iumpe his law and learning met together.
62
Cito parata Venus.
LEt Mistress Su be stirring nere so soon,
She Will not be ready until afternoon,
Nor scarcely then: for why this summer season,
The least Thing makes her sweat beyond all reason.
63
Quem suspicaueris, ipse.
^Vco is fled, more for his credit sake,
Then to be burdened with so base a deed:
^ould he (think you) such trifles undertake,
^auing that kindred, and so little need?
Damned might he be that ever meant to do it,
Had not his whore, or something urged him to it.
64
Mala crescunt deteriora.
SOto is lately gone to Sturbridge fair,
Whose little takings makes him half despair:
^were good some friend of his would tell the mome,
^is wife has had takings too much at home.
65
Non caret effectu quod voluere duo.
COnstant Renaldo, who can but commend thee,
That still one Mistress in reuersion seruest?
She could do little, if not least befriend thee,
With gleaning license for so long a harvest:
Gleaning said I? nay more, to mow her Corn,
And catch the Hare whiles others blow the Horn
66
Enecat amplexu nimio, sic Simia foetum.
CAll Danus knave, he straightway draws his swor^
And makes you prove as much, or eat your wor^
But if you call him honest Rogue* or Jew,
He hugges you then, for giving him his dew.
67
Si nihil attuleris, ibis, etc.
PLanus, an honest Swain, but monylesse,
Besought a Lawyer to be good unto him,
Who either ( gratis) must his cause redress,
Or promise what he never meant to do him,
Being asked why he careless lingered it,
Made this reply: Ex ni^ilo nihil fit.
68
Semel and semper.
CElso but newly wedded, does repent,
And means to be diuorc'd incontinent:
^ut, hang it ( Celso) since it is done and past,
As good prove Cuckold at the first, as last.
69
Form^sa facies.
FIne Mistress Foetida perfumes her self,
With sweetest odours that she can devise,
Which she preferres before all worldly pelf,
That naught avails when her beauty dies:
But this despair is very death in thinking,
That one so fair should have a breath so st^^king.
70
Sapiat qui vendit oportet.
^Anus does jesting use Equivocation*
Which he alludes as doubtful words of Art,
To hide the color of his occupation,
But to the Devil he bears an honest heart.
71
Consilium post factum.
Ask not Vincentio now when things are past,
Why he so often sported with his Puncke,
(...) wherefore so much has been spent in wast;
^ As good you told a tale to one that is druncke:)
Let it suffice, he has consumed it all,
And as you see, walks like the prodigal.
72
Ne suitor vltra crepidam.
PHilippus flouteth at these ragged rimes,
That much distasting, tax not these his times:
^ndeed I judge him much more better seen,
^n other trades that he has trained been.
73
Mole ruit sua.
QVesto that quaint and brisk Italian,
When first his trade for Merchandise began,
Would so much undertake more then his own,
(I think of purpose to be overthrown)
For when it was thought his fullness did abound,
Even then he brake for seventy thousand pound.
74
Parturiunt montes murem.
DEgo will draw, and stoutly stand unto it,
Upon the utmost of his words brauado,
But being urged on equal terms to do it,
He basely pockets up the bastinado.
75
Degeneres animos timor arguit.
MOnsieur Montanus is no little man,
Of vnapproued valor to his foe,
Persuade, or woo him with what words you can,
He Will be revenged, all the world shall know:
But when he found one with his wife in bed,
For fear of knocks he durst not show his head.
76
Vilescit dives auarus.
RVfus is wondrous rich, but what of that?
He lives obscurely, like a water-Rat,
and his apparel, which he seldom buys,
^re such as Hounds-ditch, and Long-lane supplies.
77
Mal^ parta, male paeriunt.
OLd Collins son is newly come to age,
And may dispend five hundred marks a year
But wants wit to hold his heritage,
Which has been evermore his Uncles fear:
Because his father got it by extortion,
And therefore ill to be a Woodcockes portion.
78
Habet and musca splenem.
MOpsus maintains that bankruptship less mou^^
Then such a slave as for his wives sake loves (...)
Yet well the Wit-all woteth though it grieve him,
His tonuge might starve except her Tail relieve (...)
79
Olim haec meminisse dolebit.
GRuntus lies groaning of a grievous gout,
And would give thousands to be soundly cured,
But all the cunning that his coin finds out,
Cannot expel those pains so long endured:
Oh Grunto, thou have lived so vnrepenting,
As scarce two hels suffices thy tormenting.
80
Matrimonio Patrimonium.
MVsco, that always kept with policy,
What he had scraped^ since his infancy,
Scarce one year wedded (for he needs would mary)
Has taken Ludgate for his sanctuary.
81
Duplex Iniquitas.
NOw yea and nay, quoth Mistress Temperance,
You are to blame to be so vainly given:
Cannot your eyes upon a woman glance
But they must covet? sooth you should be shriuen:
Fie, that you will swear so rashly by your troth,
Truly I would not do it but for your oath.
82
Non omnia possumus omnes.
Who says Al^ides has no wit, they lie,
His place and office proves the contrary,
Though it was not meant he should more understand
Then might concern him to subscribe his hand.
83
Sumus omnes deteriores.
COrnutus boasts of the debts he owes,
As who should think his credit then was such:
^ut all his substance valued now, God knows,
^mounts not to the twentieth part so much:
It Is to be thought, because his wife grows old,
And has less doing now a thousand fold.
84
Cani facile inueniendum Baculum.
MAdam Ventoza can no longer frolic,
She is so troubled with a sore winde-cholicke,
which to the standers by may less appear,
^ause her fyesting-Cur is still so near.
85
Aliud simulat, aliud agit.
YOung Mistress Joyce her husband does solicit^
To hire a Garden-house near to the fields,
Which with her Gossips she might weekly visit,
For something must she have that comfort yeel^
Pray God this Bower of private recreation,
Prove not a place of common occupation.
86
Quae placuit Domino nupta est ancilla sodali.
MAdam Rugosa knows not where to find
One Chambermaid of ten to please her (...)
But yet my Lord so likes their comely car'age,
As he preferre^ them to his men in mar'age.
87
Creed quod habes and habes.
LOrellos wife is lately brought to bed,
As luck would have it, of a goodly boy,
The hopeful issue of her maidenhead,
And only Jewel of the fathers joy:
Then who would doubt the time, or once but note it,
When it is as like him, as himself had got it.
88
Mendici mendaces.
PAndorus spends the day by telling news,
Of such his travels as will make you muse:
Nay sir, believe it, he will discourse at large,
How should he else be fed at others charge?
89
Aeger, cui chara libertas.
BRisco that gallant yongster keeps his bed,
As faining to be sick, but wot you why?
Not of an ague* not an aching head,
No burning fever, nor French malady:
Tush, none of these can half so much molest (...)
As yonder flat-cap fool that would arest him.
90
Qui modo rusticus, olim.
PO-lo peckes up a pretty proling trade,
That has him prouder then his master made
But yet when all is done, the world mistakes him,
For it is not's money, but the Tailor makes him.
91
Ab Equis ad Asinos.
BRutus that brave and complete Caualier,
(Who but of late in ^leetstreet flourished,
(...) thought no pleasure or expense too dear)
(...) now how soon the case is altered:
As that constrained to forsake the street,
He has betane himself unto the Fleet.
92
Furor armae minis^rat.
^Agus has studied long to break a jest,
Upon these rimes he does so much detest:
(...) can you blame him? well he may be chiding,
(...) has so often spurgal'd been with riding.
93
Dubitat men's conscia cornu.
LEt Jealous Ralph but read of Capricorn,
Or simply of the sign that is in the Ram,
He straight way thinks you tax him with the horn,
And thereon have composed some Epigram:
If Ralph on every rhyme the worst will conster
It must conclude, in time he will prove a monster.
94
Volucrem sie decipit a^ceps.
Hydrus the Horse courser (that cunning mate)
Does with the buyers thus equivocate,
Claps on his hand, and prays he may not thrive.
If that his Gelding be not under five
95
Quod mora tardat, abest.
^Vscus has long since learned his Accidence,
And now turned Sexton (Clarke I mean at least)
^ight yet for age more further far commence,
(...) lost his time wherein he was a Beast.
^or why his vather kept him still a Calfe,
And would not weane him at twelve years and half.
96
Perdat qui caveat Emptor.
NOr less meant Promus when that vow he made,
Then to give over his cousening Tapsters trade,
^ho (checked for short and frothy measure) swore,
(...) never would from thence forth fill pot more.
97
Humilis iam surgit in altum.
THe world is well amended with sir Hugh,
Since from the time he was a shepherds swain,
And little dreamed then (I may tell you)
He should have been one of the knightly train,
But (for his substance answers not his will)
As good have dreamed, or been a Shepherd still
98
Post dulcia finis amarus.
WHat grief it was Grace had no better fortune,
But that Bride-well must her disgrace importun^
And which is worse, if worse it might perplexe her,
The Beadle comes behind her back to vex her?
99
Frustra sapit qui fi^i non sapit.
^Anthus, that wise and cunning Sophister,
Lies now in Limbo for a small offense,
^ho when he came before the Officer,
(...) not one word of wit to free him thence,
Why thus it fares, when he should best dispute,
The Devil, or some ill Planet strikes him mute.
100
Vsus promptos f^ci^,
^His makes Menalcas muse above the rest,
To see how quaint my Lady is adrest,
(...) from the girdle upwards would he swear,
(...) does the shape of very man appear.
101
Humilis prostrata quadrante.
FIne Mistress D^lia defies the man,
That proffers less to her then golden fees,
What think you her some common Courtizan,
That will her credit with each Lobcocke leese?
In faith sir no, but ere you shall go hence,
She will for once accept of eighteen pence.
102
Qu^m been ^otus amor.
SHould Spruso leave the wearing of his muffe,
His golden nightcap, and his double ruff:
He would be still the same he was before,
For half the Parish knows he loves a ()
103
O infoelices quos fata seq^untur iniqua.
POntus is posting hitherwards a pace,
To dine with diverse that in Fleetstreet meets him,
But see the lucklesse chance of such a case,
As soon as he alights, the Sergeant greets him:
So that the burden he should have defraid,
Is wholly now upon mine Hostess laid.
104
Cucullus non facit Monachum.
SIluanus is become so pure and holy,
As he accounts all mirth but idle folly:
Ask him wherefore, he gives you ghostly reason,
But then his whore comes never out of season.
105
Cres^it amor pretio.
HOw like you Dorcas in her deepest Ruff,
Seems she not now as proper as the best?
^ou think you may command her, marry muffe?
^he scorns the motion, fough, that were a jest:
Because she sold her wares so cheap of late,
You think they should be still the selfsame rate.
106
Senibus voluisse satis.
^ESop must yield when Rodop will ride,
And take no knowledge where, or who is her guide
^et could the wizard wish her more in sight,
^^nce she at Braynford lodged this other night.
107
Nocte latent mendae.
What means Rosamond to walk so late,
When no man can discern her face or feature*
(But by her habit may preiudicate,
She is some fair, or rather famous creature:)
Oh good Sir understand, it is in the dark
When many a good man mistakes the mark.
108
Natura paucis contenta.
MEcus is now become a frugall Sire,
That spends no more then nature does require;
And yet his wife will prove a Traveler.
Although but once a year he lay with her.
109
Fortuna multis nimium dedit.
NOw fie upon thee Coward Nemius,
That often have pulled thy Ladies slippers on,
Yet still were bashful, not so venturous,
As once so much her leg to look upon:
Were I thy father, and thou heir to me,
I would for certain disinherit thee.
110
Hic laqueos tendit, qui laqueo moritur.
Who ever held Mendoza half so wise,
To have attempted such an enterprise,
As had not Tyburne soon prevented it,
Mendoza would have learned but too much wit.
111
Sic transit gloria mundi.
I Pray sir, did you note on Sunday last,
How richly Rubin was apparelled?
Well may he be compared to a blast,
Or unto one that is metamorphosed:
For one next morning, ere the day did dawne,
All that he wore, and more, was laid to pawn.
112
Post ga^dia luctus.
A Ye me (quoth Amy) who would ere have though
So great a mischief should arise of naught?
Which, had she known, ere she began to swell,
Each yard of pleasure should have proved an ell.
113
Noctes aique dies patet atri lanua Ditis.
The times are waxen dead with Dalila,
Who since the Term has felt but little sturri^
Then was she sought to more then Helena,
When Gallants gallopt with their Coaches hurring:
But now she speaks with all that please to call,
Lo, thus her trade does tearmly rise and fall.
114
Linguam vis nulla domabit.
MVns skill in horses does so much excel,
As no man living breaks them half so well:
And yet one Filly quite comptroles his art,
He never backs her but she breaks his heart.
115
Fronti nulla fides.
GAllus that greatest Roost cock in the rout,
Swells now as big as Bacchus did with wine,
^ike to a Hulke, bearing himself about,
and bristling as a Boar or Porpentine:
It Is not his locks that makes him look so (...),
For all men knows he wears a Periwig.
116
Roganti dabitur.
^Arcus stood musing, maugre all his might,
Where he should go to lodge this other night,
^till the Beadle unawares came on him.
^^d volens nolens thrust a bed upon him.
117
Dat census Honores
It Is plainly known that our young knight, sir Ad^^
Had his beginning from an ancient name,
And (though not rich) may make his wife a Madam,
That brings her dowry to maintain the same:
Say, that the Herald cannot blaze him forth,
Must Knight-ship therefore be of no more worth*
118
Tremuit sub pondere Cymba.
HAd not Formosa very foul ill luck,
Who^e stooping simply but a rose to pluck,
Made to the hearers that so loudly known,
Which never yet before report had blown?
119
Negat o^cula grate r^ga^a.
^Riscilla proves most dainty o^ a kiss,
When of a stranger she entreated is,
lord, how she simpring fits, and minceth it!
(...) very deed sir, she will not eat a bit:
What, would you have her by and by suspected,
That for a Whore has been so long detected?
120
Coitum, non oscula la^da^.
When Kester courted Kate but for a kiss,
She coyly told him, that he aimed amiss:
^ou may believe her ( K^ster) what she said,
(...) half the parish knows she is no maid.
121
Calum non animum mutat,
NAy fie, how strange you make it Mistress Jane,
That will not know your quondam tried friends,
Remember since you lodged in Cart-her-lane:
Shall former kindness merit no amends?
I say no more, well you may change your name,
But once a Whore, you should be still the same.
122
Purtus ventrem sequitur.
MAud being moved at fourteen years to man
Said (were she tall enough) she would not car^^
It Were good her sister but so wise had been,
That had a Bastard ^re she was fifteen.
123
Di^es quis stultus habetur?
It Is true that Simon (simple though you think him)
Knows how to execute his fathers trade,
which (no dispraise) may with that substance link him
^s quickly shall amend what nature made.
Do not your most fools thrive exceeding well,
That have but wit enough to buy and sell?
124
Hoc aliquid nihil.
GVido has gotten very goodly suits,
That of his labors are the only fruits,
^eane no other suits then those he wears,
which how to compass, is that Guido fears.
125
Qui deierat peierat.
DAcus has damned himself on due regard
From Tauernes, Plays, Tobacco, and from Win^
Swearing he will live like John of Paules-Church-yard,
At least will often with Duke Humphry dine:
It Were well done ( Dacus) had thou power to do (...)
But Dice and Drabs (I fear) will hold thee to it.
126
Impar aetas, impare sque mores.
IT could not be (me thinks) imagined,
That Iulia could have lost her maidenhead
Being so young, but that her self first told it,
To whom, and where she this vacation sold it.
127
Soluat Ecclesia.
When Rose had reckned her full time at large,
She then bethinketh whom to nominate
that might partake with her ensuing charge,
^t length, with wisdom more considerate,
She gesseth none among all the rest to fit,
As is the parish Priest to father it.
128
Indomitae tandem veniunt ad aratra i^^encae.
^Esbia the fair, that would be wooed of none,
Has since been won by many more then one:
^^d like a flower, whose color soon does fade,
^th often riding, proves a hackney Jade.
129
Casta est quam, Nemo roga^it*
Who bruits it Mistress Parnell is no maid,
And will not answer such discurtesie?
She scorns the very worst that can be said,
And stands so much on her virginity:
As flatly to their teeth she does retort it,
Presuming none so vile that will report it.
130
Aurum volat ocius Euro.
MOnsieur Fleming fraught with Angels store,
Would see fair London, never seen before:
Where lodging with his Mistress but one night,
Had (ere he parted) put them all to flight.
131
Musae spernuntur egenae*
FA^nus for feats of Fencing bears the Bell,
For skill in music on each Instrument,
For dancing, caruing, and discoursing well,
With other sundry gifts more excellent:
But striving still to make his credit stronger,
The Tailor will not trust him any longer.
1^^
Non patitur res seria iocum.
TIb took an oath, that Tomesin was no maid,
Who angry, bad, bear record what she said:
As good have published it with Trumpet blown,
As call for witness in a case so known.
133
Frustra timet, qui sperat nihil.
TVsh, hang it, have at all (says Curio)
Comes not duze ace as soon as six and three?
Who would not rather half his Lands forgo,
Then be out-dar'd by such a one as he?
Damn him, he will ventur't all upon a cast:
Were not as good turn Rogue at first as last?
134
Sic ne perdid^rit non cessat perdere lusor.
Ask Ficus how his luck at dicing goes,
Like to the tide (says he) it ebbes and floes:
Then I suppose his chance cannot be good,
For all men know, it is longer ebb then flood.
135
Sapiat qui dives, oportet.
It Is known how well I live, says Romeo,
And whom I list, I Will love, or will despise:
^^deed it is reason good it should be so:
^or they that wealthy are must needs be wise:
But this were ill, if so it come to pass,
That for your wealth you must be begged an ass.
136
Similis doctrina libello.
CRaesus of all things loves not to buy
So many Books of such diversity:
^our Almanacke (says he) yields all the sense,
^f times best profit, and experience.
137
Nilgratum ratione carens.
PAulus a Pamphlet does in prose present,
Unto his Lord (the fruits of idle time)
Who far more careless then therewith content,
Wished it were converted into rhyme:
Which done, and brought him at another season,
Said, now'tis rhyme, before nor rhyme nor reason.
138
Ingenio pollet cui vim natura negauit.
IF Nanus had but common gifts of nature,
And no arts cunning to his cubit-stature;
He never could with Ladies come so near,
Nor get his victuals gratis all the year.
139
Turba graui paci Meritrix.
Enkin is wondrous jealous of his wife,
And urges terms of shrewd suspicion,
^^t knows not him the causer of his strife,
^^t will he yield to no condition:
For now you offer Ienkin more disgrace,
Then if you horn him to his very face,
140
Quid queat esse diu.
SIgnior Fantasmus never such pleasure found
In any sport, as in a deep mouthed hound:
^^all was that pleasure, when upon one day,
(...) lost his hair, and hunted all away.
141
Non Hospes ab Hospite tutus.
LIeftenant Lentulus lives discontent,
And much repineth at the want of wars,
For when his credit, coin, and all is spent,
What should he do but idly curse the stars?
Content thee Lentulus with thine estate,
That were not idle when thou stol'st the plate.
142
I am sumus ergo pares.
DAmon his Dick had not this three years seen,
But rather thinks he has concealed been:
Was it not strange that they so iumpe should meet,
Both at a Bawdy house in Turne-bull street?
143
Turpe senilis amor.
OLd doting Claudus does in haste desire,
With beauteous young Penelope to wed,
those frozen appetite is set on fire,
^ntill the match be thoroughly finished:
Indeed as good dispatch as make delay,
That must be horned on his wedding day.
144
Incidit in Syllam cupiens vitare Charibdim.
^Arcellus museth how to spend that day,
Wherein it likes him not to see a play;
^t then he falls in some worse place (I doubt)
(...) stays so long till he be fired out.
146
Laesus amor in Furor.
Where has sir John so long been resident?
Leaving his pensive Lady all amort,
Who well may say ( woe worth the time misspent)
For grief whereof she has no list to sport:
But leave her not again in such a plight,
Least (out of mind) she prove more out of sight*
147
Nocet empta dolor voluptas.
SIsly and Kate are gone to frolike it,
Late in the evening with their Tom and Kit:
What luck had they to buy their sport so dear,
That in the morning must have whipping cheer?
147
Nullus ad amissas ibit amicus opes.
HEard you not yet of Captain Ferdinand?
That was so wont to swagger and carouse:
He lodges now no longer in the Strand,
But is removed thence to such a house,
Where all his best acquaintance that he knows,
Will not redeem the one half of what he owes.
148
Quid non speramus amantes?
^Lerce was espoused ere he went a wooing,
What should such Dunces be so long a doing?
^is wife (the wiser) thought to save that pain,
(...) getting her a cloak fit for the rain.
149
Ingenium natura dedit, queis non dedit
NAy, see if Stark as yet can cease to flout,
How should he choose? his mere conceits are suc^
It Is good sir: I Will not say you are a lout,
Yet may a man presume to think as much,
I fear, when we have both done all we can,
The best will scarce prove good Gramarian.
150
Lateat benequi male vixit.
FRancisco flies, not daring once come near,
^ut makes the infection to be most his fear:
When those his Creditors that least believes him.
Knows it is his debt more the the devil that drives h^
151
Patria est vbicunque.
Brave minded Medon can no more endure
To live in England, then to brook the lie,
Tut, your temptations cannot him allure,
He scorns them as an idle mockery:
Urge him no more, I tell you twill but grieve him,
For here his means no longer may relieve him.
152
Ignoti nulla Cupido.
CAstus of all sins makes most conscience,
That men should with their chastities dispense;
She that weds him, must have his maiden head,
At least may chance to bring a fool to bed.
153
Hoc tibi sort datum.
NAy (good sir) give us leave at least to know you,
Was not your father once a man of trade?
You now are rich, I know who may besthrow you,
That for your sake were younger brothers made:
(Hark in your ear) it is not the wealth you have
Can shield you from the scandal of a --
154
Nec cast, nec caute.
MOunsiur Du Pry has promised to take heed,
That in the dark he do no damned deed:
Fie Monsieur, fie, a man of your fair means,
And found a bed with filthy Oyster queanes?
155
Alea nil moderabile suadet.
When Milo means to spare, then spends he most
Let him but come where sport and gaming is
His humor cannot hold till all be lost,
And never thinks he has done amiss;
For thus resolved, Milo cares not whether,
He pay the one half, or lie for altogether.
156
Sero sapiunt Phryges.
FEstus, that feasted long on delicates,
Now such unpleasing foolish diet hates;
Is it not reason he should spare at last,
That has consumed more then all in wast.
157
Sine fuco pulchra venustas.
Mistress Morinda is more coy then wise,
But fair she is and that most richly fair,
Her husband bears it out, (let that suffice)
And all defects is able to repair;
But yet I wonder they should so excel,
That have been ^ankerupts, all the world can tell.
158
Mortali^ cunctacaduca.
STella the star, that whilome shined so bright,
^s now ecclipsed, and has lost her light;
(...) pity ( Stella) that thy stars were such,
Better for thee they had not shined so much.
159
Pestis, cum finis amarus.
Fie, would you offer Winefrid that wrong,
To set abroach her Virgin chastity?
Well wotteth she, you cannot love her long,
And which is worse, the world may it espy:
Which is the thing that makes her look into it,
Or else you know how easy it were to do it.
160
Similes labris lactucae.
DIck swash (or swaggering Dick) through Fleet Street reeles,
With Sis and Bettrice waiting at his heels;
^o one that would have ^ane the wall, he swore,
^ounds, do not see my Puncke and Paramore?
16^ Nec te quaesiueris extra.
SIr, can you tell where young Pandorus lives,
That was surnamed here the prodigal:
He that so much for his silk stockings gives,
Till naught is left to buy him shoes withal?
Oh blame him not, to make what show he can,
How should he else be thought a Gentleman.
162
Qui quondam Li^a, Lanista.
It Is said that Whittington was raised of naught,
And by a Cat, has diverse wonders wrought;
But Fortune (not his Cat) makes it appear:
He may dispend a thousand marks a year.
163
Auro cedit honos.
BL^do has lost his Besse he knows not where,
And frantic seeks her all the streets through-out,
Take courage ( Bindo) and be of good cheer,
To morrow thou shall find her, there is no doubt*
To morrow came: deserved she to be shent,
That brought him home enough to pay his rent?
164
Sors vniuersa r^tat.
SAm swore an oath that those late Lotteries,
Were mere deceipts, and idle mockeries,
For of a hundred, if he two did pluck,
The standers by would say, it was Cuckolds luck.
165
Omnia vincit amor.
HOw comes it Malcus lives unmarried,
That whilome was a suitor to so many,
Doubtless his love has still miscarried,
And he misled, was never loved of any.
So that I fear, the grief of what is past,
Will cause the cockscombe hang himself at last.
166
Prauis communia praua.
Ask Minos why he marries not, heel' say,
He loves not, to live at rack and manger,
Whiles he may take a snatch and so away,
In common corners, like a common ranger.
167
Hic laque^s rendit, qui laqueo leditur.
I^us, that like to Aesops Spaniell snatched,
(...) The shadow, for the substance, in the water,
^hought his eggs chickins, being yet vnhatcht,
^^d needs would thrive ere Lady Day the later:
Sure thou were blind, that could, or would not see,
To lay a trap for them that now catch thee.
168
Trahit sua quemque voluptas.
VVAt wills, you know how much he scorneth it,
To be a pick-purse of another wit:
^^t in a pocket, please you understand,
^e has a reaching, deep, and diuing hand.
169
Tempora mutantur, etc.
I Cry you mercy sir, I knew you not,
Thus Courtly Metamorphosed of late,
Your Country kinsfolks have you quite forgot,
You brave it out with that Maiesticke state,
As but I now recall whose son you were,
You might have passed for some Nobles heir.
170
Na^uram expellere durum.
PArcus now sparing cost, swears he will begin,
To enter commons in some Chancery Inn,
And will no longer once a day be fed,
That still before went supperlesse to bed.
171
Nummos and Demona iungit.
BAt bids you swell with envy till you burst,
So he be rich, and may his Coffers fill,
^ringing the example of the Fox that is cursed,
and threatening folks that have least power to kill,
For why it is known his trade can never fall,
That has already got the Devil and all,
172
Viuit post funera virtus.
SIlus has sold his Crimson Satin suit,
And needs will learn to play upon the Lute,
^is well done ( Silus) for such suits soon waste,
^hereas thy skill on Lutes will ever last.
173
Grata superueniet quae non sperabitur hora.
Persuade not Romulus to take a wife,
That is to wedlock sworn an enemy,
And ever vows to lead a single life,
Which he accounts most honest purity:
Besides a thousand reasons that constraines him,
And more (but mum) it is known whose wife maintai^ hi^
174
Opinio preualet veritati.
I Asked Pontus. why he took such pains,
To trot in Tearme-time for so little gains,
His answer was, that such as stand on wooings,
Must, howsoever, seem to have some doings.
175
Moritur, cui fama perennis.
AMongst our Poets Rauchus reckoned is,
But less beholding to be so reputed,
For honest truth it self known to be his,
With fained Poetry was never suited:
Then must it certainly be said amiss,
Amongst our Poets Rauchus reck'ned is.
176
Canis ad Vomitum.
MAt in the mood of his distemp'rature,
Swears he must fight to keep his hands in ure,
For being weary of his theeuing trade,
What should he do, if not approve his blade?
177
Sper^it gens rustica musas.
What tell you me of Pontus peasant groom,
That Tearmely posteth vpto purchase pelf^
Which he obscures within some desert room,
And basely lives a slave unto himself?
Spur him in any point, but in a lease,
You Will sooner tire the jade, then melt his grease.
178
F^uent periuria furtum.
PIso has stolen a silver Boule in jest,
For which (suspected only, not confessed,)
Rather then Piso will restore the Boule,
To quit the body he will cast the soul.
179
Timodos fortunae repellit.
When Miles the Seruingman my Lady kissed,
She knew him not, (though scarcely could resist
So sweet a youth, and well apparelled)
Had not the Dunce himself discovered:
For this (quoth he) my Master bad me say, --
How Is that (quoth she?) and frowning flings away:
^ext to the heart, she took her mark amiss,
And th^^ ^hee should a Seruing^ creature kiss*
Why thus it is, when fools must make it known^,
They come o^ others business, not their own.
180
Venaeli veneri suspensa haedera.
A Scoffing mate, that past along Cheap Side,
Incontinent a gallant Less espide:
Whose tempting breasts (as to the sale laid out)
Incites this yongster thus to gin to flout.
Lady* (quoth he) is this flesh to be sold?
No Lord (quoth she) for silver nor for gold:
But wherefore ask you? (and there made a stop)
To buy (quoth he) if not, shut up your shop.
181
Nonnunquam iactat egenus.
Jack is a Gentleman, I must confess,
For there is no woman's Tailor can be less.
182
Nemo omnibus horis sapit.
NIsus that does his nightcap so much use,
Was nearly brought unto his winding sheet,
Whose guilty conscience did him most accuse,
That he was plagued for walking late the street;
And well deserved, nor could he well do worse,
Then deal with drabs, be drunk, and lose his purse
183
Pudor est suae d^mna refer.
^Eter has lost his purse, but will conceal it,
Lest she that stole it, to his shame reveal it.
184
Prodit se lumine Luscus.
LVscus that late lay with his mistress maid,
And (fearing much to have the matter known)
Went to his fellow, whom he friendly praid
To counsel him, as were the cause his own:
He that (more cunning) knew what should be done,
Took this advantage for his better speed;
To finish that which the other had begun,
But then alas, she proved with child indeed,
And made the Woodcocke (who did first bewray i^
Stand to the reckoning, that could better pay it.
185
Quos ego? sed motos praest at, etc.
FLaccus gives out (because the world shall know it)
How bitter shortly he intends to write,
Threatening therein to firke his fellow Poet,
Against whom he bears such revenging spite:
But soft (quoth Flaccus) should I say he is poor?
Oh no: least others talk as much of me.
Or shall I tell him that he loves a whore?
Tush, therein likewise we both iumpe agree.
Faith, Flaccus doubtless will his spleen recall,
I, I: As good be friends, nor write at all.
186
Quid non pecunia?
SHall squint-eyed Mopsus, old Cincanters son,
Be matched with Beauty for his little pelf?
Much better were the Lobcocke lost then won,
Unless he knew how to behave himself.
But this has ever been the plague of it:
That such are loved more for their wealth then wit.
187
Forma bonum fragile.
MArce^la now grown old has broke her Glass,
Because it flatters not as't did: alas,
Who would desire that any senseless stone,
Should show good countenance, that receives none?
188
Sort tua contentus.
BArtus being bid to supper to a Lord,
Was marshaled at the lower end of the board.
Who vexed thereat, amongst his Comrag's does fret,
And swears, that he below the salt was set.
But Bartus thou art a fool, to fret and swear,
The salt stands on the board, would thou sit there?
189
Malum est quod tegitur.
BArtellus for a swelling in his groine,
Has cut his shoe, and of his toe does whine,
^ut what by that ( Bartellus do thou gain?)
^he neighbors know too well where lies thy pain.
190
Vox impedit Esurienti.
GLute at meals is never heard to talk:
For which the more his chaps and chin does walk^
When every one that sits about the board,
Makes sport to ask, what Gluto, nere a word?
He forced to answer, being very loath,
Is almost choked* speaking and eating both.
191
Semper tibi pr^ximus esto.
THe will that women have, does show the want of wit we (...)
For we fro women take our woe, by giving way to wom^^
192
Post dulcia finis am^rus.
Have you not heard of Monsieur Maximus,
That lives by lending without interest?
But then he tells you with prouiso, thus,
You must assure your lands for such request:
Which done, be sure you never in peace shall rest
But more perplexed, then with the devil possessed.
^94
He^ domus antiqua, etc.
BRutus whose buildings cost a thousand pound,
(Being newly framed, of late, even from the ground)
Is fayrer far then when his Father lived,
Because it is richer and more rare contrived;
Yet many times I hear the poor man weep,
Saying, his father better house did keep:
Which unto me a Paradox does seem,
That what is worser that men better deem.
195
Nil refert loqui, dum v^iliceat.
AN English Lad long wood a Less of Wales,
And entertained her with pretty tales:
Although she understood not how to try him,
^et gave consent at last to vnder-lye him;
^oth having dallyed with full saciety,
The wench to manifest the more sobriety)
^old, in her language, she was fully p'ayd:
and Degon, degon, once or twice she said,
Degon in Welsh does signify enus^,)
which he mistaking, answered thus in snuff,
Degon that will, (for I protest) so sore
Have dig'd already, I can dig no more.
196
Lenones Leones.
VRbanus that committed an offense,
With a young country Less, (poor silly fool)
To salve his credit, soon conueys her hence,
Unto a Garden-house, or Vaulting-schoole.
Where (now vnloden of that lucklesse ill)
And all dispatched (save the hou should charge:)
The good-man-Bawd, or Pander (which you will)
Brings him no Ticket, but a Bill at large.
Item for pipkins, pap, and other things,
Amounting all to twenty marks, or more:
And this aloud into his ears he rings,
Pray sir (quoth he) for shame discharge your score.
Vrbanus loath to be proclaimed a Gull,
Was willing to compound in any wise:
But yet not tendering his demand at full,
Said, he had seen the Lions once or twice,
The Lions (answers he) that may be true,
But think you thence to merit any praise?
Each Lobcooke may those Lions daily view,
Have you not seen the Dragons in your days?
No (quoth Vrbanus) that I must confess,
Then (said the Pander) you must pay no less.
197
Pud^re suo impudens.
A Certain fellow of the purer sect,
Who outwardly did holiness respect,
Could not endure a Surplice in the Church;
Yet was he lately found in such a lurch,
That though he could not with a Surplice bear,
Did in the Chancell yet a white sheet wear.
198
Non nouit seipsum.
COuld Titus deem the times he now bestows,
To be the same he did prognosticate,
that thus of late transformed himself not knows,
He is become so great a Potentate,
Who would have thought (his father but a Tanner)
The son should brave it in that pompeous manner.
199
Spernit gens rustica Musas.
What tell you me of Porcus Pesant-Groome,
That scrapeth up together so much thrift,
Which he obscures within some desert room,
And basely lives unknown by any shift.
His looks are Characters of his descent,
Sprung from the loins of some mechanic Sire,
That never knew what civil vsagement,
But to be only rich does still aspire:
Spur him in any thing but in his trade,
And you shall see how scone he will prove a Jade.
200
Ictus Piscator sapit.
When Caecus had been wedded now three day
And all his neighbors bad God give him io^
This strange conclusion with his Wife assaies,
Why till her marriage day she proved so coy;
(Quoth he) we man and wife in manner were,
A month before: then could we have repented?
Alas (quoth she) had I not cause to fear,
How you might conster it, had I consented?
Fore God (quoth he) it was well thou did not yeel^
For doubtless then my purpose was to leave thee.
Oh Sir (quoth she) I once was so beguild,
And thought the next man should not so deceive me
Now out alas (quoth he) thou breed'st my woe,
Why man (quoth she) I speak but quid pro quo.
201
Detur quod meritum.
A Courtier kind in speech, cursed in condition,
Finding his faults could be no longer hidden,
Came to his friend to clear his bad suspicion,
(And fearing least he should be more then chidden,)
Fell to a flattering and most base submission,
Vowing to kiss his foot if he were bidden:
My foot said he? Nay, that were too submisse,
You three foot higher; well deserve to kiss.
202
^enus in specie.
What curl'd-pate youth is he that sits there
So near your wife, and whispers in her ear?
And holds her hand in his, and soft does wring her?
And slides her Ring often up and down her finger?
Sure it is some man that is seen in both the laws.
Retained by her in some important cause:
Prompt of behavior in his words and action,
That does her business with great satisfaction.
203
A malo ad peius
YOu sent to me to borrow twenty mark,
But to that suite by no means would I hark,
Then presently you sent a man in post,
To tell me that a Lord with you would host:
And you must have to entertain his state,
A Silver Basin with some other plate,
Are you a cockscombe? or think me a fool?
That should be set again unto the School?
Indeed I were a Woodcocke to be wondered,
(Denying twenty marks) would lend a hundred.
204
La^et aliquid occultum
^F Doll step out of Doors into the street,
^ But toward Church or with a friend to meet,
What is the cause (it may be some will ask,)
Why she still hooded goes in her mask?
Oh she is afraid it would be much disgrace,
The wind or rain should mar her painted face.
205
Vsus promptos facit
Why strives old Turnus still to have the wall^
Oh, he is ever druncke and fears to fall.
206
Semper idem Incultus.
TOr^^s has left his late mechannick trade,
And uses now another new profession,
But being still the same that Nature made,
Yields to his former stamp the same impression:
Of whom I well may write this Epigram,
Ne quisquam Suitor vltra Crepidam.
207
For As expertus.
PRiscus has been a Traveler for why,
He will so strangely swagger, swear, and lie.
208
Leui, responsio leuis.
PRetus that late had office borne in London,
Was bid by (...) good morrow Pretus quondom,
He, with a jest (no whit put out of temper)
Replied incontinent Ad^e kn^^^ Sempe^:
Another in a kind of scoffing speeches,
Would needs request his gown to line his breeche^
Not so quoth he, but sure twill be thy hap,
That for thy knauish head thou line thy Cap.
209
Nil perdit ign^tus.
Unto a certain Gentlewomans chamber
A Peddler came, (her husband being thence)
To sell her linen, Ciuit, Musk, or A^ber:
^he francke of favors, sparing of expense,
^o bargains with him ere he par^ed thence,
That for a parcel of his purest lawne,
To grant dishonest pleasures she was drawn.
Next day the man repenting of his cost,
Began to think upon some r^stitution,
How to be paid at length for what was lost,
Which he intends to put in execution;
And therefore bent with settled resolution,
Unto her husband presently repaires,
To ask him fifty shillings for his wares.
Her husband ignorant what cause had bred it,
Says wife, how comes it you have spent such store,
And must with petty Chapmen run in credit?
Now for my honor sake do so no more.
Good Sir (quoth she) I meant it to restore,
That took it of him only for a trial,
And find it is too high prised by a ryall.
210
Vt nascimur, morimur.
WHen to the world we came, we naught did bring
Borne therefore first of naught, and naught dying
211
In obitum Promi.
THat Death should thus from hence our Butler catch,
Into my mind it cannot quickly sincke,
^^re Death came thirsty to the Buttry Hatch,
^hen he (that busy was) denid him drink:
^ut 'twas not so: it is like he gave him liquer,
and Death made drunk, took him away the quicker,
Yet let not others grieu^ too much in mind,
(The Butler gone) the Keys are left behind.
212
Imp^r Impares odit.
SOtus hates wisemen (for himself is none)
And fools he hates because himself is one.
213
Quod nimis, nequicquam.
CReta respects her husband wondrous well,
It needs no proof, for every one can tell
How kind she is, that if I not mistake,
Her love extends to others for his sake.
214
Ignauis stimulum.
VOrax is vexed that I thus reprehend him,
Faith if words will not, Silence cannot mend him.
215
Sapiunt quaecunque probantur.
WE make our Epigrams, as men taste cheese,
Which has his relish in the last farewell:
Like as the purest liquor has his leeze,
So may you yearly end the tale you tell,
The Tail (of all things) some men aim at most,
Those that had rather fast, may kiss the post.
And there is an end.
Semel insaniuimus omnes. THus have I waded through a worthless task,
Whereto (I trust) there is no exceptions taken,
For (meant to none) I answer such as ask,
It Is like apparel made in Birchin-Lane.
If any please to suit themselves and wear it,
The blam's not mine, but theirs that needs wi^^ bear
VT tibi lecta placent, mea sic mihi scripta placebu^
I^dicio seruit gratia nostra tuo.
Abijois ista ferus? mo^^tur mea musa dolendo,
Accipis ista libens? illa quod optat hab^t.
FINIS.

