THE BARREN TREES DOOM: A SERMON PREACHED AT NEWBERY ON THE FIFTH DAY OF
AUGUST.

(...) ^^E DAY OF HIS (...) MOST HAPPY DE^^^ (...) ^^^m THE BLOODY Conspiracy
of the Earl of Gowry and his brother Alexander.

By BARTHOLOMEW PARSONS Batchelour in Divinity, and Vicar of Collingborne
Kingstone in the County of Wiltes.

DAN. 4.23. Hew down the Tree and destroy it.

PSALM. 18.40. Thou have given me the necks of mine enemies, that I might
destroy them that hate me.

LONDON, Printed by NICHOLAS OAKS, for MATTHEW LAW, and are to be sold at his
shop in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Fox. 1616.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE WILLIAM EARL OF PENBROOKE, LORD HARBERT OF CARDIFFE
LORD Parr and Rosse of Kendall, Lord Marmion and St. Quintine, Lord
Chamberlain to his Majesty, Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter, and
one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
RIGHT HONORABLE LORD,
KING Saul being brought into such a straight, that to escape the hands of the
uncircumcised Philistimes, he laid violent hands upon himself, fell upon his
own sword and died 1. Sam. 31.4.
. David in his Funeral Elegies, in his Lamentations wherewith he lamented
over Saul and Jonathan, cries out, Tell it not in Gath, publish it not in the
streets of Ashkelon, lest the daughters of the Philistims rejoice, lest the
daughters of the uncircumcised triumph 2. Sam. 1.20.
. But when a better then Saul 1. Sam. 15.28.
, to whom God has given the Kingdoms of great Britain, being so brought
into the snare of those mighty Hunters, Nimrods, uncircumcised in heart, the
Earl of Gowry and his brethren, that the sorrows of death compassed him, the
floods of the ungodly made him afraid Psalm. 18.4.
, and he was ready to say with King Hezekiah, I am deprived of the residue of
my years, I shall not see the Lord in the Land of the living, I shall behold
man no more with the Inhabitants of the world Esa. 38.10.11
, was notwithstanding so delivered out of the snare of those Fowlers, that not
an hair of his head fell to the ground; It is a good thing for us that are the
Lords Praecones Esaias 58.1.
, in our Panygyrickes that we speak unto the Lord in the day of the
commemoration thereof Psalm. 18.1.
, to cry it in the streets, in the chief places of concourse, in the opening
of the gates Prou. 1.20.
, and in the Temples of the Lord that both Sion hearing of it, may rejoice and
be glad Psalm. 96.8.
; and all the daughters of Babylon that bear evil will at Sion, all
treacherous Zibahs, that could find in heart to blow the Trumpet of rebellion
against their Sovereigns 2 Samuel 20.1.
, may be confounded, and hang down their heads for shame. Now though my
tongue be not as the pen of a ready writer, though mine hand want Apelles Art
to paint out this our Alexander in his great deliverance; yet I have made bold,
in mine heart to endite some good matter, with my tongue to speak, and with my
pen to publish the things that I have made touching the King Psalm. 45.1.
And albeit it might be said to me, being little both in mine own and others
eyes, What art thou? Whence come thou? yet I have like Hester, adventured to
come with these my raw meditations into the Courts of your Honors house without
calling thither Hest. 4.10.
, hoping as David showed kindness to Mephibosheth for Ionathans sake 2. Sam. 9.7.
, so you will vouch safe to receive it into your favorable protection for the
subjects sake whereof it entreats, his Highness happy and wonderful saving,
in whose safety at that time consisted, both in general, the preservation of
these two famous kingdoms, and also in special, the continuance of your
honors prosperity and dignity unto this day; you being one of the fowls of
the air that have their habitation in the branches of this great tree Dan. 4
21.
. Again, my persuasions are strong, that any thing spoken of his Majesty's
wonderful deliverance, shall be welcome to him, in whom have been observed to
meet, and be conjoined, those several commendations that Alexander the Great
gave to two of his servants, commending the one (Craterus) to be (...), a lover
of the king in the things that concerned his crown and dignity: the other
(Hephaestion) to be (...), a lover of Alexander in a private respect and
affection toward his person: and that the basest earthen vessel, that
brings in it any of the heavenly treasures, shall find favor in his eyes,
who (as it was said of Sceuola that he was Iurisperitorum eloquentissimus, of
all the Lawyers the most eloquent man) is (...), of our Nobles the most
skillful in Divinity, who has made Gods testimonies his counselors, takes
more delight in them then in thousands of gold and silver, and thinks it a
greater honor to be a member of the Church, then a Peer of the Realm. All
which has made me put on the spirit of boldness, to dedicate unto your
honorable protection, this (...) song of triumph, wherein the highest note is
concerning the Mercies of the Lord, and the faithfulness that he has showed
unto our David his anointed. Pardon then (I beseech your Honor) my boldness,
accept it with gracious favor, and protect it under the shadow of your roof
(as Lot did the Angels) that miscreants may do nothing unto it. And in my
poor measure I will not cease to fall down an humble suppliant before the
Throne of grace, to make request, that God which has blessed you with the
blessings of heaven above, and of the deep that lies under neath, would also
bless you with all spiritual blessings in heavenly things in Christ; who has
given you a name upon earth, would give you a name and place within his house
and his walls; which has made you happy in standing before an earthly
Solomon, would give you the fullness of joy in his presence; and which has set
you with the Princes of his people, would in his good time set you at his right
hand where there are pleasures for evermore.

Your Honors in all humble duty, BARTHOLOMEW PARSONS.

THE BARREN TREES DOOM.
MATH. 3.10. Therefore every Tree which brings not forth good fruit, is
hewn down, and cast into the fire.


THAT this Parabolicall speech may not be uttered to us, as unto them to whom
it is not given to know the secrets of the Kingdom of heaven: Who seeing do
not see, and hearing do not hear, nor understand Mat. 13.11.
: If with the Disciples we ask the heavenly Master apart concerning this
Parable, (...), he will unfold and expound it unto us Mar. 4.34.
: And as he does, aperire os suum in parabolis, open his mouth in Parables; so
he will, aperire etiam ipsas parabolas, open the Parables themselves also
August. in Psalm. 77.
, if we consult with the heavenly Oracles, the light of them will dispell the
darkness that hangs on the face of this Text: Nihil enim fere, etc. (says
Saint Austin August. de doctr. Christ. l. 2. cap. 7.
) For the most part there is nothing fetched out of those obscurities (which
are in the Scriptures) which we may not find more plainly spoken in another
place. Let us know then, that the Lord (who speaks of himself according to
the Hebrew proverb, With the tongues of the sons of men, and of whom,
according to that golden rule of Athanasius, those things which in Scriptures
(...), are spoken according to humane affection, are to be understood as
becomes the nature of God) is pleased to take upon him the name and
profession of an Husbandman, whose husbandry his Saints are 1. Cor. 3.9.
: Of a Master: Of a Vineyard, Esaias 5.1.
whose Vineyard is the house of Israel, the men of Judah his Plants Ibid. v. 7.
, being a Vine, noble for generosity Ierem. 2.21.
, excellent for glory Ezekiel. 17.8.
, and pleasant for delectation Esaias 5.7.
: And of a Gardener, whose Spouse is a Garden enclosed, the Plants whereof are
an Orchard of Pomegranats with pleasant Fruit Cant. 4.12.
. Now as in the floare of the Church, there is mingled together, chafe to be
severed with the fan and thrown into the fire, and wheat to be gathered
into the Garner Math. 3.12.
; In the field of the Kingdom of Heaven, are tares to be pulled out, and
burnt up, and wheat to be carried into the Barn in their due season Math. 13
30.
: In the Net of the Kingdom of Heaven, are gathered all kinds of things; bad
to be cast away, and good to be put into vessels Math. 13.44.48.
.

So in this Vineyard of the Lords of Hosts, in this garden of our Wel-beloued,
there are found, both trees planted by the rivers of the water of the
Sanctuary, whose leaves shall not fade, neither shall their fruit fail Ezekiel.
47.12.
; and also (...) Trees of Autumn decaying, whose fruit withers; yea without
fruit, twice dead, Jude 12.
as the speech of the Holy Ghost rises by degrees in that place. These, these
Trees does this Messenger before the face of the Lord, being like to purging
fire Mal. 3.2.
De coelo tangere, strike at from heaven; and not either Totum genus humanum,
all mankind (as some Interpreters would have it Hugo Cardin. Beda Iansen.
) for they are the Trees of the Forests Esaias 44.14.
, not of the Garden of the Lord: or only Genus Israeliticum, the people of
Israel (as some restrain this commination Chrysostom. Hilar. Theophilact. Muscul.
Piscat. Maldon.
.) For though this Parabolicall speech be specially intended against evil
Professors of his time by John the Baptist here, as it is used also by our
Savior against evil Prophets of the succeeding times Math. 7.19.
; yet Communi ratione, in a general consideration all Pseudo-Christians, that
like the Angel of the Church in Sardis have a name that they live, but are dead
Reu. 3.1.
, are understood; including herein; who bearing not fruit in Christ, must be
taken away John 15.2.
, and being barren, must be cut up, that they may not cumber the ground of Gods
Sanctuary Luke 13.7.
. Of which Trees, not to the boughs or body, but to the root, is laid
already, not to be laid hereafter; not a knife to prune (for such dressing is
requisite for the good branches that bring forth fruit John 15.2.
) but an axe to cut down: Which whether we enterprete with Saint Jerome
Hieron. in locum.
of the Ministry of that most piercing Heb. 4.12.
word, which is like as a fire, and like an hammer breaking the Rocks Ier.
23.29.
, and which by denouncing vengeance against all disobedience, does pluck up,
root out, destroy and throw down Ier. 1.10.
(for so God heweth by his Prophets, and slays by the words of his Mouth Hos.
6.5.
:) Or with Chrysostom Chris. in locum.
, to be the Acutissima ira consummationis, Gods most sharp anger that will
make an end of all: With Maldonate, the Diuinum Iudicium, Maldonat. in locum.
divine judgment; It comes all to one, there being but little difference
between Gods voice threatening, and his hand taking vengeance on them.
Chrysostom summeth up the whole hitherto very elegantly, Nihil terribilius,
etc. Chris. in locum.
There is nothing more more terrible then this manner of speaking, for he
threatens not them with a flying hook, nor with the destruction of the hedge,
nor the treading down of the Vineyard, but with a cutting Axe; yea, and which
is more terrible, with such an Axe that is at hand, and cutteth even presently.

Therefore] Nihil certius, nothing is more certain, it is a conclusion from
the breathe of his mouth, who is the God that cannot lie Tit. 1.2.
.

A Tree] yea a Tree of the Vineyard, of the Garden, that no man may build upon,
or boast of a plantation without fructification.

Every Tree] that no man may exempt himself from the common condition; For he
that goes about to except himself does but deceive himself.

That brings not forth good fruit] that no man may think it enough to have
brought forth good fruit, Maldonat in locum.
nor place the whole duty of a Christian in abstayning from evil.

Is cut downe] not, shall be cut down: the time present, intimating the
presentnesse of the danger; and he threatens not any slight stroke, but
cutting down by all means Musculus in locum.
.

And cast into the fire] that like Judas it might go into his own place Acts
1.25.
.

This second Elias then walking in the spirit and power of the first Elias,
does, as it were, call for fire from heaven 2. King. 1.10.
against these barren vnbearing Trees, that have lost the blessing of their
creation in Christ Jesus Genesis 1.11. Ephesians. 2.10.
, to bring forth fruit according to their kind.

But that we may take a suruay of the particulars in their ranks, let us mark,

First, the certainty of the vengeance denounced; Therefore,] It is not a
matter nakedly affirmed, but strongly concluded, like the Apostles (...), Romans
3.28
We conclude, etc.

Secondly, the subject, or person, capable of this punishment; A Tree] of the
garden; which least the Judge should show himself partial, is amplified by
the general extent, every such Tree.]

Thirdly, the moving cause hereof; For far be it from the Judge of the whole
world that he should not do right, Genesis 18.25.
that he should punish any undeservedly; because it brings not forth good
fruit.]

Lastly, the nature of the punishment standing upon two feet:

1 Such a Tree is to be Hewne downe] that it may not cumber the ground, and
offend other good plants. 2 It must be cast into the fire] that it may receive
as it has deserved, for the end of such Trees is to be burned Hebr. 6.8.

The certainty of the vengeance here denounced, stands in the door of the
Text, like Abraham in the door of his Tent.

Therefore:] It is not a bare affirmation, which were enough, but a
demonstratiue conclusion, inferred out of his premises, which is, (...),
superaboundant: For if the words of Gods mouth are mighty and operative, Dixit,
and facta sunt; Psalm. 33.9.
much more are the counsels of his heart infallible, indiuertible, The counsel
of the Lord stands for ever, the thoughts of his heart to all generations
Ibid. verse. 11.
: Therefore (as Saint Jerome says well) If we believe not God when he
speaks, yet let us believe him when he swears: So, if we believe not God
when he does nakedly Affirm, yet let there be a (...), a full assurance of
faith in us, when he does regularly Conclude, and compel us (as it were) by
force of Argument. As then all the promises of God, are Yea and amen, in Christ
Jesus: I will not (says he 2. Cor. 1.20.
) falsify my truth, I will not alter the thing that is gone out of my lips
Psalm. 89.33.
: So all his denunciations of vengeance are stable, yea immutable, as the Laws
of the Medes and Persians, which alter not Dan. 6.8.
. Moriendo morieris, Thou shall surely die the death Genesis 2.17.
, was Adams doom, if he should fall into sin; the words being doubled,
because the thing was established, as in Pharoahs dream Genesis 41.32
: Whether vengeance then come in the morning, as upon the Sodomites Genesis
19.23.24.
, upon whom about the rising of the Sun Gehennam e coelo misit deus Saluianus
l. 1 de gubernat dei.
, God sent an hell out of heaven; Or at noone day, as to Haman, who was caught
from his dinner to the gallows Ester 7.9.
; Or at euentide, as to Ahab, who being wounded in war, dyed in his Chariot
about the going down of the Sun 1. King. 22 35
: Or in the night season, as to Chedorlaomer, and the Kings that were with him,
whom Abraham ouertooke and smote by night Genesis 14.15.
: Whether it come serius aut citius, later or sooner, yet certis passibus illa
venit, it comes surely without failing: The Lord that recompenceth will
surely recompense Ier. 51.56.
Know certainly that ye shall die by the sword, by the famine and by the
pestilence Ier. 42.22.
. And that vision that Habecuck saw against the capital sins, not only of
his times, but also of all times; Pride, Covetousness, drunkenness, and
Idolatry, must surely come Habacuk. 2.3
. Therefore not so much for the secrecy, as for the certainty thereof, is
vengeance sealed up amongst Gods treasures, Deuteronomy. 32* 34.
yea bound with the indissoluble band of an oath; The Lord swears that he
will have war with Amalecke from generation to generation Exodus 17.16.
: I have sworn unto the house of Eli, that the iniquity of Elies house shall
not be purged with sacrifice, nor offering for ever 1. Sam. 3.14.
Let no man then, when he hears the words of Gods curses denounced against
his evil ways, sing a requiem to his own soul, bless himself in his
heart, saying, with the stubborn in heart, I shall have peace, though I walk
according to the stubbornness of mine heart Deuteronomy. 29.19.
; with the wicked, I shall never be moved Psalm 10.6.
; with the sinners, Evil shall not come Amos 9.10.
with the grievous trespassers, Evil shall not come upon us, the Prophets are
but wind, and the word is not in them Ier. 5.12.13.
; with the frozen in their dregs, The Lord will do neither good nor evil
Zeph. 1.12.
. For as the Lord lives (it is his own attestation) if he whet his glittering
sword, and his hand take hold on judgment, he will render vengeance on his
enemies, and reward them that hate him, he will make his arrows drunk with
their blood, and his sword shall devour their flesh Deuteronomy. 32.40.41.42.
.

But I have many things to say, I pass from the certainty, and come to the
subject or persons, upon whom this vengeance must be inflicted: A Tree.] Now
all Trees are not of one sort, of one rank, for some are Trees of the Forest,
some of the Garden: What Trees then must this Axe hew at? Not those of the
Forest; For what has he to do to judge them being without 1. Cor. 5.12.
but the Trees of the Garden, for them he judges being within Ibidem.
, and in the Garden, Not those flourishing Palms, that bring forth fruit
still Psalm. 92.12.13
, but those ligna arida, dry Trees Esaias 56.3.
: Such as will be Citizens of Syon, and yet not suffer the Lord that reigns
in Syon Esaias 52.7.
, to rule over them Luke 19.14.27
; Such as will be in the Vineyard, yet will yield no fruit to the Lord of the
Vineyard Mat. 21.34.
; for such Chafe will grow with the Wheat Math. 13.
, such Tares will spring up with the good Seed, and such vessels of dishonor
will thrust themselves into the great house of Gods Militant Church 2. Tim.
2.20.
, though being in the Church, they are not of the Church 1. John 2.9.
; no more then the Elect being in the world, are of the world Ioh. 15.19.
. Those Pharisees then of the Concision, the brethren of the Separation, which
stand apart, will not come near our Churches, as though they were holier and
sounder then they Esaias 56.5.
, and which can find no rest for the soale of their foot, but the Synagogue
of Amsterdam, are not led with the fervor of zeal, but transported with the
fury of Schism, whilst they leave Gods Floare because of some Chafe, break
his net because of some baggage of fish, depart out of his house because of
some vessels of dishonor, and forsake his field because of some cockle: Non
propter malos boni deserendi, Angust. epist. 48.
sed propter bonos mali tolerandi: Good men are not to be forsaken for ill men's
sakes, but the ill are rather to be tolerated for the goods sake. Does the
Olive Tree presently loose his fatness, or the Fig Tree his sweetness,
because the pricking bramble grows near them? Does the Lilly cease to be a
Lilly, because it is amongst the Thorns Cant. 2.2.
? Has our Mother lost her beauty, yea her face it self, if there be a spot
or scratch upon it? Ecclesiam teneo (says Saint Austin Augst. lib. 3. contra
Crescon. grammat. cap. 35
) etc. I abide in the Church being full of Wheat and Chafe, I amend those
that I can, I tolerate those that I cannot amend, I fly from the Chafe least
I should be it, but not from the Floare, least I should be nothing: But they
being carried about with every blast of vain doctrine Ephesians. 4.14.
, still innouating their Positions, still new hammering their Church
Constitutions, show themselves to be but Chafe. Tu qui vento tentationis
euobasti, etc. (says Austen) Thou which art blown out of the Floare with the
wind of temptation, what art thou? Wheat: the wind would not carry it out of
the floare: By the place therefore where thou art, acknowledge what thou art.

But to leave the pursuit of these fugitives, and to come nearer to our selves;
if this must be done to these dry barren trees Luke 23.32.
, though they want not leaves to cover their nakedness, Math. 21.19.
though they have a name and place within the walls of Gods house, Esaias 56.5.
what profits it them to rest in an outward profession, show of godliness, and
to want the inward power, and life thereof? to be painted Sepulchers,
beautiful without, loathsome within Math. 23 27.
, foris Catones, intus Nerones, outwardly as grave as Cato, inwardly as wild
as Nero: and as Saint Austen speaks, in superficie boni, in alto mali; in the
outside good, in the inside evil: and to have our fruit like to the Apple of
Sodom, which Solinus.
in the outside has a show of ripeness, but in the inside smoaky dust, so
that upon the least touch it sends out smoke, and goes away in a flying
dust. Shall the wolf ever be set on the right hand, because he comes
sometimes in sheep clothing? Math. 7.19.
Shall not Satan fall from Heaven like lightning, Luke 10.18.
though here he often transform himself into an Angel of light? 2. Cor.
11.14.
Shall not the five foolish Virgins, that brought with them the lamps of an
outward profession only, and wanted the oil of grace, be shut out of the
Kingdom? Math. 25.10.
Could Ahab escape the stroke of the arrow, though he were disguised in his
habit? 1. King. 22.34.
And shall men, though they swear vain, false oaths, commit murder,
adultery and such like wickedness, be delivered if they come and stand before
God in his house? Ier. 7.9.10.
Assuredly such halting between God and world, will make us pendere inter
coelum and terram, hang between heaven and earth (as Erasmus was painted) yea
perdere coelum and terram, loose both heaven and earth; the world hating us,
because we are Christians so much as in appearance, God hating us double,
because we are Christians but in appearance.

But that none may dream of any starting corners, hope for any lurking holes
here, that greatness may not keep out of the way Cum priuilegio, that
meandness may not think to be returned with a non est inuentus, let us cast
our eyes upon the extent, it is every such barrentrer, that this Axe must do
execution upon. It is not in foro poli, in the Court of heaven, as it is in
foro soli, in the earthly Courts; where the greater flies break through the
Spider webs of the laws, and escape, and the lesser are only caught; and
where a David that sits on the Throne finds some sons of Zeruich too
hard for him, so that he cannot reward the doer of evil according to his
wickedness: But this Judge of the whole world (who judges without any respect
of persons) Roman. 2.11.
will do right, in giving to every such fruitless tree the recompense of
their cursed barrenness, in destroying utterly every enemy that does evil in
his Sanctuary, Psalm. 7.4.3
whether Jew or Gentile, Roman. 2.9.
whether natural branch or ingraffed, Romans 11.21.
whether low or high, rich or poor, Psalm. 49.2.
whether sitting upon the Throne, or being captive in the prison, Exodus 12.29
whether people or priest, servant or master, maid or mistress, buyer or
seller, lender or borrower, taker of usury or giver of usury; Isaiah. 24.21.
and to use Saint Austent words in another case, quicquid aliud dioi potest,
etc. August. Tract. 52 in Iohem.
Whatsoever else may be spoken, according to those innumerable differences,
whereby men differ one from another, from the highest to the lowest, from the
King to the beggar.

This ventus vrens, scorching wind then of the Lords indignation, shall not
only light upon or blight the low shrubbes, the thistle of Lebanon, 2. King.
14 9.
the hyssope that grows upon the wall, 1. King 4.34.
but also the Cedars of Lebanon, that are high, 2. King. 19 23
for their eminency, excellent Cant. 5 12.
for their glory, the Cedars of God Psalm. 80.10.
for their dignity. The voice of the Lord, the thunderbolt of his wrath,
breaks the Cedars, yea breaks the Cedars of Lebanon in pieces, Psalm. 29.5.
he will prepare destroyers for these chief Cedars, and cast them into the
fire. Ierem. 22.7.
Zedekiah an high Cedar must be taken in Gods net, and brought to Babylon,
there to receive his judgment. Eze. 17.20.22
Yea the higher they stand, the more frequent, the more vehement is the
blowing, the beating of the wind of Gods indignation against them, according
to that of the Horat. Carmin lib. 2. Ode 10.
Poet.

Sapius ventis agitatur ingens
Pinus, and celsae grauiore casu
Decidunt turres, feriuntque summos fulgur a montes.
With winds is often tossed the Pine tree tall,
And highest towers with greatest ruin fall,
And tops of mountains lightnings of tenst smite.
Horribly and speedily, will God appear to the^ that be in high places, a sore
trial shall be to the mighty Wisd 6.5.8.
, he shall cut off the spirit of Princes, and is terrible to the kings of the
earth Psalm. 76.12.
. For are not they under God? as Joseph speaks of himself Genesis 50.19.
, and being so under God, that they are solo Deo minores Tertul. ad Scapulam.
cap. 2.
only lesser then God, they do soli deo peccare, sin only against God, as
David said of himself Psalm. 51.4.
, and must give accounts of their doings at Gods tribunal seat only Gods
anointing being upon them, thought they should hunt after our lives, as after a
Partridge in the mountains 1. Sam. 29.20
, yet must we not cut off the lappes of their garments 1. Sam. 24.6.
. Neither on the other side, is this day of the Lord of Hosts only upon all
that is exalted, upon the Cedars of Lebanon that are high and exalted, and upon
all the Ol^es of Bashan, and upon all the high mountains, and upon all the
hills that are lifted up, and upon every high to well, and upon every strong
wall, super valentissimos and mu^tissimo^* upon those that are most strong and
fenced; as Iunius glosseth the words, and upon all the ships of Tarshish, and
all pleasant pictures; super opulentissimos and ^rnatissimos, upon them that
are most wealthy and gay Esaias 12.16. and Iunius Ibid.
: but also upon the Fur trees, that is, populares quosque, all the people,
and the forest of the vintage, that is, promiscuum numerum tenuium e populo,
the confused number of the poor amongst the people Zach. 11.2. and Iunius Ibid.
. Howl Fur tree for the Cedar is fallen, because all the mighty are
spoiled. Howl o ye Oaks of Bashan, for the forest of the vintage is come
down. The mean man must be brought down as well as the mighty humbled Esaias
5.25
, for every man must bear his own burden Galat. 6.5.
, every one give an account of himself to God Romans 14.12.
, and every man receive the things that he has done, according to that which
he has done 2. Cor. 5.10.
.

But what is the cause why so certainly, so generally, every such tree must be
so dealt withal? For Gods thoughts are not as man's thoughts, his ways as man's
ways Esaias 55.9.
, that he should bate any un worthily, condemn them undeservedly. No man can
complain of him, as David the type, and Christ the Antitype of their haters,
(...), They hated me without a cause Psalm. 35 19. John 15.25.
. It is a man's voice, or rather a devils, not Gods; Non amote Sabidi, nec
possum dicere quare; I love thee not. Sabidius, but I cannot tell why. As David
then answered his brother when he checked him, for coming to the war, Is
there not a cause 1. Sam. 17.29.
? So is there not a cause of the Lords war against these Trees? Surely every
Tree at his first creation, had his blessing to bring forth fruit according to
his kind Genesis 1.11.
; and these Trees of the Garden if they will be created a new in Christ Jesus
Ephe. 2.10.
, must have a blessing to bring forth fruit in him; which, if with profane
Esau Heb. 12.16.
, they have set light by Genesis 25.33.34.
, they are fit for nothing but the Axe, and good for nothing but the fire:
Being then with the cursed Fig Tree barren Math. 21.19.
, not bringing forth good fruite] the Lord who is righteous in all his ways,
holy in all his works Psalm. 145.17.
, cannot be unrighteous in executing this vengeance upon them.

We see then the evidence that is here given in against them, They bring not
forth good fruit.

Now that we may not think them thus condemned before their cause (though it
be not unheard) be well understood, that we may not cry with the Eunuch
here, How can we understand without a guide Acts 8.31.
, Nouerint vniuersi, be it known to all, that the fruits wherein they fail,
are the fruits of righteousness, wherewith they should be filled Phil. 1.11.
, good works, wherein they should be fruitful Col. 1.10.
, the fruits of the Spirit of God, in all goodness, righteousness, and truth
Ephe. 6.9.
. Now these fruits are not all of one sort, are not all subject to one
consideration; for some of them are general, growing upon all the Trees of the
Garden, upon all the branches that are graffed in the true Vine, such as are
those good fruits of the Spirit to be found on every good Tree, Love, Joy,
Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance
Gal. 5.22i
; Some are special, particular, which every Tree must bring forth according to
his kind, as being his (...) proper fruit, whereby he must be known Luke
6.42.
in that Calling wherein God has set him. For thus the Olive Tree has his
fatness, the Fig Tree his sweetness Judges 9 13
, the Vine his Vinum laetificans, Wine that cheareth God and Man, and every
Tree planted by the rivers of the waters of the Sanctuary, brings forth
fructum suum, his own fruit in due season Psalm. 1.3.
. As then (according to that difference made by Saint Austen Aust. Epist. 50
) a King serves God after one sort, as he is a man, after another sort, as
he is a King: As he is a man, he serves him by living faithfully; as he is
a King also, he serves him by ordaining Laws that command Justice, and
forbid the contrary with convenient authority. So all the household of faith
owes a service to God, after one sort in the general fruits of holiness
Romans 6.21.
, and after another sort in the proper fruits of a particular Calling, and as
they are the several Members of one Mystical Body; if Heads, in Ruling; if
Eyes, in looking about; if Hands, in working; if Feet, in walking. For thus
besides those general duties of piety, which lie equally on every ones
shoulders, the Princes fruit, that sits on the Throne, is to do equity and
rightousnesse 1. King. 10 9.
, to be (as Nebuchadnezzers Tree showed to him in a vision) fair and
fruitful, having meat in it for all, making shadow for all the beasts of the
field, and and spreading its boughs that the fowls of the air may dwell in
it, and of which all flesh may be sed Daniel 4.9.
the honorable man's fruit, to hold it his greatest honor with Iabesh, to call
upon the name of the Lord 1. Chron. 9.10.
, to honor him by whom he is honored, to open his treasures, and to offer gifts
unto Christ Math. 2.11.
. The Judges fruit to execute judgment truly and uprightly in the gate Zach.
8.16.
, the man of wars fruit, to do violence to no man, to accuse no man falsely,
and to be content with his wages Luke 3.14.18.
. The Pastors fruit, to rule well in the house of God, to labor in the word
and doctrine 1. Tim. 5.17.
. The rich man's fruit, to be rich in distributing and communicating 1. Tim.
6.18.
. The subjects fruit, to yield obedience to Principalities and Powers Titus 3.1.
. The servants fruit, to be subject to their Masters, and please them in all
things Titus 2.9.
. And in a word, every particular man's fruit wherein he is called, therein to
walk and abide before God 1. Cor. 7.20.
. And as the fig tree cannot bring forth Olives, nor the vine figs Iam 3.12.
: so neither ought one of these trees planted in the courts of the Lords house,
bring forth the fruit that is peculiar to another, but still every one
according to his kind. Simcon and Leui brought not forth fructum suum, their
fruit, when they slew Hamor and Sechem that had abused their sister as a whore
Genesis 34.26.
For vengeance is Gods Deuteronomy. 32.35.
, and this power to execute vengeance he has delegated to the Gods of the
earth, tying private men's hands therefrom. Corah, Duthan, and Abiram with their
company, brought not forth their fruit, when being not of the seed of Aaron,
they would come near to offer incense before the Lord Number. 16.40.
Vzzah not his fruit when he put his hand to the Ark of God, and held it 2.
Sam. 6.6.
, which was the Levites charge, and near to which no stranger might come Number.
18.4.
. Vzziah the King not his fruit when he went into the Temple to burn incense
upon the Altar of incense, which pertained to the Priests that were consecrated
to offer incense 2. Chr. 26.17 18.
. The base bramble not his fruit, when he would be anointed King over the
trees. Judges 9.15.
For he by whom Kings do reign Frou. 8.15.
never set such trees on the Throne. Servants, not their fruit, when they ride
on horseback, and cause Princes to walk as servants on the ground Eccles.
10.6.
. The vagabond Jews, not their fruit, when they took in hand to adjure the
evil spirits by Jesus whom Paul Preached Acts 9.13.
, for that Jesus who only could command the unclean spirits, had never said
unto them, cast out devils Math. 10.8.
Priute spirits, not their fruit, when they would reform Temples, throw out
Idols, and put down either real or supposed abominations: For their fruit
is, to keep themselves from Idols 1. Ioh. 5.21.
, not to lay hands on Idols; to beware of bowing to Baal 1. King. 19.18.
, not to meddle with breaking of Baal in pieces; to refuse to fall down before
a Nebuchadnezzars Images Dan. 3.6.
, but not to throw it down. Our reformed Sisters, not their fruit, when they
climb into Moses Chair, and will be Doctors of the Law; For Saint Paul has
long since inhibited, suspended such excess of zeal: I permit not a woman to
teach, nor to usurp authority over the man, but to be in silence. 1. Tim. 2.12.


But to leave this enumeration of particulars, In quibus non tam copia quam
modus quaerendus est, wherein I must not so much seek for store as keep
measure. From this evidence here brought in against these Trees, that they want
good fruit, arises another case in Divinity, whereby we may be resolved,
that it is not enough to be harmless in forbearing of evil, but we must
also be fruitful in doing of good: And that our righteousness must not only
be privative, in ceasing to do evil Esaias. 1.16.
, but also positive, in learning to do well: Abhor that which is evil,
cleave to that which is good Romans 12.9.
. The curse cleaves unto the Fig Tree, not because it had Figs (such as
Jeremy saw) very naughty, which could not be eaten, they were so evil Ier.
24.2.
, but for want of good Figs Mar. 21.19.
. And Jobs letters of commendation that he carries, as it were, from God to
men, run in this tenor, that he was not only harmless in eschewing
evil, but also upright in working of good Job. 1.1.
. And all the Sheep in Christ's Fold must not only be innocent in doing none
evil, but also fruitful in bringing forth thousands and ten thousands in the
Courts of his Gares. They that have learned Christ, are taught by his saving
grace, not only to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, but also to live
soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world Titus 2.11.
: Not only to cast away the works of darkness, but also to put on them the
armor of light Romans 13.12.
. Yea even that Pharisie, whose praise was of men, not of God; whose outside
only had a fair show, his inside being full of filthiness, and whose
justifying himself before men, made him abominable in the sight of God; Luke
16.15.
sounds the Trumpet of his own praise, not only for omission of evil, God
I thank thee, that I am not as other men are, extortioners, unjust,
adulterrers, but also for the operation of good, I fast twice in the week, I
give tithes of all that I possess Luke 18.11.12
, whose righteousness, if we exceed not in righteousness, we cannot enter
into the Kingdom of God Math. 5.20.
. Let the oppressor then, not only, not withold the pledge, nor spoil by
violence; but also give his bread to the hungry, and cover the naked with a
garment; Ezekiel. 18.16.
; yea, with Zacheus, restore fourfold to him that he has wronged, either by
feigned cauillation, or by horrible extortion Luke 19.8.
: and of the rest give Alms, yea sanctify an half, In pios vsus, to good
uses, that the whole may be clean unto him Luke 11.41.
. Let the swearer not only utter no blasphemy, but also bless God with that
tongue wherewith he has blasphemed him: The adulterer not only abstain from
fornication, but also possess his vessel in holiness and honor 1 Thessalonians.
4.3.4
. The Usurer, not only loose the bands of wickedness, and take off the heavy
burdens Esaias 58.6.7.
; but also break his bread to the hungry, bring the poor, that are cast out,
to his house, and cover the naked, when he sees him. The liar, not only cast
off lying, but also speak the truth unto his neighbor Epes. 4.25.
The Thief, not only not steal any more, but also labor, working with his
hands the thing that is good, that he may have to give to him that needs
Ephesians. 4.28.
. And in a word, let the wicked not only forsake his wicked ways Esaias 55.7.
, but also turn into the ways of righteousness. Otherwise, if (like to that
conceit which Atheists have of God) we will neither do good nor evil Zeph.
1.12.
, our doom shall not be so easy as to be thrown into that feyned Limbus,
either of the Fathers that dyed before Christ, or of infants that die
unbaptized, where we shall neither enjoy good nor evil Bell. lib. 2. de
purgator. cap. 6.
: But as in the omitting of good it is impossible not to commit evil, so for
our both omission of good, and commission of evil, we shall be shut out of
heaven, where is all good, and thrown into hell where is all evil.

Again, if these Trees that bring not forth good fruit be here threatened
with the fire, what shall become of those Trees, whose fruit like the Vines of
Sodom and Gomorrah, is as bitter as gall Deuteronomy. 32.32.
; yea upon every branch of which, there grows nothing but rotten, stinking,
and unsavory fruit, and whereof all the members are servants to uncleanness
and to iniquity, to commit iniquity Romans 6.19.
; whose hearts within them imagine mischief Psalm. 58.2.
, whose hands without them execute cruelty upon the earth, and whose right
hands are full of bribes Psalm. 26.10.
, whose feet run to evil and make have to shed blood Pro. 1.10.
; whose cares are vncircumscised Act. 7.51.
; whose eyes are full of all adultery, and cannot cease to sin 2. Pet. 2.14.
; Whose throats are open sepulchers, whose tongues are used to deceit, under
whose lips is the poison of Aspes, whose mouths are full of cursing and
bitterness Romans 3.13.14
? Yea out of whose nosthriles (so full has Satan filled every member with
iniquity) comes out smoke, as out of a boiling pot or caldron, like to that
Leuiathan Job 41.11.
, and all whose days are consumed not only like smoke Psalm. 102.3.
, but even in smoke and fumes. And if the rich Glutton lie in the torments of
hell, whose pride of apparel was but in purple and fine linen Luke 16.19.
, what rivers of burning brimstone shall be kindled against them, who with
Lucullus have ducent as vestes purpureas Plutarch. in vita Luculli.
, two hundred purple garments, and with Nero have new every day, and throw away
the old Sueton. in vita Neronis.
: and with the Princes children are clothed in strange apparel Zeph. 1.8.
, being so variable in their fashions, that as it is grown to a byword of
Poland, by reason of the toleration of men of every sect and religion there,
that if any one have lost his religion, he may find it there or no where: so it
may of them, that if any nation have lost their fashion, they may find it
amongst them or not at all Sir Edwin Sands his Relations of Religions.
? If he who fared only (...) (as says the original) neatly and delicatly
every day, what they who rise up early to follow gluttony and drunkenness, and
continue till night, till they be inflamed Esaias 5.11.
, yea till all their Tables be full of filthy vomitting Esaias 28.8.
. If he who clothed his back, and filled his belly with his own: what they
whose backs are clothed with the spoils of others, and their bellies filled
with the bread of deceit and rapine? If he who would not vouchsafe his crummes
to hungry Lazarus, what they who eat up the poor as bread Psalm. 14.4.
? Hinc magnopere colligendum, etc. (says Gregory on these words) we may hence
sufficiently gather, with what punishment he shall be punished which takes
away another man's goods, if he be cast into the damnation of hell, which gives
not his own. And si in ignem mittitur (as S. Austen speaks in the case of
the damned Aug. de verbis Domini sermon. 20
, etc. If he must be cast into the fire that has preyed upon another man's? If
he burn not given his own goods, whither shall he be sent that has preyed
upon another man's? If he burn with the Devil that has not clothed the
naked, where think thou shall he burn that has spoiled him? And if they
must go captive with the first, that are not sorry for the affliction of
Joseph Amos 6.6.7.
, shall not they be bound hand and foot, and cast into utter darkness Mat.
22.13.
, that have caused the affliction of Joseph? If folly be laid to his charge
that went but about to lay up the fruits of his own grounds Luke 12.20.
, shall not bitter things be written against them that enter into the fields
of the Fatherless, and devour the houses of Widows? Si stultus est qui
recondit sua Aug. de verbis Domini sermon. 19
, vos inuenite nomen eius, qui rapit aliena. If he be a fool which hoordeth up
his own, find ye out a name for him that takes away another man's.

An application of the Text to the present solemnity of the fifth day of August.
But all this while I may say unto my self, as the Lepers that met with the
spoils of the the Host of the Syrians, one to another 2. King. 7.9.
, I do not well. This is a day of good tidings, and shall I hold my peace? This
is a day which the Lord has made (as truly may it be said of our present
Sovereigns preservation, as of David's either coronation or exaltation) and
shall we not rejoice and be glad therein Psalm. 118.24.
? Shall I not entreat in my speech of the King, and of his great deliverance?
Let the leprosy of these cleave as inseparably unto me, as ever the leprosy
of Naaman did cleave unto Gehezi 2. King. 5.27.
, if it be not as joyful a thing unto me to speak of the honor of this day,
as it was to those four Lepers to publish in Samaria the the happy tidings of
the Syrians flight Oh that my tongue were as the pen of a ready writer Psalm.
45.1.
, that my voice were lifted up as a trumpet Isai 58.1.
, to found out unto you the great works of our God, and the mercies that he
has showed unto his anointed. And that the words of my mouth may be as words
spoken in due season, the matter that I will utter shall be built upon the
foundation of this present Text. For I may be bold to say unto you, that even
this day has this Scripture been fulfilled in our ears, which have heard of,
and in our eyes, which have seen, certain trees that budded forth (for that
they brought it not to maturitie, it was the Lords doing) corrupt, rotten,
abominable fruit (quis potest verbis aequare dolorem?) cut down with the Axe
of divine indignation, and thrown into the fire, even into the fire of hell.
What these trees were, what their fruit, and how hewne down, audite and
obstupescite, behold, and in beholding wonder with great marvel. These Trees
then (which, as time the mother of truth, has manifested, had many spreading
branches Restalrigge with his servant Boux. and Sprotte their accessory, with
other aid, mentioned in Restalrigges letter to the Farle of Gowry. See Sprottes
arraignment.
) were not the Thistles of Lebanon, exalting themselves against the Cedar 2.
King. 14 9.
; nor yet the Brambles of the wood, desiring to be anointed Kings Judges 9.15.
, (although Thistles and Brambles, for their pricking and piercing) for then it
had been easy to have trodden down such Thistles, a fire would quickly have
come out of the Cedar, and have consumed such Brambles: But they were a couple
of the Oaks of Bashan, (so the Prophet calls the mighty men of the Land Esaias
2.13.
) a pair of brethren; a Simeon and Leui, brethren in evil Genesis 49.5.
; Ioah and Abishai sons of Zeruiah, that thought to have been too hard for
our David 2. Sam. 3.39.
: Neither were they Trees of the Forest, open enemies, against whom there
might have been, either defense, or hiding Psalm. 55.12.
strangers for Nation or Religion, as Egyptians to Hebrews, who held it
abomination to eat bread one with another Genesis 43.32.
; as Jews to Samaritans, who meddle not one with another John 4.9.
, (which yet should not have touched Gods Anointed Psalm. 105.12.13.14.
; for was not the Amalekites blood upon him for touching of Saul the Lords
Anointed, though he were a stranger and no Subject 2. Sam. 1.16.
) But even Trees of the Garden, men of the same lip and speech, that were in
subjection under this Cedar, owing him a service in the Lord, with their goods,
body, yea the sacrifice of their dearest blood, men worshipping the same God
with him after the same manner, to whom there was one Lord, one faith, one
Baptism with him Ephesians. 4.5.
, who professed as Ruth to Naomi, thy God shall be my God Ruth. 1.16.
; and who went together into the house of the same God, as companions in the
same Religion Psalm. 55.14.
; yea Trees so clad in the leaves of an outward seeming zeal, that even this
very day, the elder of them kept an Ahabs fast, when Naboth must die 1. King.
21.12.
and with Absalom pretended a vow, when he would rebel 2. Sam. 15.8.
, came and stood before God in his House Alexander would have his Majesty
arrive there, whilst the Earl his brother was at Sermon. See Gowries
conspiracy.
, vouchsafing an care to the Gospel of peace, which has brought and taught
all peace, when war and blood was in his heart; when he purposed to have
mingled his sacrifice with the blood of his Sovereign, as Pilate did the
Galileans blood with their sacrifices Luke 13.1.
: so dangerous, so pernicious is the devil, when he is clothed in white,
when he comes in the shape of an Angel of light 2. Cor. 11.14.
. These were the Trees, Now for the ill friute that only blossomed, budded
forth out of them (for the most High blasted it that it could not come to
maturity, as that of Rechab and Baana, who smote King Ishbosheth on his bed and
slew him 2. Sam. 4.7.
, it was the fruit of sedition, of rebellion, which is as the sin of
witchcraft 1. Sam. 13.52
, of lifting up their hands with Absalom against the Father of their Country;
yea of laying violent bloodthirsty hands upon him, who was to them and is to
us, the light of our Israel 2. Sam. 21.17.
, and the breath of our Nosthrils Lam. 4.20.
, whom they should have feared to have laid hands on 2. Sam. 1.14.
, as being their Master the Lords anointed 1. Sam. 24.7. and 26.9.
, yea as being a righteous person (as David aggrauateth the sin of Rechab and
Baana, for slaying a righteous person 2. Sam. 4.11
) one cuius virtutes nullo vitiorum confinio laeduntur, as Pliny faid of
Traian, whose virtues are impaired with no neighbor vices, who never was an
Ahab, to spoil any Naboth of his Vineyard 1. King. 21.16.
, nor a Manasses, to defile the streets of his Cities with innocent blood 2.
King. 21.16
, (so far is he from that, that he has pardoned many railing Shemeis,
bloody Ioabs, and rebellions Absoloms, and would even with good Theodosius,
etiam mortuos in vitam reuocare, wish them alive that are dead) nor an Herod,
to take away another wife Math. 14.4.
: One, to whom the Church of God does even owe it self, not only for being
nursed up with the milk of his Breasts, but also for the service that he has
done to Sion in publishing Apologies in her defense, and showing himself to be
a defender of the faith, not only in a Complementall Title, but also in
actual performance. One, whom the Commonwealth has found as a
Nebuchadnezzars Tree Dan. 4.9.
, a King reigning in righteousness, and being an hiding place from the wind,
a cover from the tempest, as Rivers of water in a dry place, as the shadow of a
great Rock in a weary land Esaias 32.2.
: And one, of whom all his Subjects do for his walking in and out before them,
Eadem secreto quae palam loqui Seneca.
, speak none otherwise in secret, then openly. This was their naughty
detestable fruit; Now for the cropping of it in the bud, for the hewing down
of such corrupt Trees, well spoke even wicked Iesabell; Had Zimri peace when
he slew his Master 2. King. 9.31
: Had these men peace, when they sought, attempted to have slain their Master
the Lords Anointed, and had so far gone on in their wickedness, that they
had brought him as a bird into the snare of the Fowler; and had dealt with
their Sovereign, as the evil servant with his fellow, laid hands on him, and
taken him by the throat Math. 18.28.
? No, but even when there was but a step between his soul and death, the Lord
stirred up the spirit of some of those mighty men, whom this our David had Sir
John Ramsey, Sir Thomas Ers^ins, Sir Hugh Heries, and one Wilson a servant.
, whose hands claue unto the sword, and unto whom the Lord gave great victories
that day 2. Sam. 23.9.10.
, so that they did beat them as small as the dust, and tread them flat as the
clay of the street Psalm. 18.42.
.

And as they thought to have done not only to their brother, but also to their
master, so were they retaliated, so was it done to them, life for life, blood
for blood Deuteronomy. 19.21.
, (blessed are they for rewarding them as they would have served the Lords
anointed) although in this case there was great disproportion, they seeking
his life who was worth ten thousand of the vulgar 2. Sam. 18.3.
: yea and they found there was no enchantment against Jacob, no divination
against Israel Number. 23.23.
, Gowries enchanted characters, wherein he did trust, could not keep his body
from the sword, nor his life from destruction See Gowries corspiracie.
. And for their casting into fire, even into the fire that never goes out
Mark. 9.43.
, although we must be sparing in judging any who have a master of their own
to stand or fall to Romans 14.4.
, although Mayor sit dei benignitas (as says S. Austine) quam omnium hominum
iniquitas, the goodness of God be greater then the wickedness of all the men
in the world, so that a man may be received to mercy inter pontem and fontem,
between the bridge and the brook: Yet if rebellion threw Adam out of
Paradise, cast the Angels down out of heaven into hell 2. Pet. 2.4.
, how shall these rebels, these traitors ever escape the condemnation of hell,
and be saved in the day of the Lord? Nay, if Judas, in whom there was a kind
of remorse, (for the Holy Ghost says of him (...) Mat. 27.3.
He Was sorry that ever he had done the deed) and who took the deepest revenge
of himself that could be, (for he went and hanged himself) be yet gone into
his own place Acts 1.25.
, even hell prepared of old for him, whither are they gone, who with Corah,
Dathan, and Abiram died in their trespass Number. 16.33.
, were never pricked in heart, but stood in defense of the deed, died in
defense of it, and breathed out their last breath with sorrow that they had not
the wit Alas I had not the weight of it, said Alexander. See Gowries
conspiracy.
, to have imbrued their hands in Majesty's sacred blood, but even in infernum
inferius into the nethermost hell? And so ever let his enemies perish, let the
enemies of our Lord the King, and all that rise to do him harm, be as those
two brethren, but upon himself let his crown flourish, and let the Lord speak
of his house for a great while 2. Sam. 7.19.
, that there may never want a man of his posterity to sit upon the throne of
great Britain so long as the Sun and Moon endures. And for our selves let
us praise the name of our God with a song, and magnify him with thanksgiving
Psalm. 69.30
, who gives so great deliverance unto his King, and shows mercy unto his
anointed, and to his seed for evermore Psalm. 18.50
. Yea let us cry with Ahimaaz, blessed be the Lord which has shut up the men
that lift up their hands against my Lord the King 2. Sam. 18.28.
blessed and thrice blessed be the name of the Lord, that reserved him in
meliora tempera, for better times, that he might set him on the throne of our
Israel, and make him king to do equity and righteousness 2. King. 10.9.
. And let the King himself rejoice in the Lords strength, even rejoice greatly
in his salvation Psalm. 21.1.
, and praise his God which gave him not as a prey unto their teeeh, but even
then when there was but a step between his soul and death, sent from heaven,
and saved him from thereproach of them that would have swallowed him up Psam.
57.3.
, redeemed his life from the very brinkes of the grave, and crowned him with
mercy and compassion Psalm. 103.4.
. So that God which hitherto has saved him from the Lion and the Bear, will
hereafter also (for so he may with David, ex antecedentibus colligere
consequentia, from the bypast experiments of Gods providence toward him,
gather what will follow hereafter) rescue him from those uncircumcised
Philistims that at any time rise up against him 1. Sam. 17.36
, and which has crowned him here on earth with a corruptible crown, will crown
him hereafter with a crown incorruptible, and give him a kingdom that cannot
be shaken, reserved in Christ Jesus, to whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost
be glory for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

