(...)

OF THE CONTROVERSY
Discussed throughout this works.
WHat is in the (...) in the (...) year of (...) there is given (...), power
and (...), as by any (...) has (...) may lavvfully be (...) did assign,
(...) great Seal of England, (...)diction whatsoever, which ^^ any manner
^pirituall, (...) Authority, or Jurisdiction can, or may lavvfully be used, to
correct and (...) errors, heresies, schisms, abuses etc.

The question is
Whether this authority and spiritual (...) to the ancient laws of England in
former times, (...) were a Statute not introductory (...) law, (...) only of
an old: so as if the said Act had never (...) made, yet the (...) that
authority, and might have given it to others, as (...) holds the affirmative
part, and the Catholic (...)

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL SIR EDWARD COOK KNIGHT, His Majesty's Attorney
general:
SIR, I had no sooner taken a sight of your last Book, entitled: The fifth
Part of Reports (which was some number of months after the publication
thereof in England) but there entered with the reading, a certain appetite of
answering the same, and this upon different motives, as well in regard of
your person and place, ability and other circumstances depending thereon; as
also of the subject and argument it self, which you handled, and manner held
in handling thereof, to ^he greatest prejudice, vvrong, and disgrace of
Catholics, and Catholic religion that you could devise.

And first in your person and place, I considered your faculty and profession
of the common laws of our Realm, your long standing, and special preferment
therein, your experience, and judgment gathered thereby, your estimation and
credit in the Commonwealth, and your authority, honor, and riches ensuing
thereupon; all which drevv me to the greater consideration of your Book, but
principally your said profession of our Common temporal Municipall laws,
which science above all other, A strange attempt to impugn Catholic
religion by Catholic Princes laws in England.
next to Divinity it self, does confirm, and convince unto the understanding
of an Englishman, the truth of the Catholic Roman religion. For so much as
from our very first Christian Kings and Queens, which must needs be the
origin, and beginning of all Christian common laws in England, unto the
reign of King Henry the eight, for the space of more then nine hundred years,
all our Princes and people being of one, and the self same Catholic Roman
religion, their laws must needs be presumed to have been conform to their
sense and judgment in that behalf, and our lawyers to the laws: so as now
to see an English temporal lawyer to come forth, and impugn the said
Catholic religion, by the antiquity of his Common-lavves, throughout the
times and reigns of the said Kings, in favor of Protestants, Lutheranes,
Caluinistes, or other professors not known in those days, is as great a
nouelty and vvonder, as to see a Philosopher brought up in Aristotle's schole,
to impugn Aristotle by Aristotle's learning, in favor of Petrus Ramus, or any
other such new adversary, or lately borne Antagonist: Or as to behold an
ancient Physician, trained up in Galens tents, to fight against Galen and
Galenistes, out of their own bul-vvarkes, or fortresses, yea and this in aid
of Paracelsians, or any other fresh crew of Alchimian doctors whatsoever.

3. This first consideration then, of your person, place, and profession, did
inuyte me strongly to come, and see what you said in this behalf, but no
less did the argument or subject of your book, together with your manner of
treating the same, of which two points I shall speak severally; for that
they have several ponderations, and all in my opinion both important, rare,
and singular. For what more important matter can be thought of among
Christians, The importance of M. Attorneys Plea.
then to treat of Spiritual Power, and Ecclesiastical Authority, being the
kings bench of Christ on earth, the table of his scepter, the tribunal of his
dominion and jurisdiction, whereof depends the whole direction of souls,
the remission of our sins, the efficacy of his Sacraments, the lavvfulnes of
all priesthood and ministry, the government of the whole Church, and finally
the vigor, fruit, and effect of all Christian religion. This is the importance
of your argument M. Attorney, and consider I pray you, whether it stands us
not much in hand, to be attentive what you say, and how substantially you
plead in this matter.

4. And as for the other two circumstances of rarenes, and singularity, where
may they more be seen, then in this so weighty a case, containing the whole
power of the son of God, both in heaven, and earth, for so much as belongs
to remission of sins and government of his earthly inheritance, which is
here handled and ouer-ruled by a temporal lawyer, and by him given to a
temporal Lady and Queen; and this not only by force of a temporal Statute,
made in Parlame^t to that effect, the first year of her reign, whereby
Ecclesiastical Supremacy was ascribed unto her, The singularity of M.
Attorneyes paradox.
but by the very vigor of her temporal crown it self, without any such
Statute, and by virtue of the ancient pretended Common-lavves of our Realm,
which Common-lavves being made, received, introduced, and established by
Catholic Kings and Queens, as has been said, makes the matter so strange
and rare, the vvonder and admiration so great, as never paradox, perhaps in the
world, seemed more rare and singular in the eyes of Philosophers, then this in
the judgment of learned Deuines. And who then would not be allured with
this singular nouelty to search somvvhat after the depth of so new devised a
mystery?

5. After this ensues, as considerable, your method, and manner of handling
this subject, which to me seems nothing vulgar, and consequently (...) to
you and (...) particularit^es (...) cero; Ci^. Tuscul q. 3.
That yo^ (...)uersies, and (...) forth. All that (...) gr^^e rep^^^^^ (...)
your side, (...) use your (...) the truth for (...) modesty, and (...)

7. All th^^^ ^hin (...) encourage (...) reuievv o^ (...) hope to my (...)
modesty, and (...) so much comm(...)ued and inten^^^ (...) clear face (...) in
your (...) M. Attorney challenged of his promise.
you will do (...) cile cedes. (...) your self ^^ the (...) animo dig^^^^^
(...)se sua spo^te, (...) in deed to confess^^ (...) and fortitude but (...)ner
goes great (...) souls, neuer-dying (...) ^e accounted our highest interest,
for that the ^uestion now in hand betvveene you and me, ^o^cerneth the same
most nearly, as in the sequent ^reface will more largely appear.

^. Now only I am to say and promise also on my ^ehalfe, that I mean to
proceed in the prosecu^ion of this work, according to your foresaid
^rescriptions of truth, temperance, modesty, and vr^anity, and this both in
center, The Author promises all modesty in this answer.
and circumference, ^s near as I can, and if necessity at any time, or upon
any occasion, shall enforce me to be more earnest, it shall be rather in the
matter it self, then against the man, I mean your self, whose person and
place, I shall alvvaies have in dew regard, though I may not omit to tell you,
that in some parts of your book (especially toward the end thereof) you
wax so vvarme in your accusations against Catholics, and Catholic
religion, (which your progenitors and ancestors did so highly reverence,
honor, and esteem) as the indignity thereof, and the leuity, and open untruth
of the cauillations, and calumniations themselves (for so in deed they are to
be accounted rather then grave accusations) did enkyndle in me some
extraordinary heat, for their reiection, and depulsion, as you vvil see in the
places themselves, but especially in the last chapter of my expostulations
against you.

9. Out of which I must here again repeat one thing briefly, which there I
have more at large declared, and more earnestly urged, to wit the obligation
you have both in honor and conscience, according to the rules of all true
Christian divinity, to inform rightly his Majesty in certain points,
vvherin your self being at that time deceived, misinformed also his highness, at
the first presentation of your Book unto him, if my information thereof be
true. And for that the point it self is of very great consequence, M. Attorney
bound in conscience and honor to inform a new his Majesty.
and that the misconceat or vvrong impression of his Majesty, ma^e be to the
great prejudice of many of his dutiful subjects, I am the more earnest to
urge this obligation upon you, especially for that I understand, that since
the edition of your book, you have in a certain public Act, solemn
assembly, and most honorable auditorie, repeated again, and avouched the said
injurious assertion, concerning Catholics, that their Recusancy began upon
disloyalty, by occasion of the excommunication of Q. Elizabeth by Pope Pius
Quintus upon the eleventh year of her reign, and for that cause, and not
before, nor upon any other motive.

10. Which injurious charge, though it were sufficiently refuted there in
presence, by the M. Garnet.
prisoner at the bar, to the satisfaction of al indifferent people, that
might easily descrie your passion ^^erin; yet have I shevved the same more at
length ^^ my said last Chapter of this book, which I ^ould vvish you had
read, before so confidentlie ^ou had repeated the same charge again in the
^^id assembly, auouching upon your fidelity, and ^^ervpon challe^ging any
Recusant whatsoever, ^^at noe Catholic, or other refused to repair to our
service, until the said eleventh year of the Queens reign: but I have
shevved out of pu^licke testimonies that you ar deceived therein, and ^^at both
many Catholics, and Puritanes were ^pen Recusants before that year, and
neither of ^^em upon that cause which you suggest: and so you ^^e how far
your fidelity, which you pavvne ^or the matter may hereby come in question.

^^. I could further put you in mind, of many ^ther ouerlashing speeches,
tending to the hurt and damage, yea blood and death also, of diverse ^sed by
you in that great assembly, M. Attorneyes ouerlashing in speech.
if I thought ^ou would take it friendly, and help your self ^^ereby to the
right examen of your conscience ^etvvene God and you, when you are alone, as
^atholicke doctrine teaches men to do, espe^^ally of injurious words
against their brethren, ^herof our Savior Christ in S. Mathewes ghospel
^ronou^ceth so severe a sentence, as he appoints ^oth judgment, counsel,
Math. 5.
and hell fire for punishment of the same; and adds further, Math. 12
that no idle word shall pass from us, whereof we shall not give account in
the day of judgment: and if not idle words, how much less slanderous,
calumnious, and infamatory? whereof you used store against many innocent men
that day, especially against Fa: Garnet, and his own Order of Jesuits,
vvherof some I may not pretermit in this place.

12. You said at the very first entrance unto your speech in that place, that
you would speak of nothing but of the late most horrible treason, which for
distinctio^s sake you would call the Jesuits treason. For if it be just (say
you) that every thing be called by the name of the Author, then seeing the
Jesuits have been the Authors of this treason, you would not do them the
injury, to take from them any thing which is theirs, or to miscall any
thing which appertains properly to them, especially seeing in every crime:
plus peccat auctor quam actor; the author is more culpable and blame-vvorthie
then the actor, as is apparent by the example (say you) of Adam, Eve, and the
Serpent, where the Serpent for that it was the first author of that attempt,
The Diuel^s sins in ^^pting Adam.
committed three sins, Eua that was tempted, two sins, and Adam that was the
chiefest actor, but one sin. This was your eloquence at that time, and I
doubt not but that the learned prisoner standing at the bar, whom you
otherwise so highly commended for this talents, if other cir^umstances had
given him leave, could have smi^ed at your exact enumeratio^ of the devils
sins, who yet, for that it is not read, that he did eat ^nie of the apple
with Adam and Eve, it is like you would be much troubled to find out his
three ^eueral sins in that matter, if you were put unto ^he proof, and you
know what our common ^aying is: That it is a shame to belly the Devil.

13. But to leave this point to be discussed betvveene you, I must needs say,
that you offer the Jesuits an apparent injury, in making this last ^reason so
proper and peculiar to them, as that you will needs have it called the
Jesuits treason, M. Garnetts case.
and they to be the principal Authors; whereas notvvithstanding, when all
came to all, no other thing (I vveene) was proved against them, but that the
prisoner there present, had received only a simple notice of that treason, by
such a means as he could not utter, and reveal again by the laws of
Catholic doctrine, that is to say, in Confession, and this but a very fevv
days before the discovery, but yet never gave any consent, help,
hearkening, approbation, or cooperation to the same; but contrari-vvise sought
to dissuade, dehorte, and hinder the designment by all the means he could.

14. And is this sufficient M. Attorney, to lay the denomination of this foul
fact, upon the whole order of Jesuits? that one of them, or two at the most
knevv thereof by such a way, as probably they could not avoid, How things
heard in confession may not be uttered by Catholic doctrine.
or prevent the knowledge, not foreseeing what he penitent would confess,
and once having heard it in that manner, remained bound by the inviolable seal
of that Sacrament not to utter the same, but in such manner as the confitent
should allow of, though never so great temporal damage were imminent for
the concealment. And this is the sacred band of a Catholic priestly
conscience, much like to that of Angels, who though they know many great
hurtes or dangers to hang over kingdoms, States, Common wealths, or
particular men, and be desirous out of their love to mankind to prevent the
same; yet are they not free to reveal what they know thereof in regard of
any future good or hurt whatsoever, but only where they are permitted, and
licenced in particular: and yet ar they not justly to be accounted accessarie
to the evils that fall out, and much less authors of the same for their
silence, or not revealing, as in this case of the Jesuits you labor to infer.

15. But in truth Sir it seems that you attended more to the art of Oratory,
then to the coherence of Truth in that your speech, for that presently after
your former words you added these for the beginning of your declamatio^. In
this discourse I will speak (say you) of no other circumstances but of
treason, A partition not afterward performed.
and of no other treasons, but the Jesuits trea^ons, and of no other Jesuits
treasons, but such as shall par^iculerly concern this prisoner. VVherin
notvvith^ta^ding very soon after contradicting your self, you brought in a
long discourse of the antiquity, and inuisibilitie of your Church; as also of
Equi^ocation, and many other things, which are no ^ircumstances of treason.
You handled also of ^he Northern Earls, Excommunication of the Queeene, and
diverse other such things as hap^ened before the Jesuits came into England, and
^onsequentlie could be no Jesuits treasons. And when you come to treat of the
prisoner himself, and to prove him a traitor, you begin with ^ Statute set
forth in the 23. year of the late Queens reign, which made all Jesuits, and
other Pristes traitors, that came into England, or remained in the same, and
consequently concerned not the prisoner in such special manner, as you would
seem to promise: or if it did, yet many other things you bring in and handle,
as that of Lopus the Jew, Williams, York, Squier, Colen, partly Protestants,
and partli^ Catholics, who whatsoever their causes were (vvherof somvvhat
shall be spoken after) yet touched they nothing at all that prisoner, who yet
never dealt with them, nor ever was accused concerning them. Whereupon is
inferred, that no one of your threefold members before mentioned was
performed by you: to wit, that you would speak of no other circumstances, but
of treason, and of no other treasons, but of Jesuits treasons, and of no other
Jesuits treasons, but such as should particulerly concern the prisoner at the
bar.

16. But this defect I suppose that all your auditorie did not observe, by
reason of the multitude of other tumultuary matters, drawn in by you against
the said prisoner, but yet your Rhetoric in amplifying one point, about the
first law alleged against the coming in of Priests and Iesuitts, was so
markeable, as no man I think, was so dull, as did not observe it, and bear
it away. To wit, that whereas the said law did forbid all Priests, under
pain of death and treason, not to come into England, or execute any part of
their priestlie function within the Realm, as to preach, teach, offer
sacrifice, hear Confessions, absolve from sins, reconcile to God, and to the
union of his Catholic Church, dissuade from sects and heresies, and other
like offices; you in commendation of that law, protested to prove it, to be
the most myldest law, the sweetest law, the law most full of mercy and pity,
that ever was enacted by any Prince so injuriously provoked. And you added in
the heat of your eloquence, that if you proved ^ot this, then let the world
say: M. Garnet an honest man by M. Attorneyes warrant.
That Garnet is an honest man. Which was a vvarra^t to all the hearers, up
hold him for such; for so much as no man was there so simple, but savv it
impossible for you to ^roue that assertion, and consequently that in all their
hearings you canonized his honesty.

^^. For how did you go about to prove ( M. Attor^^y) that this law was so
myld, so full of pity, and lenity? ^or sooth, for that you say, the meaning
was by kee^ing Priests of, and expelling those that were within, M. Attorneyes
wit in making a bloody law to be a sweet law.
to ^^are their blood, though if they retired not to spill it. ^magine that
then if in Queen Maryes days (for ^xample) such a law had been made against
Prote^tant-Ministers that came from Geneua and other ^laces of Germany, would
you ( M. Attorney) have ^eemed that law a gentle law, a sweet and myld law, a
^aw full of mercy, pity and cleme^cy? I presume you dare ^ot say it. But let
us use an other example of much ^ore moment. If in the Apostles time, such a
law ^ad been made by any King or Emperor of con^rarie religion to them, that
if any of the said Apostles or Priests (for so they were) should enter unto
their dominions to preach a contrary do^trine to the religion there received
and establis^ed, and to exercise any of their Apostolical or Priestlie
functions, it should be treason and pain of death: could this be called a myld
law? a sweet law? a law full of pity and compassion? a law made for not
spilling their blood? or would, or could the Apostles, or their followers
have obeyed this law? or did they obey the Governors of the Jews
(otherwise their lavvfull Superiors, when they commanded them to preach no
more in the name of Christ, or to disperse Christian doctrine, which they
called seditious, or to reconcile any to Christian religion, which they held
for treason? or did they fly, though Princes and Emperors afterward by
public Edicts did command them out of their dominions? or is there not
another blood to be respected, called by the Prophet, the blood of the soul,
whereof the Pastor shall be guilty if he fly for fear, or forsake his
flock in time of danger and persecution? is not all this so? or can it be
denied? or have not English Priests the same obligation of conscience to help
their Country, and countrymen in spiritual necessities, as had the Apostles
and Apostolic men to strangers, for whose help yet they were content to
offer their lives and incur any danger whatsoever? Wherefore M. Attorney
to speak a truth, if you deal with men of understanding, it is but fond; and
if of Christian courage, it is but trifling eloquence, all that in this point
you have used about the myldnes, sweetness, mercy, and compassion of this
cruel, and bloody law of Queen Elizabeth. Children may be delighted, and
de^uded with such bables, but wise men do laugh at them.

18. Concerning the other heads of doctrine, which pleased you to handle in
this arraigneme^t ^t the bar, with no small ostentation of vvor^es, as being
in your own Center, namely: Of the Antiquity of your Church, Equivocation,
and some ^ther such points, as they were not much ad rem, in that assembly
and business, so could your friends ^aue wished, that either you had omitted
them al^ogeather, or handled them more substantiallie: or as for Equivocation,
About Equivocation.
or mental reservation of a ^^ne sense in a doubtful speech, it seems
plainly ^^at you understand not the Question, nor the mea^ing, which both
ancient and modern learned ^en have, in holding that true, and necessary
^octrine; and no marvel, for that it has not been (I ^^inke) your educatio^
to be troubled much with scrupulositie of words, to wit, what sense may
^e held therein without sin, and what not, the ^^amen of which matters
belong to more tender ^ timorous consciences then Kings Attorneyes co^^onlie
are presumed to have, who must speak ^o the purpose, howsoever it be to the
truth. And ^^ it well appeared in that arraignment, vvherof ^e now treat, but
intend to proceed no further ^^erein, for that the prisoner himself ansvvered
this point sufficiently at the bar, as also to the Lords before in the
tovver, and a more large discourse may be made thereof hereafter, if need
shall require.

19. As for your other article, about the Antiquity and continuance of your
Church, a man may easily see, that you sought an occasion to bring it in, by
making an objection on the behalf of Iesuitts against the same, About the
antiquity and universality of the Protestant Church.
and thereby to show your skill in answering. They hold their religion (say
you) to be the old Religion, where ours is the new, confyned to England; where
on the contrary side their Religion is universal, and embraced in the greatest
part of this Christian world. And thus for the maintenance of their rotten
Religion, do they seek to disgrace and blemish our Gospel. But (good sir)
if your gospel be that of the four Evangelists now received, we pretend
that it is as much our gospel as yours, and more also, for that you received
it from us, and upon our Churches credit, and for that you call rotten
Religion, if ever it were Religion, then never can it rott, except you put no
difference between apples and religion. But let us hear how you will
answer this objection in your own words, as they came set down unto me
from your own mouth.

20. But to this (say you) I will answer, that if our Gospel be as ancient
as Luther, it is more ancient then the Iesuitts are (though not I trow then
Iesuitts religion) albeit it be not contained in these narrow limitts of place,
A strange discourse of M Attorney about his Church.
nor bands of time, which they feignedly imagine, having been ever since the
time of Christ, and his Apostles. For we do not deny but that Rome was the
Mother Church, and had thirty two virginal martyrs of her Popes a-row, and so
continued til in succeeding ages it brought in a mass of errors, and idle
ceremonies. But you will ask perhaps, where our Church lurked before Luthers
coming, for some hundreds of years? But I say it makes no great matter where
it was, so that I ^m certain it was, for as a wedge of gold, if it be
dissol^ed, and mixed with a mass of brass, tin, and other metalls does not
loose his nature, but remains gold still although we cannot determine in what
part of the mass it is contained, but the touchstone will find it out: so
though our Church has ever been since Christ's time in the world, yet being
mixed, and covered with innoua^ons, and errors, we cannot tell in what part
it was. And I dare say, that it is now more extended then theirs ^: for we
have Many alls.
all England, all Scotland, all Germany, al Denmark, a great part of France,
al Poland, and some part of Italy. These are your words, if the Relators
have been exact in setting them down, as they say they have been. And then is
there ^o marvel, though you impugn so much the doctrine of scrupulous
reservation of true sense in ambiguous speeches, whereas so manifestly you
ouer-lash in all those periods, which here you have laid before us.

21. But to the matter it self, about the Antiquity Continuance, Succession,
Visibility, and Assurance of the Church, whereas you grant, that the Roman
Church, was the true Mother Church from the beginning, and had two and thirty
virginal martyrs (for so you call them) for her Popes one after the other,
without interposition of any one Bishop, that was not martyr, for more then
the space of three hundred years; you grant us so much in this assertion, if
it be well considered, as it will be hard for you to take it from us again
afterward in your sequent negation, which I shall show you briefly by two
conuincing Arguments, the one Theological, the other Moral.

A theological argumet for the Roman Church.
22. The first is, that if the Church of Rome was the true Mother Church of
Christ, and Christian religion for so great a space as you assign; then no
doubt were all the predictions, and promises of Prophets for the greatness,
eminency, honor, certeyntie, and flourishing perpetuity of the said Christian
Church fulfilled in her: Christ's peculier promises in like manner, Mar. vltimo
I^an. 14. and 10. Mat. 10.
that he would be with her to the end of the world, that the holy ghost
should lead her into all truth, that hell-gates (which properly signify
errors and heresies) should never prevail against her, that she should be the
pillar, and foundation of truth, and all men bound to obey and believe her, 1
Timo. 3. Mat. 18.
was ^eant also and performed in this Roman-Church for three hundred years
and more, and promised ^^ be performed to the end of the world: vvherof
^^sueth, that either God is not able to perform what he promises (for of his
will there can be no doubt, seeing he has promised) or else it cannot without
impiety be conceived, and much ^^se believed, that this Roman-mother-Church, so
^^anted in the beginning by Christ, and his Apo^^es blood, and so watered for
three hundred years together by the blood of all her Bishops, ^^ spread over
the world, Romans 1.
as S. Paul of his own time testifyeth that her faith and religion was, and
afterward all Ecclesiastical histories within the time prescribed and after,
do declare, that all other Churches commonly, at least-vvise of the
vvest-world, were her daughters by foundation, and our ^reat-Britany among the
rest; it is impossible (I say) to imagine with piety, how this Queen of the
world, how this flourishing Church, how this golden wedge (to use your own
similitude) should so be dissolved and mingled with brass, tin, copper, and
other such contemptible mettalls, which you call Errors, and innouations, as
that her Religion should become rotten, according to your phrase, and her self
in steed of being the true kingdom, inheritance and spouse of Christ, become
his enemy his adversary, an aduovvtresse, and the very power of Satan
himself against him, as you M. Attorney do make her.

23 How, I pray you can this be thought? by what reason or probability may
it be imagined when? how? by what means might this metamorphosis be made?
The very next age after the forsaid Martyr-Popesliued S. Augustine, Epist. 105
contra lit. Petiliani.
who reciting the said Popes, and their Successors unto his daie^ called them
all holy without distinction, and by their lineal succession in the said
Church of Rome did persuade himself to have demonstrated the truth of all
Catholic Religion, as well in Africa where he was, as throughout the
whole world, against all heretics.

24. And after him again lived in the same Sea, as Bishops thereof S. Leo, and
S. Gregory, both of them surnamed Great, in respect of their great sanctity,
great learning, and famous acts: and with them, and after them concurred and
suceeeded in other Christian Churches of the world, as Fathers and Doctors S.
Maximus, S. Prosper, Vincentius Lyrinensis, S. Gregory of Towers, S.
Fulgentius, S. Benedict, and others, all making the same account of the Roman
Church, doctrine, sanctity, and authority thereof, as the former Fathers did.
And how then could come in this transfusion, and transmutation of gold into
lead, which you dream of M. Attorney, and are content to deceive your ^^f and
others, to your eternal peril of perdition (...) this new invention of a
golden wedge, whereof ^^n say that you are a fast friend: but this
apper^^yneth rather to my second argument, to show the moral impossibility
also of this seely fiction.

For let us suppose that there were a wedge ^^ gold so dearly bought and
purchased, The moral argument of impossibility for the universal Church to
fall, or vanish away.
so care^^^lie delivered, and ^o earnestly reco^mended to the possessors as
the Church of Christ was unto his disciples and followers, and that there
were so ^any vvatch-men appointed to look continu^^lie upon this golden
wedge, and so sure a guard allowed them for defense of the same, as Christ
appointed Pastors over his Church, offering them for guard his whole power
and omnipotency ^o defend it; and if this were so, how could this ^^edge,
that from the beginning was pure gold, ^^e imagined to loose her nature, and
pass into other baser mettalls, or be melted, mingled, dissolved, or changed
into the same, without that any ^ne of the foresaid vvatch-men should open his
^outh, resist, or testify this change? Are not ^hese moral impossibilities,
and metaphysicall imaginations only, to delude your selves and others?

^6. Let us compare then briefly these matters together. We read in all
Authors, and see by experience, that in sixteen hundred years sin^ Christ his
Church was founded, and set on foot that in every age the Doctors, Prelates,
and Pastors, Application of this moral argument.
that were vvatch-men of the Church for that time, were so diligent in their
vvatch, as (...) least error or heresy appeared in their days bu^^
presently they cried out, made war against i^ and finally by help and
assistance of their guard and Captain, in the end overcame, and vanguished the
same. Let the examples of Simon Magus^ Philetus, Hymenaeus, Cerinthus, Ebion,
Menander, and other heretics rising up amongst the Apostle be examples for
the first age: Saturninus, Basilide Carpocrates, Cerdon, Valentinus, Marcion,
Apelle^^ and others for the second: Nouatus, Sabellius, Manes, Noetus and their
followers for the third: Arrius, Aerius, Photinus, Iouinian, Donatus,
Apollinaris and their adherents for the fourth: and so in every age unto our
days, wherein no man was spared though he were never so great, no former
meritts respected though never so many, if he uttered any thing against the
common received universal Catholic faith. And so we see that both Origin
and Tertullian most rare learned men were condemned; Osius and Lucifer
Calaritanus two famous Bishops noted; S. Cyprian also one of the oracles of
the Christian world called in question for points of doctrine different from
the universal Church Whereof we do infer most evidently and ^^ainlie,
that if any Fathers in the eusuing ages ^^ uttered any thing in their
speeches, sermons, vvritings, that in any least point had been different from
the said universal Catholic doctrine, it would have been resisted in like
man^^^ and noted in one Country or other, and ^^er would have passed for
Catholic do^^^ne to their posterity, without note or repre^^sion at all.

As for example, to take one for all, for that ^^one all may be judged of. A
most evident demonstration.
If S. Augustine that (...) more then a hundred years after those mar^^^ Popes
of Rome, which you mention, did ^^th preach and write in so many places of
his ^orkes, of Purgatory, of the Sacrifice of the Mass, ^ Justification by
good works, of Prayer for the ^^^d, of the single life of Clergymen, of the
Perfection ^^religious life, of the Preheminencie of the Sea of ^^me, and many
other such articles expreslie ^^posite to that you hold commonly in England,
which he handles so plainly as any of us can ^^e in these our days; if any
of these points ^^d been strange or new doctrine at that time, (...) so much
as suspected of error, heresy, or fal^^^ood, no man of common sense can
imagine, ^ut that they would have been contradicted, or ^oted by some man or
other, so many learned godly men living with him, and after him: b^ this
will never be proved to be so, or that the points, or the like wherein we
differ from (...) Protestans were either in him, or other, noted ^^ condemned
for heresies, and consequently b^^ this argument of moral evidence it is
conuince^ that they were never accounted either errors, (...) heresies, before
the heretical contradictions (...) these later ages sprang up, and that by
such as vve^^ accounted and condemned by the universal Church of Christ for
heretics themselves.

28. And as for the comparison of the true Catholic Church of Christ unto a
wedge of gold so mingled with lead copper and baser mettalls, as it cannot be
known where it is, is a very base and leadden comparison by M. Attorneyes
leave. For if the Church must baptize, the Church must instruct us, the Church
must govern us, and minister us Sacraments, resolve our doubts, and give us
directions to life everlasting, how can men repair unto her that is so hidden
and covered as she can neither be seen, nor found? Nay you say, it makes no
great matter where she is, so you be certain that she be. By which doctrine a
man in England may be as well saved by a Church in Constantinople or in the
Indyes, as in England it self, seeing there is no conversation necessary with
it, no conference, to treaty, no recourse, no dependence of it, no obedience
unto it, nor imports it where ^t be, so I be sure it be in some place,
though I know not where, or in whom. Stange and Chimericall imaginations.
And what does ^his certainty avail me M. Attorney, if I have no ^enefit
from her? These be those monstrous and strange Chimeraes in deed, floating in
vncertaintyes, which you mention in your Preface to the Rea^er, for that these
are euacuations, and exinanitio^s ^f all fruit of Christian doctrine, dravving
all to ^eere fancyes of idle conceits, without effects ^f any substantial
fruit, or spiritual help vvhat^oeuer. For whereas all the ancient Fathers in
all ^^eir works do labor to set forth unto us the ^^finite real benefits,
which we receive by being in the true Catholic Church, as all those before
mentioned, of instruction, government, grace ^y Sacraments, remission of sins,
and the like, and that it is impossible to be saved unless a man ^^e in her,
reverence her, hear and obey her, fear ^^ go out of her, and consequently
have daily and ^ourlie treating with her, and dependence of ^^er, vvvhich
cannot be without certain knovv^^dge where she is, or evident signs how to
know and discern her from all others; you by a contrary new devise, never
heard of I think be^^re, do affirm, that it imports not where your church
was for many ages, and hundreds of years, so ^^at she were at all.

29. And thus much for her inuisibilitie in those ages, but now she is become
visible in our days: Nay you do set her forth with so great an enlargement
of greatness and glorious appearance, as you say she is more extended now then
ours; For that (quoth you) we have all England, all Scotland, all Germany, all
Denmark, all Poland, a great part of France, and some part of Italy. Wherein
your large extension of your Church in this second part of your Relation (if
we could believe you) is no less strange, then was your restriction of her
secrecy and inuisibilitie in the first. For who vvil grant you al England
for Protestants, when they shall see so many provisions made against both
English Catholics, and Puritanes, which later part of men, as well as the
former; that they cannot make one Church with you, shall prese^tlie be shevved
in the Preface of this work.

30. How you have all Germany for youres, there being so many religions, and
the greatest part Catholic, and other different Sects greatly disagreeing
from you, I know not by what figure you can make your Reader to believe that
you speak truth The like I say of Denmark, ^
where al are Lutheranes, and not of your Church, nor will it admit
Caluinistes to dvvell, or die, or be buried amongst them. Of all Poland, it is a
notable hyperbole, for so much as both the King ^^d State profess publicly
the Catholic reli^^on, and the Sectaryes that are in that kingdom ^^e
Trinitarians, Arrians, Anabaptists, more perhaps ^^nuber then Caluinistes. I
marvel you omitted ^^ecia and Noruegia, where, as they are not Catho^^^kes,
so are they not of your religion or Church; (...) nor those of France neither,
though they be ^^luinistes (for as for your some part of Italy, I ^old to be
no part at all, nor was it any thing ^se but a certain ouerflovving of your
speech to ^ake the full sound of a greater number) the Pro^^stants of France (I
say) cannot make one Church ^^ith you; as neither those of Scotland, with the
residue of Holland, Zealand, and other of ^^ose Provinces united of Geneua, as
their Mo^^er-Church: these (I say) being all Puritanes ^^d Precisians, cannot
make any Church with ^ou in that union of faith and doctrine, which ^^e unity
of a Church requires, as by your, and ^^eir own confession, writings,
testimonies, ^^d protestations is extant in the world to be ^^ene.

Wherefore I shall desire the intelligent Rea^^r, to make with me a brief
recollection about ^. Attorneyes doctrine for his Church. First he ^^aunteth,
as you have heard, the Roman Church (...) have been the true Mother Church for
diverse ^ges together, spread over the whole world, dilated throughout all
Provinces, perspicuous eminent, and admirable in flourishing glory by the
greatness and multitude of her children, professing Christ euery-vvhere in union
of faith, doctrine, and Sacraments, as the holy Fathers i^ those ages, and
others ensuing do testify unto us

32. Secondly he will have this glorious Church so to have fallen sick,
pyned and vvithered^ way without groaning, and so to have vanishe^ out of
men's sightes, as she could not be known where she was for many hundred
years together: nay he will have her to be like a wedge o^ gold, so
corrupted and mingled with lead an^ tin, as no man can tell where the gold
lies except he try it with the touchstone, which touch stone in our case,
he says to be the scripture, whereby the Church must by every man be tried
and touched: so as each one that will know this Church, and have benefit from
the same, mus^ touch her first, and see whether she be the Church or no, and
so in-steed of submitting himself unto her, and to be directed by her, he must
first mak^ himself touch-maister and Judge over her.

33. Thirdly M Attorney having shifted of this time of the inuisibility of his
Church in this sort he now in this last age makes her so visible again upon
the sudden, as that she comprehends all the Churches of the aforenamed
King^^mes, of what Sect or profession soever, so that ^^^y differ from the
Catholic, which are some ^^ne or ten Sects at the least, al dissenting
among ^^^mselues, and professing in their vvritings, acts ^^d doings, that
they are not of one religion, nor ^^nsequentlie can be of one Church; and yet
e^^^ie one goes with his touchstone in his hand (...) wit the Bible) as
well as M. Attorney, The different use of the touchstone for finding out the
Church.
and are ^eady to touch him, and his Church, as he them ^^d theirs, but with
different effect and success: (...) he fyndeth by this touchstone (as you have
^^ard) that all they are of his Church, but they ^^d every one of them by the
same touchstone, ^^e find the contrary, and not one of them will ^^unt (I
say not one) of all the whole number of new Sects, that the Church of
England as now stands, is either the true Church of Christ, or ^^eir Church;
and in this I dare join issue with ^ Attorney, out of their own books,
assertions, ^^d protestations.

So as now M. Attorney, that which in the ^^^iptures is so memorable of it
self, so commen^^d by Christ our Savior, The baseness and contemptibility of M.
Attorneyes Church.
so respected by the A^^stles, so testified and defended by the primitive
^artyrs, so magnifyed by the ancient Doctors ^^d Fathers, and by all good
Christians so reue^^nced and dreaded, I mean the glorious name ^f the
Catholic and universal Church, and the benefit to be in her, and of her,
without which no salvation can be hoped for of Christ, but inevitable and
everlasting perdition, by which on the other side, and in which, salvation
only may be attained; all this (I say) is come to be so poor, base, and
contemptible a thing with you, and so uncertain, as you know not where your
Church is, nor greatly care, so that at all she be; and when you name your
Sectary-brethren, and associates therein, they deny you and your alliance, as
you see; and when you assign your touchstone of scriptures, they use the
same against you, and prove thereby youres to be no Church, and each one of
themselves in several to be the only true and Christian Church. And this have
you gained by leaving the Roman, which you grant in old times to have been the
holy Mother Church: see whereunto you are come, and this shall suffice for
this matter.

35. This epistle would grow ouerlong, if I should entertain my self in all
the impertinent speeches, which you had that day (in your glory as it
seems) against Catholics, the least part whereof, did in vvise-mens
sightes, concern the prisoner at the bar, though by your Rhetorical
application, all was drawn upon him by hook or by crook: for that York,
Williams, Colen, Squiar and Lopus were brought in squadron, to muster there
to that effect, vvherof all notvvithstanding, except the last, are defended,
and their conspiracies most evidently proved to have been feygned, M. T. F. in
his Apology an. 1599.
by a learned, worthy, and worshipful gentleman of our Country, dedicated
these years past to the Lords of the late Queens privy Counsel: and
whether they were true or false, yet touched they not Fa: Garnet, who never
had acquaintance or treaty with them.

36. And whereas you say that he came into England, with purpose to prepare
the way, against the great compounded navy that followed in the year 1588. It
is evident that his coming into England, A manifest calu^niation against M.
Garnet.
was two years and a half, at the least, before the said time, when there
was neither notice, nor speech, nor perhapps so much as a thought of that
navy to come: and when afterward it appeared on our seas, it had not so much
as one English Priest or Jesuit in all that multitude of men, which is like it
would have had, if M. Henry Garnet, and M. Robert South-well that came in
together, had been sent to prepare the way for the same. Your combinations
also of books and attemptes, the one allwaies (as you say) accompanying the
other, though you esteemed it perhaps a witty fine devise, and probable to
the unlearned hearers that cannot distinguish of times or things; yet others
that looked into the matter more iudiciouslie, and found neither coherence of
time, or subject, betvveene the book by you named, and the attempts pretended,
laughed in their sleeves, remembering the saying of the Poet: ^rent. ^ An^^i^.
Non sat commode diuisa sunt temporibus tibi Daue haec. I will reapeat your
words of one only comparison, and thereof let the rest be judged: Then
comes forth Squiar (say you) with his plot of treason, but this not alone
neither, but was accompanied with another pernicious book written by Dolman: ^
seely ^uen^^n of ^ookes and trea^ons.
which words importe that Dolmans book did accompany Squiars treason, but
he that shall examine the order of Chronology, shall find in this matter, that
Dolmans book was in print four years (at least) before Squiars treason (if
he committed treason) was ever heard of; nor has the argument of the book
any more affinity at all with Squiars fact, then has a fox with a figg
tree, but only that your floating Chimeraes, intoxicating (to use your own
words) your hearers brains, do make you seem to speak oftentimes
mystically, when in deed you speak miserably.

37. You remember (I think) how the aforesaid gentleman in his book (for
others do not forget it) gave you a friendly reprehension, by the words of
the famous Orator Catulus, or rather of Cicero in his name, Cicero de Oratore.
for a ridiculous fact of yours in weeping, and shedding many tears in
follovving the fiction of Squiars conspiracy at the bar, therebie to vvynne
credit, and show your self admirable at that time to the Earl of Essex, and
others in authority: but now I am to expostulate with you upon this
occasion, for another no less patheticall excess, uttered in pleading against
M. Garnet, wherein not so much your tears did run, as your hairs did stand
and stare, and your ears glovv, to hear blasphemy uttered by him in a
certain letter of his intercepted: Wherein (say you) was contained one of
the most horrible blasphemies that ever I heard proceed from any Atheist, and
makes my hair to stand on end to think of it. So you say.

38. And what was this horrible blasphemy (good Sir) that put your tender,
and religious heart in such a pitiful plight and horror? It follovveth that he
had written with the juice of a lemmo^ to his friends abroad out of the tower,
that he had been often examined, but nothing was produced against him, but yet,
necesse est, vt vnus homo moriatur pro populo. A fond feigned blasphemy.
So you alleged the text, and added presently: See how he assumeth most
blasphemously to himself the words that were spoken of Christ our Savior, but
I hope ere he die, he will repent him of this blasphemy.

39. But (good Sir) did you look upon the place of S. John's gospel, before
you recited the same, and played this pageant in so solemn an essemblie? If
you did, then will you find that these words were spoken by an evil man,
Ioh. 11.
unto an evil sense in his own meaning, to wit by Caiphas, The meaning of
Caiphas in speaking of the death of Christ.
that persuaded first in a Council gathered upon the resuscitation of Lazarus,
to put Christ to death, thereby to content the Romans, who had the whole
Jewish nation in iealosie of their loyalty toward the Emperor, and that
now by putting one to death that was accused (though falsely) to deny
tribute to be paid to Caesar, they should clear their credit with the said
Emperor, and by his only death prevent the destruction of the said Jewish
people by the Roman armies, and therefore he said: Expedit nobis, vt vnus homo
moriatur pro populo, and non totagens pereat. Luc. 13.
It is expedient for us, that one man die for the people, to the end the whole
nation be not destroyed. And therefore he says not necesse est, as you cite
the words, but expedit, to show his political drift therein.

40. And this being Caiphas his crastie and wicked counsel, and his words
in his sense, bearing this meaning, the holy ghost (which as S. Chrysostom
and other holy Fathers do affirm, (...) 4. ^n Ioanne^^.
ostantum, and non scelestum eius cor attigit, moved his tongue and not his
wicked mind, and was in his words, not in his sense) made him vnvvittinglie
to utter a prophecy, and a great high mystery, that except one man (to wit
Christ) should die for the sins of the people, none could be saved. Now then
(Sir) this sentence of Caiphas having two meanings and senses, The meaning of
M. Garnet in using the words of Caiphas.
as you have heard, let us examine which was most probable to be used and
alluded unto by M. Garnet, who gathering by many conjectures, that you, and
some other of his good friends, had a great desire to bring the Iesuitts
within the compass of this late odious treason, or at least-vvise within the
suspicion or hatred thereof, for that the lay-gentlmen partakers of the fact,
were thought to be devoted toward them, and their Order; and seeing that God
vnexpectedlie had delivered him into your hands, he might very well think,
that he at least should pay for the rest, and die also of likeli-hood for
disgracing the rest, and in that sense alluded to the words of Caiphas,
tending to like policy.

41. But now for the second sense, which particularly designed the death of
Christ our Savior, for the redemption of mankind, none I think is so
simple, as would imagine M. Garnet to apply to himself, though in this point
also M. Attorney is to be taught out of true divinity, that diverse places
uttered litterallie of Christ in holy scripture, may secondarily also by
allusion be applied unto men, and this without all horror of blasphemy, or
imputation of Atheism, which are M. Attorneyes passionate accusations in this
place. As for example, where the Prophet vvriteth of him: Isa. 60.
Et cum iniquis reputatus est: he was esteemed with the wicked; which was
meant immediately and principally by the holie-ghost of Christ, and yet by
allusion it may be applied to any of his servants. And that other place;
Psalm. 109.
De torrente in via bibit, propterea exaltauit caput: and infinite other
throughout all the new and old testament, spoken literallie of Christ, and yet
by allusion applied to good men, as the ancient Fathers do testify in their
works, applying to the members oftentimes that which belongs principally
to the head: so as herein M. Attorneyes hairs needed not to stand upon end,
nor trouble themselves or their master; neither was it needful that M.
Attorney should pray for M Garnet to repent himself of this blasphemy (which
was none at all) before he dyed. God grant Sir Edward Cook be in state to
make so clear, and easy an account at his departure from this world, as the
other was, which hardly may be hoped, considering their great difference of
life and functions, except God work a miracle, or that solifidian
justification do enter for smoothing of all, which makes all men equal, and
equally saints.

42. But to dravve to an end, one of your last triumphant speeches touching all
Jesuits was, that they were Doctors of four different doctrines; the one of
dissimulation; Sundry calumniatio^s.
the second of deposing Princes; the third of disposing of Kingdoms; the last
of deterring Princes with fear of excommunications: and of all four you
discoursed with great resolution, and peremptory determination, well assuring
your self, that none in that place should have means to answer you, though
there vvanted not many, who out of their discretions, did note where and
how you might have been ansvvered with no small advantage, as perhaps you may
be hereafter more at large, upon some other occasion.

43. Now only I thought good to put you in mind, that these, and other your
discourses, founded commonly upon divisions, and little concerning the
prisoner, or matter in hand, were noted and borne away, and this among the
rest, was observed; that you were more fertile in setting down divisions,
then fruitful afterward in prosecuting the same; yet in the last part of
this fourfold partition, about terrifying Princes with excommunications, you
flowing now with full sea toward the end of your accusations, men say,
that you insulted greatly over Catholic religion, and brought forth a book
of your own compyling (to wit your Reports) pretending to show out of the
same, that our English Kings in former ages, were nothing afrighted with the
idle menaces of Papal excommunications; that one was condemned of high treason
for bringing in a Bull against a subject without the Kings license: that the
King was never reputed subject to any Pope in Ecclesiastical matters, but that
himself was absolute: how the Popes Legates were often times stayed at Calls,
until the King had given them license to come into England, M. Attorney in his
vaunting vain.
with many other such points, partly true, partly false, partly
impertinent to the matter, partly proving de facto, and not de iure, partly
misalleadged, partly misco^stred, but altogether misapplyed to the disgrace of
that religion, for whose service al your laws in those times and ages were
instituted, and honored: and yet you protested in that vaunting vain of
yours; that you were exceeding glad to see your modern religion in this point,
so agreeable to the ancient laws of the Realm, which laws (quoth you) if they
were exactly looked into, would restrain our Romish Catholics for growing
any further, as you hoped they would be.

44. But Sir, how little ground of truth or substance all this has in it, and
how contrary effects the dew consideration of our English laws may, and
must needs work in the minds of al discreet men, toward the settling of a
stable judgment and firm persuasion in favor of Catholic religion, All
ancient English laws in favor of Catholic religion.
in that the said laws proceeded al from Catholic Princes (though alvvaies
I except such as do frame their judgment to the current of the present time,
and do subordinate their understanding to their wealth and honors) this (I
say) shall afterward be so evidently declared in this Answer of ours
throughout the whole book, as no man I suppose with any indiffere^cy, or
probability of reason, shall be able to deny or co^tradict the same.

45. And in particular the Reader shall see refuted the several members by you
here set down, as namely, how great and hearty reverence and respect our
Catholic Kings did ever bear unto Ecclesiastical Censures, not only of the
Pope as supreme, but of their own home-Bishopps also: and that no King in all
that rank for almost a thousand years, did ever hold himself absolute in
Ecclesiastical power, until King Henry the eight; and that it cannot be
true, The particulers brought in by M. Attorney refuted.
which here and elsvvhere you so much bragg of, and bring forth upon every
occasion (as the archer that had but one arrow in his quiver that would fly)
how that in the reign of King Edward the first, it was treason by the
common law for a subject to bring in and publish a Bull from Rome against a
subject, without the Kings license; which is your first objection in that
Kings life, and ansvvered by me after in the eleventh Chapter of this book.

46. And as for the objection of the Popes Legates or Nuntij detained sometimes
by the Kings order at Calls, from entering the Realm, until some difference
between Popes and Kings were accorded, though it be so vveake a thing as
deserves no answer, yet have I ansvvered the same upon diverse occasions, and
shevved amongst other, that by this argument, if it were good, King Philip and
Queen Mary might be said not to have acknowledged the Pope his spiritual
authority, for that they detained in Calls the messenger of Paulus Quartus,
Paulus Quartus C^^dinall ^oole.
when he brought the Cardinals hat, and Legacy of England for Friar Peto in
prejudice of Cardinal Poole, which the said Princes would not suffer to be
put in execution, until they had better informed the said Pope, upon which
information and their intercession the controversy ceased.

47. Much other matter I do willingly pretermit ( M. Attorney) which you
uttered that day in contempt, and derogation of that religion, vvherby all
your progenitors, yea all the Peers and Princes of our Realm in precedent
ages thought themselves both happy and honorable: and if they had imagined
that in future times an Attorney would have stepped up to rail, and revile that
religion, calling it rotten and contemptible, and them all blind and deceived
people; what an opinion (think you) would they have fore-stallen of you? and
how base and odious a conceit would they have preconceaued against you?
especially if they had seen you (as others did that stood near) so carried
away with heretical humor, as to wander, and range, and run from your
matter in your pleading, to seek occasion of insolent tauntes against them in
such sort, as your whole subject by your own confession, being of treason,
the most of your inuectiue speech was against their religion.

48. For which cause I thought my self bound to say somevvhat in this
behalf, principally to that which is proper to the argument of your late
book of Reports, here by me ansvvered. For as for the other part concerning
treason, and the whole Act of the late arraignement about the same, I have of
purpose forborne to speak, as well for that it is a matter not appertayning
to my faculty; The arraignment of M. Garnet.
as also in regard of the dew respect I bear both unto the laws, and
customs of my country, my Princes person, and the honor of that great
assembly: in all which I have nothing to complain of (all having passed by
order) but only of your extrauagant excursions, to confou^d religion and
treason together: nay to make religion the fountain of treason, and thereby to
inuolue within the hatred of treason, all those that by conscience are tied to
that religion, be they never so innocent; than which there can be no greater
iniquity imagined.

49. With M. Garnets particular cause I will not meddle in this place, he is
gone to his last Judge, before whom also you, and others that have had part
in the handling thereof, must finally appear, to see confirmed or reuersed
whatsoever has passed in that affair. As for that which you and others so
often urged against him, to confess, that he was lavvfullie condemned by the
temporal law of the land, imports little for the impayring of his innocence
before almighty God. You know who said in a far vveightier cause,
concerning the trial of our Savior himself: Joan. 19.
We have a law, and according to this law, he ought to die, for that he has
made himself the son of God; The law misapplyed against Christ our Savior
Le^^t 24
and their error was not so much in the object, as in the subject: for as for
the law it self, we find it in Leuiticus that blasphemy (whereof the
highest degree was for a man to make himself God) was punishable by death;
but the subject, to wit, the person of our Savior was mistaken, they
esteeming him to be only man, whereas they ought to have known, that he
was God and man, as well in respect of the predictions of all the Prophets,
foretelling that Christ should be the son of God; as also of his stupendous
actions, that proved him to be truly Christ: so as though the law alleged
by the Jews against blasphemy and blasphemers, were true and in force of it
self; yet held it not in the person of Christ, but was in the highest degree
injurious, as all Christian-men must confess.

50. Let us see then how from this case of the master, some light may be
drawn to that of his scholar and servant. You, M. Attorney, pleaded against
him, as the Jews Attorneyes did against our Savior and said; Nos legem
habemus etc. we have a law, that whosoever reuealeth not treason by such a
space, shall be accessarie of treason, and die as a traitor: nor do we deny the
law, or complain thereof; but yet if this case were pleaded in a forrayne
Catholic country, where the prisoner also should have his Attorney
allowed him, he would say on the other side: The privilege of secrecy to be
observed in Confession.
Nos legem habemus superiorem, Ecclesiasticam, Diuino iure intentam, qua
sacerdos neque mori, neque puniri debet, ob proditionem sub confessionis
figillo cognitam, and non reuelatam: we have a contrary law, to wit, an
Ecclesiastical and spiritual law, higher then your temporal, and a law
founded on the law of God, whereby it is ordained, that a Priest shall neither
die, nor be punished, nor be accounted traitor, for treason discovered unto him
under the seal of confession, and not by him revealed; nay he shall be punished,
and that most grieuouslie, if he do for any cause reveal the same.

51. And this plea of the prisoners Attorney (which by Catholic doctrine and
schools is easily proved in all the parts or members here set down)
would presently have been admitted in all Catholic Countries and Courts,
and in ours also, vvhiles our Kings and people were of that religion, and your
temporal law would have been put to silence. Oh, you will say, but now it
is otherwise, and we care not for your Ecclesiastical law. Whereunto I
answer: Gods truth always and every where one. Psalm. 116.
Veritas autem Domini manet in aeternum. If this law be founded in Gods truth
and was left unto his Church by Christ himself the fountain of al truth, for
the honor and defense of his Sacrament of Confession, as al ancient divinity
does affirm; then must it for ever endure immutable: and now and then, here
and there, this country and that country, this and that alteration of
religion, or Princes temporal laws, must not alter the case or substance of
truth, either in Gods sight, or wise men's eyes; and so M. Garnets case, dying
for this truth in England now, is no worse, then if he had dyed a thousand
years gone for the same, either in England or any other Cath. country, that
is to say, he dying only for the bare co^cealing of that, which by Gods, and
the Churches Ecclesiastical laws he could not disclose, and giving no consent
or cooperation to the treason it self, should have been accounted rather a
martyr then a traitor, and no less now.

52. Which being so, consider I beseech you M. Attorney, what a different
reckoning there is like to be betvveene you two, at your next meeting in
judgment: you know somvvhat by experience how dreadful a thing the form of
public judgment is, but not so much as some others, for that hitherto it
has been still your lot to be actor and not reus, predominant both in words
and power, and consequently terrible and nothing terrifyed: but when the time
and case shall come, vvherof the holie-ghost foretells us: Sap. 5.
Stabunt iusti in magna constantia, aduersus eos qui se angustiauerunt. Just
men that were ouerborne in this world shall stand up boldly with great
constancy, against those that ouerbare them: and when the saying of our
Savior shall be fulfilled: Math. 7.
that every man shall receive, and be treated according to the measure whereby he
has measured to others; then vvil be the day of woe: neither do I say this, M
Attorney, to condemn your office, I know that in all times, under all Princes
your office of Fiscal-Aduocate or Attorney has been in use for the Princes
service and good also of the Commonwealth if it be well and moderately
used; but yet I cannot but friendly put you in mind of that, which holy S.
Gregory does admonish, where he handles the cause and reasons why S. Peter,
S. Andrew, S. James, and S. John returned to their art of fishing, Gregor.
(...) in (...) ^ngel. ^oan.
after the Resurrection of our Savior, but not S. Matthew to his
Custom-hovvse; to wit, that certain arts and occupations there are more
dangerous far, the one then the other, as more subject and incident to
greater sins.

53. In which kind truly, Sir, if any office in the world be dangerous in
deed, yours may be accounted in the highest degree, that has every day almost
his finger in blood, or in particular men's afflictions, and ouerthrovves. And
albeit the act of justice be laudable and necessary; The dangerous state of
^^r En^lish ^^torneyes office.
yet the Actor oftentimes runs no small danger of his soul through the
passions of anger, hatred, revenge, vain-glorie, couetuousnes, appetite of
honor, and the like affections of mind, which pervert justice, and vvherof
most strait account must afterward be rendered for the same.

54. And if in any part of the world this Fiscall office and authority be full
of peril, much more in England, where his power is much more absolute then
in any other country whatsoever. For that in other Realms the defendant for
his life, has other Attorneyes, and learned counsel allowed him, as has
been said; but in England all is committed in a certain sort to the Kings
Attorney only, where the matter any way concerns the Princes interest: and
albeit he be sworn to be equal, and indifferent between the Prince and his
subject, especially in matters of life and death; yet do all men see, how
that is observed, the Attorney thinking it his greatest honor to overthrow
any man that comes in his way by all manner of opprobrious proceeding, by
scoffs, iestes, exprobrations, urging of odious circumstances, tales,
inventions, co^parisons, rhetorical exaggerations, and the like; which seemed
in old time so uncivil, and inhumane against men in misery, that diverse States
and Co^mon-vvealthes, though Pagan and Gentile, did forbid them to be used by
the Actor, notvvithstanding the law allowed them a defender and twice as
much time for the defense, as the Actor had for his accusation.

55. All which points of aid and comfort do fail in our English trial of
life and death, and one more besides of singular importance, which is, that
the Jury commonly is of unlearned men, and thereby easily, either deceived by
crafty and colored arguments of the accuser (not having time to examine, or
judgment to discern them) or led by false affections, or terrifyed by force
of authority, which in grave learned Judges were not so much to be feared.
And by this may M. Attorney acknowledge with me some part of the danger of his
office, who by one only word, look, sign, or action, may oftentimes
prejudice the blood of the prisoners, that stand at the bar, and much more
by so many exaggerations, reproaches, and insolences used against them. Who
remembers not that late hateful exprobration to the unfortunate Earl, to
whom it was objected at the bar: that he thought to be the first King
Robert, and now he was like to be the last Earl of that name and house. And
the other yet more bitter unto his Secretary Cuff, that you would give him at
length such a cuff, as should make his head to reele against the gallovves:
these things to men in misery, are great encreasme^tes no doubt of their
calamityes, and so much the more, by how much they tasted of insolency, never
allowed of by wise and moderate men, toward those that be in affliction or
distress. And thus will I end this my first speech with you, referring my
self for the rest to that which ensues throughout this whole Answer.

Cath. Divine.
A TABLE Of the particular Contents, Chapters, and Paragraphes of this ensuing
Treatise.
THe Preface to the Reader, containing the weight and importance of this our
Controversy; whereby may be resolved whatsoever is in question between men of
different Religions at this day in England. The Answer to the Preface of Sir
Edward Cook the Kings Attorney General; about Error, Ignorance, and Truth,
and way to try the same. Chap. I. page 1. The state of the Question in
general, concerning Spiritual and Temporal Power and Jurisdiction: their
origin, and subordination one to the other. And how they stand together in a
Christian Commonwealth. Chap. II. page 23. The second part of this Chapter,
about the subordination of these two Powers, the one to the other; and
different greatness of them both.. 1. page 32. The third Part of this Chapter,
showing how these two Powers and Jurisdictions may stand well together in
agreement, peace and union.. 2. page 40. The particular state of the
controversy with M. Attorney concerning the late Queens Ecclesiastical Power
by the ancient laws of England; deduced out of the case of one Robert Caudery
Clerk. Chap. III. page 47. The second part of this Chapter, with a more clear
explication of the Question.. 1. page 57. VVheras in the case proposed, there
may be two kinds of Proofs, the one De Iure, the other De Facto; M. Attorney
is showed to have failed in them both: And that we do evidently demonstrate in
the one, and in the other. And first in that De Iure. Chap. IIII. page 63. The
second Part of this Chapter, wherein is showed, that Queen Elizabeth in regard
of her sex, could not have supreme Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction.. 1. page 74.
Of the second sort of Proofs named De Facto, whereto M. Attorney betaketh
himself, alleging certain instances therein: And first out of the Kings
before the Conquest. Chap. V. page 92. How the Attorney not being able to prove
his affirmative Proposition, of English Kings Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical
before the Conquest: we do ex abundanti prove the negative by ten several
sorts of most evident demonstrations, that there was no such thing in that
time, but the quite contrary. Chap. VI. page 103. Conquest. 1. page 105. Kings,
but from Prelates.. 2. page 108. Kings and people to the Sea of Rome.. 3. page
113. etc. were granted by the Pope.. 4. page 124.. 5. page 131. Conquest, and
what laws they were like to make.. 6. page 139. England with other Princes,
and Catholic people abroad.. 7. pag^ 141. Rome, the Kingdom of England.. 8.
page 142. England to Rome for devotion to that Sea.. 9. page 147. England for
pre-eminence of spiritual Power. With a Conclusion upon the former
demonstrations.. 10. page 151. Conquest unto our times. And first of the
Conqueror himself, whether he took spiritual Jurisdiction upon him, or no,
by virtue of his Crown and temporal authority. Chap. VII. page 155. William
the Conqueror, to have acknowledged ever the authority of the Sea
Apostolic.. 1. page 160. William the Conqueror his laws in favor of the
Church and Churchmen.. 2. page 165. M. Attorney taken out of the reign of K.
William the Conqueror, refuted.. 3. page 169. William Rufus, and Henry the
first, that were the Conquerours sons; and of K. Stephen his nephew: And how
they agreed with the said Conqueror in our Question of Spiritual Jurisdiction
acknowledged by them to be in others, and not in themselves. Chap. VIII. page
176. Of King Henry the first, who was the third King after the Conquest.. 1.
page 180. Of the reign of King Stephen, the fourth King after the Conquest..
2. page 189. Of the Reign of K. Henry the second great Grandchild to the
Conqueror, and the fifth King after the Conquest, with his two sons K.
Richard and K. John; and their comformityes in this Controversy. Chap. IX. page
196. Of the Reign of K. Richard the first, the sixth King after the Conquest..
2. page 208. Of the Reign of K. John, who was the seventh King after the
Conquest.. 3. page 222. Of King Henry the third, that was the eight King after
the Conquest; and the first that left Statutes written. And what M. Attorney
alleges out of him for his purpose. Chap. X. page 232. Two Instances
alleged out of the reign of K. Henry the third by M. Attorney and of what
weight they be.. 1. page 245. Of the lives and reigns of K. Edward the first
and second, Father and Son. And what Arguments M. Attorney draws from them,
toward the proving of his purpose. Chap. XI. page 256. Of K. Edward the first,
who was the nynth King after the Conquest.. 1. page 257. Of King Edward the
second, which was the tenth King after the Conquest.. 2. page 278. Of King
Edward the third, and K. Richard the second his nephew and successor: And
what Instances or Arguments M. Attorney draws from their two reigns,
which continued betvveene them for seauenty years. Chap. XII. page 285. M.
Attorneyes objections out of the reign of K. Edward the third aforesaid.. 1.
page 292. Of the reign of K. Richard the second, the tvveluth King after the
Conquest.. 2. page 308. Of the three King Henryes of the house of Lancaster,
the fourth, fifth and sixth, who reigned for the space of threescore years.
And what is observed out of their reigns concerning our Controversy with M.
Attorney. Chap. XIII. page 312. Instances alleged by M. Attorney, out of the
reign of K. Henry the fourth, who was the thirteenth King after the
Conquest.. 1. page 315. Out of the reign of K. Henry the fifth, that was the
fourteenth King after the Conquest.. 2. page 322. K. Henry the sixth the
fifteenth King after the Conquest.. ^. page 326. Edward the fourth, Edward the
fifth, Richard the third, and Henry the seventh: And how confo^me they were
unto their Ancestors in this point of Controversy we have in hand. Chap.
XIIII. page 328. K. Edward the fourth, the sixteenth King after the Conquest..
1. page 331. K. Henry the seventh, who was the nynteenth King after the
Conquest.. 2. page 337. K. Henry the eight, and of his three Children, King
Edward Que^ne Mary and Queen Elizabeth: And how the first innouati^n thout
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction was made, and continued in their days. Ch^p. XV.
page 341. M. Attorney out of the Reign of K. Henry the eight. 2. page 351.
Edward the six, the one and tvventith King after the Conquest.. 3. page 357.
Mary, the two and tvventith Princess after the Conquest.. 4. page 359.
Elizabeth, who was the three and tvventith Princess after the Conquest, and
last of K. Henryes race.. 5. page 361. M. Attorney, about evil preceding, and
iniuryes offered to diverse sorts of men in this his book of Reports,
especially to ^ards the end thereof: Together with the Conclusion of the whole
work. Chap. XVI. page 368. Recusant-Catholickes of England, grieu^^sly injured
by M. Attorney.. 1. page 369.. 2. page 376.. 3. page 384.
THE PREFACE TO THE READER. Concerning the weight, and importance of this our
Controversy; whereby may be resolved whatsoever is in question between men of
different Religions at this day in England.
ALBEIT the moment, and vtility of that we have in hand (discreet Reader) will
best be seen by perusal of the Treatise it self, and by thy judicious
consideration thereof: yet for thy better encouragement to this labor, and to
stir thee up to more attention herin; I have thought good, to touch some
points in general, at this first entrance, remitting the larger, and more
particular declaration thereof, unto that which is to ensue throughout the whole
discussion of the Controversy.

2. First then, to pretermit the whole view of our English Christian
antiquities, which here by fit, and necessary occasion is searched and laid
open, together with the lives, and laws, government, and Religion of all our
Christian Kings, both before and after the Conquest; The important weight of
this controversy.
This one point seems to me to be of most moment for the present; that whereas
under the reign of Queen Elizabeth (about whom principally is our question)
three sorts of Religion did stand up, and strive together (and do unto this
day) the Protestant, the Puritan, and the Catholic: their whole contention
seems to me to ly within the limits of this Controversy, moved by M.
Attorney about Q. Elizabeth's spiritual jurisdiction, and that out of the same,
the whole may easily be determined, as presently you shall see.

3. For whereas there are two principal parts of any Religion whatsoever; the
one, doctrine or precepts, for instruction; the other, power and authority,
for direction, and government; Two parts of Religion.
albeit the first be the ground, and foundation whereon to buyld, and work; yet
is the second that which gives life, and motion to the former; and must try
and judge the same: for that in every religion or society of men, professing
one, and the self same faith, those that are the chief members thereof, and
presumed to ^aue principal power and spiritual jurisdiction therein, are they
that must authorize, discern and justify the doctrine thereof to their
followers. For as S. Augustine said in ^is days to the Manichies that pressed
him to believe certain things out of the scripture in their sense: That he
would not believe the gospel it self to be the ghospel, except the authority
of the Chuch did move him thereunto: August. contra epist. Fu^^^menti. cap. 5.
that is to say, the chief governors of the Church, and such as had chief
spiritual authority therein from time to time: of whom Christ meant when he
said: Math. 18
Dic Ecclesiae, denounce it to the Church; and again. If he hear not the
Church, let him be to thee, as a heathen, or publican: so in like manner must
we say in these days, nor have we any other reasonable answer, why we believe
any one book of the new, or old Testament to be scripture (that is to say to
contain doctrine of the holy ghost, and not of man) but for that the
governors of our Church, which have spiritual power among us, do tell us so.

4. Yea, all Sectaries likewise, of what sort or sect soever, are forced to
follow the same rule; for that whatsoever they admit to be scripture, they
admit the same either upon the credit of our Church, and governors thereof, or
of their own, or of both; but especially indeed of their own, which is seen
by their doubting or rejecting of any parcels of scripture, doubted of, or
rejected by their own leaders, though admitted by ours. As for example, the
book of wisdom, See Magdebar. Genesis 2. li. 2. cap. 3. col. 41. 42. and
deinceps. Magde. ibid. Col. 53. 54. and deinceps.
of Toby, Judith, Ecclesiasticus, the first and second of Machabees, and other
parcels of the old Testament, rejected by Luther, and Lutherans; as also the
Epistle of S. James, the second and third of S. Peter, the Apocalips, and other
pieces of the new testament, which our Church admits simply. But Calvin, and
Caluinists, though expreslie they reject them not with the Lutherans, as
appears by our English Church, where they are left to stand in the Bible: See
Calvin l. 1. instit. cap. 11. and lib. 3. cap. 5.
yet is their admission so could, and conditional, as it may rather seem a
courteous dimission, then any way a faithful, or confident acceptance.

5. And the same may be said of any other particular point or points of
doctrine of any Religion, or sect whatsoever; the leaders, or governors that
are presumed to have chief authority, must judge and discern, distinguish,
expound, and determine, what is to be believed or not; what is to be held and
taught, or rejected; and finally, what is to be done and practiced; what
Sacraments, what Ceremonies, what Customs are to be used, how, where, and
when; And last of all this second part of power and authority, rule, order,
government, and jurisdiction is that, which gives light, direction, and life to
every religion. And for so much as there can be but one true, that can bring
us to salvation; True power and spiritual jurisdiction the only ^^e ^uide to
salvation.
it follows, that whersoeuer this true spiritual power, and jurisdiction is
found, there is the only true religion also, which a man may securely follow:
yea, that under pain of eternal damnation, he is bound to follow, for that
this authority will lead him to life everlasting, Christ having given the
keys of heaven thereunto, that is to say, Math. ^^. and 18.
full power to shut and open heaven by binding or loosing sins upon earth;
and that in such sort (says S. Chrysostom and all other ancient Fathers with
him) that the Court or Tribunal of heaven stands expecting, what is done
upon earth to confirm the same there: Chrysostom. lib. 3. de ^acer. and (...) 4.
and 5. de verb^s (...).
for so much, as ever since this admirable, universal, and dreadful
authority was given (say they) by Christ upon earth, D Hier. epist. ad
unto the Governors of his Church, nothing is done in that Court of heaven,
but by presidence, and predetermination of that which is done, Heliodor. de
vita^ solitaria. Hilar. Can. 16 in Mat. and alij alibi.
or sentenced in the Tribunal of the militant Church on earth; that is to say,
he that is here absolved, is absolved there, and he that is here condemned, is
condemned there, without remission. VVherof also the said Fathers do infer,
that to find out this authority, and to follow the same, and the direction
thereof, is the only sure way to salvation. And that the erring herin, either
wilfully or of ignorance, is the most certain path to damnation; for that by
no other ordinary means (since this Commission given, and authority instituted
among Christians) is any grace, favor, pardon, light, direction, or other
spiritual benefit to be received from God, but by way of this subordination of
spiritual authority appointed in his Church.

6. Wherefore al hope of life depe^ding, as you see, of this sovereign point
so as whosoever erreth in this, erreth in all; each man will easily consider how
much it imports him to look well thereunto, and to stand attentive and
vigilant in the discussion thereof; to see whence, and how, and by what means,
and from what sourge and fountain, this authority and spiritual Jurisdiction
is derived: Three grounds of spiritual authority supposed by three different
religions.
In which point the three professors of different religions before mentioned,
do principally differ, and distinguish themselves. The Protestant deducing
this spiritual power from the temporal Prince (or rather Princess under Q.
Elizabeth.) The Sea Cartwright, Iunius, and other of then alleged in the
Survey of pretended discipline. Cap. 16. Romans 13. Math. 24
Puritan from the people. The Catholic from the succession of Bishops from
Christ's time down wards, and especially from the highest, which they hold to
be S. Peter, and his successors. And which part soever of these three hitteth
right, goes happily and securely, and the other two do run to everlasting
perdition.

7. The Protestant for his ground, has those sayings of scripture: That all
orderly authority is from God. That we must give to Caesar, that which is
Cesars: That Princes are to be honored, and obeyed for God; 1. pet. 2.
and Kings, as highest in dignity, and that he which resists lavvfull
authority, resists Gods ordination: and thereby incurreth damnation etc. The
foundation of the Protestants assertion.
All which the other two parties granting, do affirm to have been understood
of temporal authority only, for governing the Commonwealth; and not of
spiritual for governing of souls, which they prove: for that all Kings, and
Princes were then infidels, and especially the Roman Emperors of whom this was
principally meant, who by these places of scriptures, cannot be said to have
received Commission, to govern the Christian Church, which was in their times,
and under their dominions; but only in temporal matters, and Civil affairs.
And that the spiritual power and jurisdiction whereof we talk, was at that
time in another sort of men, to wit in the Apostles and their successors,
which were Bishops, according to the testimony of S. Paul in the Acts of the
Apostles, Acts 20.
speaking unto them, and saying: The holy Ghost has placed you Bishops to
govern his Church which he has purchased with his own blood.

8. The Puritanes, Puritan grou^des. Acts 1.23.
or rigid Caluinists have for their ground, certain elections made by the
people, and recorded, as well in the Acts of the Apostles, as in other
histories of the Primitive Church: as for example when they chose two in the
place of Judas, to wit, Joseph, and Matthias, to be determined by lot which of
them should be. And when afterward they chose S. Stephen, Acts 6.5.
and six others to supply the place of Deacons, and many times afterward in the
primitive Church we read, that the people did choose or name their Bishops. But
to this, the other two parties do answer, that in the first two examples, out
of the Acts of the Apostles, it is evident by the Text, that those elections,
or nominations were permitted to the people, by the Apostles themselves, for
their comfort and encouragement; but that the parties so chosen, had, and
received their authority and spiritual jurisdiction from the Apostles
themselves. And the like is answered for the times ensuing, wherein the Bishops
did oftentimes permit the said electios to the people, for their greater
co^tentment, and consolation in those days of persecution, to choose and
nominate for their Bishop and Pastor the man whom they best liked, who
afterward was invested and consecrated by the said Bishops notwithstanding: and
took his jurisdiction, and spiritual power from them, to whom properly that
power and authority belonged, to ordain, both Bishops, and Priests, as we see
the Apostles themselves did every where, and gave the like authority to
others ordained by them. As we read, that S. Paul having made Titus Bishop of
Creta, gave him order also to ordain: vt co^stituas per civitates presbyteros,
sicut and ego disposui tibi. 1. Tit. 5.
That thou ordain Priests for Cities, as I have appointed thee.

9. The Catholics for their ground have this: That Bishops only, and Priests
were made spiritual gouernous of Christ's Church by Christ himself, and so
continued vader Infidel Emperors for three hundred years together, Grou^des
of the Catholics for spiritual jurisdiction.
until the time of Constantine the great, that was first converted, as
afterward more largely will be showed in due place; and that this authority is
to continue in lawful succession of Bishops, by ordination, and imposition of
hands, until the worlds end. And that neither temporal Prince can have this,
except he be also Priest, and received it by the same ordinary way of
ordination and succession (whereof Q. Elizabeth was not capable) and much less
the common people, except only by permission, to elect and nominate, as has
been said: whereof ensues that if they have not this spiritual authority in
themselves; much less can they give it to others. And thus according to the
Catholics judgment, do fail the grounds, both of the Protestant, and
Puritan in this great affair: and failing in this, do fail in all the rest;
for that of this, depends all, as before has been said.

10. For if in their Religions, there be no true authority spiritual, or
jurisdiction, derived by ordinary means, and succession from Christ; Important
consequences.
then are they awry in all, nor have they any true authority, to preach,
administer Sacraments, absolve, or bind from sins, judge of doctrine,
determine or decree of any spiritual action whatsoever; nor are they within
the compass of Christ's Church, or state of salvation, as by necessary
consequence does ensue; and the like of the Catholics, if they in this point
be amiss

11. And herby we may see the importance now of this controversy, between M.
Attorney and me, as also their shallow understanding (if they speak as they
think) or rather malicious folly (if they do not) who affirm every where in
their books against Catholics, Sir Francis Hastings against the vvardvvord
and M. Sutcliffe in his defense.
that Protestants and Puritanes are but only iarring-brethren, and
reconcilable between themselves, and that their differences are not in
principal points of Religion, but in certain lesser things, and ceremonies.
For that this being indeed, not only so substantial a point of doctrine, as
before you have heard; but containing also the whole second part of Religion
before mentioned (to wit, all that belongs to power, authority, government
and jurisdiction) by which Religion has her life, virtue, force, and efficacy:
It is easily seen, how vain, and false, or rather ridiculous and pernicious
the other assertion is, and if we well enter into the examination of
particulars, we shall easily see the same.

12. For suppose (for examples sake) that the Protestants ground be true, that
all spiritual jurisdiction, force, and efficacy thereof came unto their Church
in Queen Elizabeth's time, by her, and from her, out of the Right of her
Crown; and that the Puritanes ground be false, who pretend the same from the
people, I mean from their own Congregations, Classes, and Presbyteries (for
no other gave it them) what follows of all this? No doubt, it must needs
follow, by manifest consequence of truth, that the Puritanes have no
authority, or spiritual jurisdiction in the Church of God at all, nor are
lawful Pastors, but usurpers, and intruders; Puritan and Protestants grounds
vncompatible.
and that they entered not by the door, as Christ says, but by other means:
that is to say, not by the ordinary door of lawful vocation, ordination,
and succession of Priesthood. Of which door the Apostle S. Paul made such high
account, as having set down that vninersal proposition to the Hebrews: Heb. 5.
2. paralip. 10.
Nec quisquam sumit sibi honorem, sed qui vocatur a Deo, tanquam Aaron. That no
man takes unto him the honor of being a Bishop, or Priest, but he that is
called by God thereunto, as Aaron was in the old law. Psalm. 2.
After this (I say) he passes on to prove, that Christ himself the son of
God, took not this honor of high Priesthood upon him, but by the public
testimony of his said Fathers vocation, set down by the Prophet David, many
hundred years before he was borne. Tu es sacerdos in aeternum secu^dum ordinem
Melchisedech. Psalm. 1
Thou art a Priest for ever, after the order of Melchisedech, and not of Aaron.
And according to this high order of Melchisedech, that was both King and
Priest, and whose sacrifice was not of beasts and birds, as those of Aaron, but
of bread, and wine only, to prefigurate the most pure, and holy sacrifice,
that Christian Priests were to offer afterward to the worlds end, of the body
and blood of Christ, in like forms of bread and wine, as all ancient Cyprian.
l. 2. ep. 3. August. l. 16. de Ciuit. Des. cap. 22. and l. 1. contra aduers.
leg. and Proph. cap. 2. and lib. 2. cont. lit. Petil. c. 37. Chrysostom. hom. 35.
in Genesis Clem.
Fathers do expound it: Of this order (I say) Christ being high Priest, made
all his Apostles Priests, and they others after them, and they others again,
by the ordinary way of ordination, imposition of hands, and succession, which
has endured from their time to ours, and shall from ours, until the day of
judgment.

13. And this ordinary door (so called by Christ our Savior) of entering into
spiritual authority, and jurisdiction over his flock, is of such high
esteem and importance, that as the first general door, Alexa^d. lib. 4.
strom.
whereby a man must enter to be a sheep in the said flock, to wit Baptism, is
a Sacrament, not reiterable, Ambros. l. 4. de Sacram. c. 3. Hierom. in cap. 1.
ad Titum. and alij. Joan. 10.
and so absolutely necessary, as no man can enter by any other way: so
likewise this other particular door of entering into Prelacie, or Pastor-shipp
over Christ's flock, was ordained a Sacrament by our Savior, no less
necessary for distinguishing thieves, robbers, and intruders, from true and
lawful Pastors (to use our Saviors similitude) then the other of Baptism, to
distinguish sheep from wolves, and Christ's flock, from Infidells and others of
the Synagoge of Satan.

14. And now in all this which we have spoken by occasion of the Puritanes
pretense, to enter into spiritual government over Christ's flock, by voice and
choice of their own people, we do not much differ from their Master and
Doctor John Calvin, who confesses that this door or entrance to the Clergy
by lawful vocation and ordination, is so necessary, as if it be not observed,
all would grow to confusion, and no man could know, who has spiritual
jurisdiction over souls, and who has not. Calvin. lib. 4. instit. cap. 19..
31. and 14.. 31.
And further he confesses that albeit be appoint but two general Sacraments
for all sorts of people, Baptism (to wit) and the Lords supper: yet he
grants this Ordination of Church-ministers, to be a true Sacrament also, and
to have promise of grace annexed unto it, as other Sacraments have, but that it
strecheth not so far, as the other two do; but is particular for ministers and
Clergymen only.

15. But then if we press him, how he, and his came in by this door; he and
they have no other shift, but to say, that their first masters and teachers
entered in by this ordinary vocation and ordination of our Bishops (for others
there were none at that time to call; or ordain them) from whom afterward they
disioyned themselves in doctrine, to join with the Apostles. And this is the
leap they make from our age to the Apostles time.

16. But suppose they could say this of their first teachers, that they had
their ordination, and consequently also their vocation and spiritual
jurisdiction from our Bishops; yet afterward when they fell to different
doctrine, and for that cause were cut of by excommunication from them, and
especially now when the said first teachers are dead and gone; they can have
no other assurance of their vocation of ministry, then from the people of
their own sect, in their Presbyteries, as before has been said: which how much
it is, or whether it may be any thing at all, shall Infra cap. 2.
afterward be discussed.

17. Now it shall be sufficient only, for the argument of this Preface,
concerning the weight, and importance of this Controversy we have with M.
Attorney about spiritual jurisdiction, that we consider, and bear in mind the
different origin, from which each party of the foresaid three professors of
Religion, do pretend to derive their right and interest to the said spiritual
jurisdiction, which they exercise. And what side soever erreth therein, erreth
also in the maine mark of their salvation, and does draw both themselves, and
their followers to everlasting perdition. And furthermore that the difference
and contrariety in this point, is much more between Puritanes and Protestants,
then between them both and Catholics: For that they both do grant and
cannot deny, but that the deduction of spiritual jurisdiction in our
Catholic Prelates, The Protestant and Puritan yield more in deed, to the
Catholic then to each other.
has come down line-allie, and successively by ordination, and imposition of
^ands, the one of the other, from the Apostles time, though declined (as they
say) in doctrine. But we, on the contrary side, do infer the surety of our
doctrine, by the certainty of this succession of Priestlie power, and
spiritual jurisdiction. For that whersoeuer this is truly to be found, which
cannot be but in the true Church; there also has Christ assured us, that by
his omnipotent power and presence, the purity, and certainty of doctrine
shall ever in like manner be infallibly conserved.

18. But to the Protestant, the Puritan does not yield thus much by many
degrees, and much less the Protestant to the Puritan. For they do not grant
the one, to the other, that they have true ordination of Priests and ministers
among them, as to us they do: in s^gne whereof, if any Priest of ours do fall
to their side^ they give him no new orders, but think him sufficiently
ordained by us, to minister in their Church, which the Protestant does not
admit in Puritan ministers, The Protestant and Puritan ministers not admitted
the one by the other.
but that they must be ordered again by their Bishops, as having no Orders
before; nor yet the Puritanes with the Protestant-ministers when they turn
unto them, but do appoint, that he renounce his former Orders in their
Congregation, or Presbytery; and by new imposition of hands of the said
Presbiterie he be ordained a new minister in that profession: so as by opinion
and estimation of the Protestant-religion, the Puritane-ministers are mere
laie-men, taking upon them spiritual jurisdiction over souls without any
lawful authority, or commission at al; and consequently have no power to
preach or teach, or administer Sacraments, and much less have they that high,
and excellent judicial authority to bind, or loose sins. What the Puritan
is to the Protestant by this ground of spiritual power.
And that which follows also of this, that they have no Sacraments at all, no
Clergy, no ministry, no sacred or divine thing; but are only a lay
company of men and women, joined together in a certain worldly secular
society, as Fish-mongers, Iron-mongers, Drapes, and other like companies in
London. And the same opinion have they of the Protestants, and of their Church.

19. And by this you may see, how far they differ in substance of religion
(though sometimes for fashion-sake they call themselves Brethren) more indeed
then both of them from us, as before has been said; which proceeds from this
main ground and Principle, to wit, from whence each part draws their
Ecclesiastical Power, and Spiritual Jurisdiction over souls: for that this
being once found out, all the rest is easy and clear, for so much as this
true spiritual authority, can be but in one party, and in one Church only,
which is the true: and wheresoever it is found, there is assurance also of all
truth, Christ having promised us, that this Church, and the true Pastors
thereof shall not deceive us, Mar. vlt. Luc. 10. 1. Tim. 3.
nor be deceived. And therefore that we may boldly, and confidenlie hear
their voice, and do that which they bid us, though otherwise in life, and
manners, they should be as bad as Scribes and Pharisees. Mat. 23.


20. And on the other side where this true authority, and lawful jurisdiction
is not, there we must not believe, though they speak never so fair, for that
we are foretold and fore-taught, Mat. 7.
that they are but wolves in sheeps apparel, false prophets to deceive,
thieves and murderers to kill and destroy, John. 10.
and other such fore-warnings left unto us by Christ and his Apostles. All
which ought to make us vigilant, attent, diligent, and curious to understand
really the truth about Spiritual Jurisdiction, which in the ensuing Treatise
is handled, so far forth, as M. Attorney has given occasion, though nothing so
largely, as the thing it self might be discussed; but yet sufficiently for
every discreet man to see the grounds, and with that modesty also (I hope) as
may justly offend no man. And so I shall now pass on, to join with M.
Attorney more nearly in the maine battle, if first by the way (as it were of
skirmish) we shall answer somewhat in like manner to his Preface, wherein
diverse points are not unworthy of consideration.

THE ANSWER TO THE PREFACE of Sir Edward Cook, THE KINGS ATTORNEY, About
Error, Ignorance, and Truth: and way to try the same. CHAP. I.
BEfore I come to discuss the Preface it self, which I purpose to set down
wholly as it lies in the Author, it shall not be amiss perhaps (Gentle Reader)
to speak a word or two, concerning the Title, whose inscription is. Reports of
diverse Resolutions; and Judgments, given upon great deliberation in matters of
great Importance and Consequence, by the Reverend Judges, and Sages of the law:
together with the Reasons and Causes ^f their Resolutions, and Judgments
published. etc. The Title examined.
By which words of ^reat Deliberation, great Importance, and Consequence,
Reverend Sages, and the like, M. Attorney like a studious Rhetorician procures
to purchase credit, and estimation to this his work of Reports. Al^eit I be
confident to the contrary, that upon the ensuing search, ^hese Reports directed
by him to the impugning of Catholic re^^gion (being only bare and naked
Reports indeed without proof or reason alleged at all) will neither prove so
grave Resolutions and ^udgeme^ts, nor to have been given always upon so great
deliberation, ^or of so great importance, and Consequence as he pretends; and
that when the reasons, and causes thereof shall be examined, they ^ill rather
overthrow, than establish his principal conclusion; wherein I remitt my self to
the event.

^. There follows the same title to knitt up the page, this plea^^ng sentence
of Cicero in his Tusculane questions. Quid enim lae^ro, nisi vt veritas in omni
quaestione explicetur, verum dicentibus facile ce^^m? Cicer ^ib. 3. Tus^^^.
quaest.
What do I endeavor, but that the truth should be laid open in every
question, with resolution to yield to them that shall speak the truth. This
sentence (I say) gives me great comfort, if M. Attorney will do as he
insinuates, and follow the indifferency of his Author alleged, The
indifferency required in treating this controversy.
who in the matters he handled (which were of philosophye) is known to have
been so equal, as he was not well resolved, what part to take. Yet do I not
exact, so much equality in this our controversy of divinity (presuming my
adversary to be preoccupated with the prejudice of one part) but shall rest
well satisfied with his desire, to have the truth examined in every point; and
much more with his readiness, to yield unto her, whersoeuer she shall be found.

3. And with this I shall pass to his Preface notinge only one point, or two
more, by the way, whereof I shall have occasion to speak again afterward. The
first is, that whereas this book of Reports is set forth with two distinct
Columns in every page, the one in Latin, the other in English, the Title or
superscription of the one runs thus. De iure Regis Ecclesiastico. The other
has this interpretation, Of the Kings Ecclesiastical law. As though the word
Ius (which signifies Right) were always well translated by the word Law. The
word Ius, extends it self further then Lex.
Whereof afterward he seeks to make his advantage. But the error or fraud is
evident, for that the word Ius, has a much larger signification, then Lex,
which may be proved, as well out of ancient Lawyers, as Deuines. For that
^^lu^ss de Iusti^ia and ^^re.
Paulus Iurisconsultu^ does affirm the word, Ius, to be extended, ad omne quod
quouis modo bonum and aequum est; to whatsoever is any way good or right. And
then, in another signification the same Ibidem ^^lus.
Paulus does say that it signifies, Sententiam iudicis, The sentence of the
Judge. And in another signification (...) and Cel^us ibidem.
Vlpian, and Celsus two ancient Lawyers take it for the science, and skill of
law. And (...) 5. cap^ ^.
Aristotle in his Ethics, pro omni eo quod est legitimum. for all that which
is any way lawful. And so S. 2^ q. 57. art. 1.
Thomas, and other School-deuines do affirm, Ius, to be obiectum Iustitiae,
the object of Justice, that is to say about which all justice is exercised. And
finaly ^ib 5. E^ym^l. c. 3.
Isidorus says, Lex est species Iuris, Law is a branch or kind of right: and
consequently M. Attorney does not so properly throughout his whole book
interpret Ius by the word Law; which I would not have noted so largly, but
that he being so great a lawyer, had obligation to speak more exactly; though
noe man deny, but that Ius and Lex may sometimes be taken for the same, but not
ever, nor properly in this case. For that the question is not, nor was not of
Q. Elizabeth's Ecclesiastical laws but of the right she had to make such
laws.

4. The second point, worth the noting is, that whereas both the title, and
subject of all this book, is of the Kings Ecclesiastical law. M. Attorney in
the whole Course thereof, from the beginning of our Christian Kings unto K. Henry
the eight, (who were above an hundred and twenty in number) never cites so
much as one Ecclesiastical law made by any of them. For that, they being
Catholics, made not, but received Ecclesiastical laws, That temporal
Princes make not ecclesiastical laws but receive them.
from such as had authority to make them, in the Catholic Church. And such
later Statutes, Decrees, and Ordinances as were made by some later Kings, from
K. Edward the first downward, for restraint of some execution of the Popes
ecclesiastical power, in certain external points, were not made by them, as
ecclesiastical, but as temporal laws, in respect of the common wealth, for
avoiding certain pretended hurtes, and incommodities thereof. And M. Attorney
is driven to such poverty, and straights in this case, as not being able to
allege any one instance, to the contrary, out of all the foresaid ages: he
runs every where to this shift, that the Popes Ecclesiastical, and Canon
laws, being admitted in England, may be called the Kings ecclesiastical laws,
for that, they are admitted, and allowed by him, and his realm. In which
sense, the Evangelical law, may be called also the Kings law, for that he
admits the Bible. But of this we shall have occasion to speak more often
afterward. For that M. Attorney does often run to this refuge. Now then to the
Preface in his own words.

The Attorney to the Reader.
It is truly said (good Reader) that Error (Ignorance being her inseparable
twynne) does in her proceeding, Of Error, and Ignorance.
so infinitely multiply herself, produces such monstrous and strange
chimeraes, floateth in such, and so many incertainties, and sucketh down such
poison from the contagious breath of Ignorance; as all such into whom she
infuseth any of her poisoned breath, she dangerously infects, or intoxicates:
and that which is wonderful, before she can come to any end, she brings all
things (if she be not prevented) by confusion to a miserable and untimely end.
Naturalia and ve^e artificialia sunt finita. Nulius terminus false Error
immensus.

The Catholic Divine.
5. To this so vehement accusation of Error and Ignorance, I could

10. Moreover our Deuines do handle this matter of Ignorance so exactly in all
their writings, as by treating of Ignorance, they prove themselves not
ignorant, but most learned. For first defininge Ignorance in general to be
want, or lake of knowledge, they distinguish the same into two sorts The one
Negative, the other Privative. The definition, and diui^^on o^ Ignorance See 2.
did. q 42 and D. The 2^. q. 76 art. 1. 2. ^.
And as for the Negative, which imports only a simple, and pure want of
science, it is not reprehensible of it self, for that it might be in man, even
before his fall in the state of innocence, and is now in Angels and other
Saints in heaven; for that they do not know all things which may be known
(this being proper to God alone.) Ignorance nega^i^e
Albeit they know so much as is sufficient, to their everlasting beatitude. So
as this kind of Ignorance may stand with blessedness in heaven: Eccles. 5. Romans
12. Job. 9.
And upon earth also the Scripture signifies that it is lawful, and good for
men to be ignorant in many things, and not to know, or desire to know more then
is needful, which leads to curiosity, and this of Ignorantia negatiua.

Ignorance privative.
11. Priuatiua ignorantia is that which depriueth a man of some knowleg, which
he may and ought to have. And unto this, our Deuines do show that Error does
ad an approbation of that which is false, either in judgment, or will. And unto
Error, heresy does ad yet further, pertinacity, and obstinacy, of will
especially. And these are the four degrees of Ignorance in this sense, to
wit, Negative, Privative, Erroneous, and Heretical. But now this privative
Ignorance is subdivided again into diverse other members, and branches.
Diverse sorts of privative Ignorace
As for example into Voluntary, and Vnuoluntary Ignorance: and Vnuoluntary has
two degrees. The one that is altogether vnuoluntary, so as by noe diligence of
ours it could be avoided, and therefore by Deuines is called Invincible: D.
Thom^^. 1 page 101. and ^. 2. q. ^. art. ^ ^ q. ^^. art. ^.
and this is so far of from being a sin, or causing sin, as it does excuse
any sin whatsoever. For if a man should kill his own father not knowing him,
or what he does at all, nor any way concurringe to the said Ignorance; he were
to be excused, I doubt not, even by M. Attorneys law.

12. The other sort of vnuoluntary Ignorance, called Vincible is that which
albeit it proceeds not of our own will directly, yet with some kind of
diligence, it might have been avoided, and prevented, and according to this it
may be culpable, or vnculpable. Voluntary Ignorance also may be either,
effect^ta that is willingly procured, either in it self, or in her cause, or by
some gross negligence, not avoided; and this either antecedenter,
consequenter, concomitanter, in facto, vel in iure, and other considerations,
and circumstances, which Catholic Deuines do prescribe, for discerning or
judging of men's sins, and offenses, according to knowledge and a good
conscience. And in this are they occupied, whilst Protestants stand crying out
and exclaiming against Ignorance in general; and that for the most part so
ignorantly, as in nothing more they show their ignorance, then by such manner
of impugning Ignorance. I will not apply this to M. Attorney, whom I take in
his art to be a man of much science, yet is his speech in this place
considerable for his degree. Strange speeches of imagined ignorance by the
Attorney.
Error (says he) does in her proceeding (he should have said (his) according
to the gender) so infinitely multiply her self, produces such monstrous and
strange chimeraes, floateth in such and so many incertainties, as all such into
whom she infuseth any of her poisoned breath, she dangerously infects or
intoxicates. A strange and sharp inuectiue; for all men, more or less, do
err; if we believe either Gods word, or our own experience. Some ignorance
also is inauoidable, some excusable, some laudable, some tolerable, some
culpable, and some inculpable; as before it is showed; and being but a
privation, or negation, how comes she to have such poison, and so contagious
a breath, as here she is accused to have, without any distinction at all;
seeing that in some degree she is also in Angels, as has been said; and may
be in good and most learned men upon earth, as holy Job testified of himself.
Job. 9.
Si simplex fuero (says he) hoc ipsum ignorabit anima mea. If I be simple, or
innocent (in the sight of God) yet shall my soul be ignorante of this: to wit
in this life. To which purpose the holy Ghost says in another place: Nescit
homo vtrum amore an odio dignus fit. Ecclesiastes 9.
A man knows not (in this life) wheather he be worthy of love, or hatred
before God. And again: Nescit homo suum finem. A man knows not his end. And
none of these ignorances are reprehended. Nay S. Paul does commend and counsel
ignorance to the Romans in many things, writing thus. I say unto you all by
the grace of Christ, which is given unto me, that you go about to know noe
more, the^ you ought to know, but that your knowledge be to sobriety. Romans 12.
And this is Catholic sober doctrine of science, and ignorance, whilst
sectaries do intemperatly bragg of knowledge, and object ignorance to others.

13. And surely I cannot but marvel, Sir Francis Hasting^ in his VVatchvvorde.
with what show of reason, this Knight Attorney here now, as also another
knight Puritan not long ago in his writing should object so confidently
Ignorance to Roman Catholics of these our days. For if we cast our eyes upon
any kind of learning whatsoever, that may be handled by learned men, and skill
showed therein, whether it be divinity, or other science, the Catholics are ten
for one in number in all preeminence before any one sect of our days, or all
put together. Look over all sciences, No^ (...) variety or depth of learning.
and writers thereof at this day, as of Eloquence, skill of toungs, Philosophy,
Mathematicke, histories, and the like; number the authors, consider their
substance, weigh their estimation, and see whether it be not so, or not, even
in the opinion of all protestant students.

14. And as for Theology which is the principal subject, whereas they handle
only one, or two parts of positive Divinity; to wit controversies, and the
text of Scripture, we handle not only the same much more abundantly, as
appears by our writers, both of controversies, and commentaryes; but do
handle two other parts also of much more importance, which is, scholasticall,
appertaining to knowledge, and moral for direction of men's consciences in
practice; both which are wholly wanting in Protestant schools.

15. And this being so as by the eye is evidently verified to him that will
look upon it, how inept and ridiculous is it, that every Sectary beginning to
write against us, Why every Catholic has more knowledge than an hundred
secta^^.
shall presently take his exordium from obiecting Ignorance, whereas every mean
learned Catholic man, by verdict of common sense and reason (if no other
proofs were) must needs be presumed to have more knowledge, then a hundred
sectaryes together. For that he following in his knowledge, and learning
(touching all points of his faith) the knowledge, learning, wisdom, and
authority of the universal Catholic Church, consistinge of infinite, wise,
and learned men, and directed by the highest wisdom of God himself; he makes
all their wisdom, his wisdom, their knowledge, his knowledge, and their
learning his learning, in this point of his salvation. Whereas the sectary
following his own sense, and brain, each one in his fancy, is alone as you
see, and has no true knowledge, learning, or wisdom at all, though he bragg
never so much of special knowledge, and illumination, as before you have
heard, out of Tertullian and Irenaeus to have been their ancient spirit, and
will be to the worlds end. And this shall suffice to this point. Now will M.
Attorney pass to another, of the commendation of Truth; as though that were
with him, and his. And we shall follow him, to examine that point also, as we
have done this other about Ignorance.

The Attorney.
On the other side Truth, Of truth^.
cannot be supported, or defended by any thing, but by Truth herself, and is
of that constitution, and constancy, that she cannot, at any time, or in any
part, or point, be disagreable to her self. She hates all bumbasting, and
sophistication, and brings with her certainty, unity, simplicity, and peace
at the last. Putida salsamenta amant origanum, veritas per se placet, honesta
per se decent, falsa fucis, turpia phaleris indigent. Ignorance is so far from
excusing, or extenuating the error of him, that had power to find out the
truth (which necessarily he ought to know and wanted only will to seek it) as
she will be a just cause of his great punishment. Quod scire debes, and non vis
non pro ignorantia, sed pro contemptu habers debet. Error, and falsehood, are of
that condition, as without any resistance they will in time of themselves fade
and fall away. But such is the state of Truth, that though many do impugn
her, yet will she of her self ever prevail in the end, and flourish like the
palm tree: she may peradventure by force, for a time be trodden down, but
never by any means whatsoever can she be trodden out.

The Catholic Divine.
16. None do more willingly hear the commendation of Truth then we, who say
with S. Paul. 2. Cor. 13.
We can do nothing against truth, but for truth. And therefore do I willingly
join with M. Attorney in this point of praisinge Truth. We do mislike also,
no less then he, all bumbasting, and sophistication: Truth vaynly commended by
Sectaries.
neither are we delighted with stinkinge salt-fish, that had need of Orygon, to
give it a good savor. We allow in like manner of his other latin phrases, and
do confess, that Truth herself may be trodden down for a time by force, but
never trodden out. But what is all this to the purpose we have in hand of
findinge out the Truth in this our controversy? Let us suppose for the
present, that both parts do like well of her? but what means is given here,
or may be given, to discover where she lies? In all other controversies
lightly, our adversaries, are wont to remit us only to scriptures for trial:
which was an old tryck in like manner of their foresaid forernuners, as the
ancient Se Hilar. lib. 2. ad Constant. Von ^nt Li^^^ lib cont. proph^n haret
no^t^. August l 1. de (...). c. 3. and tract. 18. in Joan and l. 7 de Genesis ad
lib. cap. 9.
Fathers testify, for that, scriptures being subject to more cauillation many
times, both for the interpretation, and sense, then the controversy it self,
gave them commodity to make their contentions immortal.

17. But the same Fathers urging them with a shorter way, asked them still.
Quid prius, quid posterius? What was first, and what after? for that heresy is
nouelty, and comes in after the Catholic Truth first planted. The way how
to find out the Truth.
And for that every heretic pretends his heresy, to be ancient, and from
the Apostles, the said Fathers do urge further, that this Truth of our
Religion, must not only be eldest, but must have continued also from time to
time, at least with the greater part of Christians. Tert. lib. aduersus Prax.
cap. 20.
Quia proprium est hareticorum omnium (says old Tertullian) pauca aduersus
pl^^a, and posteriora aduersus priora defendere. It is the property of all
heretics, and their peculiar spirit, to defend the lesser number, against the
greater, and those things that are later, against the more ancient: Which
agrees with another saying of Tertullian. Tert. lib. de Prescript. cons.
haret. cap 2^.
Quod apud multos vnum inuenitur, non est erratum, sed traditum. That which is
found one and the self-same with many (to wit, the greater part in the
Christian Church) is no error, but comes down by tradition. So he. Aug.
(...) 1. cont. Gana. Donat. c. 1. and form. 131 de tempt. and lib. de ^ni^.
Eccles cont. Petil. cap. 2.
But S. Augustine delivers another direction much conformable to this in
sense, though different in words. Consider (says he) what is KATH'HOLON. Id
est secundum totum, and non secundum partem. According to the whole, and not
only to a part; and this is the truth. And another of his time says. Teneamus
quod ab omnibus creditum est, hoc enim vere Catholicum. Vincent. La^in. lib.
cont. proph. haer. (...).
Let us hold that which has been believed by all: for this is truly Catholic;
and consequently Truth it self. And another Father before them both. Catholicum
est, quod vbique vnum. Pa^amus Epise. Bar^in. cap. 1. Symph.
That is Catholic, and undoubtedly true, which every where, is one and the
same. And this both in time, place, and substance.

The application of the Fathers directions.
18 These are the ancient Fathers directions; now let us apply them to our
present question, which is so much the easier to discuss: for that, albeit it
comprehend some part of doctrine in controversy, concerning the Right of
temporal Princes, to spiritual Jurisdiction; yet is it principally, and
properly a question of fact, to wit, whether, by the ancient common laws of
England, and practice of our Princes, according to the same spiritual
Jurisdiction, they were exercised by them in former ages, by force and virtue
of their Imperial crowns; as Queen Elizabeth did, or might do, by the
authority given her by an Act of Parliament, in the first year of her reign,
whereby she was made head, of the Church, and supreme gouernesse, as well in all
causes, Ecclesiastical, as temporal. In discussion whereof, if we will use the
directions of the forsaid Fathers, for clear and infallible trial, we shall
easily find out where the Truth lies; which is the but, we ought to shoore at;
and not to contend in vain: for that our assertion, quite contrary to that of
M. Atourneys, is. That if we consider the whole rank, of our Christian English
Kings, from the very first, that was converted to our Christian faith, to wit,
King Ethelbert of Kent, unto the reign of King Henry the eight, for the space
of more then nine hundred years, (and King Henry himself, for the greater and
best part of his reign) did all, and every one of them confess, and
acknowledge the spiritual power and Jurisdiction of the Sea of Rome, and did
never contradict the same, in any one substantial point either by word, law,
or deed: but did infinite ways confirm the said authority, each one, in their
ages and reigns. And this is that KATH'HOLON, or secundum totum which S.
Augustine requires; and vbique vnam, which the other Fathers do mention; which
is a Catholic proof, in a Catholic cause, and M. Attorney must needs fly ad
partem, to a part only, to wit, to two or three later Kings, of above half a
hundred, that went before; which is a schismatic proof as S. Augustine
shows, Contra partem Donati. Vide etiam Psalm. Aug. contra partem Donat. and
O^t^tu^. Mileuit. contra Parm^n.
Against the part of the heretic Donatus. And before him Opratus Mileuitanus,
and diverse other Fathers, who always call Sectaries, a Part; For that they
follow indeed but a part, and Catholics the whole; and thereof (says S.
Augustine) their name is derived. August. de g^^us ad ^^, imperfect. cap. 1.
And thus much shall serve for our manner of proof which we mean to hold;
remittinge us to the effect it self, when we shall come to join issue
afterward. Let M. Attorney vaunt in the mean time of the name only of Truth,
but without means or meaning to try the same.

The Attorney.
There is no subject of this Realm, but being truly instructed, Birthright of
laws.
by good, and plain evidence, of his ancient and undoubted patrimony, and
birthright (though, he has for some time by ignorance, false persuasion, or
vain fear, been deceived, or dispossessed) but will consulte, with learned and
faithful Cou^selours for the recovery of the same. The ancient and excellent
laws of England, are the birthright, and most ancient and best inheritance,
that the subjects of this Realm have. For by them, he inioyeth not only his
inheritance, and goods in peace and quietness, but his life, and his most dear
country in safty. And for that I fear, that many of my dear countrymen,
(and most of them of great capacity, and excellents parts) for want of
understanding of their own evidence, do want the true knowledge, of their
ancient birthright, in some points of greatest importance: I have in the
beginning of this my first work directed them to those, that will not only,
faithfully counsel, and fully resolve them therein, (such as cannot be daunted
with any fear, moved by any affection, nor corrupted with any reward) but also
establish and settle them, in quiet, and lawful possession. Upon just grounds
to rectify an error in a man's own mind, is a work of clear understanding,
and of a reformed will, and frequent with such, as be good men, and have sober,
and settled wits.

The Catholic Divine.
19 It may please the reader, to consider, that of two propositions, which M.
Attorney uses commonly to lay forth for the furnishing of his discourse; The
first called the mayor, we have hitherto admitted, denying the second, or
minor, and ther-vpon, his whole conclusion, for that he subsumeth not well. As
for example, in his first proposition in reprehension of Ignorance, we agreed
in such ignorance as is reprehensible, but his application thereof to Catholics,
I showed to be false, and his mere imagination. And the like in the second
encounter, about Truth, I admitted his Encomion, and praise of Truth, but
disagreed in the manner of seeking out of the same, which he wholly omitted: The
Attorneys mayor admitted, and his minor denied.
And the same must I say in this third meeting of ours; I do not contradict his
mayor proposition, that every wise, and discreet subject of the land, having
been dispossessed of his ancient inheritance, and birthright by ignorance,
false persuasion, or vain fear, will consult with learned, and faithful
Counselours, for recovery thereof. All this (I say) is granted; but the
application thereof to the municipal laws of England (which is the assumpt, or
minor proposition) I cannot confess, to be so well and fitly made. Let us
discuss a little what the Attorney writes. The ancient, and excellent laws of
England (says he) are the birthright and most ancient, and best inheritance
that the subjects of this Realm have. Much is said in this, and albeit I do
not mean to deny, or draw back any part of the just commendation, due to our
municipal laws; yet this strange hyperbole, axaggeration, or ouerlashing of M.
Attorney, tending (as after shall appear) to a false, and prejudicial
conclusion, is worthy some stay thereon. For, first I would ask him what great,
and singular antiquity he finds in our municipal laws, that so often he
names them ancient, as though, they were eminent, and singular in that point
of antiquity above other laws; Of the antiquity of our municipall laws.
whereas I, for my part, find noe memory of any of them extant, before the
Conquest and no written statute law before the reign of King Henry the third,
which was two hundred years after that again, and with him does Judge Rastall
also begin his collection of laws and statutes, from Magna Charta downwards:
which was made in the 9. year of the said King, and of Christ, one thousand,
two hundred and sixteen; which is not yet full four hundred years gone. And
yet did Englishmen live in England before the Conquest, more then twyse as
long, under laws, partly municipal, and partly Imperial; to say nothing of
the Britains before them again: And consequently, I see not how we may brag
so much of antiquity in this point.

20. As for the excellency of our laws, I mean not to withdraw, any due
commendation, as before I said, nor to stand here to discuss, what
commodities, and incommodities they have, as al humane things that depend of
the variable judgment, and likinge of men; yet cannot any indifferent, and
disappassionat man, but remember that, which all our writers do commonly note,
that they were brought in principally by Conquest, and a Conqueror, and such a
one as intended to bridle the English by that means, and to bring them under
by those laws; The commodities and discommodities of our municipal laws.
And what misery, calamity and exceeding thraldom, our afflicted nation passed
in those days, under those laws, and the insolent dominion of the Normans;
let any man read Ingulphus, that lived in those days, and other English
Historiographers that ensued soon after, as Malmesbury, Huntington, Houeden,
and the like, and then will he pity their case that first lived under them.

21. It is evident likewise by all testimony of our old histories, how
frequent, and earnest reclaim was made by the people, and nobility to diverse
Kings after the Conquest, against these newer laws, for the restoring of such,
as were in use before the said Conquest, especially those of King Edgar and S.
Edward the Confessor, about which point oftentimes, there were no small tumults
made, and yet now by use, and tract of time, the mislike being assuaged, and
we taught to be still, yea and to kiss the rod, wherewith then we were
beaten; M. Attorney, now will needs have us, adore the same, and esteem them
not only for ancient, but excellent laws also, wherein I mean not to loose
time in stryuing with him, for that I do hasten to a more important conclusion.

22. Further then, he not being contented with these two most honorable
Epithetons and Euloges of Antiquity and Excellency, passes on to another
superlatiue degree, saying, that they are not only the undoubted patrimony, and
birthright, but also the most ancient and best inheritance, which the subjects
of this Realm have; whereof he yeldeth this reason, for that by them, they
enjoy, their life, livings, and country in peace and saftie: The birth-^^gh^
of our common laws.
Which if it be so, then what inheritance had old Englishmen, for so many
hundred years, before these laws were made? what riches, or inheritance have
those men by them in our days, which are borne, without lands or livings?
Will this patrimony of the law, make them rich? M. Attorney, and diverse of his
fellows, have had a good patrimony, and inheritance by them: but this is not
every man's case.

23. I confess that the laws of every country, are a certain birthright of
all subjects that are borne therein; and if they be good and equal, it is a
public benefit, but much more if they be well executed, by a just Prince,
which imports more than written laws. For that he, as M. Attorney
confesses, is the soul of the law, that gives life, who also without written
laws, either municipall, or Imperial, may administer justice, by law of
nature and nations, if he will. What special, or singular commodity then, is
here showed to issue out of the municipall laws of England above others, that
they should be called our ancient, and best inheritance? Yea, as he adds
after, in matters of greatest Importance, meaning thereby our soul, and
salvation. Is not this an ouerlashing? is not this an egregious hyperbole? Do
not subjects in Scotland, France, Italy, Spain, and other places, enjoy their
goods in peace and quietness, and their lives, and dear countries in safty, as
well by their laws Imperial, as we do, by our municipall Yes; and much more, if
we will believe them, and their learnedest, and this upon some attent
consideration of events, which daily they hear, and read, of many men both
great, and small, to have bin overthrown, and condemned in our country, both
in lives, and liuinges, which they think by their Imperial laws were
impossible. And one only circumstance of English trial in life, and death (to
omit the rest) does leave them astonished, to wit, that be he never so great a
man, yet for his life, and lands honor, and posterity, he may not have that
allowed him, which in an action of five pounds renr, or less, he should
obtain; The objection of externe lawyers against diverse points of ours.
which is a learned lawyer, or advocate to speak for him at the bar; but
that all the Princes officers, and learned Counsel, shall plead against him,
exaggerating matters to the uttermost; and he only suffered to speak for
himself, and that in measure, who for lack of skill, or memory, or time to
consider, or boldness to speak, or talent to utter well his meaning, may there
betray, and overthrow both himself, and his whole posterity in his own defense.

24. And finally, the last vpshot being of that dreadful action, to commit the
matter to a jury of unlearned men, that must give their verdicts openly; and by
consequence, upon the same causes before mentioned of error, fear, hope, or
other passion (the Prince being always on part interessed) may easily be led
finistrously to the prisoners condemnation. Se also Sir Thomas Moore Lib. 1.
Viepia.
All which inconveniences, being carefully provided for, by course of other
laws do make foreign learned men to think, that ours are more defective,
than we persuade our selves, and that it may easily be believed, that they were
made indeed by a Conqueror. And I could have been glad, that M. Attorney in
this place, had alleged, some singular thing in their extraordinary
commendation, for that the enjoying of our goods, lives, lands, and country by
them (which he mencioneth) are very ordinary, and vulgar commendations, and
common to all laws in general, that ever were made, by reasonable men. And
yet, do we not deny, but that our English laws, for the whole corpse, and
dryft thereof, are very commendable; especially where the spirit, and meaning
of the first founders is observed by the followers: yet want there not, by
grave men's judgments, many considerable points that might be better rectified;
and namely concerning the imperious, and dominant manner of proceeding of many
lawyers, and their exorbitant gains, which yet perhaps M. Attorney will place
among the chief commendations of our said common laws.

25. In the other point also of remitting men for the knowledge of their
evidence, and ancient birthright in some points of greatest importance to
faithful Counseloures, Whether common lawyers determine and deal without
passion.
that will resolve them fully without fear, affection, or corruption, if he
mean by these Counseloures, as he does, those Judges and Sages of the
Common Law, from whom he has taken these pieces, against Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction; which after he has set down, I must needs say, that it is
little to the purpose. For albeit, now they be dead, he may well say (as he
does) that they cannot be daunted with any fear, moved by any affection, or
corrupted with any reward; yet when they were alive, and gave their
resolutions, (which he says they did) it is hardly credible that they were so
deuoide of those passions, as he would make them, they being no Saints, but
wordlie men that sought their advancement under their Princes, by pleasing
their humors; as lawyers of our times do; whereof I could alleadg many
examples, and some perhaps we may touch after in their due places. Now it shall
be sufficient to remember that in diverse Kings days, after the Conquest, the
chief complaints of the people, were against their chief Iusticers, Anno 1.
Edward's 3 ^. 2. Inst^^. 2.
(would God we had not the like cause now) who in those times most governed
the state, or abused rather the same, as the examples of Hubert de Borgo, and
Robert Tresilian, chief Justices under K. Henry the third and Richard the
second, and both of then punished publicly for their wickedness, do testify.
And in the beginning of K. Edward the third his reign, I read of a complaint
made by the King, and the whole Parliament, that his father, K. Edward 2. had
been induced by evil Counselors (which in that case may justly be presumed to
have been his Judges, and lawyers) to sease into his hands the temporaltie of
diverse Bishoprics, etc. Which, for the time to come, he promised not to do.
And finally after that again, when the contention, and controversy, between
the two potent houses, of Lancaster, and York began, and endured for almost
100. years, I find few Judges, or great Sages of the common law, to have lost
their lives therein, for any side, or party, as many Dukes, Earls, Barons,
knights, yea, and some Bishops also, and religious did. Which is a sign that
those Sages were to wise to oppose themselves, to any sort of Princes
whatsoever, but could accommodate themselves to all and draw the birthright of
laws to the establishing of any Kings right, that by his sword could get the
possession.

The Catholic religion, the ancient, birthright of ^nglish^^n.
26. But to prosequute these matters no further in this place, I am only to add
for conclusion of all, that the true ancien^ birthright, and best inheritance
of English subjects indeed, i^ their right to Catholic religion, which was
first planted among them, from the Sea of Rome, by the singular zeal of holy
Pope Gregory the first, a thousand years gone, and continued without
interruption to our days, as afterward shall be showed, and that for seeking
out and clearing the evidence of this right, they ought to be diligent, and to
spare no labor, pain, or industry; for that thereof depends their eternal
salvation, or damnation, which does not of the knowledge, or not knowledge of
the common law, and that for certifyinge themselves in this point, they ought
to repair to faithful Counselors indeed, who are the ancient Fathers, and
writers of Gods Church in every age; who being not only wise, and learned, but
holy also, may securely be presumed to deliver the Truth in this controversy,
which was not raised up in their days, and consequently could not be
passionate therein, nor daunted with fear, moved by affection, or corrupted
with reward, as later lawyers and Sages might be, that gave sentence in
matters which concerned their interest, favor, or disfavor of present
Princes; And (would God) M. Attorney himself would in this point follow the
direction of his Poesy out of Macrobius de veterum lectione; of reading the
ancient Fathers, and old incorrupt writers diligently to this effect: For I
doubt not, but that so good a wit, as his is, would quickly discern the
truth, if prejudice or passion, upon interest or disinterest, do not deprive
him of that happiness. For albeit our Savior has a dreadful sentence, Math. 10.
that it is as hard for a rich man to enter into heaven, as a Camel to go
through a needels eye; yet does he say also in ^he same place, Marc. 10.
that what is impossible to man, is possible with God, which may justly deliver
rich men from desperation, though not from due fear. And so much of this. Now
shall we see, what M. Attorney says more.

The Attorney.
The end of such as write, concerning any matter, which by some for want of
instruction is called into controversy; should be with all the candor, and
charity, that can be used, to persuade, and resolve by demonstratiue proofs,
the diligent Reader in the Truth: Against bitter vvri^ing in controsies.
But now a days those that write of such matter, do for the most part, by
their bitter and uncharitable inuectiues, transported with passion and fury,
either beget new controversies, or do as much as in them lies to make the
former immortal. Certain it is that some books of that argument, have had
Truth for their Center, yet because they have wanted temperance, modesty, and
vrbanity for their circumference, have, to the great prejudice of the truth,
hardened the adversaries in their errors, and by their bitter inuectiues,
whetted them not only to defend themselves, and to offend in the like, but many
times (being thereby urged to write) to defend the error it self to the hurt of
many; which otherwise might have vanished away, without any contradiction.

The Catholic Divine.
27. This candor and charity, which M. Attorney wishes in all writers of
Controuersyes is laudable, and fully agreeing also to our desires, that be
Catholics; and it falls out well, that some grauer men of the Protestant
party do show at length by public testimony, their mislike of such bitter,
and uncharitable inuectiues, which their ministers, that should be guides of
modesty to others ( being transported with passion, and fury to use M.
Attorneys words) do exercise, and thereby they do beget new controversies, and
make the former immortal. Matthew (...), Thomas ^el, VVille^, and others.
All this we grant, and do much allow, and commend M. Attorneys vrbanity
therein, and could easily also guess, at the persons, whom principally he
means, who have by their beastly late libels so defiled as it were, the very
art, and profession of writing books, through base, exorb^tant, and shameless
scurrility, as men disdain to read them any more, holding both them, and
their Authors in most odious contempt.

28. And yet in one thing I cannot agree with M. Attorney in this point, when
he says that these bitter inuectiues of theirs have whetted their adversaries
to defend themselves, which otherwise they would not have done: For I hold the
contrary to be true, which is, that their brutish vein of intemperate, and
shamles writing, has freed them from all reioynder of any modest or civil
adversary; whereas on the other side M. Attorney is answered as you see, for
that his temperance, modesty, and vrbanity in the circumference of his Center,
deserves the same, though his said Center have not that truth in it, which
were to be wished, answerable to those other good commendations of his. And
this will ly upon us to prove in the prosecution of this whole Answer. Now let
us pass to the rest of his Preface.

The Attorney.
He that against his conscience, does impugn a known truth, does it either
in respect of himself, or of others; Of himself, in that he has within him a
discontented heart; Of others, whom for certain worldly respects he seeks to
please. Discontented he is, Of writing of controversies against conscience.
either because he has not attained unto his ambitious, and unjust desires; or
for that, in the eye of the State, he for his vices, or wickedness, has justly
deserved punishment, and disgrace: and therefore does oppose himself against the
current of the present, to please others, in respect that his creditt, or
maintenance depends upon their favor and benevolence. I know that at this
day, al Kingdoms, and States are governed by laws, and that the particular,
and approved custom of every nation, is the most usual binding, and assured
law. I deal only, with the municipal laws of England, which I profess, and
whereof I have been a student above these 35. years. My only end, and desire is,
that such as are desirous to see and know, (as who will not desire to see, and
know his own?) may be instructed; such as have been taught amiss (every man
believing, as he has been taught) may see, and satisfy himself with the truth;
and such as know and hold the truth (by having so ready, and easy a way to
the fountains themselus) may be comforted, and comfirmed. Farewell. Multa
ignoramus quae non laterent, si veterum lectio nobis esset familiaris. Macrob.
6. Satur.

The Catholic Divine.
29. Albeit this last part of M. Attorneys Preface, be somewhat close, and
dark; yet it is not hard (these circumstances considered) to level at his
meaning, which is that Catholic men, that write of controversies in this time,
do write against their consciences, upon coffeehouse, which he presupposing
without proof (whereas principally he should have proved this) he passes on to
tell us, why they do it, in respect of themselves, or others, and upon what
grounds, their discontentments arise, which by M. Attorneys leave, is
altogether impertinent, both for that he leaves unproven, that which
especially he should have proved, and that which he endeavors to prove, is
wholly from our purpose and has no coherence with our cause at al.

30. For first we deny that Catholics do write against their consciences to
impugn a known truth, for this they hold to be a most heinous, and damnable
sin, and one of the six that are against the holy Ghost, and very peculiar to
heretics, as appears by those words of S. Paul before recyted, where he
writes in respect of this pertinacy in defending their own heresies, and
proper elections against their consciences, Tit. 4.
that heretics are damned by their own judgments, Se S. Augustine (...). de
^ut D^ cap 51. l. 7 de Ge^. ad lit. c. ^. and nact 8 in Iu^^ l^b. (...).
and so do the ancient Fathers with great consent ascribe unto heretics this
special sin among others of Impugnatio veritatis cognitae, Impugning the
know truth for wilful defense of their own fantasies, which is properly
termed by t^em Pertinacia or peruicacia haeretica, Heretical pertinacy. But
now for English Catholics at this day, what reason have they to sin so
damnably, as to write against their own consciences, seeing that by following
their consciences, they might follow also their commodities? What new opinions
have they invented of their own, or taken upon them to follow invented by
others; for which they should be drawn to write against the known tru^h^ that
is to say (as all Fathers do expound it) the Catholic truth. For that is
known, received, and acknowledged, and has been from time, to time, throughout
Christendom; whereas new opinions, are not known truths, but presumed truths
by a few, in some particular place, or country, and for some certain time
past, and not publicly continued from the beginning.

What is the comm^n ^^e vvn^ truth in re^^ to and vv^^ impugneth it.
31. As for example in the present controversy (to pretermit all others)
English Catholics say, that they approve noe other Ecclesiastical power, than
that which all the Kings of England from the first that was converted unto King
Henry the eight together with their Counselors, lawyers, and Sages, both
spiritual, and temporal, have allowed, received, practiced, and confirmed by
their own municipal laws. M Attorney on the other side holds the contrary,
and brings only for his direct proof, the constitutio^s of two or three late
Princes, Q. Elizabeth a woman K. Edward a child, and some part of King Henry's
reign, distracted from the rest, and divided also from himself in all other
points of Religion besides Ecclesiastical jurisdiction; but for indirect
proose, he cyteth certain pieces, and parcells of Ordinances, Laws, and
Decrees of some former Catholic Princes, which seem to restrain, or suspend
in some particular cases, the execution of the said Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction in matters not merely spiritual, but mixed with temporalities as
to them it seemed, and not denying thereby any part of the spiritual power it
self, as after shall be showed.

32. Now then whereas he alleges three Princes Decrees against the Popes
authority interrupted by a fourth, (for that Queen Marie annulled the two
that went before her, and joined fully with her ancient progenitors) we one
the contrary side, The difference of substa^t^all proof between M. Attorney
and us.
for these three interrupted, do produce near threescore by descent without
interruption, and for threescore years more, or less, wherein they made these
laws, we allege more, then three times three hundred, and for a part or
parcel of the Sages of our Land, which in these later days, upon art, fear,
or industrious induction were drawn to consent unto these new laws, against
the old, with utter mislike of the sar greate^t part; we ^ay forth the whole
uniform consent of all sorts, beginning with the first very planting of
Christian Religion in our country, and continued for more than nine hundr^d
years together: so as we alleadg both antiquity, prioritie, universality,
continuance, and succession, without interruption; which are all the marks of
Catholic verity, and consequently when we write for defense of this, in every
controversy of our days, how can the Attorney say, or pretend to imagine,
that we write against our consciences, and the known truth.

33. And as for the imaginary causes of coffeehouse, which he deuiseth;
either for that men have not atteined unto their ambitious, and unjust desires,
or for that, in the eye of the State, their vices, and wickedness have deserved
punishment, and disgrace; and therefore do oppose themselves, against the
current of the present. These speculations, I say, cannot fall any way upon
English Catholics, not do subsist of themselves. Not the later, for that they
are known to be temperate men, Why Catholics are not to be thought to write
against their conscience.
and so will the country commonly, where they live, bear them wittnes, and
the experience of their singular patience under the pressures of the late
Queen does manifestly testify the same. Not the first, for that if conscience
did not retain them, they might gain more, and more advance their ambitious
desires (if they have any) by following the Current of the time with M.
Attorney and others, than by standing against it, to suffer themselves to be
overflowed therewith. And it is a great presumption in all reason, that he has
a good conscience who stands thereunto with his loss, that might run down
the hill with the current, to his gain, and preferment. For that this later is
easy, and vulgar, and common to the worst men, as well as to good: the other
is hard, and rare, and needs great virtue, and fortitude of mind, whereof I
may chance to have occasion to speak more largely afterward at the end of
this book in a special chapter to M. Attorney himself (when our principal
controversy shall be tried) showing what urgent, forcible, and peremptory
reasons Catholic men have, though with never so great loss temporal, to
stand for the defense of their consciences and not to run down the current
with him and others, that swymme with full sail therein. And so much of this.

34. Some other few points of little importance, do remain in this passage of
M. Attorneys Preface, which might be touched, and examined; as where he says,
that the particular, and approved custom of every nation is the most usual
binding, and assured law; and for more authority of this asseueration, as also
of whatsoever he says besides, or pretends to say, out of our laws in his
ensuing Treatise: he adds that he has been a student thereof for these 35.
years: but I could bring forth lawyers of no less standinge, and study, Time
of (...).
(though perhaps with less gain) that would contradict him, in both these
points. First, that custom is not always the most usual binding law, either
in conscience, or otherwise; and with these would run, all the ministers of
Englaud, in the case of Catholic, and Protestant Religion, wherein custom by
their own confession is against them. And in the second point concerning the
pieces, and parcelles here alleged, out of our Common-lawes, against the
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, as M. Attorney would have it seem; these men
would allege, twenty for one, not shredes or liberts of laws, but intyre
laws themselves; authorizinge and confirminge, with full uniformity and
universality of our English nations consent, the said Jurisdiction, from time
to time, and the use and practice thereof. But of this afterward.

35. Now to conclude with M. Attorney in this his Preface, if his end, and
desire be, as he says, that such, as are desirous to se, and to know, may be
instructed, and such as have been taught amiss, may se, and satisfy themselves
with the truth, and such as know, and hold the truth, may be comforted, and
confirmed, I shall gladly join with him in this end, and desire; p^aying
almighty God, that himself also and many more with him, may be in the first
two members, for that in the third, none can be, but true Catholics. And this
shall suffice for this place. M^^cb. 6. (...)
For as for the Latin sentence out of Macrobius, that our ignorance in many
things proceeds of that we read not diligently the work of ancient authors,
I have touched in part before, and do allow of the sense now again, though
more fitly the same might have been showed out of many Christian authors of
more authority, that this heathen. Yet let M. Attorney join issue with me
upon antiquity, in this our controversy (which he ought to do) as well in
regard of this sentence, as also for that every where he iterateth the name,
and sound of the ancient, and most ancient Common-lawes of England; and then
will the matter be quickly decided, as the proof will afterward declare:
whereunto I remit me, and do end my answer to M. Attorneys Preface, returning
him his freindlie Farewell, as also to the Reader.

OF THE STATE OF THE QVESTION IN GENERAL, Concerning Spiritual, and Temporal
Power, and Jurisdiction; their origin, and subordination one to the other: And
how they stand together in a Christian Commonwealth. CHAP. II.
TO the end, that the prosecution, and issue of the particular controversy we
have in hand, about the Spiritual authority of Q. Elizabeth, may be more
clear; it shall not be a miss perhapes, in this very beginning, to set down
breiflie, what Catholic Deuines, and other learned men, do write and hold of
Power, and Jurisdiction in general, and of the origin, offspring, author,
division, and parts thereof; wherein M. Attorney is wholly silent, using no
explication, or distinction at all, and consequently gives occasion thereby to
some confusion.

2. First then our Deuines affirm that almighty God is author of all lawful
Power whatsoever, God the author of all lavvful power.
both spiritual, and temporal according to that general proposition of S.
Paul, Non est potestas nisi a Deo. Romans 13.
There is no power but from God. For that, as it pleased his divine majesty,
to imparte with man other sparks of his excellencyes, as wisdom, reason,
knowledge, providence, and the like; so vouchsafed he also to make man partaker
of his power, and authority not only to govern all other creatures of his in
the world, but mankind also, and this both in body and soul, temporal, and
eternal things under him in this world, as his liestennant and substitute.

3. The differences which are between these two Powers, and Jurisdictions,
Spiritual, and Temporal Ecclesiastical, and Civil; are diverse and sundry,
taken from the diversity of their ends and object; The different ends and
objects, of spiritual, and temporal power.
The end of Spiritual Power being to direct us, to everlasting salvation, both
by instruction, discipline, and correction; and of the Temporal or Civil, by
like means, and helps, to govern well the Commonwealth, in peace,
abundance, order, justice, and prosperity. And according to these ends, are
also their objects, matter, and means. As for example, the former has for her
object spiritual things belonginge to the soul, as matters of faith,
Doctrine, Sacraments, and such other; and thy latter handles the Civil
affairs of the Realm, and Commonwealth, as they appertain to the temporal
good, and prosperity thereof.

4. The ancient learned Father S. Gregory Nazianzen in a certain Oration of
his, does express, the nature, and conditions of these two Powers; Spiritual
and Temporal. Ecclesiastical, Spiritual and te^mporal power, as spirit, and
flesh in a man.
and Civil, by the similitude of spirit and flesh, soul, and sense; which he
says, may be considered, either as two distinct Commonwealths, separated the
one from the other; or conjoined together in one Commonwealth only. ^
An example of the former, wherein they are separated, may be in Beasts, and
Angels; the one having their Commonwealth of Sense only, without soul or
spirit, and their end and objects conform thereunto, which are the nourishment,
and preservation of the body. And the other Common wealth of Angels, being of
spirit only, without flesh or body; but in man are conjoined, both the one, and
the other. And even so in the Common wealth of the Gentiles, was only
authority political, earthly, and humane, given by God to govern worldly
and human things, Temporal and spiritual authority separated in the Pri^^^^
(...).
but not spiritual for the soul; whereas contrariwise in the Primitive
Christian Church, for almost 300. year together, none or few Kings being yet
converted, only spiritual authority was exercised by the Apostle and
Christians Bishopps, their successors for gouerninge the Church in
Ecclesiastical affairs without temporal, according to the saying of S. Paul
in the Acts of the Apostles speaking to Bishops. Act. 20.
Vos posuit Spiritus Sanctus Episcopos regere ecclesiam Dei. The holy ghost
has appointed you, that are Bishops to govern his Church.

5. And this Spiritual Jurisdiction in respect of the high end, and object
thereof, above the temporal, did the same Apostles by instruction of the same
Holy Ghost, so highly esteem, as the same S. Paul writing to the
Corinthians, and reprehendinge them for going to law about temporal things,
before the heathen magistrate, said, 2. Cor. 6.4
that in secular matters, they should appoint for judges, such as were
contemptible in the Church, that is to say, men of mean account, which was
spoken by him, not for that he contemned temporal Power, as the heretical
Anabaptists out of this place would prove, Anabaptists.
(for so he should be contrary to himself, who a little before, as you have
heard, auowed, that all power is from God, Romans 13. 1. Pet. 2.
and in other places, that the King, and temporal magistrate, is to be
honored, and obeyed, as Gods minister, and the like) but only, he says this
in comparison, the one of the other, and of their ends, and objects, so
different in dignity, and worthiness, as you have heard. And this continued in
the Primitive Church, (to wit, Spiritual Jurisdiction, without Temporal)
until Constantine the Great; and other Emperors and Kings after him, being
converted to the Christian faith, entered into the said Church, retaininge their
Temporal States, and Temporal Power, which before they had, but submitting
themselves in spiritual, and Ecclesiastical matters, unto the spiritual
government and governors, which they found to have been in the same Church
before their conversion.

6. Furthermore besides these differences, of the end, and objects of these two
Powers, the forsaid Deuines do show another no less considerable then the
former, which is, that albeit, both of them be of God, and do proceed from
him; as the Author, and origin, as has been said; yet far differentlie: for
that Ecclesiastical authority, is immediately from God, and was given by
Christ immediately to his Apostles, Act. 10.
and Bishops, as before you have heard, out of S. Paul, who adds in the same
place, that Christ gave them this Spiritual Jurisdiction over that Church quam
acqui fiuit sanguine suo, Spiritual jurisdiction independent of Te^porall.
which he had bought and purchased with his blood, to make them and others, in
respect of this dreadful circumstance, to esteem and respect the more this
Spiritual Jurisdiction over souls: which Jurisdiction Christ also himself,
God and man, did exercise in person upon earth, wholly separated from the use
of all Temporal Jurisdiction, notwithstanding he was Lord of all, as the same
Deuines out of the Gospel do prove. S^ewing thereby and by the long
continuance of his Church, without the said Temporal Authority, that
Spiritual Jurisdiction is wholly independent thereof, and utterly distinct by
her own nature.

7. And albeit Civil Power and Jurisdiction be of Gods institution also,
Tempo^al power not imm^diat^ly but mediately from God.
and duly to be honored in his Church and Christian common wealth, as before
we have showed; yet do they teach the same to be far otherwise derived, and
received from God, then is Spiritual Power, that is to say, not immediately
by Gods own delivery thereof, but mediatlie rather, to wit by meditation of
the law of nature, and nations. For by the law of nature, God ^ath ordained
that there should be political government, for that otherwise no multitude
could be preserved, which the law of nations assuming, has transferred that
government unto one, or more, according to the particular forms thereof, as
Monarchy, Aristocracy or Democracy or mixed: wherein is to be noted, that the
ordination of God by the law of nature, does give political Power unto the
multitude immediately, and by them mediately to one, or more, as has been
said. But Spiritual Power Christ gave immediately, and by himself, to the
Apostles, and their Successors, by these words, (...) ^^ Mat^. 18.
whatsoever you shall bind upon earth; the same s^all be bound in heaven. And
whatsoever you shall loose one earth, shall be loosed in heaven. Whereby you se
a general large commission, granted to them of binding, and loosing;
Quaecunque, whatsoever, without exception. And the like to S. Peter, as head
and chief, by special power and commission of those words. Joan ^1.
Pasce oues meas, Pasce agnos meos. Feed my sheep, feed my lambs, thryse
repeated: signifying thereby the Pre-eminence, ^.
and Primacy of his Pastoral Authority in Gods Church, as the ancient
Fathers have always understood the same. For that to the office of Supreme
feedinge, is required also all other authority necessary to govern, direct,
command, restrain, and punish in like manner, when need requires.

8. About which point, is to be observed and considered attent^uelie (say
Catholic Deuines, and most learned lawyers) that when God almighty gives any
office; he gives also sufficient Power, and Authority, every way to execute
that office, as when he gives the office of a King, or temporal Magistrate,
for good of the Commonwealth, he gives Authority therewith, not only to
direct, command, and instruct; but to punish, and compel also, yea, and to
extirpate, and cut of those (when need is) that are rebellions, or otherwise
deserve that punishment. And the like is to be observed in Spiritual Power,
and Jurisdiction, according to which the Civil law says. Leg. 2 ff. de Iu^^sd.
(...) Iud. and l. vlt. ff. d^^^. cui mand. iurisdict.
Cui Iurisdictio data est, ea quoque concessa esse intelliguntur, sine quibus
Iurisdictio expleri non potuit: To whosoever jurisdiction is given, to him also
must we understand to be granted all those things, without which his
Jurisdiction cannot be fulfilled. And the Canon law to the same effect. In cap
pastora ^ in p^^^^ip de offic. delegati.
Iurisdictio, nullius videretur esse momenti, si coercionem aliquam non
haberet: Jurisdiction would seem to be of no moment, if it had not some power
to compel. And finally it is a general rule given in the said Canon law; In
c^p. praeterea ^od^^ tit.
that when any cause is committed to any man, he is understood to receive
also full authority, in all matters belonging to that cause.

9. Out of all which, is deduced, that for so much, as Christ our Savior, God,
and Man, having purchased to him felfe, by the price of his own blood, a most
deerlie beloved Church, and committed the same as S. Paul says to be governed
by his Apostles, and Bishops their successors, unto the worlds end; it must
needs follow, that he has endowed the same Church with sufficient spiritual
Authority, both directive, and coactiue, to that end, for governing our
souls, no less than he has done the temporal Commonwealth for affairs of
the body. Nay much more, by how much greater the importance is of the one, than
of the other, as before has been said.

10. If you ask me yet more particularly, where and how, by what commission,
and to whom, Christ our Savior left this high Spiritual Power in his Church:
What is the spiritual power of the church and Pastors thereof.
what it is, and wherein it consists? I answer first to the last, that it
consists (as often has been said) in guiding our souls in this world, to
everlasting salvation in the next: Which thing, for that principally it
depends of this, that we avoid sins in this life; or if we committ them,
that they be pardoned us, or corrected by this Power; Christ our Savior, does
most aptly give and describe the same Power, by the words of binding, or
loosing sins. And therefore, in the foresaid place alleged, out of S.
Matthew his Ghospel, he gives the said commission, as you have heard. Math. 26.
Whatsoever you shall bind, or loose upon earth, shall be bound or loosed in
heaven. Whereby the Church of God, has allwaies understood, full authority of
Judicature, to have been given to the Apostles, and their successors, to
discern, judge, bind or loose in all things belonging to this end of
directing souls.

11. Truth it is, that diverse learned deuines, are of opinion, that in these
places, Christ did but promise to his Apostles to give them this high judicial
authority in his Church, when by his death, and resurrection, it should be
founded. And that the actual performance of this promise was made unto them in
the 20. if S. John's gospel, where Christ said unto them. Sicut misit me
pater, and ego mitto vos. Joan. 20.
As my father sent me so I do send you; and then presently breathing upon
then he adds. Receive the Holie-ghost: whose sins you shall forgive, they
are forgiven unto them, and whose you shall retain, they are retained. Where we
se, that Christ speaks now in the present tense, they are forgiven, and they
are retained: and not in the future, as before in the place of S. Matthew his
gospel. And we must note that those words of our Savior ( As my father sent
me, so I do send you.) are understood by ancient Doctors, Se S. Cyril. l 12.
in Joan. ^. 55. and S. Cyprian lib. de ^nt. E^^^es^. and a^ist. 73 ad (...).
of Authority, as though he had said, that with the same power, and
authority, that my father sent me into this world, to gather, and govern my
Church, I do also send you; that is to say, withal spiritual power,
necessary to your office, and charge, both on earth, and in heanen. And
therefore he says in S. Matthew his Gospel: That whatsoever they shall bind,
or loose upon earth, (which are the Acts of high judges) shall be loosed or
bound in heaven.

12. And to S. Peter in like manner, as Chief of the rest, the promise of his
Supreme, and singular power (besides the other, which out of the former
general commission, he received with the rest of the Apostles) was made unto
him, first in S. Matthews gospel, when Christ said, Thou art Peter, (which
signifies a stone, or rock) and upon this rock will I build my Church, and
will give unto thee the keys of the Kingdom of heaven. Matthew. 16.
etc. Which he performed afterward, in the 21. chapter of S. John: after his
resurrection, when asking him three times of his love toward him, he as many
times gave him commission of high-pastor over his flock. Pasce oues meas,
pasce agnos meos. etc.

13. This Spiritual and Ecclesiastical Power then which Christ has left for
governing his Church, though it be to be exercised here upon earth, and by
men; yet is it justly called by holy fathers, not humane Power, but divine,
and heavenly, both for that, it was given immediately, and exercised also by
Christ himself, that came from heaven, and for that it tends to heaven, and
is approved in heaven; yea to use the Phrase of S. Chrysostom, Chrysostom.
homil. 5. de verbis Esa. Vidi Dominum.
and other Fathers, directs and commands the very Tribunal of heaven;
which heavenly Power on earth, S. Paul, as an Apostle extraordinary, having
extraordinarily also received, not by man, but by Jesus Christ as himself does
signify, did so much glory of, Galat. 1.
as he wrote to the Corinthians. 1. Cor. 13.
If I should glory some what of our Power, which Christ has given us to
edification, and not to destruction I would not blush at it. 2. Cor. 10.
And a little before in the same Chapter, he says. Nam arma militiae nostrae
non carnalia sunt, sed potentia Deo. etc. For the armor of our warrfare, are
not carnal or wordlie arms, but are power from God. In promptu habentes,
vlcisci omnem inobedientiam. etc. having speedy means to revenge all
inobedience. And yet further to the said Corinthians within two Chapters after.
2. Cor. 13.
Quoniam si venero iterum, non parcam. If I come unto you again, I will not
spare to punish. And a little after in the same place. S. Paul's esteem of the
high power given unto him and to other Apostles and their Successors.
Ideo absens scribo, vt non durius agam, secundum potestatem, quam Dominus
dedit mihi. I do write unto you absent, to the end that when I shall come, and
be present with you, I be not forced to deal more roughly according to the
Power, which our Lord has given me.

14. Behold the dreadful Spiritual Power, which S. Paul affirms to be
given to him by Christ, as well to punish, as to instruct and direct: and
according to this Power, he writes again to the said Corinthians. Quid
vultis? in virga veniam ad vos, an in charitate and spiritu mansuetudinis? what
will you have me do; shall I come unto you in the power of the rodd, or in
love, and spirit of mildnes? As who would say, choose which you will. And note
that here the Power of correction given to the Apostles, and their successors,
is called the rodd in respect of strikinge, as before in the words of Christ,
it was called the key of the kingdom of heaven, and the power, of binding, and
loosing sins, in regard of the dreadful shutting or opening heaven, or hell
gates unto us. And according to this power S. Paul afterward exercised
judgment, and gave sentence in a certain grievous case of Incest among the
said Corinthians in these words. 1. Cor. 5.
Ego autem absens corpore, praesens autem spiritu iam iudicani, vt praesens,
eum qui sic operatus est. I though absent in body yet present with you in
spirit, have given judgment upon him that has committed this sin, as though
I were present in body. And the same Apostle writing to his scholar Timothy
does tell of another sentence, 1. Tim. 1.
and judgment pronounced by him, upon Hymenaeus and Alexander two seditions and
heretical men; quos tradidi Sathanae. (says he) whom I have delivered over
to Satan: which is as much to say, as I have excommunicated, and cut them of
from the Church of God, whereby they come to be no more in the protection of
Christ, but in the power, and protection of Satan.

15. And the like Spiritual Judgment was exercised by S. Peter, upon Simon
Magus when he said unto him, Diverse excomunications by the Apostles.
Non est tibi pars, neque sors in sermon isto. Thou have no part nor
participation with us in this word of God which we preach. By which words of S.
Peter, the 30. Canon of the Apostles does affime, Act. 8.
Simon Magus to have been excommunicated and cut of from the number of
Christians and from all spiritual benefit belonging thereunto. Which (if we
believe S. Augustine) was a more greiuous and dreadful punishment, than if he
had been sentenced, Aug. lib. 1. contra Aduer (...) and Proph. c. 10.
to be burned with fire, drowned with water, or pierced through with a
temporal sword. In consideration whereof, holy S. Chrysostom cried out in
his time. Chrys^st hom. 4. ad Helr. and (...) fe^tur. 11. quaest. 3. cap. ^1.
Nemo contemnat vinculae Ecclesiastica, non enim homo est qui ligat, sed
Christus qui nobis hant potestatem dedit. Oh let no man contemn the chains,
which ecclesiastical power lays upon him, (in bindinge, or loosinge his
sins) for it is not man that binds, but Christ which has given unto us
(that are Governors of his Church) this power. And S. Augustine again. Aug.
ibid.
Alligatur bomo amarius, and infaelicius Ecclesia clauibus, quam quibuslibet
grauissimis, and durissimis ferreis, vel adamantini^ nexibus. A man is bound
more bitterly, and miserably by the keys of the Church, than by any most
greiuous sharp iron, or adama^t bounds. Whereof the holy Martyr and Bishop S.
Cyprian gave the reason, before them both, saying: Cypr. lib. 1. epist. 1. ad
(...) Deuteronomy. 6.
That in the old law, which was Carnal, God gave commandment, that such as
were rebellious to their Priests, and Judges, should be slain with the sword:
Math. 16.
But now in the law of Christ that is Spiritual, proud and disobedient men,
are commanded to be slain eternally with the spiritual svvord, which is,
their castinge out from the Church out of which they cannot have life.

16. This then is the Spiritual, and Ecclesiastical dreadful Power, which
Christ has planted in his Church, by his own immediate commission for
gouerninge the same, in the affairs of our souls, unto the worlds end. And
here we may note also, that the same is double, or of two sorts: The one
internal, concerning man's conscience only by loosinge or bindinge sins, by
means of Sacraments. The other is external Jurisdiction, Two points of
Spiritual Jurisdiction internal and external.
in hearing, judging, and determining causes in public affairs, that do
fall out in the Church, tending to the same end; and this distinction is
founded in the words of Christ himself, as well for binding and loosing of
sins in respect of our conscience, as also in that he adds; Si ecclesiam
non audierit, sit tibi tanquam Ethnicus, and Publicanus. Matthew. 6.
If he hear not the Church, let him be to thee, as a Heathen, or Publican;
that is to say, (as holy Fathers expound) let him be excomunicated and cast out
from the Church, and then fled and avoided, as one separated, by the authority
of the said Church, from all communion and fruit of Christian religion, as
much as if he were an Infidel or Publican. Which meaning of our Savior, S.
Paul well understanding, said of like men, 1. Cor. 5.
Auferte malum ex vobisipsis. Take away and separate the evil from among your
selves: which words S. Augustine expoundinge, says to be as much as if he had
said. Aug lib. 2. retract. cap. 17. and l. de correct. and Gra. c. 15.
Hominem malum, and pernicipsum a vobis separate per excommunicationem; Do you
separate from your selves an evil and pernicious man, by excommunication;
which is an act of external Jurisdiction, called by Canon lawyers Actus sori
contentiosi. As to absolve, or retain sins in the Sacrament, are acts of
Internal Jurisdiction, appertaininge to sorum conscientiae, the tribunal of
conscience.

17. So that as the temporal magistrate for furnishinge of his authority,
has Power also to punish temporallie when occasion is offered, and this either
in goods, body, or life; so have Spiritual Magistrates, also by Christ his
appointment, Ecclesiastical Power, not only to teach, exhort, instruct, and
direct, as has been said, but to punish in like manner by Spiritual Censures
much more greiuous, and dreadful in respect of the life to come, than are the
fore named punishments of the civil magistrate for this life. Which Censures
are three in number, answeringe after a certain manner, to the former three of
the temporal magistrate, and these are according to Catholic divinity, and
Canons of the Church, Se (...) 3. in cap. Quaren de rebu^ signify.
Suspension, Interdict, and Excommunication; which I leave further to discuss
in this place.

THE SECOND PART OF THIS CHAPTER, About the Subordination of these two Powers,
the one to the other; and different Greatness of them both.. I.
18. Upon these and other like considerations then, and premises, Catholic
deuines do deduce that these two Powers of Spiritual, and Temporal
Jurisdiction, whenever they meet together (as in the Christian Commonwealth
they do) they are subordinate the one to the other, according to the rule of
Aristotle in Philosophy, Aristotle.
(which holds also in this case of divinity) that whenever the ends of
any faculties be subordinate, and do serve the one to the other, there also
the faculties themselves are subordinate. And so whereas the end of Spiritual
Authority is, to direct men to everlasting Salvation of their souls, and the
end Temporal Government, to procure their temporal prosperity; but yet with
referment, and subordination to the attainment also of life everlasting in the
next world: it follows by most certain consequence, that Temporal
Government is subordinate to the spiritual, which is so much the more
excellent and eminent, as is an everlasting end, above a temporal; our
immortal soul, before our corruptible bodies; and the Kingdom of heaven,
before worldly prosperity.

19. Out of which considerations, no doubt did proceed those speeches of
ancient and holy Fathers, about the comparison of these two Powers,
Ecclesiastical, and Temporal, The eminency of Spiritual Power above
Temporal.
which are found every where in their works, highly preferringe the one
before the other, and subiecting the one unto the other. An me libere
loquentem, aequo animo feretis? Greg. orat. Ad (...) t^mere p^r^ulso^.
(says S. Gregory Nazianzen to the Emperor) Nam ves quoque, etc. will you
hear me with patience to speak my mind freely unto you? Which truly you
ought to do for so much, as the law of Christ, has made you subject to my
Power, and to my tribunal. For we (Bishops) have an Empire also, and that
more excellent, and perfect then yours, except you will say that spirit is
inferior to flesh, and heavenly things to earthly. But I doubt not, but that
you will take in good part, this my freedom of speech, you being a sacred
sheep of my holy flock, and a disciple of the great Pastor, rightly
instructed by the Holy Ghost, even from your young years, etc. So Gregory
Nazianzen to the Emperor.

20. And here we see, what difference this great Doctor and Father S.
Gregory Nazianzen almost 1300. years gone, did put between these two Powers
of Kings, and Bishops, Civil and Ecclesiastical dignity; even as much, as
between, flesh and spirit, heaven and earth. And the same difference does S.
Chrysostom set down in his books of Priesthood, Chrysostom. lib. 3. de
sacerdoti^, Hom. 4. in cap. 6. Esai.
and elswere. I shall allege some place or two out of him, as briefly as I
may, that you may see his sense, and judgment therein: though I would wish the
Reader, to peruse the places themselves here cited, for that they will fully
satisfy him in this matter.

21. First then in his third book of Priesthood, comparinge the Power of a
King with the Power of a Priest he has these words. Habent quidem and
terrestres Principes vinculi potestatem, verum corporum solum, etc. S.
Chrysostom. sentence of spiritual power.
It is true, that earthly Princes, have power to bind, but our bodies only:
But the bands, which Priests can lay upon us, do touch the soul it self, and
reach even unto the heavens so far forth as whatsoever Priests shall determine
here beneath, that does God ratify above in heaven, and confirms the
sentence of his servants upon earth. And what is this, (I pray you) but that
God has given all heavenly Power unto them, according to those words of his.
Whose sins soever you shall retain they are retained. Joan. 20.
And what Power, I beseech you, can there be greater then this? I read that God
the Father gave all manner of Power unto his Son. Math. 28.
And I see again, that God the Son has given over the self same Power unto
Priests, etc. what a manifest madness then is it, for any man to despise this
Princedome of Priests, without which we cannot possibly be made partakers,
either of eternal salvation, or of the good promises of our Savior, etc. Quo
nomine, sacerdotes non modo plus vereri debemus; quam vel Principes, vel Reges;
verum etiam maiori honor, quam parents proprios honorare. Chrysostom. ibid^
In which respect, we ought to reverence, and fear Priests more, not only
then Princes, and Kings; but honor them also more, then our own parents, etc.
All these are S. Chrysostomn words.

Chrysostom. homil. 4 de versu ^sa. Vidi Dominum.
22. And the same Saint, in his Homilies upon Esaias the Prophet, writes thus.
Rex quidem ea quae sunt in terris, sortitu^ est, administranda, etc. The King
has received the administration, and government of those things that are on
the earth. But the Priests authority comes from heaven; whatsoever you shall
bind (says Christ) upon earth, that shall be bound in heaven. Matthew. 16.
To my King, are committed earthly things, but to me heavenly; and when I
say, to me I understand a Priest, etc. To the King are committed the bodies, to
the Priest the souls: the King can remitt bodily spotts; but the Priest can
take away the spotts of sin: Mayor hic principatus, This principallitie of
Priests is greater, then that of Kings.

23. And yet further in another Homily upon the same Prophet. Sacerdotium
principatus est; ipso etiam regno venerabilius, and maiu^. Ne mihi narres
purpuram, etc. Chrysostom. vbi supra. hom. ^.
Priesthood is a Princedome; yea more venerable and great then is a Kingdom.
Do not tell me of the purple, or diadem, or scepter, or golden apparel of
Kings, for these are but shadows, and more vain then flowers at the spring
time. Si vis videre descrimen, quantum absit Rex a sacerdote, expende modum
potestatis vtrique traditae. Mark this notable discourse of S. Chrysostom.
If you will see indeed the true difference between them, and how much the King
is inferior to a Priest; consider the manner of the Power delivered to them
both; and you shall see the Priests tribunal, much higher then that of the
King, who has received only the administration of earthly things. Neque vltra
potestatem hanc, quicquam habet praterea authoritatis. Neither has he any
authority, beyond this earthly Power: But the Priests tribunal is placed in
heaven, and has authority to pronounce sentence in heavenly affairs. And
who affirms this? The King of heaven himself, who says, whatsoever you
shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever you shall loose,
shall be loosed. Matthew. 18.
Here you see heaven, to take principal authority of judging from earth, for
that the Judge sits on earth, and our Lord follows his feruant: so as
whatsoever the said servant shall judge here beneath, that will his master
allow in heaven. So S. Chrysostom.

24. And consider here (good Reader) that this holy Father and Doctor, wrote
all this in Constantinople, where the Emperor was present, and many Courtyers
together with the Empress herself, auerted from him for his severity of
discipline, and ready to note and take advantage against any thing that he
should say. A weighty consideration.
And yet was this doctrine never objected against him, as injurious to the
Emperor, or to his Imperial crown: notwithstanding (as you see) he speaks
plainly, both about the Subordination of temporal and spiritual Power, the
one to the other; as also that the Emperor had the one, and not the other. And
if the same Father should preach this doctrine at Paul's Cross in these our
days, he would be hissed out, and be called into question of treason by the
tenor of M. Attorneyes book; so far are our times different from these. But
God and his truth are always one.

25. And to this very same effect might I alleadg here the sayings, and doings
of diverse other ancient Fathers and Bishops, Anno 116.
(for all were of one spirit, opinion, and faith in this behalf) but it would
be ouerlonge; yet S. Ambrose I cannot omit, Diverse examples of S. Ambrose
who in two or three occasions with the Christian Emperors of his time, did
express most manifestly, the judgment of the Catholic Church in those days.
The first whereof was with Valentinian the the younger, who being induced by the
Empress Iustina to command S. Ambrose Bishop of Millaine to dispute with
AuxentiuS the Arrian Bishop, and other of his Sect, before the Emperor, and
his Counselors, and whole court in his palace, he refused the same, and
gave his reasons to the said Emperor in a several book which begins thus.
Libellus Ambrosij. ^. 32.
Clementissimo Imperatori and Beatissimo Augusto Valentiniario, Ambrosius
Episcopus, etc. and then he sets down how the Tribune Dalmatius with a
public Notarie did cite him in the Emperors name, to come to that conference,
or disputation, and what he answered unto him, which was in these words. I
answered (says he) that which your Father of glorious memory ( Vaelentinian
the elder) not only answered in speech upon like occasion, but confirmed also
by his laws, that in causes belonging to faith, Priests only should judge of
Priests: Yea further also that if a Bishop should be called in question for
his manners, this judgment likewise should appertain unto Bishops: Episcopal
authority greater then Imperial in matters of faith.
And who then of us, do answer more peruerslie? we, that would have you like
your Father, or they that would have you unlike him, etc. Quando audisti,
Clementissime Imperator, laicos in causa fidei de Episcopo iudicasse. When have
you ever heard, most Clement Emperor, that lay men did judge Bishops in
matters of faith. Certe si vel scripturaerum seriem diuinarum, vel vetera
tempora retractemus, quis est qui abnuat in causa fidei, (in causa, inquam,
fidei) Episcopos solere de Imperatoribus Christianis, non Imperatores de
Episcopis indicare. Truly if we will consider, either the whole course of
divine scriptures, or the use of ancient times, no man can deny, but that in
matrers of faith (I say in matters of faith) Bishops were wont to judge of
Christian Emperors, and not Emperors of Bishops. Eris, Deo sauente etiam
senectutis maturitate prouectior, and tunc de hoc censebis qualis ille
Episcopus sit, qui laicu ius sacerdotale substernit, Pater nunc, vir maturioris
aeui dicebat, Non est meum iudicare inter Episcopos; Tua nunc dicet Clementia;
Ego debeo iudicare? You shall be, by Gods favor, by the maturitie of old age
(you being now in your youth) better informed, and then you will be able to
judge better of this point, what manner of Bishop he is to be accounted, that
subiecteth the right of Priestdome to lay men, your Father being a man of
riper years, said, It belongs not to me to be Judge amongst Bishops; And
will your Clemency say now, that you ought to be their Judge? so S. Ambrose in
this occasion.

Anno 387.
27. The next year after with the same Valentinian, who by instigation of the
said Arrians, favored by Iustina the Empress, decreed, that a Church in
Millaine should be given unto them, S. Ambrose resistinge the same, Lib. ^.
epistola^u^ epistola. 13.
had a notable combat, which besides other Authors, himself sets down at
large in a certain epistle to his sister Marcellina, where showing the solemn
denuntiation of the Emperors Decree unto him, with his answer, he says.
Conuenerunt me primo viri comites Consistoriani, etc. First, there came unto me
certain Earls of the Court to command me to deliver the Church, etc. S.
Ambrose his combat about delivering up a Church to the Emperor.
I answered that which belongs to a man of my order, that the Church could
not be given up by a Priest, etc. Ego mansi in munere, missam faecere caepi,
dum ^ffero, raptum cognout, etc. I continued on in my Priestlie function, I
began to say mass, and whilst I was offering, I understood that one of the
adversary part, was taken by the people, I began bitterly to weep, and
beseech God in my oblation; that he would help, that no blood might be shed in
this cause of the Church; but that my blood only, if it were his holy will,
might be shed not only for saftie of the people, but also for the wicked sort
themselves. etc. The Emperors Earls and Tribunes urged me again, that I
should deliver the Church saying. Imperatorem iure suo vti, eo quod in
potestate eius essent omnia. Respondi quae diuina sunt, Imperatoriae
popotestaeti non esse subiectae, etc. They said that the Emperor did but use
this own right, and due authority, for that all was in his power. I answered
that those things that were divine, and belo^ged to God, are not subject to the
Emperors power. So S. Ambrose for defense of this his particular Church
against the Emperors commandment, which notwithstanding was but a material
Church as you see; and yet he said the cause was divine and not subject to the
Emperors power; but to a higher authority of the clergy.

27. And yet further when the said Tribunes, sent by the Emperor required to
have certain Church-vessels delivered unto them. S. Ambrose writes thus.
Ambr. ibid.
Cum esset propositum, vt Ecclesiae vasa iam traderenpius hoc responsi reddidi,
etc. when it was proposed unto me by the Emperors officers, that we should
presently deliver up the vessels of the Church ( behold Church-vessels of price
in those days) I gave this answer: that if any things of mine were
demanded, either land, or house, or gold, or silver, or any other things that
lay in my power to give, I would willingly offer the same; but from the Church
of God I could take nothing away, nor deliver that which I had received to be
kept. S. Ambros. conflict about Church vessels.
And that in this point I did respect the health principally of the Emperors
soul: for that it was not expedient for me to deliver the said Vessels, nor
for him to receive them: And that he should take in good part, the speech of a
free Priest. If the Emperor did love himself, he should do well to cease from
offeringe injury to Christ. So he. And what would he have said (think you) or
answered, if he had been in our English Parliament, when K. Henry the 8. both
demanded, and obtained not only the Vessels of many hundred Churches, but the
lands, livings, houses, and Churches also themselves which he pulled down, and
equalled with the ground, or from sacred, translated them to profane uses.

28. But let us hear the same Doctor and Father, Ambros. concione de basilis
non tradendit harot^^i^, aut gentelibus.
handling this subject more clearly in another place, to wit, in a public
sermon to the people, wherein he instructs them of the true nature, and
subordination of these two Powers, Spiritual, and Temporal, Ecclesiastical
and Imperial. Soluimus (says he) quae sunt Caesaris, Caesari; and quae sunt
Dei, Deo. etc. we do pay unto Caesar those things, Tom. 5.
that belong to Caesar, and we give unto God, the things that appertain unto
him. Is it Caesar's tribute that is demanded? we deny it not. Is it the Church
of God? It ought not to be given up to Caesar. For that the Temple of God,
cannot be the right of Caesar, which we speak to the Emperors honor, for
what is more honorable unto him, then that he being an Emperor, be called a
child of the Church? The Emperor a child of the church and not above the
Church.
which when it is said, it is spoken without sin, and to his grace, for that
a good Emperor is within the Church, but not above the Church, and he seeks
rather help of the Church, than refuses the same; this as we speak in
humility, so with constancy we freely affirm it. And albeit some do here
threaten us fire, sword, and exile, yet we being Christ's servant have learned
not to fear such things, and him that fears not, no threats can daunt.

29. And finally not to be longer in this matter, the same good Bishop some
few years after, having occasion to reprehend, and correct by his
Ecclesiastical Power and Jurisdiction, the famous Emperor Theodosius the
Great, S. Ambrose his correction of Theodosius the Emperor.
he failed not to use the same, and thereby showed the eminency of his
jurisdiction above the other. The occasion was, for that the said good Emperor
had suffered himself, by the incitation of certain of his court about him, to
permit the sackage, or spoil of the City of Thessolonica, Ambros. epist. 18.
for certain hours to his souldiars, in revenge or chastisement of a certain
disorder committed by them, but the said sackage and massacre proceedinge
further upon fury of souldiars, then the Emperors meaning was, and many
thousands of innocent people slain. S. Ambrose wrote first an earnest epistle
to the said Emperor, laying before him, the grieuousnes of his sin, and
exhortinge him to do penance; Anno 390.
Wherein he; when the Emperor performed not so much as he desired, proceeded
further. And when the Emperor came one day to the Church, the foresaid Bishop
went forth, and met him without the Church door, forbidding him to enter
therein, as unworthy the communion of Christian faithful people, until he had
done sufficient penance for his sin, which the good Emperor meeklie obaied;
as he did afterward also, when he coming to the Church to be reconciled, and
having made his offering, he remained within the chauncell among the Priests.
But S. Ambrose sending unto him his Deacon, signified, that, that place was
only for Priests and Clergy men, and therefore he should depart forth into the
body of the Church amonst lay men, adding this sentence. Purpurae Imperatores,
non sacerdotes efficit. Purple robes make Emperors, but not Priests. Which
admonition (says Theodorete) the most faithful Emperor took in good part,
and said, that he did not stay within the chauncell, upon any presumption, but
for that he had learned that custom in Constantinople: Theodoret. lib. 5.
hist. cap. 17.
and therefore gave him thanks also, for this wholesome admonition. So he.

30 But all which is seen what eminency of Spiritual Authority, was ascribed
by these holy Fathers and Doctors, to Bishops Priests, and Clergymen, above
Kings and Emperors; and I might add much more out of them to the same effect
for confutation of M. Attorneys Paradox, but that I am to reserve diverse
things, to the fourth chapter of this book, where I must answer his
principal argument; That whosoever ascribes not all supreme power to
Princes, as well in Ecclesiastical as Temporal matters, makes them no
complete monarchs: But these holy Fathers of the ancient primitive Church
were of another judgment, as you see.

31. Wherefore this being so, that in the Church, and Commonwealth of Christ,
though Kings and Emperors be Supreme in temporal Authority, and both
honor, obedience, and tribute due unto them in their degree, Matthew. 21. Romans
13. 1. Pet. 4.
as Christ and his Apostles do teach: yet, that in spiritual, and
Ecclesiastical matters, concerning the soul, Priests and Bishops are more
eminent in Authority. Hence it was deduced, that for combininge these two
Powers, and Authority together in peace and union, and due subordination in
the Christian Common wealth, How these two powers are to be combyned.
the one having need of the other (for that neither the temporal party can
save their souls, without the spiritual function; neither the Ecclesiastical
State be defended without the temporal sword) hence (I say), it proceeded that
presently after the entrance of Constantine the Emperor into the Church,
whereby Temporal, and Spiritual Power were to be conjoined together, and
exercised in one body (though in different tribunalls, and distinct affairs)
several laws, and ordinances were set down, and agreed upon, how they should
live together in peace, and concord, and dutiful respect the one to the
other: See of the distinction of these 2. names the Canons of the Apostles.
Can. 12. 13. 15. and Tertul. l. de Mo^^g. and Conn. Nuo^. 1. Can. 1. ^. ^. 1.
17. 18. 19. etc.
the Ecclesiastical party, by an ancient name, even from the Apostles time
downwards, being called the Clergy, which signifies the Lot, or peculiar in
heritance of God himself; and the temporal party named the Laity, which
imports as much as the rest of the people, besides the Clergy.

32. These two parties I say, are directed by most anncient laws both divine,
and humane how to live together in union, and due subordination, giving to
each power, and government, that which is due to each other, especially in
these points following, which Catholic deuines, and Canon-lawyers do larglie
handle: But I shall breiflie touch the sun only in this place so far, is it
may appertain to better decision of this our controversy. Noting first by the
way for the Reader his better advertisement, Note.
that these two Powers of Spiritual, and Temporal Jurisdiction, being
different (as has been said) and having so different ends, and objects; and
proceeding so differentlie from God, by different means and manners; and that
they may be separated, and remain severally and alone in different subjects,
as they did for diverse ages together in the primitive Church. All this (I
say) being so, it follows that it is no good argument, but rather a manifest
fallacy, to infer the one of the other, as to say, he has spiritual
Jurisdiction over me, and therefore also temporal; which follows not, and
much less the contrary; he has temporal Authority over any ergo spiritual
also. And least of all, as M. Atorney argues euery-where. A Prince or Monarch
has supreme authority temporal, ergo also spiritual; for that the one may
be without the other, as coming down from one origin, by different means, and
to different ends, as before has been declared. Now then let us pass to the
decisions above mentioned for due Subordination in these two Powers.

THE THIRD PART OF THIS CHAPTER, Showing how these two Powers, and
Jurisdictions, may stand well together in agreement, peace and union. 4. II.
33. The first affertion both of Deuines, and Canonists is, that
notwithstanding the former Prerogatives of Spiritual Power above Temporal;
yet when they are conjoined in one Commonwealth (as they have been in the
Catholic Church for these thirteen hundred years at least, since the
Conversion of Constantine the Emperor) the Clergy, and Ecclesiastical
persons of every Realm, as members of that Commonwealth, are subject unto
the Emperor, King, or other head of that Civil and politic body, or
Commonwealth in all temporal laws, and ordinances, not contrary to Gods law,
nor the Cannons of holy Church; and are punishable for the same, though not in
temporal courts, but spiritual, as after ward in the third assertion shall be
declared. As for example; when the Civil magistrate appoints things to be
sold at such, or such price: that no man go by night with arms: or carry out
commodities of the Realm without license, and the like: The obedience of
Clergy men, due to the Civil magistrates.
clergy men as Citizens of the Commonwealth are subject also unto these
laws which are made for direction of of the Commonwealth, to peace,
abundance, and prosperity: and consequently, are to be observed also by
Bishops, Priests, and Cleargie-men.

34. And in this sense, are to be understood the words, both of our Savior,
and his Apostles, when they ordain all obedience to be exhibited by all
Christians to their temporal Princes, without exception of any, yea though
they were evil men or infidells. AS namely where S. Paul says. Romans 2.
Omnia anima potestatibus sublimioribus subdita sit. Let every soul be subject
to higher powers, which S. Peter expounds, 1. Pet. 2.
sieve Regi, sieve Ducibus, etc. Whether it be to Kings, Dukes; and the like.
Upon which place to S. Paul, the holy Doctor S. Chrysostom infers that
political, Chrysostom. comment. in Romans 13.
and temporal laws, are not abrogated by the gospel, but that both Priests,
and monks, are bound to obey the same in temporal affairs. And Valentinian
the good Christian Emperor, Valent apud Theod. l. 14. hist. cap. 7.
in a certain Epistle of his, to the Bishops of Asia above 12. hundred years
gone, said^ that good Bishops do obey, not only the laws of God, but of Kings
likewise. Which Pope Nicolas the first, writing to Michaell the Emperor does
prove, when he says, Nicol. 1. epist. ad Mica^lem. Imper.
that Christian Emperors do need Bishops for the attaining of everlasting
life; But that Bishops do need Kings, and Emperors only, to use their laws,
for their direction in temporal affairs. And finally the matter is clear not
only, by the testimony, and practice of the primitive Church (say our
Deuines) but also by reason it self. For that if any sort of people should
live in a Commonwealth, and not observe the laws thereof, it would be a
perturbation to the whole. And for that these Civil laws, albeit their
immediate end be temporal good; yet may the observation thereof be referred
also to a higher spiritual end by good men, and therefore are all good subjects
bound to obey them. And this for the first point.

35. The second is, that in causes mere Ecclesiastical, and Spiritual, which
appertain to Religion, Faith, Sacraments, holy Orders, and the like, and are
to be determined out of the gospel, Counsels, Canons, and Doctors of the
Church: In all these affairs Catholic deuines hold, that Ecclesiastical
persons, are no way subject to temporal Princes, for the reasons before
alleged of prehemine^cy of Spiritual Power, Clergy men in spiritual
matters cannot be under the laytie.
above Temporal in these affairs. In respect whereof the holy ancient Bishops
did stand with Christian Emperors, and auerre their Authority to be above the
others, as before out of S. Gregory Nazianzen, S. Ambrose S. Chrysostom and
others you have heard declared. So as here you se a mutual Subordination of
Priests to Princes, in Civil and temporal matters, and of Princes to Priests
and Bishops, in spiritual affairs: which according to S. Gregory Nazianzen
his comparison before mentioned, may thus be expressed; that the soul in
matters of this life, though with some grief and regreate of spirit in good
men, is bound to follow the direction, and law of the body for health,
strength, and other such corporal commodities; and the body in matters of life
everlasting, must be content to follow the soul, and direction of spirit, and
so is bound to do, though with repugnance oftentimes of the flesh, as in
fasting, praying, penance, and other such like exercise. And wheresoever these
two mutual subordinations be well observed; there the Common wealth goes
forward well, and prosperously; and contrariwise where the said subordination
is neglected or perturbed, there all goes out of order and joint.

36. But now there remains a third point of further moderation, between these
two Powers, which is according to our deuines, and Canon-lawyers; Ha^ clergy
men's persons and good^ are ^^^mp^^d (...) power.
That albeit Ecclesiastical men be subject to the observation of temporal
laws; as before is said; yet are as well their persons, as their goods free,
and exempted, from the temporal magistrate, and his tribunalls, even in those
causes also: in so much, that if Clergy men do offend against the laws of
the Commonwealth, they are to be judged, and condemned by Ecclesiastical
judges, in the Courts, and tribunals of their prelates, and afterward to be
delivered to secular power, to inflict the decreed punishment upon them, which
they shall be found worthy of. Their goods also both Ecclesiastical, and
temporal, are exempted from all secular power, and their impositions, or
exactions, by ancient Decrees and Constitutions, as well of the Church, as of
old Christian Emperors in honorem Cleri in honor of the Clergy, See Council.
La^eran. sub Alex. 3. part l. c. 10. ^ s^b ^^. no^. 3. c 46. Item cap. Quanqu^
de Censibus, and cap. Clericis, and cap. Nonnulli, etc. in 6.
to use the ancient word. And as for Ecclesiastical Constitutions to this
effect made as well by general Counsels as particular Popes, even down from
the primitive Church, sufficient testimonies, or rather abundant are extant,
and may be seen collected together by Gratian, and others in the sixth Book of
Decretalls, especially out of two Lateran General Counsels and many other
particular decrees, Laws, and Ordinances Ecclesiastical, tending to this
purpose. And many ages before this, the same exemptions be recorded, especially
for the immunitie of their persons from secular power, and tribunals, as in the
Council of Calcedon, and 9. Canon: See the Council of To ^t. also ^on. 3. can.
13. and Matis^on, can. 8.
The Council Agathense, and 32. Canon, and the third Council of Carthage,
wherein S. Augustine himself was present, and diverse other Councels.

37. And there do not want many learned deuines, who are of opinion, that this
exemption of Ecclesiastical persons, and their goods, is not only Iuris humani
Ecclesiastici, by positive and humane Ecclesiastical laws: Exemptio^ of
Clergy men en Iure diu^^^.
But Iuris diuini also; that is to say, by right of divine law in a certain
sort, which is thus to be understood; That albeit God has not expreslie
commanded it in the written law of Scripture, yet is it conform both to the
law of nature, which is also Gods law; as likewise it may be deduced, and
inferred from examples recorded in Scripture, under the old Testament, that God
would have this honor of exemption, and immunitie in temporal things to be
exhibited to his Clergy. Genesis 47.
And therefore we do read in Genesis that Joseph the Patriarch in the law of
Nature, did exempt the Priests of the Egyptians, from all temporal tributes.
1. Esd. 7.
And in the books of Esdras we read, that Artaxerxes King of the Persians, out
of the same law of Nature, did make free also the Priests of Israel. And that
the very Gentiles did the same to their Priests out of the same law, and
instinct of Nature, is evident out of Aristotle in his second book
Oeconomicorum. And of Caesar in his sixth book De bello Gallico. And out of
Plutarch in the life of Camillus, and other Pagan writers. And in the written
law we read, as well in Exodus, Exodus 30.
as in the book of Numbers, 1. Number. 5.
That God did often affirm, that he would have the order of Levites to be his,
and to be freely given, and made subject only to Aaron their high Priest, and
to pay no tribute. Out of which is inferred, that if God in the law of Nature,
and of Moses, would have Priests, and Levites to be free in their persons, and
goods, from temporal exactions; much more may it be presumed, that he will
have it so in the new Law of the Ghospel, S. Leo sermon. 8. de p^ss. Dor^n^.
where to use the words of S. Leo. Et Ordo clarior Leuitarum, and dignit as
amplior seniorum, and sacratior vnctio sacerdotum, etc. The order of Levites is
more eminent, and the dignity of elders more excellent, and the anointing of
Priests more sacred and holy among Christians, then they were among the Jews.
And thus much of Ecclesiastical Laws, for exemption of the Clergy.

Exemptio^ of the Clergy by Imperial ^avves.
38. But now upon the very self same Considerations, temporal Princes also
coming to be Christians, did voluntarily consume, and establish by their
political laws, the same exemptions, as first of all, our first Christian
Emperor Constantine the Great, as soon as he came to receive that Grace, and
light of the gospel, Cons^antin (...) ad Auill apud Euses. ^. 10. ^ist. ^^p.
7 cod. Ib^^d. ^. 16. ^^t. and ^. 26. and ^od. (...) l. San^imu^ (...) Eccl.
Hi^ram.
did upon his singular devotion, make all the Ecclesiastical persons, immunes a
communibus Reipublicae oneribus. Free from al public charges, and burdens of
the Commonwealth, which lay men did under go; as by his epistle set down
by Eusebius is clear. And the same example did other Christian Emperors
follow after him, as may appear by diverse laws, as well in the Code of
Theedosius, as also of Justinian. And the same does S. Hi^rome signify to have
been in use in his days, and S. Ambrose also in his, so much as appertains
to the freedom of their persons; though for their lands, and possessions, he
says. ^
Agri Ecclesiae soln^nt tributum. That the lands of the Church did pay a
certain tribute at that time; which may be understood in the respect of the
Emperors public necessity through wars; upon which or like due
considerations, Clergy men have all ways been ready and ought to be, to
contribute willingly, and gratefully according to their abilities, toward the
public charges of their temporal Princes affairs; notwithstanding their
exemptions by law, and justice.

39. Particular Kings and Princes in like manner upon their devotions, and to
the imitation of their foresaid good Emperors, have by their particular laws
in every Christian country confirmed the franquises, freedoms, and immunities
of the Church and Clergy: and perhaps in no one nation more throughout
Christendom, than in our English Realm, whether we consider times either
before the Conquest, or after: And before the Conquest it may be seen by the
collectio^ of old English laws of every Kingdom, set forth by K. Edgar, and
K. Edward the Confessor; Exe^ptions confirmed by particular Kings and Princes.
and after the Conquest by the Co^querour himse^, as after shall be showed; And
after him again by the very first Statutes, that are extant in Print, namely,
from the great Charter made by K. Henry the third in the 9. year of his
Reign, Magna Charta arti^^d. Cleri.
and the articles of the Clergy established in the 9. year, of K. Edward the
second in the favor of the said Clergy; the said great Charter being
reiterated and ratified, in most of the ensuing Parlaments for authorizing, and
establishinge the foresaid exemptions, and privileges of Clergymen, which
were from time to time by all our Kings confirmed (as afterward shall more
largely and perticularly be proved) until the later times of K. Henry the
eight.

40. Now then, matters standing thus, and the Church in every country
throughout Christendom being in possession of these liberties, freedoms, and
immunities, for their persons, and goods, and acknowledging for their supreme
superior in Spiritual Power, and Jurisdiction, the Bishop of Rome, and their
temporal Kings in Civil, and temporal matters: there grew in process of
time, many difficulties, and entanglements, about the execution, and
subordination of these two Jurisdictions Temporal, and Spiritual the one to
the other, sometimes by abuse, passion, or indiscretio^ of some under-officers
of these two supreme powers, and tribunals within our land; each side seeking
to incroach upon the other, or at leastwise not to be content with their own
limits, For as between the spirit, and flesh in this life, (to use again S.
Gregory Nazianzens similitude) there is some continual strife, and
struglinge; The competence between temporal and ecclesiastical Magistrates
in some external things.
so has it been always in a certain sort between these two powers of
Spiritual and Temporal Jurisdiction, or at leastwise in the exercise thereof,
especially as riches, and temporalityes grew more in the Clergy; and thereby
gave matter of envy, and emulation; and less devotion to the laytie toward
them; in so much, that at length for auoidinge worse inconveniences,
limitations, conditions, concordates, and transactions, were made and brought
into use, how far the execution of each parties authority should be exte^ded in
certain inferior things, that might seem either mixed, or doubtful, as by
many examples, both in France, Spain, Sicily, Naples, Flaunders, England, and
other countries may be declared: Whereupon notwithstanding daily we see sundry
difficulties, suits, and controversies to arise.

How restraints came in of exercising some points of the Popes ancient
authority.
41. Some States also, and Catholic Kingdoms, have made certain Decrees, or
Restraints at sometimes de facto (whether rightfully or not, I will not now
dispute) for preuentinge, and remedyinge some pretended inconveniences, in the
exercise of certain points of the Popes Authority within their said Realms,
Some other also pretend to have done the same with indult, consent,
transaction, or conuiuency of the Pope himself. But none of all these (which is
the main point) did ever deny, or call in question the said Authority it
self, as after shall appear; but rather did many ways acknowledge, and
confess the same; and of this kind of Restrictions, or Interpretations, are
the most part of these few pieces of Decrees, and Statutes, Customs, Laws, or
Ordinances, that M. Attorney does allege, which make nothing at all for the
proof of his main question, that our English Kings before and after the
Conquest, did take upon themselves supreme Spiritual Authority, as derived
from the Right of their Crown: nay rather they make fully against him, for
that the very manner of making these restraintes, first by way of supplication
to the Popes themselves (as after shall be showed) and then by domestical
ordinances, does well declare what opinion the said Princes had of that power
to be in the said Popes, and not in themselves. And this is so much as needs
to be said in this place for a general light to the whole matter. Now shall we
pass over, to treat of the particular occasion, whereupon M. Attorney thought
good, to ground his whole discourse of Q. Elizabethes Ecclesiastical
Authority, as presently shall be declared.

THE PARTICVLAR STATE OF THE CONTROVERSY With M. Attorney, concerning the late
Queens Ecclesiastical Power, by the ancient laws of England, deduced out of
the case of one Robert Caudery Clerk. CHAP. III.
Master Attorney for preamble or entrance, to his designed Argument against
recusant Catholics (for that to be his purpose, the end of his book
declares) he sets down a pitiful case of one Robert Caudery Clerk,
deprived of his benefice, or parsonage of North-looffennam in Ruland-shire, by
the Bishop of London, as high Commissioner, with consent of some of his
associates, authorized in Causes Ecclesiastical by a Commission of the late
Queen, granted by her letters Patents the nynth day of December, in the 26.
year of her Reign. I do call the case pitiful, not so much in respect of
the poor man deprived and vexed, as after shall appear, but much more of the
public partiality appearing to have been used against him, by sway of the
time, and by such men, as occupied the place of Justice. You shall hear how
the Case passed, and judge thereof your selves.

2. This Caudery in the Term of S. Hilary (says M. Attorney) in the 33. year
of the reign of Q. Elizabeth brought an action of trespass, Caudery his Case.
R^tulo. 304. Reports. sol. 1.
against one George Atton, for breaking of his cloase in North-looffennam
aforesaid, upon the 7. day of August in the 31. year of the said Q. But Atton
pleaded not guyltie; and the Jury found, that the said Cauderie, had been
deprived of that benefice, (...) (...) (in part whereof the Cloase was broken)
by a sentence of the said Bishop of London, Cum assensu A. B. C. D. etc.
Collegerum suorum. For that he had preached against the Book of Common-praier,
and refused to celebrate divine service according to the same.

The ground of the controversy.
3. Heerupon it came in question, how and by what Authority, the said Bishop of
London had given his sentence, either rightfully or wrongfully. And first it
was alleged by Cauderyes Counsel, that the Authority of commission given to
him (to wit to the forenamed Bishop of London) and certain others his
Colleags, Statute for spiritual authority Anno 1. Elizabethae.
by the foresaid Q. Elizabeth's letters Patents, was only founded upon a
Statute, made in the first year of her Reign, by which it was enacted, That
such Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, as by any spiritual, or Ecclesiastical
power, has heertofore been, or may lawfully be exercised, for the visitation
of the Ecclesiastical estate, and persons, and for the reformation, order, and
correction of the same, and of all manner of errors, heresies, schisms,
abuses, offenses, contempts, and enormities within this Realm, should for ever
be united and annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm. And that her
highness, her heyrs, and Successors should have full power, and Authority, The
Spiritual authority given to Q. Elizabeth by Statute.
by virtue of that Act, by letters Patents under the great Seal of England, to
assign, nominate, and authorize such persons (being natural borne subjects) as
her Highness, her heirs, or Successors should think meet, to exercise and
execute, under her highness, her heyrs, and successors, all, and all manner of
Jurisdiction, Privileges, and Preheminences, in any wise, touching or
concerning any spiritual, or Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, within this Realm
of England, and Ireland. And to visit, reform, redress, order, correct, and
amend all such errors, heresies, schisms, abuses, offenses, contempts, and
enormities whatsoever, which by any manner of spiritual, or Ecclesiastical
Power, Authority, or Jurisdiction, can or may lawfully be reformed, ordered,
corrected, and amended. etc.

4. This was the ground, whereby both the Queen was endued as you see, with all
manner of Ecclesiastical power, and Jurisdiction, and had authority also
given her, to bestow the same upon others: without any other condition here
expressed, but only that they should be natural borne subjects. So as if it
had pleased her Majesty, to have bestowed a Commission, upon so many Ladies of
the Court, to visit some part of the Clergy, or Laity; to redress their
errors, heresies, abuses, or other enormities; or instead of the Bishops named
by her, she had thought good to nominate their wives for high commissioners
over them, to reform, order, redress, correct, or amend abuses, I see not by
the words of the Statute, why it had not been lawful; For so much, as there is
no exception of sex therein. And as well might the Queen have made women her
substitutes in this point, as this Statute gave all the power in capite to her
self being a woman. I would ask moreover, that whereas K. Henry the eight, when
he was made head of the Church appointed for his Vicar-Generall in
Spiritualibus the Lord Cromwell, Certain cases of inconveniences upon Q.
Elizabethes supreme spiritual authority.
that was a mere lay man, and caused him to sit above all the Bishops in
Synods and Councels, about Ecclesiastical affairs: why his daughter Q.
Elizabeth that had the same authority that he had, might not have appointed my
Lady Cromwell, or any such other Lady of that sex, whereof there were diverse
that professed good skill in divinity (at the beginning of her Reign) for her
Vicaresse-Generall, in Ecclesiastical affairs. Nay why the feminne sex might
not have conspired together to have put down men for a time, and to have
taken the government of the Church upon themselves: making themselves the
Clergy, as their husbands were the laity. And truly albeit this may seem
ridiculous; yet I see not, what in earnest can be answered hereunto, but only
the novelty, and indecency of the thing. For, as for the lawfulnes, according
to Luthers doctrine, Lutherus. lib. de abroganda missa. Et ^ cap. Ba^il.
that holds all people, to be Priests, and capable of all spiritual
functions, both men and women, I se no great difficulty. And as for the said
inconveniences of novelty and indecency, there might seem to be as great, or
greater in giving Ecclesiastical primacy to a woman, as to make another woman
her substitute, or Vicaresse; But we see the first done, and therefore the
second in like manner might have been done, if her Majesty had pleased.

5. But leaving this we shall return to our Case of Caudery the Clerk, who
whether he were a Catholic Priest, or Puritan-minister, that was deprived for
refusing to follow the Communion-booke, is uncertain; but whatsoever he was,
it seems that his cause was much over borne by the Current of the time, in
favor of the Bishop of London that deprived him, which I notwithstanding would
not trouble my self, nor my Reader to repeat in this place, but that I am
forced thereunto in regard, that upon his Plea, and Resolution of the temporal
Judges thereon, rises out the occasion of our particular Controversy, about Q.
Elizabeth's Spiritual Jurisdiction.

The first argument of Caudery.
6. First then the said Cauderyes Counsel pleaded for him, that whereas in the
Statute concerning the foresaid Book of Common prayer (which they said was
made with much moderation, and equity) it was appointed and ordained, that if
any did offend against the same, he should for the first time loose only the
profit of his Ecclesiastical livings for one year, and suffer imprisonment
for six months: And for the second offense, be deprived ipso facto: And for
the third, be imprisoned during his life; And that of every of these offenses,
in order, the delinquent should be severally convicted, and condemned
iudiciallie; which they said, that the Bishop of London had not observed, but
had deprived Caudery for the first offense; and this upon no notorious evidence
of the fact, or by his own confession as the statute ordained: but only by
default of his appearance. So as they alleged two great, and important
defects, to have been committed by him; The reply against Caudery. Reports
for. 5.
and consequently his fact to be void. And yet not withstanding says M.
Attorney; it was resolved by the whole Court, that the Bishops sentence was
not to be impeached, for either of them; First, for that it was not said in the
Queens Commission, that you shall proceed thus, and not other wise, or in no
other manner or form. Secondly for that the Ecclesiastical and temporal
laws, have several proceedings, and several ends. And thirdly, for that there
is a certain prouiso in the said Act, that all Archbishops and Bishops, and
every of their Chancellours, Commissaryes, Archdeacons, and other Ordinaries,
having peculiar Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction; may inquire, and punish within
their said Jurisdictions, by admonition, excommunication, sequestration, or
deprivation. etc.

Three shifts re^u^ed.
7. But by M. Attorneyes leave, none of these three shifts can satisfy the
reason of an indifferent man in this Case: Queen, was stricti Iuris, and
consequently not to be enlarged further, than the express words do bear;
especially seeing that it is in prejudice of others. law, (that belike
proceeds without Reason) though how, or why, nothing is here set down, but
only this, Reporte^ fol. 6.
that the temporal law is to inflict punishment upon the body, lands, and
goods; the other being spiritual, is pro salute anima; the one to punish the
outward man; the other to reform the inward: as though, this external act of
depriving Caudery from his benefice, did not punish him outwardly, as well, as
reform him inwardly: and yet does M. Attorney, (as though he had said
somewhat to the purpose) quote his 12. Isa^. ^. 22. and 10. Edw. 4. etc.
book for it, and thereon makes this conclusion. Then (says he) both these
distinct, and several Jurisdictions, consist and stand well together, and
do join in this, to have the whole man inwardly, and outwardly reformed.
Which conclusion supposinge, as you see, all Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, to
be inward only, is denied by us flattlie; for that we hold Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction to be both internal, and external, in fore conscientia, and in
fore contentioso: as in the precedent Chapter we have showed. And secondly we
say, that this seems nothing to the purpose, for releeuinge the Bishop of
London his Act, in depriuinge Caudery beyond the form of his Commission.

8. The third evasion also, Shifte.
under color of the forenamed prouiso, is to little purpose; for that it
allows only ordinary Ecclesiastical Judges within their proper
Jurisdictions, to proceed by admonition, excommunication, sequestration, or
deprivation; which was not so dangerous a matter, for so much as the party
aggreiued might allwaies appeal from them to higher courts for remedy, if he
were aggreiued. But this authority of the high commissioners, being
extraordinary and supreme, has no Appellation from it, and consequently it
was more reason and needful, that their Authority should be limited with some
bounds; and that they should not exceed, the strict words of their commission,
to the end, that the aggreiued might appeal, at leastwise to the faid
Commission and clauses thereof, when they found themselves injured. And the
argument used here by M. Attorney, a fortiore, M. Attorneys Argument a
fortiore of no force.
has no force at all; to wit, that for so much, as these inferior
Ecclesiastical ordinary Judges had power to proceed, without restraint of
any particular form; much more, high Commissioners had that Authority given
them; For that (says he) Cui licet quod in maius est, non debet quod minus est
non licere. He that may do the greater, may not be denied the lesser. This I
say, is to simple to be brought forth, by so grave a Sage of the law, as M.
Attorney is held to be. First, for that this Maxim agrees not properly to out
case: For albeit no man deny, but that high Commissioners could do more and
greater things, than these ordinary Commissaries; yet, for this it self, they
needed more to be bound, and tied to a prescript manner of justifiable
proceeding, as has been said; least they might iniure, and oppress men at
their pleasure without remedy. And secondly is is not always true, that he
which can do the greater, can do the less, when it is in different kind of
Jurisdictions, ordinary, or extraordinary: as in our case it falls out.

An example against M. Attorney.
9. For if (for examples sake) a Visitour be sent to a College to visit the
same for certain defects, with particular order, how to proceed, and punish
the said offenses; though in many things he have greater Authority, by his
extraordinary commission, then is the ordinary of the President and fellows,
and other ordinary officers: yet cannot he either tacit or a fortiore by
virtue of this Maxim take unto him, all the power, and manner of proceeding
which the said President and fellows have, by their ordinary Authority of
Statutes, in admitting and rejecting scholars, giving, and changing offices,
setting, and letting of lands, and the like: except it be epresslie in his
Commission. Noe, not in punishments neither, concerning those defects, which he
has to visit may he exceed his prescript order; they being things, as I say,
stricti Iuris, which both law, reason, and conscience do forbid to be enlarged
beyond his commission. And so does M. Attorney seem to grant that it should
be so in any judgment given by Commissioners, of Oyer and Terminer, or other
Commissioners, or Judges of the common law; insinuating belike, that the Canon,
or Ecclesiastical law now used in England, is abritrary, and to be applied, as
they please that sit in Authority.

The second argument of Cauderyes case.
10. And this seems greatly to be confirmed, by another Resolution of his
Judges made to another argument of Caudery, wherein his Counsel urged for him,
that according to the commission, sentence should have been given against him,
by three at least of the Commissioners jointly concurring, which was not
observed; but given only by the Bishop, though he pretends, that it was also
by the consent of some of his Colleage. Strange resolution.
It was resolved (says M. Attorney) by the whole Court that the sentence
given by the Bishop, with Consent of his Colleags, was such, as the Judges of
the Common Law, ought to allow to be given according to the Ecclesiastical
laws. Consider, I pray you, this Resolution, that they, out of the Common Law,
do allow it to be well done, according to the Ecclesiastical laws: but hear
the reason, for it imports much, to se thereby the manner of proceeding:
Reports fol. 7.
for seeing (says he) that their authority is to proceed, and give sentence
in Ecclesiastical causes, according to the Ecclesiastical law, and they have
given a sentence in a cause Ecclesiastical, upon their proceedings; by sorce
of that law, the Judges of the common law, ought to give faith, and credit to
their sentence, and to allow it to be done according to the Ecclesiastical
law. For Cuilibet in sua art perito est credendum. We must believe every
skillfull man in his art etc. So he. And is not this a strange Reason of a
judicial sentence think you? that for so much, as the Bishop of London had
deprived Caudery by pretense of an Ecclesiastical law, his fact must be
allowed by virtue of this maxim: That every skillfull man is to be credited in
his art. And was not the poor plainteife well helped up, who after four years
travel and cost, as it appears, wherein he followed the suite at the
Common Law against the said Bishop, he was now answered, That every skillfull
man, must be believed in his art, without further inquiring.

11. And yet M. Attorney here auerreth, that it is a common, received opinion
of all books, and cites diverse 11. Hen. 7. 9. 14. Hen. 6. 14. etc.
booke-cases for the same. And albeit I have not by me the books themselves
nor do profess my self skillfull therein; yet must I needs ascribe so much
equity, prudence, and reason, unto the Common law as to presume that it will
not admit this Maxim without some distinction or reasonable restriction. As
for example; that this Peritus or skillfull man, that must be so believed, be
eminent in his art, and be not interessed, nor passionate in the Case proposed;
For other-wise absurd effects would ensue: as for example. If a surgeon hired
to cure a wound, should be suspected to have intoxicated the same, and that the
Plainteife should have this answer, that every skillfull man is to be believed
in his art, it were injustice: For that he might, either of ignorance, have
erred therein, if he be not known to be very well learned in his art; or of
malice, if he might be presumed to hope, or expect gain by the wounded man's
death. An example with the application thereof.
And howsoever it be, the matter in right, and conscience were not to be
shuffled over with such an answer of the appointed Judges, but the Case were
to be examined, other surgeons to be consulted, them ans skill, honesty, and
reputation to be inquired of, and other such diligence to be used, as might
content, and satisfy the afflicted party; whereof none was done, as it
seems, in the behalf of Caudery.

12. For whereas in this case the Bishop of London was interessed in his honor,
to defend that which he had done; Caudery shifted of ^ightly.
and not perhaps the greatest Canoinst, or Ciuilian Lawyer in the world for his
skill; and this poor plainteife, as I say, having followed the Common
Lawyers to judge the case for so many years; it seems a slight shifting off,
for the Judges to tell him now, in favor of the said Bishop and his Colleags,
Cuilibet in sua art perito, est credendum. We must believe every man skillful
in his science; which is as much as if they had said; he has deprived you, and
he is skillful in depriving, and therefore you must think that he has done it
very well. And this is all the remedy you are like to have.

31. And by this the reader may also perceive how much is to be ascribed to M.
Attorneyes words before recited, when he says of those Judges of the Common
law, from whom he cites some certain little pieces of Interpretations,
Ordinances, Statutes, or decrees, in proof (as he would have it seem) of the
Queens Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction; persuading us, that they could not be
daunted with any fear, moved by any affection, nor corrupted with any
reward: which as I believe in some, so the experience of these our days, and
of these our fornamed Judges and modern Sages, may teach us to suspect the
same in others also of those auncienter times, who may be presumed to have
followed the current of their days, and to have been no less ready, to run
after their Princes humors, than we see many lawyers and Deuines also in our
days to do. But now to the last argument of Caudery, and final Resolution
against him.

14. After that he had declared the three defects before mentioned of the
Bishop of Londons sentence against him. First that he was deprived upon the
first accusation. Secondly that he was convicted by no Jury, witnesses, or
confession, but upon not appearance. Thirdly that the sentence was not given
by three, or more Commissioners jointly. All which are express clauses of
their commission slightly euacuated, The third argument of Caudery and how it
was ansvvered.
as before you have heard: he came to the fourth point, which is, that the
Statute whereby this supreme Ecclesiastcall power was given to the Queen
herself by the Parliament, has a clause; that such as should be named for
commissioners must be naturally borne subjects. Which his counsel said did not
appear by the special verdict of the Jury, to have been observed, and
consequently that the sentence was not good and auailable in law. Hereunto
(says M. Attorney) a threefold answer was given, and resolved by the whole
court. Reports fol. 7.
First, that they which were Commissioners, and had places of judicature,
should be intended to be subjects borne, and not aliens, etc. Quia stabitur
praesumptioni, donec probetur in contrarium. The common presumption must be
followed, until the contrary be proved. Here you see how much this answer
weighs. It seems to me that this matter might easily in four years have
been verefied, if the Judges had listed, whether these Commissioners were
aliens, or borne Subjects, and not to reject the Plainteife now with this
shadow, of common presumption, that they might be presumed or supposed to be
naturally borne.

15. Secondly, says M. Attorney the Jurors have found that the Queen, by her
said letters Patents, did authorize them secundum formam Statuti praedicti:
according to the form of the said Statute that authorized her; and therefore it
does by a necessary consequence amount to as much, as if they had found, that
they had been subjects borne. Mark this kind of reasoning.
For if they were not subjects borne (says he) they could not be so authorized
secundum formam Statuti praedicti. This is the second answer somewhat weaker
(as to me it seems) than the former, of presumption and common intendement.
For here, instead of proving that the Commissioners were borne subjects, and
consequently well anthorized; he subsumeth, and infers the contrary, to
wit, that they were authorized by the Queen, secundum formam Statuti
praedicti. ergo they were borne subjects: as who would say the Queen, or those
that counseled her, could not be deceived or evil informed, or negligent in
this point, about the observing of that clause: and yet this is all, that was
answered by the Court to this matter. Which themselves (belike) considering,
fell to devise a third answer, more absurd and paradoxicall, than all the
rest, which have given the ground or argument of this Sage fable or Comedy,
which M. Attorney has here partly reported, and partly exhibited unto us,
in this his book, to the laughter of such as read it, and do consider the
exorbitant vanity thereof. I shall set it down in very few words.

16. When the forenamed Sages did perceive, that the former two answers to
Cauderyes fourth exception, against the Queens commission, The last answer of
the ^^dg^e ^vherin (...) case (...) Caudery ^s^uded.
made out upon virtue of the statute in the first year of her reign, that
gave her all kind of Spiritual power, and Jurisdiction did not satisfy, they
fell upon this third, that albeit the said Queen, had not observed the
clauses, and conditions specified in the said Statute for authorizing others in
the like Jurisdiction: yet had she authority otherwise, to make out such a
Commission, in that she was Queen, and this by the virtue of her Crown,
according to the ancient Common laws of England. ^^p^rtes ^. ^.
. You shall hear M. Attorneys own words in this resolution. This Act (says
he) of the first year of the late Queen ( concerning Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction) was not an act introductorie of a new law, but declaratorie of
the old: which appears as well by the Title of the said Act, Anno. 1.
E^izabeth ^.
videlicet. An Act, restoring to the Crown the ancient Jurisdiction over the
State Ecclesiastical and spiritual: etc. As also by the body of the Act in
diverse parts thereof, for that this Act does not annex any Jurisdiction to
the Crown, but that which in truth was, or of right ought to be, by the
ancient laws of the Realm, parcel of the Kings Jurisdiction, and united to
his Imperial Crown, etc. so as, if the said Act of the first year of the
late Queen, had never been made, it was resolved by all the Judges, that the
King or Queen of England for the time being, may make such an Ecclesiastical
commission, by the ancient prerogative, or law of England. Thus he.

17. And truly I am sorye, that he affirms this strange Paradox to have been
the resolution of all the Judges there present. But to the end that all may not
seem to have entered into this solemn folly, it were good that their
particular names were known, that resolved the same; For certainly, it will
be the most notorious jest, unto foreign lawyers of all sorts, and unto
other grave, and learned men when it shall come abroad in other countries (as
shortelie it will, for that M. Attorney has caused it also to be published in
Latin) The absurdity and str^nge ^^a^l^y of this reso^u^ion.
which has happened in many years, if not ages; and much laughter it will
cause, and will celebrate, solemnlie M. Attorneys name that is the Reporter
thereof. For this matter touches not only England and English-laws, but all
other Countries besides, who have run jointly with England for many hundred
years, in the self same conformity of Catholic Religiou, and of temporal
laws confirming the same in each Country, and particularly in this point of
the Popes Spiritual Authority universally received: So as, for so much as
their kingdoms being entyre Empires, and Monarchies, (as ours is) they must
needs be said, to have had this Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction also in the
highest degree, included in their Kingly right, as parcel of their Imperial
Crown; whereof insueth, that either they, and their learned Counselours,
Lawyers, and Sages, did not see or know the same, which had been great
Ignorance: or esteemed it not, which had been great negligence; or (which is
most likely) that our lawyers now will be thought by them ridiculous, to set
forth such a strange Paradox to the world, contrary to that which so many
thousand Sages of former times both in general Counsels and otherwise, have
resolved, decreed, and determined, upon better deliberation, and more search,
both of divinity, history, and law, than these temporal Judges could do upon
the sudden in Cauderyes case, howsoever M. Attorney does magnifye the same;
who as I hear by some that will seem to report it from his own mouth, he
that is the Reporter, is in great part also the author, or at least wise
affects to be thought so, as of a new witty invention; having often, and unto
many promised to prove it, and now has begun to set upon it. We shall see
with what event.

THE SECOND PART OF THIS CHAPTER, With a more clear explication of the
Question.. I.
18. But before we come to treat of proofs, we must consider of one
circumstance of the matter more, which is of no small importance, for judging
of the whole, and this is the circuit of words, and multitude of dark and
dazeling phrases, which the foresaid Statute uses, in delivering, and setting
down the Ecclesiastical power and Jurisdiction, Reports fol. 1.
given to Q. Elizabeth, to wit; that all such Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, as
by any spiritual, or Ecclesiastical power, has heertofore been, or may
lawfully be exercised, for the visitation of the Ecclesiastical estate and
persons, and for their reformation, order, and correction of the same; and of
all manner of errors, heresies etc. is given to the Queen, with full power and
authority, to assign, nominate, and authorize others also, to exercise and
execute under her highness all, and all manner of Jurisdiction, privileges, and
preheminences, in any wise touching or concerning, any spiritual or
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and to visit, reform, redress, order, correct,
and amend, etc.

19. Which words may seem by their often naming of visitation and visiting,
that they meant only to make the Queen a visitrix over the Clergy, which
imports much limitation of supreme power, and yet on the other side, they
give her all Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, that ever has been heertofore, or
may be exercised by any Ecclesiastical authority or person; and that both
she, and her substitutes, have all, and all manner of Jurisdiction,
privileges, and preheminences concerning spiritual affairs, as you have
heard. Why so great circuit of words is used in the Statute of Supremacy.
So as, on the one side, they seem to restrain and limitt, not calling her
head of the Church, as before in the style of K. Henry, and K. Edward was
accustomed, but rather a supreme Visitrix, as by these words appears. And on
the otherside they giving her, all, and all manner of Jurisdiction
Ecclesiastical that by any power, or person Ecclesiastical has ever
heertofore been used, or may be used (including no doubt therein both the Pope,
and all other Bishops, or Archbishops, that ever have exercised Jurisdiction in
England) they make her spiritual head of the Church in the highest degree;
giving her the thing, without the name, and dazeling the eyes of the ordinary
Reader, with these multitude of words subtilie couched together. And why so
think yon? I shall breefly disclose the mystery of this matter.

20. When K. Henry the eight, had taken the Title of Supreme head of the
Church upon him; as also the governors of K. Edward had given the same unto
him, being but yet a child of 9. years old: the Protestants of other Countries,
which were glad to se England, brake more and more from the Pope, whom they
feared; yet not willing instead thereof to put themselves wholly under temporal
Princes, but rather to rest at their own liberty, of chosing congregations
and presbyteryes, to govern; began to mislike with this English style of
Supreme head, See Mar^mus (...) epist. ad ^^ector. Brand and Calvin in c. ^.
Amos. and epist. ad Myc^s. and Viretus d^alog 3. de a^^^s damonibus. etc.
as well the Lutheranes, as appears by diverse of their writings, as also the
Zuinglians; and much more afterward the Caluinists, whereupon John Calvin their
head and founder, in his Commentary upon Amos the Prophet inueigheth bitterly
against the said Title, and authority of supreme head taken first by King
Henry, and says it was Tyrannical, and impious. And the same assertion he
held during his life, as after by occasion, more particularly shall be showed.
And the whole body of Caluinists, throughout other Countries, are of the same
opinion and faith, though in England, they be upon this point divided, into
Protestants and Puritans, as all men know.

21. This then being the State of things, when Q. Elizabeth began her Reign,
those that were nearest about her, and most prevailed in Counsel, inclining to
have a change in Religion, that thereby also other changes of dignities,
offices, and livings might ensue, and desiring to reduce all to the new Queens
disposition; but yet finding great difficulty and resistance in many of the
Caluinists, to give the accustomed Title of headship, in respect of John
Caluins reprobation thereof: A new devise to give the headship to Q. Elisabeth
without the title of Head.
they devised a new form and featute of words, whereby covertly to give the
substance without the name; that is to say, the whole spiritual power, and
jurisdiction of supreme head under the name of Visitrix, or supreme
gouernesse, as in the Oath of the same Statute is set down where every man,
under forfiture of all his lands and livings, (and life also in the third time)
is bound to swear, and profess, that he beleiueth in his conscience, that the
said Qneene is supreme gouernesse in all causes Ecclesiastical in this sense;
and that there is no other Spiritual power, or Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction
over souls in England, but this of the Qneene, or such as comes from her.
And this was also the high iniquity of this tragical Comedye among other;
that the whole Realm being almost all Catholic and of a contrary belief at
that time, was forced to swear, within thirty days after the said Act, to
this fantastical devise of giving supreme authority Spiritual to a woman,
whereof by natural, divine, and humane law, she is not capable, (as in the next
chapter shall be proved) being a devise of some few, in a corner first, and
then procured by negotiation to pass in Parliament; or else to incur the
danger of the foresaid penalties; that is to say, either sacrilegiouslie to
forswear themselves against their consciences, or to undo themselves and
theirs in wordlie affairs; a hard and miserable choice.

22. But now to the point it self, what real, and substantial difference
(think you) can their be imagined between the spiritual Authortie of
Head-ship given unto K. Henry the 8. by the Statute of the 26. year of his
reign, and this of visitrix or supreme gouernesse, given to Q. Elizabeth in
the first of her reign? Was not the self-same power and Jurisdiction meant to
be given? And if there be no difference in the thing it self why do they fly
the word in this, which they used in that; and why do they use such large
circumloquutions, of visiting, ordering, redressing, and the like? For as for
K. Henry's statute, Statut. 26. Henr. 8 c. 1. anno Christi 1535.
it bears this Title. An act concerning the Kings highness, to be supreme
head of the Church of England etc. And in the statute it self it is said. Be it
enacted by the Authority of this present Parliament, that the King our
sovereign Lord, his heirs, and successors, shall be taken, accepted, and
reputed the only supreme head on earth of the Church of England, called
Anglicana Ecclesia. And the same Title was 9. or 10. years after, given in like
manner to K. Edward the sixth, by the same Authority of Parliament, if in this
Case it had any authority: anecting also thereunto all Jurisdiction spiritual
whatsoever; as it appears by a certain declaration thereof, made in the
Statute of the first year of the said King. Statut. 1. Edvva^d. 6 an. Domin^
15^7.
It says thus. That for so much as all authority of jurisdiction, spiritual,
and temporal, is derived and deducted, from the Kings Majesty, as supreme
head of these Churches, and Realms of England, and Ireland, and so justly
acknowledged by the Clergy thereof; and that all Courts Ecclesiastical within
these said two Realms, be kept by no other power and authority, either
foreign, or within the Realm, but by the Authority of his most excelent
Majesty: Be it therefore enacted, that all sommons and citations, and other
processes Ecclesiastical in all causes of Bastardy, Bygamye, and such like,
called Ecclesiastical shall be made in the name of our King. etc. And that in
the Archbishops, and bishops seals of office (for testisying of this) the Kings
Highness arms, be decently set with Characters under the said Arms, for the
knowledge of the diocese: and that they shall use noe other seal of
Jurisdiction, but wherein his Maiestyes arms be engraued, etc.

23. Lo here, not only the name, and Authority of head of the Church given
to K. Edward the Child, and taken from the Pope; but all Jurisdiction also, and
sign of Jurisdiction spiritual taken from the Archbishops, and Bishops of
England, excepting only so far forth as it was imparted unto them by the said
Child K. Which imports much, if you consider it well: For this is not only
to have power, to visitt, and govern Ecclesiastical persons and to reform
abuses and. Set down in the Queens grant by parliament; but to have all
Ecclesiastical and spiritual power, and jurisdiction originallie included in
his own person and so to be able from him self, as from the first fountain
and highest origin on earth, to derive the parts and parcells thereof to
others, which you may consider how different it is from that which here the
Statute would seem to ascribe to the Queen, and opposite and contrary to all
that which the ancient Fathers in the precedent chapter did affirm, and
protest not to be in their Kings and Emperors at all, but in Bishops and
Priests only, as delivered immediately to them by Christ our Savior, and by
them, and from them only to be administered to others for their salvation. But
by this new order of the English Parliament, The absurdities of the Statute
decrees about sovereign spiritual authority.
the contrary course is established, to wit, that it must come to Bishops and
Priests, from a lay man; yea a Child, and from a lay-woman also, as the other
Parliament determines, and then must it needs follow also (as after more
larglie shall be proved) that both the one, and the other (I mean K. Edward,
and Queen Elizabeth) had power, not only to give this Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction unto others; but much more, to use, and exercise the same in like
manner in their own persons if they would, as namely to give holy orders,
create, and consecrate Bishops, confirm Children, absolve sins, administer
Sacraments, teach, and preach, judge, and determine in points of faith and
belief, sit in judgment upon errors and heresies, and the like. And this for
K. Edward.

24. Now then if it may be presumed, (as I think it may) that Queen
Elizabeth's meaning was, to have no less Authority Spiritual, and
Ecclesiastical given unto her, and acknowledged in her, then her said Father
and Brother had used before; why did not the makers of this Statute set it
down in plain words as the other did, but disguised the matter, by such
manner of speech as they might seem to give but little, whereas they gave all,
and more then all? The Cause was that which I have said before, for which they
labored not to be understood of all men, but to speak, as it were in
mysterye; not to offend so publikelie the Caluinists, and yet to include matter
enough, to overthrow Catholics. But the said exacter part, and purer
Caluinists, See G^lby in his Dialogue. The man Cartwright, ^ others.
quickly found out the matter, and so they began very shortly after to mutter
and write against this, and diverse other points of the Statute, and so have
continued ever since; and the Controversy between them, is indeterminable.

25. Well then, for so much, as now we have laid open the true state of the
Question, and that M. Attorney is bound to prove his proposition in this sense
and explication, that here is set down out of K. Henry, and K. Edwards
Statutes, to wit that Q. Elizabeth had all plenarie power of Spiritual
Jurisdiction in her self, (...) state (...) the ^^^stion.
to derive unto others at her pleasure, as from the head, and fountain
thereof. And that no Bishop, Archbishop, or other Ecclesiastical person within
the Realm, had, or could have any spiritual power, or jurisdiction, but from
the wellspring, and supreme sourge thereof. And this not only by virtue of
the foresaid Statute of the first year of her reign, but before, and without
this also by the very force of her Princely Crown, according to the meaning
of the old, and most ancient common laws of England. It will be time now to
pass on to the veiw of his proofs, which for so new, strange, and weighty an
assertion that touches (if we believe the former alleged Fathers) the very
quick, and one of the nearest means of our eternal salvation or damnation,
ought to be very clear, sound and substantial; We shall see in the sequent
Chapter what they are.

VVHERAS IN THE CASE PROPOSED, THERE MAY BE TWO KINDS OF PROOFS, The one DE
IVRE, the other DE FACTO; M. Attorney is showed to have failed in both: and
that we do evidently demonstrate in the one, and in the other. And first in
that DE IVRE. CHAP. IIII.
THat the late Queen of England had such plenary Ecclesiastical Power, as
before had been said, and this by the intent and meaning of the old ancient
Common-lawes of England; though unto me and to many others, it seem a most
improbable Paradox, and do mean afterward, by Gods assistance, to prove
and evidently demonstrate the same, and show that from our first Christian
Kings unto K. Henry the eight, the Common-lawes of our Land, were ever conform
and subordinate to the Cano^ Ecclesiastical laws of the Roman Church in all
spiritual affairs: yet for so much as M. Attorney has taken upon him, to
prove the contrary, two heads of proof he may follow therein. Proofs de Iure
and de Facto.
The first De Iure, the second De facto. And albeit he entitle his Book
according to the first, to wit, De Iure Regis Ecclesiastico; yet does he
nothing less then prosecute that kind of proof, but rather flippeth to the
second which is De Facto, endeavoring to prove, that certain Kings made
certain laws, or attempted certain factes sometimes and upon some occasions,
that might seeeme somewhat to smell or taste of Ecclesiastical power, assumed to
themselves in derogation or restraint, of that of the Bishops, Popes, or Sea of
Rome.

2. Now albeit this were so, and granted (as after it will be reproved) yet
well knows M. Attorney that an argument De facto infers not a proof De
Iure. For, if all the factes of our Kings among others, should be sufficient to
justify all matters done by them; then would (for example) fornication be
proved lawful, for that some of them are known to have had unlawful
children, and left bastardes behind them: And the like we might exemplify in
other things. Neither do I allege this instance without peculiar cause or
similitude; For as in that unlawful act of the flesh, they yielded rather to
passion and lust, then to their own reason and judgment, knowing well enough
that they did amiss, when they were void of the same passion: so in some of
these actions of contention, about Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, some of them
were biased with interest somtymes, by indignation, ielousy, and other like
motives to do or attempt that, (especially in these later ages) which reason
and Religion did not always approve, nor themselves nether upon more mature
deliberation. And yet do I not grant that M. Attorney brings any thing of
moment in this kind of proof de facto also, as after shall appear, though all
his pretenses of proofs be in this kind only.

3. For, as for the first, though he entitle his book De Iure as you have
heard, yet little or nothing does he allege therein worthy to be repeated:
Only he has one Argument mentioned and refuted by us before in the second
Chapter of this Answer: ^^portes fol. 9.
which is that the Kingdom of England being an absolute Empire and Monarchy,
consisting of one head, which is the King, and of a body politic divided into
two general parts, the Clergy and the Layty: both of them next under God,
must be subject and obedient to the same head in all causes, for that otherwise
he should be no perfect Monarch or head of the whole body etc.

4. But to this the answer is plain, by the grounds we have laid down in
the same Chapter, of the different origin of spiritual and temporal power, and
that it is sufficient to any temporal Monarch and to the perfection of his
Monarchy, that all sorts of people throughout his dominions, as well Clergy
as Layty, be subject unto him in all temporal affairs: and that with this
perfection of Monarchy were content both Constantyne the first christian
Emperor, and also Valentinian, Gratian, Theodosius, Arcadius, Honorius,
Justinian, and other Emperors that eusued after him, as also Charles the Great
in France with his Successors and all our English Kings before K. Henry the
eight, who esteemed themselves for great perfect Monarchs over their people
(as in deed they were) without this challenge of Spiritual Jurisdiction in
Ecclesiastical matters. And therefore the said greatest Emperors, were content
also to bear patiently, and christianly the denial thereof in diverse
occasions, Freedom of speech in the Fathers to Emperors.
by their good Bishops and Prelates, S. Basil, S. Gregory Nazienzen, S.
Ambrose, and S. Chrysostom, yea and checkes also for usurping somtymes, either
by themselves, or their officers, upon Ecclesiastical power that belonged not
to them; whereof many examples might be alleged, and some have been touched
Sup. c. ^. Nazian. orat. ad ^ues timore porculs^s.
before in the place mentioned. For to this end was that admonishment of S.
Gregory Nazienzen to the Emperor Valentinian, that he should understand, that
he being a Bishop had greater Authority than the said Emperor. To the same
effect likewise was the resolute speech of S. Ambrose unto the same Valentinian,
Anno 387. Theodoret. lib. 8. hist. and Paul^. in v^ta S. Ambrosij Ruffin lib.
2. Inst. c. 18. Zozomen. lib. 7. c. 24. Ambros. epist. 33. ad Sororem.
Nolite grauare Imperator. etc. Trouble not your self, Emperor, in co^ma^ding
me to deliver the Church, nor do you persuade your self that you have any
Imperial right over those things that are spiritual or divine; exalt not your
self, but be subject to God if you will reign; be content with those things
that belong to Caesar, and leave those which are of God unto God. Palaces
appertain to the Emperor, and Churches unto the Priest. You have right over
the walls of the Cyttie, but not upon sacred howses. So he; And the same S.
Ambrose some 3. or.4. years after, used the like speech of superiority in
spiritual matters to the good Emperor Theodosius checking him greiuously, yea
keeping him out of the Church, and holding him under excommunication, for eight
months together. And when the said good Emperor came humbly on foot unto
him, saying: Ora vt mihi soluas vincula, and ne mihi occludas ianuam. I beseech
you loose my bands and shutt not the Church door against me; The other
answered, what penance can you show me that you have done since the committing
of your greiuous sin. etc.

5. And the like liberty of speech might I allege out of S. Chrysostom,
Chrisost. homil 4. de verb. Isa. Vidi Dominu^. etc.
where speaking of the presumption of King Ozias, that would meddle in
Spiritual matters used this Apostrophe unto him, Mane intra terminos tuos, aly
sunt termini Regni, alij termini Sacerdoty: hoc Regnum illo maius; Stay king
within thy bounds and limitts, for different are the bounds of a Kingdom and
the limitts of Priesthood, and this Kingdom ( of Priesthood) is greater then
the other; whereof he yeldeth this reason a little after, ^odyes to ^^e King
^^ules to ^^e priest.
Regi corpora commissa sunt, sacerdoti animae? The bodies be committed to the
King, the souls to the Priest. And in the next homily following he infers
this conclusion: Ideoque Deus etc. Therefore has God subjected the head of the
King, to the hands of the Priest; instructing us thereby that the Priest is a
greater Prince, then the king; Hebr. 7.
for that (according to S. Paul) the lesser always receaueth blessing from
the greater, and more eminent. Other Fathers sayings to the same effect I
purposely omit for breuityes sake, but by these few M. Attorney may see, how
he is deceived in placing the perfection of a temporal Monarchy, in having
spiritual Jurisdiction over Priests in Ecclesiastical affairs.

6. We read that when Constantius the Emperor some to Constantyne the Great,
took upon him to favor the Arrian heresye, he called unto him diverse
Catholic Bishopps, as S. Athanasius does relate and sets down their names,
willing them to subscribe to that which he had appointed for the bannishment of
the said S. Athanasius, Athan^s. epist ad so ^^^riam vita^ ^ge^tes.
and communion with the Arrians: Quibus admirantib^^ etc. Who marueling (says
he) at this commandment, as a new thing, and telling him that this was not
according to the Ecclesiastical Canons, the Emperor replied, I will have that
held for Canon which I do appoint, either obey or go into banishment; The
words of holy Bishops to Constantius.
whereat they more wondering, and holding up their hands to heaven, did with
liberty propose their reasons unto him, telling him that his Kingdom was not
his, but from God who had given it unto him, and that it was to be feared least
he would take it again from him, and finally denounced unto him the last day
of judgment, persuading him that he should not pervert the course of
Ecclesiastical affairs, nor intermeddle his Roman Empire, in dealing with
Ecclesiastical Constitutions etc. So Athanasius of these good Bishops.

7. And unto the same Emperor, a little after, that great and famous Confessor
Osius, Athanas. ^. ^^d.
who among the rest had sitten as Judge in the Nicene Council, upon like
occasion, wrote this grave and important admonition: Define quaeso, and
memineriste mortalem esse, resormida diem iudicij, etc. Leave of, I beseech
thee, o Emperor, and remember that thou art mortal, fear the day of
judgment, The resolute speech of Osius to the same Consta^tius.
and keep they self pure from this kind of sin, and do not intermeddle with
Ecclesiastical causes. Do not use commandments to us in this kind, but
rather learn of us God has committed the Empire unto thee, but unto us the
things that appertain to his Church; and as those, that malignantly do carpe
at thy Empire, do contradict the ordinance of God; so beware thou, least by
drawing unto thee those things that appertain unto the Church, thou do
inuolue thy self in a heinous sin, Give unto Caesar those things which are of
Caesar (says the Scripture) and to God those things that are of God; Matt. 22.
Luc. 20.
and therefore as yt is not lawful for us to meddle with thy earthly Empire; so
have not thou power, o Emperor, over sacred things; which I write unto thee
for the care I have of thy salvation. etc.

8. And do you see here this liberty of speech in Ecclesiastical Prelates of
the primitive Church, toward their Kings and Emperors? do you see what
difference and distinction they make between Ecclesiastical and temporal power?
and yet we read not that any Attorney or Advocate of these Emperors, did ever
accuse these Bishops of treason for speaking as they did, or once objected that
they meant hereby to take away any part or parcel of their entire and
absolute Monarchies. No though S. Athanasius for his part went yet further;
for when he saw that all these admonitions, and reprehensions would not
prevail, but that the said Constantius went forward to intermeddle more, and
more in Ecclesiastical affairs; he wrote thus in the same Epistle. S.
Athanasius his severe reprehension of the Emperor Constantius.
I am d^nuo in locum Ecclesiasticae cognitionis suum palatium Tribunal
constituit, etc. Now again has the Emperor Constantius made his palace a
Tribunal of Ecclesiastical causes, in place of an Ecclesiastical Court, and
has made himself the chief Prince, and Author of spiritual pleas. etc. These
things are grievous and more then grievous, but yet are such as may well agree
to him that has taken upon him the image of Antichrist, for who is there,
that seeing him to bear himself as Prince, in the determyning of Bishops
causes, and to sit as Arbiter in Ecclesinsticall judgment, will not worthily
say, the Abhominatio^ foretold by Daniel to be now come, etc. So he. And there
were no end if I would prosecute all that might be said out of the sense and
judgment of the ancient Fathers against this first argument of M. Attorney,
That te^porall Princes are not absolute Monarchs, except you give them
spiritual jurisdiction also. But we must be myndfull of breuity and so this
for the first shall suffice, remi^ting you to that which has bin spoken more
largly hereof in the second chapter before.

9. An other Argument yt seems M. Attorney would insinuate (for urge it he
does not) by the consideration of two Tribunalls or Courts of the King of
England: the one Temporal, the other Ecclesiastical, and several causes
belonging unto them. You shall hear it out of his own speech, To the second
argument of M. Attorney.
and then judge if it make for him or against him. The kingly head (says he)
of this politic body, is instituted and surnished with plenary and entire
power, prerogative, and Jurisdiction to render justice and right to every part
and member of this body, Reports f^l. 8.
both Clergy and Laytie, of what state, degree, or calling soever, in all
causes etc. and as in temporal causes, the King by the mouth of the Judges in
his Courts of Justice, does judge and determine the same, by the temporal
laws of England; so in causes Ecclesiastical, and spiritual, as namely
blasphemy, ^^st^^y from Christianity, Heresies, Schisms, Ordering, Admissions,
Institutions of Clerks, Rites of matrimony, Divorces, and otherlike; the
conusaunce whereof, belong not to the Common-lawes of England; the same are to
be determined and decyded by Ecclesiastical Judges, according to the Kings
Ecclesiastical laws of this Realm. So M. Attorney making this note in the
margent: What causes belong to the Ecclesiastical Courts; see Circumspecte
agatis 13. year of Edward the first, etc. And West. 2. and 13. Edward. ^ Cap.
5. art. Cleri Edward. 2. 9. Whereunto though I might oppose the Authority, and
speeches of all the ancient Fathers, before mentioned that in this matter of
divinity, ought to weigh more with us then any particular Ordination of
secular laws, though they were against us, yet in this case I dare join issue
with M. Attorney upon this very Argument, which he has allege, for that
truly I do not see what could be produced more effectually either against
himself, or for us, then here is set down. For as we willingly grant the
former part of his speech, to wit, M. Attornes (...) ^o^^^e.
that the kingly head of the politic body, is instituted and furnished with
plenarie power, to render justice, and right in all causes that belong to his
^^^^ticke and temporal government, ends, and objects thereof ^o all persons of
his Realm as before has been declared: So here the very naming of two
general parts of the kingdom, which M. Attorney graunteh, that the ancient
law of England deuideth into Clergy, and Laytie and the mencioning of two
several Courts, and distinct causes to be handled therein, by distinct Judges,
in such manner, as the one cannot have conusaunce of the other, infers
plainly two distinct powers, desce^ding from two distinct origens, the one
Temporali the other Ecclesiastical; and so do the places quoted by him, of
Circumspecte agatis, westminster. the second and Articul. Cleri under K. Edward the
first and second most evidently declare.

10. And first I would ask M. Attorney what the distinction of Clergy and
Laity does mean; Of Clergy and Lay men.
not made or brought in first by our Common-lawes (as he would insynuate when
he says that the law deuideth our Political body into two general parts,
the Clergy and the Laity) but rather instituted by the Sea of the distinction
of these names the Canons ^f the Apostles
Apostles themselves, and admitted only by our Co^mon-lawes, and continued from
that time to ours, as before has been showed. This distinction (I say) of
Clergy and Layty whereof the former signifies the portion of God, that is to
say, those persons that be peculyarly appropriated to the service of
Almighty-God: the other of Laity taking their name of from the common people,
can. 12. 13. 15 etc. Te^^ul (...) de Mona. and Cont Nicen. ^a^. 1. 2. 3. 5. 17.
1^. 19 etc.
I would ask of M. Attorney what it imports, and especially in this case of
Queen Elizabethes supreme primacy? does it not argue a distinct order of men,
governed by distinct laws, distinct Judges, and distinct power and
Jurisdiction? But you will say the Queen was head of them both, and we grannt
it, as they are members of one Commonwealth, but in their several distinction
and separation, as they are Clergy and lay people, she could not be of both,
but of one only, to wit of the Laity: For that no man will say that she was
also a Clerk, or of the Clergy. And yet in this partition, no man will deny,
but that the Clergy is the worthier part and member, and so is placed first
in all our laws: whereof is inferred that the said Clergy, as Clergy, is of a
higher degree, according to our Common-lawes, then the temporal Prince, which
is of the laity only, and not Clerk, as in Q. Elizabeth is confessed; and
consequently she could not be head of the Clergy, as Clergy, that is in
Ecclesiastical Clergy matters, belonging to Religion. Whereof we may take a
notable example from the great Emperor Valentinian the elder, who refused to
be present, (and much more President) in certain conferences about religion
between the Catholic Bishops and the Arrians, upon consideration of these two
distinct Orders of Clergy and laymen, though he were invited thereunto by
Catholic Bishops themselves. Mihi quidem (says he) cum vnus de populo sim,
fas non est talia perscrutari, Hist Tr^. (...). l^b. 7. cap. 12.
verum sacerdotes qui bus haec cura est, apud semetipsos congregentur vbi
voluerint. Unto me that am but one of the lay people, it is not lawful to
examine such things (as appertain unto religion) but let priests, to whom
this care is committed, meet together among themselves to discusle the matter
where they will. So much was this distinction between laymen and priests
esteemed by this ancient Christian Emperor.

The diffeence of Courts what it proves, Reports sol. 9.
11. Secondly I demand of M Attorney concerning his distinction of Courts and
causes to be handled therein, Temporll and Spiritual, how it comes to pass,
that the Conusaunce of such causes as here he calls Spiritual, belong not,
as he says, to the Common-lawes of England: No, nor (as presently after he
affirms) could not belong: For that they are not within the conusaunce of the
said Common-laws. And why is this, I pray you? For if the temporal Prince be
equally head in both causes, and in both Jurisdictions, and that the power to
know, discern and judge in both sorts, do descend only from the temporal
Prince, as before out of the Statute of King Edward the 6. you have heard, by
the Statute-makers determined, and M. Attorney confirms every where in these
Reports: then should the common-Lawes of our Realm which are the temporal
Princes law be common indeed according to their name to all causes, as well
Spiritual as Temporal, for that their author and origin, which is the King,
has equal Power, and Jurisdiction in both, for that it is a maxim
uncontrollable, that, according to the Jurisdiction of the L^w maker, virtue
and power of the law does extend it self. And then does M. Attorney affirm
that the conusaunce of so many Ecclesiastical causes as he sets down, is
not within the compass of our Common-lawes, or what compass will he assign
or lymitt to that Princes laws, that according to this assertion, has power
in all? Is not this to contradict himself, and to overthrow with the one hand,
that which he goes about to establish with the other? For, if the Kings power
be common to both causes, as well Ecclesiastical as Temporal, then must the
Kings Common-lawes be common to both Courts and matters therein handled.

12. But let us see a certain slight or evasion of his worth the noting: As
in temporal causes (says he) the King by the mouth of the Judges in his
Courts of Justice, does judge and determyne the same by the temporal laws of
England; so in causes Ecclesiastical, as Blasphemy, Apostasy. Heresies,
Ordering, Institutions of Clerks, etc. the same are to be determined and
decyded by Ecclesiastical Judges, according to the Kings Ecclesiastical laws
of this Realm. Mark here (gentle reader) how M. Atnorney plays wyly
beguyly; For according to the proportion of his comparison, he should have
concluded thus: A ^^i^e of M. Attor^ys po^^ often.
So the King by the ^outh of his Ecclesiastical Judges, does judge and
determine the said Spiritual and Ecclesiastical causes, by his own
Ecclesiastical laws. But this he foresaw would include this great
inconvenience among others, that if he said, that the King did judge and
determine by the mouths of his spiritual Judges the aforesaid spiritual
causes, as he does the temporal, then might he do the same, yea and exercise
them also immediately by himself, if need were, as well as by others; for in all
temporal judgments and affairs, the King may sit himself in court, and
perform in person whatsoever his Officers, by his authority do or may do:
which yet M. Attorney saw would be somewhat absurd to grant, in the spiritual
causes proponed by him of Blasphemy, Ordering of Priests (or giving holy
Orders) Institutions of Clerks, Celebration of divine service, and the like,
to wit, that the King should perform them immediately in his own person; for
who would not say it were absurd (for example) that the King should sing, or
say the common service to the people; or administer the Sacrament of Absolution
or Marriage, or give holy Orders, and the like: which yet the Bishop of Rome
and all other Bishops or Prelates, He that gives power to another to do a
thing must first have it i^ himself.
never so great do and may do without inconvenience. And in truth it
follows evidently that he, who can give authority or power for another to do
a thing as from himself, and in his name, may perform the same in person also
if he list, at least wise it cannot be unlawful for him so to do. And
therefore coming to the application of his comparison, he changes his phrase,
and says, that the same are to be determined and decyded by Ecclesiastical
Judges, according to the Kings Ecclesiastical laws of this Realm.

13. Wherein you must note another shifte more poor and silly, then the former;
for that having declared unto us before that there are two general parts and
members of the Realm, to wit the Clergy and the Laity, and that these two
have two several Tribunalls in their affairs, governed by two sorts of
different laws, Temporal and Ec^lesiasticall, Common and Canon, and these
derived from two different Authors and origens; the Common Law from the
temporal Prince and Commonweath, Ecclesiastical from others, says M.
Atorney, but specifieth not from whom, or whence, though all the world know,
that they come originally from the Church and Sea Apostolic: (all which
infers distinct original Jurisdictions) M. Attorney by his great wit has
devised a new slight never perhaps yet heard of in the world before which is
to make these Ecclesiastical laws though derived from others, to be the Kings
own laws, for that he approves and allows them within the Realm; and
consequently that all laws both Temporal and Spiritual do come from the
King, A ^^vv dem^^ to make Ecclesiastical laws to be the Kings laws.
as their Author: which is a token that he has full Supreme power. And this
singular devise pleases him so well, as he repeateth the same sundry times in
this Treatise. You shall hear the same in his own words in this place, and
how dangerous and preiudicyall a Conclusion he builds upon the same, against
Catholics.

14. For as the Romans (says he) fetching diverse laws from Athens, yet being
approved and allowed by the State there, called them notwithstanding, Reports
Ius Civil Romanum. And as the Normans borrowing all or most of their laws
from England, yet baptized them by the name of the laws, or customs of
Normandy; so albeit the Kings of England, derived their Ecclesiastical laws
from others, yet so many as were approved and allowed here, by, and with a
general consent, are aptly and rightly called the Kings Ecclesiastical laws
of England, which whosoever shall deny, he denies that the King has full and
plenary power, etc. And consequently that he is no co^plete Monarch, nor head
of the whole entire body of the Realm.

15, You see whereunto this devise tends to make yt a matter of treason, to
deny this fancy of M. Attorney, that for so much as the Canons, and
Ecclesiastical laws of the Church, made by Popes and by General Counsels,
from time to time, and receued universally for spiritual and Ecclesiastical
matters throughout the Christian world, were receued also and allowed by the
Kings Comnn wealth of England. (which was an evident argument of their
acknowledging of the said Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction of the Church, and
spiritual governors thereof) of this approbation and allowance, he would
infer, that these laws were the Kings laws, though derived, as he says,
from others; that is to say from Popes and Bishopps. At which inference I doubt
not, but that his fellow-lawyers will smile. And truly, I am sorry that he being
accoumpted so great a man in that faculty, which is wont to reason well, has
given so manifest occasion of laugther. For that every puney and young student
of law, Admitting of other Prince^ laws shows rather subjection then
superiority in the admitter.
will see by common reason, that the admitting of an other man's law, does not
make it his law, or that he had power to make that law of himself, but rather
to the contrary it shows, that the admitter acknowledges the other for his
Superior in all matters contained under that law; For the power of making
laws, is the highest power that principally proves dominion in any Prince,
and the admitting and obeying thereof by another Prince, is an evident argument
of inferiority and subjection; and so here the admitting of the Popes
Ecclesiastical and Canon-lawes, was an argument that the admitters
acknowledged his supreme authority in Ecclesiastical affairs.

16. Neither is M. Attorneys example of the Romans or Normans any thing to the
purpose all; The answer to M. Attorneys instance.
For that the Romans did not take from the Athenians any formal laws made by
them, for the government of the Romans (for that had been to acknowledge
superiority as before has been said) but rather they taking a survey of all
the Grecian laws, as well of Athens as other Commonwealths or States, they
took parcells thereof here and there, and applied the same to their
Commonwealth, which was properly to make laws of them selves. And the like
may be said of the Normans, if they borrowed any of their laws from England;
which yet I never read in any Author besides M. Attorney, but rather that the
Normans gave laws to England.

17. But now in the Canon-lawes received in England for almost a thousand
years together after our first Conversion, the matter is far different; for
that these were received wholly and formally, as laws made by another superior
power in a different Tribunal and different causes, and sent expressly to
England, How the Canon-lavves were received in England.
and to all other Christian Kingdoms, to be received and observed, and some
also out of the same Ecclesiastical power made within the land, by Synodes and
Prelates thereof, and promulgated to be observed both by Prince and people
formally and punctually as they lay; and so were received, admitted, allowed,
and put in execution by the said Prince and his Officers, except perhaps some
times, some clause or part thereof might seem to bring some inconvenience to
the temporal State; for which exception was made against it, and the matter
remedied by common consent. And this was another manner of admitting laws,
then the Romans admitted some pieces of there laws from Athens, or rather
translated some points of the Athenian laws into theyrs, which was to make
them selves Masters of thus laws, and not receivers or admitters. And finally
we see by this, to what poor and pitiful plight M. Attorney has brought
the title of his book, De Iure Regis Ecclesiastico. Of the Kings
Ecclesiastical law, to wit that it is the Popes Ecclesiastical law^ in deed,
made and promulgated by him and his, but received and obeyed by the King, and
consequently not the Kings law, but the Popes.

18. Wherefore to conclude the first part of this Chapter, for so much as M.
Attorney by these two arguments De Iure, (which are the only he mentions)
has proved no right at all of supreme spiritual Jurisdiction, The conclusion
of the first part of this chapter.
to have accrewed to Q. Elizabeth by the title and interest of her temporal
Crown, but rather the contrary, to wit, that both his Arguments have proved
against himself: we see thereby how unable he is to prove his said affirmative
proposition, by this first head and sort of proof De Iure. I shall now in the
second part of this chapter endeavor to prove the negative, by as many sorts
of rightes and laws as any thing may be proved, that is to say not only by
Canonical and Civil laws, but by law of Nature also, of Nations, Mosaycall,
Evangelical, and by our ancient Common-lawes of England; all which do concu^
in this, that Q. Elizabeth being a woman could not have any supreme spiritual
power or Jurisdiction in Ecclesiastical matter^.

THE SECOND PART OF THIS CHAPTER, VVherin is shevved that Q. Elizabeth in
regard of her sex, could not have supreme Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction.. I.
19. First then, being to perform this, we are profess in this place, that we
mean not to imitate the proceeding of some Protestants in this behalf, who
following no certain rule of doctrine, no^ moderation in their doings or
writings do pass to extremes, and therefore feeling themselves greiued under
Q. Maryes reign, with the course of Catholic religion then held, took upon
them to publishe that women were not capable of any government at all,
Temporal, or Spiritual, nor to be further obeyed, than they would make
Reformation in Religion (for so they called it) comforme to their wills and
prescriptions, as appears by the books, writings, and actions both of
Goodman; See the Protestant Book of Dangerous positions against the Puritanes
anno. 1591, lib. ^. c. 1.
VVhitingham, Gilbye, Knockes and others, who taking their fire of fury from
Geneua, sought first to kindle the same in England, and being repulsed thence,
brake into open flames of combustion in Scotland, and never coassed, until it
brought two Noble Queens, mother and daughter to their ruin; and afterward put
their heir and successor into such plunges, by those and other heads of like
doctrine, and desperate attemptes answerable thereunto, as Gods right hand did
only preserve him from like ruin.

20. But we are not of this spirit to seek revenge by such new brayn-sicke
doctrine, we grant that Queens may lawfully reign and inherit that
Succession, which every Country by their peculiar laws does allow them. Of
vvomens government.
The great Kingdom of France does excude them, and so do many lesser States
in Italy, and Germany and other Countries, yet does Spain, England, Scotland
and Flanders admit them for preventing other inconveniences when
Male-sucessors do fail. So as for this point of Q. Elizabeth's temporal
government, we have no controversy in this place: If any fell out between her
and the Bishop of Rome, whose authority she took from him, and applied it to
her self, and many otherwise exasperated him; that fact appertains not to
us, that are private men to judge, especially in this place where our question
is only of spiritual Jurisdiction in Ecclesiastical causes, which that it
could not be in a woman in regard of her sex, all Catholic deuines do prove
by these reasons following.

21. Canon-lavve.
which containing the sense of Gods universal Church, from time to time, both
in the right and practice of this affayre of spiritual government, ought to be,
and is with wise, learned, and Godly men, of principal account, credit, and
authority. For that the said Canon Law is deduced from the decrees of
Counsels, Synodes, Popes, ancient Fathers, Doctors, and Bishops, and from the
custom and practice of the said Church from time to time directed by Gods holy
spirit according to his promise, and received throughout all christendom from
age to age, though now contemned by certain new masters, whose maistery
stands in this, to scoff at that which they understand not, or list not to
follow, be it never so good.

22. This law then and judgment of the Church is so far of, and ever has been,
from granting spiritual Jurisdiction to be in any Queen, as in Capite, Cap.
de monia^^us desent: and excom and cap. Noua de paenis. and remiss. and cap.
Muli^rem ^ausa 33. q. 5. vbe multa Patru^ sent. Peferu^tur and Silis. and (...)
Sunesta in verb Abatissa.
by right of any temporal Crown, and to be derived from her to others; as it
does not allow any woman, to be capable of any spiritual power or Jurisdiction,
though it be but delegated, and given by commission and substitution from
another, as appears by the textes of Canon Law cited here in the margent.
And the princypall reason hereof is, that all spiritual power being of two
sorts, Ordinis and Iurisdictionis of holy order, and Jurisdiction, the femynine
sex is capable of neither of them. Not of the power of Order, says S. Thomas,
which belongs to the administering of Sacraments, for that a woman by her sex
cannot administer them, nor is capable of Preist-hood, or sacred orders
required thereunto. D. The. in 4. did. 25. q. 2. Calu in An^id, a^ can. 10.
Council. Trid. sess. 7. and l. 4. inst. cap. 3. and 15. Iuth. lib de Capt.
Rabil. cap. de Ordine and in articulu a Leone 10. da^na^^, art. 1^. and lib.
contra stuliam ^^on^ 10.
And in this both Calvin and Cluinists agree with us, though Luther at the
beginning held that all Christians baptized might be priests and administer
Sacraments, as well women as men; yea children, and devils also, if they used
the words, and institution of Christ, as in the places of this worke^ here
quoted may be seen.

23. The second part of Spiritual power, appertayning to Jurisdiction, either
internal or external in fore conscientia or in sore contentioso that is to
absolve or loose in the secret Trybunall of conscience, or in the open Court of
external contention, cannot fall upon a woman, for the infirmity and indecency
of her sex, says the Vbe supra.
Canon Law, and for many other absurdities that would ensue thereof, if a woman
should be admitted to the acts of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, which are
principally two, Docere, and Iudicare says the said law, Innocent 3. cap. noua
de panet and re^^ision.
to teach and judge, whereof neither of them stands well in a woman to
exercise over men; the same law noting, that albeit Christ our Savior loved
well Mary Magdalen, and other holy women that followed him, and served him unto
his death; yet is it never read, that he committed any part of Jurisdiction in
governing his Church, unto them; no, not unto the blessed Virgin his mother,
though she were replenished with grace and full of the holy Ghost. And this of
the Cano^-law.

24. For the Civil, Of the Civil law.
albeit little occasion was given therein amongst the ancient heathen Romans
the chief Authors thereof, to talk of of this controversy of Spiritual
Jurisdiction, their whole subject being of temporal, and Civil affairs; yet
in a certain Treatise De Regulis Iuris of the rules of that law, they have
this direction; Lib. 2. ff. de regul^^ Iuris.
Faeminas remotas esse ab officijs publicis, and ideo iudices esse non posse.
That women are to be removed (by the Civil law) from all public offices, and
therefore cannot be Judges. And if in Civil matters, by that law they could not
be Judges, how much less can they be supreme Judges in spiritual causes,
which are of a far higher dignity, and indecency for women to meddle therein.
All which better appear by that which is to eusue, out of the law both of
Nature, and Grace, which are the grounds of these Civil, and Canonical
Constitutions. For as the Civil law followed the one, so the Canon follows
the other, or rather both, for that both proceed from God, and are his laws.

25. To consider then of the law of Nature, The law of nature.
which is common to all Nations; we read in the book Genesis, that the order
observed by God in the creation of man and woman was this; that first Adam and
all other Creatures were made, 2. Genesis ^9.
and placed in paradise, and afterward Eua was created for man, and out of man,
and to the liknes of man, as man was created before to the likeness of God. Out
of which order of Creation, S. Paul does in diverse places gather the natural
subjection of woman unto man, (especially in spiritual matters appertayning to
God) to be eternally established by this law of their creation.

26. For when to Tymothie he had said, 1. Tim. 2^.
Docere autem mulieres non permitto, neque deminari in virum, I do not permit
women to teach, nor to have dominion over her husband, he adds presently for
his reason, these words. For Adam was first created and then Eua; And Adam was
not seduced, but the woman was seduced. And the same Apostle writing to the
Corinthians about a certain precept and ordination of his, 1. Cor. 1^.
that woman should be covered in the Church, and men not, and men to have their
hair cut, and women not, in sign of subjection, and subordination the one to
the other, he says, A vvoma^ cannot be the head of man in spiritual matters.
I do praise you, brethren, for that you are mindful of me in all things, and
do observe my precepts, as I delivered them unto you. I will have you know
that Christ is the head of every man, and man the head of the woman, and God
the head of Christ. And as every man that prays, or prophesies with his head
covered, dishonoreth his head (which is Christ) so every woman praying or
prophesying with her head not covered, dishonors her head (which is man) And
the man ought not to cover his head, for that he is the Image, and glory of
God; but the woman is the glory of the man; for man was not made of the woman,
but the woman out of man, not was the man created for woman, but the woman for
man, etc. Ipsa natura docet vos. Nature it self does teach you, etc.

27. Now then out of these deductions from the law of Nature; so much urged, as
you see by S. Paul for subjection, and subordination of women, even in little
small points, concerning Religion, Absurdities ensuing the supremacy
Ecclesiastical of a woman.
as about speaking, teaching, and veiling their heads in the Church; it may be
inferred how earnest the same Apostle would have been, if the question had been
propounded about the highest point, honor, and office of Religion, which is to
exercise the place of Christ, by mediation between God and man, and to be as
it were high priest, and President over men, in matters belonging to their
souls; Heb. 3. Gal. 3. Act. 3.
for in this case all this law of Nature, would be broken and the women should
be head over men, in the highest degree, and so should not be the glory of the
man as S. Paul says, that is, subordinate to his glory; as he is to the glory
of Christ, and Christ to the glory of God; but the man should be her glory,
that is to say, subordinate to her In iis quae sunt ad Deum. In those things
that appertain to God: yea she should be mediatrix between him and God, in
place of him, that is chief priest. And so all this first natural institution
of God should be wholly perverted, broken, and turned vpside-downe.

28. Neither is it of any force, to object (as some do) that a woman may be
head of men in temporal affairs, as Queens are, for that God has left this
free to m^n, to dispense in the use of their natural privilege of superiority
for temporal government, and to appoyn^ women to govern them, for avoiding
worse inconveniences, when there are no heyres-male to succeed, as before has
been said. But the matter is far different in spiritual government, which
depends immediately of God himself; and was delivered by him to men, and not
to women; and so has been continued, throughout all ages from Adam to our
days; and under all laws, both of Nature, Moses, and Christ. For in the law
of Nature, The singularity of Q. Elizabeth's case.
the first borne-male among the Patriarchs was always head of the family,
both in temporal and spiritual matters, and consequently also Priest. And in
the law of Moses the said priesthood, and presidency in spiritual matters,
was annexed unto a tribe of men, and no woman admitted thereunto. And much more
in the law of the gospel as presently we shall declare; and so we may
conclude that from Eve, to Elizabeth there was never woman that was supreme
head, concerning matters of Religion, before her self; so singular was she and
her case in this point.

29. Now then for the Evangelical law, Of the law Evangelical.
meaning, and sense of our Savior Jesus Christ, in founding of his Christian
Church, that it was not to leave any part or parcel of the spiritual
government and Jurisdiction thereof unto any woman (and much less the supreme in
any Kingdom or Country) besides that which before has been cyted, and
pondered out of S. Paul that, women may not teach or speak in the Church
(which yet is a necessary part to be able to do if need require) and that
which the Canon Law puts in consideration, that Christ left no part of
Ecclesiastical government, either to his mother, or to any other of his
women-disciples; besides all this (I say) it is not hard to show, out of the
very Institution of Gods Church from the beginning, and the establishment and
perfection thereof, when Christ came in flesh, he excluded clearly women from
all dominion therein.

30. For proof whereof, first we are to suppose, according to the understanding
of all ancient Fathers, and declaration of scripture it self in many
particulars, that concerning the work of our first creation, That all
miraculous actions of God in the old testament are to be ascribed properly to
Christ.
and all ordinan^^^ depending thereon, as also the Miracles, and highest actions
that fell out afterward, from that creation to the time of our redemption,
when any thing is ascribed peculiarly to Gods hand, saying that God did this,
or God did that, we must understand it princypally of the second person in
Trinity son of God himself, who as he was to come down to take our flesh and
redeem us, and to make us his Church, his Kingdom, his body, his price, his
glory: so to that end did he create us also, according to that saying of S.
Sohn. Ioh. 4.
Omnia per ipsum facta sunt. All things were made and created by him: and S.
Paul speaking of those myraculous assistances given to the people of Israel,
going forth of Egypt, does ascribe the same every where to Christ. As does S.
Jude also, saying, Iud. 1.
I would have you to know, brethren, that Jesus, ^^ first he saved the people
of Israel, that he brought out of Egypt, so afterward those that believed
not, he destroyed.

31. This being supposed, we are to note further, that as Christ created Adam
as the first head of his Church here on earth under himself, and made him Lord
of all both temporal and spiritual and as Priest to offer Sacrifice; and Eve
out of him afterward^ subiecting her thereby unto him, 1. Cor. 11. 1. Tim. 2.
and to his perpetual Dominion, (as before you have heard S. Paul to collect
out of this first institution); so the devil taking upon him presently to
contradict and overthrow this work of Christ; followed a quite contrary order
and went first to Eve, persuading her to go and preach to Adam the sermon that
he had taught her, as she did, and because his Doctor and Mistress in this
Ecclesiastical function, and thereby turned vpside-downe, to both their tuynes,
and to the ruin of us all, the whole order of subordination which Christ had
appointed before: Whereby she should have been taught by Adam, and not he by
her. Genesis 2.
But Christ coming afterward to visit them again, and to take accoumpt of
this disorder, albeit he knew then that the woman had been the author thereof,
yet would he not speak first to her, but according to the order appointed by
himself, asked first for Adam. Our Lord called for Adam, says the text, Genesis 3.
and dixit ei, vbi es? and said unto him, where art thou? And when afterward
the whole cause being examined he gave sentence upon each part for this
disorder; he specially confirmed again his first Institution, for the Dominion
of man^ and the subjection of woman, saying unto her, Genesis 3.
Sub viri potestate eris and ipso dominabitur tui. Thou shall be under the
power of man (thy husband) and he shall have Dominion over thee. Which law and
ordination is to be understood in all kind of subjection, How vv^man must be
subject to man in all respects.
as well domestical and political, as Ecclesiastical or divine: so as in all
these three kinds of affairs, man is made head, and governor both at home, in
the commonwealth, and in the Church by this first institution of Christ,
though in the former two, it is permitted unto man, as has been said, upon
some occasions, to yield up his right, when he will, though more in the second
then in the first, for that the things are more arbitrary and tolerable, to
wit that a woman should be head over all in the Commonwealth then at home
over her husband. But in the third which is in the Church, and Church Matters,
no dispensation is permitted, but that woman's subjection must be perpetual. And
therefore when S. Paul, as before has been touched, comes to talk of
Church Matters, he suppresseth women presently by this law of Christ Mulieres
(says he) in Ecclesia tace ant, non enim permittitur eis loqui sod subditas
esse sicut lex dicit. 1. Cor. 14.
Let women hold their peace in the Church, for it is not per^itt^d into them to
speak, but to be subject, as the law says.

32. This law named here by S. Paul, is the law instituted by Christ in the
former words of Genesis, where he appoints women to be subject not only at
home unto their husbands, but especially and principally unto the government of
man in Ecclesiastical matters, as you see by the application thereof so often
by S. Paul to Church affairs. For before in the eleventh chapter to the
Corinthians, 1. Cor. 11.
he repeateth a precept of his own made unto them about veyling of women in
the Church, as you have heard, founding the same upon the first Institution of
man and woman in paradise, proving thence that the woman could not be head in
the Church, How eagerly S. Paul did stand against vv^mens superiority in the
Church.
and therefore must cover her head; and thereby yield to her husband: and now in
this place he gives other strait precepts, about women's silence and subjection
in the Church, and says moreover, Qua scribe vobis Domini sunt praecepta.
These precepts which I write unto you, are not mine but of our Lord. Adding
presently this terrible threat, Qui autem ignorant, ignor^bitu^, he that knows
not these things or will not know them, shall not be known by the same Lord.
And finally the same Apostle unto Tymothie urges the same again concerning
the Church. Mulier in silentio discat cum omni subiectione. 1. Tim. 2.
Let the woman (in the Church) learn in silence with all subjection. Mark the
asseueration of all subjection. What would S. Paul have said, if any woman in
his time had challenged to her self all dominion in the Church, and yielded
subjection to no Ecclesiastical person whatsoever?

33. But to go forward in the Institution of Christ, for the spiritual
government of his Church: when he had governed the same by men and not by women,
for the space of four thousand years and more, under the law both natural
and written, and coming now to institute a new, more exact and perfect
government thereof, under the law Evangelical; what did he? was he unmindful of
this his first Institution in paradise? No: For he chose men, to wit his
Apostles, and their Successors to govern his Church, saying unto them, I^a^.
20.
As my father sent me, so I send you, whose sins you forgive they shall be
forgiven, and whose you retain shall be retained. And to one of them in
special. I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven. Feed my
sheep^, feed my lambs. And S. Paul speaking to some of those spiritual
Governors, Math. 16. Joan. 21
Priests and Prelates, says. (...) 20.
The holy ghost has placed you sor Governors of Gods Church which he has
purchased unto himself with his own blood. And again the same Apostle to the
Corinthians setting down the subordination of the said Governors of Christ's
primitive Church, says, 1. Cor. 12.
that the first degree was of Apostles, the second of Prophets, the third of
Doctors, etc. And in all this, is there no mention of women; V^^^ersall (...)
against M Attor^^^
though there were many holy women among them, and one more high in Gods favor
then they all, as before has been said. Neither ever is it recorded, that
afterward any Apostle, Father, Doctor, Council, Synod, Schole, University,
Pope, Prince, Nation, Country, Commonwealth, or private man in Christendom,
did appoint, admit or allow any woman to be chief in spiritual matters,
before the English Parliament in the beginning of Q. Elizabeth's reign; Nor can
any Protestant in the world bring any one instance, example, or memory recorded
by man or woman, against this universal prescription, that I have laid down.

34. And this is sufficient for proof out of the Evangelical law, by Christ's
own Institution; albeit many other might be alleged in the conformity and
confirmation hereof, as several members of this proof, to wit the
School-doctors, that have handled the same largely, in their co^mentaryes, and
disputations upon the 4. Book of Sentences and els-where, (...) did. (...)
Yno. (...)
and do by sound foundations overthrow the imaginary monstrosity of giving
spiritual Jurisdiction to women, S^^^ole D^^^ors.
which is ascribed as an old heresy or madness rather unto the Cataphrygians
and Pepuzians as may be read in Philastrius and S. Epiphanius: (...) and (...)
in (...).
which heretics notwithstanding did go about to confirm their phantasy by
those words of S. Paul. In Christo neque masculus neque faemina etc. that there
is no difference of male or female in Christ, that is to say whether he be man
or woman. Which the said doctors do declare to have been meant of the faith of
Christ, and vocation to Christian Religion; to wit, that all are called and
received equally; but yet not to government or Jurisdiction the in Church.

35. The rank of other doctors also, that write of the moral part of divinity
appertayning to manners, and Cases of Conscience, do handle the same at large
upon diverse occasions in their Treatises: (...)
As also of the third sort of learned men Expositors of the Scriptures,
preachers, and teachers, especially the ancient Fathers, ^
who albeit they handle not this question of ours in particular, and proper
terms, Doctors, Fathers, and expositors.
About the spiritual supremacy of a woman in the Church of God (for that they
never imagined any such thing would, or could fall out) yet in other occasions,
wherein great women sometimes, not as heads but helpers to unlawful purposes,
would be meddling in Ecclesiastical affairs, as the Empress Eudoxia against
S. Chrysostom and the Empress Iustina against S. Ambrose and other the like:
the said Fathers spoke so sharply, and rejected them with such indignation, as
a man may easily se what they would have done, if any least insinuation had
been made, to challeng unto them Ecclesiastical power and Jurisdiction, and
much more to be heads of the Church, which in those days was never so much as
dreamed of. And if the said Fathers upon occasion offered, did so earnestly
deny unto the husband of the one, and the son of the other, that were
Emperors, the said supremacy in spiritual things, or that they had any power
at all, in Ecclesiastical causes, as you have heard: what would they have said
to the women, if they had pretended any such matter? Let one short sentence of
S. Chrysostom serve for all in general, to declare his opinion of women's
government even in temporal things, and much more in spiritual. Chrys^^. 5.
ser. Quid regulares famina viris non ^^habitant.
Caput omnino mulieris vir est (says he) and magna saeditas esset si superiora
fiant inferiora, and ciput deorsum, and pedes sursum. Man in all respects is
head of the woman, and it should be a great deformity, if the things which are
the higher should be made the lower, and that the head should be brought
under, and the feet placed above.

36. But in another place, he decideth this our Question more in particular,
concerning spiritual government, removing all women-kind, from the
possibility thereof, A notable discourse of S. Chrysostom. l. ^. de sacordo^i^. sub
initiu^^.
and for that his discourse in the said place, is of great weight, and
consideration being set down between him, and his deer friend S. Basil in
Dialogu-wise with much maturitie, and does not only deny all spiritual
government to women, but places it where it ought to be, in S. Peter, and his
Successors above all others; I shall allege the place somewhat more at large,
which contains a grave ponderation of those words of our Savior unto S.
Peter in S. John's gospel. Joan. 21.
Petre amas me, etc. Peter do thou love me more then the rest, and he
answearing that he did: Christ replied; if thou love me, feed my sheep. Whereof
S. Chrysostom does infer, that Christ in these words did first of al
specially commit the supreme charge of his said sheep to S. Peter, and his
Successors. Pecud^^ curam (says he) quas sanguine suo acquisierat, tum Petro,
tum Petri Successoribus committebat. He committed to Peter, and to Peter's
Successors the care of his sheep which he had purchased with his own blood.
And again. Petrum Christus authoritate hac praeditum esse voluit, and reliquos
item Apostolos long praecellere. Christ would have Peter to be endued with
this supreme authority over his sheep, and therein far to excel all the rest
of the Apostles, etc.

37. Secondly S. Chrysostom makes a deep ponderation upon these words of our
Savior, of the singular love, which he would have Pastors to bear unto his
sheep, and which he bare himself, giving his blood for them, and what he
exacted at this high Pastors hands for governing and feeding of them, in this
his demand or interrogation, concerning his love. (...) co^^^^dable (...) good
^^stor.
Atque illi quidem licebat (says he) verbis huiusmodi Petrum affari: Si me
amas Petre, Ieiuniae exerce, super nudam humum dormi, etc. Our savior Christ
might have spoken to Peter in this sort (upon his answer of love) if thou
love me Peter, exercise fasting, sleep on the bare ground, watch continually,
releive them that be oppressed, show thy self a Father to orphans, and be
unto widows instead of their husbands. But now, Christ pretermitting all
these other good works, what says he unto him? Pasce oues meas, etc. Feed
(and govern) my sheep: for that all the rest of those good works before
mentioned, may be performed by many subjects, not only men but also women, At
cum de ecclesiae Praefectura, de credenda huic vel illi, tam multarum animarum
cura agitur; vniuersa quidem mulieris natura, functionis istius moli ac
magnitudini caedat oportet, itemque and bona virorum pars. But when the
Question is of any government over the Church, or about committing to this or
that person, the charge of so many souls; then must all women kind yield, A
vvome^ (...) ex^^^led (...) ^^urch-g^^ern^^nt.
and give place to the weight and greatness of this function, and so must also a
good part of men, to wit all such as are of the lay sort, and have not
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction laid upon them, by the ordinary means before
mentioned, of ordination and succession in the Church of God, descending
originally from this first fountain, of all ecclesiastical power upon earth,
committed by the son of God to S. Peter, and his Successors, to endure to
the worlds end.

38. And thus have we cleerlie the sentence, belief, and judgment, of S.
Chrysostom concerning spiritual authority, for governing our souls, that it
was given eminently to S. Peter and his Successors, above the rest of the
Apostles, but so, as only men, and those not all, but Priests alone, and
Cleargie-men, do, or may succeed therein, and that all kind of women are
excluded, in respect of their sex from any superiority, or prefecture over the
Church. How much S. Chrysostom. authority ought to be esteemed in this point.
And what-soeuer S. Chrysostom held, preached, or left written in this
behalf, be being so great a Doctor, and pillar of Christ's Church in his days,
and the thing it self never contradicted, or reprehended by any other, may
assuredly be held for the common doctrine, judgment, sense, faith, and
belief, of the universal Catholic Church in that age; and consequently also,
both of the former and following ages, until our time. And how much this
consideration ought to prevail with a prudent man, that follows not passion,
but reason, and has care of his own soul, is easy to see. And so much of
this matter.

39. And now further I remember that I promised to prove my negative also by
the ancient common and municipall laws of England; of which, though I might
say, as before I said of the Fathers and Doctors of former times, that they
ordained nothing expressly of this particular case; for that they never imagined
that any such matter would fall out: The municipall lavvey of England.
yet do they determine that expressly which includes this; which is that they
confirm euery-where the libertyes, preheminencyes, and prerogatives of of the
Church, and Churchmen of England: which do principally consist in this, that
only Ecclesiastical men have Power and Jurisdiction in Ecclesiastical
affairs; and that no lay person (and much less a woman) can meddle therein;
and that there be two distinct swords in a Christian Commonwealth the one
temporal in the hands of the Prince, the other Ecclesiastical in the hands of
the Bishop; and that the Ecclesiastical is greater and more sovereign then
the temporal, and that this later must help and be subordinate to the former.
All which you shall see decreed as well in the laws of K. Edgar, and K. Edward
before the Conquest, as also of the Conqueror himself which Infra. ^. 6.
demonstrat. 10. and in cap. 7.
after in due places we shall set down.

40. And to all this now may we ad certain manifest reasons, which besides the
foundations before laid, or rather out of them all, Manifest reasons.
our Deuines do allege why a woman may not be head of the Church, or have
spiritual Jurisdiction in Ecclesiastical affairs.
Whereof the first is that Christ our Savior being a Priest according to the
order of Melchisedech, and refusing to be a temporal King, as out of the
gospel is evident, he left in his place Priests to govern his Church, as
before has been declared, both out of Scriptures and ancient Fathers: but a
woman cannot be a Priest, as both we and Caluinists do hold; though Luther
taught otherwise for a time (as has been said and is refuted at lardge, by K.
Henry the 8. Q. Elizabeth's Father in his book against him) and therefore the
said Q. Elizabeth could not hold the place of Christ, in spiritual
Jurisdiction, in the Church of England.

maxim before alleged by M. Attorney, Cui licet quod maius est, licet quod
minus. He that can do the greater, can do the less: But it is more to be
able to give authority to others, to exercise spiritual functions and
Jurisdiction, than to do the same in his own person, ergo if Q. Elizabeth
could give authority to Bishops, and Pastors to make Ministers, administer the
Sacraments, preach, and teach with the like (which belongs to the head of the
Church) than could she do them also her self. Which conclusion notwithstanding
all English Protestants commonly do deny; yet is the Consequence evident, and
the Minor proposition is proved. For that, he that gives a power to an other,
A^^^rdi^^ ^f co^se^^ (...)
is presupposed to have it first in himself, for that no man can give that
which himself has not; so as if Q. Elizabeth did give any spiritual
Jurisdiction to her Bishops to teach, preach, make Ministers, absolute, and
loose sins, and the like (who otherwise could have no such authority at all)
she might, no doubt, have exercised the same in her own person, as in all
temporal Jurisdiction we see, that whatsoever power the King gives to any
Governor, Judge or Magistrate to exercise in his name, he may exercise the
same also him self if he will. And the same holds in the Pope, for any
spiritual Jurisdiction or function that he commits to any Bishop, Priest or
Clerk whatsoever.

ab inconueniente, to wit from this inconvenience, that if a Queen could be
spiritual head of the Church, and should marry without making her husband
King, A ^^eat (...)
she should be his spiritual head also, to loose and bind his sins, and to
exercise Ecclesiastical Censures of Jurisdiction, Suspension, or
Excommunication against him at her pleasure, and he for his part should be
bound in conscience under pain of sin to hear and follow her doctrine, if
at any time she list to preach unto him, or to prescribe what he must believe
or not believe in matters of faith; which besides that it should be contrary to
that we have alleged before out of S. Paul, and Christ his Institution, for
the subjection of women in these causes, it would be very absurd and ridiculous
also, as you see, and unworthy of the excellent government of Christ his
Church, instituted and framed by the highest wisdom of almighty God.

Consent of Protestant vvriters.
yet ought it to be of singular great moment with M. Attorney, and this is the
universal agreement of all Protestants, both of Calvin and Luthers sect,
commonly throughout the world, except only in England. And as for Caluinists
the matter is clear, if we respect France, Germany, Holland, Zeland, Scotland,
and other places, who all agree in this point; following therein their first
Author John Calvin, who not only in the place by me alleged upon Amos the
prophet, but in diverse other places also of his works, Calvin in cap. 6. Amos
and epist. 54. ad mycon^^^.
does earnestly impugn not only this Ecclesiastical power of a woman, but of
any temporal Magistrate whatsoever; affirming further in a certain epistle of
his, to his friend Myconius, that those who defend the same, are profane
spirits and madmen, and that the Lord with the breath of his mouth shall
destroy them, and that both he, and his, would encounter and fight against them
with a valiant and invincible Zeal etc. Of the same opinion and spirit, was
Theodore Beza the chief scholar and successor of Calvin, in his chair of
Geneua as appears by his writings, Beza in ^^fes^r^ne cap. 5. and de pr^sb.
fol. 32. 43. Viretus Dialog. 3.
and another chief scoller and companion of them both, named Viretus, in his
dialogue entitled, Of white Devils, calling them false Christians and
dissembled devils that defend this false position of Princes Ecclesiastical
Supremacy, though they cover them selves (says he) with the cloak of the
Gospel; and then sets he down, four or five arguments, to prove the
position to be false, which I pretermitt to recite in this place, for breuities
sake, remitting the Reader to the book it self, for that it is exstant in
English. And I do pass over the writings of many other principal men of that
profession, both in England and abroad, who in this point are no less
opposite, and earnest against M. Attorney, that we, and are known in England
by the name of Puritanes or precise Caluinists, who being the far greater
part, if we respect all Countries about us, must needs in this point be
confessed to have more reason (the thing being affirmed so earnestly as you
have heard by Calvin himself,) than the other of that sect, who for pleasing of
te^porall princes, are accused by them to hold the contrary. For that if John
Calvin be to be followed in all the rest, as they confess; why not also in
this? And if the holy ghost failed him in this so important a point, as
comprehends the whole government of their Church, and the lawful or unlawful
vocation, and function of their whole Ministry, what certainty can they have
in any other thing, or point of his doctrine.

44. But now not only those of the Caluinian sect, but others also of the
Lutheranes, do laugh at our English Protestants, for holding this position of
M. Attorney, about Queen Elizabeth's Spiritual and Ecclesiastical Supremacy:
wherein not to weary the Reader which enumeration of many witnesses; I shall
alleadg only one for all, but yet such a one, as may well stand for all; For
that he is the most eminent, and principal man of them all, to wit Mart^nus
Keronitius, an ancient public Reader of divinity among the Lutherane Sect in
Saxony, that has written many volumes for defense of the said sect in our
days.

45. This man then being consulted and demanded his opinion by the Prince
Elector of Brandeburg, what was to be done in certain points concerning those
of the Caluinian sect, he answers him in a large epistle extant in print,
allowing first, and greatly praising the Princes judgment. (...) ad (...)burg.
Quod consultum non esse iudicat, vt cum Caluinistis Generalis Synodus
habeatur: That his Highness thought it not expedient to hold any general Synod
with the Caluinists, as they desired for composing of Controuersyes between
Lutherans, and them.

46. Secondly he adds his own judgment unto that of the Prince Elector about
punishing the said Caluinists within his State, affirming. Non expedire, vt
punitionis officium contrae Caluinistas interea temporis penitus quiescat. It
was not expedient that the office of punishing Caluinists should cease in the
mean space, until the said general Synod were held, as they demanded.

(...) and (...) of (...)
47. Thirdly and lastly having resolved these two points, he passes over to
give his judgment in like manner, to the said Elector, about the Religion held
in England, and of Q. Elizabeth her self, and her title of supremacy, saying
first that no good thing in Religion was further to be expected from her; that
she had used hardly the Protestants of Germany; that she saw and felt no^ a
third sect risen up in her Realm of Puritanes, that hated both her and the
other Caluinians that followed her, who were enemies in like manner to
Lutherans; So he. And then passing yet further he scoffeth merrily, that she
being a woman had taken upon her to make Ecclesiastical laws. Et quod
faemineo, and a saeculis inaudito fastu se Papissam and caput Ecclesia fecit.
That with a womanly pride, never heard of in former ages, she had made herself
a She-pope, and head of the Church. Thus Kemnitius. And mark that he says a
saeculu inaudito that from the beginning of the world there was never any such
thing heard of, either among Christians, Jews, or Gentiles.

48. Wherefore we having now proved this our negative ^e Iure against M.
Attorney by so many and different sorts of proof as you have heard, as well
out of the Canon and Civil laws, as of Nature, Nations,, Mosaicall and
Evangelical, The repetition and conclusion of all.
and of all the parts and members thereof, as Scriptures, Fathers, Doctors of
all sorts: yea, and by the testimony of our Common Municipall ancient laws of
England, and the concurrence and consequence of reason it self; and lastly by
the consent and asseueration of the best-learned Protestants of each sort, both
Lutherans and Caluinians: I do not see what M. Attorney will be able to bring to
the contrary to prove his affirmative propositions De Iure, with any show of
probability. Wherefore I shall conclude this whole Chapter, noting only to the
Reader two considerations, for his better memory out of all the premises. The
one worthy of laughter, the other of tears.

49. The former is the evil luck that M. Attorney had in making choice of Q.
Elizabeth for an example of Ecclesiastical supremacy in a temporal Prince;
For whereas three Princes only of our Nation, from the beginning of the world,
had taken upon them this title, A point worthy of laughter.
to wit K. Henry the 8. K. Edward the 6. and Q. Elizabeth; M. Attorney chose
the worst and weakest of all the three, to be defended. For, as for K. Henry,
K. Henry ^
though by the Canon Law he were incapable of Priesthood or holy orders (whereof
depends spiritual Jurisdiction) for that he was married when he took the
same upon him, and not only married but many times married, which is another
Canonical impediment (for he was not only Bigamus, and Trigamus, but twice
also Trigamus, having been married the sixth time) yet was all this in rigor
of Ecclesiastical power dispensable by the Church, being but only. Iuris
humani impedimenta, and non diuini: Impediments of humane, and not divine law;
and so K. Henry either by dispensation, or by occasion, that this last wife had
dyed, might have been made Priest and capable of spiritual Jurisdiction.

Ed^^^d 6.
50. But K. Edward being a child, of 9. years old, and consequently under the
use of reason, when this supreme spiritual Jurisdiction was given unto him,
he was so incapable thereof, as by no dispensation it might be made lawful,
until he came to the years of perfect reason, and so do prove both Canonists,
and Ciuilians; for that Jurisdiction cannot be given nor admitted, but where
perfect use of reason is; for that otherwise, it should be no humane act. But
yet this impediment though not dispensable for the present, would have come
afterward to be removed without dispensation, by tract of time it self, which
would have brought the perfect use of reason.

^
51. But in Q. Elizabeth, in regard of her sex, no time, no dispensation, no
authority humane, nor other circumstance could remove the impediment or
incapacity of her sex, which God and nature had laid upon her, so as in this
point M. Attorney his choice was very erroneous; ^^^tvvin (...) cap 1.
but whether the Twynne of Ignorance were also conjoined, which before he said
to be inseparable from error, I leave to himself to consider. And thus much of
this former consideration.

A point ^^rthy of (...).
52. The other which I said to be worthy of grief and tears, consists in
this, that the former position of the said Queens Ecclesiastical Supremacy
being a thing impossible in it self for so many respects and causes, as before
has been showed, humane and divine; and that the very Protestants themselves of
the more learned sort do laugh at it, and condemn the same as a new invention
never heard of in the world before: yet notwithstanding that the same in our
country should pass by Parliament as a matter of faith, and to Religion, and
be pressed upon men by corporal oaths under pain of extreme punishments; must
needs be a matter of great compassion to every pious mind, that considers
the infinite danger of souls thereby. Every Archbishop and Bishop (says the
Statute) and every Ecclesiastical person, of what estate, ^
dignity, pre-eminence, or degree soever he or they be; and all and every
temporal Judge, Ius^icer, Mayor and other lay, or temporal officer, etc. And
all that s^all suc out the livery of their lands and inheritances, when they
come to lawful age: All that shall take any order, office, benefice,
promotion, dignity, or degree in the university, etc. shall make, and take, and
receive a corporal oath upon the Evangelist, according to the tenor and
effect following. I A.B. do utterly testify and declare in my conscience that
the Queens highness is the only Supreme Governor, etc. as well in all
spiritual or Ecclesiastical things or causes, as in temporal, etc. So goes
the oath; And by the last words that give her as much spiritual Jurisdiction
in all things, The oath of supremacy exacted of Q. Elizabeth.
and causes Ecclesiastical, as she had, or could have in temporal, you may
see how far they extended the meaning of this power, though they left out the
word Supreme head for the causes before mentioned.

53. Now then (pious and godly Reader) consider with thy self out of thy
Christian compassion, The final consideration upon all.
Quae strages animarum: What a slaughter of souls ensued upon this new devise.
And first how many thousands were forced, or allured by fear and terror, or
desire of preferment to take this oath against their consciences, the far
greater part of the Realm being then Catholic, and condemning the said oath
in their judgments, and belief. And when afterward God styrred up another
generation, that had more care of their said consciences, and thereupon refused
so wilfully to damn themselves, as to take such oaths with repugnant
consciences; what troubles, what afflictions have ensued thereof in all the time
of that Queen? And among many others above an hundred learned preests, that in
conscience were most free and innocent in all matters meant against the State,
gave their blood for preservation of their said consciences in that case: and
now both they and she are gone to plead their cause before the high and
everlasting Judge. And if this matter of her spiritual supremacy were but a
jest and fancy, and new devise for for the time, as you have heard the best
sort of foreign Monsieur La^sa^. Ambassador of the K. of France and others
vvherof see more.
Protestants to affirm, and as her self would sometimes merrily but seriously
say: then was the same both deerly bought and sold in this life by some, and
will cost more dear in the other, where now the matter is in handling.

54. And this shall suffice for this chapter, Infra cap. 15.
and for the first head of proof De Iure, wherein you may have seen how
sparinge M. Attorney has carried himself: we shall now pass to the other
sort of his proofs De facto wherein consists the whole corpse of his book,
and shall examine whether any better substance may be found in that, then has
been in this. The proof will be the trial of all.

OF THE SECOND SORT OF PROOFS NAMED DE FACTO, Whereto M. Attorney betaketh
himself, alleging certain Instances therein: And first, out of our Kings
before the Conquest. CHAP. V.
THE whole bulk of M. Attorneyes book (such as it is) consists (as before
has been noted) in the recital of certain laws, or pieces of laws, and
therefore called by him Reports or Relations of clauses, found in his
Commonlawes, or Statutes that may seem somewhat to sound against the absolute
Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical of the Bishops and Sea of Rome, or to the
restraint thereof under certain Kings, and in certain occasions; and to
ascribe unto the said Kings some Ecclesiastical power, in those cases, as
afterward shall be seen. Wherein first is to be considered, that which before
has been observed, that he abandoning, as it were, the first head of proofs
De Iure, flies only to the other De facto which always holds not: for that
all factes, do not infer necessarily the right of equity and Justice, as
before has been showed. And secondly, if all the examples De facto were
granted, in the sense, as by him they are set down; yet are they far of from
proving his principal, as often afterward upon many particular occasions
shall be declared. For that his said principal Conclusion is (as you may know)
that Queen Elizabeth by the ancient Common laws of England, ^
had as full, and absolute power, and Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, as by any
spiritual or Ecclesiastical person, had ever been at might lawfully be
exercised within the Realm. And these Instances by him alleged do concern
but certain pieces, Reports fol. 1.
and parcells of Jurisdiction in some particular cases and causes, as by
examination will be found. Wherefore to draw near to this examination we must
understand, that M. Attorney rightly deuideth the times of our Kings into
before, and after the Conquest; and I shall willingly follow him in this
division, and search out what Ecclesiastical laws or Ordinances there were
made in those days, by our Kings of those ages, for his or our purpose.

2. And first before the Conquest when our best English Kings were most
eminent, if we respect piety and religion, as living nearer to the origin and
fountain of their first conversion and fernour of Christian spirit: Of English
Kings before the Conquest.
out of this time (I say) and rank of our Christian Kings from Ethelbert the
first, to K. Edward the last before the Conquest (for of K. Harold we make
little account, he being an intruder and reigning so small time, and with so
many troubles as he did) they being otherwise above a hundred in number, within
the space of almost five hundred years, two only inferences he produces, and
these of very small moment, as presently will appear, yet let us hear how he
begins and what Preface he makes to his proofs in these words. Reports
fol. 9.
To confirm (says he) those that hold the truth, and to satisfye such as
being not instructed, know not the ancient and modern laws and customs of
England, every man being persuaded as he is taught: these few demonstratiue
proofs out of the laws of England in steed of many in order and serie
temporum are here added. This is his Preface wherein he promises as you see
demonstratiue Proofs which are the strongest, most clear, evident, and
forcible, that logic does prescribe in any science: but we shall be enforced
afterward to admit proofs of a lower degree, then demonstrations, as by
experience you will find: Wherefore to the matter.

3. His first instance is taken out of the words of a certain Charter, given
by King Kenulfus of the VVestsaxons, The Charter of K. Kenulphus anno 755.
some two hundred and fifty years after the conversion of K. Ethelbert of
Kent, and confirmed afterward by K. Edwin Monarch of all England, Stamford.
lib. 3. c. 39. fol. 1012.
which Charter begins thus. Kenulfus Rex, etc. per literas suas patentes,
consilio, and consensu Episcoporum, and Senatorum gentis suae, largitus fuit
monasterio de Abindon in Comitatu Bark. and euidam Ruchino tunc Abbati
monasterij, etc. This charter was pleaded 1. H^nr. 7. 23. 25.
quandam ruris sui portionem, id est, quindecim mansias, in loco qui a
ruriculis tunc nuncupabatur Culnam, cum omnibus vtilitatibus, tam in magnis,
quam in modicis rebus. Et quod praedictus Ruchinus, (...)
(...) ab omni Episcopali iure in sempiternum esset quietus; vt habitatores
^iu^ nullius episcopi, aut suorum officialium iugo inde deprimantur; sed in
cunctis rerum euentibus, and discussionibus causarum, abbatis monasterij
praedicti decretis subijciantur, itae quod, etc. Thus goes the Charter, which
though M. Attorney thought not good to put in English, but to set down both
his pages in Latin; yet we shall translate the same, for the better
understanding of all sorts of Readers. K. Kenulfus, etc. by his letters
parents with the Counsel, and consent of the Bishops and Councillors of his
nation, did give to the monastery of Abindon in Barkshire, and to one Ruchinus
Abbot of that monastery, a certain portion of his land, to wit fifteen
mansians, in a place called by the countrymen Culnam, with all profittes, and
commodities, both great and small, appertaining thereunto. And that the
foresaid Ruchinus, etc. should be quiet from all right of the Bishop for ever,
so as the inhabitants of that place, shall not be depressed for the time to
come by the yoke of any Bishop, or his officers, but that in all events of
things, and controversies of causes, they shall be subject to the decree of
the Abbot of the said monastery; so as, etc.

4. Thus goes the Charter, which if it were all granted by us, as it lies;
yet is it far of (as you see) from inferring M. Attorneys conclusion, that K.
Kenulfus was head of the Church, or had supreme power Ecclesiastical. It
might make it probable, that he had some Jurisdiction in some particular case,
but what or how much that was or whence he had it, either of himself, or by
delegation of another, to wit of the Popes or Clergy that is not evident by
the Charter. ^
But let us see, what M. Attorney can make of these words, for that lawyers
commonly can make the most of matters to their advantage. First he will needs
enforce out of his Charter, that this K. Kenulfus, took upon him
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction; for thus he writes. By this it appears, that
the King by this Charter, made in Parliament (for it appears to be made by the
Council, and consent of his Bishops, and Senators of his kingdom, which were
assembled in Parliament) did discharge and exempt the said Abbot from the
Jurisdiction of the Bishop, etc. And by the same Charter did grant to the same
Abbot Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction within his said Abbey: Which
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction being derived from the Crown, continued until
the dissolution of the said Abbey in the reign of K. Henry the 8. So he.

5. In which words three things are affirmed by him, whereof I hold never a one
to be certain, and the last evidently false. For neither does it appear, by
the words of the Charter, that the King did exempt the said Abbot from all
Jurisdiction spiritual of the Bishop, but rather of some temporal interest or
pretense that the Bishop of that Diocese might have, or pretend to have in
those days. Nor does he seem to have given Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction to
the Abbot, but rather temporal concerning controversies that might arise about
the lands of the lordship of Culnam, whereof he had made donation to the said
monastery. And thirdly howsoever this might be, the third point and chief
conclusion is false, that he either gave, or took away Jurisdiction by his
own power derived from his temporal crown (for this was impossible, as
before in the second Chapter of this answer has been showed) but rather by
some spiritual Jurisdiction, committed unto him by some other higher
Ecclesiastical power, either of his Bishops gathered together in Parliament,
or Synod; or of the Bishop of Rome himself: all which three points, we shall
breiflie here show, and thereby conclude that M. Attorney his inference, set
out with a Nota in the margent, is worth no note at all, but only of weakness
and impertinencie.

6. For first, to begin with the second, The first point of M. Attorneys
collection refuted.
it does not appear by the words of this Charter, that the King did grant to
the same Abbot Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, within his said Abbey; but only
that in all events, and discussions of causes or controversies arising about
the foresaid Lordship of Culnam, given unto the said monastery, the Tenants
thereof should stand to the Decree of the said Abbot, and not have recourse to
the Bishop of the Diocese, who before, perhaps, pretended temporal
Jurisdiction over them, or at leastwise over that Lordship of Culnam. And this
conjecture is greatly confirmed by a Canon of a National Synod held in
Hereford almost a hundred years before this, under Theodorus Archbishop of
Canterbury, the 24. of September. Anno Christi. 670. and related by S. Bid:
Bed. lib. 4. hist. Angl. cap. 5.
where the third Canon of the Council decrees thus. Vt Quacunque monasteria
etc. That all monasteries consecrated to God, noe Bishop has authority to
inquiet them, nor violently to take from them any thing of their goods; etc.
whereby appears that some Bishops in those days did pretend also temporal
Jurisdiction over monasteries and their goods, which here K. Kenulfus would
prevent in this his monastery, to which he gave his Lordshipp.

The second po^nt ansvv^^^d
7. And by this also the other point is confirmed, that it does not appear by
the force of these words, that the Abbot was exempted from all spiritual
Jurisdiction of the Bishop by this Charter of the King (though otherwise by
some privilege of the Pope I doubt not but he was, it being a thing common
lightly to all Abbots) for he says only: Abomni Episcopali Iure: from all
right of the Bishop, and not Jurisdiction, which might be meant, as has been
said, of some temporal right pretended over that Lordship, and was found now
not to be just; or for that the said Bishop in Parlame^t, or otherwise (for M.
Attorney holds, that all this was done in Parliament) had renounced his
temporal right therein, which before he pretended to have; or that the King
made this declaration of the monasteries exemption (for he seems rather to
have declared what was done, or granted, then to ordain it himself) by force
of the foresaid Synodicall Decree of the Ecclesiastical Council before
mentioned.

(...) the (...) then (...)
8. And truly, that the words of this Charter do seem rather to mean
temporal, then spiritual Jurisdiction in this place (though I doubt not (as I
said) but that they were exempted in the one, and in the other by the
privileges of the Sea Apostolic accustomed in such cases) that which ensues
in the said Charter does much confirm, to wit, that the Abbot should be quiet
from the Bishops right, and that the inhabitants from thence-forward should not
be depressed by the Yoke of the Bishops officers. Which imports as much, as
that they had been unjustly disquietted and depressed before; the same noe way
seeming fittly to agree to be spoken of Bishops Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction,
and consequently it is not improbable, that only temporal Jurisdiction is
here talked of: and so neither spiritual Jurisdiction taken from the Bishop,
nor given to the Abbot by the King in his Charter.

(...) third (...)
9. But howsoever this were, or may be; most certain it is, that M. Attorney
his inference and conclusion, is manifestly false; to wit, that it was
derived from his Crown. For albeit, it were evident, that the meaning here
were of spiritual Jurisdiction: yet might the King have that power, to give
the exemption which he did to the monastery, either from the Bishops gathered
together now in the Parliament, or before in Synod, as has been said,
renouncing all their Jurisdiction therein: or he might have it from the Pope,
which is most likely, for that all such privileges, and exemptions were
demanded in those days at his hands, by Princes, and founders of pious
works. And the said Popes made ordinary graunts thereof, (as in our days also
they do) and this is different sort and manners: For that sometimes they
granted the same immediately, as from themselves, sometimes they gave commission
to Princes to give it in their names; and some other times they confirmed that
which Princes had done before in this kind under ratihabition, or future
allowance, or ratification by the Sea Apostolic.

10. And of all these three sorts, many examples might be alleged, Of diverse
sorts of exemptio^^ granted to pious works by Popes.
but that I shall have occasion again in the next Chapter to treat more
largly of these points, where I shall show, that in this very time, when
Kenulfus lived, his neighbor King Ossa of the Mercians demanding the
Canonization of S. Alban the Protomartyr of England, at the hands of Adrian the
Pope, as also that he might build a Monastery in the place where he was
martyred, Ossa K. of Mercians. Paris. i^ hist. Angl. anno 794.
and this (as Parisiensis says) Ab omni Episcoporum subiectione emancipandum.
To be free, and exempted from all subjection of Bishops; the Pope granted both
his demands, answering him thus, as the same author records. We do most
willingly give our consent to your petition for building of a monastery, and
do privilege the same; and when you have made your Charter or privilege,
we shall afterward confirm and strengthen your Original with ours, and
exempt that monastery from all jurisdiction both of Bishops, and Archbishops,
subiecting it immediately unto our Apostolic Sea. So he. Whereby we see, that a
temporal King, and founder of a monastery or other pious work, might give
privileges, either by commission, or under ratihabition as before has been
said.

11. The like examples we find in the lives of King Edgar and S. Edward the
Confessor, and many others that demanded and obtained confirmation and
exemptions for pious works erected by them, of the Popes of their times. But
for that these examples will be more fittly produced in the sequent Chapter,
and fourth demonstration thereof, I will remitt the Reader thereunto. Only I
cannot let pass to recite unto you in this place a certain Charter of K.
Ethelbert of Kent our first Christian English King, confirmed by a Bull in
lead, of S. Augustine first archbishop of Canterbury and legate of the Sea
Apostolic, unto the monastery of S. Peter, and Paul in Canterbury erected by
the said K. Ethelbert: the words of the Charter are these. In nomine Domini
nostri Jesus Christi, etc. Ego Ethelbertus Rex Cantij;, etc. In the name of our
Lord Jesus, etc. I Ethelbert King of Kent, (...) Gul^^l. (...) l. de
(...)talibus (...)ast. S. ^^ustin.
with the consent of the venerable Archbishop Augustine, and of the Princes of
my Realm, do give and grant in the honor of S. Peter and S. Paul a certain
pe^ce of my land which lies in the East part of Canterbury, to this intention
only that a monastery be builded in that place, (...) Char. (...) K. ^^^elbert
^605.
with this condition; that my said land be for ever in the power of the said
Abbot, which there shall be ordained. And therefore I do adjure, and command
in the name of almighty God that is the just Judge of all; that the foresaid
gift of lands made by me, be held for ever firm, so as neither it be lawful
for me, or any of my Successors, Kings, or Princes, or for any
Ecclesiastical person of what degree, or dignity soever, to defraud the said
monastery of the same, or any part thereof. And if any man shall go about to
impeach, or diminish any point or part of this donation: let him be separated
in this life, from the holy communion of the body and blood of Christ, and at
the day of judgment, for the demeritt of his malice, be sequestered from the
company of Saints, and all good men. Given at Canterbury: Anno Christi. 605.
the 8. indiction.

12. Thus goes that Charter: and in the same form went all other Chartes of
this Kind, wherein is to be noted first the dreadful imprecation against all
breakers thereof, confirmed by the Authority of so great a Saint, ^^ainst
^^^^ders (...) Abbey (...) or (...).
as S. Augustine was: and how many lamentable inheritours we have of these
curses and imprecations in our country and round about us at this day, where
all such pious works are over thrown. And secondly for that he says expressly,
that he did all by the counsel, and consent of S. Augustine; it may be
inferred, that whatsoever privileges he gave, that may seem to appertain to
Ecclesiastical matters or Jurisdiction, he did them under ratihabition of the
said S. Augustine, that was not only Archbishop, but legate also of the Sea
Apostolic, and confequentlie had authority to exempt the said monastery (as
we see, he did) not only from the Jurisdiction of all other Bishops, but of his
own Sea also, ^.
in such sort, as no Archbishop of Canterbury had any authority over them,
which is much more then the Charter of Kenulsus alleged here by M. Attorney.
And we do read that the monks of Canterbury did plead this Charter of K.
Ethelbert confirmed by S. Augustine, for their liberties against the Archbishop
Richard Successor of S. Thomas Becket in the year of Christ 1180.

13. Wherefore to conclude this matter; it seems that M. Attorney has gotten
nothing at all by this his instance of K. Kenulfus, whether in his Charter he
meant of temporal, or spiritual jurisdiction. For if he meant of te^porall,
that is to say, that the Abbey of Abindon should be free from molestation of
the Bishops officers in temporal affairs, it is nothing to our purpose, and
if he meant of spiritual Jurisdiction, clear it is, that the said King had it
not of himself by right of his crown, as M. Attorney often repeateth and
urges without all ground, but either from the Bishops of his Realm, gathered
together in Parliament: (which seems very probable by the words of the
Charter: Consilio, and Consensu Episcoporum: That he did it by the Counsel and
Consent of his Bishops) or that, he had it immediately from the Pope, as we have
showed the use to be in those days, and shall do more largly in the ensuing
Chapter.

14. And that which is yet more, Harpe^sel^ hist. Angl. saculo 10. c. 9. ex
Mariano Scoto.
and seems to convince the whole matter and to decide our very case in
particular, I do read of one Bishop Rethurus who was Abbot also of Abindon,
during the reign of the said Kenulfus, who went to Rome to obtain the
confirmation of privileges to the said Abbey of Abindon, about the year.812.
Romam profectus (says the Story) Pontificia authoritate privilegia Canobij
communiuit. He going the Rome (by consent no doubt, of K. Kenulfus himself)
obtained the confirmation of the privileges of the said monastery (of Abindon)
by the Apostolic authority of the Sea of Rome. K. Kenulfus gave his Charter
to Abindon by authority of the Pope.
And it is no doubt, that among other privileges, this Charter also of
Kenulfus was one; which being so, every man may see, how much this instance
has helped M. Attorney his cause, or rather made against him, that Kenulfus
procured the confirmation of his Charter from the Pope himself.

15. And surely if in this M. Attorney committed an error in alleging
Kenulfus for an example of one that took supreme Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical
upon him, he being so obedient and subordinate to the Church of Rome, as we
have said: much more did he err in choosing S. Edward the Confessor, for his
second instance (for he has but two, as before I have said, out of all our
Kings before the Conquest) which K. Edward of all others, The instance of K.
Edward the confessors charter examined.
was most devoutly obedient to the Sea Apostolic, as may appear both by
that, which before we have touched of him, as by that which after we shall more
largly show in the next Chapter, that he presumed not to found his monastery of
Westminster, without particular license, and approbation of the Pope. In like
manner, for that having made a vow, Alredus (...) in (...) S. Edo^^^ds.
to go in pilgrimage to Rome, to show his devotion and obedience to that Sea;
he finding afterward some difficulties therein, in respect of his Kingdom, that
repined at his absence, and of the troublesome times, that then were, he
remitted all first to Pope Stephen the tenth, and when he being dead, to his
successor Nicholas the 2. who determined, that he should not take that voyage,
but bestow the charges thereof upon the buylding of that monastery of
Westminster, to which effect both their letters are exta^t in Alredus, that
lived about 400. years gone, and wrote the same Kings life. The Kings letter
has this Title. Summo vniuersalis Ecclesiae Patri Nicolao, Edwardus Dei gratia
Anglorum Rex debitam subiectionem, etc. ^^^g Ed^^rd the ^^^^^ssors ^^^^ection
(...) the ^^pe. (...) 1033.
To the high Father of the universal Church Nicolas, Edward by the grace of God
King of England, does offer due subjection and obedience. Whereby is evident,
that if K. Edward did hold himself for supreme head, and governor of the
Church in spiritual matters as M. Attorney would infer upon certain words of
one of his laws, as presently you shall hear; it must needs be, that he was
governor, under the Pope, to whom he professes (as you have heard) obedience
and subjection.

16. But what proof (think you) has M. Attorney out of this King to show,
that he exercised spiritual jurisdiction by virtue of his temporal crown?
You shall hear it all, as it lies in his book; for the whole narration is
but of 3. or 4. lines taken out of K. Edward his laws. The words are these in
Latin. Rex autem qui vicarius summi regis est, (...) S. ^^^vards (...) 19.
ad hoc constitutus est, vt regnum and populum Domini, and super omnia Sanctam
Ecclesiam regat, and defendat ab iniuriosis; malefices autem destruat. Which M.
Attorney Englisheth thus. The King, who is the vicar of the highest King, is
ordained to this end, that he should rule, and govern the Kingdom, and people
of the land, and above all things the holy Church, and that he defend the same
from wrong-doers, and destroy and root out workers of mischief. Which words,
supposing them to be truly alleged, as they lie, have a plain and easy
interpretation, which is, that the King, as Gods minister (for so S. Paul
called also the hea-Magistrate) must govern the Church, and Clergy of his
land in temporal matters; cap. 2.
for that they are members also of the Commonwealth, as before we showed: In
which respect they are subject to the said temporal Magistrate, and in that
sense to be governed by him, though not in spiritual things.

17. And if M. Attorney will infer, that because the King is calcalled Gods
Vicar, he has spiritual Jurisdiction; then may he as well infer that the
heathen Magistrate had spiritual Jurisdiction over Christians, for that S.
Paul calls him the minister of God, which is as much in effect as Vicar, Romans
13.
for that the minister supplieth the masters place. And thus you see that
albeit we admit these words as here they ly alleged by M. Attorney, noe
advantage can be rightly inferred against us by them. But I am forced to
suspect some little fraud or shuffling to be used in the citation of this piece
of law, and therefore I entreat the Judicious Reader, who is learned and has
the commodity to see the Originals; that he will examine both this, and the
former instance of K. Kenulfus, in the authors whence they are taken, for I
have them not by me.

18. The reasons of suspicion are, first for that I see M. Attorney his
translation in these few lines, not to be very exact, as it will appear to him
that examineth the same; and secondly for that I find this clause of S. Edwards
law, differently alleged hear by M. Attorney from that which is cited by
Roger Houeden in the life of K. Henry the second, Rog. Houed. part 1. ant. al.
in vit. Hen. 2.
as also from another allegation thereof by John Fox in his Acts and Monuments:
Joan. Fox in Act. and Monument.
by all which may be gathered that the verb regat is wrongly placed in M.
Attorneys allegation, which being amended, and the said verb placed before in
his dew place, the sense is perfect; to wit, vt Rex regnum terrenum and
populum Domini regat, and sanctam eius veneretur ecclesiam, and ab iniuriosis
defendat, etc. that the King rule his earthly Kingdom, and the people of God,
and reverence and defend the holy Church. Thus (I say) ought the words to
stand, to make good and congruons sense, and not as they are transposed, both
by M. Attorney and John Fox to make a blind sense: who yet agree not in their
allegations thereof, as in the places cited you may see.

19. And this our assertion (concerning the true sense and meaning of the
former clause) is confirmed yet further by the words of K. Edward immediately
following in the same law, omitted here by M. Attorney, but set down by Fox,
which are these. Quod nisi secerit, nomen regis in eo non constabit, verum,
Papa Ioanne testante, nomen Regis perdet. If a King do not perform the
points before mentioned (of gouerninge his people, and defending the Church)
the name of a King agrees not to him; but he must leese that name, as
testifies Pope John. So he. And the same K. Edward in the end of this speech,
does cite the authority of the said Pope John again, saying that the wrote to
Pipinus, and his son Charles, before they came to be Kings of France, that no
man was worthy to be called a King; except he did vigilantly defend and govern
the Church, and people of God; So as now this government of the Church which M.
Attorney hitherto has urged so much against the Popes authority, must be
understood according to the meaning and sense only of Pope John; ^
who I suppose notwithstanding will not mean that temporal Princes shall be
heads of the Church, and to have supreme spiritual Jurisdiction in causes
Ecclesiastical, derived from their Crowns as M. Attorneys meaning is. And so
you see unto what good issue he has brought this argument out of S. Edwards
laws, which is, that Kings have so much government over the Church, as Pope
John allowed them, and no more.

The (...) of (...)
20. And finally let us hear the words of Pope Nicolas the second to this very
K. Edward, concernining the government he had over the Church; for thus he
writes to him. Vobis vero, and posteris vestris Regibus committimus
aduocationem eiusdem loci, and omnium totius, Angliae Ecclesiarum, vt vite
nostrae, cum Consilio Episcoporum and Abbalum, constituatis vbique quae iusta
sunt etc. We do commit unto you, and to the Kings of England your
Successors, the aduocation, and protection of the same place (or monastery of
Westminster) and of all the Churches throughout England; to the end that in
our name and authority, you may by the counsel of your Bishops, and Abbots,
appoint euery-where, those things that are just, etc. By which words is easy
to see what government and jurisdiction, King Edward's government (...) Ch^^ch
vva^ by (...).
K. Edward had over the Church of England; to wit, by commission of the Pope
and noe otherwise. By which commission also diverse other Catholic Princes have
had in sundry cases committed unto them, and have at this day spiritual
Jurisdiction, as namely the Kings of Sicily do pretend to have had, and to
have supreme spiritual authority in that Kingdom, Se^ Baron. (...) 97.
as legati a latere by concession of Pope Vrbanus the 2. granted unto Roger
the Norman, Earl of Sicily above five hundred years past: to wit, from the
year of Christ 1097. The K. of Spain his Ecclesiasti^^ll Iu^^^^^^tion (...)
And yet will none of those that defend this spiritual monarchy at this day
(for by that name it is called) say, that it descends by right of their
Crowns, but by concession and delegation of Popes. And so much of this matter.

HOW THE ATTORNEY NOT BEING ABLE TO PROVE HIS AFFIRMATIVE PROPOSITION, Of
English Kings Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, before the Conquest: We do ex
abundanti prove the negative, by ten several sorts of most evident
demonstrations, that there was no such thing in that time, but the quite
contrary. CHAP. VI.
Thou have seen and considered I doubt not (gentle and judicious Reader) how
M. Attorney in the former Chapter has been grauelled in proving his affirmative
proposition, that our Kings before the Conquest, took supreme Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction upon them, and acknowledged it not in the Pope or Sea of Rome. For
proof whereof he brought forth two such poor, and petite instances, as they
being, besides their weakness, impertinent and untrue, and not subsisting in
their own grounds, they were no more for perfourmance of his promise of clear
and demonstratiue proofs; then if a man being bound to pay ten thousand pounds
in pure and current gold, should bring forth two mites of brass for discharge
of his band. And surely if M. Attorney should have failed so, some years gone
before he was so wealthy, How little M. Attorney proves.
as that taking upon him with so great an ostentation, to prove an affirmative
assertion of so main importance, and consequence, as this is, he should have
performed no more, then he has here done, he would never have attained by law,
to the preferment he has. But now^ perhaps he persuadeth himself that by his
only credit already gotten, he may say what he will, and prove as little as he
list; because by only saying he shall be believed.

2. But on the contrary side we require proofs, and offer proofs (gentle
Reader) and for that the matter is of singular great weight even for thy soul,
we rest not in ostentation of words only but in probation of deeds. And
though we might remain sufficiently with the victory, for that our adversary
rests with so apparent a foil in the proof of his foresaid affirmative; yet
that you may see, and behold, as in a glass, the difference of our cause and
confidence therein; I have thought convenient, out of the great abundance and
variety of proofs, that our truth has in this controversy (as well as in all
others between us and Protestants) to take upon me to prove the negative,
against M. Attorney (which of it self is ever more hard, as you know; Ten
demonstrations be^o^^ the conquest.
than to prove an affirmative, except evidence of truth do facilitate the
matter, as in our case) and to prove, and make evident by sundry sorts of
clear and perspicuous demonstrations (nine or ten at the least) that during
the time before the Conquest, no one of all our Christian English Kings,
(exceeding the number of an hundred as before has been said) did take upon
them either to be heads of the Church, or to be supreme governors in
Ecclesiastical causes, or to have any spiritual Jurisdiction, al derived from
the right of their Crowns, or denied this to be in the Pope, and Bishops only,
or did make any Ecclesiastical laws concerning spiritual matters; and
consequently that this Treatise of M. Attorney, Of the Kings Ecclesiastical
law, does apperteine no more unto them in realitie of truth, than to the man in
the Moon to govern the heavens: For that they never so much a^ dreamed of any
such thing, nor of any one of the forsaid clauses of spiritual power and
Jurisdiction, to belong unto them, which here shall brefely be proved, with
such variety of demonstrations, taken out of their own words, deeds, decrees,
and actions, as I doubt not, but will make more then moral evidence.

The first Demonstration.
3. The first Demonstration may be taken from the consideration of all the
ancient laws, Of the laws made by ancient Kings before the conquest.
made by Christian Kings in our Country before the Conquest, every one in his
several State, and Dominion, according to the times and places they reigned
in, and governed their Commonwealthes, both Britanes, Saxons and Danes: and
among the Saxons again, their Kings and Princes in every of their several
Kingdoms, about which point Malmesbury writes thus, Malmes. l. ^ de gestis
Regum Anglorum c. 2. in I^^.
of the noble King Inas: Porro quantus in Dei rebus fuerit, indicio sunt leges
ad corrigendos mores in populo latae, in quibus viuum ad hoc tempus puritatis
suae resultat speculum. How great a King Inas was in Gods affairs, the laws
which he made to correct the manners of his people do sufficiently declare, in
which until this day, there is seen as in a lively glass the said Kings
purity of mind. And the like laws (no doubt) other Kings also made in their
Dominions, all which remained afterward to their posterity, under the names of
Mulmutian laws. For the laws of the Britans, as also the laws of the
Mercians, Differences of laws and lavv-makers before the conquest.
called in their tongue Mercen laga, and of the West Saxons, called VVest-saxen
laga, and of the Danes named Dan laga, stood in force until England came to be
a Monarchy, when the first author of the said Monarchy King Egbert began
first to draw them into one body of conformity. But after him again K. Edgar
surnamed the peaceable and wise King, confirmed the same and set them forth,
but by the wars and confusion of the Danes, which after his death ensued, they
were for the most part put out of use again, until K. Edward the confessor
recalled them, increased, and made them perfect, and by the counsel of his
Peers and Realm, did frame a new ordination of the same laws, which remained
afterward under the name of K. Edward his laws; and were so much approved and
loved by the people, as John Fox also out of Matthew Paris does affirm, Fox
Acts and Mon. page 149.
that the common people of England, would not do obedience to William
Conqueror, but that first he did swear to keep these laws, which oath
notwithstanding (says he) the Conqueror did afterward break, and in most
points brought in his own laws. See the Conquerours Ecclesiastical laws
cap. sequent^.
So Fox which if it be true, yet is it to be understood principally of his
laws, appertayninge unto secular men: for that in the rest which concerned the
Church, and her privileges, he followed absolutely the laws of K. Edward, as
in the next Chapter shall appear, where we shall set down the said
Conqueror his laws in this behalf, which are as favorable and respective
unto Ecclesiastical power and persons, as of any one King, either before or
after him.

4. Whereupon it follows, that M. Attorney, who so often iterateth this word
of ancient and most ancient common-lawes of England, which as he says (but
cannot prove) did authorize Q. Elizabeth her spiritual Jurisdiction over the
Church, speaks but in the air and at random, beating us still with the
empty sound of these words, without substance: For in real dealing he should
have alleged some one law at least to that purpuse, out of all these before
the Conquest, if he had meant to be as good as his word.

5. But this he cannot do, as already you have seen by his two poor
instances, and we do show on the contrary side that all these and other laws
of these days were for us, in the favor of Catholic Religion, and
particularly for the liberties, franquizes, privileges, exemptions, and
immunities of the Church and Clergy, according to the Canons and Decrees of
the Popes Ecclesiastical law, which is the very decision of our Question. For
that by these phrases and clauses is signified, as in the Canon Law (and
particulerly throughout the sixth book of Decretals may be seen) is properly
meant, that the Church and Clergy is free from all jurisdiction of temporal
Princes, except only in Civil matters; and that their goods and persons are
exempted from Princes secular Courts, and that they are immediately under their
Prelates, and they again under the Sea Apostolic, What the (...), he^ (...).
unto which may lawfully be made appeals when just occasion is offered; and
that no lay judge may sit in judgment upon them or give sentence over them,
or lay hand upon their persons or goods, but refer them to their own
Ecclesiastical Emperors, and other such points, as may be seen in the
Canon Law, in the places before cited. And you have heard before in the second
Chapter of this book, how conform all these things are to Gods law, and how
willingly they were embraced, approved, and allowed by the first Christian
Emperor Constantine, and his Successors, and by all Christian Catholic
Princes since that time throughout the world: but especially, and above others
in comparison, by our English Kings before the Conquest. and after also, as in
their dew places shall be showed.

6. And so when the forenamed Kings Edgar and Edward, in their very first law
do set down and determine (as Fox also confesses) that the Kings office is
to keep, Fox vbi supra.
cherishe, mainteyne, and govern the Church within his Kingdom, (which word
govern I have showed Cap. 5.
before to be wrongfully put in, out of his due place, and to apperteyne only
to the government of the Commonwealth) with all integrity and liberty,
according to the constitution of all their Ancestors and predecessors; and to
defend the same against all enemies etc. they do in all this, but approve and
second the Popes Canon-lawes and decrees thereof, for the pre-eminence of the
Clergy, and thereby they do directly overthrow M. Attorneys proposition; and
so do all the Kings in like manner after the Conquest, who following this
example do ever in the beginning of their laws, renew, and confirm this law
of King Edward, for the libertyes, and privileges of the Church and Church
men. As first the Conqueror himself, as afterward in the next Chapter more
largely shall appear, when we come to speak of him in particular, whose laws
are set down by Houaden and others, Roger Hodon par. 1. Annal. in vita Henr. 2
and are as effectual for the Church, as could be devised: and after him (to
omit K. John and others) Henry the third, who was the chief founder of our
present later Common-lawes, and author of the Great Charter. Magna carta cap. 1.
His first law likewise is for the foresaid liberties of holy Church in these
words; We have granted to God, and by this our present Charter have
confirmed for us, and our heirs for evermore, that the Church of England
shall be free, and have all her rights wholly, and her liberties inuiolated, etc.

7. This Charter of K. Henry did Edward the first his son publishe and
confirm after him, Confirmation of Churches libertyes in England.
as appears by his own preface prefixed before the said Magna charta. And
Edward the second, that ensued after him, not only ratifyed the same, but added
other Statutes also called Articuli Cleri in favor of the same Clergy.
Articuli Cleri an. 9. Edward. ^.
And in K. Edward the third his time, I find the same Charter confirmed and
ratifyed by diverse, and several Statutes, as namely in the first, second,
fourth, fifth and fourtenth year of his reign; and the like in the first,
sixth, seventh, eight and nynth year of K. Richard the second: and in the
first, second, fourth, seventh, nynth, and thirtenth year of K. Henry the 4.
and in the third, and fourth of K. Henry the 5. and in the sixth of K. Henry the
sixth, etc.

8. And herby now though we go no lower, may the indifferent Reader see, how
vain M. Attorneys vaunt was, and is, that he would prove, and demonstrate by
the ancient laws of our Realm, that Q. Elizabeth had supreme jurisdiction
Ecclesiastical, by virtue of her Crown. And yet hitherto has he alleged no
one law at all, within the compass of nine hundred years together, but only
certain impertinent scraps, and rags nothing making to the purpose, nor
worthy the gathering up, as after when we come to examine them, will appear.
And we on the contrary side have so many, so ancient, and so authentical
laws, as you have heard, and afterward shallbe more particulerly declared,
for proof of the opposite proposition i^ his, that all spiritual jurisdiction
was only in Ecclesiastical persons, both b^sore and after the Conquest until
K. Henry the 8. his days. And thus much of this first demonstration concerning
laws.

The second Demonstration.
(...) the (...) Eccles^^^^ca (...) coun^^^ ^^ine (...) from (...), but (...)
P^e^^^.
9. The second demonstration is deduced from an other consideration not
inferior to the former; which is, that when ^. Ethelbert of Kent (for example)
was sirst of all other Kings converted to Christian faith by S. Augustine the
Monk, sent from Pope Gregory the first to that effect, upon the year of
Christ 600. and that by this occasion, a new Ecclesiastical Commonwealth was
to be instituted and erected within his dominion, concerning matters depending
of Religion, far different from that which passed in his Realm before when
he was a Pagan, as namely (to omit matters of doctrine, and mere spiritual
government) concerning marriages legitimation of children, burying, paying of
tithes, jurisdiction of Bishops and priests, and the like that might seem in
some sort to be mixed and concern also the Commonwealth: to whom was the
recourse made sor direction, counsel, and ordinance in these affairs? to K.
Ethelbert think you, or to S. Gregory the Pope? no man will say, I think, to
K. Ethelbert, for that he was yet but a nouice in Christian religion, though as
capable of spiritual jurisdiction by his Crown, as either Q. Elizabeth being
a woman, or K. Edward the sixth a child of nine years old when he was
proclaimed Head of the Church of England, as well in spiritual as temporal
affairs.

10. But in our case under K. Ethelbert we read both in S. Bid and S. Gregory
himself, that in all Ecclesiastical matters, recourse was made to the said S.
Gregory, as having supreme authority in these affairs, and therefore the said
King was no sooner converted, and S. Augustine made Archbishop, but the said
Archbishop according to his office sent two messengers to Rome, Laurentius a
priest, and Petrus a Monk, See Bid lib. 1. histor. Angl. c. 2^.
to ask counsel and direction in diverse cases; as namely about the
distribution of oblations at the altar, diuersitye of customs observed in
diverse contreys in saying Mass; about punishing of sacrilege in such as
steal from Churches, about degrees of kindred, Of Recourse made to Rome
presently after our English Church was founded.
or propinquity to be observed in marriages; about ordination of Bishops, and
how he should proceed with the Bishops of France and Britany; about baptizing
women with child and churching them after their childbirth, and the like.

11. To all which questions S. Gregory answers, and prescribes in particular
what is to be done, as lawful Judge in these matters. And to that of the
French Bishops, he gives such answers, as thereby he testifyeth that he well
knew himself to have supreme authority and jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, as
well over all Bishopps of France, as of England, and all countries besides
throughout all Christendom. For thus he wrote, as S. Bid relates: Ibidem.
The answer of Pope Gregory co^cerninge French Bishops.
For as much as concerns the Bishopps of France, I gave you no authority
over them, and from the ancient times of my precedessors, the Bishop of Arles
has received his pall; (from the Sea of Rome) whom we ought not to deprive os
that authority, which from them he has received, etc.

12. And the same Pope Gregory sending the pall (which is the proper sign of
Archi-episcopal authority) unto the same S. Augustine of England, he appoints
him his limitts of power and jurisdiction, and what he shall do, and give to
others, and this without any reference unto K. Ethelbert, any way to depend of
him in his said authority or execution thereof. For thus he writes unto him:
Reuerendissimo and Sanctissimo Fratri Augustino, Coepiscopo, Gregorius seruus
seruorum Dei. Quia noua Anglorum Ecclesia, etc. Beda lib. 1. hist. cap. 27. and
Grego^. in Regist. lib. 12. c. 15.
For that a new Church of the English nation by Gods gift and your labor, is
now brought to participate of the grace of our Savior Christ, we do grant
unto you the use of the pall in the said Church, only to be used in the solemn
celebration of Masses; we grant you also authority to ordeine twelve Bishops
under you, which shall be subject to your jurisdiction, but yet s^ as the Bishop
which shall be ordained for the city of London, shall ever afterward be
consecrated by a Synod, and shall receive also a pall of honor from this holy
and Apostolic Sea of Rome^ wherein by Gods appointment I do serve at this
time. We do will you also to send a Bishop to the City of York, whom your
self shall think good to ordeyne: but yet with this condition, that if that
City, with other places near about do receive the word of God; he may
ordain twelve Bishops also, and so remain with the honor of a metropolitan:
for that we do intend God willing (if we live) to give him also the pall,
(...) Grego^^^^ com^i^sion to Augu^^ine.
whom yet notwithstanding we will have to be subject to your disposition,
though after your death he shall so be over these Bishops, whom he has
ordained, as he be no way subject to the jurisdiction of the Bishop of London,
etc. But your Brotherhod shall not only be Superior, and have authority over
those Bishops, which your self have ordained, but over those also which shall be
ordained by the said Bishop of York. And so in the authority of Jesus Christ
our God and Savior you shall have subject unto you all the Priests of
Brittany; to the end that from your mouth and holiness of life, they may receive
a true form both of right belief, and virtuous life; and thereby performing
their duties of good Christians both in faith and manners, they may come at
length by Gods holy grace to enjoy his heavenly Kingdom, who keep and defend
you ever, most reverend Brother. The tenth day before the Calends of July,
Mauritius being Emperor. etc. the 4. indiction, anno Domini 601.

13. By this epistle, and commission of Pope Gregory, we may see what authority
he took himself to have, for all matters spiritual and Ecclesiastical in our
Country: neither did he think herby to do any injury to King Ethelbert,
neither did the King take it so, or imagine that himself had any spiritual
Jurisdiction, or Ecclesiastical authority to govern the Church, by virtue of
his temporal crown, more now by being a Christian, then he had before, when
he was a Gentile; but only that now he was to govern Ecclesiastical persons
also, in civil and temporal matters, and thereby might rightly be called King
of them both in the sense which before in the second Chapter of this answer we
have declared.

14. Nay, good King Ethelbert was so far of from thinking himself to receive
any prejudice against the power and authority of his temporal Crown, by the
spiritual jurisdiction over him and all others, instituted by Pope Gregory; as
he infinitely rejoiced thereat, and presently made temporal laws to confirm
the same: having special care to provide for the fafety, and immunity of the
Clergy, as S. Bid does signify. Bid lib. 2. hist. Anglicana cap. 5.
And moreover that he reduced the form of his secular judgments and
Tribunalls, to the likeness of those of Rome. Among other good things and
benefits (says he) which King Ethelbert with his wisdom did bring into his
nation, one was, that he appointed by the counsel of wise men, the decrees of
judgments to be made according to the example of the Romans, which decrees
being written in the English tongue do remain in use and force unto this day.
So Bid. Who lived an hundred and fifty years after. And this may suffice for
example of the first Kingdom converted to Christian religion, which was of
Kent, and the countries round about even unto the river of Humber.

15. But if I would pass to the consideration of other Kingdoms also converted
after this, The conversion of other Kingdoms after that of Kent.
and of their Christian Co^mon-wealthes instituted, and ordained according to
the form of this first, there would be much to say. For first some four
years after the conversion of the said K. Ethelbert of Kent by S. Augustine,
Anno 600.
was converted by the preaching of S. Mellitus, Sebert, Anno 604.
or (as S. Bid calls him) Sabered, King of the East Saxons; and some five
years after that again, King Sigebert of the East Angles, Anno 709.
by the preaching of S. Felix Bishopp: and some seventeen years after that
again, K. Edwyn, of the Northumbers, by the preaching of S. Paulinus. Anno 606.
And then further some nine years after that^ K. Kinegilsus of the
West Saxons, by the preaching of S. Berinus: Anno 635.
and about the same time Prince Peda of the Mercians, or Middle-iland people,
by the persuasion of the good K. Oswyn of Northumberland. And finally about
some 27. years after all this. K. Ethelw^ld, Anno 662.
or Ethelwalch (as S. Bid calls him) of the Southsaxons, was converted by
the preaching of S. Wilfrid.

16. All these Pagan Kingdoms, as they received the faith and Kingdom of
Christ, by the industrye and labors of spiritual and Ecclesiastical men,
that preached and instructed them, and were subordinate the one to the other,
but all to the Sea os Rome: so did those Kings (now made Christians) subject
themselves unto them, not only in matters of faith and belief, but in
discipline also and Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, as sheep to their Pastors,
according to that which before you have heard S. Creg^^^ Nazianzen tell the
Emperor of his time; ^up. cap. 2. ^ 4.
and herby it came to pass, that albeit these different Kingdoms had
different te^porall laws, for secular affairs before their conversion, and
retained the same afterward until England became one sole Monarchy, as in the
precedent demonstration you have heard: yet in Ecclesiastical and
Church Matters, they had all one, and the self same laws, ^cclesia^ticall
^^vves all ^^ne, though in ^^^serent ^ingdo^es.
though they were different Kings, and enemies for the most part, one to the
other, living in contin^all wars for the suspicion, the one had, that the
other would encroache upon him. And yet shall you never read, that any of them
did go about to punish a Priest, or Clergy man for bringing in any
Ecclesiastical ordinance, function or order from his enemies countries, which
is an evident argument that all was one in Ecclesiastical matters, and
consequently that these law^^ and ordinances did not proceed from any of the
Kings authority, in their particular Kingdoms (for then would not the other
have received the same) but from one general body and head, which is the
Church, and universal governor thereof.

17. To all which may be added this consideration of one Metropolitan, the
Archbishop of Canterbury, who had the spiritual jurisdiction over the far
greatest part of all these English King^ Dominions, whereof diverse were enemies
in temporal matt^^^ to the King of Kent, in whose territoryes his Bishopric
and Residence was: and yet did no one of all these other Kings except against
this his spiritual authority and ecclesiastical jurisdiction, in matters
belonging to Religion, which does evidently demonstrate that this
Ecclesiastical power of the said Archbishop, was a different thing from the
temporal of these Princes, and placed in a different person; and that all
these Kings were one in acknowledgeme^t of obedience unto this spiritual
jurisdiction, though in other things each man had his temporal power and State
a part. But if these powers were combyned together in the person of the
Prince, and annexed to his Crown and Scepter, as M. Attorney does pretend;
then would each of them have had a several Metropolitan under him, independent
the one of the other, which we see was never attempted, but all acknowledged
the said Archbishop of Canterbury, or the other of York, in their districts,
ac^ording to the power, and limitations given them by the Bishop of Rome, as
already has been declared. And though much more might be said in this point,
and many particularities alleged, which for breuities sake I omit, yet this
already said, will suffice to show the force of this argument.

18. One thing only I may not let pass, to advertise the reader of, which is a
certain wyly slight devised by M. Attorney, to decline the force and evidence
of this proof saying that albeit those Ecclesiastical laws were taken from
others; yet being allowed and approved by the temporal prince, they are now
his laws. M. Attorney his evasion ansvvered.
But this shift is refuted by that which already we have set down before. For
if one and the self-same Ecclesiastical law, received by seven Kings and
Kingdoms jointly within our land, shall be said to be each Kings proper laws,
for that they are approved and received by him and his realm: then shall one
and the self-same law have seven authors, yea more then seauenty: for that so
many Kingdoms and States, as through-out Christendom shall receive the same
Ecclesiastical and Canon Law (for example) made and promulgated by the
general Pastor thereof: each particular Prince (I say) admitting the same, as he
is bound to do, if he be truly Catholic, shall thereby be said to be the
particular author thereof: which is no less ridiculous, then if a man should
say, that every province in France admitting a law made by the King in Paris,
should be the several makers of that law. But for that I shall have occasion
perhaps to handle this point more at large afterward, I shall say no more now
but pass to another Demonstration.

The third Demonstration.
19. The third Demonstration consists in this, that in all the time of our
Christian Kings before the Conquest, That all Ecclesiastical weighty matters
were referred by our Kings and people to Rome.
being above an hundred in number in the space of almost five hundred years
(as before has been said) all doubts, or difficulties of greatest importance,
that fell out about Ecclesiastical business, or me^, all weighty consultations,
and recourse for remedy of justice, and decisions in Ecclesiastical causes of
most moment, were not made to the Kings of our Realm, nor to their Tribunalls,
but to the Bishops of Rome for the time being, as lawful judges thereof, both
by the subjects and Princes themselves: and consequently those Princes did not
hold themselves to be heads of their Churches, nor did think that they had
supreme Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, derived from their Crowns. And this
point is so evident, in (...) the course of our ancient English histories, and
so abundant to amples do euery-where offer themselves to this effect, as a
whole book might be made of this point only. But I shall be myndfull of breuity,
and out of many and almost infinite examples name a few, observing also some
order of time therein.

20. We have said somewhat before in the next precedent demonstration, of the
beginning of spiritual Jurisdiction and exercise thereof in England by S.
Augustine our first Archbishop under and Gregory the Pope (both of them our
Apostles) who did exercise, and put in ure spiritual jurisdiction over all the
Church of England, without reference to K. Ethelbert, though he were a
Christian and a very good Christian King. And when the said S. Augustine dyed,
he remitted not the matter to the said King, to appoint an Archbishop after
him, ^. Augu^^ine appointed his succes^ors by or^^r and au^horitie to Rome.
but by concession of the Sea Apostolic, did nominate two that should succeed
him in order, Laurentius and Mellitus upon the year of Christ 604. as S. Bid
does testify. Anno Do^^ni 604. (...) lib. 1. (...) p 4.
And some six years after that again, the said Mellitus being Bishop of
London, and having begun to buyld a certain Monastery, at the west part of
that City (called afterward Westminster) intending to make it a Seminary of
Bishops and Clergymen for the spiritual help of the whole realm, he
este^med it of such importance, Anno 610.
as for that and other such Ecclesiastical affairs, he went to Rome to take
direction therein, from Pope Boniface the 4. who thereupon called a Synod
together in Rome: de necessarys Ecclesiae Anglorum causis ordinaturus says
Bid: (...) de 2. hist. ^
to ordeine what was convenient, about the necessary occasions of the English
Church. And that Mellitus had his seat and place also, as Bishop of London in
that Synod: To the end (says he) that he retourning into Britany, should carry
the ordinations of this Synod, to be observed by the Church os England and
Clergy thereof. And further he adds, that ^^nisacius the Pope wrote letters
by the said Mellitus, as well to Lau^ence then Archbishop of Canterbury, as to
Ethelbert their King, and to the whole nation of Englishmen, though now the
said le^ters be not extant; yet herby it is evident,, what authority they
acknowledged in those days to be in the Bishop and Sea of Ro^^, Ethel^^rt and
Sebert ^ovv they ^epended ^^ Rome.
about English affairs; and that neither King Ethelbert of Ken^, nor King
Sebert of London and Essex, being both Christian princes did repyne thereat, as
done against the privileges of their Crowns.

21. After S. Mellitus, who dyed Bishop of Canterbury, there succeeded in that
Sea, by the appointment of Pope Boniface the fifth, the holy man Iustus, Bishop
of Rochester before, who by his doctrine and holy life, had helped greatly to
the reduction of Eadbald King of Kent, K. Eadbald an Apostata reclaymed.
who after the death of his good Father K. Ethelbert, by dissolute life, had
fallen back again to Paganism, and renounced the Christian faith. But
afterward returned again, and became a good Christian King: and presently
thereupon he wrote his humble letters of submission to the said Pope Boniface
the fifth, as appears by the Popes answer unto the said Archbishop Iustus,
upon the year of Christ 618. related by S. Bid, where Boniface writes:
Susceptis namque apicibus filij nostri Eadbaldi Regis, etc. Beda lib. 2. hist.
cap. 8.
We having received the letters of our son K. Eadbald we do find thereby with
how great learning of Gods word, you have moved his mind to true conversion
and undoubted faith. And in the same letter he signifies, that together
therewith he sent him (to wit to S. Iustus) the pall, with authority of
Archbishop of Canterbury: and further, concedentes etiam tibi ordinationes
episcoporum exigente opportunitate, we do also grant unto you power to
ordeyne Bishops, Autho^ity given by the Pope to make Bishops in England.
wheresoever opportunity for Gods glory is offered. Neither did Pope Boniface
think to displease or iniure K. Eadbald by writing in this sort, or by giving
to this Archbishop S. Iustus such authority to make Bishopps over all England,
as herby he did, without respect of his kingly power as you see.

22. And not many years after this again to wit upon the year of Christ
621. K. Edwyn of the Northumbers, Regum potentissimus inter Anglo-saxones:
Malmesb. in fas^is. anno Christi 621.
says Malmesbury the most potent of all other Kings amongst the
English-Saxons was converted to the Christian faith by the preaching of S.
Paulinus sent thither from Kent, by the foresaid Iustus Archbishop of
Canterbury, as to accompany the most Christian Lady Ethelburga daughter of K.
Ethelbert, who was married to the said K. Edwyn, upon hope of his conversion to
ensue thereby, as after it did. This man then some dozen years after his said
conversion, desiring to have an Archbishopricke erected in his Kingdom in the
City of York, and to have Paulinus that was there with him, to be made
Archbishop thereof, not esteeming it to be in his own power, to do the same of
himself, or by his Parliament, though he were a Christian King: whither think
you, or to whom did he make recourse and suit to have the same effected? S.
Bid says that he sent an ^^bassadge to Rome, K. Edvvyn demanded Bishops from
Rome.
to Pope Honorius to demand this benefit at (...) hand, as also for so much as
the foresaid S. Iustus Archbishop of Canterbury was now dead, he would appoint
some other in (...) place, and namely a holy Reverend man called Honorius; and
that for avoiding of so often recourse to Rome in those troublsome days, full
of wars and dangers; he would vouchsafe to appoint, that whosoever should dye
first, of these two Archbishops of his district, Honorius and Paulinus (for now
the government of Kent apperteyned also to Edwyn) the suruiuer of the two,
should appoint and consecrate a successor unto him that dyed. All which
demands Honorius the Pope granted unto K. Edwyn, as appears by his answer
recorded by S. Bid in these wor^^ Eae vero quae a nobis pro vestris
sacerdotibus ordinanda sperastis etc. Beda lib. 2. ^ cap. 17.
As f^^ the things which you hope I will ordeyne for your two priests (
Paulinus and Honorius) we do willingly, and with a grateful mind, and
without all delay go about to perform, in respect of the syncerity of your
faith, which by the faithful relation of the bearers of your letters, was much
to your praise insinuated unto us. And therefore we have sent unto Honorius, and
Paulinus two palls of Metropolitanes, Pope Honorius his ^riuiledges graun^ed to
K. Edvvyn.
and have ordained, that whosoever of them two shall first be called out of
this world unto his ma^^^ the other that remains may ex hac nostra
auctoritate, by this our authority given him subrogate another in his place.
Which priledge we are induced to grant, as well for the special affection of
love, which we bear toward you, as also in regard of so long distance of
Countries, that lie between you and us etc.

23. Thus wrote Honorius the Pope to K. Edwyn in these day^^, and thus he
thought of his Ecclesiastical jurisdiction over England, as well as other
Countries. Neither did K. Edwyn thi^^e himself injured thereby, but much
honored and obliged. And the same Pope Honorius writing at this very time, to
the forsaid Honorius whom he had made Archbishop of Canterbury, by sending him
the pall, (as you have heard) begins his letter thus: Dilectissimo Fratri
Honorio, Honorius: and then showing him what authority he had sent to him, and
to Paulinus Archbishop of York, he has these words: ^
Quae pro vestrarum Ecclesiarum priuilegijs co^gr^^r^ posse conspicimus, non
desistimus impertire: we do not cease to grant unto you those things, which
we see to be convenient for the privileges of your Churches etc. Consider of
this superiority.

24. And after this again, about some thirty years, the sixth Archbishops of
Canterbury being dead, Anno Domini 665.
whose name was Adeodatus, the two Kings of Northumbers and Kent, to wit Oswy
and Egbert, being very solicitous (says S. Bid) to have a good Archbishop
given them, that might appoint good Bishops, Bid lib. 3. hist. cap. 29.
throughout the Realm, resolved to send a common embassadge to Rome to Pope
Vitalianus, to obtain the same. And the more to facilitate the matter, they
caused an English priest, Bid ibid. anno Domini 665.
named VVighard, cum electione and consensu Sancta Ecclesia gentis Anglorum,
says the same author, by the election and consent of the holy Church of the
English-nation, to be sent to Rome and presented for this effect. And together
with him they sent certain religions oblations and alms to the use of S.
Peter's chapel, but the said Priest dying, so soon as he arrived, could not
satisfy their desires. Whereupon the Pope wrote back several letters, whereof
that to King Oswy began thus: Domino excellentissimo, filio Oswie Regi Saxon^,
Vitalianus Episcopus seruus seruorum Dei, etc. Wherein after congratulation for
his zeal and fervor, and the presents, gifts, and offerings sent to S. Peter's
chapel, he answers to the business proposed thus: We could not find out at
this present, a fit man to be made Archbishop and sent unto you, according to
the tenor of your letters, but as soon as any such person shall be found, as
is apt, we shall direct him to your country with our instructions, etc. He
that brought your tokens hither so soon as he had visited the Churches of the
holy Apostles was taken away out of this life, to our great grief. The Pope
sends relics to the King and Qeeene and promises an Archbishop.
But to the bearers of these our letters, we have delivered for you certain
sacred relics, to wit of S. Peter and of S. Paul, S. Laurence, S. John, S.
Pancratius, and S. Gregory: and unto your Queen our spiritual daughter, we
have sent a cross, and golden key, having in it some parcells of the sacred
chains, wherewith the Apostlds S. Peter and S. Paul were bound.

25. Thus wrote the Pope at that time, not being able to give them an
Archbishop fit for the present, Bid lib. 4. histor. Anglican^ c. 1.
but afterward (says Bid) he being very careful thereof, and enquiring
amongst learned men, whom he might choose, he first cast his eye upon one
Adrian an Abbott of a monastery near unto Naples, Abbott Adrian.
which Adrian was by nation an African, but very skillfull in the Latin and
Greek tongue, and well instructed as well in Monastical, as in
Ecclesiastical functions. But this man flying the dignity of Archbishop, named
unto the Pope one Theodorus a Monk, borne in Tharsus of Cilicia, as S. Paul
The Apostle also was, a man of excellent learn^^^ and virtue, whom Pope
Vitalianus commanded to take the charge upon him of being Archbishop of
Canterbury, Theodorus sent for Archbishop of Canterbury
and Metropolitan of the English Church: which thing he refusinge for a time,
yet at length accepted it with condition, that the forsaid Adrian should go
thither with him, and so he was consecrated, and sent with authority to create
other Bishops, thorough-out England, Anno 669.
as he did. He arrived there upon the year 669. and wa^ joyfully received by
the foresaid Kings, and Christian people, and lived twenty years in that sea.
^eda lib. 4. ^^st. cap. 2.
Neither were there ever (says Bid) after the English-mens arryuall into
Britany more happy times then these, when our nation had most valiant Christian
Kings, that were a terror to barbarous nations, and when all men desires were
enflamed with the love of Christ's heavenly joys, A happy ^ate of ^he English
Church.
lately revealed unto them; so as whosoever had desire to be instructed in
sacred doctrine, had masters ready to instruct them (by the diligence of this
new Archbishop) and not only this, but all English Churches also began now by
the industry of the Abbot Adrian, to learn the tune of singing in the Church,
throughout the realm, which before was only in Kent, etc. Theodorus also
visiting the whole Realm, ordained Bishops in all opportune places, and
whersoeuer he found any thing not perfect, he by their helps did correct the
same. Hitherto are the words of S. Bid of this our Christian primitive Church.

26. And all this now is within the first hundred years thereof, when it was
most happy, fervent, and devout by S. Bedes judgment; but much more remains
to be said of the same, if I would consider every particular Kingdom, and what
passed therein this first age. But if I should pass down with like search
through the other four hundred years, that do ensue before the Conquest, I
should not be able to conteyne my self within the compass of this book, and
much less of one Chapter, and of one only argument, or Demonstration thereof.
For that every where during this time, we shall find that all our Christian
Kings, in all spiritual matters, appertaining to Ecclesiastical jurisdiction,
made their recourse to Rome, or to the Archbishop^ or Bishops of England, as
subordinate or authorized from th^^ Sea; nor ever did they by act, word, deed,
or decree signify that they thought to have Ecclesiastical power or
jurisdiction to dispose of those affairs themselves, except perhaps some
times, and of some things by commission from the other.

27. Let amongst others the wise and renowned King Edgar the first public
author of English laws, Malmesb. lib. 2. de Regib^s Anglorum c. 8.
be an example, who having in hand a most important consultation, how to
reform the lives of Clergy men of this realm, but especially of certain
secular Priests in those days, procured first that S. Dunstan the Archbishop,
of Canterbury, should call a Synod about the same, who resolving that the best
means would be, to put in religious men, to wit Monks into every Cathedral
Church, K. Edgar sent for authority to Rome to reform the Clergy.
in place of the other that lived disorderly, the King took not upon him to
do it himself, by his own kingly authority, or to give commission to any of
the said Bishops to do the same, but made his recourse to Rome to Pope John
the 13. praying him to authorize the two holy Bishops of Winchester, and
Worcester, to wit S. Ethelwold, and Oswald, to make this reformation, which he
would never have done, if he had thought, that by his own Kingly power,
descending from his Crown, it had belonged to himself; or that his Parliament
might have given him the said authority of visiting and reforming, altering and
disposing, as it did to Q. Elizabeth.

28. And this may be showed from one to one, in all this time throughout the
reigns of above an hundred Christian Kings before the Conquest, as has been
said, if the breuity of this place did permit me to prosecute the same. And my
adversary is not able to show me one instance out of all this time truly and
sincerly alleged to the contrary: M. Attorney challenged.
and in this I challenge him, if he think himself able to answer me: And so
shall I pass to the fourth argument, if first I recite one example more out of
the second age after our conversion, for it is of eminent circumstance, and
declares fully what was the sense of our Kings, and their nobility and
Clergy in those days.

29. Next after K. Ethelbald, who was the fifth Christian King of the Mercians,
K. Ethelbald. See Stovve anno 71^.
and to whom S. Bonifacius (called VVinfred before) martyr, and Apostle of
Germany wrote so sharply to amend his life, as in all our English histories is
to be seen, there succeeded K. Offa, who did great matters in his days,
Malmesb. lib. 1. de gest^s Regum Anglorum. and lib. 1. de gostir Pontific^^.
and as Malmesbury writes, had both great vices and great virtues: and among
other things, he bearing a grudge to the people of Canterbury, and to their
Archbishop Lambert, he pretended to separate from the obedience of that Sea,
all the Bishops, and Bishoprics that were within the Kingdom of Mercia,
which were the grea^er (...) of the Suffraganes of that Sea, and to procure
them by the consent and authority of Pope Adrian to be subject to the bishop o^
LICHFIELD, as to the chief Metropolitan of his dominion^ and so many reasons he
alleged and urged for the same, The at^^mpte of ^^ng Offa againsts the
^^risdictio^ of Canterbury.
together with his might and power, that the said Pope Adrian (as after you
shall hear) began to yield somewhat to his demand, notwithstanding the often
appellations of the said Archbishop Lambert, but Pope Adrian dying, and Leo the
third being chosen in his place, Offa dyed in like manner soon after, as also
the Archbishop Lambert, and in Offa his place succeeded Kenulphus a most noble
King, and to the Sea of Canterbury for Lambert was chos^^ Athelardus, that had
been Bishop of Winchester before, one of the rarest men, if we believe famous
See diverse ^auses of Al^uins ^pistle to ^thelard ^ Malmesb. lib. 1. de gostis
^^^tificu^.
Alcuine master to Charles the Great, that ever our nation bred.

30. This Archbishop then, having made his appeal also to Rome, as his
predecessor had done, for recovering the ancient honors, and jurisdiction of
his Church of Canterbury, used such means, as at length he persuaded K.
Kenulphus to be content therewith, and that himself might go in person to
solicit the same; and so he did, with a letter of the said King himself, and
of all his Bishops, and nobility gathered together about that affair: you
shall hear some clauses of the said letter, and thereby judge of the rest. It
begins thus. Domino Beatissimo etc. To the most Blessed and most loving Lord
Leo, Bishop of the Holy and Apostolic Sea of Rome, Kenulphus by the grace of
God, King of the Mercians, with the Bishops, Dukes, and all other degrees of
honor and dignity under our Dominion, do send salutations of most sincere
love in Christ etc. This is the title of the epistle wherein after many thanks
given to God, for the election of (...) good and pious a Pastor in place of
Adrian deceased, The epistle of K. Kenulphus to Pope Leo.
he showed the special reason why English men above others, had cause to
rejoice thereat, saying: Nos quoque merito quos extremitas orbis tenc^ prae
caeteris gloriamur, quia vnde tibi Apostolica dignitas, inde nobis fidei
ver^tas innotuit. We also which dwell in the extreme parts of the world, do
rejoice above other men at your election, for that whence you have received
your Apostolical dignity, the ^^ have we received the truth of our faith. And
then he goes forward desiring humbly Pope Leo, to give him his Apostolic^^^
benediction, to the end he may govern his people well; (...) benediction
(says he) all my ancestors that have reigned over the Mercians, have obtained
of your predecessors, and I do in all humility demand the same of you, and
that you will take me for your adopted son, as I do love you, as the person
of my father, and do embrace you with all the force of obedience that I can.
These are his own words.

32. And then yet further after diverse such speeches of piety, he comes to
beseech the said Pope to examine the matter, and to resolve the doubt, which
the Archbishop Athelardus was to propose unto him, about the jurisdiction of
the Sea of Canterbury, and that the decision might be according to the Canons,
and Apostolical decrees of S. Gregory the first, who sent S. Augustine into
England, and by his authority founded that Sea of Canterbury, The humble
petition of King Kenulphus.
showing moreover that his predecessor King Offa, was the first that ever
attempted to withdraw the Bishoprics of Mercia from the obedience of
Canterbury, and that (as he says) for emnytie that he had with Archbishop
Lambert, and for aduauncing his own Kingdom of Mercia, by making LICHFIELD a
Metropolitan. Wherefore he concludes thus: Quare Excellentiam vestram humiles
exor amus, quibus a Deo merito clauis scientia collata est, vt super hac causa
cum Sapientibus vestris quaeratis, and quicquid vebis videatur nobis seruandum
rescribere dignemini, etc. Wherefore we humbly beseech your excellency, Key of
knowledge.
unto whom God has worthily given the key of knowledge, that you will
consulte with your wise and learned men about this cause, and whatsoever shall
seem good to you, do you vouchsafe to write it back unto us, that we may
obey and observe the same.

32. Thus wrote K. Kenulphus, unto whom the Pope answered: Domino
excellentissimo, filio Kenulpho Regi Merci^rum Prouinciae Saxoniae, Leo Papa
etc. And in this letter after congratulation of the piety of the said King, The
determination of Pope Leo 3. for Archbish. Athelarde. Kings and Princes
subjects to the Archb. of Canterbury; in spiritual matters.
and commendation of the Archbishop Athelard he declares, that according to
the Canons of holy Church, and institution of S. Gregory the first (which
institution he says, he found extant in the Records of the Roman Church) he
determined that all the Bishops and Bishoprics of Mercia should return to
the obedience of the Sea of Canterbury again, and then for more commendation,
dignity, and authority of the Archbishop Athelard, he has these words; We
by the authority of S. Peter, Prince of the Apostles, whose place though
unworthily me do hold, have given unto him such pre-eminence, as if any one of
his subjects, whether they be Kings or Princes, or any of the people, shall
transgress the commandments of God, he may excommunicate them until they
repent, and if any repent not, (and mark that the King and his Princes also
are declared to be subject to him and to his Ecclesiastical Censures) let them
be held ^^ heathens and Publicanes. So he: And by these two examples of King
Offa and Kenulphus, in their recourse to Pope Adrian and Leo the third, in so
great an affair as this was, concerning their state, and dominions, we may
easily see, what account they made in those days of the Popes authority in
like cases, and they never so much as dreamed, that themselves by right of
their temporal Crowns, had power or right to determyne the same.

Missions made by authority of the ^^pe
33. I might add to this consideration of missions out of our Realm into
diverse countries, for preaching the word of God, which always was done by
the Popes order and commission, and not by temporal princes, as all examples
do testifye both the sending of our Apostles, and first preachers Augustine,
Laurence, Paulinus, Iustus, Mellitus, Honorius, and Theodorus into England; as
also when Germany, Frizland, and other Countries were by Gods holy providence
and appointment, to be converted by Englishmen, Bonifacius, VVillebrordus and
others, they took not their mission from temporal Princes, but from the
Popes; no not of the Princes of the places themselves. For when S. VVillebrord
was to go to preach in Frisia, which newly by force of arms King Pipin had
subdued, ^^^rent. in ^^r^n. in ^ngl.
Florentius writes thus: VVillebrord, having obtained license of Prince Pipin
to go and preach in Frisia, went to Rome to ask license of Pope Sergius, that
he might begin his work of preaching, which having obtained he began the same
Anno. 693. and four years after he was made Archbishop of the said Country,
by the Sea Apostolic, as S. Bonifacius was of the Germans.

34. And so much of this third demonstration might suffice, because we have been
ouerlong already, Dispen^^tions of ^ost im^ortance ^^ocured (...) Rome.
but that I cannot well omit one other consideration of moment, to the same
purpose, which is of certain dispensations used to be procured from Rome in
those ancient times and afterward, for quetting of men's consciences, when any
scruple fell out. As for example. When King Egbert the first famons Monarch of
our English Realm, dyed upon the year of Christ 839. as Stow reckons the
years, though others assign it some years before, there remaining unto him
one only child called Adelnulfus or Ethelwolfus, or Adulphus (for by all these
three names, there is mention of him in diverse authors) who being brought up
Sub Sanctissimo padag^go Swithun^ (says Malmesbury) under the most holy
scholmaister S. Swithyll Bishop of Winchester, Malmesb. lib. ^. de vltis
Pontifi^um in S^^thu^^.
was at length made (subdeacon (as the same author says) of that Church, and
some other as Stow cites, do affirm that he was made Bishop of Winchester
and Abbott of Geruaux: but his said Father being dead, and none other left of
the bloud-royall to succeed him, he was persuaded for the public good of his
Country, upon the dispensation of Pope Leo the third, procured by his Father
before (notwithstanding his said holy Order of Subdeaconship) to accept the
Crown, and marry, and so he did: Concedente Leone illiuis nominis tertio, ex
gradu Subdiaconi VVintoniensis, in Regem translatus est. Malmesb. ibidem.
By the concession, or dispensation of Pope Leo the third he was translated
from the degree of a Subdeacon in the Church of Winchester, to the
Crowne-royall. So Malmesbury. Stow in anno ^39.
Whereunto both he and Stow do add, that he married soon after Judith
daughter to Charles the great King of France, by whom he had four sons,
Malmesb. lib. 2. d^gestis Regum Anglorum cap. 2.
which all succeeded him after in the Crown, and he lived so long, as he sent
his fourth son Alured, or Alfred a goodly young Prince at that time, to be
brought up in Rome, under Leo the fourth of that name, which began to sit in
that Sea, upon the year 847. to whom K. Ethelwolfe went also after himself in
person, and received many favors, and spiritual graces from him. And thus do
write our ancient historiographers in this matter.

35. The other example may be of King Edward the Confessor, who having made a
vow to go in person to Rome, Alredus Ri^uall, in vita D. Edvvard^.
and being dissuaded from the same, by the consent of his whole realm, for the
dangers of the ways in those troublesome times, and for the necessity of his
presence at home, was forced to ask dispensation of his vow at the hands of
Pope Leo the nynth, who granted the same willingly, as appears by his
letters thereof written, appointing him to bestow in alms upon the Monastery of
Westminster, what otherwise he should have spent in his journey: and the same
was confirmed after again by Pope Nico^^s the second (unto whom the said King
wrote also for the confirmation of Pope Leo his sentence) that succeeded in the
Sea of Rome, though not immediately after the former, as by diverse clauses of
both their letters which we will produce in the next ensuing chapter, does most
evidently appear.

36. And for other two examples after the Conquest (to omit the rest) may
serve, first that of King John, Polidorus and alij ^^ Iohan^^.
who sued to Pope Innocentius the third, to be dispensed withal for his oath
which he had made to the Barons of England, upon fear and coaction as he
pretended, Two ex^mples after the ^onquest. ^^anderus lib. 1. de (...).
whereof more afterward shall be said, when we come to treat of his life and
reign in particular. And the other of King Henry the seventh, who procured
from Pope Julius the second, that notorius dispensation for Prince Henry his
son, to marry the Princess Katherine of Spain, left by his brother Arthur,
wherabout there was so much ado afterward, for avoiding the force thereof, when
their divorce was treated in England, and elsewhere abroad. Others I omit
because these alone are sufficient to show what opinion was held from time to
time by the Kings of England concerning the Popes sovereign supreme authority
in spiritual matters, belonging to conscience and direction of souls; far
different, yea quite contrary to that which M. Attorney would persuade his
Reader. Now let us pass on to some other Demonstrations.

The fourth Demonstration.
(...), ^riuiled^es, (...) of Churches, Monasteryes, Hospitalls, etc. by the
^ope.
37. The fourth argument, is gathered out of that which before we have mentioned
in the precedent chapter, of confirmations of Churches, Hospitalls,
Monasteryes, and other pious works, that are to be perpetual, and of
privileges immunityes, and exemptions, granted thereunto; which always were
demanded of the Sea Apostolic in these days (as they are now in ours) and
their foundation was never held for firm to perpetuity, without the said
confirmation, and ratification of the Bishop of Rome, which is a sign that
they acknowledged his supreme spiritual authority, and that it was not in
their temporal Kings: especially for so much as the said Kings themselves, did
sue to Rome for such confirmation, ratification, and spiritual privileges, as
the works by them founded had need of.

38. And of this, infinite examples might be showed throughout all this time
before the Conquest, but I must moderate my self, as well in this, as in the
former; and therefore shall touch some few only and those all as briefly as I
can, for that this chapter grows to be ouerlong. We have showed how King
Ethelbert ^or the first Monastery that ever was in England, within four years
after his conversion, procured confirmation and exemption thereof from S.
Augustine Archbishop and Legate of Pope Gregory: and how S. Mellitus some
years after that, being the third Archbishop of the same Sea, went to Rome in
person, about the confirmation of his Monastery of Westminster (by Pope
Bonifacius) and how Pope Honorius after him again granted privileges to the
Churches of Canterbury and York, at the petition of King Oswyn of
Northumberland, and of King Egbert of Kent. And this course was held afterward
by all other Kings, in the founding of Churches, Monasteries and other pious
works; to wit that they made recourse unto Rome and the Bishops thereof, for
the confirmation, ratification, establishment, privileges and exemptions of
the same in spiritual matters, which by all likelyhoode they would not have
done, if these Kings had thought themselves to have had sufficient authority,
from their Crowns, to do the same without dependence from the Sea Apostolic.

39. We read in S. Bid that in the time of King Egfrid and S. Theodorus
before mentioned the seventh Archbishop of Canterbury, Abbott Biscopus sent to
Rome for privileges.
about the year of Christ 680. one Biscopus an Abbot, otherwise called
Benedict, having by the license and liberality of the said King, builded a
Monastery near to the mouth of the river VVyer, went by consent of the said
King to Rome, to ask confirmation and privileges of Pope Agatho: He demanded
and received (says S. Bid) of Pope Agatho a letter of privilege, Bed^ lib.
4. hist. Angl. cap. 10.
confirmed by his Apostolical authority, for the defense and strengthening of
the liberty of his Monastery, according to the will and meaning of King Egfrid,
by whose license and liberal gift of lands and possessions, he had erected the
same Monastery. So Bid. Who also in another part of his works, writing the
life of S. Bertolphus a holy Abbot, says: that in the days of Honorius the
Pope, for that a certain Bishop went about to molest the said holy man's
Monastery, Bid t^m. 3. in vita S. Bertolph^.
he made a journey to Rome to demand franquises and exemption for the same,
from the said Episcopal authority: Cui praebuit (says Bid) optatum munus
sanctus Papa, priuilegia scilicet Apostolicae sedis, quatenus nullus
Episcoporum, in praefato Coenobio quolibet iure dominari conaretur. The
privileges of S. Bertolphus his Monastery.
Unto which holy man, the holy Pope Honorius gave the gift which he desired,
to wit the privileges of the Apostolical Sea, to the end that no Bishop under
any pretense of right whatsoever, should go about for the time to come, to
take upon him any dominion in that his Monastery.

40. Furthermore some few years after this again, under Pope Sergius, there
went to Rome to be baptized, the famous young King Ceadwalla of the
West Saxons, Ceadwalla.
of whom Malmesbury says: Tantum etiam ante baptismum inseruierat pietati, vt
omnes manubias quas iure Praelatorio in suos vsus transcripserat, Deo
decimaret. He did observe such piety even before his baptism, as he gave to
God the tithes of all his spoils, which he had applied to his own use out of
the bootyes he had gotten of his enemies; Of whose baptism and death in Rome
we shall have occasion to speak after. Inas.
To whom the famous King Inas succeeded both in his Kingdom and virtues. And
with both of them was insingular credit, the holy Abbot S. Adelmus, afterward
by the said Inas, made Bishop of Shirborne, who going to Rome with the said
Ceadwalla, returned after his death, and carried with him says Malmesbury,
Malmesb. 1. de g^stis ^^gum Anglorum c^p. 2.
Priuilegium quod pro liberate Monasteriorum suorum ab Apostolico Sergio
impetrauerat, quod libens Inas confirmauit, and multa Dei famulis eius hortatu
contulit, and ad extremum renitentem Episcopatu honorauit. He brought from Rome
the privilege for the liberties, or franquises of his Monasteryes, which he
had obtained of Sergius Bishop of the Sea Apostolic; which privilege King
Inas did willingly confirm, and by his persuasions did bestow many benefits
upon Gods servants, and last of all honored him also with A Bishopric (to
wit of Shirborne) though he resisted the same what he could.

41. And moreover he says of the same King, and of his respect unto the
aforesaid Saint and learned Bishop (for Malmesbury says he wrote an excellent
book of virginity, Malmesb. (...).
dedicated to the Nunns of Berkensteed, Adel^^us his book of virginity.
whereby many were moved to that holy kind of life): eius pracepta audiebat
humiliter, suscipiebat granditer, adimplebat hilariter. King Inas did harken to
the precepts of Adelm^^ with humility, received the same with great estimation,
and fulfilled them with alacrity. And this point concerning the privileges of
Monasteries, fell out about the year 687. and in the number of these
Monasteries, Malmesb. ^^ 2. histo^^ nouella.
the same Malmesbury treating of the year 1140. in King Stephens time, says
that the Abbey of Malmesbury was one: and in the former, he signifies that
Inas obtained also, the like privileges for diverse Monasteryes: Reg^is
sumptibus nobiliter a se excitatis. Nobly erected by him with royal expenses:
and that the Abbey of Glastenbury was one, whose most ample privileges both
from Popes, and diverse Princes, were renewed and ratifyed again largly in K.
Henry the second his time, as all our historyes do set down.

42. And all this happened out in the first age of our primitive Church, and it
would be ouerlong to run over the rest with like enumeration, but yet some few
more examples we shall touch, as they offer themselves in order. And first we
read that immediately after this first age, to wit in the year of Christ 70^.
two famous Kings, Kenredus of the Mercians, and Offa of the East Saxons,
leaving voluntarily their Kingdoms, and going upon devotion to Rome, there to
lead and end their lives, in prayers, alms, and other pious exercises, there
went with them as ghostly-father and directour of that devout journey (as after
more largely shall be showed) Egwyn third Bishop or Worcester, Florentius in
chronico anno 70^.
as Florentius declares, who retourning home required of them, as it seems no
other reward, but that by their intercession and his own, he might obtain of
Pope Constantine, and Charter of privileges, for a monastery of his, newly
erected within the territory of Worcester, which the said two Kings had endued
with many temporal possessions; and so he did, and returned with great
contentment for the said privileges and exemptions obtained for his foresaid
Abbey of Euesham. (for so it was called) And by this we see, that he did not
hold his said Abbey for secure, Privileges of the Abbey of Euesham.
and well defended, by the provisions of the said Kings, except he had obtained
also his confirmation thereof from Rome.

43. Next after this we read, of the foresaid famous King Offa of the Mercians,
who meaning to build a royal, and stately Monastery unto the protomartyr of
England S. Alban, went to Rome to Pope Adrian, to ask license, confirmation,
and privileges for the same, upon the year (as Matthew of Westminster
writes) 794. and among other exemptions (to use his own words) that he might
have it ab omni episcoporum subiectione emancipandum, The privileges of S.
Albanes founded by King Offa.
that is to say, that it might be free and exempted from all subjection of
Bishops: which the Pope granted willingly, as appears by his letter unto the
said Offa, wherein among other things he says: Fili charissime etc. Most dear
child, and most potent King of the English Offa, we do commend greatly your
devotion, concerning the protomartyr of your Kingdom S. Alban, and do most
willingly give our assent to your petition of buylding a Monastery in his
memory, Math. Vestmonasteriensis in historia anno 794.
and do privilege the same etc. Wherefore by the counsel of your Bishops and
noble men, you may make your Charter, and afterward we shall confirm and
strengthen the same with our letters, and exempt the said Monastery from all
authority of Bishops and Archbishops, and subject it immediately to this our
Apostolical Sea. So VVestminster^ whereby we may see that this potent King Offa
did not pursuade himself that he had authority by the right of his crown, to
give Ecclesiastical exemptions to the monasteries of his realm, though they
were of his own founding: which yet M. Attorney, as you have seen in the
former chapter, would needs prove by the example of K. Kenulsus, about whose
time as before has been alleged out of Marianus Scotus, Bishop Rethurus was
sent to Rome to obtain privileges for the Abbey of Abindon from the Sea
Apostolic as he did.

44. But before we pass from this example of King Offa, let us hear the words
of Matthew Paris about this fact: ^at. Paris vita Hen^^^^ter^^s ^^no. 1256.
Ipse insuper (says he) Rex Offa in quantum potuit aliquis Rex, Coenobium
sancti Albani quod ipse magnifice fundauit, liberum esse constituit in
temporalibus, and vt ipsum liberum faceret in spiritualibus, Romam in proprio
corpore adijt. This K. Offa moreover so much as a king might do, made the
monastery of S. Albanes, which himself magnificently had founded, free in all
temporal affairs, and that i^ might in like manner be free (or have
privileges) in spiritual matters, he went in proper person to Rome etc.
Behold the distinction, how a King could give libertyes, and privileges in
temporal things, but could procure them only in spiritual from the Sea
Apostolic; which is quite opposite to all that M. Attorney affirms, but let
us go forward.

45. After this again we read in William of Malmesbury, of the great and
godly King Edgar, who ruled over all England, that he having a special
devotion to the forementioned Abbey of Glastenbury, whereunto he had given
great possessions, sent a solemn embassage to Rome, unto Pope John the
thirtenth, at the very same time, when there was a Synod there gathered
together, to wit upon the year 971. beseeching the said Pope, that he would
confirm the privileges already granted by the said King unto the Monastery
of our blessed Lady in Glastenbury, (behold how the King grants privileges
under ratihabition, in hope of ratification by the Pope) and so (says
Malmesbury) direxit ch^rographum Regiae liberalitatis, Malmesb. (...) 2. de
(...) Regum anglorum ^^p. 1.
orans vt and ipse hoc roboraret scripto Apostulicae auctoritatis. And the King
directed unto the said Pope letters written with his own hand, testifying his
princely liberality, bestowed upon the same Monastery, beseeching that the Pope
also would strengthen the same with some writing of his Apostolical authority.
Which embassadge of the Kings Pope John receiving benignly, and by the uniform
consent of the Council gathered together, Privileges granted to Glastenbury
at the petition of K. Edgar.
confirmed the said privileges of K. Edgar by an Apostolical rescript, and
not only did he confirm that which Edgar had done before, but added diverse
spiritual privileges besides, saying amongst other things thus: We yelding
to the humble petion of King Edgar, and Archbishop Dunstane, do receive the
said place (of Glastenbury) into the bosom of the Roman Church, and into the
protection of the blessed Apostles, endewing and strengthening the same, with
diverse privileges, namely that the Monks may choose unto themselves a Pastor
or Abbot of their own, in whose power it shall be to prefer Monks and Clerks
under him to holy orders; that no man may molest them, take, or retain any
thing of theirs, etc. Concluding in the end thus. In the name of the Father,
the Son, and the holy Ghost etc. everlasting malediction to the breakers
thereof. Whereunto Malmesbury adds this contemplation: Malmes. i^ vita Edgar^.
perpendant ergo contemptores tantae comminationis quantae subiaceant
sententiae excommunicationis. Let the contemners of so great a threat or
commination consider, how heavy a sentence of excommunication they do
undergo. So he. A thing (no doubt) worthy to be remembered in these our days.

46, And many more examples of like privileges, might be alleged, under the
same King Edgar, confirmed mutually by the Pope and King, and namely one
related by Ingulphus, which was given by a Charter of the said King upon the
year 970. subscribed by himself and thirty two other witnesses, Ingulphus in
historia de Cr^yland.
to the Monastery of Medeshamsteed, now called Peter-burrow: Ego Edgarus totius
Albionis Basileus. etc. I Edgar King of all Albion, do grant most willingly
that the holy, and Apostolic Monastery of Medeshamsteed shall be free for
ever from all secular causes and services; and that no Ecclesiastical or lay
man shall have dominion over the same or over the Abbot thereof etc. And
moreover that it be secure eternally, King Edgar charter confirmed the Popes
charter.
from all worldly yoke; and that it remain free from al Episcopal exaction
and molestation, according to the libertyes given thereunto by the Sea
Apostolic, and the authority of the most Reverend Archbishop Dunstan etc. And
furthermore we have thought good to corroborate by this Charter the said
privileges from the Sea Apostolic of the Roman Church, according to the
first institution of the said Monastery, which whosoever shall presume to
infringe, let him be damned eternally to hellfyer, by the punishment of the
high Judge S. Peter and all the order of Saints. Thus far that charter.

47. And finally not to go further in this argument whereof infinite examples
might be alleged, I shall end with one only more to show the perpetuity, and
continuance of this use taken out of the fifth age of our English Church, The
privileges of Westminster procured by K. Edward.
to wit of King Edward the Confessor, not long before the Conquest, who having
a great desire to enlarge the Monastery of Westminster with new buyldings and
possessions, dealt with two Popes therein, to wit Leo the nynth, and Nicolas
the second, asking their approbation and confirmation thereof, which they
granted one after the other. Leo wrote back unto him in these words: Leo
episcopus servus seruorum Dei: Alredus Rieuell in vita S. Edwards.
Dilecto silio suo Edwardo Anglorum Regi, salutem and Apostolicam
benedictionem. And then he begins his letter. Quoniam voluntatem tuam
laudabilem, and Deo gratatu cognouimus, etc. For that we have understood your
intention to be laudable and grateful to God, etc. We do agree unto the same,
and do command by our Apostolic authority, that whatsoever possessions you
have given or shall give, unto your said Monastery of Westminster, it be firm,
and appertain unto the Monks, and that the said place be subject unto no
other lay person, but only to the King; And whatsoever privileges you shall
there appoint to the honor of God, we do grant the same, and confirm the
same by our most full authority, and do damn finally the breakers thereof unto
everlasting malediction.

48. Thus Pope Leo the nynth, who dying upon the year of Christ 1054.
two-other succeeded within the space of four years, Anno Domini 1054.
to wit Victor the second, and Stephen the tenth, after whom succeeded Nicolas
the second, unto whom S. Edward made suit again by a solemn embassage, for
confirmation of his said privileges of Westminster and other affairs, giving
this title to his letter, Ibidem.
as before has been noted. To the highest Father of the universal church
Nicolas, Edward by the grace of God King of England, does offer due subjection
and obedience. Mutual letters between Pope Nicolas and King Edward.
Whereunto the Pope answered in these words: Nicholas Bishop and servant of
the servant of God, unto the most glorious and pious, Edward King of
England, most worthy of all honor, and our special beloved son, does send
most sweet salutation and Apostolic benediction. And after many loving and
sweet speeches in the said letter, he says to the petition it self about
privileges: Renouamus ergo, and confirmamus, and augemus vobis priuilegia
vestra, etc. We do renew and confirm, and increase unto you your privileges:
And for so much, that this place of Westminster, from antiquity has belonged
unto the Kings of England, we by the authority of God, and the holy Apostles,
and of this Roman Sea and our own, do grant, permit, and most strongly
confirm, that the place for ever be of the jurisdiction of the Kings of
England, wherein their royal monuments may be conserved, and that it be a
perpetual habitation of Monks, subject to no person but to the King, etc. We
do absolve the place also, Privileges of Westminster with a terrible curse
to the breakers.
from all service and subjection of the Bishop, etc. and whosoever shall go
about to infringe, or invade, or diminishe, or undo any of these privileges,
we damn him to everlasting malediction, together with the traitor Judas: that
he have no part in the blessed resurrection of Saints, etc. Thus he. And with
this shall we end this fourth consideration or argument, whereby is
sufficiently made evident, if nothing else were, how vain, and untrue the
imagination of M. Attorney was in the former chapter, who by the pretense of
certain words, in the charter of K. Kenulsus, to the Monastery of Abindon,
would seem to persuade himself, and others that our English Kings in those
days, did take upon them spiritual jurisdiction, to give privileges, and
exemptions from Episcopal authority unto Monasteryes, and consequently, that
they had all supreme jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, in as ample manner, as Q.
Elizabeth took upon her, or was given unto her by Act of Parliament, which is a
most evident dream as you see.

The fifth Demonstration.
49. Now then to pass to the fifth argument, Appeals and complaints to the
Sea of Rome about controversies that fell out.
which makes matters yet more manifest, the same is taken from the
consideration of Appeals when any controversy fell out, either between the
King and his Bishops, or between any lay power and Ecclesiastical, or between
Bishops and Churches themselves; which Appeals shall never be read to have been
made in these times before the Conquest, either to the King, or to his secular
Courts, but rather to the Archbishop of Canterbury or to the Pope for the time
being.

50. And albeit in this time of religious fervor of our Eng^^^^ Kings, there
were fewer occasions given of Appeals to the Sea Apostolic, then after the
Conquest when Kings were less devout and sometimes more violent, as may
appear by the examples of S. Anselme, S. Thomas, S. Edmond all three
Archbishops of Canterbury, Appeals more frequent since the Conquest.
Thurstan, S. William and Gaufred Archbishops of York, S. Richard of
Chichester, Hugh of Durham to speak nothing of that notorious Appeal between
Richard of Canterbury against King Henry the third and Hubert Earl of Kent,
and diverse others, as is evident by the histories of our Country, in which we
find that always the Bishops for remedy of such aggrieuaunces, as either by
the Kings, Nobility, or others after the said Conquest were laid upon them, or
their Churches, made their recourse for succor to the Sea Apostolic: yet
before the Conquest also though the occasions (as I said) were not so frequent
sometimes they were driven to use the benefit of this remedy, as we see in the
two Archbishops of Canterbury, Appeals before the Conquest.
Lambert and Athelard before mentioned, under King Offa and Kenulfus of the
Mercians: and before that again in the famous cause of S. VVilfryd Archbishop
of York who in the very first age after our conversion, was twice put out of
his Bishopric, and forced to appeal to Rome, first by Egfryd King of the
Northumbers, and then by Alfryd his successor, with the concurrence against
him of certain Bishops. And both times he appealed unto Rome, Bid lib. 4.
historia cap. 11. and 13.
as S. Bid declares, and to follow his appeals, went thither twice in
person, and was twice absolved; first by Pope Agath^ in a Synod of an hundred
twenty and five Bishops, upon the year of Christ 679. and the second time by
Pope John the seventh six and twenty years after, S. VVilfrides Appeals to
Rome anno. 679.
to wit upon the year 705. Of the first absolution, S. Bid himself writes
that he was not only found innocent, and thereupon cleared by the Pope and whole
Synod (as has been said) but that they thought good likewise, to give him his
place in the said Council, and to note his absolution, and the special
respect borne unto him in the very acts of the said Council, holden against the
Monothelites in these words: VVilfryd the beloved of God, Bishop of the City
of York, Beda lib. 5. histor Ang. cap. 10.
having appealed to the Sea Apostolic in his cause, and being absolved by the
authority of this Council in all things, both certain and uncertain, was
placed in his seat of Judgment together with an hundred twenty five his
fellow-Bishops, in this Synod, and has confessed the true and Catholic faith,
and confirmed the same by his subscription, for himself and all the north
parts of Britanny and Ireland, which are now inhabited by Englishmen,
Britanes, Scotts, and Picts.

51. Thus relates Bid of S. VVilfrids first appellation, and most honorable
absolution in Rome, and that then retourning to his country he converted the
kingdom of the South saxons, and that afterward again, being inuyted by King
Alfred, that succeeded Egfryd, to return to his Bishopric of York, heat
length upon persuasion of good men accepted thereof. Beda ibid.
But after five years he was expulsed again by the said Alfred, and appealed
again to the Sea Apostolic, and went to Rome to Pope John the seventh (as
has been said) who hearing his cause in the presence of his adversaries, The
second Appeal of S. Wilfrid to Rome. Bid ibid.
and accusers together with many Bishops that did sit in Judgment with him:
Omnium iudicio probatum est, etc. says Bid. It was proved by the judgment of
all, that his accusers had devised certain calumniations against him: whereupon
he was absolved; and letters were written (says Bid) by the foresaid Pope
John unto Alfred, and Edelrede Kings of England that they should cause him
again to be received into his Bishopric, for that he had been unjustly
condemned. This is the sum of the story, briefly set down by S. Bid.
Malmesbur. lib. 3. de gestis Pontif. Anglorum in Vvilfrid^.
But William of Malmesbury writes the same, to wit, both these appellatious
of S. VVilfryd much more at large, telling how the first persecution against
this holy Bishop had beginning from the envy of Queen Ermenburga second wife
to King Egfryd of the Northumbers, who understanding that his first wife
Ethelreda did love, and reverence much this good man, she thought it a
sufficient cause for her to hate him, and so incensing first the King her
husband against him, by saying that he was rich, and that many gave their goods
unto him to build Monasteryes, she drew by little and little the King to
mislike him, as also she did by like means and sleights incense the good
Archbishop Theodorus of Canterbury, to impugn and contradict him.

52. The same Malmesbury also sets down the particulars that passed in that
Council, wherein he was absolved at Rome, and how at his return into England
with the Popes letters, the said Theodorus Archbishop of Canterbury repented
himself much, that he had been drawn against him, and wrote earnest letters
unto King Alfred, that had succeeded Egfrid, that he would admit him again
into his Archbishopricke of York: saying among other words: Et ideo charissime
te admoneo, and in Christi charitate pracipio tibi, etc. And therefore most
dear King I do warn you, and in the love of Christ do command you:
Malmesb. (...).
Ego Theodorus humilis Episcopus, decrepita aetate, hoc tuae beatitudini
suggero, quia Apostolica hoc (sicut scis) commendat auctoritas, and vir ille
sanctissimus in patientia sua possedit animam suam, etc. The epi^^le of S.
^^eodorus (...) favor VV^l^^id S. (...) vvho^e he had ^mpu^ned
I Theodorus humble Bishop (of Canterbury) in this my broken old age, do
suggest this unto your Happiness or Majesty, both for that the authority of the
Sea Apostolic, (as you know) does commend it to be done, and the holy man
VVilfryd has (according to the saying of our Savior) possessed his soul in
his own patience: and most humbly and myldly forgetting the injuries done unto
him, has followed the example of his head and master Christ, and has
expected the remedy at his hand; And if I have found any grace in your sight,
although the way between you and me be long, yet I beseech you, let my eyes
once see your face again (to treat of this matter) and that my soul may
bless you, before I die. Wherefore my dear son deal with this holy man (
VVilfryd) as I have besought you, and if in this point you show your self
obedient to me your Father, that am shortly to depart out of this world, it
will profit you much to your salvation. Fare you well.

53. Upon this letter King Alfred being much moved permitted him to return to
his Archbishopricke again: And S. VVylfryd by the persuasion of the said
Theodorus and other Bishopps, was induced to accept the same, and so he did for
some time, but after five years, the complaints of his emulatours growing
strong against him, S. Wilfrid restored to his Bishopric of York the second
time.
he was forced to fly the second time, unto King Etheldred of the Mercians, but
after again appealed to Rome, and went thither being now full threescore and
ten years old, whence retourning absolved (as has been said) with letters of
commendation from Pope John the seventh, both to Britwald Archbishop of
Canterbury, that had succeeded Theodorus, as also to Alfred King of the
Northumbers, and to Etheldred King of the Mercians; he obtained again his
Archbishopricke of York, and held^ it four years before his death.

54. The letters of Pope John, unto the two foresaid Kings, do begin with a
complaint of sedition raised in England amongst the Clergy by opposition
against S. Wilfrid, which he exhorts the two said Kings to suppress, and
then begins his narration thus: Malmesb. ibidem fol. 152.
Whereas of late under Pope Agatho of Apostolic memory, the Bishop VVilfryd
had appealed to this holy Sea, for the trial of his cause etc. The Bishops at
that time gathered herein Rome from diverse parts of the world, having
examined the same, gave the definition and sentence in his favor, which was
approved both by Pope Agatho and his Successors our predecessors etc. and
then shows he, how the same having succeeded in this his second appeal, he
does appoint Britwald Archbishop of Canterbury to call a Synod, and by all
consents either restore him to his Archbishopricke, or to come and follow the
cause at Rome against him; and whosoever did not so, should be deprived of his
Bishopric: and then concluding with this speech to the King, he says: Vestra
proinde Regalis Sublimitas faciat concursum, The Decision and commandment of
Pope John.
vt ea qua Christo aspirante perspeximus, perueniant ad effectum. Quicumque
autem cuiustibet persona audaci temeritate contempserit, non erit a Deo
impunitus, neque sine damno calitus alligatus euadet. Wherefore do your royal
highness concur also to this our ordination, to the end that those things,
which by the inspiration of Christ we have judged for convenient, may come to
their effect. And whosoever upon the audacious temerity of any person
whatsoever, shall contemn to do this, shall not be unpunished of God, neither
shall he escape that hurt which those incur, whose sins are bound from
heaven. So he.

53. And I have thought good to allege this notorious example, somewhat more
largely, for that it expresses evidently, both the acknowledgement and
exercise of the Popes authority in those days, as also the devout and prompt
obedience of our Christian Kings and Prelates thereunto, in that holy time of
our first primitive Church. The humility and obedience of our Kings in those
ancient days.
For that of the two forenamed Kings Malmesbury writes, that Ethelredus of the
Mercians received the Popes letters upon his knees on the ground. And albeit
that Alfryd of the Northumbers, somewhat stomaked the matter for a time, as done
in his dishonor, yet soon after being strooken with deadly sickness, sore
repented the same, and appointed in his testament that S. VVilfryd should be
restored; which testament the holy virgin Elfled his sister, S. Elflede.
that stood by him when he dyed, brought forth and showed before the whole
Synod of Bishops, gathered together about that matter in Northumberland.

57. And thus having been longer than I purposed in this example of S. VVylfryds
appeals, I will pass over as before I have said, the other appeals above
mentioned of Lambert and Athelard, Supra ^^m^n. 3.
Archbishops of Canterbury under King Offa and Kenulfus, Kings of the Mercians,
unto the Popes Adrian the first, and Leo the third; w^^ determined the great
controversy about the jurisdiction of the Sea of Canterbury, Many examples of
Appeals.
at the humble suit of the said King Kenulsus, and of all his Clergy and
nobility; I will pass over in like manner^ the example of Egbert Archbishop
of York, who by his appealing to Rome: multa Apostolici throni appellatione,
says Malmesbury, that is by frequent appellation to the Apostolical throne,
recovered again the pre-eminence and dignity of his Archbishopricke, and
Pontifical pall, upon the year 745. which had been withdrawn from that Church,
for many years together after Panlinus his departure. Malmesb. lib. 3. de
gestis Pontif. anno. 745.
And I may add further to this argument and consideration, not only that
appellations were ordinarily made to the Sea of Rome, concerning
Ecclesiastical affairs, upon any aggreiuances of particular persons,
Churches, or Societyes in those days, as appears by the examples alleged;
but also complaints of public defects, negligences, or abuses, if they
concerned the said Ecclesiastical affairs, were carried to Rome, and to the
Bishops of that Sea, as well against Bishops and Archbishops, as against the
Kings themselves, where occasions were offered, which Bishops of Rome, took
upon them as lawful judges to have power, to hear, determine, and punish the
same, by acknowledgement also of the parties themselves, whereof we might
allege many examples. But one only in this place shall serve for the present,
which fell out in the time of King Edward the elder, upon the year of Christ
894. (though others differ in the number of years) And the case fell out thus.

57. The Bishop of Rome in those days, named Formosus the first, being
advertised that diverse provinces in England, especially that of the
VVestsaxons, by the reason of Danish wars, were much neglected and void of
Bishops for diverse years, the said Pope says Malmesbury wrote sharp letters
into England: Malmesbu. de rebus ges^is Regum Anglor. lib. 2.
Quibus dabat excommunicationem, and maledictionem Regi Edwardo, and omnibus
subiectis eim a sede S. Petri, pro benedictione quam deder at Beatus Gregorius
genti Anglorum. By which letters he sent excommunication and malediction to
King Edward, and all his subjects, from the Sea of S. Peter, in steed of the
benediction which S. Gregory had given to the English-nation; whereof Malmesbury
adds this reason, that for full seven years, the whole region of the
West Saxons, had been void of Bishops. And that King Edward having heard of
the sentence of the Pope, presently caused a Synod of the Senators of the
English nation to be gathered, in which sat as head, Pleam^ndus Archbishop of
Canterbury, who interpreted unto them strictly (says Malmesbury) the words of
this Apostolical Legacy sent from Rome: Whereupon the said King, and Bishops
took unto themselves wholesome counsel, choosing and ordeyning particular
Bishops in every province of the Geuisses or westsaxons. Pope Formosus did
excommunicate K. Edward the first and how the matter was amended.
And whereas the said province had but two Bishops in old time, now they divided
the same into five, and presently the Synod being ended, the said Archbishop
was sent to Rome with honorable presents: Qui Papam (says our Author) cum
magna humilitate placauit, Decretum Regis recitauit, quod Apostolico maxim
placuit. He did with great humility endeavor to pacify the said Pope
Formosus, reciting unto him the decree that King Edward had made, for better
furnishing the Country with more Bishops for the time to come, then ever had
been before, which most of all pleased the Apostolical Pope. Wherefore the
Archbishop retourning into England ordained in the City of Canterbury seaueu
Bishops upon one day, appointing them seven distinct Bishoprics: Atque hoc
totum (says he) Papa firmauit, vt damnaretur in perpetuum qui hoc decretum
infirmaret. And the Pope ( Formosus) did confirm this decree (of this
distinction of Bishops in England) da^ning him eternally which should go about
to infringe the same. So Malmesbury: and consider the authority here used.

58. The same Pope also wrote a letter to the Bishopps of England by the said
Archbishop Pleamond, in these words: To our brethren and children in Christ,
all the Bishopps of England, Formosus. We having heard of the wicked rytes of
This he speaks in respec^ of the conversation with Danes that were
Infidells.
Idolatrous Pagans which have begun to spring up again in your parts, and
that you have held your peace as dumme dogs not able to bark, we had
determined to strike you all with the sword of separation from the body of
Christ, and his Church, but for so much as our dear brother Pleamond, your
Archbishop has told me, that at length you are awakened, and have begun to
renew the seed of Gods word by preaching, Malmesb. lib. 1. de gestis Pontificum
Anglorum.
which was so honorably sown from this Sea in times past, in the land of
England, we have drawn back and stayed the devouring sword; and moreover do
send you the benediction of almighty God, and of S. Peter Prince of the
Apostles, praying for you, that you may have perseverance in the good things,
which you have well begune, etc.

Decrees and ordinances of Pope Formosus for the church of England.
59. Thus went that letter with a far longer exhortation ^^ that behalf, with
order and instruction how to proceed to co^tinew good Bishopps among them,
which was that as soon ^^ knowledge came to the Metropolitan of any Bishop
dead, he should presently without delay cause another Canonically to be elected
in his place, and himself to consecrate the same. And moreover he determines
that the Bishop of Canterbury, has been ever from ancient times held for chief
Metropolitan of England, otdeyened so by S. Gregory himself, as in the Roman
Registers was authentical recorded, and therefore he confirms the same,
threatening, that what man soever shall go about to infringe this decree,
shall be separated perpetually from the body of Christ and his Church. So
Malmesbury.

60. And in this example we see many points, expressing the sense of these
ages, as first the vigilance of the Pope Formosus over England, and the
affairs thereof (though far remote from him, and altogether embroyled with
wars) no less then over other Provinces and Kingdoms of the world, The
vigilance of ancient Popes over England.
which is conform to that which S. Bid writes of the like diligence of Pope
Agatho above two hundred years before this of Formosus, that is to say, that
he seeing the heresy of Monethelites, that held but one only will in Christ, to
spring up and increase in diverse places of the world, sent one expressly from
Rome into England, to learn what passed there. Pope Agatho (says Bid) being
desirous to understand, as in other provinces, Beda lib. 4. ^^st Angl. cap. 8.
20. and 23.
so also in Britany, what was the state of the English Church, and whether it
preserved it self chaste and unspotted from the contagions of heretics; sent
into England for this purpose, a most reverend Abbot named John, who procuring
a Synod of Bishops to be gathered together about that matter by Theodorus the
Archbishop, found that the Catholic faith in England was conserved in all
points entire and inuiolated: of which Synod he had an authentical copy
delivered him, by public testimony to be carried to Rome. Thus S. Bid
touching the attention and diligence of Pope Agatho in our English
Ecclesiastical affairs.

61. And it is to be noted, that in the same Synod is set down that four
several Kings concurred thereunto, to give thereby satisfaction unto the Pope,
to wit Egfryd King of the Northumber^ Ethelred of the Mercians, Adelnulphus of
the Eastangles, and Lotharius of Kent; which is conform to that which the King
Edward the first ^^ the former example did, when presently upon the threatening
letters of Pope Formosus, he called forthwith a Council, remedyed the fault
that was committed, and sent the Archbishop Pleamond to Rome to give
satisfaction, and promise of amendment for the time to come, which is to be
presumed that none of these Kings would have done, if they had thought
themselves injured by this intermedling of the Pope, as an external power; A
consideration of moment.
and that themselves had authority Ecclesiastical derived from their crowns,
to dispose and order these things without any reference to the Sea Apostolic.
And so much for this argument and demonstration, which opens a window to see
many things more, which by me of purpose are pretermitted, for that I covet not
to be ouerlong.

The sixth Demonstration.
62. The sixth Argument may be deduced, What Kings Archbishops and Bishops
lived together, and what laws they were like to make.
from an universal contemplation of all the Kings, Archbishops, and Bishops
that have lived, and reigned together in all this time in England, and the
several Provinces, and Kingdoms thereof, before the Conquest, the Kings being
in number above an hundred that were Christened, as often before has been
mentioned, the Archbishops of Canterbury the spiritual heads of the English
Church 32. from S. Augustine unto Stigano, and other Bishops of far greater
number, laying before our eyes, what manner of men all these were, what faith
they believed and practiced, what union and subordination they had in
spiritual and temporal jurisdiction amongst them selves, both at home and
abroad with the Sea Apostolic, which in great part has been declared by the
precedent arguments and demonstrations. All which being laid together, we may
infer, that for so much as laws are nothing else but ordinances and
agreemenrs of the Prince and people, to the public good of every Kingdom,
State, and Country; we may infer (I say) that according as we find the faith
and religion of our Princes, Bishops, and people to have been in those days, so
were also their laws. For out of their religion, they made their laws, and
consequently it must needs follow, that they being all perfectly Catholic,
according to the Roman use, as by all the former arguments you have seen, that
they made no laws concerning Ecclesiastical matters, nor admitted ^onceaued
any from their ancestors, nor could not do (they being also Catholic) that
were repugnant or contrary to the Canonical laws of the universal Church,
and Sea of Rome, in those ages: whereof again ensues that M. Attorney that
tells us so often of the ancient and most ancient Co^mon-lawes of England;
cannot presume to have any law for him, and his assertion within this compass
of 466. years before the Conquest: for that those that should make or leave
unto us these laws, were all of a contrary judgment, and religion unto him,
in the very point which he treats of spiritual Jurisdiction. As for example.

63. There reigned in Kent in the first age of our primitive Church
successively these Kings, to wit: Ethelbert, Eadbald, Ircombert, Egbert,
Lotharius, Edrycus, and VVithredus; The concurrence of Kings and Bishops in
Kent and London for the first age of English Christianity. 1
and their Archbishops of Canterbury, by whom they governed themselves in
spiritual matters, were Augustine, Laurence, Mellitus, Iustus, Homrius,
Deusdedit, Theodorus, and Britwaldus. And in London, Mellitus, Ceddus, VVyna,
Erkenwald, VValdherus, and Ingualdus. And in the sea of Rochester, Iustus,
Romanus, Paulinus, Thamarus, Damianus, Putta, Q^^chelmus, Germundus, and
Tobias. All these kings, with all these Bishops were of one, and the self same
religion, and of one judgment and sense in Ecclesiastical matters, and so
were all the rest of the Christian Kings, together with their Bishopps, in
other Kingdoms of the land. And the like I might show throughout all the other
four ages that ensue after this, first before the Conquest. And how then is it
possible, that these Princes with these Bishops and Counsaylours, and with
their people conform to them in the same religion, should make or admit laws
contrary to the common sense of the Catholic universal Church in those days,
concerning Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction? And this is a demonstration which
morally conuinceth, and cannot by any reasonable man be denied. A necessary
inference.
Whereunto I may adioyne, that if they had made any such law, contrary to the
common sense of the general Church in Church Matters, they would have been
noted, and reprehended for it, or at leastwise some memory would have been left
thereof by historiographers, tradition, register, or some other monument, which
is not found, nor ever will be. And this shall be sufficient for this
demonstration, whereby occasion is given to the ingenious reader to prosecute
the same, and discourse further of himself, and to consider how metaphysicall
an imagination that of M. Attorney is, of ancient laws made in the air, and
no where extant, contrary to the sense, and judgment, both of Prince and
people in those times.

The seventh Demonstration.
64. An other Demonstration not much unlike unto this, The concourse with
other Kings, Princes, and Catholic people abroad.
may be taken from the view of external Kingdoms, in this time before our
English Conquest: to wit what they taught, what they believed, and what they
practiced in this point, concerning Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, whether they
derived it, or acknowledged the same, in, or from their temporal Kings, or
from their Bishops and Sea Apostolic of Rome. For if they did the later, then
is it most certain that all the Kings, Kingdoms, and people of England did
the like, for that otherwise they should have been noted, and taxed as has been
said for some discrepance, division, disagreement, sedition, schism, or
singularity in this behalf, which is not read of. Nor can M. Attorney, or any
Attorney else whomesoeuer he can take unto him for his help in this matter,
ever show me any one word of ancient testimony for proof thereof, and thereupon
may we confidently conclude, that there was never any such thing.

65. But now what was the doctrine, use, and practice of all the rest of
Christendom besides, concerning Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, derived from the
Sea Apostolic of Rome, The universal authority of the Sea of Rome during the
time of our Christian kings before the Conquest.
as the head and fountain thereof, throughout all this time, whereof we speak
before our Conquest, it shall be enough to cast our eyes only upon the
universality of all writers in those days, whose volumes are full of
narrations, apperteyning to this effect, as namely of Bishops made throughout
all Kingdoms, by ordinance and authority of the Bishop of Rome: Of Churches,
Abbyes, Monasteryes, Hospitalls confirmed, and privileged by the said
authority: Of Kings, and Emperors also anointed by them and their authority
for the spiritual and temporal good of Christendom. And in this very time,
whereof we talk, happened the mutation of the Kingdom of France from
Chilpericus, to Pipinus and Charles his son: and of the Roman Empire from the
Grecians unto the said Charles; and of the said Empire from the French to the
Germans, by the authority of the Pope of Rome; and infinite other public
testimonies of supreme spiritual jurisdiction, exercised (...) where by that
Sea, with the approbation of all the world. And no one example can be
alleged of any such power or jurisdiction pretended, or exercised by any
Prince temporal whatsoever, throughout all the Christian world in this time by
us prescribed.

66. And for so much as by this argument we presume, that our English Kings and
Princes ran vnitedly in all points of religion with others abroad, for that
they were never noted of any difference or opposition, as has been said, it
follows by good deduction and inference, that no such Common Law (as M.
Attorney imagines) could have place among them, deriuing spiritual and
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction from the right of Princes temporal Crowns, and
excluding that of the Sea Apostolic. For in case that any such law had been
made, it would have been extant; either by writing or tradition; and if it had
been Common (as often here it is called) it would have been known by some one at
least, Mark the consequence.
besides M. Attorney, for that community imports participation with many: how
then could there be any such Common-lawes in those days, which no man knew, no
man recorded, no man ever thought or dreamed of, as by all circumstances of
those times, and men, and state of things, may be presumed? And if any such
thing had been devised in those days it must needs have been rejected and
impugned as singular, schismatic or heretical; for that it would have been
contrary and contradictory to the common sense and judgment, and whole current
of that time. And let this suffice for this consideration.

The eight Demonstration.
The ma^ing tributary to the Sea of Rome the Kingdom ^^ England.
67. The eight Demonstration in this matter, may be the extraordinary devotion
of our ancient Kings before the Conquest; toward the Sea of Rome, in making
their Kingdoms tributary thereunto, even in temporal things also: which is a
sign that they meant not to deny unto that Sea, her spiritual jurisdiction,
which from the beginning, had been exercised by the same in our country, seeing
voluntarily likewise they gave her te^porall jurisdiction, in gathering and
axacting this tribute of every house throughout the Realm; which beginning
from K. Inas (as all our Authors do agree) above 900. years gone, has been
continued ever since, under the name of Peter Pence, for that they were first
given to S. Peter, and to his Successors the Bishops of Rome, until the later
part of K. Henry the eight his reign, even in the time of the Danes
themselves, as presently shall be showed.

68. And for breuities sake, it will be least perhaps to allege here the
words of one that was skillfull in the matter, for that he had been Collector
or gatherer of this tribute for diverse years together in England under the
said King Henry, to whom also he dedicated his history, to wit Polidor Virgil
an Italian, Archdeacon of Wells, The beginning of Peter Pence.
who out of al historiographers had gathered the grounds, and antiquities of
this tribute: and in the life of King Inas of the West saxons, having showed
and declared first, together with all other ancient writers, how wise,
valiant, and pious a King he was, and what singular monuments thereof he had
left behind him, as among other the buylding of the Church of Wells, the
Abbey of Glastenbury, and the like; he finally concludes thus: Polidor. Virgil
lib. 5. de hist. Angl.
Officia eius Regis pietatis plena infinite a referuntur: and illud imprimis,
quod Regnum suum Romano Pontifici vectigale fecerit, singulis argente^ nummis
(quos denarios vocant) in singulas domus impositis, etc. There are infinite
good works of this King related by Historiographers full of piety, and this
among the first, that he made his Kingdom tributary to the Bishop of Rome,
imposing upon every house a penny. And all England at this present time, does
pay this tribute for piety and religious sake to the Bishop of Rome, gathered
from every house of the whole Kingdom, and vulgarly they are called the pence
of S. Peter, which the Pope gathers up by his officer, called Collectour,
which office we for some years did exercise in that Kingdom, and for that
cause went first of all thither. Thus Polidor.

69. John Stow does set down many particularityes of the rich gifts of gold
and silver, Stow in Inas (...) 705.
vestments, and Church-ornaments, which this King Inas gave and bestovved upon
the Church of Wells builded by him: He testifies also of his gift of
Peter Pence imposed upon his Kingdom, as given about the year of Christ 705.
And Polidor has further these words of him. King Inas being exceeding
desirous to amend, and establish the state of his Kingdom, and to instruct his
subjects how to live well and happily, did make most holy laws, and left them
to be observed. But the wickedness of his posterity, has by little and little
worn out the same. And lastly after all this glory wherein he had reigned
thirty seven years, K. Inas his laws in favor of the Pope.
he leaving voluntarily his Kingdom w^^^ to Rome for devotion and pietyes
sake, and there says Stow lived, and ended his life in poor estate. And hear
now I would (...) whether any of these laws made by King Inas were likely to
be against the Popes spiritual jurisdiction, or in favor thereof; And if the
later may with more reason be presumed, then have we more ancient
co^mon-lawes, that is to say temporal laws, against M. Attorney, then he can
allege any for himself, to the contrary.

70. But to go forward in showing the continuance, confirmation, and increase
of this temporal tribute to the Pope of Rome, the said Polidor writing of King
Offa, the most famous and valiant King of the Mercians, and showing how wicked,
and cruel he had been first, and how godly he became afterward, has these
words: He built the magnificent Cathedral Church of Hereford, and adorned the
same with most ample gifts: he caused to be sought out the body of S. Alban,
Kings Offa his confirmation of the tribute of Peterpe^ce anno. Dom. 77^.
and placed the same in a monastery of S. Benedicts order built by himself; and
further he builded the monastery of Bath. And yet more for further satisfaction
of his former sins, he passed the Ocean sea, went to Rome, and there made
tributary his Kingdom of Mercians, to Adrian the Pope, by imposing that
tribute upon every house of his people, which was called Peter Pence: and this,
as some think, by the imitation of King Inas, which had done the same some
years before, in the Kingdom of the VVestsaxons. And this says Polidor was
done by Offa, upon the year 775. which was according to this account seventy
years after the other. And this King Offa was he, who made the famous Dich
between his Kingdom and Wales, The greatness of K. Offa.
called Offa-hi^-dich, reigned thirty and nine years in all prosperity, and had
present with him that subscribed to his Charter, for the founding of the
monastery of S. Albanes, besides his son, and Prince Egfryde, nine Kings,
fifteen Bishops, and ten Dukes, as Stow relates, out of the Charter it self,
dated the thirty and three year of his reign, and of Christ our savior 793.

71. And about some fourscore years more or less, after this again King
Adelnulph, otherwise called Edelnulph, or Edelph, son and heir to King
Egbert, the first great Monarch that gave the name of Anglia, or England to our
Country, having adjoined unto his Kingdom of the West saxons five more, to
wit, that of the Mercians, Kentish saxons, East Saxons, South Saxons and
VVelsh-men; This Adelnulph (I say) coming to reign after his Father, was a
rare man of virtue, The confirmation of Peter pence by King Adelnulfe anno.
Dom. 947.
and left exceeding many monuments of piety behind him, gave the tenth part of
his Kingdom to the mayntenaunce of Clergy men: sent his youngest son Alfred
to Rome to live there, and to be brought up under Pope Leo the 4. and afterward
resolved also to go himself in person. He went (says Polidor) to Rome upon a
vow, and was most benignly received by Pope Leo the fourth, and there he made
tributary unto the Pope of Rome, such parts of the Island, as King Egbert his
father had adjoined unto the Kingdom of the West Saxons, imitating herin his
predecessor King Inas: and moreover made a special law thereof, that whosoever
had thirty-pence rent in possessions by the year, or more houses then one,
should pay yearly a penny for every house, which they did inhabit, Polidor.
(...). 5. historia.
and that this should be paid, at the feast of S. Peter and S. Paul: (which
comes upon the 29. of June) or at the furthest at the feast of the Chains of
S. Peter, which is the first of August. So Polidor: adding that some do
attribute this law unto King Alfred his son, when he came to reign, but not
truly, for that it was made by Adelnulph upon the year of Christ 947.

72. Here now then we have this tribute granted, and confirmed by three
seuer^^l Kings, the first of the West Saxons, yet in effect Monarch of
England. And some have noted, that as the West Saxons and Mercians were the
first that made this offer of tribute upon devotion to S. Peter and his
Successors, so were they the Kingdoms, A special note.
that were most advanced in their temporal felicity, and successes, and
finally were united together under one Monarch. And that of the West Saxons
being the first and last, that gave and confirmed, and continued the same, grew
to be the Monarch over all the rest. For as for the continuance, and perpetual
payment thereof to the Church of Rome, throughout all times, there can be no
doubt made, for that in the yery time of the Danes (as before I noted) King
Canutus the Dane (as Ingulphus testifyeth, which lived presently after him) was
so careful to have this duly paid, Ingulfuri^ histor. Monasteri^ de Cr^yland
fol. 50^.
with other duties belonging to the Church, as being in his journey toward
Rome he wrote back to his Bishops, and other officers in these words: Nunc
igitur obtestor, etc. Now then I do beseech all you my Bishops, other
officers, and all governors of the Kingdom, by the faith which you do owe
unto God and me, that you will so provide, The great care King Ca^ulus the Dane
had that Peter pence or other Ecclesiastical duties should be paid an. 1032.
that before my arrival at Rome, all debts be paid, which according to
ancient laws are due. That is to say, the accustomed alms for every plough,
the tithes of beasts borne every year, the Pence which you owe to S. Peter at
Rome, whether they be due out of the cittyes, or the Country, and that by the
midst of August you pay the tithes of your corn; and that at the feast of S.
Martine, you pay the first fruits of your seed to the Church and parish, in
which every man lives, which payment is called K^ke-seet. And if these things
be not performed by you before I return, assure your selves, that my Kingly
authority shall punish each man, according to the laws most severely, without
pardoning any. Fare you well: Upon the year of Christ 1032. So he. And mark
(good Reader) that he says he will punish according to the laws, Ancient
laws against M. Attorney.
yea, and in his former words that there are ancient laws for these Duties to
Rome, which M. Attorney cannot bring for his assertion against the Pope, so as
in ancient common laws we are now before him. But let us go forward, and end
this Demonstration.

73. About thirty years after this again, King Edward the Confessor wrote to
Pope Nicolas the second in these words: Alredus in vita S. Eduard^.
Ego qu^ que pro modulo meo augeo etc confirmo etc. I also for some small gift
of mine do increase, and confirm the donations of paying such money, as S.
Peter has in England, and do send unto you at this time, the said money
collected, together with some Princely gyfts of our own, S. Edward's
confirmation of Peter pence and other duties an. 1062.
to the end that you may pray for me, and for the peace of my Kingdom, and
that you do institute some continual and solemn memory before the bodies of
the Blessed Apostles, for all the English-nation, etc. So good S. Edward.

74. And when not long after him King William of Normandy obtained the crown
he forgott not this law, among the rest, as afterward when we come to talk of
him, and his reign in particular, we shall more at large declare. R^^^rius
Houiden par. 2. Annal in vita Henry's 2.
For his tenth law in order has this title: De denario Sancti Petri qui
Anglice dicitur Rome-scot^ of the Penny of S. Peter, called Rome-scot in the
English tongue. And then he begins his law thus: Omnis qui habuerit triginta
dena^^ vinae pecuniae in domo sua de proprio suo, Anglorum lege dabit denarium,
Sancti Petri, and lege Danoru^ dimidiam marcam etc. Peter pence confirmed by
the Co^queror anno 1070.
Every man that shall h^u^ the worth of thirty-pence of lively money of his own
in his house, shall by the law of Englishmen, pay the penny of S. (...) and by
the law of the Danes shall pay half a mark. And this penny of S. Peter shall
be summoned, (or called for) upon the solemnity and feast of S. Peter and Paul,
and gathered upon the feast of the Chains os S. Peter, so as it shall not be
deteyned beyond that day, etc. thus the Conqueror in confirmation of that
which other English Kings had done before him, appointing also in the same
place, that his Justice should punish them, that refused to pay the said money,
or paid it not at the due day appointed.

75. And to conclude this matter, this tribute was continually paid, from the
first institution thereof, not only before the Conquest (as now you have heard)
but afterward also by all the Norman Kings, and their Successors, unto King
Henry the 8. as out of Polidor we have seen. Peter pence continued after the
Conquest until K. Henry the eight. Anno Domini 1532.
And the same King Henry himself duly paid the same in like manner, for more
then twenty years together, until he brake from the Pope and Sea of Rome,
upon the causes which all men know. Whereupon this our Demonstration infers,
that all this while it is not likely (they paying so willingly, and deuourly
this temporal tribute unto the Popes of Rome) that they denied his spiritual
jurisdiction, or held him in that iealosie of competency, for usurping thereby
upon their Crowns, as now we do. And lastly, that the supreme spiritual
authority of Queen Elizabeth without any Act of Parliament, was warrantable by
these Kings laws, which is the main paradoxicall conclusion of M. Attorneys
whole discourse, against which we have yet a Demonstration or two more: and so
an end.

The nynth Demonstration.
76. The nynth Demonstration then about this matter, The going of diverse Kings
and Princes to Rome, for devotion to that Sea.
shall be the consideration of our English Kings their singular, and
extraordinary devotion before the Conquest to the Sea of Rome; which was such
as diverse of them left their Crowns, and Kingdoms (after many years that they
had reigned, and ruled most gloriously at home) and went to live, and dye in
that city: some in religions habit and profession of Monastical life, as
Kenredus, King of the Mercians, and Offa King of the East angles; some in
secular weed, but of most religious, devout, and exemplar conversation: as Inas
and Ceadwalla Kings of the West Saxons; some others went thither of devotion
with intention to return again, as the other great Offa King of the
Mercians, Adelnulph alfred, and Canutus Monarchs of all England: and lastly
good King Edward the Confessor had determined, and vowed a journey thither in
pilgrimage, but that his Kingdom greatly repyninge thereat, in respect of the
dangerous times, two Popes ^^ and Nicolas, decreed that he should not come (as
Supra Demon. 3.
before we have touched) but rather bestow the charges of that voyage upon some
other good work, namely the increase of the Monastery of Westminster.

77. And here I might enlarge my self much, in the declaration of these
particulers which we have named, and of many others, that we have omitted in
this kind (I mean of English Kings) that leaving their temporal Crowns, have
submitted themselves to the sweet yoke of Christ in religious life. John Fox in
his Acts and Monuments does recount nine crowned Kings, Acts and Momuments
page 121
that became Monks within the first two hundred years after Englands
conversion to Christian faith (though all of them went not to Rome) and some
eighteen or twenty Queens, or daughters to Kings or Queens, that took the
same course, contemning whatsoever pleasures or preferments the world could
give them. But of such Kings as went to Rome, Beda lib. 4 histo. Augiscana cap.
29.
and made themselves religious there, the foresaid Kenredus of the Mercians,
and Offa of the Eastangles were the most famous, who agreeing together upon
the year 708. (as Florentins after S. Bid does recount the history) lest both
their Kingdoms, wives, children, honors, goods, and the like together.
Relictis vxoribus, agris, cognatis, and patria propter Christum, etc. ad limina
Apostolorum, in precibus, ieiunijs, elecmosynis, vsque ad diem vltimum
permanserunt. They leaving their wives, their possessions, their kynred, their
country for Christ, went to Rome, and there near unto the Apostles bodies,
they perseuered in praying, fasting, and giving alms unto the end of their
lives.

78. But S. Bid sets forth this famous fact in other words, describing also
the persons of these two noble Kings. Kenredus, (says he) who for a time had
most nobly governed the Kingdom of the Mercians, did much more nobly leave the
same, giving over his scepter willingly to his nephew Celred, and went to Rome
where he lived in prayer, The admirable ^oing of (...) kings to Rome.
fasting, and alms, until the last day of his life; And with him went Offa
the son of Sigard King of the East Saxons: Iuuenis amantissima aetatis, and
venustatis, etc. a young man of a most lovely age and beauty, and most
singularly desired by all his nation, that he would stay amongst them, and
enjoy his Kigdome; but he being led with the devotion of his mind, left his
wife, his possessions, his kynred, and country for Christ and his gospel,
that he might receive a hundred fold in this life, and in the world to come
life everlasting. Thus S. Bid, who was of a far different mind from M.
Attorney as you see.

79. And Florentius adds further to this history, that with these two Kings
went to Rome as ghostly father, and spiritual directour of their journey, the
famous holy man S. Egwyn before mentioned, S. Egvvyn Bishop of Worcester.
third Bishop of Worcester, and founder of the Monastery of Euesham, for which
he obtained privileges and exemptions of Pope Constantine then Bishops of
Rome, Supra D^mon. 4.
and carried them home with him, as before has been declared. And Platina in
the life of the same Constantine, makes mention also of the coming to Rome of
these two Kings, Platina ^^ Constantino PP.
and what a rare spoctacle of virtue and devotion it was to the whole Christian
world, to see two such excellent Princes in their youth and beginnings of their
reigns, to take such a rare resolution of leaving the world and following
Christ in the strait and narrow path of perfection.

80. As it was in like manner some twenty years after, according to the forsaid
Florentius to see the great and potent King Inas of the West Saxons, to come
thither with like resolution of mind, who having been a famous warrier, for the
space of seven and thirty years, Floren. in Chron. anno 723.
in the end leaving his Empire (says Florentius) and commending the same to
noble Athelard that was of the line of Cerdicus first King of West Saxons, he
resolved to go to the Churches of the Apostles in Rome, under Gregory the
Pope, and there to end his life and this worldly peregrination on earth, near
to their bodies, to the end that he might the more familiarly in heaven be
received into their companyes. So he.

81. But Malmesbury expresses the same in more pregnant and effectual words
after his sort: Post triumphales bellorum manubias, post multarum virtutum
gradus, summum culmen perf^ctionis meditans, Romam abijt. Malmesh. lib. 1. de
gestis Regum Anglorum.
Ibi ne pompam suae conuersionis faceret, non publicis vultibus expositus
crimen, sed deposuit vt solius Domini oculis placeret, amictu plebeio tectus,
clam consenuit. After triumphant victoryes, and spoils of war, after the
degrees of many virtues obtained, King Inas proposing to himself the highest
top of perfection, went to Rome, and there least his conversion might be
glorious unto him, he did his penance or laid down his sins, not in the
p^^blike eyes of the world, but rather desiring to please only the eyes of
almighty God, he put himself into a vulgar habit, and ^^ that he ended his
life. So Malmesbury.

Beda lib. 5. hist. Angl. cap. 7.
82. All which in effect was set down before by S. Bid who calls this Inas
by the name of Hun that succeeded King Ceadwalla in the Kingdom of
West Saxons, K. Inas his going to Rome.
who after thirty seven years reign. Relicto regno ad limina Beatorum
Apostolorum, Gregorio Pontificatum tenente, profectus est, cupiens in vicinia
locorum sanctorum, etc. He leaving his Kingdom went to Rome, under the
Popedom of Gregory, desiring to live and die upon earth near to the Apostles
Churches, to the end he might enjoy the better afterward their familiarity in
heaven.

83. And a little before this man again, his said predecessor Ceadw^lla took
the like journey to Rome, for devotion of the place being vet unbaptized, as S.
Bid writes the story in these words: The history of Ceadwalla his going to
Rome and dying there.
Ceadwalla King of the West saxons when he had governed his people with great
fortitude for two years, leaving his scepter for Christ, and his everlasting
Kingdom, went to Rome, desiring to obtain this singular glory to be baptized
in the Church of the blessed Apostles, in which baptism he had learned, that
the only entrance to heaven for mankind did consist, hoping most certainly,
that being once baptized, he should soon after dye, and be received into
everlasting glory: both which points by the help of our Lord were performed
unto him, as in his mind he had conceived, and so coming thither (upon the
year of Christ 689.) Sergius being Pope he was baptized on Easter eve, and
soon after being yet in his white attire (according to the custom of holy
Church) he died upon the 19. of April immediattly ensuing, and was buried in
S. Peter's Church, whose name in baptism he had taken, and from thence his
soul passed to the joys of heaven. Thus S. Bid; and touching this recourse
and pilgrimage to Rome he adds in the same place: Beda ibid.
Quod his temporib^s hoc idem plures de gente Anglorum nobiles, ignobilesque,
laici and clerici, viri and faeminae certatim facere consueuerunt: The seruour
of English men toward Rome in these days.
that in these times many of the English nation, both noble and vulgar, lay men
and Ecclesiastical, men and women were accustomed to do the same with great
fervor.

84. Wherefore out of all these considerations and the like, it seems we may
deduce, that for so much as our English Kings, and people in those days were
so singularly devoted unto the Sea of Rome, and Bishops thereof, as they gave
themselves, their goods, their honors, their whole life thereunto; An evident
deduction out of the premiss^^.
it is not likely that they had that conceit of Rome then, as we have now; or
that they lived in iealosie, or competency of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction with
the same, or thought themselves injured by the spiritual power, which the said
Sea did use, and practice over England, and other Kingdoms of the world in
those times. And much less can it be presumed, that they challenged to
themselves, or made laws in those days in favor of their own
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, in restraint of that of the Popes: and
consequently M. Attorney I trow, will hardly prove by the most ancient laws of
those times, that Q. Elizabeth could justify the supreme Ecclesiastical
authority, which she exercised in her days; if the statute of the first
Parliament had not given the same unto her, which had as good authority to give
it her, as she to use the same, according to that which you have seen declared
in the former Chapters, whereunto we refer our selves for the proofs laid
down.

The tenth Demonstration.
85. And now to draw to an end, and to join issue with M. Attorney in more
plain words and assertion, The assertion and asseueration of diverse Kings
for pre-eminence of spiritual power.
my tenth and last demonstration shall be out of two of the most noble, wise,
and famous Kings of our land and Monarchs of the same, before the Conquest,
Alfred to wit, and Edgar, who do expressly set down the contrary proposition
to that of M. Attorney, about spiritual jurisdiction belonging to Kings, and
temporal Princes, so as where the former demonstrations, are but deductions
and inferrences, though clear and evident as you have seen; this last is a
plain, and perspicuous asseueration of two such renowned Kings, as were most
eminent for wisdom, learning, religion, and valor of all the rank of those
times. Apud Harpesf^ld^^ in histor. Angl. Sacul. 9. cap. 5. ex Asserte Menem.
Of King Alfred is recorded this speech of his: Germanam and genuinam esse
Regis dignitatem dictitare solebat, si in Regne Christi, quae est Ecclesia, se
non Regem sed ciuem agnosceret, si non supra sacerdotum leges se elate
efferres, sed legibus Christi per sacerdotes promulgatis, submisso se atque
humili animo subderet. He was wont to say, that the true and proper dignity of
a King, consisted principally in this, that in the Kingdom of Christ which is
his Church, he bare himself not as a King, but as a citizen, and that he should
not arrogantly lift up himself about the laws of Priests, but rather with a
lowly and humble mind, subject himself to the laws of Christ promulgated by
Priests. So he.

Florentino and Marianus in anno. 9^5.
86. But now touching King Edgar about a hundred years after him, of whom
Florentius, Marianus, and others do write these words: That he was the
Monarch of the English world, the flower and ornament of all his predecessors,
the peaceable King, no less memorable to Englishmen; then Romulus to the
Romans, Tyrus to the Persians, Alexander to the Macedonians, Arsaces to the
Parthians, and Charles the great unto the French. Of this man, I say, we have
extant a certain oration of his, made in the third year of his reign, unto
the Bishops of his land, gathered together for reformation of the Clergy,
Apud Alridum Retuallo s^r^ de Regibus Angli^.
whereof S. Dunstane Archbishop of Canterbury was the chief, and with him was S.
Ethelw^ld B. of VVincester. His oration is somewhat long, and begins thus:
Quoniam magnificauit Dominus misericordiam suam facere nobiscum: dignum est
Patres Reuerendissimi, vt innumeris illius beneficijs, dignis responde amus
operibus. Neque enim in gladio nostro etc.

An excellent speech of K. Edgar to his Bishops, concerning reformation of the
Clergy.
87. For so much as our Lord has exalted his mercy toward us, it is
convenient most Reverend Fathers, that we endeavor to answer his innumerable
benefitts, with dew works on our behalf; for that as the prophet says, we
do not possess this land by our own sword, nor shall the strength of our
arm save us, but the right hand, and holy arm of him, that has vouchsafed to
take us to his favor: And therefore it is just and right, that for so much, as
he has subjected all under our feet, that we subject our souls unto him, in
such sort, as that we endeavor to bring them that he has put under us, to be
subject also unto his laws: and as for me, my part is to govern lay men by
the law of equity, to do just judgment between every man and his neighbor,
to punish sacrilegious men, to repress rebels, to take the poor man out of
the hand of his stronger, and deliver the needy and impotent from such as
oppress and spoil them. It belongs also to my solicitude, to provide
necessaries for Ministers of Gods Churches, couents of Monks, cloisters of
virgins, and to procure them peace and quietness to serve God^ But unto you it
apperteyneth, to make inquiry examination of their manners, if they live
continently, if they behave themselves decently, and with edification toward
them that be in the world, if they be solicitous in serving God, vigilant in
teaching the people, sober in diet, moderate in habit, and the like. So he.

88. And then after a long complaint of many disorders in those days, crept
into diverse of the Clergy, the good zealous King has these words: These
scandalous things are proclaimed every where by soldiers, muttered by the
people, sung by players, and will you (reverend Fathers) neglect, dissemble,
and spare them that so offend? where is the sword of Leui? where the zeal of
Simeon? where is the spirit of Moses? where the sword of Phinees the Priest?
Yea, where is the spirit, and fervor of S. Peter whereby he so dreadfully
punished both avarice and heresy? follow him, follow him o you Priests: tempus
faciendi contra eos qui dissipauerunt legem Dei: it is high time to punish
those, that have dissipated the law of God by their evil life: Two swords
of S. Peter and Constantine acknowledged by K. Edgar.
Ego Constantini, vos Petri gladium habetis in membus, iungamus dexteras,
gladium gladio copulemus. I have the sword of Constantine, you the sword of S.
Peter in your hands, let us join our forces, and couple sword to sword: vt
eijciantur extra castra leprosi, that leaprous and infectious people be cast
out of the tents of God, etc. Thus this noble and pious K. pronounced in the
presence of his Prelates and people, with much more, which for breuity I do
omit.

89. And now M. Attorney will see here what account these two ancient Kings
made of these two powers and swords, spiritual and temporal, and of their
distinction and subordination the one to the other. And it seems that this
speech of King Edgar, was so memorable and famous to all his posterity, that
William Conqueror also did imitate the very same, Rogeri^^ Houeden part 2.
Annal. in vita Henry's secundi.
when in certain laws of his, ordeyning, that such lay men as were
disobedient to the Bishops sentence, should be punished by his temporal
officers; he uses this phrase of Edgar saying: Rex constringit malefactorem,
vt emendet primum Episcopo, deinde Regi; and sic erunt ibi duo gladij, and
gladius gladium i^uabit. The King shall compel the malefactor to make amends
first to the Bishop, William Conquerors judgment of this matter.
and then to the King, and so shall there be two swords, and the one sword
shall assist the other. Where we see that he did subordinate his own sword to
that of the Bishops, and Ecclesiastical power of the Church. And the self same
manner of speech and form of belief, as common to the whole world, did Queen
Eleanor wife to King (...) the second, Q. Eleanor anno. 1194.
use in her epistle to Celest^nus the Pope, when she ^^ treated him to
excommunicate the Emperor and Duke of ^^stria, for deteining her son K.
Richard the first prisoner; which letter was written by Petrus Blesensis,
Blesensis epist. 146.
and has these words; Chrisicrux antecellit Caesaris aquilas, gladius Petri
gladio Constantini, and Apostolius seeds praeiudicat Imperatoriae potestati.
The cross of Christ excels the spread-eagles in Cesars banners, the sword
of Peter is of more eminent power then the sword of Constantine; and the Sea
Apostolic is more potent then any Imperial authority. And this was the
opinion, sense, and judgment of these Princes and times, wherein they made this
difference and degree of these two swords, without any such prejudice of
taking away half their Monarchies from themselves, or other Princes thereby, as
M. Attorney and other such Prince-flatterers do pretend.

The Conclusion upon the former Demonstrations.
90. Now therefore (gentle Reader) by these ten demonstrations thou have seen,
what was the opinion, judgment, and practice of all our ancient English Kings
before the Conquest about this point of temporal and spiritual power and
authority, and hear I think thou will not deny, but that my manner of proof
is, and has been according to the rule of the Fathers touched before in the
answer to the preface, to wit, KATH'HOLON or secundum totum, bringing forth
the whole body of this time; and that M. Attorneys proof, if it had been a
proof, that is to say, if he had proved that which he propounded, is secundum
partem according to a part, he only alleging two sole petite instances, out
of all the rank of above an hundred Kings, for the space almost of five
hundred years; and these two also so weak and impertinent, as no way they
can subsist in the sense wherein he alleges them. And herwithall in like
manner, thou may pleas^ to call to remembrance the ancient observation of
old Tertullian, above forteene hundred years gone: Tertull lib. de pudiciti^
cap. 17.
Solem^ est heretic, etc. It is a solemn trick of heretics, by the
occasion of some one doubtful sentence or clause, to wrest matters contra
exercitum sententiarum, against a whole army of sentences to the contrary. And
S. Cyprian in the next age after him, notes the like audacity of heretic of
his time, that would take a part and leave out a part, Cyprian de Vn^ala
Ecclesia.
and prefer some piece or parch before the whole. And whether M. Attorney do
not follow the same spirit here, in peeping forth with two little miserable
mistaken instances, out of so great an army of plain testimonies to the
contrary, you have already seen, and out of your wisdom will easily judge.
The like or worse dealing will you find afterward, when we shall have passed
the Conquest, whereunto now we hasten, and for the event I remit my self to the
experience.

OF THE KINGS AFTER THE CONQVEST UNTO OUR TIMES: And first of the Conqueror
himself, whether he took spiritual jurisdiction upon him, or no, by virtue of
his Crown, and temporal authority. CHAP. VII.
HAVING perused what passed among our Kings before the Conquest, (to which
pervse and veiw we were led by M. Attorneys induction of two instances of those
days, as you have seen) we are now to follow him also beneath the said
Conquest, for trial of our controversy, where albeit, as before I have noted,
the further we go from the origin of our English conversion, and heat of
that primitive spirit of devotion, that God gave our Kings in those first ages
of their said conversion to Christian religion, the more coldness we shall find
in some cases, and more worldly and secular spirit in diverse of our Norman and
French Princes, then wa^^ the English before them: The Conqueror began his
reign 1066. and reigned 21. years unto the year 1087.
yet for the substance of this point of controversy between M. Attorney and
me, about the acknowledgement of the Popes authority Ecclesiastical, we shall
find them in effect no less resolute, then the other, if you respect the
substance of the thing it self, though in tenderness of piety and devotion,
their different lives and courses (as after you shall se) be witnesses unto us
of no small difference.

2. And this is seen in none more then in K. William the first himself, the
head and stock of all the rest, who though in life and action, as a warryer and
Conqueror, were rough, fierce, and boisterous, K. William boisterous, but
truly Catholic.
especially in the former years of his reign over England, wherein upon ielosy
of his unsettled state he did many things de facto which were not so justifiable
de Iure; for which Authors do note, that he was greatly punished by God, both
in himself and in his children and childrens children: Florent. 10^6. S^ovv.
an. 20^7. in vita Guliel. Conquestoris
yet in this point of true and substantial obedience to the Church, when he
was void of passion, and out of occasion of any co^straining necessity, he
all-wayes showed himself dutiful, respective, and humble toward the said
Church: according to his Oath taken at his Coronation before the Altar of S.
Peter at Westminster, se velle Sanctas Dei Ecclesias, ac rectores defendere
(says Florentius) that he would defend the holy Churches of God, and the
governors thereof, which to have performed he professed also at his death with
tears, as John Stow and more ancient writers then he, do bear him witness;
and some are of opinion, that the long continuance of his line in the Crown of
England, considering how he entered, and how some of them have governed after
him, may principally be ascribed unto this, that he would not take in hand the
enterprice of England, but that first it should be consulted, and approved by
the Sea Apostolic at at Rome, as presently you shall hear that it was, and
for that himself so firmly relied upon the same afterward, in all his greatest
occasions, and recommended the same, especially to his sons on his deathbed,
when he was free from these interests, which oftentimes before drew and wrested
him to diverse actions, which in that last hour he approved not, but condemned
and much bewailed.

3. And of this later point many examples might be alleged, both of much
bloodshed in England, of spoiling and destroying the country, of casting down
many towns and Churches for enlarging his hunting, of vexing and oppressing
the English-nation, of ryfling and spoiling monasteryes and Churches,
Boisterous actions of K. William.
where the English had hidden some of their wealth to maintain themselves
withal, his detayning in prison all days of his life the Archbishop Stigand,
and diverse other Bishops and Abbots, deposed in the Council at Winchester by
Pope Alexander his legates, in the fourth year of his reign, and of his
brother Otho Bishop of Baion held in prison by him; albeit this, concerning
Ecclesiastical persons, he professed to do by license and commission of the
Sea Apostolic: yet in truth the chief cause was his own vehement passion,
and jealousy of his temporal estate; For I find a letter of Pope Gregory the
seventh, that succeeded Alexander the second, written unto him upon the year
of Christ 1084. which was the 18. of K. Williams reign, wherein the said Pope,
though praising his religious zeal in other things (which he would never have
done, if he had been opposite to his authority, and jurisdiction) yet does he
reprehend greatly this violent severity, toward Ecclesiastical persons. Ex
Registro. apud Bar. in Annal. anno. 1084.
One thing (says he) among so many excellent monuments of your royal virtues,
does greatly mislike and afflict me, and contristate my loving heart toward
you, that in the taking, and detayning prisoner your brother Otho Bishop of
Baion, you had not that care which was convenient of your Princely reputation,
but did prefer the secular caution of your temporal state, before the law of
God, in not bearing more reverence unto Priestly dignity. So he.

4. And this very same violent nature of K. William, who had been a soldier,
and borne arms, and brought up in continual bloodshed, from eight years old
(as himself testifies) was that, which pious and learned Lanfranke (nominated
and chosen Archbishop of Canterbury, after the deposition of the foresaid
Stygand) did so much fear and mislike at his first coming into England; as
may appear by an epistle of his to Pope Alexander the second, Ex epist.
Lanfran. apud Baron An. 1070.
that had commanded him (sore against his will) to leave his monastery in
Normandy, and to take that Archbishopric upon him: but now being come into
England, and seeing how matters did pass there, he was utterly dismayed, and
besought the Pope, by all means possible, and by all the most effectual ways
of persuasion he could devise, that he might be rid of it again. Your legate
(said he) having gathered a Synod here in Normandy, commanded me, by the
authority of the Apostolic Sea, to take the government of the Church of
Canterbury upon me, neither could any resistance of my part, by laying forth
the weakness ^f my body, the unworthiness of my person, the lack of skill in the
English tongue, the barbarousness of the people, nor any other such excuse take
place with them, wherefore at length I gave my consent. I am come hither into
England, The pitiful state of England for manners under the Conqueror.
and have taken the charge upon me, wherein I find so great trouble, and
affliction of mind, such rediousnes of my soul, such want of courage in my
self, such perturbations, such tribulations, such afflictions, such
obdurations, such ambition, such beastlynesse in others; and do every day,
hear, see, and feel such misery of the Church, as it loatheth me to live, and
am sorry that I have lived unto this day. For as the evils are great for the
present, so do I expect far greater for the time to come, etc. Wherefore I do
most humble beseech your Highness, even for Gods sake, The desire of Lan^rank to
^^e ^id of ^his charge.
and for your own soul, that have bound me to this charge, that you will
absolve me again, and let me return to my monastical life, which above all
things in this world, I love and desire, and let not me have denial in this
one petition, which has both piety, justice, and necessity in it, etc.

5. So wrote the Archbishop Lanfrank. And that the most of this was meant in
respect of difficulties with K. William himself, it may be gathered by that in
the same letter, he desires the Pope to pray for the said King William, and
among other points, Vt cor eius ad amorem suum, and Sanctae Ecclesia spirituali
semper deuotione compungat. Lanfrankes fear of the Conquerors ^^ough nature.
That God allmighty will stir his heart to love him, and his holy Church, and
bring it to compunction by spiritual devotion. For this was the thing that
King William had most need of, to wit spiritual compunction, with a tender
conscience, whose affections were more out of order commonly, then his
judgment: which himself confessed with great lamentation at his death, as you
may read in Stow, and other Authors. (...) an. 1087.
For he (I mean the King) having related his hard proceedings in England he
said; that he was pricked, and bitten inwardly with remorse and fear,
considering that in all these actions (says he) cruel rashness has raged.
And therefore I humbly beseech you (o Priests and ministers of Christ) to
commend me to the almighty God, that he will pardon my sins, wherewith I am
greatly pressed, etc. ^he Con^^erours ^^ni^ent ^^each at ^^s death.
And whereas a little before, he had raged in his wars against the Town of
Meaux in France, and had burned diverse Churches therein, and caused two holy
men Anchorites to be burned in their Cells, wherein they were included; (which
might seem to be an act of no very good Catholic man, and God stroke him for
it presently) yet was not this of judgment, Satisfaction.
but of rage (to use his own word) and he sorely repented the same soon
after, and sent a great sum of money (says Stow) to the Clergy of Meaux,
Stow ibid.
that thereby the Churches, which he had burned might be repaired.

6. And the same might be showed, by a like passionate accicident, that fell
out on the 13. year of his reign, and of Christ 1079. when having upon
jealousy of his estate, forbidden that any of his Bishops should go over the
sea to Rome; Pope Gregory the 7. wrote a sharp reprehension thereof, to be
denounced unto him, by Hubert his legate then residing in England, saying that
it was, Irreuerentis and impudentis animi praesumptio etc. Greg. septimus lib.
7. epist. 1.
the presumption of an irreuerent and immodest mind, to prohibit his Bishops
to make recourse to the Sea Apostolic. A sharp reprehension of Pope Gregory
the 7. to the Conqueror. Ibidem. epist. 2^.
Which reprehension made him so enter into himself, as he sent two Ambassadors
to Rome, in Company of the said Hubert when he returned to excuse the matter,
and showed himself afterward a most obedient, and faithful child to the said
Church, even in that troublesome and tempestious time, when Henry the Emperor
with all forces impugned the same, as appears by the letters, yet extant of
the same Pope Gregory unto him.

7. Wherefore having premissed this for K. William, and all his Successors, of
the Norman, French and English race, in number above twenty, for the space
well near of 500. years, until K. Henry the 8. that whatsoever some particular
actions of theirs upon interest, anger, fear, prevention of imagined dangers,
co^petency, or some other such like motive, may seem to make doubtful
sometimes, and in some occasions, their judgment or affection to the supreme
Ecclesiastical power and jurisdiction of the Sea Apostolic of Rome: yet were
they indeed never of any contrary opinion, faith, or judgment; but held the
very same in this point, which all their ancestors, the English Kings before
the Conquest did, and all Christian Princes of the world besides in their
days. And for K. William Conqueror in particular, the several reasons that
do ensue may easily convince the same.

Reasons that show William Conqueror to have acknowledged ever the Authority
of the Sea Apostolic.. I.
8. First, that before he would take in hand or resolve any thing upon the
enterprice of England, as already we hane noted^ he sent his whole cause to be
considered of, examined, and judged by Pope Alexander the second, showing him
the pretense he had by his affinity to K. Edward the Confessor deceased: as
also the said Kings election and nomination of him by testament; the
unworthiness of Harold the inuader; the occasion of just war, which he had
given him by breaking his faith, and refu^ing his daughter in marriage; the
secret affection that most of the English nobility did bear unto him, with
general hatred to his adversary; The arguments of K. VVillia^ against Harold.
the peril of the Country by continual wars with the Danes and Scotts; the
hurt of the Church by Harolds irreligious government, but especially his
contempt of the said Church and Sea Apostolic, in that he had taken the Crown
upon him, says Matthew Westminster, Matthew. VVestmo^ast. anno. 1065.
without the ordinary rites and solemnity thereunto appointed, and consent of
the Prelates of the land. And finally says Malmesbury. Malmesb. lib. 3. in
vita Guhelme Conquest.
Iustitiam suscepti bell^, quantis poterat facundiae verbis, allegabat. He did
allege the equity of his cause (unto Pope Alexander) by all the force of
eloquence that he could. Which Harold on the other side did omit (says he) to
do, either that he was proud by nature, or distrusted his own cause; or for
that he feared that his messengers might fall into William his hands, who had
besett all the ports. Whereupon Alexander the Pope, having weighed his
reasons, sent unto him a banner for the war, in token of his consent, and
Stow adds these words. Stow in the life of Harold.
Duke William after he had got the victory sent his standard to the Pope,
which was made after the shape and fashion of a man fighting, wrought by
sumptuous art with gold and precious stones. And further the said Stow, out of
Malmesbury and Matthew Westminster does ad, that Duke William being arrived in
England, and offering conditions of composition to Harold before the battle,
one was, that he was content to stand to the judgment of the Sea Apostolic
in that controversy. All which, is likely he would never have done, K.
William offered to stand to the Popes judgment for his Crown.
if he had esteemed so little of the said Sea Apostolic and authority thereof,
as M. Attorney does; but rather would have remitted the justice of his cause to
be examined and sentenced by the Emperor, or by some other te^porall tribunal.
But he remitted it to the Sea Apostolic, and it fell out well for him, as you
know.

9. Secondly whereas K. William from his very first entrance had a desire to
remove Stigand from the Archbishopric of Canterbury, partly perhaps for his
demerits, and partly to have a sure man in his place, that was not English, he
dissembled the matter for three or four years, and this, as some think, in
regard that the same Stigand had been a persuader to K. Edward the Confessor, to
name Duke William for his Successor, for so the said Duke confesses in his
message sent to Harold before the battle, as Stow relates. But now upon the
year 1070. understanding that Pope Alexander had cited to Rome certain
Archbishops of Germany, to wit that of Ments and Bamberge, Lan^b^^t. in Chron.
anno 1076. Deposing of Stigand and other Bishops by authority of the Pope.
to answer to certain accusations laid against them of Simony, he thought
good to take this occasion, to demand also of the said Pope, judgment against
the foresaid Stigand and his brother Agelmare Bishop of the East Angles, and
certain Abbots suspected of like crimes. Whereupon Pope Alexander sent three
Cardinals into England for legates, one of them a Bishop, and the other two
Priests, who gathering together a Synod at Winchester, the forenamed persons
were deposed by sentence of the said legates, whereof two returned to Rome, and
one remained there: as both Malmesbury and other historiographers do write.
Malmesb. in vita Guliel. 1.
Out of which case we do infer, that if K. William had thought his own
authority sufficient to have deprived the foresaid Bishops, he would never have
sued to Rome for the matter, nor have been at the trouble and charge, to call
from thence three Legates.

10. As soon as Stigand was deposed, Lanfranke a most famous and learned Abbot
of Normandy, was called for by K. William, and commanded in the Popes name by
the Legates, to accept the same (as before you have heard) who obeying thereunto
made afterward his recourse confidently to Rome, In epist. Lanfranci apud
Baronium in an. 1070.
in all matters of importance that fell out, as namely in this very first
year, he wrote a letter to Pope Alexander about a case concerning the Bishop
of Lichfield in these words; Vniuersae Christi Ecclesiae summo Rectori
Alexandro, indignus Anglorum Archiepiscopus Lanfrancus, etc. Unto Alexander the
highest governor of the universal Church of Christ, unworthy Lanfranke
Archbishop of English men, Lanfranke proposes his doubts to the Pope.
etc. And proposing sundry business and difficultyes unto him, he says among
the rest; that in the forenamed Synod of Winchester, the Bishop of Lichfield
being cited thither, to answer to certain crimes of incontinent life, laid
and proved against him, and he refusing to appear, was excommunicated and
deposed by the said legates, and license given to the King, to nominate another
for that place. But afterward at the feast of Easter, he coming to the Court
in time of Parliament, resigned up his Bishopric unto the King that was
sitting together with his Bishops and lay nobility. In which case, Ego tum
nouus Anglus (says he) rerumque Anglicarum, etc. I being but a new English
man, and unskillful in English affairs, but what I learn of others, do not
presume, either to consecrate another Bishop in his place, nor yet to give
license to other Bishops to consecrate any, quoadusque praeceptio vestra
veniat, quae in tant^ negotio quid oporte atfieri informare nos debeat; until
your commaundment come, which in so great a business must inform us what we
ought to do. So Lanfranke: who refers these matters, as you see to the
Pope, and not to the King (though he were the Kings favorite) nor did he fear
to iniure, or offend the King thereby.

11. And soon after this again, to wit, the very next year following, which
was the year of our Lord 1071. and 5. of K. Williams reign, the said
Lanfrancke, elected Bishop of Canterbury, and Thomas a Norman, chosen Bishop of
York, went both of them to Rome in person, to receive their palls and
confirmation, at the hands of Pope Alexander by K. Williams consent; The palls
of England accustomed to be taken at Rome.
albeit it was a very troublesome year in England, for that all the
North-parte of England rebelled, to wit Edwyn Earl of Mercia, Morcar Earl of
Northumberland, Eglewyne Bishop of Durham, the famous Captain Sewardbran, and
many others; with whom joined the Scots and Danes against the Normans: and K.
William had need of the presence of two such trusty chief men and principal
Prelates, for staying the people at home. And therefore Ambassadors were sent
to obtain, that their said palls might be sent to them into England. But it
could not be obtained, for that Pope Alexander answered that it was an old
custom, that Archbishops of England should come, and receive their palls at
Rome. And this answer was written to Lanfrancke in the Popes name by
Hildebrand Archdeacon of that Sea, Sea Baron. in annal. T^m. 11. an. 1070.
who succeeded Alexander in the Popedom, and was called Gregory the 7. By all
which is evident what authority Ecclesiastical K. William did acknowledge to
be in the Pope of Rome, and how little he ascribed to himself in that kind.

12. Furthermore, the same Archbishops returning the year following to England
again, the said Pope Alexander wrote to K. William by them. Alexander
Episcopus, Seruus Seruorum Dei: Charissimo filio Gulielnio glorioso Regi
Anglorum, etc. Wherein after he had told him. Inter mundi Principes and
Rectores, egregiam vestrae religionis fan^am intelligimus: that among all the
Princes and governors of the world, we have heard the singular fame of your
religion; exhorting him to go forward in the same, for that perseverance only
to the end, is the thing which brings the Crown of everlasting reward: he
touches also diverse points of defending Ecclesiastical persons and libertyes
of the Church, of releeuing oppressed people under his dominion, telling him,
that God will exact a severe account thereof at his hands, Malmesb. l. 3. hist.
in vi^. Gui^l.
which (no doubt) was meant principally of the oppressed English nation by him,
whereof Lanfranke secretly had informed the said Pope. Baron ^^. 1071.
After all this (I say) he tells him of certain business, that he had
committed to Lanfranke to be handled in England, in a Synod to be gathered
there; as namely about the pre-eminence of the two Archbishopricks, Canterbury
and York. And also to hear again, and define the cause of the Bishop of
Chichester, deposed before by his legates. And finally he concludes that he
should believe Lanfranke; Vt nostrae dilectionis affectum before cognoscatis,
and reliqua nostrae legationis verba attentius audiatis: that by him, you may
more fully understand the affection of our love toward you, as also hear more
attentively the rest of our legation committed unto him, etc. Where he speaks
to the King, as you see, like a Superior. And John Stow reciting the history
of the said Synod, Stow (...). 1071.
gathered about these matters in England the year following at VVindesor, has
these words, taken out of ancient historiographers. This year by the
commandment of Pope Alexander, A Council gathered by the Popes commandment.
and consent of King William the Conqueror, in the presence of the said King
his Bishops, Prelates, and Nobility, the primacy which Lanfranke Archbishop of
Canterbury, claymed over the Church and Archbishop of York was examined and
try^d out, etc. Here then was no repining of King William at the Popes
authority in those days, but all conformity rather with the same.

13. I might allege many other examples to this effect, as that which Stow
writes in the 17. year of the reign of K. William and year of Christ 1083.
Stow an 1083.
that William Bishop of Durham, by leave of the King and nobles of the Realm,
went to Rome, Charters from Rome confirmed by the King.
and obtained of Pope Gregory the 7. to bring the Monks from Tarrow and
Yarmouth into the Cathedral Church of Durham; where he gave to them, lands,
Churches, ornaments, etc. all which (says he) K. William the Conqueror
confirmed by his charter, in confirmation, no doubt, of the Popes Charter,
which to procure he went to Rome, and he had license thereunto from the King and
nobles, that were sounders of that Church: which license, they would never have
granted if they had thought, that the matter had appertained only to the King
at home in his own country, and not to the Pope.

14. And in the very same year K. William (as before we have touched) being
entered into great iealosie of the ambition, and aspiring mind of his
halfe-brother Otho Bishop of Baion and Earl of Kent least with his Council
and riches, he might assist his son Ro^^rt and others, that did rise in
Normandy against him; or as some think, desirous to sease upon his great
riches and wealth which he gathered together; he suddenly returned from
Normandy to the I Will of VVight, where he understood the said Otho to be in great
pomp pretending to go to Rome, and at unawares apprehended him; but yet for
excuse of that violent fact upon a Bishop, he made first a long speech unto his
nobles there present, showing that he did it not so much in respect of his own
temporal security, as in defense of the Church, which this man oppressed.
Stow in anno. 1087. ^xfra mentis de vita Gu^e^^i.
My brother (says he) has greatly oppressed England in my absence, spoiled
the Churches of their lands and rents, made them naked of the ornaments given
by our predecessors the Christian Kings, that have reigned before me in
England, and loved the Church of God, endowing it with honors and gifts of
many kinds. The Conquerors accusation of his brother for n^^ting the Church.
Wherefore now, as we believe they rest rejoicing with a happy retribution;
Ethelbert, and Edward; S. Oswald, Athulse, Alfred, Edward the elder, Edgar, and
my cosen and most dear lord Edward the Confessor, have given riches unto the
holy Church, the spouse of God; my brother, to whom I committed the government
of the whole Kingdom, violently plucketh away their goods, etc.

Stow Ibid^m.
15. This was one excuse used by the Conqueror. Another was, as Stow records
that he said, that whereas his brother was both Bishops of Baion and Earl of
Kent, he apprehended him as Earl of Kent, and not as Bishop of Baion, that is
to say, as a lay-person, and not as an Ecclesiastical. And yet further, when
he was urged about that matter by his own Prelates, he was wont to say, (as
Stow and others do also note) that he did it by particular license of the
Pope, and not only by license, but also by his decree and commandment; and so
he protested at his death. Whereby we see, how little opinion he had of his own
spiritual jurisdiction in this behalf.

Of King William the Conqueror his laws, in favor of the Church, and
Churchmen.. II.
16. But no one thing does more exactly declare the sense and judgment of King
William in these things, R^g. Houeden. annal pa^^. 2. in vi^. hen^. 3. fol.
342.
then his particular laws, which are recorded by Roger Houeden, (an author of
good antiquity) who showing that King William in the 4. year of his reign,
calling together all his Barons, Governors of Provinces, and twelve expert
men out of every shyre, did reveiw the ancient laws both of the English and
Danes, approving those that were thought expedient, and adding others of his
own; beginning with those that appertained to the libertyes and exaltation of
the Church. Taking our beginning (says he) from the laws of our holy mother
the Church, by which both King and Kingdom have their sound fundament of
subsisting, etc. And then follows the first law with this title. De clericis
and possessionibus little. What the peace of the church is.
Of Clergymen and their possessions: and the law it self is written in these
few words, but containing much substance. Omnis Clericus and etiam omnes
Scholares, and omnes res and possessiones little, vbicunque fuerint, pacem Dei
and Sanctae Ecclesiae habeant. Let every Clergie-man, and all scholars, and
all their goods and possessions whersoeuer they be, have the peace of God, and
of holy Church. And afterward he declares what this peace of the Church is,
to wit, that neither their persons, nor their goods can be arested, molested,
or made to pay tribute, or otherwise troubled by any secular judge whatsoever.

17. And in the second law, which is entitled. De temporibus and diabus pacis
Domini Regis. Of the times and days of peace, and freedom of our Lord the
King; he does explicate that it belongs to the King and his officers, to see
these liberties of Ecclesiastical peace, franquises, and freedom, be exactlie
observed to Ecclesiastical persons, and especially to punish them double,
which refuse to put in execution the Bishops sentence of justice. Quod si
aliquis ^i foris fecerit (says he) Episcopus inde iustitiam faciat; veru^tamen
si quis arrogans, pro Episcopali iustitia emendare noluerit, Episcop^^ Regi
notum faciat: Rex autem constringet malefactorem, vt emendet cui foris facturum
fecit, scilicet primum Episcopo, deinde Regi, and sic erunt ibi due gladij, and
gladius iuuabit. If any man shall do any hurt to him (that has the peace of
the Church) let the Bishop do him Justice; but if any man will be arrogant
and not make amends, according to the sentence of justice given by the Bishop,
let the Bishop make it known to the King (or his Courts) and the King shall
constrain the malefactor, to make amends to him, unto whom he did the hurt,
to wit, first unto the Bishop, and then to the King, and so there shall be two
swords against malefactors, and the one sword shall help the other. And here
let be considered, what he says of two swords, one in the Bishops hand, and
the other in the Kings; and that this must assist that of the Bishops, as the
principal and superior; Two swords the one subordinate to the other.
which is conform to the speech of K. Edgar (if you remember) whereof we made
mention in the former Chapter and last demonstration thereof. Whereby is made
evident, that these ancient Kings believed not to any have spiritual sword or
authority, by right of their Crowns, but only the temporal to command and
punish in temporal affairs, and to help and assist the others in causes
belonging unto them.

18. The third law has this Title. De Iustitia Sanctae Ecclesiae. Of the
justice of the holy Church and prerogative thereof, which she is to receive in
temporal tribunals. In which law is determined in these words. Vbicunque Regis
iustitia, vel cuiuscunque sit, placita tenuerit, si vllus Episcopus venerit
illuc, and aperuerit causam Sanctae Ecclesiae, ipsa prius terminetur: Iustitia
enim est, vt Deus vbique prae caeteris honoretur. The privilege of
Ecclesiastical men in temporal Courts.
Wh^rsoeuer the Kings Justice, or the Justice of what other Lord soever, shall
hold pleas (or keep courts) if any Bishop come thither, and open a cause of the
holy Church, let that cause of all other be first determined: for it is just
that God be honored every where before all other. Mark his reason, why the
expedition of the Bishops cause, is to be preferred before that of the King;
for that he holds the place of God, and thereafter must be respected.

19. The fourth law has this Title: De vniuersis tenentibus de Ecclesia. Of
the privileges of all those that are any way tenants of the Church. Tenant^ of
the Church privileged.
And then it follows in the law. Quicunque de Ecclesia aliquid tenuerit, vel
in fundo Ecclesiae mansionem habuerit, extra curiam Ecclesiasticam coactus, non
placitabit, quamuis foris fecerit, nisi (quod absit) in Curia Ecclesiastica
rectum defecerit. Whosoever does hold any thing of the Church, or has his
mansion house within the land of the Church, shall not be constrained to plead
any matter of his, though he be a malefactor, out of the spiritual court,
except (which God forbid) justice could not be had in the said Ecclesiastical
court.

20. These are the first laws of all, that were made by King William, Diuer^
other laws.
and after these do ensue five more to the same effect of Churches
privileges; whereof the first has this Title. De reis ad Ecclesiam
fugientibus. Sa^ctuary.
Of malefactors, that fly to the Church, how they are to have Sanctuary and
protection. The second. Breakers of Privileges.
De fractione pacis Ecclesiae. Of breaking the peace of the Church, that is to
say of her privileges: the breakers whereof are appointed to be sharply
punished, first by the Bishop, and then by the King, if he be arrogant. The
third. De decimis Ecclesiae maioribus. Of the greater tithes belonging to the
Church. Tithes.
The fourth. De minut is decimis. Of lesser tithes; all which are commanded to
be paid exactly. And finally the fifth law, which is the tenth in order, has
this Title. De denario S. Petri, qui Anglice dicitur Rome-scot. Of Peter Pence,
Peterpe^ce.
called in old English Rome-scot: wherein is appointed the order, how the said
Peter Pence shall be gathered and made ready against the feast of S. Peter and
S. Paul, or at the furthest, against the feast of S. Peter's Chains, as we have
seen also before ordained by the law of K. Kanutus. By all which is understood,
and much to be considered, that neither K. William, nor any of his ancestors
took upon them to make any Ecclesiastical law at all of spiritual matters,
as of their own; but only did second, and strenthen, and confirm the laws of
the Church, by their temporal laws, by defending the same, and punishing the
breakers thereof. Which is a far different thing from the Ecclesiastical power,
which M. Attorney will needs have us believe to have been in the ancient Kings
of England, according to the meaning of the ancient Common-lawes thereof, but
produces none. And I persuade my self, he will hardly allege me any so
ancient as these, though he have studied them, as he says 35. years: but five
hundred more were necessary to find out that which he affirms. And thus much
of laws for the present.

21. There remains only one argument more, concerning K. William, which is
the time of his death, and of what sense and judgment he was in this point at
that time, when commonly men do se more clearly the truth of matters
(especially Princes) then before in their life, health, and prosperity, when
passion, honor, or interest may oftentimes either blind, or byasse them. And
albeit of K. William diverse ancient writers do record, that notwithstanding
in his anger, unto secular men he was fierce and terrible; The Conquerors
humility toward his Archbishop.
yet unto Ecclesiastical persons, he bare still great respect, whereof among
others, this example is recorded by Nubergensis, that when at a certain time
Archbishop Aldred of York, that had crowned him, and was much reverenced by
him while he lived, Nu^e^g. Re^u^ Anght. l. 1. c. 1
entreating him for a certain pious work, and not prevailing, turned his back
and went away with show of displeasure; the Conqueror took hold of him, and
fell down at his feet, promising to do what he would have him: and when the
Nobles that stood round about, began to cry to the Archbishop, that he should
take up the King quickly from his knees, he answered let him alone, he does but
honor the feet, of S. Peter, in kneeling at mine. Which well declares (says
Nubergensis) both what great reverence, this fierce and warlike Prince did
bear unto this Prelate, as also how singular authority and confidence the good
Archbishop had with him.

22. But (as we have said) his true sense and meaning will best be seen by own
his words and behavior at his death when finding himself in great affliction
and perplexity of mind, with the ^^ror thereof, as before has been touched, and
of Gods iudgemen^ ensuing thereon: for that to use his own words, he saw
himself ^^den with many and greiuous sins, and greatly polluted with the
effu^^^^ much blood, and ready to be taken by and by unto the terrible
examination (...) God, etc. Stow in vit. Guliel. in sine.
In this plight (I say) which Stow and others (...) down out of ancient
authors, his greatest comfort^ (...) he had been ever obedient to the Church:
whereunto by (...) he assigned the most part of his treasure; adding this (...)
thereof, that those things that had been heaped up by wicked deeds, The
Conquerours last speech of his devotion toward the Church.
might be disposed to holy uses of Saints. And then turning his speech to
Ecclesiastical men he said; You remember how sweetly I have ever loved you,
and how strongly against all emulations defended you. The Church of God which
is our mother, I never violated, but in every place (where reason required) did
willingly honor; I have not sold Ecclesiastical dignityes, and Symony I
always detested; in the election of Pastors, I ever searched out the merits
of his life, his learning and wisdom; and so near as I could, committed the
government of the Church unto the most worthy; this may be seen in Lanfranke
Archbishop of Canterbury, and in Anselme Abbot of Beck, and others, etc. This
course have I followed from my first years; this I leave unto my heirs to be
kept in all times; In this do you (my Children) ever follow me, to the end
that heerby you may please both God and man, etc.

23. And this was the last speech of the Conqueror to his children, and others
standing by at the day of his death, which does sufficiently declare, what his
sense and judgment was concerning this point of spiritual jurisdiction. And
to impugn and overthrow all this our adversary the Attorney had need to bring
many and strong batterings, as you see. Let us pass then to examine what they
are.

The first Instance taken out of the reign of this K. William the
Conqueror.. III.
24. One instance only does M. Attorney find to be alleged, during the reign
of this Prince, which we shall allege in his own words, as they ly in his
book; and this shall we observe commonly through all his instances. Thus then
he says.

The Attorney.
It is agreed, that no man only can make any appropriation of any Church, 7. ^.
9. ^^. Qua^^ ^^pedes. 19.
having cure of souls, being a thing Ecclesiastical, and to be made to some
person Ecclesiastical, but he that has Ecclesiastical jurisdiction: But
William the first of himself, without any other, as king of England, made
appropri^t^^^ of Churches with Cure, to Ecclesiastical persons: wherefore it
follows, that he had Ecclesiastical jurisdiction.

The Catholic Divine.
25. This is the only one argument or instance, as has been said, which M.
Attorney has found in all the life of K. William the first, whereby to prove
his principal Conclusion, which is, that K. William had as much
Ecclesiastical power and jurisdiction, by the ancient common laws of
England, as ever had Queen Elizabeth, and she as much, as ever any
Ecclesiastical person had, or might have in England. And yet you se, that if
al were granted, which here is set down, M. Attorneyes Instance of no force.
it amounts to no more, but that K. William did bestow a benefice with Cure,
upon an Ecclesiastical person: which he might do, either by nominating or
presenting, as patron of the benefice; or by some indult from the Pope, or
Bishop of the diocese in that behalf; or under ratihabition (as before in
Charters has been declared) or finally he might do it De facto and not De
Iure, as oftentimes it falls out in such actions of Princes. And in all these
senses, though we grant whatsoever M. Attorney says and sets down in this
place, it comes so far short to prove supreme Ecclesiastical jurisdiction
in K. William, as it proves not any spiritual jurisdiction at all; for that
all he says may be grauuted in any layman whatsoever: which we shall
endeavor to make clear by explication and distinction of those things, which
here are set down confusedly by M. Attorney.

26. First then this instance consists of a Syllogism, as you see; the Mayor
whereof is related out of the collection of some law book, as may appear by
his quotation in the margent, though I have not the book by me: and we grant
the proposition to be true in his due sense, to wit, that no man can
appropriate a Church or benefice with Cure, to an Ecclesiastical man, but he
that has Ecclesiastical jurisdiction. Power ways by which a lay man may
Confer benefices.
And then, we deny the Minor proposition, which ^^ of M. Attorneys own
addition, to wit, that K. William did so appropriate, or bestow any benefice
with Cure, upon an Ecclesiastical person, except it were in one of the four
manners before specified. And M. Attorney ought to have proved his said Minor,
if he had dealt substantially.

27. And moreover I find that he faltereth somewhat also (...) setting down
the very words of his Mayor proposition, though much more in the true sense, as
presently shall be declared. For whereas he begins. It is agreed that no man
can make any appropriation, etc. the latin words of this Report cited by
himself are: Inter omnes conuenit, quod nemo possit appropriare, etc. which
have this sense: that it is a common received opinion (to wit from the
Canon Law) that no man can appropriate, or bestow a Church with Cure, except he
have Ecclesiastical jurisdiction. But M. Attorney by shutting out the word
inter omnes, and translating the rest, it is agreed, would make his reader
think, that it was an agreement or resolution only of the temporal Judges in
this case, in K. Edward the 3. his reign, and that they first founded this
Maxim about Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, whereas they related it only, as an
ancient Maxim received in the Canon and Civil law, in this sense which
presently we shall declare.

28. And whereas he translateth the word appropriare Ecclesiam Ecclesiasticae
personae. To make appropriation of any Church to an Ecclesiastical person;
this may have two senses, and be meant either of appropriations, or collations
of benefices, wherein there is little difference in respect of our controversy;
for that neither appropriation, nor collation can be truly and properly made,
without spiritual jurisdiction, either ordinary or delegate. And as for
appropriations, which consisted commonly in this, that the gleab-lands, and the
better tithes were united to some religious houses, or Parsons, leaving the
lesser tithes unto their Vicars, Appropriation of Benefices.
they could not be made nor granted, but by the license of the Sea
Apostolic; as neither in our days they can, in Catholic countries; and upon
this pretense of a greater good to ensue thereby unto the Church and Country,
where they are granted: and consequently if K. William in his days, Sup.
cap. 6. Demon. 4.
did make any such appropriatio^s in this sense, it is to be understood that
the same was first allowed by the Sea Apostolic, as before we have showed in
the examples of Charters, for buylding and establishing of Churches,
monasteryes, and other pious works. And the same may be gathered also out of
the Ordinances made about the said appropriations afterward in the 15. year of
K. Richard the second, and 4. of K. Henry the fourth by Parliament, wherein the
Bishops did fit as chief in these affairs.

29. Collations also of benefices require spiritual power and jurisdiction in
him, Collations of benefices,
that does give or confer the same; though in this there may be diverse degrees,
which are declared (...) Canon Law. And M. Attorney being so eminent in the
common law, ought not alltogeather to have omitted them. For first, whereas the
word Benefice, or Church with Cure, or Parish (for all these are used
oftentimes for the same) does comprehend as well a Bishopric, as a lower
benefice; if M. Attorney will understand it here of the former, that is to
say, that no man can appropriate, or bestow a Bishopric upon any person, but
he that has Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, he must remember (if before he knew
it) that three things do concur in making of a Bishop by divine and
Canon Law, Cap. Intet, and cap. Licet, extrau. de tra^slat. epise. and extrau
de electione, cap. Cum in cunctis.
to wit Election, Confirmation, and Consecration, as may be seen by the places
thereof here quoted in the margent, not to trouble the text therewith to
unskillful Readers.

30. And albeit the first, to wit Election, Extrau. de elect. cap. postquam and
cap. Intet Canonicos. and cap. Scriptum est.
when it is justly made, do give right to the elected, to pretend the second
and third, that is, confirmation and consecration, nor can they be denied unto
him without injury, except upon just cause, as the same law says: yet can he
not upon his only Election, exercise any part of his office of a Bishop, either
in jurisdiction or order. But when he has the second part, which is
confirmation and induction to the benefice, which is properly called
inuestiture; then has he jurisdiction upon those people, and may exercise the
Acts thereof by visiting, Ex capite, qualiter extrau. de elect.
punishing, or the like; but not the Acts of Order, until he have consecration
also, that is to say, he cannot make Priests, nor administer the sacrament of
confirmation, nor do other such actions, as are peculiar to Episcopal Order.

31. Now for these three things, the first (which is election or nomination)
may be performed by any Prince or layman, that has lawful authority
thereunto, which diverse ways he may have, as after shallbe showed; either by
Ius patronatus of the benefice, or prerogative granted him by the Church. The
second which is confirmation and giving of jurisdiction, Election confirmetion
and consecration of a Bishop by vvhomel
must only proceed from him that is the fountain of all spiritual
jurisdiction under Christ (which is the Bishop of Rome) or some Metropolitan or
Bishop under him, that has authority and commission from him. The third which
is consecration, must be done according to the Canon Law, by three Bishops at
the least. And by this also may we understand, what is necessary for the
appropriating or conferring of any lower Benefice with Cure to an ordinary
Priest, to wit, the two first, election or presentation, which may be done by a
secular man and confirmation or inuestiture, which always must come, as has
been said, either from the Sea Apostolic, or some Bishop authorized under him;
for that it gives spiritual power and jurisdiction over souls, which no man
can do, but he that has it in himself, and no man can have it, but he that
received it from those that had it immediately from Christ, to wit S. Peter and
the rest of the Apostles and their Successors, Governors of the Church, as
before in the second Chapter of this Answer we have declared.

32. And yet further it is to be noted, for more cleernes and distinction, that
the first of these three to wit Election, is of four distinct sorts in the
Canon Law. The one called election properly or choice, by suffrages and voices
of such as have to choose. Extrau. de postula one prelatorum, cap. pennl.
The second is termed Postulation, when one is offered that is not altogether
capable of the benefice, but has need of dispensation. The third is called
presentation, when he that is patron, Cap. vlt. extrau. de Iure patronatus.
or has the aduouson of any benefice, presents one by right of that Ius
patronatus, the right of patronage. The fourth is called nomination, which has
diverse curious differences noted in the law, over long here to be discussed.
Glossa dist^n^^. 63. cap. qua^to. and extrau. de postul. prelatorum, cap. Bonae
memoriae.
But this is sufficient for our purpose, that all these four ways do
comprehend but only the first degree of appropriating a benefice to any
incumbent. And albeit originally they do all four appertain to
Ecclesiastical power, for that they concern an Ecclesiastical thing; yet
for many ages have they been imparted also by authority and commission of the
Sea Apostolic, or by right of patronage, to secular laymen, both Princes and
others: I mean to choose, postulate, present, and nominate fit persons, both
for Bishops and Pastors. And this we see in use now for many ages in all
Catholic Countries throughout Christendom; especially concerning Bishoprics,
and greatest dignityes Ecclesiastical. But yet no Prince takes that
authority, as descending from his Crown, but as by commission, grant, or
indult of the Sea Apostolic, which they hold to be the fountain of all
spiritual authority and jurisdiction.

33. All which being well understood, it is easy to distinguish, and thereby
euacuate the argument of M. Attorney in this place: which is a plain Sophisme,
and deceitful Syllogism, having one sense in the Mayor, and another in the
minor. For if in the mayor proposition, wherein he says out of the Report of
his law, that no man can appropriate an ecclesiastical benefice with Cure, but
he that has sp^rituall jurisdiction. If he understand (I say) the first degree
only, which is to choose, postulate, present, or nominate; then the said mayor
is false, for that laymen may do it also by commission (as before we have
said) and then do we grant his minor proposition, that K. William did, or
might so appropriate. But if he understand in the second or third degree of
confirmation and consecration of Bishops; then is the mayor true, and the minor
false. And so M. Attorneys syllogism every way is found faulty and guylfull,
nor worthy of his place and credit.

34. And yet will I add one thing more for conclusion of this matter, which is,
that as diverse secular Princes in former ages, and in ours also, have had the
first degree of approprition (as has been declared, to wit, to nominate fit
persons; so have diverse pretended, as well in our Countries as elsewhere, to
have, in a certain manner, the second from the Sea Apostolic, that is to
say, to give the inuestitures in Bishoprics, Abbyes, and other chief
benefices Per annuium and baculum, that is, by giving them a ring and a staff,
Inuestitures desired by Princes but denied by Popes.
which are the ordinary signs and marks of taking possession of their
jurisdiction: which though the said Princes do acknowledge, to be a
spiritual Act, and consequently not possible to descend from the right of
their temporal Crown (as M. Attorney would have it) yet desired they to enjoy
it by Commission from the Sea Apostolic, in respect of their greater
authority among their Subjects, and for more brevity of providing, and
establishing incumbentes, when benefices of cure fell void, and for other such
reasons: whereof we may read in the lives of diverse of our Kings. And namely of
King Henry the first this Conqueror his son, what earnest suite he made, to
have these inuestitures granted him, which the Pope did flattly deny to do;
yea and the greatest causes of that wonderful breach between the Popes
Alexander the 2. and Gregory the 7. and others of that age, with the Emperor
Henry and his Successors, were by the occasion of these inuestitures, which
the said Popes would not grant. Bald. l. rescrip. in penul. col. in versi^. Et
ideo rex Angl. ^od. de preci bus Imper. aufere^dis.
Albeit I find some ages after, that the great and famous Lawyer Baldus above
two hundred years gone, records that in his time, two Kings only had these
privileges, granted them from the Sea Apostolic; The King of England to
wit, and the King of Hungary, which perhaps was in regard that their Kingdoms
lay so far of, as it might be prejudicial to their Churches, to expect
always the said Inuestitures from Rome; But yet he expressly says, that it
was by Commission and delegation of the Pope. Papa (says he) committit
spiritualia etiam mero laico, and ideo Rex Anglorum, and rex Hungaria conferunt
in suis Reguis Praebendas ex priuilegio Papa. The pope may commit spiritual
things to a mere layman (and this he proves by diverse texts of law) and
hence it is, that the King of England, 32. de^^n. cap. prater (...), paragraph
vetum, and d^stinct 96. cap Been quidem.
and King of Hungary do in their Kingdoms give Prebends, by privilege of the
Pope. Whereby we understand, that in Baldus his time, it was held for a pecular
privilege of these two Kings, which fithence has been communicated to diverse
other Christian Princes, who do use and exercise the same at this day; but yet
none pretending it, as from the right of their Crowns. For they never
pretended to give benefice or Bishopric, by their own Kingly authority, but
only to present and commend fit persons unto the Sea Apostolic, to be
admitted and invested thereby, as all other Catholic Princes at this day do
use: yea, and that this right of presentation also, they took not, but by
concession and approbation also of the foresaid Sea Apostolic, as by the
former examples may appear.

35. And this is so much as I think convenient to say in this place to M.
Attorneys silly instance, and I have been the longer theraout, for that this K.
William is the head and root of all the Kings following: and this which has
been answered to this objection will give much light to all other instances,
that are to ensue. And if any King should have taken any other course from
this, established by the Conqueror (their head and origin) which yet none ever
in any substantial point did until King Henry the 8. you may see by all this
discourse that the Conqueror might say of them, as S. John said of some of
his. Ex nobis prodierunt, sed non erant exnobis. 1. Joan. 2.
And so much of the Conqueror.

OF KING WILLIAM RUFUS AND HENRY THE FIRST That were the Conquerours sons;
and of King Stephen his Nephew: And how they agreed with the said Conqueror,
in our Question of spiritual jurisdiction acknowledged by them to be in
others, and not in themselves. CHAP. VIII.
THis beginning being established in the Conqueror conform to that which was
in the precedent Kings before the Conquest, their remains now, that we make
our descent, by showing the like conformity in all subsequent Kings, unto K.
Henry the 8. according to our former promise. Wherefore first in rank there
comes K. William Rufus second son of the Conqueror, K. William Rufus
began his reign an. 1087. and reigned 13. year, to an. 1100.
among those of his children that lived at his death, who being named to the
succession by his said father upon his deathbed, and so charged and
forewarned, as you have heard, in this very point of honoring the Church and
Ecclesiastical power, and under that hope and expectation embraced and crowned
by the good Archbishop Lanfranke, (...) king first his solemn Oath to the same
effect, which his father had taken before him in the day of his Coronation, he
gave g^^^ satisfaction and contentment to all his people, K. William Rufus a
good King for a time.
at the beginning of his reign, as all our historiographers do testify, that
is to say, so long as Archbishop Lanfranke lived, to whom he bare singular
respect, love and reverence: but the said Archbishop deceasing in the second
year of his reign (which was about the 20. of his age) the young man, as
thinking himself free from all respect to God or man, brake into those extreme
disorders of life, which our historyes do recount.

2. And among others, or rather above others, in oppressing the Church, holding
Bishoprics and Abbeys in his hands, as they fell void, and not bestowing them
afterward, but for bribes and Simony: And namely the Archbishopricke of
Canterbury he held four years in his hand after the death of Lanfranke, until
at length falling greiuously sick in the City of Gloucester, and fearing to
die, made many promises of amending his life: as namely (says Florentius)
Ecclesias non amplius vendere, nec ad censum ponere, sed illas Regia tueri
potestate, irrectas leges destruere, and rectas statuere Deo promisit.
Florentius wigorniensis. an. 1093. in annal. Anglis.
He promised to God not to sell Churches any more, nor to put them out to
farm, but by his kingly power to defend them, and to take away all unjust
laws, and to establish such as were rightful. And heervpon presently to begin
withal, he nominated to the Archbishopricke of Canterbury, a great and worthy
learned man named Anselmus Abbot of the monastery of Beck in Normandy who was
then present in England; for that some month or two before, he bad been
entreated by the Earl of Chester Sir Hugh Lupus, Stow an. 5. Guliel. Rufi.
to come into England to found and order his Abbey (says Stow) of S. VVerberge
at Chester; Commendation of S. Anselme.
of whom Malmesbury living presently after him says. Quo nemo vnquam iusti
ten^cior, etc. then which Anselmne, Malmesb. l. 4. de Guliel. 2.
no man was ever more constant in righteousness; no man in this age more exactly
learned, no man so profoundly spiritual as this Archbishop, that was the
father of our country, and mirror of the world.

3. But this unfortunate King was no sooner recovered (say the same Authors)
but he repented himself sorely, that he had not sold the said Archbishopricke
with other for more money; and thereupon took an occasion to pick a quarrel
against the said Anselmus, and among other things, to let him, that he could
not do his office; Florentius an. 1095.
for that (says Florentius) from the time he was made Archbishop (which was no
less then two years) it was not permitted unto him, either to hold any Synod,
or to correct the vices which were sprung up through England. Malmesb l. 1. de
g^stis Pontif.
Whereunto Malmesbury and Edmerus that (...) with him, do add, that the King
would not suffer him to go to Rome to take his pall of the Pope, Edmerus in
vita Anselm^.
as all Archbishops of Canterbury were accustomed to do, and the other greatly
urged to have license: But after a long combat, which he had had with the King
and diverse other Bishops, that followed the Kings favor, in a Synod at London
upon the third week in lent Anno Domini 1095. and eight year of King William
his reign, the said Archbishop being extremely baited by the King and his
followers, stood constant in his appeal to Rome.

4. Which thing Rufus perceiving (says Malmesbury) he sent secretly certain
messengers to Rome, to entreat the Pope (which then was Urban the second) to
send the Pall of Canterbury unto the King, to be given to whom he would.
Whereunto though the Pope would not yield; yet he sent back with his messengers
for Legate, the Bishop of Albanum named VValta, with the said Pall, who showed
unto the King so many reasons, why the Pope could not yield to his demand, and
entreated him so forceably to be content, that he might give the said Pall from
the Pope to Anselme with accustomed ceremonies in the Church of Canterbury, S.
Anselm his pall brought him from Rome by the Popes Legate.
as at length he obtained the same, and made them friends.

5. But this friendship lasted not long, for that the very next year after,
the King continued his old manner of oppressing the Church. S. Anselme went
unto him to Winchester, and there first by intercessors, desired the King that
he might have license to go to Rome to conferr diverse difficultyes of his with
Urban the Pope. The King answered, that he would not give him license, for that
he knew him to have no such great sins, that it was needful for him to go
to Rome for absolution; nor yet to be less learned then Pope Urban, whose
counsel and direction he would ask. S. Anselm his plain dealing with K.
Rufus
Whereupon the Archbishop entering the Kings chamber, sat down by his side
(says the Story) and disputed the matter with him, affirming him to deny
Christ himself, that denied recourse unto his Vicar upon earth. And thereupon he
concluded, that this license could not be denied him by a Christian King, and
consequently he would go. The King said he should carry out nothing with him.
The Archbishop answered, he would go naked and bare-foote. Which firm
resolution the King perceiving to be in him, used by messengers unto him diverse
intreatyes (says Walsingham) and offered large promises of favors if he
would stay. VValsing i^ Ypodig. Neus^ria an. 1^97.
But the other would not, but departed the Realm, though he were searched and
rifled by the Kings Officers at the port.

6. By all which story it most evidently appears, that albeit this young
disorderly and passionate King, were as well in this, as in other matters,
headstronge and violent in pursuing his appetites and desires, as well in
Ecclesiastical, as Temporal affairs: yet did he never deny the Popes
spiritual jurisdiction in England, but rather acknowledged the same, in
sending to Rome to entreat that the pall might be sent to him, as also in going
about to divert S. Anselms recourse thither. But (alas) there passed not many
years, but God punished severely these greiuous sins against his Church: For
as both the foresaid Malmesbury and Edmerus that lived with him do write, S.
Anselms going to Rome and from thence with Pope Urban to a Council of Bishops
gathered together at Bary in Apulia, wherein among other things, all laymen
were excommunicated, that presumed to give Ecclesiastical Inuestitures, as
also those that received them at laymens hands, which was thought principally
to have been done in respect of King William; he returned again some years
after into France, and there passing his banishment with great quietness of
mind, he being one day with S. Hugh Abbot of Cluniaecke, The pitiful death of
K. Rufus.
famous in those days for holiness, the said Abbot told him in the hearing of
diverse others, that the night before, he had seen King William called before
God, and received the sorrowful sentence of damnation; whereat all the hearers
marueyling, the next news they heard from England, was, that the said King was
strangely slain by an erring arrow of his familiar servant Tyrrell, while he
hunted in the New-forrest, and that being stricken, he fell down dead without
speaking any one word. And the same authors do recount diverse other the like
presages and prognostications, that happened as well to the King himself, as to
other friends of his in England, portending this event, but neglected by him.

7. And this shall suffice for King William Rufus, who reigned thirteen years.
And though he was naught to all kind of men, (says Malmesbury) and pernicious
in his actions, as well to secular as Clergy men; yet had he no other judgment
in matters of religion, then his father or ancestors; nor ever was he noted of
any least difference therein: Nor does Master Attorney bring any instance at
all out of this Kings Reign: and therefore shall we pass to his younger
brother that ensued him in the Kingdom.

OF KING HENRY THE FIRST, Which was the third King after the Conquest.. I.
K. Henry the first began his reign an. 1100 and reigned 25 years unto 1135.
8. This was the third son of William the great surnamed the Conqueror, who
finding the commodity by absence of his eldest brother Robert Duke of Normandy,
took the Kingdom of England upon him, having gained by fair promises, the
good-wills of all or most of the Realm, and so was crowned by Maurice Bishop
of London, for that S. Anselm Archbishop of Canterbury. was yet in exile, as
before under Rufus you have heard.

9. What the said Henry did swear and promise, and what he began, even from
the very day of his Coronation, to put in practice, Florentius that then lived,
declares in these words: Consecrationis suae die Sanctam Dei Ecclesiam, etc.
Florent, in Chron. an. 1100.
From the very day of his consecration, he set free the holy Church of God,
which in his brothers days had been sold and let to farm; The good beginning
of K. Henry the first.
he took away all evil customs, and removed all unjust exactions, whereby the
Kingdom had been wrongfully oppressed before, and commanded, that peace and
freedom should be holden throughout the whole Realm. He restored the law of
S. Edward to all men in common, with those additions or corrections which his
Father had added thereunto, etc. So Florentius. And what his Fathers additions
were, and how greatly in favor of the Church, and of Ecclesiastical power,
authority and libertyes, you have heard before in his life and laws. Whereby we
may easily guess with what mind and judgment this man entered unto his crown.

10. And albeit in this point he never altered; yet there passed not two years
of his government, but partly upon Kingly appetite to have power in all
things; and partly also by incitation of flatterers, that seek to feed and
nourish Princes humors in that behalf; he began to lay his hands upon
Inuestitures of Bishops, by giving them Annalum and baculum for their induction
to their benefices; saying that his Father and Brother before him, had used and
exercised the same. But S. Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury newly returned
into England with other Bishops, opposed himself against the same, as a thing
unlawful, and condemned by the Canons of the Church; and namely in the late
Council of Bary, where himself was present: (as before has been showed) and
this contention grew to be so strong, as the next year after, being the third
of K. Henryes reign, the said holy man was forced again to appeal to Rome to
Pope Pascalis, and thereupon to leave the land, and once more to go into
Banishment, In vita Henri^^ primi.
where he lived three years, going and returning often from Lions to Rome, (say
Malmesbury, Florentius, and Houeden) about this matter. And the first of these
three does set down diverse epistles of Pope Pascalis, both to Anselme the
Archbishop, and to K. Henry himself, wherein he tells him first, why he could
not grant unto him the authority of inuesting Bishops, which by his letters
sent by Clarke William he had demanded saying: Grave nobis est, quia id a
nobis videris expetere, quod omnino praestare non possumus, etc. Pope Pascalis
his letter to K. Henry the first.
It greiueth us much that you seem to demand at our hands, that which no
ways we can grant; for if we should consent, or suffer inuestitures to be
made by your Excellency, it would turn (no doubt) to the exceeding great
danger, both of you, and me before God, etc. Secondly he exhorts him
earnestly to admit S. Anselme to his Bishopric and favor again. Prospice
(fili Charissime) vtrum dedecus an decus tibi sit, quod sapientissimus and
religiosissimus Episcopus Anselmus, propter hoc, tuo lateri adharere, tuo
veretur in Reguo consistere. Qui tanta de te bonae hactenus audierant, quid de
te sentiant, quid lequentur? etc. Malmesb. li. 5. annal in vit. Hen. 1.
Consider (my most dear child) whether this be an honor or dishonor unto
you, that so wise and religious a Bishop as Anselmus is, should fear for this
cause to live with you or to remain in your Kingdom. What will men think or
say of you, who hitherto have heard so great good of your proceedings? Thus he,
and much more (which for breuity I omit) from his palace of Lateran upon the
9. day before the Kalends of December.

11. But not long after, to wit upon the year 1106. which was the sixth of K.
Henryes reign, he being in some difficultyes in Normandy in respect of the
wars he had there against Duke Robert his brother, and many great men that
took his part, and perceiving great discontentments to be likewise in
England, as well (...) regard of the absence of their holy Archbishop Anselme;
as of the greiuous exactions which he had made upon them. Non fac^^^ potest
naerrari miseria (says Florentius) quam sustinuit isto tempore ^err^ Anglorum,
propter exactiones Regis. Florent (...) an. 1106.
The misery can hardly be declared, which England did suffer at this time by
the Kings exactions. All these things, (I say) being laid together, and God
moving his heart to turn to him for remedy, he thought best to go to the
monastery of Beck in Normandy, where Anselme remained in continual fasting
and praying for his amendment. S. Anselm and the King reconciled.
And there agreeing with him to stand no more in these matters of Inuestitures,
or any other spiritual jurisdiction, he willed him to return securely into
England, to pray for him in his Archbishopricke, and so he did.

12. And this being upon the Assumption of our B. Lady to wit the 15. of
August, the K. confident now of Gods favor, as it seems upon this agreement,
gathered presently an army against his enemies, and upon the vigil of S.
Michael next ensuing entering battle with them, Prosperous success of K.
Henry upon his amendment.
had a singular victory, and took therein both Duke Robert his brother, and
William Earl of Morton, and Robert Earl of Stutauill, William Crispin, and
all the head Captains of Normandy with them: whereof presently the King wrote
letters of joy to Archbishop Anselme in England (says Florentius) And the next
spring about Easter returned into England with the said prisoners, and left
Normandy wholly gained unto him and to his Successors.

13. And upon this, he calling together upon the first of August and 7. year
of his reign, all his Lords, both spiritual and temporal, consulted for three
days together with them, not admitting S. Anselme to that consultation, least
his authority might seem to have ouer-borne the matter, what it was best to
do in that case of inuestitures, which he had before used; albeit diverse
(says Florentius) did exhort him not to obey the Pope in this, but to retain
the use, which both his Father and brother had practiced, yet others alleging
the Censures both of Pope Vrbanus and Pascalis against the same, and that they
left unto the King all other privileges and regalityes: the King on the 4. day
causing Anselmus to be present: Flo^ent. VV^^^. in Chron. an. 1107.
Statuit (says Florentius) vt ab eo tempore in reliquum, nunquam per dationem
baculi pastoralis vel annuli quisquam (...) Episcopatu aut Abbatia, per Regem
vel quamlibet laicam manum in Angli^ inuestiretur. The King with his Counsel
did decree for that time forward; that no man in England should be invested of
any Bishopric or Abbey, by the King, or by any lay man's hand or power, with
giving him the pastoral staff or ring, as sometimes had been accustomed. And
this was done in obedience of the Canonical constitution made in the Council
of Bary, against such inuestitures, as we have declared.

14. And thus was that controversy ended, which was the only controversy of
importance, that this K. Henry had with the Sea of Rome during the time of his
reign, Malme^b. in ^it. Hen. 1. l. 3.
which Malmesbury then living, recounted as done of conscience saying;
Inuestituras Ecclesiarum, post multas controuersias inter eum and Anselmum, Deo
and and Sancto Petro remisit. He did release again to God and to S. Peter,
the Inuestitures of Churches after many controversies had there about with
Anselmus. How K. Henry of conscience resigned inuestitures.
Which he did perform so syncerely from his heart, as afterward Anselme being
dead, and he marrying his only daughter Maude to the Emperor Henry the 5. upon
the year 1114. he seems to have induced his sonne-in-law the Emperor to
remit also the said inuestitures to Pope Calixtus, for which his Father and
grandfather had held so long and scandalous broils with the precedent Popes;
yea and himself also, that is to say this Emperor Henry, not long before going
to Rome with a main army, had taken prisoner, and held for certain days Pope
Paescalis that sat before Calixtus, thereby to force him to grant and confirm
the said Inuestitures, which now upon a better mind he gave over again. For
this I find recorded by Malmesbury and others of that time; that Calixtus being
made Pope upon the year 1119. and presently coming into France, and calling a
Council at Rhemes, K. Henry of England sent diverse Bishops at his
commandment unto that Council. And the next year after going to treat with
the said Pope in person, at his Castle of Gesorse in Normandy: Acta sunt
multae inter illos, etc. many things were treated between them (says Houeden)
as it was convenient in the meeting of so great personages. Houeden. part. 1.
a^nal. fol. 272.
But the principal was that Henry obtained of the Pope, to grant unto him,
The meeting of K. Henry and Pope Castus at Gesorse in Normandy.
that he might have all the customs confirmed, which his Father had in England
and Normandy, and especially that none from thenceforth should be sent Legate
into England, except the King, upon some controversy falling out which could
not be ended by his Bishops, should demand the same of the Pope. So Houeden.

15. Whereby we may see the Kings judgment of the Pope ^^thority, and the
recourse to be made thereunto in matters of mo^^ moment. And that which is more,
soon after this meeting, I find, that the foresaid Emperor made the like
atonement with the same Calixtus, which Malmesbury records in these word^ In
nomine Sancta and indiuiduae Trinitatis. Ego Henricus, etc. Mal. lib. 5. annal.
in vita Henr. 1.
In the name of the holy and indivisible blessed Trinity. I Henry by the Grace
of God Emperor, etc. for the love of God, and of the holy Roman Church, and
of my Lord Calixtus the Pope, and for remedy of my soul, do remit freely to
God and his holy Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul, and to his holy Catholic
Church all inuestitures by ring and staff, and do yield and permit, that in
all Churches within my Kingdoms and Empire, there be made Canonical election,
and free consecration of Ecclesiastical persons, etc.

16. And thus was ended that fierce and bloody controversy; that had lasted
and troubled the whole Christian world above fifty years (says Malmesbury)
about the use of Inuestitures, pretended by princes to be granted unto them
and their ancestors by different Popes: But yet never challenged the same as
incident to their Crown or temporal jurisdiction, but as a privilege
granted by the Sea Apostolic, which might lawfully be done, as you have heard
by the former rule of Baldus the Lawyer, that the Pope may commit spiritual
things, by privilege, in some cases, as the is, to a mere layman. And yet
further if we seek the beginning of these inuestitures, how, and when, and to
whom they were first granted; we shall find the matter very uncertain. For
albeit some have thought, and written out of a certain relation, Polid.
virgil. l. de inuento^ib. Retu^. Gratian disti^^. 65. cap. 22. Adrian Sigebert
in Cron anno. 1111. Baron in annal. an. 774.
in Sigebert his Chronicle; that the first grant of these Inuestitures was
made by Pope Adrian the first unto Charles the Great, in respect of his great
meritts toward the Church: yet others do hold this to be false, and that the
name of Inuestitures was not known in those days, but rather crept in
afterward; yea, and rather taken and usurped to themselves by certain Princes,
by invasion of intrusion upon the Church privately first, and then more
publicly afterward (and thereupon pretended by their Successors) than granted
by special gift or consent of any Pope a^ al^^. The beginning of inuestitures
by secular Princes.
Which seems to have been the case also of our King Henry (...) first, who as
you have heard, did pretend to challeng the i^^^^^^tures, as used by his Father
and brother before him, whereof (...) notwithstanding we find no express
proof (for example) (...) any of our historyes that they used them, and much
less that they were lawfully granted unto them. And albeit they had been, yet
might the same authority which did grant them, revoke them again upon the
notable abuses, which thereof did ensue, by selling and buying of Churches by
Princes and their officers.

17. But howsoever this were, yet is it manifest heerby, that as well those
princes which violently took these inuestitures upon them, as others that
might have them perhaps granted for a time; both of them (I say) did pretend
to have them from the Sea Apostolic, and therein acknowledged the Primacy and
Supremacy of Ecclesiastical power to be in that Sea, and not in themselves:
Which is wholly against M. Attorneys conclusion. And therefore the said Emperor
Henry the 5. when he deteyned prisoner the foresaid Pope Paescalis, and forced
him to make a constrained grant unto him of the said Inuestitures, The use of
Inuestitures granted only by the Se^ Apostolic.
he would needs have him put these words in his Bull. Illud igitur diguitatis
priuilegium, etc. That privilege of dignity therefore, that our Predecessors
Bishops of Rome have granted unto your Predecessors Catholic Emperors, and
have confirmed the same by their Charters, we grant also to you, and do
confirm by this present privilege and Charter, that unto the Bishops and
Abbots of your Kingdom, that shall be chosen freely without violence or
Symmony, you may give the inuestiture of staff and ringe, Malmesb. l. 5. hist.
in vit. ^en. ^. fol. 94.
and that after the said inuestiture, they may canonically receive their
consecration from the Bishop to whom it shall appertain, etc. So he.

18. And now consider (good Reader) that if so great and potent an enemy of the
Church of Rome, was so desirous to have her grant (albeit perforce) of such
little pieces and rags of Ecclesiastical authority, as these were: how much
more glad would he have been, to have had all the Popes authority acknowledged
to be in himself, if he could have derived it from the Title of his Crown and
Empire, A consideration of much moment.
as Sir Edward Cook would have taught him, if he had been his Attorney: and how
easily might he have procured such a Statute to have been made unto him, by his
people in Parliament, as was made unto Queen Elizabeth, to give her all supreme
authority Ecclesiastical, that ever any person had, or might have, if he had
listed, or if he had thought it had been worth the procurement. And surely it
had bin a much more easy, and less costly way, to procure it at home in
Germany, (...) to have gone to Rome with so main an army and extraordinary
charges, labor, and danger, as he did, to extort the same from the Pope; and
yet not all his authority, but a small piece thereof, as has been said.

19. But now all was amended and accommodated again, and as well the Emperor,
as his Father-in-law K. Henry yielded up all their pretended right in those
inuestitures, as you have heard. And as in the procuring and retaining them, by
what manner soever, they acknowledged the spiritual power of the Sea of Rome;
so much more in rendering them up again. And for so much, as both their acts
are presumed principally to have proceeded of our K. Henry, all men may thereby
see his devotion to that Sea.

20. And this devotion and obedience he continued from that time forward unto
his death, which was some 15. years: in all which time I might show diverse
evident arguments of this point, as of his often sending to Rome special
Ambassadors, the particular confidence that sundry Popes had with him (as may
appear by their letters unto him) his sending to Rome upon the year 1123.
William newly elected Archbishop of Canterbury and Thurstyn of York, to
receive their confirmation, and palls there, for more honor and devotion of
the place and Sea; Florent in ^^on. (...) ^11. and 1213.
though otherwise, he might have procured the same to have been sent to
England, as eight years before he did, unto Raphe Bishop of Canterbury, as
Florentius declares.

21. And two years after this again, to wit. 1125. (in which year the
foresaid Emperor Henry died, that had kept so much stir about inuestitures)
there was a Synod celebrated in the Church of Westminster, by order of Pope
Honorius, his legate Cardinal Johannes de Crema being present and President
thereof, wherein diverse Canons were decreed: Diverse proofs of K Henry
acknovvledging the Popes Supremacy.
and in the third; That no Clergy man should receive any benefice at the
hands of aelaie-man etc. without the approbation of his Bishop; and if be did,
the donation should be void: Which the King took not to be against himself,
or any way repined at that Council, gathered by the Popes authority, neither
at this Decree thereof, that might concern both him and his. Which well
declares the piety of his mind, and what his judgment was of his own
Ecclesiastical authority, derived from his Crown. And now let us see what M.
Attorney has observed out of him and his reign to the contrary, that is to
say, to prove his supreme jurisdiction. It is but one sole and solitary
instance, and this nothing to the purpose, as presently you shall see.

The Attorney.
Henry by the grace of God K. of England, Duke of Normandy: to all Archbishops,
Bishops, Abbotts, Earls, Barons, and to all Christians as well present, as to
come etc. We do ordain, as well in regard of Ecclesiastical, as royal
power, that whenever the Abbot of Reading shall die, The Charter of Hen. I
founder of the Abbey of Reading in the 26. year of his reign and an Dom. 1125.
that all the possessions of the monastery wheresoever it is, do remain
entire and free, with all the rights and Customs thereof, in the hands and
disposition of the Prior and monks of the Chapter of Reading. We do therefore
ordain and establish this ordinance to be observed ever, because the Abbot of
Reading has no revenues proper and peculiar to himself, but common with his
brethren, whosoever by Gods will shall be appointed Abbot in this place by
Canonical election, may not dispe^d the Alms of the Abbey by ill usage with
his secular kinsmen, or any other, but in entertaining poor pilgrims and
strangers and that he have a care, not to give out the rent-lands in fee,
neither that he make any seruitours or souldiars, but in the sacred garment of
Christ, wherein let him be advisedly provident that he entertain not
young-ones, but that he entertain men of ripe age or discreet, as well Clarks,
as laymen.

The Catholic Divine.
22. Here I desire the prudent Reader to consider, how weak and feeble a
battery M. Attorney brings forth, against so strong and founded a bulwark,
as before we have set down to the contrary; wherein having showed and
demonstrated by sundry sorts of evident proof, that King Kenry, as in all
other points of Catholic doctrine, usage, and practice; so in this special
point of the Popes Ecclesiastical jurisdiction was a perfect Catholic
Prince, acknowledging and yielding unto him, his due spiritual superiority and
eminency in every occasion as you have heard. Now M. Attorney, from whom we
expected some substantial proof to the contrary, VVeake and impertinent
proof.
to wit, that he acknowledged not, nor practiced the same, but held this
supremacy to be in himself, as derived from his Crown, in as ample sort, as
Q. Elizabeth had, or might have by the Statute of Parliament, that gave her all
power, that had been, or might be in any spiritual person whatsoever, etc. To
prove all this (I say) he com^^^^ forth now, with this one sole Charter, which
you have he^^^ whereby the said King, as founder of the Abbey of Reading, does
assure the lands and temporal possessions, which he had given to the said
Abbey, that neither Ecclesiastical, nor Royal power shall take away, or
distract the same upon any occasion after the Abbots death; but that they shall
remain entyre and free, with all their rights, in the hands of the Covent,
Prior, and Monks thereof, until a new Abbot be Canonically elected, who shall
have no propriety in any part thereof, but all common with his brethren: in
regard whereof he is willed to dispend the same religiously, according to the
founders meaning and intention, as out of the words of the Charter it self you
have heard.

23. And now what proves all this against us, or for our adversary? Or why is
it brought forth think you? For here ^ mention only of temporal matters, for
assuring the possession, and due use of the monasteries temporalityes: Here is
no mention at all, or meaning of spiritual jurisdiction. And how then is this
drawn in to M. Attorneys purpose? We have showed before out of the examples of
diverse Kings, that founded sundry monasteryes before the Conquest, namely K.
Ethelbert that of Canterbury: K. Offa that of S. Albans: K. Edward that of
Westminster, and others: that besides the ordinary power and privileges,
which founders of pious works, Founders had authority to give Charters.
have by the Canon-lawes (which are many and great) to dispose of their own
donations, and to assure the same according to their perpetual intention: The
Sea of Rome was wont also to grant them authority oftentimes, to dispose and
ordain spiritual privileges, to be confirmed afterward by the same Sea, as
out of diverse like Charters and Graunts you have heard; Supra cap. ^.
which was much more then this, which here M. Attorney alleges (though
nothing to his purpose) to prove his maine proposition of supreme
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction derived from Princes Crowns.

24. Whereof it ensues, that this is less then nothing. And if he will urge
those words of the Charter, We do ordain as ru(...) regard of
Ecclesiastical, as Royal power, which in latin are: Stat^i^^ autem tam
Ecclesiasticae quam Regia prospectu potestatis, etc. it is also less then
nothing; This in^^^nce of ^o value.
importing only, that he both as King and founder, forbids all men, both
Ecclesiastical, and temporal, to enter upon the lands, which he has given to
the said monast^^^, either by spiritual or Royal authority: even as you have
heard K. Edgar before prohibit the like concerning the monastery of
Medeshamsted founded by him. Supra Ibid.
Vt nullus Ecclesiasticorum vel laicorum super ipsum Dominium habeat. That no
Ecclesiastical or lay-person have dominion over it, or over the Abbot thereof;
signifyinge in the same place, that this privilege notwithstanding was
confirmed by the Pope and Archbishop of England. And the like we may presume of
this other of K. Henry, as also we may note the great respect that he bare
(even in this Charter) to the Church, for that he puts Ecclesiastical
before Royal in this affair. And finally all this auailing nothing to the
point, whereunto M. Attorney should have brought it, he remains destitute of
any instance out of this Kings reign, as well as out of his Predecessor and
Successor: of which Successor we have now also to say a word or two, to end
this Chapter withal.

OF THE REIGN. OF KING STEPHEN, The fourth King after the Conquest.. II.
25. After K. Henry reigned K. Stephen his Nephew, that is to say, K. Stephen
began his reign an. ^^35. and held it 1^. years and more, until ^^54.
the son of his sister, eighteen years and somewhat more; wherein the misery
and uncertainty of human designements is seen that K. Henry the first, who
had labored so much to establish after him, his own succession in England by
his sons; and the like in the Empire by marriage of his daughter Maude to
Henry the 5. Emperor, as you have heard: and to this effect was induced to cut
of so many noble men and houses, Uncertainty of humane designement^.
both in England and Normandy, and to pull out his own brothers eyes for more
assurance thereof, holding him almost thirty years in perpetual prison until
his death; having heaped together infinite riches and treasures (says
Malmesbury) to wit above a hundred thousand pounds in ready-money besides plate
and Jewels, to establish these his designements, etc. that now notwithstanding
all was dashed upon the sudden, his male children being drowned upon sea, and
his daughter returning without issue from Germany, and (...) dispossessed in
like manner of her inheritance to England by (...) nearest kinsman Stephen,
that first of all other had sworn ^^mage unto her in her Fathers days.

26. This man then, having gotten the possession of the Crown, albeit he had
infinite troubles therewith, and the Realm much more by this means, and by his
instability of nature, Malmesb. in Stephene.
who was wont (says Malmesbury) to begin many things, and go through with
few, to promise much and perform little: yet held he out for more then 18.
years together, as I have said. And in all this time though he had little
leisure to attend peculiarly to Ecclesiastical matters, and less will
oftentimes, being wholly entangled in matters of war: yet his whole course and
race of life shows evidently, that in this point, either of belief or
practice, concerning Ecclesiastical power, he did not differ or dissent from
his ancestors, or from other Christian Catholic Princes, that lived round
about him in those days. Nay, he was held for so religious in this behalf,
before he was King as the opinion thereof did greatly further him to gain the
Kingdom. For that (says Malmesbury) Henry Bishop of Winchester, Malmesb. l.
1. Hist. Novel.
which now was Legate of the Sea Apostolic in England, that principally was
the cause of his preferment to the Crown, was induced thereunto by most
certain hope, that Stephen would follow the manners of his grandfather the
Conqueror, in governing the Crown, but especially in preserving the
discipline of Ecclesiastical vigor; and upon this hope, did the said Bishop
interpose himself, as mediator and pledge for Stephen, with William
Archbishop of Canterbury, and the rest of the Bishops and nobility, exacting of
him a strict oath De libertare reddenda Ecclesia, and conseruanda. For
restoring and conseruing the liberty of the Church, which William Rufus by his
loose government, had much infringed.

27. The same Malmesbury also that lived with him sets down the mutual
oaths, Malmesb. Ibid.
both of him and his nobility, the one to the other. surauerunt Episcopi
fidelitatem Regi (says he) quamdiu ille libertatem Ecclesiae and vigorem
disciplina conseruaret. The Bishops did sw^^^ homage and fidelity to the King,
The oath of K. Stephen for the libertyes of the Church.
as long as he maintained the liberty of the Church, and vigor of discipline
therein. But the Kings oath was large, concerning his election, admission,
crowinge by the Archbishop of Canterbury as Legate Apostolical, that he was
particularly confirmed by Pope Innocentius, etc. And then it follows: Ego
Stephanus etc. respectu and amore Dei, Sanctam Ecclesiam liberam esse, etc. I
King Stephen do grant, and confirm for the respect and love I bear to
allmighty God, to maintain the freedom of his Church, and do promise, that I
will neither do, nor permit any symmoniacall act of selling or buying
benefices within the same. I do testify also and confirm, that the persons
and goods of all Clergymen, be in the hands, power, and justice of their
Bishops, etc. And I do confirm by these presents, and their, dignityes,
privileges, and ancient customs to be inuiolably observed, etc.

28. This oat^ made he at his first entrance, as Rufus and others had done
before him, whereby they testified not only their judgment, but also their
obligation, though afterward in observance thereof many times they failed upon
particular interest or passion moving them to the contrary. Malmesb. Ibid lib.
1. Novel.
For so writes Malmesbury also of this King. Pene omnia ita perperam mutauit
postea, quasi ad hoc tantum iurass^t, vt preuaricatorem Sacramenti se Regno
toti ostenderet. Inconstancy of King Stephen by evil cou^sailors.
He did afterward in his life, so peruersly break all that he had sworn, as
though his swearing had been only to this effect, to show himself an
Oath-breaker to the whole Kingdom. But yet presently after he excuses him
again: Sed haec omnia non tam illi, quam Confiliarijs eius ascribendae put^.
But I do think all these things, to be ascribed rather to evil Counselors,
then to himself.

29. One notable case fell out upon the 4. year of his reign, to wit in the
year of our Lord 1139. when holding his Court in the City of Oxford, and
expecting daily the coming out of Normandy of Robert Earl of Gloucester, in
favor of Maude the Empress, (I mean that famous Robert base son of K.
Henry the first, most excellent in wisdom and feats of Arms, and a great
favorer of learned men, to whom both Malmesbury and Geffrey of Monmouth
dedicated their books) the King being persuaded (I say) by certain il
Counselours and souldiars about him, to lay hands upon the goods and Castles of
two rich and potent Bishops, the one Roger of Salisbury that had been Chaplain
to King Henry; and the other Alexander of Lincoln his nephew, A violent act of
K. Stephen.
and the Kings Chauncelour; he followed at length their counsel, and caused
both Bishops to be apprehended, and forced to deliver up the keys of their
Castles and treasures therein, pretending fear and doubt, least they would
otherwise hape kept the same for the said Earl of Gloucester and Maude the
Empresse^ (...) 30. And albeit these two Bishops power and greatness had (...)
much misliked also by the Clergy it self; yet seeing (says Malmesbury) this
violence to be used against the Canons, they admonished the King thereof by
diverse ways, especially by his brother Bishop of Winchester, now also Legate
of the Sea Apostolic, a likewise by Theobald Archbishop of Canterbury that
had succeeded William; who went so far, and were so earnest in this matter
(says Malmesbury then living): Malmesb. Ibidem.
vt suppliciter pedibus Regis in cubicul^ effusi, orauerunt, vt misereretur
Ecclesiae, misereretur anima and fama s^^ne pateretur fieri dissidium inter
Regnum and sacerdotium. They falling down at the Kings feet in his chamber,
besought him most humbly, that he would have pity of the Church, mercy of
his own soul and good name, and that he would not suffer division, and
sedition to be made between the Kingdom and Preisthood. Whereat (says he) the
King rising respectiuelie from his seat, albeit he excused his fact by laying
the ent^^ thereof upon others; yet being prevented by evil counsel, he never
performed in substance, the good promises that hear upon he made.

31. Wherefore it seemed best to the said Legate and Archbishop to call a Synod
at Winchester, and to cite the King there unto under pain of Censures to
appeer therein, The K. cited to appear before the Bishopps.
and to give the reason of this his violent fact against the foresaid two
Bishops; for so much as if they had offended: Non esse Regis, sed Canonum
in^^cium affirmabant. They affirmed the judgment of this, did not appertain to
the King, but to the Canons of the Church.

32. This Ecclesiastical Council then being called together upon the first
of September, Non abnuente Rege, not altogether against the Kings will (says
Malmesbury) who was present in the said City of Oxford, he sent two Earls for
his proctors, with an excellent learned advocate or Attorney called Albericus
de V^^^ who excusing the Kings fact, and showing many reasons of S^^^^ which
forced him to assure himself of those strong Castle sand holds, in so
suspicions a time as this was, as also to retain their wealth therein found,
for that one of them being Chancellor had many money-reckonings to make to
the King; conclu^^^ in the end, that the King presumed to have done nothing
against the Canons of the Church and true meaning thereof in such a (...) for
that the self same Canons did forbid Bishops to buyld such strong Castells.
And in this later point Hugh Archbishop of Rome being newly come to this
Council, did take the Kings part; The kings plea by his Attorney before the
Bishops.
affirming that in so suspicious a time, the King might without breach of
Church-canons, demand the keys of any Bishops Castle within his Realm. But
the legate and Archbishop of Canterbury were of opinion, that first the
violence of the fact should be remedied, and then the matter tried according to
the said Canons: which the King refusing to do, the two Bishops interessed
appealed to Rome, whereunto the King answered by his Attorney Albericus in these
words: For as much as some of the Bishops had used threats, and were preparing
to send some to Rome against the King; in this (said he) the King does commend
them for their appealinge: but yet he would have them know, that if any went
against his will, K. Stephen granted an appeal to Rome but doubts the same.
and against the honor of the Realm, his return home should be harder then
perhaps he imagined. Nay moreover the King showing himself greiued in this
cause, did of his own free will and motion, appeal for himself to Rome. Which
when the King, partly praising their appeal, and partly threatening (as you
se) had uttered, all men understood whitherto it tended, to wit that they
should not carry the matter to Rome at all, but end it at home.

33. This was the event of that Council; which I have related somewhat more
largely out of the writing of an eye-witnes, for that it expresses manifestly
what was then held and practiced for truth in our controversy. For that K.
Stephen and his learned Council, and Attorney did not stand upon denyinge the
Popes Ecclesiastical authority, as our Attorney does now, nor yet of the
Bishops of his Realm in Ecclesiastical matters, but is content to undergo
the same, defending only the reason and lawfullnes of his said fact; nor did he
pretend by reason of Kingly Crown to have this jurisdiction, but allowed, as
you have heard, both their appeal to Rome, and appealed also himself.
Difference betwixt K. Stephens Attorney and ours. Ibidem.
And surely if our Attorney and that Attorney should have disputed about the
plea that was to be held therein, they would greatly have differed; and yet was
that Attorney in Causaruns varietate exercitatus (says Malmesbury) much
exercised in all variety of causes: but his judgment, learning, and belief,
was different from that of ours, though he were four hundred years elder. And
so to return to our Story again, this was the success of these affairs, and
conform to this was all the rest of his life and reign: as for example when
Innocentius the Pope did call to Rome (...) Archbishop of Canterbury, Simon
Bishop of Worcester, Roger Bishop of Couentry, Robert Bishop of Excester,
Reynold Abbot of Euishant, ^o sit and have their voices in a General Council,
Florent. an. 11^9.
(says Florentin^) the King presently obeyed and sent them thither. The same
Stephen also made suite, and obtained of Pope Lucius the 2. (says Walsingham)
that the Sea of Winchester should be an Archbishopricke, VValsingh. in ^pod^g.
Neustriae, an. 1142.
and have seven Bishoprics under it, which had been effectuated if the same
Pope had lived. But the ensuing Popes not liking thereof, it took no place,
though the said King desired it much, and would, no doubt, have done it by
himself, if he had thought his own spiritual authority to have been sufficient
for that matter.

34. Another case also fell out of great moment, between Pope Eugenius the 3.
that ensued Lucius, and K. Stephen, which was about William Archbishop of
York, called afterward S. William, who being Nephew unto the said King, that
is, borne of his sister Lady Emma, William Archb. of York the Kings nephew
deprived by the Sea Apostolic.
and by his procurement made Chanon and Treasurer of the Church of York, was
after the death of Archbishop Thurstan, chosen by tha mayor part of the
Chanons, to be Archbishop of the said Sea; who sending the certificate and
authentical writings of his election unto Rome to be confirmed first by Pope
Celestinus, and after by Pope Eugenius then newly chosen: he was first called
to Rome sore against K. Stephens will, and being there, Nuberg. l. 1. hist.
caep. 1^. and 26. Pol^d. l. 12. hist. versus finen^.
was charged (as both Nubergensis that lived at that time, and others do
largely declare) that his election was not Canonical. And so after much
pleading of the matter (wherein are extant also diverse earnest and vehement
Epistles of S. Bernard to Pope Celestinus, Be^^ard. epist. ^^4. and 235 and 237
238. 139. and 251.
and after to Pope Eugenius against the said election) the conclusion was, that
William the Kings nephew, instead of receiving his approbation and Pall for
his installment, was deprived, and sent back into England again without any
benefice at all, where he lived for the space of seven years with his other
uncle, Henry Bishop of Winchester in great perfection and austerity of life,
until the said Bishopric being void again, he was chosen the second time,
and going to Rome was confirmed by Pope Anastasius that ensued Eugenius.

35. But now for the first time, notwithstanding all that King Stephen could
do or entreat for him, he was deprived, as has been said, and one Henry Murdat
a learned man, Abbot of a monastery of S. Bernards Order in Wells, who also
had been scholar in the monastery of Clare-vallis under the said S. Bernard,
was promoted unto the dignity, and proved a notable good Archbishop, though at
the beginning he being contradicted by the King, had great difficulty to enter;
the people also being against him, as well for fear of the said King, as for
favor and love of the other good man deposed: and the Kings son Eustachius
going to York upon that occasion, used great violence, and insolency (and some
not to be named) against such as had opposed themselves against the election of
the said deposed. But finally the sentence and judgment of Pope Eugenius took
place, and K. Stephen after a time permitted the other to live quietly in his
Bishopric: whereby we may see, what power and jurisdiction the Pope had for
such matters in England at that time. And that neither K. Stephen, nor his
son Eustachius, nor any of his Counsel, went ever about to say for their
pretense or excuse, that these things belonged to the Kings authority-Royall,
and not to the Popes tribunal.

36. All which points being laid together, and many other that for breuity I
do pretermit, it comes to be manifest, that whatsoever actions this King, in
those infinite troubles, fears, and suspicious of his, might sometimes use for
his gain or interest, or upon persuasion of others, against the Church or
libertyes thereof: yet was his will and judgment truly Catholic in this point,
nor was he ever noted for the contrary; nor does M. Attorney allege any one
instance out of him or his time, to that purpose. And therefore shall we pass
to other Kings after him.

OF THE REIGN OF KING HENRY THE SECOND Great Grandchild to the Conqueror:
And of his two sons K. Richard and K. John, and their conformityes in this
controversy. CHAP. IX.
AS in the former Chapter for breuityes sake, we joined three Kings together;
so shall we do the like in this: especially for so much as M. Attorney has no
one instance out of any of them, whose reigns iudured for the space of above
threescore years; and thereby sufficiently testifies, that in this point of
the Popes Ecclesiastical authority, their belief, judgments, and actions
were correspondent and uniform to those of their progenitors and predecessors,
as also were their laws; and consequently (which always is to be borne in
mind) the common laws of their days, could not be contrary to that
jurisdiction of the Bishop of Rome, which they themselves euerywhere did
acknowledge, profess and practice. For better declaration notwithstanding
whereof, we shall not omit to set down some particular and several notes, as
well of these Kings, and their successors, as we have done of the former.

OF KING HENRY THE SECOND, The fifth King after the Conquest.. I.
2. This King then was a Frenchman borne, This King reigned from the year
1154. unto 1189. which was 35. years.
as well as K. Stephen, and of the English-bloud only, by Maude the Empress
daughter to K. Henry the first, and niece to the Conqueror. He was son and
heir to Geffrey Duke of Anioy and Poytou, and a little before his inheritance
of England, he had the rare fortune (as then it was thought) to marry with the
young Queen Eleanor lately divorced from K. Jews the seventh of France, upon
their falling out after their return from Jerusalem, which Queen was daughter
and heir to the Duke of Aquitaine; so as all those States of Gascoyne, Gwyan,
Poytou, Anioy and Normandy, were united together in this K. Henry, and by him
conjoined to England. The Dukedom of Brittany also falling in his time to the
inheritance of an only daughter of Duke Canon, K. Henry his temporal greatness.
King Henry procured to marry the same to his third son Geffrey, for he had
four by his said Queen that lived together, besides a fifth that died young.
It was his chance also to have an English Pope, named Adryan in his days, by
whose favor and concession he got interest to Ireland, so as if we respect the
greatness and multitude of his dominions; he was the most puissant King of all,
that ever had dominion over our nation until that day.

3. But if we respect his manners, Nubergens. l. 3. c. 25. The same handles
much more largely Petrus Bles^^sis, Archdeaco^ of Bath, that was his latin
Secretary many years. epist. 47.
you may (besides others writers) read a whole Chapter in Nubergensis, of the
conflict and combat between vices and virtues in him, though he conclude that
his virtues were the more, and his vices were sore punished in him by almighty
God in this life, to the end that his soul might be saved in the next, as the
same Author writes. And to this effect was he punished and afflicted most in
those things, wherein he had taken most delight, and for which he had most
perhaps offended God; as first in the alluring of the said Q. Eleanor to make
the foresaid divorce from the King of France to marry him, who afterward was a
great affliction unto him: for that ha^^^^ borne him many fair children, she
set the same against him, ^^ thereupon the former ardent love waxing cold
between them, he was the more induced to live lasciuiously with others, and ^^
the end committed her to prison, and held her so, for near a dozen years
together before his death.

4. His children also he covered exceedingly to aduau^ce, crowning the elder of
them King in his own days, by the name of K. Henry the third, and giving him
in possession the States of Gascoyne and Gwyan; the second being Richard, he
made Earl of Poitou; the third which was Geffrey, he invested (as has been
said) in the Dukedom of Brittany; and the fourth named John, for that he had
no several State as yet to give him, K Henry punished in that vvherin he took
most delight.
he called in jest s^^^ terre, or lack-land, signifying thereby the great desire
he had to provide some State for him. And for effectuating this (says
Nubergensi^ which lived in that age) that is to say, for aduauncing his
children, he offered injuries to many: whereby it came to pass by Gods just
judgment, that they all at different times conspired against him. For first
about the midst of his reign, both the mother and the children banded
themselves against him, with Jews the K. of France, that had been her former
husband, whereof Petrus Blesensis, that was his latin Secretary, makes mention
in diverse epistles that are extant, as namely, in one written by two
Archbishops that had been his Ambassadors to the said K. Jews, to make peace,
but could not; who discovered that both his Queen and children had all
conspired against him. Rhetemag and Lexomen epist and Henr. 2 ep^^t 253. apud
Ble^^^s.
Quid amabilius ^ilijs (say they) quid vxore familiarius, recessit tamon vxor a
latere vestro, and filij insurgunt in patrem. What is more delectable them
children, what is more near or familiar then the wife. And yet is your wife
departed from your side, and your children are risen against their father, etc.
And in the same epistle, they counsel him to look well to his person, for
that they sought his destruction.

5. And the same is testified in another epistle written by the Archbishop of
Roane in Normandy unto Q. Eleanor her self, wherein he persuadeth her vehemently
by many reasons, to return to the obedience and freindship of her King and
husband; and in the end threatens to use the Censures of the Church against
her, ^ct. Blese^ epis^^la 164.
if she obaied not. Parochiana eniu^ nostra es (says he) sicut and ^^ (...),
non p^ssumus deesse iustitia, etc. For you are our Parishioner, a^ also your
husband; I cannot but do justice, either you must return, to your husband
again, Excommunication threatened to the Queen.
or by the Canon Law I shall be forced to constrain you by Ecclesiastical
censures. I write this unwillingly, and if you repent not, I must do it,
though with sorrow and tears.

6. The like letter at the same time, wrote Richard Archbishop of Canterbury to
K. Henry the son, persuading him by diverse earnest arguments, to return into
grace with his Father, and in the end threatened him, that if within fifteen
days he performed it not, he had express commandment from the Pope to
excommunicate him. But how this matter was afterward ended, or compounded
rather for that present, you shall hear a little beneath, though again upon
other occasions, matters brake forth and brought the afflicted King at last to
the most miserable state of desolation in mind, that ever perhaps was read of
in historyes. For that, Stow in v^^. Henr. 2.
as Stow out of ancient writers reports, he died cursing the day that ever
he was borne, and giving Gods curse and his to his sons, (which were only two
living at that time) and that he would never release or go back in this,
albeit he was entreated by diverse, both Bishops and other religious persons,
even until the very hour of his death. Where unto Nubergensis adds this
saying for some reason thereof. Nondum (vti credo) satu defleuerat, etc. He had
not (as I believe) mourned or bewailed sufficiently the rigor of that most
unfortunate obstination of mind, Nuberg. l. 3. 6. 25.
which he had used against the venerable Archbishop Thomas ( in giving the
occasion of his murder) and therefore do I think this great Prince to have
had so miserable an end in this world, that our Lord not sparing him here, K.
Henry his lamentable end.
might by his temporal punishment prepare him everlasting mercy in the life to
come. So Nubergensis. And this for his manners and conversation, wherein
otherwise the said Author does much commend him for a good Iusticer and leuing
Father to his people; a great Almes-man and founder of pious works; and for a
principal defender and preserver of Ecclesiastical libertyes, etc. His
virtues.


7. But now if we consider the point of our controversy about his religion,
and particular judgment in the matter of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction; no King
ever of our nation did make the matter more clear for his obedience to the Sea
of Rome in all occasions, whereof he had many in his days, and some of them
nearly concerning himself, as that of Thomas Becket Archbishop of Canterbury,
who for opposing himself against certain new Statutes and Ordinances of the
said King, which in the heat of (...) greatness and temporal fortune, he would
have made against the liberty of the Church, pretending them to have been of his
Grandfather K. Henry the first (and if they had been, Laws attempted by King
Henry against the Church.
the antiquity was not great as you see) the said Archbishop incurred highly
his heavy indignation, which cost him afterward his life, as is notorious. And
these laws were six in number, as the histories of that time do set them
down. that no appellation might be made to Rome without he Kings consent. that
no Bishop might go out of the Realm without the Kings lic^nce, though he were
called by the Pope himself. that no Bishop may excommunicate any man that held
of the King in capite, but by the Kings approbation. that it shall not
appertain to the Bishop to punish men for perjury, ^^ violating their faith;
but that it shall belong to the Kings Courts. that Clarks may be drawn to
secular tribunals in certain causes. that the King and his lay-Iudges may
determine controversies about titbes or Churches.

8. These were the laws, for which K. Henry the second made so much ado to
have them pass, as he enpawned his whole power therein, and moved, for so much
as in him lay, both heaven and earth to effectuate them, even by the Pope
himself, but could not. And yet you see, that here is not pretended any
absolute spiritual jurisdiction, but only delegatory in certain little pieces
and parcels thereof, or rather some little restraint of that supreme authority,
which he acknowledged to be in the Sea of Rome. K. Henry vehement contention to
have these laws take place.
But yet for the good and peace of his land he pretended to have them granted,
confirmed, and allowed unto him, as he said they had been to his Grandfather,
but could not show it. For as you have heard in the life of K. Henry the first,
the holy and learned prelate S. Anselme stood against him in such sort, so as
he prevailed not.

9. It is here also specially to be noted against M. Attorney, that this King
pretended not (as has been said) to have this jurisdiction against Clergy men
by right of his Crown, but by concession rather of his Bishops, and
confirmation of the Pope himself. For so expressly affirms Houeden that lived
at that time, that he required the seals of the said Bishops, (...). port. 2.
A^nal. in ^^. 1164.
and confirmation of Pope Alexander the third; whereunto when Thomas Becket
Archbishop of Canterbury, that was Legatus-natus would not yield: the King sent
messengers to Rome presently says Houeden, to wit, John ^^^^ford and Geffrey
Ridell, to desire of Pope Alexander, that he would make his extraordinary Legate
in England, Roger Archbishop of York, an old emulator and enemy of S. Thomas.
But the Pope perceiving his drifte, which was to oppress the said Archbishop
of Canterbury, denied the Kings petition in this behalf, though at the request
of the Kings said messengers, K. Henry the second made Legate of the Pope.
Consessit Dominus Papa, vt Rexipse Legatus esset totius Angliae, it a tamen,
quod ipse nullum grauamen facere posset Cantuariensi Archiepiscopo. The Pope
granted that K. Henry himself should be his Legate over all England; but yet
so, as he should not be able, to lay any aggreiuaunce upon the Archbishop of
Canterbury: that is to say, should not preiudicate his ordinary jurisdiction,
or have any authority over him. Which point the King perceiving, and that his
whole intent of oppressing the said Archbishop was heerby prevented, he would
not, through indignation (says our Author) accept of the said legation, but
sent back the Popes letters of that commission to him again. Whereby you see,
that he refused the said office, for that he thought the jurisdiction given
him, was less then he would have had, and not for that he did not acknowledge
the whole to be in the Pope, and nothing in himself, as from the right of his
Crown.

10. But to abridge this matter, concerning his contention with S. Thomas,
whereof afterward he sore repented himself, as you will hear; though he entered
into the same with great heat and resolution, to go through therein by his
power and authority with the Pope: yet when he saw the said Pope to mislike his
proceedings, and to stand constant against him, he amayned and and humbled
himself presently, and this in respect of his conscience and fear of God, as
himself caused to be written by his Bishops to the said Pope Alexander. For
there is extant in Houeden a large epistle of all the Bishops Suffragans of
Canterbury, that were subjects to Thomas the Archbishop, written unto Pope
Alexander in the Kings name, of his prompt obedience toward him, and the Sea
of Rome in all things, saying: K. Henry his humility to the (...) Apostolic.
Ad vestra quidem mandata non itatus intumuit, non elatus obedire contempsit,
verum gratias agens paterna correctioni, Ecclesia se statim submisit examini.
when the King received your commandments, he did not swell with anger, nor
proudly contemned to obey, but giving thanks for your Fatherly correction, did
presently submit himself to the examination of the Church. And again. Ipse
diuini reuerentia timoris, (...) Maiestatempreferens, sed vt filius obediens,
se iudicio sistere, legitimaeque parere sententiae, seque legibus alligatum
Prinscipem, praesto est in omnibus exhibere. He for reverence and respect of
the fear of God, did not prefer the majesty of his Kingly State, but as an
obedient son, is ready in all things, to stand to judgment, and to obey
lawful sentence, acknowledging himself, though he be a Prince, to be bound to
the laws of the Church.

11. This then, was his disposition of mind in this behalf, which he presently
showed in fact, by sending a most honorable Embassage to the Pope, to wit, the
Archbishop of York, and Bishops of Winchester, London, Chichester and
Excester, with the Earls, Arundell, the Gundauell de Sancto Valerico, and many
others both gentlemen and Clarks. And as Houeden affirms; Appellauit pro se
and regno suo, ad Praesentiam Summi Pontificis; K. Henry himself appealeth to
the Pope.
He appealed for himself and for his kingdom to the Pre^ence of the Pope;
desiring that two Legates might be sent into England to judge of the cause,
between him and the Archbishop. And soon after when the Archbishop, upon
pacification made was returned, and within a few months after wikedly slain
in his own Church of Canterbury; the same Pope Alexander taking upon him, as
lawful Judge, to examine and punish the fact upon the person of K. Henry
himself, sent two Cardinall-Legats for that purpose into Normandy, Houed. part
2. annal. in v^^. H. 2.
named Graetianus and Viuianus, as Houeden at large sets down the history.
Whereof K. Henry being advertised, that was present then in those parts beyond
the Seas, and fearing the event, Ad Praesentiam Summi Pontifi^^ appellauit, K.
Henry appealeth the second time.
appealed again (as once he had done before) to the presence of the Pope
himself from his said Legates. Whereby we see that he granted and acknowledged
the Popes authority over him in that matter. And the same writer adds in the
same place, that the said King fearing also (notwithstanding his appeal) the
severity of the Sea Apostolic in this case, passed over presently into
England, giving strait order and commaundment, that no man should be permitted
to enter with any Bull or Bre^^ of the Pope of what sort soever, except first
he gave caution and security, that he would thereby bring no hurt or
greiuaunce to the King or Kingdom.

12. But after this again (to omit many other things and iu^d^dicall Acts,
which passed in this affair, set down by the said Houeden, and other authors
of that time) two other Cardinall-^^gats, Theodinus and Albertus were finally
directed from the said Pope Alexander into Normandy, K Henry comes from
Ireland to appear before the Popes Legates.
to give the last sentence upon the matter. Unto whom K. Henry being then in
Ireland, and cited to appear came purposely to present himself in person,
which notably signifies his obedience. And there by his oath he purged
himself, swearing first, that his intention was never to procure the said
Archbishops death, and secondly promising diverse things by the same oath, to be
performed in satisfaction of his fault, in having given some occasion thereof by
angry words against the same Archbishop Thomas. All which is set down in the
said Author under this title, Pet. Bloson. Epist. 136.
recorded likewise by Peter Blesensis. Purgatio Henrici Regis pro morte Beati
Thomae. The purgation and absolutio^ of King Henry.
The purgation or satisfaction of K. Henry for the death of S. Thomas; and
thereupon ensues. Charta absolutionis Domini Regis. The charter of absolution
of our Lord the King by the said Legates in the Popes name.

13. And amongst other six or seven points, whereunto the King swear at this
time, one is set down in these words. He swear also, that he would neither
let, nor permit to be let, any Appellations to be made in his Kingdom, to
the Bishop of Rome in Ecclesiastical causes, with this condition, that if any
that do appeal be suspected to the King, they should give security, that they
would not seek, or procure any hurt to him or his Kingdom. And so was that
controversy ended, and the laws abolished, which the King would have
established against the liberty of the Church. Whereby we se clearly what
persuasion K. Henry had of the Popes supreme authority in Ecclesiastical
affairs, and his loyal obedience thereunto; which is so much the more to be
esteemed, if we consider the circumstances of the time wherein he exhibited the
same, which was such, as he might easily have declined himself (if he would)
from the force of Pope Alexander his authority, that pressed him so much, by
adhering to some one of his enemies the Antipopes, that by faction of a few
were chosen and set up against him, three or four one after another, naming
themselves, Victor the 4. Calixtus the 3. A circumstance notably commending the
true obedience of K. Henry to the Church of Rome.
and Pascalis the 3. and held out against him, for more then 17. years
together, by the power and peruersity of Fredericus Barba-rossa the first
Emperor of that name, who often also allured K. Henry to be partaker of his
Schism, but he refused, followinge heerin his Catholic ancestors William
the Conqueror, that stood constantly with the true Popes of his time,
Alexander the 2. and Gregory the 7. against those that by sedition of Henry the
4. Emperor, were set up against them, to wit Cadolus, calling himself Honorius
the 2. and Gilbertus, that was named Clement the 2. K. Henry also the first
obaied the true Popes of his time, Paschalis the 2. G^lasius the 2. Calixtus
the 2. Honorius the 2. and Innocentius the 2. against six schismatic
intruders, calling themselves, Clement the 3. Syluester the 3. Gregory the 8.
Celestinus the 2. Anacletus the 2. Victor the 4. all set up and maintained by
the German Emperors Henry the 4. and fifth, and by Lotharius the 2. after
them. But our Kings of England obayed always their true and lawful Pastors
of Gods Church, and were highly commended for it. And now K. Henry the 2.
followed their virtues, wisdom, religion, and magnanimity in that behalf;
and found (no doubt) his reward in the life to come for it. And so much of this.

14. But now to pass to another consideration about the same King, it seems
to me, that nothing shows more this King^ true affection, devotion, and
confidence toward the Pope and Sea of Rome, then his own recourse thereunto in
his greatest affliction before mentioned, of the conspiracy of his wife and
children against him. For then he wrote a very lamentable letter unto Pope
Alexander, Pet. ^^esen. ^pistola 136.
beginning thus. Sanctissimo Domino suo Alexandre, Dei gratia Catholicae
Ecclesia Summo Pontifici, Henricus Rex Angliae, etc. Salutem and deuotae
subiectionis obsequium. In which letter, among other things, he says thus:
Vbipleniorem voluptatem contulerat mihi Domm^^, ibi grauius me flagellat, and
quod sine lachrymis non dico, contra sanguine^^ ^eum and viscera mea, cogor
odium mortale concipere, etc. Where God has given me greatest pleasure and
contentment, there does he most whip me now, and that which without tears I
do not speak unto you, I am constrained to conceive mortal hatred against my
own blood, and my own bowels. My friends have left me, A letter of K Henry
the second to the Pope written in great affliction.
and those of mine own house do seek my life, and this secret coniuration (
of my wife and children) has so intoxicated the minds of all my most familiar
friends, as they prefer their traitorous obedience to my son, and would
rather beg with him, then reign with me, and enjoy most ample dignities, etc.
Abse^^ corpore, presens tamen animo, me vestris aduolno genibus: I being absent
in body, but present in mind with you, do cast my self at your knees: Vestrae
iurisdictionis est Regnum Angliae, etc. Experiatur Anglia, quid possit Romanus
Pontifex. The Kingdom of England is under your jurisdiction. Let England
learn by experience, what the Bishop of Rome can do. Promitto me dispositioni
vestra in omnibus pariturum. I do promise to obey your disposition in all
hings.

15. Thus he wrote at that time with tears, as you have heard, wherewith Pope
Alexander being greatly moved, sent commandment to Richard Archbishop of
Canterbury, to write earnestly unto K. Henry the son, to recall him from his
rebellion under pain of excommunication, as before we have showed. And this
confident recourse of K. Henry to the Pope in so great an affair, declares
well the opinion he had of his authority. And conform unto this, were all the
rest of his actions and doings, concerning Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, when
he was out of passion and perturbation, acknowledging none at all in himself,
but only from the Sea Apostolic. And heervpon he fouuded the security of all
his hopes, by his first marriage with the Queen Eleanor, as has been said,
whose divorce from King Jews was upon the Popes sentence, declaringe the same
to be inualide and no marriage at all, by reason that they were married within
degrees of consanguinity prohibited by the Church.

16. And soon after this again, about the 6. year of his reign the same
King (as Stow relates) procured dispensation of the said Pope by his
Legat-Cardinalls, Stow a^. 1160.
Henricus Pisanus, and Gulielmus Papionensis, to make a marriage between Henry
his eldest son of seven years old, and Margaret the French Kings daughter,
K. Henry founded al his state upon the Popes authority.
that was yet but of three years old, which he would not have done by all
likelihood, with so manifest peril of his whole succession thereby, if he had
either doubted of the Popes authority therein, or presumed of his own.

17. And not many years after this again, the said King being very desirous to
remove from the Church of VValtam in Essex certain secular Chanons, that lived
not with edification, and to place in their room regular Chanons, presumed not
to do it of himself, or his own authority (which yet might seem a small
matter) but by the authority of the Pope. Houed. in vi^. Hon. 2.
Rex (says Houeden) ex authoritate Domini Papae instituit in Ecclesia de
Waltham Canonicos regulares. The King did appoint regular Chanons in the
Church of Waltham, by the authority of the Pope. And the same does testify
Walsingham upon the year 1177. VValsing. in Ypod^g^^. noustr. an. 1177.
that it was done in the vigil of Penticost: Authoritate Summi Pontificis sub
praesentia Regis. By the authority of the Bishop of Rome, the King being
present at the doing.

18. And the same Walsingham two years after that again, does record another
judicial Act of the said Pope Alexander in England, which is, that he exempted
from the obedience of the Archbishop of Canterbury, Roger, that was Prior of
the monastery of S. Augustine in the same City, Di^erse things done by
authority of the Pope in England.
which had been subject to him (says he) for five hundred years before. And it
is probable, that neither the King, nor Archbishop did like thereof, but could
not let the same.

19. And finally to go no further in this matter, of this Kings obedience and
devotion toward the Church, when he was out of choler and passion, and free
from such other perturbations, as did draw him strongly oftentimes to the doing
of certain things, which after he repented; I shall end with one short
narration only of the foresaid Walsingham, or a strange extremity and
adversity of fortune, from which God delivered him at one time, by means of his
devout mind toward the blessed Martyr S. Thomas of Canterbury, upon the year
1174. which was three years after his said martyrdom, at what time the Kings
state was this, as partly before you have heard. Lewys King of France
co^ioyning himself with Henry the third King of England, The straites whereunto
King Henry was driven.
and the rest of his brethren against their Father, pressed him sore with great
armies in Normandy, and other parts of his Dominions in France. And at the
very same time, his wife Queen Eleanor in England conspiring with her said
sons, incited by her example many other Princes and noblemen to do the like,
who raised diverse rebellions. And besides all the rest, William King of
Scotland came in with a great Army on the North-side, and Philip Earl of
Flaunders was entered with another on the South Side. At which time K. Henry
seeing himself in these straites, and not well knowing what to do, yet
resolved at the length to pass from Normandy into England, and first to
succor the principal part. VVasing in Ypodig. (...) an. 11^4.
But being on the Sea, there arose such a tempest, as seeing himself in great
danger, Erectis in caelum luminibus (says Walsingham) lifting up his eyes to
heaven he desired God, K. Henry strangely delivered.
that saw his intention, to be merciful unto him, as his meaning and purpose
was to seek the peace both of the Clergy and people of England, etc. And God
(says our Author) admitted presently the prayer of this our humbled King, and
brought him safe to Hampton-port with all his people; who from that day
forward, giving himself to pennaunce, used (says he) a very thin diet, to
wit, bread and water only, and casting of all temporal cares, nor entering into
any one City, as he went by the way, never ceased until he came to
Canterbury; where the glorious body of Thomas the martyr lay, The earnest and ^
sincere penaunce^ of King Henry.
where with abundance of tears and sighs, going bare-foote, and casting
himself prostrate on the ground, he did demand pardon and mercy; humbly
beseeching first, that the Bishops there present would absolve him, and then
that every religious man would give him three, or five strokes of a discipline
(or whip) on his bare flesh; and then putting one his apparel again, which in
all their presence he had put of, he rose from the ground, and then gave
precious gifts to the said Martyr and his sepulcher; and among other forty
pounds by the year of perpetual rent for maintenance of lights at the said
Sepulcher, and so giving himself to waching, fasting, and prayer for three
days together, it is not to be doubted (says he) but that the said martyr
being pleased with his repentance and devotion, God also (by his intercession)
took away the Kings sin. So Walsingham.

20. And presently in token heerof he says, that the very same day, wherein
the King was most devout in humbling himself and kissing the said martyrs Tomb
in Canterbury, God delivered into his hands William King of Scotland, who was
taken prisoner by his Captains: and that upon the same day also, his
rebellious son K. Henry the 3. having taken shipping to come with a great
Nauye into England against him, was driven back by tempest; the King himself
going to London was received with extraordinary joy of al his people, The
vvonderfull successes of K. Hen. upon his penance.
by whose help he soon pacified and conquered all his rebels, and thence
going presently over into Normandy with a great army, and leading prisoner
with him, the foresaid K. of Scotland, with diverse other enemies fallen into
his hands, he so terrified the King of France, and other his confederates that
beseiged the City of Roane, as they retired presently; and his sons Henry,
Richard, and Geffrey so humbled themselves unto him, as they were reconciled,
and received to grace again; all coming home together in one shipp (says
Walsingham) whom a little before it seemed, that the wide world could not
contain.

21. And this was the effect of K. Henry's devotion at that time, which Petrus
Blesen^is also that was most inward with him, does ^estifie and recou^t at
large in an epistle to his friend the Archbish. of Palermo in Sicilie, wherein
he affirms not only that K. Henry assured himself, that he had all these
good successes by intercession of the said holy martyr S. Thomas, but moreover,
that he took him for his special Patron in all his adversities. Illud quoq^^
noueritis (says he) Dominum Regem gloriosum martyrem in omnibus angustijs suis
Patronum habere praecipuum. This also you must know, that my Lord the King does
hold the glorious martyr S. Thomas for his chief Patron in all his straites
and necessities: and the same you may read in Nubergensis, See Nuberg. l. 2.
hist. ^. 25. and 33. and ^
that lived at the same time, though not so intrinsecall with the King as the
other. And this passed at that time, though afterward he committing his said Q
Eleanor to prison, for diverse years before his death, and continuing his loose
life with other women (as has been said) God for punishment, permitted, that
albeit two of his sons Henry and Geffrey died before him; yet the other two
remaining, Richard and John, and falling from him again, did so afflict and
press him, as they brought him to that desolate end, which before has been
mentioned. Though some other do ascribe the cause heerof, not so much to his
loose life, as to his irreuerent dealing sometimes in Church Matters. For so
two Bishops, that were his Ambassadors wrote unto him in confidence, Blesensi^
epist. 153.
as Petrus Blesensis does testify, saying: Non est quod magis hosts vestros
incitat ad conflictum, quam quod arbitrantur Vos Ecclesia Dei minus extitisse
deuotum. There is nothing, that does more stir up, or animate your enemies to
fight against you, then for that they persuade themselves, that you have
sometimes showed your self less devout toward the Church of God. And thus
much of K. Henry.

OF THE REIGN OF K. RICHARD THE FIRST, The sixth King after the Conquest.. II.
This King reigned from the year 11^9. until 1199. that is 10. years.
22 For that we have been somewhat large in the life of K. Henry the Father, we
mean to be breefer (if it may be) in his children, who were only two that
seruiued him, and reigned after him, to wit Richard, and John; for that the two
other Henry, that was crowned and named by him K. Henry, and Geffrey Duke of
Brittany, after their many tumultuations, conspiracies and disobediences
against their said Father, died in his life time; and of these two that lived,
he had little comfort, as before you have heard.

25. And yet proved this Richard no very evil King afterward, for the space of
ten years that he reigned, though unfortunate, both in war and peace; which
men ascribe (in great part) to the demerit of his own disobedience against
his said Father. For punishment whereof both his own brother John conspired
often against him, and K. Philip of France her colleage and confederate, brake
his faith with him, Misfortunes of K. Richard.
and the Duke of Austria persidiously took and held him prisoner in his
return from Jerusalem, and Henry the Emperor laid him in fetters, and many
other miseries followed, and fell upon him, until at length he was
disasterously slain by a poisoned arrow, shot out of a Castle against him, as
our histories do testify.

24. But as for his religion, it was all ways truly Catholic, and in no
point different from that of all Christendom in his days. And particularly in
that which appertains to our controversy, he was most obedient and devout to
the spiritual authority of the Sea Apostolic in all his actions: King Richard
devout and obedient to the Church of Rome.
which I may prove by the authority of a whole Synod of the Archbishop of
Roane, and all his Bishops writing to Pope Celestinus the third, in
recomendatio^ of his cause when he was Captive, saying: See Blesen. epist. 64.
ad Celest. PP.
Christianissimus Princeps Rex Angliae, illustrissimus Dominus noster, and
deuotissimus Ecclesia Romanae filius, quem specialiter in suam protectionem
susceperat in sua peregrinatione, etc. The most Christian Prince Richard King
of England, and our most honorable Lord, and most devout son of the Roman
Church, whom the said Church had specially taken into her protection in his
journey to Jerusalem, is now unjustly detained, etc.

25. But if this testimony were not, yet all his other life and actions, as
has been said, do sufficiently testify the same. For first, to go in order,
and name some few of many, it is registered by Houeden that lived at that time,
and was present perhaps at his coronation, how religiously and humbly he
received the same, Reg. Ho^ed. part. 2. Annal. in vit. Rich. 2.
at the hands of the Archbishop and Clergy, not calling himself King; but Duke
only, until he was crowned. Cum autem Dux (says he) ad altar veniret, etc.
When the Duke came before the Altar, in presence of the Archbishops, Bishops,
Clergy, and people, he first fell down on his knees before the said Altar,
King Richards behavior and oath at his coronation.
where we^^ laid open the holy ghospells, and the relics of many Saints,
according to the custom, and there he swear that all the days of his life, he
would maintain peace, honor, and reverence to the holy Church, and all those
that were ordained by the same. He swear also to maintain good justice and
equity to the people, to take away evil laws and customs, and to make good,
etc. So Houeden.

26. And not many months after this, being called upon, and entreated by Pope
Clement the 3. to make have in his preparations, for succouring of Jerusalem,
which was now taken and held by Saladinus the great Prince of the Saracens; the
said Pope sent soon after a special Legate into England, named Cardinal John
Anagnanus, King Richard goes to Jerusalem by the Popes procurement.
as well to hasten that journey, and the journey of K. Philip of France that
was to go in his compaine, as also to end certain controversies between
Baldwin Archbishop of Canterbury, that was to go with the King in his vioage,
and Geffrey the Kings base brother nominated Archbishop of York, and commended
by the King (but not yet admitted hitherto by the Sea Apostolic) and other
Bishops and principal persons. And when they were all met at Canterbury
together, the King taking order and disposing many things, for the quiet and
safty of his Kingdoms in his absence, which are set down at large by the said
Houeden, Nubergensis, Matthew Paris, and other authors; he thence began his
journey in the month of December, and first year of his reign.

27. But before this, as has been said, he did dispose of many things: as
namely the setting at liberty of his mother Q. Eleanor, that had been long in
prison in his Fathers days, restoring her to all former honors, and far
greater then ever she had before, assigning to her the dowries, both of Q.
Maude wife of K. Henry the first, The Kingdom commended to the Popes protection.
and of Alyce wife of K. Stephen, and of the other Maude the Empress mother of
K. Henry the second. And to his brother John Earl of Morton, besides all other
States and Titles he had before, he gave four Earl-domes more, to gain him
withal and hold him content, to wit, of Cornwall, Deuonshyre, Dorcet and
Somerset: but yet left to none of them the government of his Realm, but to two
Bishops to wit, Hugh Bishop of Durham, See Houed. and math. Paris anno. 1190.
for the North-partes, and to William Bishop of Ely, for the whole body of the
Realm, making him his Chancellor and supreme Judge, and praying Pope Clement
for his more authority, to make him also his Legate a latere, and to take into
his protection the whole Realm, and so he did: whereby appears what opinion
K. Richard had of the Sea Apostolikes authority in his days.

28. But the same appears yet more, by the many appellations that were made
in the Kings own presence, at the forsaid meeting at Canterbury unto the Pope
himself. For first Baldwin Archbishop of Canterbury (who, as I say, was to go
with K. Richard in his said journey of Jerusalem) appealed against the foresaid
Geffrey, the Kings brother, nominated by the King to the Archbishopric of
York: Appellauit ad Dominum Papam (says Houeden) coram Rege, and vniuersis
Episcopis, and Clero. He appealed to the Pope, in presence of the King, Houed.
i^ vit. Rich. 1. fol. 375.
and all the Bishops and Clergy. One Hammon also Chaunter of the same Church of
York, receiving letters from K. Richard, to install one Buchard in the dignity
of Treasurer of the said Church, according as he was elected: Noluit mandatis
Regis obedire (says Houeden) sed super hoc ad Sedem Apostolicam appellauit. He
would not obey the Kings commandment in this point, but appealed in the
controversy to the Sea Apostolic: Diverse Appellations from the King to the
Pope.
which King Richard did no ways let or deny. And again in the same place, the
King having given the Deanery of York to one Henry, brother to the Lord
Marshall of England, commended the man for his installing, to the Archbishop of
York; but he refusing said, that he could not do it: Donec electio eius
confirmata esset a Summo Pontifice: until his election were confirmed by the
Bishop of Rome. Houed. Ibid. fol. 376.
Which answer the King took in good part, and thereby well declared, what his
opinion was of his own Ecclesiastical authority, as also of the Popes.

29. Moreover says the same Author: Richardus Rex Angliae, missis nuncijs suis
ad Clementem Papam, obtinuit ab eo literas Patentes, etc. This Richard King of
England sending his messengers to Pope Clement, obtained letters Patents of
him, that whosoever he should send unto any towns, lands or lordships of his,
to keep, and defend the same in his absence, should be free from all oath, vow,
or other obligation of going the voyage to Jerusalem: Vnde, ipse sibi
inastimabilem acquisiuit pecuniam. Whereby he procured to himself an inestimable
sum of money.

30. And this before the Kings departure from England; but being entered into
the journey, and arrived in the Kingdom of Sicilie, he there married his new
wife Berengaria, daughter to the King of Navarre, conducted thither by sea, by
Q. Eleanor his mother; who after four days stay only in the port of Messina,
King Richard sent his mother to Rome to entreat the Pope.
was (...) by her son, to return to England by land, taking Rome in he^ way,
to the end she might in his name, entreat the Pope to admit for Archbishop of
York his foresaid brother Geffrey, whom he had presented and nominated. Per
illam mandauit Rex Angliae Summ^ Pontisici (says Houeden) and humiliter
postulauit, vt ipse electionem prodicti Gaufredi confirmaret. King Richard of
England did send by his said mother, to the Pope, and humbly besought him, that
he would confirm the election of the foresaid Geffrey to be Archbishop of
York. Which labor of going to Rome, it is like that he would never have put
his mother unto, Houed. part 2. An. page 392.
nor yet have used so much humility of intreatinge the Pope, if he had thought
his own Ecclesiastical authority to have been sufficient, as well for
inuesting him, as for his nomination and presentation.

31. And moreover, when the said King had ended a certain controversy in the
same port and City of Messina, with Tancredra King of that Island; he gave
account of all by a large letter, unto the said Pope Clement, as to his dearest
Father. Beatissimo Patri Clements, Dei gratia Sanctae sedis Apostolica Summo
Pontifici: Richardus eadem gratia Rex Angliae, sincerae in Domino deuotionis
affectum. And then presently he begins his epistle thus. Iustiorem exitum
facta Principum sortiuntur, cum a Sede Apostolica robur and fauorem accipiunt,
and Sancta Romanae Ecclesiae colloquio diriguntur, etc. The acts of Princes do
come to best end, Houeden. Ibid. fol. 326.
when they receive strength and favor from the Sea Apostolic, and are
directed by the conference or communication of the Church of Rome. King
Richardes letter to P. Clement the 3.
And therefore we have thought it convenient to let your Holiness understand,
what agreements have been made these days publicly, between the excellent
Lord Tancred King of Sicilie, and us. And then after recital of all
particularityes, he ends thus: testibus nobisipsis, vndecimo die Nouembris
apud Messanam. We our selves being witness of this agreement, the eleventh day
of November at Messina.

32. But when K. Richard soon after, departing thence was arrived in Asia, and
had begun most prosperously his wars against the Infidels, the Devil envying
his good success, stirred up first sedition in England, by means of John the
Kings brother, who perceiving diverse to envy the Greatness of the Bishop of Ely,
left governor by the King, and some Bishops also to be in faction against him,
began to make great stirs. And on the otherside, the same enemy of mankind
castinge ielousies between K. Philip of France, and the said King Richard, did
separate them at last; whereupon ensued the return of the said King Philip,
with intention to invade King Richards Dominions, and to set up his brother
John in his place, as the sequel declares.

33. But Pope Celestinus the 3. that had succeeded in the place of Pope Clement
lately deceased, Pope Celestines letter to the Realm of England.
understanding of the former conspiracy, and faction against the Bishop of Ely
in England, wrote a vehement letter against the same, to all the Archbishops,
Bishops, and Clergy of England, saying among the rest. Cum dilectus in Christo
filius noster Richardus, etc. whereas our deerly-beloued son in Christ
Richard, noble King of England, when he resolved by taking upon him the sign
of the Holy cross of Christ, to revenge the injury of his redeemer in the
Holy land, left the tutele and care of his Kingdom, under the protection of
the Sea Apostolic, we that have succeeded in that Sea, have so much the more
obligation to co^serue the State of the said Kingdom, the rights and honors
of the same; by how much greater confidence he placed in our protection: and
thereupon has exposed his person, riches, and people, to greater perils for
exaltation of holy Christian religion, etc. Wherefore understanding of certain
troubles, lately moved by John Earl of Morton, and certain others combined
with him, against your honorable Father William Bishop of Ely, Legate of the
Sea Apostolic, and Governor of your Realm. Vniuersitati vestrae per
Apostolica scripta mandamus, and in virtute obedientiae praecipimus, etc. We
do by these Apostolic writings, give commandment to your whole community
and Realm, and charge the same in the virtue of obedience, that all men
surcease from like practice of conspiration, turmoyle, or faction, etc. given
at our palace of Lateran, the 4. day before the Nones of December, in the
first year of our Popedom. And by this you may see what authority he took
himself to have over all England, and Bishops and Princes thereof at that day.

34. The which is yet more declared, by that which soon after ensued; for that
the foresaid Earl John, and other Lords and Bishops combininge themselves with
him, having proceeded yet further in that quarrel, and by common consent of
all the Realm (as it seemed) deprived the said Bishop of Ely of his office of
Governor, imprisoned him, and driven him out of England, and elected in his
room, Walter Archbishop of Roane, for governor of the Realm, they were no
less careful to send presently to excuse, and justify the matter unto Pope
Celestinus, then they (...) to the King himself for his satisfaction. The
Bishop of Ely favored and defended by the Pope and the King.
All which appears by a large letter written from Rome to the said Archbishop
by his agents, that were there, who aduertized him, how evil the matter was
taken by the said Pope Celestinus. Dominus Papa (say they) in restri
depressione negotij, plurima indignanter, and cum amaritud^ne proponebat, etc.
The Pope did propose very many things with indignation, and amaritude of mind
to the depression of your affair; iterating many times, that he knew the great
affection and confidence of the King of England toward his Chauncelour and
Governor the Bishop of Ely, and that he had seen many letters of the said King
in his commendation, but none against him; and that at his earnest instance,
the Sea Apostolic had made him also Legate a latere. And that finally, he
absolved him from the sentence of excommunication, which the said Archbishop of
Ro^^ had laid upon him; and for the rest, he would expect the Kings
inclination, who being soon after taken prisoner in Germany, sent presently
for the said Chancellor to come unto him; and made great use of him, for he
was not only his interpreter between the Emperor and him, and other Princes,
but he sent him also into England, not as Chancellor or Governor, but as
Bishop of Ely, to lay the plot for his ransom.

35. And I might recount many other examples of the same jurisdiction,
exercised in England by the same Pope without contradiction of any man, in the
absence of the said King, though Earl John the Kings brother was present, and
very potent among them, and no great friend to the Pope, as by the former
letter may be imagined; and who finally did drive out of England the said
Bishop of Ely, but yet never objected, or put doubt in the Popes authority,
about any Ecclesiastical matter that there fell out. As for example upon the
year 1191. which was the very next after the Kings departure, Nubergens. reiu^
Angl. l. 4. cap. 17.
Nubergensis living at that time, recounteth, how Geffrey the Kings base
brother, having been long beyond the seas, suing at Rome to be admitted to the
Archbishopricke of York, and to have his Pall, which Pope Cleme^^ would not
grant for diverse objections, and appealles made against him, as well by
Baldwyn Archbishop of Canterbury (as you have heard) as also by others, and
namely the Bishop of Ely that was Governor of the land, Geffrey the kings
brother by authority of the P. made Archbishop of York.
being much against him: yet now upon King Richards commendation, and his own
many (...) promises, Pope Celestinus so much favored him (says Nubergensis)
as he gave him his pall before he was consecrated, and sent him to be
consecrated by the Archbishop of Towers in France, commanding him, vt ei, non
obstante vel appellatione, vel occasion qualibet, manus imponeret, that he
should, by imposition of hands, consecrate him, notwithstanding any
appellation, or other occasion whatsoever to the contrary. And so he did: and
he came into England, and took possession of the said Archbishopricke, and
enjoyed the same by this authority of consecration and inuestiture from Pope
Celestinus, notwithstanding all the contradiction and opposition of his potent
adversaries, as in the same Author at large is set down.

36. And when not long after this again, the said Archbishop Geffrey
requiring Canonical profession of obedience to be made to him, and his Sea,
according to custom, at the hands of Hugh Bishop of Durham, who had purchased
before of King Richard, an Earl-dome to be annexed to his said Bishopric;
Nubergens. Ibidem. cap. 25.
and that the said Hugh refusing to do the same, upon pretense of many causes,
appealed therein to the Sea of Rome; the Archbishop not admitting the same
appeal, pronounced notwithstanding sentence of excommunication against him:
Celestinus the Pope not only revoked the said sentence, but exempted moreover
the said Bishop and Bishopric, from the obedience of the said Archbishop and
Archbishopricke of York, as the same author relates. So as in this he showed
his authority in England.

37. But now let us pass to K. Richard himself, who being valiantly occupied
in the wars against the Infidels and enemies of God in Asia, had many crosses
fell upon him: First, the falling out and departure of K. Philip of France from
that war, as you have heard; who returning into France, began to treat
presently with Earl John, to trouble the peace of his brothers territoryes;
and the principal point that combined these two together against King
Richard, King Richards fortunes let by his brothers ambition, and envy of
the K of France.
besides the envy of the one, and ambition of the other, was, that both of them
were afraid least Prince Arthure Earl of Brittany, son to Geffrey, John's
elder brother, should succeed in the Kingdom of England, if any thing should
happen to King Richard: (and so the Bishop of Ely had given out, that King
Richard himself had written from Sicily) which point was much feared, as
prejudicial to them both. Whereupon they made a fast league, and began on both
sides of the Sea to trouble the State; which when K. Richard understood, and
that Pope Celestin^^ (...) his letters, and other diligence could not stay
them, and that (...) grew into sedition at home by partes-takinge, he was
forced sorely to his grief, and to the public lamentation of all
Christendom to leave that war, and to abandon the victory, that was even
now almost in his hand, if he had stayed, as the event also showed; for that
soon after dyed the Saladine, by whose death, there was no doubt, but that
King Richard had recovered Jerusalem.

38. But he returning for defense of his own country, fell into great misery.
For being taken, as has been said, by Duke Leopold of Austria, upon pretense of
certain injuries received from him and his people in the wars of Asia, he
was detained by him, King Richards captivity in Austria.
and by the Emperor Henry the 6. more then fifteen months prisoner, and
forced to pay in the end, above two hundred thousand marks for his ransom,
partly in present money, and partly in pawnes and pledges left for the same;
And so after four years absence, the said King returned.

39. But in this time of his captivity, his chiefest comfort and refuge was in
the assistance of the said Pope Celestinus, as may well appear by the sundry
letters of many, written unto the said Pope in his behalf; but especially and
above others, of the afflicted Lady and Queen his mother Eleanor, who wrote
three large letters unto him, by the pen of Petrus Blesensis Archdeacon then of
London, See Pet. Blesen epest. 144. ad Celest. PP.
that had been Secretary to her husband K. Henry the second: and she begins
one, saying thus: Sane non multum ab insania differt dolor: Sorrow truly does
not much differ from madness: And then. Gentes diuulsae, populi lacerati,
prouinciae desolatae in spiritu contrito and humiliato supplicant tibi, quem
constituit Deus super Gentes and Regna in omni plenitudine Potestatis. Q
Eleanores complaints unto Pope Celestinus.
These nations here divided in their own bowels, ( by absence of their Prince)
this people torn and broken in themselves, these desolate provinces do in a
contrite and humbled spirit make supplication to you, whom God has placed over
Nations and Kingdoms in all fulness of power. And then again. Moueat te
(Sum Pontifex) etsi non huius peccatricis infalicissimae dolor, saltem clamor
pauperum, compeditorum gemitu^, interfectorum sanguis, Ecclesiarum spoliatio,
and generalis denique pressura sanctorum. Be you moved (o high Priest) if not
with the sorrow of me, a most unfortunate sinner, yet with the cry of poor
men, with the groans of them that are in fetters, with the blood of them that
are here slain, with the spoiling of Churches thereof ensuing, and with the
general oppression of all holy people. And yet further: Duo filij mihi
supererant ad solatium, qui body (mihi misera and damnatae) supersunt ad
supplicium. Rex Richardus tenetur in vinculis, Johannes frater ipsius regnum
Captiui depopulatur ferro and vastat incendijs. Two only children of many
remained unto me for my comfort, which now are unto me (most miserable and
damned woman) become a torment. King Richard is held captive in chains, and
John his brother does spoil by sword and fire, the said captives Kingdoms,
and dominions.

40. This and much more to the same lamentable effect, wrote this afflicted
mother unto Pope Celestinus in those days, requesting him by Ecclesiastical
censures, to compel both the Emperor and Duke of Austria, to set her son
the King at liberty. And to this effect has she many vehement speeches and
exhortations unto him; as for example. ^les. epist. 145.
Nonne Petro Apostolo (says she) and in eo vobis, a Deo, omne regnum, omnisque
potestas regenda committitur? Benedictus autem Dominus, qui talem potestatem
dedit hominibus: non Rex, non Imperator, aut Dux a iugo Vestrae Iurisdictionis
eximitur. Vbi est ergo Zelus Phinees? vbi est authoritas Petri, etc. were not
all Kingdoms, Q. Eleanora her petition to Pope Celestinus.
and was not all power and government committed by God unto Peter the Apostle,
and in him to you? Blessed be our Lord, that gave such authority unto men: No
King, no Emperor, no Duke is exempted from the yoke of your Jurisdiction. And
where is then the Zeal of Phinees? where is the authority of Peter, etc.

41. And again in another epistle. Illud restat, vt exeratis in malesicos
(Pater) gladium Petri, quem ad hoc constituit Deus super gentes and regna.
Christi crux antecellit Caesaris Aquilas, gladius Petri gladio Constantini,
Ibid. epist. 146.
and Apostolica Seeds praeiudicat Imperatoria potestati. Vestra Potestas a Deo
est, an ab hominibus? Nonne Deus Deorum locutus est vobis in Petro Apostolo di
cens, Matt. 16.
Quodcunque ligaueris super terram, erit ligatum and in caelis; and quodcunque
solueris super terram, erit solutum and in caelis? Quare ergo tanto temporetam
negligenter, immo tam crudeliter filium meum soluere defertis, aut potius non
audetis? Sed dicetis hanc potestatem vobis in animabus, non in corporibus
fuisse commissam. Esto: Certe sufficit nobis, si eorum ligaueritis animas, qui
filium meum ligatum in carcere tenent. Filium meum soluere robis in expedito
est; dummodo humanum timorem Dei timor euacuet. This only remains (o Father)
that you draw forth the sword of Peter against malefactors, which sword God
has appointed to be over nations and Kingdoms. The Cross of Christ does
excel the Eagles that are in Cesars banners, the spiritual sword of ^^ter is
of more power then was the temporal sword of Constantine the Emperor, and the
Sea Apostolic is more potent then any Imperial power or authority. And I
would ask whether your power be of God, or from men? Did not the God of Gods
speak^ to you in Peter the Apostle, saying: Whatsoever you shall bynd upon
earth, shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever you shall loose upon earth
shall be loosed in heaven? And why then do you so negligently, yea cruelly,
delay for so long time to loose my son? or rather why dare you not to do
it? Perhaps you will say, that this power given you by God (of binding and
loosing) is for souls, and not for bodies. Let it be so. Truly it is
sufficient for us, if you would bind the souls of those, that hold my sons
body bound in prison. And finally I know, that it lies in your power to loose
my son, if the fear of God may euacuate in you the fear of man.

42. Thus wrote this afflicted Queen unto Celestinus the Pope; and the same
wrote diverse other great personages at the same time, Epist. 6^. ad Celest. ^P.
as may be seen in the said Petrus Blesensis: and among others, the foresaid
Gualterus Archbishop of Roane and Governor of England, The speech of the
Archbishop of Reane in K. Richards behalf concerning S. Peter's power.
a man of great authority, learning and wisdom, who after many reasons
concludes his Epistle thus. Exerat ergo beati Petri gladium manus vestra
(Clementissime Pater) quid and quantum tanto filis debeatis, exhibeatis in
opere, vt experientia mediante, addiscant minores and inferiores filij, quantum
a ^obis auxilium in suis necessitatibus debeant expectare. Let your hand then
(most Clement Father) draw forth the sword of Peter, and do you show by
works, how much you owe unto so great a child, (as is K. Richard) so as by
experienc^, your lesser and lower children may learn, how much help they may
expect from you in their necessityes. So he.

43. And by this may appear, what opinion men had in those days of the Popes
authority: and let the Reader here mark, as also M. Attorney, how usual a
phrase it was at that time, to name two distinct swords, the one of
Constantine, the other of Peter; the one temporal over bodies, the other
spiritual over souls; and th^^ the later was the greater and higher. Which
was the speech also and phrase of King Edgar before the Conquest, and of the
Conqueror himself in his laws (if you remember) and is now here used again,
and so was ever after, until King Henry the 8. as by this our deduction will
appear. Sap. ^^p. 6. (...) 10.
And only this phrase of speech, and common belief of all our Kings and
Country from time to time, that there were two distinct swords or powers, one
temporal in the Prince, and the other spiritual in the Pope, A manifest
inference upon the premises against M Attorney.
is sufficient to overthrow M. Attorneys whole Book, though nothing else were
said to it besides, the purporte thereof being (as has been seen) to prove, that
either no such distinction of swords and powers is to be admitted, or that
both are equally in the temporal Prince, and so used and exercised by our
ancient Kings of England.

44. But now you see the vanity (in truth) and absurdity of that Paradox
refuted by all this here set down, concerning K. Richard: and many examples
more might be alleged during his reign, after his return again to England,
who meaning to euacuate the alienation of many things sold, lent, or empawned
before, for his going to Jerusalem, caused himself to be crowned again in
Winchester; reducing all things to a new order, and among others he set
down, Capitula placitorum Corona Regis. The heads or chief branches of
pleas, Hou^d in vt. R^^^. 1. fol. 445.
that belong to the Kings Crown, or Courts: wherein nothing at all is
contained concerning Ecclesiastical affairs, but only De aduocationibus
Ecclesiarum, quae sunt de donatione Regis: Of the aduowsons of such Churches,
as are of the Kings gift; that is to say, whereof he had Ius Patronatus. How
small and little spiritual jurisdiction King Richard pretended.
Which is a small spiritual jurisdiction, if we consider it well, and may be
in any secular man whatsoever, that buyldeth or foundeth a Church. And
Matthaeus Parisiensis speaking of the Church of Normandy under K. Richard,
commends him highly for delivering the said Church de longo seruitutis iugo,
from a long yoke of servitude, which secular men by little and little had
brought in upon her under other Kings and Dukes, by often drawing Clergymen
to secular Judges and tribunals, Paris. i^ vit. Rich. 8.
inuadinge their goods, restraining their liberties, breaking their
privileges, and the like. All which the said Author says; Ipso glorioso Rege
Richardo annuente, and omnia disponente, emendata sunt: Were amended by the
consent of glorious King Richard, who disposed all things himself, to the
restitution of the ancient liberties, and freedom of the said Church of
Normandy.

45. It were over long to run over many other examples, which might be
alleged to this effect for proof of King Richards true Catholic devotion
toward the Church; as also of his acknowledgement and obedience to the
authority of the Sea of Rome, in all Ecclesiastical affairs, during his life
and reign. There are 4. or 5. epistles exstant in Houeden, written to diverse
parties by Celestinus the Pope, which he wrote one soon after another,
concerning the forenamed Geffrey Archbishop of York, citing him to Rome to
answer to certain accusations, laid against him by his Chanons and others,
accusing him among other things. Quod ^enationibus and aucupio totius animi
studium applicabat; Hunting and hauking reproved by the Pope in our English
Bishops.
That he applied his whole mind hunting and hauking. And again; De inhonesta
vita, and invtili conuersatione: They accused him of dishonest life, and
unprofitable conversation. For which though he were the Kings brother; yet not
making his appearance in Rome, nor lending his lawful defense or purgation
thither, he was suspended by the said Popes Bull: and the King was so far of,
from taking it evil, ^^u^d. in vita Ru^ar. 1. fol. 428.
or defending him, as he caused the lands and possessions of his Bishopric to
be seized on. Praecepit illum dessesire (says Houeden) de Episcopatu suo, and
de Vice-comitatu Eboraci. He commanded him to be dispossessed of his
Archbishopricke, and of the Vicount-ship of York.

46. But afterward Celestinus being dead, and Innocentius the third succeeding
him in the Popedom, and the said Geffrey amending his manners, as may be
presumed; Misit literas suas deprecatorias, ad Richardum Regem, etc. The said
Pope Innocentius sent his letters to K. Richard of England, requesting and
exhorting him, by Fatherly admonition, Ibid. fol. 176.
that he would receive into his love and brotherly familiarity again, the said
Archbishop at his request, and suffer him in peace to return to his
Bishopric, for that otherwise he should be forced, to use Ecclesiastical
Censures against the said King and his Kingdom. Unto which petition joined
with some commination, as you see, the King obeyed, sending diuer^ Bishops unto
the said Archbishop (whose names Houeden sets down.) In spiritu humilitatis
postulantes ex part Regis, vt ipse ratas haberet donationes, quas fecerat Rex
in Eboracensi Ecclesia; and Dominus Rex redderet ei Archiepiscopatum suum cum
omni integritate etc. These Bishops were to demand in the spirit of humulity
on the Kings behalf, Geffrey restored to his Bishopric by Pope Innocentius.
that the said Archbishop would ratify, and make good all the donations or
gifts, which the King had bestowed in the Church of York (during the time he
had withheld his Archbishopricke) and that there upon the King would restore
unto him his Archbishopricke with all integrity. But the Archbishop demanded
first of these Bishops sent unto him, whether they would under their hands and
writings assure him, that he might do it in conscience, but they refusing, he
refused also to grant the Kings request, and thereupon appealed again to
Rome, and went thither in person; and the King, on his side, sent Proctors and
Aduocats thither to plead for him, as Houeden at large declares. And moreover
to bridle him the more, he besought the Pope to make Hubert then Archbishop of
Canterbury Legate of the Sea Apostolic over all England.

47. And again, both this Author and Nubergensis do declare, how the foresaid
Walter Archbishop of Roane that had been so great a friend of K. Richard ever
since the beginning of his reign, and had gone with him to Sicily, and
returned again to England, for pacifying of matters between the Bishop of Ely,
that was Governor, the Earl John; and moreover had also been Governor of
England himself, and after King Richards Captivity had not only labored for
him, as you have heard by his letter to the Pope, but went also in person to
assist him in Germany, and remained there in pledge for him: this man (I say)
receiving disgust at length from the said King, Disgust and appeal of the
Archb. of Roane against K. Richard.
for usurping upon certain lands, and liberties of his in Normandy, he brake
with him, appealed to the Pope, went to Rome against him; and the King was
forced to send Ambassadors to plead for himself there against the other, who
pleaded so well (says Nubergensis) alleging the Kings necessity for doing
the same, as the Pope took the Kings part, and told the Bishop openly in
public Consistory, that he ought to bear with the King in such a necessity
of war, which being once past, matters might easily be remedied. And thus
much for the Popes authority acknowledged and practiced, during the reign of
this King Richard the first, out of which M. Attorney found no probable
instance at all, to be alleged to the contrary, and therefore made not so
much as mention of any.

OF THE REIGN OF KING JOHN, Who was the seventh King after the Conquest..
III.
This King began his reign an. 1199. and reigned 18. years unto an. 1216.
48. Of this King, being the last son of K. Henry the second, we have heard
much before, under the name of Earl of Mor^^^, which may declare unto us, the
quality of his nature and condition; to wit, mutable and inconstant, but yet
vehement for the while, in whatsoever he took in hand; indiscreet also, rash,
and without fear to offend either God or man, when he was in his passion o^
rage. This appears well by his many most unnatural and treasonable actions,
against his kind and loving Father whilst he lived, whereby he shortened his
said Fathers life, as before has been related. Variablenes of K. John.
And the same appears yet more in a certain manner, by his like attempts
against his own brother, both when, and after he was in captivity; which
brother notwithstanding had so greatly advanced him, and given him so many
rich States in England, as he seemed to have made him a Tetrarch with him (say
our English authors) that is to say, to have given him the fourth part of his
Kingdom, which notwithstanding was not sufficient to make him faithful unto
him.

49. This man then succeeding his brother Richard, with whom he was beyond the
seas when he died, laid hands presently on the Treasure and fortresses of his
said brother, and by the help of two Archbishops especially, to wit Walter of
Roane in Normandy, and Hubert of Canterbury in England, he drew the people and
nobility to favor him, and was crowned first, Duke of Normandy by the one, and
then King of England by the other, when he was 34. years old, and held out in
the said government with great variety of state and fortune for 18. years old
together. The first six with contentment and good liking of most men, the
second six in continual turmoile, vexation, and with mislike of all; and the
thi^d six did participate of them both, to wit, good and evil, though more of
the evil, especially the later part thereof, when his nobility and people
almost wholly forsakinge him, did call in, and crown in his place Jews the
Dolphin and Prince of France, The pretenses of the Dolphin of France to England.
pretended to be next heir by his wife the Lady Blanch, daughter to the said
K. John's sister, Queen of Castile, which brought K. John to those straites, as
he died with much affliction of mind, as after you shall hear.

50. To say then somewhat of each of these three distinctions of time, noting
some points out of them all that appertain to this our controversy with M.
Attorney: you have heard in the end of K. Richards life, K. John's obeyng, the
Sea Apostolic.
how Walter Archbishop of Roane appealed to Pope Innocentius against the said
King, for seasing upon certain lands of his, and namely the Town of Deep,
which Innocentius commanding to be restored, K. John obayed, and made
composition with the said Archbishop upon the year of Christ 1200. which was
the second year of his reign, as Houeden reports; Houed. 2. part. Annal.
fol. 458.
restoring him Villam de Depa cum pertinentijs suis, The Town of Deep with
the appurtenances: and diverse other things, which the said author sets
down, showing thereby the obedience of K. John to the Popes ordination.

51. Moreover there falling out a great controversy between Geffrey Arcbishop
of York, K. John's brother, K. John pretended no supremacy Ecclesiastical.
and the Deane and Chapter of the said Church, and both parties appealing to
Rome, Pope Innocentius appointed the Bishop of Salisbury, and Abbot of Tewxbury
to call them before them in Church of Westminster, and determine the matter,
and so they did, and made them friends; the King not intermedling in any part
thereof, though the matter touched his brother, and concerned his own
Ecclesiastical supremacy, if he had persuaded himself, that he had had any.
And the very same year the Bishop of Ely, and the Abbot of S. Edmunds-bury
were appointed Judges by the said Pope, in a great cause between the
Archbishop, and monks of Canterbury, which they determined publikelie, Vt
Iudices a Domino Papa constituti: (says Houeden) as judges appointed from the
Pope, without any dependence of the King at all, though their chief
controversy was about the privileges and proprieties of lands, lordships, and
officers of theirs, to wit of the said Archbishop and Monks.

52. And whereas the foresaid Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury with the rest of
the Bishops, summoned a general Synod in England for ordaining many things,
according to the need or necessity of the English Church; and the King by
evil (...) sail of some, went about to let the said Synod, forbidding the
same by his supreme Iusticer (which was the highest power at that time under
the King) the said Archbishop admitted not the prohibition: A council h^ld
against the kings prohibition.
Archiepiscopus (says Houeden) generale celebrauit Concilium Londonys apud
VVestmonasterium, co^tra prohibitionem Gaufredi filij Petri Comitis de Essexia,
tunc temporis Summi Iusticiarij Anglia. The Archbishop did celebrate a general
Council at Westminster in London, against the prohibition of Geffrey the
son of Peter Earl of Essex, which at that time, had the office of the chief
Iusticer of England. So as we see, that they followed not the Kings inclination
in this spiritual affair, but held their Council, and finished the same,
notwithstanding the former secular prohibition of the supreme Iusticer. And
Houeden that was then living, sets down all the Canons and Ordinances at
large of the said Council, which had these words in the end of every one
severally repeated: Saluo in omnibus Sacrosanctae Romanae Ecclesiae honor and
priuilegio: saving in all points, the honor and privilege of the holy Church
of Rome: Which was the sooner added for that the general Council of Lateran in
Rome, was shortly after to ensue, which might add, take away, or alter
whatsoever should seem best to the Decrees of this National Council.

53. Neither is there read any thing to have been done or said against this by
the King, though it is like that some of his Counsel did egg him against it,
as may appear by the said prohibition of his Iusticer before mentioned. Nay,
not only was K. John obedient to the Church and her authority at this time; but
otherwise also showed himself very devout and pious by many ways: to which
purpose among other things, it is recorded by this author, Houed. in vi^. Joan.
fol. 461. The piety of K. John in the beginning of his reign.
that when S. Hugh Bishop of Lincoln, who was held for a great Saint all days
of his life, lay on his deathbed at London, King John went unto him to visit
him with great devotion, and confirmed his testament, which he had made of his
goods in favor of the poor, and promised moreover to God in his presence,
that during his life, he would always confirm and ratify the testaments of
English Bishops, and Prelates made to that effect.

54. And the same author recounteth furthermore, that n^^ long after this, the
King being at Lincoln, twelve Abbots of the Order named Cistercienses, coming
unto him, fell down at his (...) of his (...)ence, all their cattle (...) in
the same (...) whom the King said, that they should rise up; (...) (says our
author) diuina inspi(...), cecidit (...) omiam postulant, etc. And then the
King himself, by the inspiration of Gods holy (...), K. Iohne humility and
liberalitye.
fell down upon (...) on the ground before their feet making them pardon, for
the injury done to them by his officers. And from that day forvvard he granted
them, that all their (...) should feed freely in his forest: And moreover he
willed them to seek out a fit place in the Kingdom, where he might buyld them
a monastery for his devotion, and so he did: founding both that and (...)
others, as the monasteryes of Farendon, ^^^^ayles, (...), and VV^^x-hall^ so as
if he had continued in the course of piety and moderation in life, he had been a
notable King toward which he had many good parts.

55. But about the 7. or 8. year of his reign, he began greatly to change his
conditions to the worser part^, which some ascribe (...) to the death of Queen
Eleanor his mother, upon the sixth year of his reign, K. Io^ns mutation to
the worse.
to whom he bare respect as long as she lived, and her death was thought to be
hastened, by the affliction she took of K. John's cruelty toward Arthure Earl
of Brittany her Nephew, who being a goodly young Prince of 17. years old, was
made away in the Castle of Roane, in the year 1203. by poison, See vvalsing.
in ^pedig anno. 1204. and Math. Paris anno. 2215.
as some men think; but as the King of France maintained before Pope
Innocentius, he was slain by K. John's own hands, and his younger sister
carried prisoner into England, and kept in Bristo^ Castle, where she pined
away; though both these pretended to be nearer the Crown of England, then K.
John himself, for that they were the children, of his elder Brother Geffrey, by
marriage Earl of Brittany.

56. From this beginning then of domestical blood, K. John fell into his other
rages of dis^re^^^^ life, and namely against the Church and Churchmen (...),
whereof this particular occassion fell ou^^ that the foresaid (...) Archbishop
of Canterbury being dead, upon the you^^ (...) the King desiring to prefer to
that (...) one John Gray Bishop of (...) whom he great^^^ (...) principal
monks of the (...) election appertained, to (...) for that (...) Canterbury,
to further that election by his own presence. And the monks (...)cretly, they
had chosen another before, whose name was (...) Sub-prior of the house; and
with the same secrecy had (...) away toward Rome for his confirmation, with
oath (...) should not disclose himself until he came thither: yet (...)ly upon
offense taken with him, for discovering himself (...) election in Flaunders,
and partly upon the instance and (...) the King present, they chose the said
Bishop of Norwich (...) him his letters of election in like manner, with which
the King presently sent him away to Rome, adjoining special messengers of his
own, to commend him to Pope Innocentius, by all me^^es possible for his
admittance.

57. But the Pope seeing two elections made by the monk^^^ (...) two several
men, and that the Covent was divided upon the matter; he persuaded them for
concordes sake, to choose a (...) and to leave the former two, and so at last
they did, and tooke^ certain English Cardinal then in Rome, named Stephen
Long^^^ a man of great learning, and most commendable life, but not known or
liked by the King, The first occasion of K. John's breach with the Church and
churchmen.
both for that he had been brought up in the universities of France, and not of
England; and for that the King could not brook, that the election which he had
^^^cured, with so great diligence of the Bishop of Norwich, should be rejected;
whereupon he fell into so great distemper of passion, as was lamentable. For
first, having made proclamation, that the said Cardinal elected Archbishop,
and confirmed by the Pope, and sent into France, should not come into England,
(...) received by any man under pain of death; he sent his officers to
Canterbury, to sease both on the lands of the Archbishopricke, ^^ also of the
monks, and to drive them out of the Realm, with all the shame and vexation
that might be; and so they did. And the said expulsed monks, were forced to
fly over the sea to (...) and lived for the time in the monastery of S. Berlin
in that Ci^^^ and the King commanded to be put into that Covent (...)
religious men of the order of S. Angustine: and more then this (...) to that
exasperation against all Clergymen, Great offense and indignation of K. John
against Clergy men.
as he seized (...) most part of their goods throughout all England. And (...)
Pope Innocentius wrote diverse letters to pacify him, (...) angerly to him
again. Affirmae^s (says our (...) electione simul and promotione N^rvicensis
Episcopi, (...) reuocari. Affirming that he could not be (...) (...) and
promotion of the Bishop of Norwich, whom he understand to be profitable unto
him. Quod pro libertatibus Corona sua ^^abit (...) fuerit, vsque ad mortem.
Houed. Ibid.
That he would stand (if need should be) for the libertyes of his Crown, even
unto death. Et si de prae(...) fuerit exa^ditus, omnibus Roma^^ petentibus
maris semitas angu(...). That if he may not be heard in the premises, he
threatened to ^^^iten the passage of sea to all them, that would go to (...).
So he.

58. In all which we see, notwithstanding his great displeasure taken, he does
not deny the Popes authority spiritual, nor ascri(...) the Supremacy thereof
unto himself; but only stands upon the libertyes of his Crown, which was, as
there he signifies, that the Archbishop of Canterbury, should not be chosen
without his consent or li^^ing, though the election thereof he took not to
himself, but left it free to the said monks, to whom from the very beginning
of Christianity in England, the said election appertained. And truly, many
godly and wise men at that time did wi^h, that Pope Innocentius had not stood
so hard with K. John in (...) point as this was, Many vvish that Pope
Innocentius had dealt more myldly with K. John.
for contending him with a person grateful unto him in that Archbishopricke:
For from this disgust proceeded all the disorders and miseries, that afterward
ensued, as namely the Kings raging against all the Clergy, the particulars
whereof are strange and lamentable; the interdict of the whole Realm that
lasted for five or six years, without celebrating of divine service in the
Churches; and finally the excommunication of the King himself, and other
infinite troubles thereof ensuring: the said King so raging on the otherside for
diverse years together, as he seems not to be well himself, specially after
he saw his Nephew Otho to be deprived also of the Imperial Crown by the said
Innocentius.

59. Many strange acts are recounted of K. John in this time, as for example,
that he sent from time to time, to all noble men and gentlemen, whom he any
ways suspected to be offended with him, commanding them to give him for
pledges, their sons or daughters, or next of l^yn? And for that the wife of
one VVil^^^^ Erause Bar^^, cast out a word that she doubted; least her children
might be used by Duke Geffreys children were, to wit (...), his (...) the King
sent to apprehend them all, Extreme acts of K. John in his indignation.
and they (...), he (...) them so hardly, as he took (...), and caused them to
be starued to death in VVindes^r castle. Paris. in vit. Joan. an. 1210.
And the same author of ^^^^ris, who lived at that time writes the Kings fury
to h^ (...) great, and to commit such horrible acts of cruelty: vt (...)
extuteret Tyrannorum. That it would make even Tyrants to (...) and he adds
further: Muk^rum nobiliam vxores and s^ti^ appr^^^^^ (...) did oppress and use
violence not only to the lands, good^, (...) honors of noble men; but to their
wives and daughter (...). He tells further, that being one day at Nottingham,
and (...) that the Welch-men began to styr, he commanded to be brought forth
28. fair young children, which he had for pledges of the chiefest nobility of
that nation, Paris. Ibid. an. 1212.
and all to be hanged together upon one gallows in the year 1212.

60. He caused in like manner; all the Jews through (...) glaud, both men,
women, and children, to be taken and ^^^^^ted, to know where there money was,
who commonly (...) the violence of the said tortures, gave him all that they
had, and more too. And when in Bristow, they had tortured one by (...) sorts
of torture; the King gave this sentence upon him, that every day he should have
one of his teeth pulled out, with the (...) test despite and torment that might
be, until he had paid (...) ten thousand marks of money; and when the Jew had
(...) seven teeth to be so pulled out in seven sundry days; (...) to avoid
the torment of the eight tooth, bound himself to pay the ten thousand marks.

61. The same author relates in like manner, that the said King meeting one
day a company of men, which were the (...) officers, that led bound a murderer
toward prison, that had robbed and slain a Priest upon the high way, said
unto them, It is no matter, he has killed an enemy of mine, let him go^^^^;
and so they did. And at another time being at Oxford, and ^^^ring that a
certain Clarke by mere chance, had (...) woman to death and thereupon fled,
and the Justice having (...) three other Clerks whom they found dwelling in
the (...) house, though utterly guyltlesse of the fa^^, the King com^^^^ded
them all three to be hanged. Math Paris Ibid
And mo^^ouer when the ^^^^dome was put under interdict: Rex quasi in f^riam
v^^sus (says (...) author) in verba blasphemia pr^^upit, iura^per (...) and
(...) King being turned as it were into fury, did (...) blasphemous words,
swearing by the teeth of God^ (...) ^^^soeuer he should find any Romans in any
of his land^ he (...) (...) to Rome, with their eyes pulled out, and nosthrels
(...) He spoke also words as though he believed not the resurrection of the
next life. So (...) our Author.

62. But above all fury and wickedness, was that resolution which he took soon
after, Paris anno. 1213. in vit. Joan.
to wit, upon the year 1213. when he sent Sir Thomas H^^thington, and, Sir
Raph Nicholson Knights and Sir R^^^rt of London Priest, for his, Ambassadors
to the great Ma^^^^^^, King of Afric, Morocco, and Spain, named
Miramumilinus, offering to be of his religion, and to make his Kingdom
tributary unto him, King John offered subjection to the K. of the Moors.
and to be his vassal and hold it of him, if he would (...) with an army by
sea to assist him. But when the said Ma^^^^^tan great Prince, being a very wise
man, informing himself of the particular^ of his person and state, showed
contempt thereof, (...) also of his offer, (as our Author, that spoke with one
of the Ambassadors sets down at large) K. John took another resolution,
and passed to the quite contrary extreme, resolving not only to obey the Pope
in spiritual jurisdiction, but in temporal also, and to make his Kingdom
tributary, and feudatory to the Sea of Rome, The strange co^trariety of King
John.
by payment of a thousand marks every year there unto; which he bound himself
and his heirs to do, under a (...) large Charter, sealed with the great seal
of England in gold, sending the same to Rome to Pope Innocentius, upon the
year 1214.

63. And by this, and other such tokens of his hearty conversion and sorrow
for things past, he so gained the said Pope, that suruiued him, as he had him
his most earnest defendour, all days of his life after, both aginst the King
of France, and his son Prince L^wes, and the Barons of England, that made
war against him. All whom, he first commanded to surcease their said wars
and emnities against the said K. John, The aydea that King John received from
P. Innocentius.
and then for that they obaied not, he threatened and ^enounced excommunication
against them, and besides this he sent his Legate named VVaell^ to be with K.
John, and assist him in person in all his needs and necessities which was no
small help and comfort unto him in those distresses. And final in after his
death he was a principal cause why his young son Henry the ^. was admitted
for King, notwithstanding the Barons firm resolution, promise, and oath to the
contrary, and that Prince Laws was forsaken, and forced to (...) of England
the said Lega^ being made general Governor both of the King and Kingdom for
that present, together with the Earl of (...) Lord Marshall of the land.

64. And as for the said Barons, that so resolutely stoods (...) K. John and
his succession, their cause was about the privileged and laws of the Realm,
as well concerning the Glergie, as lay men, which were the same privileges, as
they affirmed, that were granted and set down in King Edwards days the
Confessor, confirmed by the Conqueror, allowed and published again by K.
Henry the first, and not disallowed by this man's Father K. Henry the 2. in
witness whereof, they produced a Charter of the said K. Henry the first. All
which liberties, laws, and ordinances K. John promising them at his first
reco^ciliation, to give gr^in^ and ratify, was urged afterward by them to
publish the same ^^ writing, under the great seal of England, as he did at
Oxford in the presence of al his nobility, in the 17. year of the said King^
reign, which was the next before his death, syaing in the (...) writing. Ex
mera and spontanea a voluntate nostra concessimu, and Char^a^^stra
co^firmauimus, and eam obtinuimus a Domino Papa Innocencia confirm^n; qua^ and
nos obseruabimus, and ab haredibus nostris in perpetuu^ bona fide (...)
obseruari. The church-liberties confirmed by K. John and the Pope.
We have granted out of our own mere and free good will, and have confirmed
the same by our Charter, and have contained of Pope Innocentius, that he
confirm the same also with his assent; which Charter both we shall observe our
selves, and will have to be observed faithfully by our heirs for even behold,
that K. John does not only confirm these liberties himself, but procured the
same to be confirmed also by Pope Innocentius for more stabilitie. And the
beginning of the said liberties it thus set down; Quod Anglicana Ecclesia
libera sit, and habeat iuras^^ integra, suas and libertates illasas, and maxim
libertatem electionum, q^^ maximae and magis necessaria reputatur Ecclesia
Anglicunae. Paris. an. a^ 15.
That the English Church be free, and have all her rights whole, and all h^^
liberties inuiolate, and especially her liberties of elections ( (...)
choosing her Prelates) which is held to be the greatest and most necessary to
the English Church. And then follow the oth^^ liberties of Barons, noblemen,
and the common people.

65. And for that it was understood, that, notwithstan^^^^ these two graunts
and confirmations of these laws and priuile^ges, K. John by the counsel of
certain strangers, that wee^ about him of his Countries in France, was
persuaded to (...) the same again, and to inform the Pope wrong full^e (...)
intentions of the said Barons, as though they mean not so (...) the
conservation of these privileges indeed, a^^^so^^ (...) Kingdom to the King
of F^^nce, and the Pope inclining to be^^u^e him the said Barons were so much
exasperated thereby, as they made the vow before mentioned, never to obey him,
or his anymore. And thereupon calling over the said Prince Jews of France, gave
him London and all the South-parts of England; and would have gained him the
rest in like manner, if the Popes resistanes had not been so great, and K. John
had not died at that very instant, in the heat of all the war: not poisoned
by a monk (as foolish John Fox does affirm, and set forth in many printed and
painted pageants of his book) but upon grief of mind, See Fox and his
pageants of the toade skinned to prepare the poiso^, with other circumstances
page 133. of his Acts and monuments.
travail and disorder of diet, as all ancient authors by uniform consent do
agree. And John Stow cites four that lived in K. John's days, to wit? Matthew
Paris, Roger VVyndouer, Raph Niger, and Raph Gogshall, in their histories of
that time.

66. Wherefore to conclude this Chapter of K. Henry the second, and of his two
sons, we see how firm they were all three in this belief and
acknowledgement of the Popes spiritual authority over all the world; and no
less over England in those days; and how fully the same was in practice among
them. And that albeit in some cases and causes, wherein they received some
distaste, they strugled sometimes about the particular execution thereof,
indeauoring to make some restraint, especially when it seemed to strech
indirectly also to temporal affairs; yet did they never so much as once deny
the said Ecclesiastical supremacy to be in the Sea of Rome, and much less did
ever ascribe it to themselves: which so clearly overthrows M. Attorneys
position, as I marvel what he will say to these and like demonstrations.

67. And for that his often repeated ground is, that Queen Elizabeth had her
supreme authority in cases Ecclesiastical, according to the ancient common
laws of England: hitherto he grants that there was no Statute-lawes at all
by Parliament, All ancient English laws against M. Attorney.
until the ensuing King K. Henry the third. And for other laws, we see here
what they were by the testimony of the Bishops and Barons of England, under the
Charters both of (...) K. Henry the first, and other Kings upward unto K.
Edward the Confessor, to wit all in favor of the Church, her liberties,
^^nquises, and privileges; which liberties (as other where I have noted, and
must often hereafter do the same) do infer our conclusion of Ecclesiastical
and spiritual jurisdiction, subordinate to the Sea of Rome, and wholly distinct
from temporal power, and do overthrow M. Attorneys assertion for the said
spiritual (...) those liberties were (as they were) that (...) should have
jurisdiction in (...)ctions, choice of Prelates, of the (...) liberties are
mentioned, cited; allowed^ (...) by any King (as you shall see they were by
(...) them, unto K. Henry the 8.) so often receiue^^ (...)tion, and his whole
new books, an open out (...) field; And thus much of K. John.

OF KING HENRY THE THIRD That was the eight King after the Conquest^^^ And the
first that left Statutes written: And vvha^ instances and arguments M.
Attorney alleges out of him for his purpose. CHAP. X.
K. Henry the third began his reign 1216 and dyed anno. 1^7^. having 56. years.
HITHERTO have we passed over six hundred (...) since our first English king
rece^ued and thereby put themselves under the of (...) Bishops depending thereof,
for (...) of their (...) Which Spiritual (...) have been ever believed, (...)
both Kings, and Subject from the (...) their laws, and continued by su(...).
Which as it has been declared (...) proofs, and demonstrations, so (...)ted
many other for breuityes sake; the (...)tion being so apparent, as there was
(...) confirm the same; whereas on the contrary side M. Attorney shows
himself so poor, weak, needy, and naked in his proofs, as he has alleged
only hitherto but four instances or examples out of all these six hundred
years, that may seem somewhat to favor him, though indeed they do nothing at
all, as in their places has been declared. But now from this King downward we
shall have somewhat more store laid together by him out of pieces or rags of
Statutes, though as little effectual to prove his purpose, as the other before
recited and refuted.

2. To begin then with young K. Henry, who was but entered into the tenth year
of his age, when the scepter was delivered unto him, and reigned somewhat more
then 56. years. He was crowned at Gloucester after the death of his Father, by
one part of the Realm, that followed him, and this especially, as has been
said, through the presence and authority of the forsaid VVallo Pope Innocentius
his Legate, The coronation and beginning of King Henry the third.
who earnestly persuaded and invited all sorts of people, to follow and obey
this young King, and to forsake Prince Jews of France, that had London and the
South-partes of England delivered unto him. And finally denounced
excommunication upon all those that resisted this K. Henry, and thereby drew at
length all the Lords and Barons of England in effect, to return unto him; and
was chief Governor, both of the said Kings person and Realm for a time,
together with some of the English nobility, as before has been declared.

3. Neither shall it be needful here to set down the particulars of his said
Coronation, with the ordinary oath, which all Kings took humbly upon their
knees, before the high Altar, and upon the holy Evangelists, to maintain the
liberties of the Church, and to do justice to all sorts of men; which for me
we having set down in the life of K. John this man's Father, and some other
Kings before, may serve for an ^xample of all the rest. Only there is to be
noted, as particular in this man's coronation, that presently after his said
oath, he added this clause, as Matthew Paris sets it down: Math. Paris in
vit. Hen. 3. an. 1216.
Deinde fecit homagium Sancta Romanae Ecclesiae, Innocentio Papae, etc. Then he
did homage to the holy Roman Church, Temporal homage done to the Sea
Apostolic by King Henry the third.
and to Innocentius the Pope thereof, for his Kingdoms of England and Ireland,
and swear that he would faithfully pay every year those thousand marks of
tribute, which his Father K. John had given unto the said Church, etc. Which is
the first solemn homage that we read to have been made by any King for
temporal obedience unto the Church of Rome in their coronation. For albeit K.
Henry the 2. in his sorrowful epistle before mentioned to Pope Alexander the
3. when he was in his greatest affliction, wrote, as Petrus Blesensis sets
it down, Bles epist. 136. ad Alex. PP.
who was his secretary: Vestrae Iurisdictionis est Regnum Augliae, and quantem
ad seudatorij iuris obligationem, vobis duntaxat obnoxious teneor and astringor.
The Kingdom of England is of your jurisdiction, and to you only am I bound as
subject, for so much as appertains to the obligation of feudatorie right: yet
is this by most men understood, to be meant by that King, either in respect of
that ancient voluntary tribute before mentioned of Peter Pence, or else of some
particular agreement made between the said Pope Alexander and him, upon the
controversy about the death of S. Thomas of Canterbury.

4. But we read no such thing continued by his sons after him, until K. John
upon the occasions before specified, made this new covenant, as has been
declared. Which yet afterward upon the year of Christ 1245. and 29. of this
Kings reign, when a General Council was gathered by Pope Innocentius the 4.
at Li^^ in France, Walsingham writes that four noble men, Vvalsing^m in
(...) Nous^ria anno. 1245.
together with the Kings advocate or attorney William Powycke, were sent by
the King and common consent of the Realm to the said Council and Pope, to
contradict the said ordination and concession of K. John, as a thing, that he
could not do without the consent of his whole Realm, for many reasons which
they alleged. And so we se, that in this very contradiction, what respect
they bare, Ibidem.
^oth to that Council, and head thereof Innocentius the 4. to whose judgment
they were content to remit the matter. And the Popes answer was (says
Walsingham) Remindigere m^r^sa deliberatione, that the thing required a long
deliberation: and so left the matter in suspense for that time.

5. But to return to this young King again, who being first, as has been
said, under the Government of the Popes Legate, and the Earl of Pen-broke, high
Marshall of England, and after his death, K. Henry obtains of the P. to be
accounted of full age.
which was upon the 4. year of the said Kings reign, and the Legates
departure, he was wholly under the government of Peter Bishop of Winchester,
until the year of Christ 12^3. and y. of his reign; at what time being 17.
years old, and feeling in himself a great desire to govern (as young Princes
are wont to do) thought to obtain the same by the Popes authority, and so
sent privy messengers to Rome, to Pope Honorius the 3. (says Matthew Paris)
and requested at his hands, Paris in (...) Hen. 3. an. 122^.
for many reasons, that he might be declared able to govern of himself,
together with his counsel, and to receive into his hands, all those castles
and lands which diverse of his Barons did hold in his name, from the time of his
Fathers death. Which thing was granted him, and the Popes Bull sent to the
Archbishops, Bishops and Barons about the same, with authority and
commandment, to compel them by Censures to do the same, if any should
refuse.

6. And two years after this again, when he was 19. years old, he calling a
Parliament, did decree and publish the famous great Charter called Magna
Chaerta, for the privileges of the Church, as also the Charter of Forests,
for the nobility and common people: and many other things did happen in this
time of his youth and nonage, The beginning of the great Charter for church
privileges.
which do evidently declare his dutiful respect unto Ecclesiastical power,
and especially to that of the Sea Apostolic, not assuming to himself any piece
or parcel thereof. And this might we easily declare by many examples, wherein he
proceeded as he was taught, both by the presidence of his ancestors, and by
the common induction of religion, and practice of all Christian Princes in
those days; and this as well after he came to full age, as before, and so
continued unto his dying day.

7. And for that this man's reign was large, and of many years, as has been
said; and if I should stand upon particular proofs, and examples of his
acknowledgement of the supreme authority of the Sea of Rome, and practice
thereof, in all occasions, it would be ouerlong and tedious: and therefore it
shall be sufficient for the indifferent Reader, to consider these points
following.

Thomas Walsingham, VValsingh. in vi^a Edward's prim^^ initi^. E^ypodig. N^u
(...) an. 1274.
who in the beginning of K. Edward the first his life, gives a breife note of
this King Henry's life and death, saying first of his sickness and death, that
being at the Abbey of S. Edmunds-burie, and taken with a greiuous sickness,
there came unto him diverse Bishops, Barons, and noble men to assist him and be
present at his death; The devout behavior of K. Henry 3.
at what time he humbly confessed his sins (says he) was absolved by a
Prelate; and then devoutly receiving the body of our Savior, asked all
forgiveness, and forgave all; had extreme unction; and so humbly embracing the
cross, gave up his spirit to almighty God: adding further of his devotion in
his life; that every day he was accustomed to hear three masses sung; and
more privately besides, and that when the Priest did lift up the host
consecrated, he would go himself and hold the Priests arm, and after kiss
his hand, and so return to his own place again.

9. He tells also of his familiarity with S. Jews K. of France, who
reigning at the same time (though some few years younger then K. Henry)
conferred oftentimes with him about matters of devotion; Conference between K.
Henry and S. Jews K. of France.
and once telling him, that he was delighted more to hear often preaching,
then many masses, K. Henry answered, that he was more delighted, to see his
friend, than to hear another man talk of him, though never so eloquently.

10. This then being so, and K. Henry both living and dying so Catholicklie, as
both this man, and all Authors do write of him; there can be no doubt, but
that he agreed fully in judgment and sense, with all his predecessors, as
well in this point of the Popes Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, as in all others.
And for his obedience to the Sea of Rome, it was so notorious, as diverse of his
own people at that time, did think it to have excess: For that it was not
only in spiritual matters, but in temporal affairs of his Kingdom also;
Nihil enim (says Matthew Paris) nisi ex consensu Papae, vel illius Legati
facere voluit. Paris anno. 12^4 in vst. Hen. 3.
He would do nothing (especially in his later years) but either by the
consent of the Pope or his Legate. And further in another place. Ipso quoque
tempus Rex, secus quam deceret aut expediret, se, suumque Regnum sub paena
exhareditationis (quod tamen facere nec potuit nec debuit) Domino Papae
obliga^it. At that very time also the King, otherwise then was decent or
expedient, did oblige himself and his Kingdom (which yet he could not, nor
ought to do) unto Pope Innocentius the fourth under pain of disinheritage,
etc. So he.

11. And many times elswere is this complaint renewed; and yet on the
otherside, we may understand by the same Matthew Paris (who so much misliketh
this over much subjection, as he calls it, to the Sea of Rome) that diverse
great commodityes ensued often thereby, both to him and the Realm. To the
Realm, for that the Popes wrote heerby more confidently and effectually unto
him, The vtilities by our English Kings devotion to Rome.
for amending certain errors of his, then otherwise perhaps they would or
could; yea threatened him also with excommunication, when need required: Whereof
the said Paris writes thus in one place. In those days the Popes anger began
to be heat against the K. of England, for that he kept not his promises, so
oftentimes made to amend his accustomed excesses, and therefore at the instance
of Lautence Bishop of Ely, and many other, that earnestly urged him, he
threatened after so many exhortations made unto him without fruit, to
excommunicate him, and interdict his Kindome, etc. Paris Ibid.


12. But yet for all this, when after his Barons did rise against him, and held
him diverse years in war, Pope Urban the 4. (says Matthew Paris) sent his
Legate, Cardinal Sabinian, as far as Bellen in France to pronounce there, and
set up the sentence of excommunication against the said Barons, who being in
arms, permitted him not to enter the ports of England; but yet not long after
by the said Urban his means, and Pope Clement the 4. that succeeded him, peace
followed again in the said Realm, after many years of war and civil
commotion, with great variety of events succeeding on both sides. For that
sometimes the King himself, with his brother Richard surnamed King of the
Romans, and Edward the Prince, were taken by the Barons; and sometimes the
Barons had the worse, and Simon Momfort Earl of Licester their chief head and
Captain, The Civil wars of England under K. Henry the third.
was slain in the field; and many miseryes, distresses, and calamityes ensued
on both parts, as are accustomed in warlyke affairs; but especially of
Kingdoms, which have their waves and turmoiles, according as the winds of
great men's humors and passions do swell, stir up, or calm the same. But in
all this time no question was of Catholic religion in England nor any doubt at
all of the distinction and subordination, between temporal and spiritual
power and government; but that the one was acknowledged in the King, as chief
head of the Commonwealth, and the other in the Bishops, as subordinate to the
Sea Apostolic.

13. And if we consider the chief, and most evident points, wherein this
acknowledgement is seen, and to be observed, they are these in effect. England,
nor other wise, then they came authorized and allowed by the said Sea
Apostolic. The points vvherin the sovereignty of the Sea of Rome was seen.
as to be observed generally throughout all Christendom, England presently
admitted the same; though in other matters, which were either particular,
national, or several to every Commonwealth, England followed that which was
most convenient for her state, peace and quietness.

14. And as for Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction and libertyes of the Church, we se
by the said Magna Charta, decreed and confirmed by this King (which is the very
same in effect, that his Father K. John, out of the Charter of K. Henry the
first, granted upon the 16. year of his reign) and confirmed again, and
published by K. Edward his son, and all his Catholic Successors; that it
was wholly left unto Clergy men, and to the Sea Apostolic, and not taken nor
used by the Kings: as namely in all matters of Spiritual dispensations,
elections, institutions, admissions, confirmation^ of Prelates, and the like;
all gathering of Synods, making of Ecclesiastical decrees, excommunications,
absolutions, indulgences, judging and determining of Church-causes; whereof M.
Attorney, as before you have seen, sets down a long catalogue of such
causes, as cannot be judged by the temporal law, but must necessarily be
remitted to spiritual Courts: all these things (I say) matters and affairs,
were left, as fully and wholly in the hands of the Bishops and English-Clergy,
The manner of Ecclesiastical elections under K. Henry 3.
with their subordination to their head the Pope, by this K. Henry, as by any
of his predecessors or successors, without the intermedling of any secular
man therein, as judge, or having authority Ecclesiastical, as of him self, but
only by way of intercession. And this may be proved by infinite examples, but
none more apparent, then by the practice of elections, and promotions of
Ecclesiastical persons; wherein though since that time, by agreement of the Sea
Apostolic, Catholic temporal Princes, have for the most part, denomination
and presentation; yet then they had not^ but that all elections were free to
the Chapters of Churches and monasteries; and the confirmation commonly was
sought at Rome, and the King had no more part therein, but only that the said
elections must be made by his leave, and so presented to the Pope for
confirmation.

15. And of this, and other like matters we might give examples without end,
for that every day they fell out. As for example upon the year 1226. which was
the tenth year of K. Henry's reign, the Bishop of Durham Richard being dead,
the K. endeavored greatly to bring in a certain chaplain of his, named Luke,
into that dignity, and dealt earnestly with the Prior and Coue^t of that C^^rch,
to whom the election belonged to further the same. But they holding the man
unworthy, says Matthew Paris, for so great a dignity, chose a learned and
virtuous Priest, that was Archdeacon of Worcester named William Scot, The
manner of placing a Bishop of Durham.
praying the King to be content therewith: and so sent him to Rome to be
confirmed by Pope Honorius the 3. But K. Henry being offended therewith, sent
the Bishop of Chichester with another Prior, for his Ambassadors to Rome, to
contradict the said election; and thereby h^ld it in suspension for two years,
until Pope Honorius being dead, and Gregory the 9. succeeding in his place, he
did reject both the one, and the other before named, and translated unto
Durham, Richard Bishop of Salisbury. Paris in vit. Henr. 3. an. 1226. 1228.
And the same year determined also that great controversy (says our Author)
that had lasted diverse years, between the Prior and Covent of the Monks of
Couentry, and the Deane and Chapter of the Chanons of Lichfield, which of them
should choose their Bishop; and the said Popes determination was, that one
part should choose him one time, and the other the other; but yet so, as the
Prior of Couentry should always have the first voice in both elections,
neither did the King contradict this ordination.

16. Moreover in this very same year of 1228, died Cardinal Stephen Langhton
Archbishop of Canterbury, with whom, and against whom K. John moved so great
troubles (as before you have heard) who being dead, and the monks according to
order, having obtained license of the King to make their election of a new, An
other example of the provision of the Church of Canterbury.
they chose a monk of their own, called Walter Hemesham; but the King after
some deliberation, not liking of him, began to lay diverse objections against
him, as may be seen in our Author that lived in those days. But he appealing
to the Pope, went to Rome; whereupon the King, setting down his objections in
writing, sent the Bishops of Rochester and Chester, together with the
Archdeacon of Bedford, for his Ambassadors to contradict the same also: whom
Pope Gregory having heard, and considered for diverse months together, gave
sentence the next year after against him, and at the instance both of the King
and Suffragan Bishops of Canterbury, elected of himself into that dignity, one
Richard that was Chancellor of the Bisho^ of Lincoln: Virum eminentis
scientiae and literatura and conuersationis ^^ nestae, says our Author. A man
of eminent knowledge, and learning and honest conversation: though he do add
this, that to obtain this election of the Pope, and to reject the oth^^, the
said Kings messengers offered, that his majesty and the Realm, should be
content to grant to his Holiness a tenth over all England, for his wars
against Frederick the Emperor. But howsoever that was, this proves evidently
the acknowledgment of his supreme Ecclesiastical authority ou^r England by
this King, as do infinite other things, which are over many to be recou^ted in
this place.

17. For first this very Archbishop Richard being procured, as you have seen,
with such diligence by the King, three years after his election, to wit, upon
the year of Christ 1231. when the King in a Parliament holden at Westminster,
exacted as well of the Clergy, as of the laity, a certain payment or
contribution of money called Scutagium, not accustomed to be paid before,
Ibidem.
the said Archbishop with his Bishops audacter resistentes dixerunt, quod non
tenerentur viri Ecclesiastici iudicio subijci laicorum; boldly resisting said
unto the King, that Clergymen were not bound to be under the judgment of
Lai-men in the Parliament. And moreover the said Archbishop going privately
afterward to the King, Richard of Canterbury appealeth to Rome against K.
Henry. 3.
complained much of his high Iusticer Hubert de Burgo Earl of Kent, for
detaining certain lands belonging to the Sea of Canterbury; and a little after
not receiving satisfaction from the King, he pronounced excommunication against
the said Hubert and other detainers, and all that should keep them company,
except only the King himself; and having done this, he appealed to Rome, and
went thither himself, Against whom the King sent one Roger de Cantelu and
diverse other learned men, for his procurators, whom Pope Gregory the nynth
having heard, gave sentence for the said Archbishop Richard against the King:
Paris an. 1231. in vit. Henr. 3.
Proposuerunt autem in contrarium Clerici Regis (says Matthew Paris) pro ipso
Rege and Iusticiario, multa inaniter allegantes, sed parum vel nihil
profecerunt, quia causa Archiepiscopi iusta erat and fauorabilis. The Kings
Clarks and Procurators proposed many things to the contrary in favor of the
King and his Iusticer, but of no moment; and consequently they profited little
or nothing with the Pope, for that the Archbishops cause was both just and
favorable. See here again the Popes authority in practice.

18. And when this good Archbishop Richard dying in his way homeward, left the
Church void again of a Pastor, the Prior and Covent of Canterbury chose for
Archbishop, one Raph Ne^il Bishop of Chester, and Cauncelour of the Realm,
whereat the King being very glad, sent his messengers together with the party
chosen, and the monks that accompanied him to Rome, for his confirmation. But
Pope Gregory upon the information of one Simon de Langituna, Two elected
Archbishops of Canterbury refused by the Pope.
to whom the examination of the person was committed, did refuse him, as an
unlearned man, and a Courtyer, and unapt to preach or teach; but indeed (as
some suspected) least being a great lawyer, and of much authority in England
(for that he was Chancellor also of the Realm) he should go about to undo
that covenant of temporal subjection, which King John had made to the Church
of Rome, and his son King Henry hitherto continued. But howsoever this was,
Paris anno. 1232.
he was not admitted, but the Covent of Canterbury was commanded by the Pope
to choose an other, which they did the next year after, choosing the Prior of
their own Covent named John, whom the King accepting, he was sent to Rome with
recommendation of both their letters; and at the same time, the King sent also
to Rome (says our Author) a young knight named Robert Thynne of the
North-countrey, that had fallen into the Popes excommunication, for a certain
excess of his, to the end that he might be absolved: Deprecans obnixe, vt
militem illius intuitu exaudiret, Desiring the Pope most earnestly, that for
his sake, he would grant the knight pardon and absolution in the thing he came
for.

19. And albeit we may presume, that the Pope absolved the same knight, at the
Kings request; yet did he not admit for Archbishop, the elected Prior, but
esteeming him to be over aged, commanded the Prior and Covent of Canterbury,
to choose a third, which was S. Edmund of Abingdon, canonized afterward by Pope
Innocentius the 4. And at the same time, he wrote very sharp letters unto the
King of England, reprehending him for suffering certain violent excesses to be
committed against Clergymen; Non habens respectum ad sacramenta, quae
iurauerat tempore Coronationis suae, de pace Ecclesiae mantenenda, etc. As not
having regard of the oath, which he did swear in the time of his coronation,
to maintain the peace of the Church: Mandans Regi, and firmiter praecipiens
sub paena excommunicationis, etc. Commanding the King under pain of
excommunication, to cause due (...)tion to be made of the fact, and to send to
Rome, How obedient K. Henry was to the Sea of Rome.
those that should be found culpable therein, to be absolved by himself. To
which commandment the King obayed most promptly, and sent to Rome among
others, the young knight before mentioned, with diverse of his servant; which
well proves the opinion he had of the Popes authority, and how far he
acknowledged the same. And many hundred other such like examples might I
allege out of the life and large reign of K. Henry, if it were not over
tedious, for that this course did he hold all his days.

20. And albeit there began to be in his days, more then before, very great
repining in the people, nobility, and Clergy, first against all strangers in
general, Complaints of Englishmen against stra^gers^ in England.
for that the King was most ruled for many years by Pictauians, or men borne in
his Countries of Poytou beyond the seas, the principal whereof was one Peter
Bishop of Winchester, who did patronize the rest; and then in particular also
against Italians, that were preferred to Ecclesiastical livings in England, by
the Popes of those times, more then before had been accustomed (who perhaps
might presume the mo^^ therein also, in respect of the temporal acknowledgement
of the Kingdom before mentioned) and that the said complaints grew to be so
great and general, as the King was sore pressed therewith; and for remedy
thereof forced at length to dismiss and put away his said Pictauians: yet in
the other point of Italians and Romans, he could never be induced to do
more, but to represent only by way of supplication to the Popes themselves, the
hurtes and inconveniences, that did ensue thereof, that they themselves might
put convenient remedy.

21. And therefore first of all, upon the year 1244. which was the 28. of his
reign, he wrote a letter to Pope Innocentius the 4. in these words. Math.
Paris. anno. 1244.
Sanctissim^ in Christo Paetri ac Domino Innocentia, D^^ gratia Summo
Pontifici, Henricus eadem gratia, salutem and pedum (...) beatorum: and then he
begins his le^ter thus. Quo amplius, etc. By how much the more an obedient
son does submit himself unto his Fathers will, and more promptly and deuontly
(...) subject himself to his commandments, the more does he deserve to have
his fatherly protection, as the reward of his obedience and devotion. Hence it
is, that albeit, at all times (...) our reign we have exposed our selves and
our Kingdom in all things, to the will of your Fatherhood; and there we have in
most business of ours, found your fatherly solicitude and grace toward us: yet
in some provisions of yours made to Clergymen, The loving and obedient letter
of K. Henry unto Pope Innocentius.
both English and strangers, we find our selves and our Kingdom not a little
aggreiued, etc. Wherefore we do supplicate unto your Fatherhood, that you will
defend with Fatherly care and solicitude, all our rights and libertyes, which
you may repute to be not so much ours, as yours; and that you will cause them
to be preserved in your Court, against the suggestio^s of whomsoever. And your
Holiness must not be moved, if we have gone against some of your orders, and
commandments in this behalf, for that the clamor of such, as thought
themselves aggreiued, have compelled us thereunto; and we may not deny any man
right, for so much as by the office of Kingly dignity given us by God, we are
bound in civil matters to administer full justice to all.

22. Thus wrote K. Henry upon the foresaid year unto Pope Innocentius the 4.
and the next year after, which was 1245. there being held a general Council
at Lions (as before has been said) the King and Realm took this resolution,
to send certain procurators thither, to complain of the said greiuances and
hurtes, which the Realm received by so many strangers, placed in benefices
throughout England, Complaints made to the Council and Pope himself of abuses.
who had neither language to preach and teach, nor mind or mean to keep
hospitality for the poor; and that the natural subjects of the land were
heerby deprived of that preferment, and the patrons of benefices debarred of
their right, to nominate, and present incumbents, by the Popes provisions made
in Rome, or of his Legates in England: which complaints seeming reasonable, were
favorably received in the said Council, as may appear by diverse rescripts of
the said Pope Innoce^tius, to the Archbishops and Bishops of England, about
providing the benefices under their charge, with fit English men: Vniuersitatem
vestram monemus, rogamus, and hortamur, etc. We do warn, beseech and exhort
the whole body of your Realm, and do command you by these our Apostolical
letters, that you have great care of all the youths of your Cittyes and
Diocesses, that are Clergy men, or desire to be, Paris anno. 1245.
especially gentlemen and noble-mens sons, whom we desire to promote, etc.
The popes several orders for providing for Englishmen.
And again in another Breue to the said Archbishops and Bishops: We do
exhort and command you, to bestow the Ecclesiastical benefices belonging to
your collation, when they shall fall void, upon fit men of your nation, etc.
And yet further in a third Breue: Volentos iura vestra illaefa ser^ari, etc. We
desiring that your right for bestowing of Ecclesiastical benefices, (...)
inuiolate; and that such as are Patrons of benefices, may present fit men of
your nation, when they shall fall void, etc.

23. But yet the next year after, the King calling a general Parliament at
London, and the former greiuances not seeming to be sufficiently remedied, by
the said recourse to the Council, and answers and promises of the Pope; the
same complaints were renewed again with greater exasperation then before, and
the said greiuances put down in writing. All which being considered and
weighed by the Parliament: Vnanimiter consenser^^t omnes (says Matthew Paris) vt
adhuc ob reuerentiam Sedi^ Apostolicae, Domino Papae humiliter and deuote, tam
per Epistolas, quam per solennes Nunci^s supplicarent, vt tam intollerabilia
grauamina, and iugum subtraheret importabile. The whole Parliament did agree,
that yet once more for reverence of the Sea Apostolic, humble and devout
supplication should be made to the Pope, General consent of vv^^ting to the
Sea of Rome for remedy of agrieua^ces.
both by their letters and solemn messengers, that he would take from them the
intolerable greiuances, and importable yoke, which by the foresaid abuses,
they felt to ly upon them. And so presently were written letters severally to
be sent by the said messengers; Frist by the Archbishops and Bishops; Secondly
by the Abbots, Priors, and religious men; Thirdly by the Earls, Barons, and
community of the Parliament; Fourthly by the King himself, who wrote not only
to the Pope, as the rest did, but a several letter also to the Cardinals, to
further the suite, which letters are set down by Matthew Paris at length, and
are to long for this place.

24, Yet one thing I cannot omit, that whereas the King wrote most devoutly and
humbly, both to the Pope and Cardinals, saying that he did make recourse in
these complaints of his nobility and subjects, to the Church of Rome, Vt filius
ad matrem, quem suis lactavit vberibus, as a son to his mother, whom she
has nourished with her teates of milk: The said Barons, though oftentimes
repeating the words implorantes humiliter ac deuote, we beseeching you humbly
and devoutly, vt dignemini miscricorditer exaudire, Math. Paris. Anno. 1146.
that you will vouchsafe mercifully to hear us: Yet adjoined they also this
threat in the end; that except they were eased of these burdens laid upon
them, the Realm, and their King, they should be forced to put themselves, as a
wall, for defense of the liberties of the said Kingdom, which hitherto for
reverence of the Sea Apostolic, they had differred to do, nor could expect
any longer, then the return of their Ambassadors. So they.

25. And by this we may se where the beginning was of those restraints, which
afterward in the days of other ensuing Kings were made against provisions from
Rome, and benefices to be given to strangers: as also against appeals in
certain cases, and other such like ordinances, which seem to contain some
restraint of the execution of the Popes Ecclesiastical authority in England.
Which did not rise, as you see, upon any change of former faith or judgment in
religion, The beginning and original cause of al restraints.
or calling in question the said Popes spiritual jurisdiction over souls; but
only upon temporal respects, reasons of state, and the like, which concerned
nothing at all, faith, or belief, or substance of religion. And this one only
consideration overthrows all the poor objections, which M. Attorney has
picked out, under the reign of this and other Kings that follow, which now we
shall take in hand to examine, and discuss every one, as they come in their
place.

Two instances alleged out of the Reign of this King Henry the third; and of
what weight they be.. I.
26. And first, what do you think M. Attorney brings out of this Kings
reign, or can bring to overthrow all that we have alleged before, in the
same Kings life, belief, government and actions? Does he allege any one Law
or Statute of his? (for that he was the father and founder of our
Statute-lawes, as he confesses) does he produce any one decree, whereby he
declared, that he thought himself to have supreme spiritual authority? or
denied, or called in question that of the Sea Apostolic, notwithstanding all
the greiuances which before have been mentioned? No truly: no one word is
alleged thereof, though otherwise as I said, this K. Henry made many Statutes,
at sundry Parlaments; as for example upon the 9. year of his reign, he made
the famous Charter whereof we have spoken before, called Magna Charta,
containing 37. Chapters, which may in effect be called so many different
Statutes. Mag. C^art. cap. 1.
The first whereof begins thus: We have granted to God, and by this our
present Charter have confirmed for us, and for our heirs for evermore, that the
Church of England shall be free, and shall have all her holy rites and
libertyes inviolable. So (...) first and most ancient Statute, and the chiefest
liberty of the Church of England, is understood to have been their free
dependence of the Sea Apostolic, and their recourse thereunto without
interruption, or intermedling of any secular power in their Ecclesiastical
affairs.

27. Besides this, there was made by him in the same 9. year of his reign,
the other notorious Charter, named Charta de Foresta: co^taining 16. Chapters
or branches; as also the other named Merton upon the 20. year of the said
Kings reign, that has six several branches or Statutes; as diverse others
also made upon the 51. year of the said Kings reign, entitled under diverse
particular titles; The statutes of K. Henry all in favor of the Clergy.
as Dies communes in Banco: Dies communes in dote: District^^^ Scaeccariae:
Iudicium Collistrigij de compositione mensurarum, and the like. And finally the
other book of Statutes made upon 52. year, called Marle-bridge, containing
16. branches or statutes. In all which no one thing is found in favor of M.
Attorney or his assertion, but many for us, if we would examine the parts and
clauses of every one. For that the religion of England in that time being
perfectly Catholic, and agreeing in all things with it self, and with other
Kingdoms of the world in one manner of belief, and acknowledgement of the
dependence of Spiritual and Ecclesiastical power from the Sea Apostolic;
they could not make laws, for ordering their temporal affairs, but must
needs enterlace many things, that did testify the conformity and
subordination thereof to the spiritual. And if any temporal lawyer in England
at this day, though of far inferior account and place to M. Attorney, would
take upon him to write a book, and allege all the laws, both common and
statute, and branches thereof, that do confirm, allow, or strengthen the
Catholic Religion, from most ancient times, wherein any memory is of our
laws; he might so far ouerbeare M. Attorney both in bulk and substance, and
truth of his allegations, as S. Augustines volumes (for example) do exceed in
all these points Esops fables. And this will you see in part, by that which we
are now first to examine in this place I mean his first objection, set down
out of King Henry, which shall go in this own words, as before we have
accustomed.

The Attorney.
In all the time of K. Henry the third, and his progenitors Kings of England,
and over sithence, if any man do sue before any Judge Ecclesiastical within
this Realm, for any thing, 2. H. 3. tit. Prohibitio^ 13. 4. H. 3. Ibidem. 15.
15. H. 3. tit. Prohibitio^ 22. Regist. fol.
whereof that court, by allowance and custom, had not lawful Conusaunce, the
King did ever by his writ, under the great seal, prohibit them to proceed.
And if the suggestion made to the King, whereupon the prohibition was grounded,
were after found untrue; then the King by his writ of consultation, under his
great seal, did allow and permit them to proceed. Also in all the reign of
Henry the third, and his progenitors Kings of England, and ever sithence, if
any issue were joined upon the loyalty of marriage, general bastardy, or such
like, the King did ever write to the Bishop of that Diocese, as mediate
officer and minister to his court, to certify the loyalty of marriage,
bastardy, or such like: all which do apparently prove, that those
Ecclesiastical Courts were under the Kings jurisdiction and commandment, and
that one of the Courts were so necessarily incident to the other, as the one
without the other could not deliver justice to the parties, as well in these
particular cases, as in a number of cases before specified, whereof the Kings
Ecclesiastical Court has jurisdiction. Now to command and to be obayed,
belong to sovereign, and supreme government, etc.

The Catholic Divine.
28. The conclusion or inference upon this narration, must be noted by the
Reader, to be M. Attorneys own, and not to be taken out of any other lawyers
book, as the former part of the narratio^ is, that tells us, how the King
appoints, that each Court, both spiritual and temporal, shall handle matters
and causes, The explication of the law.
proper and peculiar unto them, and the one not to intrude it self into the
affairs of the other; and to this effect are his writs appointed of
prohibition, where matters are assumed, which ought not in that Court to be
treated, and of consultation to will them to proceed, when their right is
known. All which makes for us, showing that the King would have the
subordination between these two Courts to be observed, and the spiritual to
direct the temporal, where any one thing might belong unto them both. As for
example, if any man were impeached of bastardy, and thereupon his inheritance
were claimed by another, the Ecclesiastical Court was first to give sentence
of the marriage, whether it were lawful, or no; and then according to that
sentence was the temporal Court to give possession, or not, of the inheritance.

29. And that this was the true sincere meaning of the law at that time,
intending thereby to show the excellency and prerogative of the Bishops
spiritual Courts, above the Kings temporal; is plain and evident by an other
Statute of this manner (which M. Attorney would not see) made in the 9. year of
King Henry the 6. where it is ordained in explication of the former, that when
any such Plea of bastardie is held in any Court of the Kings, the Judges
thereof shall make proclamation once in their Court, and the Chauncelour of
England certified thereof by them, shall cause to be made 3. several
proclamatio^s, in 3. several months, in the Chau^cery: Stat. an. 9. (...). 6.
cap. 11.
That al persons pretending any interest, to object against the party, shall
sue to the Ordinary (or Bishop) to whom the writ of certificate from the said
Judge or Judges, is, or shall be directed, to make their allegations, and
objections against the party, as the law of Holy Church requires. And that
without this form observed, al other process shall be void, etc. 30. And by
this we may see how careful the ancient laws were to have the spiritual
Court, as the superior, well informed according to the law of Holy Church;
and how not only ordinary Judges, but the Chancellor of England himself, and
his highest Court of Chauncery was appointed to serve unto this: Spiritual
co^^tes superior to the te^porall.
for that of the spiritual Courts judgment, depended in all such causes, the
judgment of the temporal Courts. And by this you will se also, the vain
sleight of M. Attorney, in telling us, that the King did ever write unto the
Bishop of that Diocese, as mediate officer and minister to his Court, to
certify the loyalty of marriage, etc. For where does he find in any ancient
law at all, those words ( as mediate officer and minister to his Court) and in
the latin, himself leaves out the words, to his Court; though in calling the
Bishop mediate officer, or minister, which is as much to say, as superior
officer, (for that in mediation and subordination of officers, and ministers
that govern, the mediate has the higher room, in respect of the people and
Court whereof he is officer) he includes a contradiction against himself, for
then is the said Bishop also above all immediate temporal Judges, that must
give him certificate (whereof the Chancellor we se is one) even in the Kings
temporal Courts themselves.

31. But the inference is much more subtle, when M. Attorney says: All which
do apparently prove, that those Ecclesiastical Courts, were under the Kings
jurisdiction and commandment. But M. Attorney must not so huddle up
jurisdiction and commandment, for that no man will deny, but that all sorts
of persons (as before has been said) are under the commandment, and
government of the temporal Prince, whom he may command, each one to do their
office and duty in the Commonwealth. And so may he appoint Ecclesiastical
Courts, to notify their sentences, judgments, and proceedings to his Courts,
and his Courts to inform the Ecclesiastical Courts, for good and mutual
correspondence between them both, which we grant also to be necessary in every
Commonwealth.

32. But jurisdiction, which M. Attorney craftily confounds here and
shuffleth up with commandment, is a far different thing, importing a higher
authority in the same kind: as if the temporal Prince have jurisdiction
Ecclesiastical upon Bishops and their spiritual Courts; How spiritual
Courts are the Kings courts.
then does it follow that all their power in spiritual matters is subordinate
to him, and derived from him; and so were there no necessity of this
distinction, and subordination of spiritual and temporal Courts. For that the
Prince having both powers in himself, might give the same unto any temporal
Judge to decide Ecclesiastical matters also in his Court: which yet M. Attorney
does often deny, that the Common-lawes can take conusaunce of such affairs.
And surely it is worth no less then laughter, to hear him repeat so often The
Kings Ecclesiastical Court, as though this were sufficient to prove the Kings
Ecclesiastical authority in those Courts, for that all Courts are the Kings
Courts, in that they are under his protection, government, and direction, and
to the use, and profit of his people. And so were also the Ecclesiastical
Courts of King Henry the third in this sense, who yet challenged no spiritual
authority therein, as by our whole former discourse you have seen.

33. But now let us contemplate a little the last conclusion of M. Attorney
upon this narration. Now to command (says he) and to be obayed, belongs to
sovereign and supreme government: which we deny not in the sense, wherein it
may be true; that is, to command, and to be obaied in temporal matters,
belongs to sovereignty in that kind; and to command, M. Attorneys inference
how it holds and holds not.
and be obaied in spiritual matters, belongs to sovereignty in those
affairs: whereof you have heard many examples, concerning the Sea of Rome
before alleged. But for the King, and his temporal officers to demand a
certificate from the Bishops Court (for the Statute used not the word, of
commanding or obaying) to let them know thereby, what the Bishops sentence and
judgment is, to the end they may frame theirs accordingly; this by M.
Attorneys leave is no commanding in the jurisdiction it self of spiritual
affairs; and consequently infers no Ecclesiastical sovereignty. And if he
be not satisfied by that which we have already alleged, out of the reign of
K. Henry the third, of spiritual sovereignty acknowledged by him, and all his
Realm in the Sea of Rome, but would see further some examples in particular of
the same sovereignty, or superiority at least, used and practiced by the
Bishops of England toward the King himself and Realm in that kind; let him
consider these examples following besides the former.

34. When K. Henry the third upon the 16. year of his reign falling out with
Hubert de Burgo Earl of Kent, that had been his great favorite, and high
Iusticer for many former years, cast him into prison, and he escaping, fled to
a certain Chapel for Sanctuary, Diverse examples ouerthrovving M. Attorneys
commentarye.
from whence the King had caused him to be drawn forth; Roger Bishop of London
(for that it was in his Diocese) came unto him, and said, that except he
caused him to be restored to the place of Sanctuary again, Ipse omnes huius
violentiae authors excommunicationis sententia innodaret. He would bind all
the authors of this violence used, by the sentence of excommunication. And what
followed of this? Did the King deny his authority? or say that he was not under
his jurisdiction? or that himself had supreme authority and jurisdiction over
the Bishop in that case? (as he might have done according to M. Attorneys
assertion) No: For the words of Matthew Paris immediately following, are these:
Paris anno. 1^32.
Rex autem licet inuitus, reatum suum intelligens, remisit Hubertum ad
Capellain, and vbi captus suerit a militibus armatis, restituitur ab ijsdem,
quint^ Calendas Octobris. The King, The King obeyed the Bishop of London in
restoring Earl Hubert.
though against his will, perceiving his own fault, sent back Earl Hubert to
the Chapel again, where he was restored, upon the fifth day before the
Calends of October, by the same armed souldiars, that had drawn him from
thence. And the same Author adds, that the Kings anger was so great, as he
commanded the Earls of Hartford and Essex, to set souldiars about the said
Chapel, that no meat might be given him, until he rendered himself. And not
many days after this the said Earl Hubert being carried from that Chapel,
upon composition, unto the castle of Vise in the Diocese of Salisbury, he by
help of two souldiars that kept him, escaping thence, got into a Parish Church
near by, out of which being taken by the Kings officers, Robert Bishop of
Salisbury, excommunicated them altogether, with their aiders and defenders,
and then went to the King in company of other Bishops, to denounce unto him
the said sentence, who after much resistance, yielded, says our Author; Paris.
Ibid.
Et in eadem Ecclesia, concedente (sed inuito) Rege, remissus est 15. Calend.
Nouemb. And so the said Earl Hubert was sent back again out of the said
Castle, unto the Church, the King yielding thereunto, though against his will,
upon the 15. day before the Calends of November in the year 1232.

35. The next year after this again, the forsaid Roger Bishop of London,
having been at Rome, and returned to Dover, found there Walter Bishop of
Carleile in his journey toward Rome, having appealed to the Pope against K.
Henry, for certain injuries offered him, and to his Church, as he pretended;
and albeit the King did not let or forbid his repair to Rome, yet showing
himself much displeased therewith, his officers at the port handled him very
discourteouslie, and denied him passage without the Kings license: which the
said Bishop of London seeing, K Henry obeyed the B. of London in spiritual
matters.
excommunicated all the Kings officers, that had part in that violence, and
then going to Hereford, where the King at that time lay with a great army to
invade Wales, and taking certain Bishops with him, they told his Majesty of
the abuse committed. Which, when the K. seemed not to care for, or not willing
to redress, they renewed there again in the Kings presence, the sentence of
excommunication against the said malefactors, and all those that assisted or
favored them. Non mediocriter Rege murmurante (says our Author) and ne talem
ferrent sententiam prohibente. The King not a little repinning, and forbidding
them to pronounce any such sentence; So as here we see commanding without
obaying in spiritual matters, meets with M. Attorneys conclusion, that to
command, and to be obaied, belongs to sovereignty, and supreme government.

36. And yet further the next year ensuing, which was the 18. of K. Henry's
reign, the King being highly offended with the Earl Marshall of England, The
Bishops refuse to excommunicate at the Kings appointment.
for entering into a certain Castle of his own, by force: Praecepit Episcopis
cunctis, vt Mariscallum nominatim excommunicarent. Sed illi e contrae
communiter dixerunt; Indignum esse, quia Castellum, quod suum fuit, occupauit.
The King commanded all the Bishops (being gathered together in Parliament) to
excommunicate by name, the Earl Marshall. But they answered him with one voice
to the contrary; that he deserved it not, for so much, as he had taken, but
his own Castle. And here again we see commanding without obaying in
spiritual affairs. And if the King had thought himself, to be supreme in
Ecclesiastical authority, he might have excommunicated the Marshall himself,
without depending of his Bishops.

37. And a few days after this again upon the year 1234. the holy man
Edmund, that afterward was canonized for a Saint, being consecrated Archbishop
of Canterbury, at which consecration, the King himself was present with his
nobility, and 13. Bishops, (as our Author recounteth) the said Archbishop after
his consecration, consulting with the said Bishops and nobility, about the
pitiful State of the Realm, divided in it self by the Kings evil
government, that followed the counsel of Pictauians, Paris. anno. 1234.
and other strangers; the said Archbishop went to the King, laid the
inconveniences before him, humbly besought him to take the true remedy, which
was to dismiss those strangers, and if he would not, S. Edmond Archb. of
Canterbury threatens excommunication to the King if he obey him not.
he should be forced to use Ecclesiastical Censures against them: Et ipse in
co^tinenti, cum omnibus, qui aderant, Praelatis, in ipsum regem sententiam
serret excommunicationis: He would out of hand, with all the Bishops there
present, pronounce the sentence of excommunication against the King himself.
Rex autem peris audicas, humiliter respondit; quod consilijs little in omnibus
obtemperaret, etc. And the pious King hearing this, did answer humbly, that he
would in all things obey their counsels. And so he did, and within few days
after, he sent away Peter, Bishop of Winchester from the Court, which was the
chief of the said strangers that most defended them, and cast into prison
another Peter surnamed De Rhicuallis, that had been Treasurer, and diverse
others. So as here also we see the spiritual authority of Clergymen above
the King; not only in the Pope himself, but also in the Bishops of England,
which otherwise were subjects to the said King in temporal affairs.

38. Yea, not only Bishops, but other Prelates also of lesser degree, have
exercised the same authority spiritual in England, even against the King when
occasion was offered. As for example, Paris anno. 1215. page 656.
when this K. Henry had used very familiarly and intrinsecally, one Raph
Briton, that had been his Treasurer, he after falling out with him, banished him
the Court: and soon after that again, the said Raph being a Clerk, and
living at his Chanonry of S. Paul's, the Mayor of London had commission to
apprehend him, K. Henry obeyed the Deane of Paul's in spiritual authority.
and send him to the Tower, as he did: which Doctor Lusey Deane of Paul's
understanding, called his Chanons together (the Bishops of London being
absent) and seeing the violence used to a Clergyman, did put the Church of S.
Paul under Interdict, and pronounced sentence of excommunication against the
doers, maintainers, and favorers of this unlawful act. The King stood stiff
for a time (says our Author) but at length, Rex dictum Ranulphum, licet
inuitus, solui, and in pace dimitti praecepit. The King though against his
will, did command the said Raph to be remitted peaceably unto the place,
whence he was taken.

39. Now then these examples and many more which for breuityes sake I
pretermit, do make another manner of proof of Ecclesiastical sovereignty in
Clergymen, then does M. Attorneys poor infere^ce about the sending for a
certificate to the Bishops Court, concerning matters to be tried therein, as
before you have heard. And by this also you may see, and consider the
difference of substance, and substantial dealing between us. And so much to
this first instance. Now let us examine the second.

The Attorney.
By the ancient Canons and decrees of the Church of Rome, the issue borne
before solemnization of marriage is as lawful and inheritable (marriage
following) as the issue borne after marriage. But this was never allowed or
appointed in England, and therefore was never of any force here. And this
appears by the Statute of Merton, The Statute of Merton. an. 20. Hen. 3.
made in the 20. year of Henry the 3. where it is said to the Kings writ of
bastardy: Whether one being borne before matrimony, may inherit in like manner,
as he that is borne after matrimony? All the Bishops answered, that they would
not, nor could not answer to it, because it was directly against the common
order of the Church: and all the Bishops instanted the Lords that they would
consent, that all such as were borne before matrimony should be legitimate, as
well as they that be borne within matrimony, to the succession of inheritance;
for so much as the Church accepts such to be legitimate. And all the Earls
and Barons with one voice answered, we will not change the laws of England,
which hitherto have been used, and approved.

The Catholic Divine.
40. This is the second instance of M. Attorney, taken out of this reign of K.
Henry; and we must imagine, that proofs go hard with him, when to seem to
say somewhat, he is driven to bring forth such silly ware, as this is. For if
all be granted (as it may be) which here is said, what can he infer thereof,
but only, that the Lords and Barons of the Parliament, This instance proves
nothing.
did not think good to alter or change the ancient laws, or customs of the
Realm, about succession of their children, by legitimation, after matrimony
contracted: notwithstanding the Church of Rome in certain cases did allow them
for legitimate and lawful, in respect of taking holy orders, enjoying
benefices, and other like commodityes: what (I say) does this import M.
Attorneys conclusion, that K. Henry took upon him supreme Ecclesiastical
government? For that this was free for the Realm to admit, or not admit the
said legitimation, to the effect of lawful succession and inheritance. And so
the Canons themselves do expressly set down.

41. For better understanding whereof, we must note, that whereas by the
ancient Ciuill-law, great respect was had ever to children, borne out of
wedlock, if marriage afterward did ensue, notwithstanding they held marriage
but only for a Civil contract: so afterward when Christian Emperors came to
bear sway, more indulgence and favor was showed therein; as may appeer by the
Constitutions, both of Constantine the first Christian Emperor, and Zeno that
ensued him, and more yet by Justinian, See the Code l. 5. tit. 27. log. 1.
Constant and lib. 5. Imper. Ze 1. and lib. 10. Imper. Justin. and Novel.
constit. 89. de natural. liberis.. Siquis igitur. etc. Lib. 4. Decret. tit. 17.
cap. 6.
which do most fully in diverse places, both of the Code, and Novel
Constitutions explicate the same. In conformity whereof the Canon Law also
decrees in this sort: Tanta est vis matrimonij, vt qui antea sunt geniti,
post contractum matrimonium legitimi habeantur. So great is the force of
matrimony (held for a Sacrament among Christians) as it makes such to be
legitimate after it is co^tracted, who were illegitimate before. But yet this
is with some restrictions: as for example, that they must be borne, ex soluto
and soluta: that is to say both the father, and mother must be unmarried at the
time when the said children are begotten. For if either of them were married at
that time, then this privilege holds not, as Cap. Co^questus est.
appears in the same law.

42. Secondly this legitimation by ensuing marriage, is to be understood
principally, as before has said, In spiritualibus: To enable men to
Ecclesiastical promotions, though in the Popes temporal dominions it may
enable them also to temporal succession, but not in the States and dominions
of other Princes. And this very distinction or caution is set down in like
manner by the Cap. 13. Per venerabilem.
law it self; and heervpon is resolved also in a case touching the King of
England, by Pope Alexander the 3. that albeit the Ecclesiastical Judge must
determine of the lawfulnes of marriage it self; yet the question of temporal
succession, or inheritance thereupon depending, must be decided by the Judges
of the temporal Court: Ilidom. Cap. 7. Causam quae.
Nos attendentes ( says Pope Alexander to the Bishops of London and
Worcester) quod ad Regem pertinet, non ad Ecclesiam de talibus possessionibus
iudicare, Fraternitati vestrae mandamus, quatenus Regi possessionis iudicium
relinquentes, de causa principali cognoscatis, eamque terminetis. We
considering that it belongs to the King of England, and not to the Church to
judge of such possessions, as depend of legitimation; we command your
brotherhoods, that leaving the judgment of the said possessions to the King and
his Courts, you examine only the principal cause, concerning the loialtie of
the marriage it self, and determine the same.

43. Heerby then we see first, that M. Attorney alleging this instance, has
alleged nothing at all against us, or for himself. For that when the Earls
and Barons refused to change the laws of England, concerning inheritance upon
legitimation, they said no more, then is allowed them by the Canon Law it self,
as you have heard. And how will M. Attorney infer of this, that K. Henry the
third, held himself to have supreme authority ecclesiastical; for that this
must be his conclusion out of his instance, or else he says nothing,

44. And it shall not be amiss to note by the way, how these men do use to
ouer-lash in their asseueratio^s, to help their feeble cause thereby. M.
Attorney mistaketh and mis-relateth the matter.
By the ancient Canons and Decrees of the Church of Rome (says he) the issue
borne before solemnization of marriage, is as lawful and inheritable (marriage
following) as the issue borne after marriage. But this is not sincerely
related: For the Canon Law, as you have heard, puts diverse restrictions,
both in the persons to be legitimated, and in the ends and effects, whereunto
they are legitimated; as also concerning the Countries and Kingdoms, wherein
they are legitimated. Of all which variety of circumstances and considerations
M. Attorney saying nothing, his intention therein may easily be ghessed at. And
so much for this matter.

OF THE LIVES AND REIGNS OF KING EDWARD The first, and second; Father, and
son: And what arguments M. Attorney draws from them, toward the proving of
his purpose. CHAP. XI.
HAVING now come down by orderly descent of seven hundred years and more, of
the reigns of our Christian English Kings, and showed them all to have been of
one, and the self same Catholic Roman religion, and comforme also in the
point of this our controversy, about the acknowledgement and practice of the
spiritual power, and authority of the Sea Apostolic in England, concerning
ecclesiastical affairs: And having declared the same so largely, as you have
heard, in three Henry's since the Conquest, of famous memory and authority
above the rest, and the last of them author also, and parent of all Statute Law
in our Realm; we are to examine now in order three Edwardes lineally
succeeding the one to the other, and all three proceeding from this last named
Henry. Under which Edwardes and their offspring, M. Attorney prete^deth more
restraint to have been made in some points, of the Popes external jurisdiction,
then under former Kings; which though it be granted upon some such occasions
(as after shall be showed) yet will you find the matter far short of that
conclusion, which he pretends to maintain, that hereby they took upon them
spiritual soueraingty in causes Ecclesiastical. You shall see it by the
trial.

OF KING EDWARD THE FIRST, Which was the nynth King after the Conquest.. I.
2. When King Henry the third dyed, This King began his reign an. 1272. and
reigned 35. years until 1307.
his eldest son Prince Edward was occupied in the wars of the Holy land,
being then of the age of thirty three years, who hearing of his Fathers death,
returned presently homeward, and passing by the City of Rome, found there
newly made Pope, Gregory the tenth, called before Theobald, with whom in times
past, he had familiarly been acquainted, whiles he was Legate for his
predecessor Vrbane the fourth, in the said wars of the Holy Land; who received
him with all honor and love, Stow in vita Edouards pr^^^.
and granted unto him ( says Stow) the tenth of all Ecclesiastical benefices
in England, as well temporal, as spiritual, for one year, and the like to
his brother Edmund for an other, in recompense of their expenses made in the
Holy Land. Whereupon, when the next year after, the said Gregory called a
general Council at Lions in France (which was the second held in that place)
of above five hundred Bishops, and a thousand other Prelates, King Edward sent
also a most honorable embassage thither, both of Bishops and Noblemen.

3. This King Edward beginning his reign in the year of Christ 1272.
continued the same for almost 35. years, King Edward surnamed Long-shanke.
with variable events. For as he was a tall, and goodly Prince in person, high
in stature, and thereof surnamed Long-shanke; so was he in mind also no less
warlike, haughty, earnest, and much given to have his own will by any means
whatsoever, when once he set himself thereon: though yet when he was in calm,
and out of passion, he showed himself a most religious, and pious Prince.

4. Of the later may be example among other things, his special devotion to
the Blessed Virgin mother of our Savior, which both Matthew Westminster,
Devotion of K. Edward.
and Walsingham do recount from the very beginning of his reign, and do
continue the same throughout his life, by occasion of many strange and
miraculous (...) from imminent dangers, which himself ascribed to the said
d^uotion, and to our Blessed Ladies special protection. Whereunto may be
referred in like manner, the piety of the said King, showed in diverse other
occasions. As first of all, when in the first year of his reign he
voluntarily set forth, published, and confirmed the Great Charter made by his
Father in favor of the Church, saying as in the said Charter is to be read:
Magna Charta.
Pro salute animae nostrae, and animarum antecessorum and successorum
nostroruus Regum Angliae, ad exaltationem Sanctae Ecclesiae, and emendationem
Regni nostri, spontanea and bona reluntate nostra, dedimus and concessinius,
etc. We have given and granted freely, and of our own good will, this
Charter, for the health of our soul, and of the souls, as well of our
predecessors, as successors, Kings of England, to the exaltation of holy
Church, and amendment of our Kidgdome, etc.

5. And the like piety he showed in many other occasions in like manner, as
namely, when he being in his journey with a great army toward Scotland, and
his wife Q. Eleanor daughter to King Ferdinand the third of Spain, surnamed
the Saint, a most virtuous and religious Lady falling sick, and dying near
the borders thereof, he leaving his course, returned back with her dead body
to London: VValsingam in vitae Edward's p. anno. 1191.
Cunctis diebus vitae suae eam plangebat (says Walsingham) and Iesum benignum
iugis precibus pro ea interpellabat, eleemosynarum largitiones, and Missarum
celebrationes pro ea diuersis Regni locis ordinans in perpetuum and procurans.
King Edward prayed and gave alms for his Queens soul.
The King did bewail this Queens death all the days of his life, and did by
continual prayers, call upon merciful Jesus, to use mercy toward her,
ordeyning great store of alms to be given for her, as also procuring Masses to
be said for her soul, in diverse parts of the Kingdom.

6. And moreover in all the places where the said body rested, as it came to
London, he erected great goodly crosses in her memory: Vt a transeuntibus
(says Walsingham) pro eius anima deprecetur: that such as passed by, seeing
that cross, might pray for her soul. And moreover in particular, Crosses
erected.
Stow out of ancient records does affirm, the said King to have bestowed two
manors, and nine hamlets of land, upon the monastery of Westminster, for the
keeping of yearly obits for the said Queen, and for money to be given to the
poor in alms.

7. I leave to speak of many other such actions of his, as that he procured
amongst other things, the solemn and most honorable translations of the
bodies of three English saints, Works of piety of King ^dvvard.
in his days, S. Richard Bishop of Chichester S. Hugh Bishop of Lincoln, and
S. William Archbishop of York: He consented also and concurred that Q Eleanor
his mother, should leave her Princely state and dignity, and to be veyled Nun
in the Monastery of Almesbury, and enjoy her dowry (which was great) that she
had in England all days of her life, VVestmon. in he^. or maiori in vita Edou.
primi.
which was also confirmed to her by the Popes authority: (says Matthew
Westminster) yea and soon after he consented in like manner, that his own
dearest daughter the Lady Mary also (to whom he had designed a great and high
state by marriage) should follow the like profession of religions life in the
same monastery, though in this later he had much more difficulty to win
himself to consent thereunto, then in the former.

8. And finally, this other act also may be added for a full complement of his
piety, when he was in good tune, which is recorded by the said Matthew of
Westminster that lived at the same time, and perhaps was present; that in the
year of Christ 1297. which was the tenth before he dyed, being to pass over
the seas toward his wars, and having extremely vexed his people, both
spiritualty and temporalty, with heavy exactions for the same, and in
particular broken grievously with Robert VVinchelsey Archbishop of Canterbury,
he being now ready to depart, called all the people together, upon the 13. of
July, before the great hall of Westminster, and there standing up upon a
certain scaffolde of timber, the said Archbishop of Canterbury, newly
reconciled unto him, remaining on the one side, and the Earl of Warwick on
the other, and his little Prince Edward before him: Vestmonasteriensis anne
1197. A pious and patheticall speech of King Edward.
Erumpentibus lachrymis (says our Author) veniam de commissis humiliter
postulauit, etc. the tears breaking forth, he did most humbly ask forgiveness
of his subjects, for all that he had committed against them, confessing that he
had not governed them so well, and quietly as became a King to do, but had
taken their goods from them, etc. Adding further and saying: Behold I go now
to expose my self, and my life to danger for you: wherefore I ask at your
hands, that if I return again, you will receive me in the place that now you
hold me, and I shall restore unto you again all that I have taken from you,
and if I return not, then take this my child, and crown him for your King.
Whereunto the Archbishop weeping abundantly, answered that it should be so, and
the people with crying out, and casting up their arms, promised fidelity, and
obedience unto his ordination. So Matthew Westminster. And this for his piety.

King Edvvardes occasions of dealing in Wales and Scotland.
9. But of the other point of his peremptory and violent proceeding diverse times
with his subjects, there want not also many examples, especially in exacting
often, and great subsidies at their hands, for his wars of France, Scotland,
and Wales, wherein he was continually employed; and was the first King in deed,
that ever brought Wales to be wholly subject to England, Lecline the last
Prince thereof being taken and slain, and his brother David likewise
apprehended, and put to death in London by the same K. Edward.

10. Alexander also King of Scotland being deceased, and all his issue
extinguished, K. Edward as chief Lord, took upon him to decide that
controversy for the succession, and in the end determined the matter in favor
of John Baliol Earl of Galloway, against Robert Bruise Earl of Valenand, that
pretended the same. And albeit the whole nobility, and people of Scotland bound
themselves by obligation (which our historyes do set down) to stand to the
judgment of the said K. Edward: VValsingam anno. 1292. in vita Edouards.
yet in the end they would not, but assisted the said Bruise, and made recourse
to Pope Boniface the 8. to prohibit K. Edward to proceed in that matter, and
to command him to surcease from his wars against Scotland, which they
pretended to be in the protection of the Sea of Rome: and finally after much
bloodshed, and infinite expenses, both in this Kings time and his successors,
the offspring of Bruise prevailed in that Country.

11. But now (as I said) in respect of these wars, and many necessityes thereon
depending, K. Edward was forced greatly to press his people with exactions,
and to make them forfaite, and buy again their libertyes, especially that of
Magna charta, King Edvvardes mutabilitie in keeping privileges.
and of the Charter of Forest, which as voluntarily, he set forth and
published in the beginning of his reign, as you have heard: so afterward (the
same not being observed) upon instant suites of his people and nobility, and
contributions granted him for the renouation thereof, he confirmed it two or
three times in his life, and as often revoked the same again, until he had
more money. And last of all, Math. Vestmonast. and VValsingam anno. 1307.
in the year 1307. which was the last of his reign, he sued to the Pope for a
dispensation of his oath, made in that behalf to keep the said Charters and
privileges, affirming them to be made against his will, and by force of his
peoples importunity.

12. We read also, that in the year 1278. and sixth of his reign, Math.
Vestmon. an. 1278.
he did deprive many famous Monasteryes (says Matthew of Westminster) of their
ancient accustomed libertyes, and namely among others, the Monastery of
Westminster, wherein he had received (says he) both baptism, confirmation,
and coronation, and wherein his Fathers, and other his ancestors bodies lay.
And moreover, in the year 1295. he used great violence to all Monks and
religious men, Violent proceeding of K. Edward.
that were strangers, and had their Monasteryes builded by strangers in
England: for he took their Monasteries and goods from them, allowing only to
every Monk 18. pence a week for his mayntenaunce, for a time: and the next
year after he commanded upon the sudden all the Monasteryes of England to
be searched, and all their treasure to be taken violently, and to be brought to
London to his Exchequer, for the charges of his said wars. And two years
after this again, the same King holding his Parliament at S. Edmunds-bury, and
demanding a great contribution of his people, the Clergy denied it, pretending
a new commandment and constitution lately made by Pope Bonifacius the eight,
whereby he did forbid under pain of excommunication, that any such exactions
should be paid by Ecclesiastical men, without consent of the Sea Apostolic;
whereat King Edward being offended, A sleight of K. Edward against the Clergy.
though he would not contradicte the said constitution; yet he excluded the
Clergy, that refused to pay, from his protection, and from the protection of
the laws; whereby they being abandoned, and exposed to all iniuryes, the most
of them fell to composition with the King, and so bought out, and purchased
their protection again, more deerer then they might have continued the same by
their contribution.

13. And as for the Archbishop of Canterbury that stood constant amongst the
rest in that denial: In anno. 1294.
Omnia bona eius (says Matthew of Westminster) mobilia, and immobilia capta
sunt in manu Regis. All his goods both moveable and immovable were taken into
the Kings hands. And the same Author does recount infinite other intolerable
vexations, laid upon them that would not agree to the Kings demands in those
affairs, which were accompanied with such threats and terrors, as the Deane
of Paul's in London, named William Mont-fort, coming one day before the King,
to speak for his Chanons, was so terrifyed, as he became mute, and fell down
dead before him: which yet (says out Author) moved little the King, but that
he persisted in his demaundes. And one day sending a knight, named Sir George
Hauering, to the Monastery of Westminster, when all the Monks were there
gathered together in their Refectory, or dyning-place, the said knight
proposed in the Kings name, that they would grant him half their revenues
for his wars, A Knight sent to force the Monks of Westminster to yield by
fear to the Kings will.
and if any will deny this demand (says he) let him stand up, and show
himself, that he may be handled as one guilty of breaking the Kings peace:
Whereupon all yielded, says Matthew of Westminster, and no man would after,
with so great danger, contradicte the Kings will. And thus much of his violent
manner of proceeding with the Church and Clergy, whereunto I might adioyne many
other things; as his dryuing out of the Realm the forsaid Robert Archbishop of
Canterbury; his Statutes made in the last Parliament at Carleile the same year
he dyed, in prejudice of Holy Churches liberty, which were the first that are
read to have bin made in that kind, and consequently are thought to have been a
great cause of all the miseryes and calamityes, that fell upon his posterity,
as after you shall hear.

14. But yet all this does not prove, that King Edward denied, or doubted of
the Popes spiritual power, or took the same upon himself, which is M.
Attorneys case and conclusion. Nay rather they do show, and prove his
acknowledgement of the said authority, if we consider them well, though in
certain points that seemed to extend themselves to temporal affairs, and
might be prejudicial unto him, he sought to decline and avoid the execution
thereof. In mere spiritual things the King never made difficulty to obey the
Sea of Rome.
But in things merely spiritual, he never showed difficulty. As for example:
that his Bishops and Archbishops went to Rome to receive their confirmation and
inuestitures there, and sometimes were chosen also immediately from thence: as
when in the year 1278. Robert Kilwarby Archbishop of Canterbury was made
Cardinal by Pope Nicholas the third, and the Monks of Canterbury by request
of the King, had chosen his Chancellor, the Pope would not admit him, but
appointed an other, to wit John Peckam, Provincial of the Franciscan friars
in England, who being admitted, held the said Archbishopricke for 13. years
until he dyed. But as for confirmation and inuestitures, no doubt can be made,
but all was to be had from Rome, as expressly you may read of the admission and
consecration of William Archbishop of York: In Romana Curia co^secratus
(says VValsingam) who was consecrated in the Court of Rome in this same year
of 1278. by Pope Martyn the fourth, VValsingam. eodem anno.
that succeeded to Nicolas. And the same Author affirms, that the foresaid
John Peckam, Archbishop of Canterbury being also consecrated in Rome, did some
two years after, call a Council at Reading, commanding all his Suffragan
Bishopps to observe exactly the decrees of the late general Council held at
Lions by Pope Gregory the tenth; nor did King Edward mislike or repine any
thing at this, as neither he did at another Council called by the same
Archbishop Peckam in the year 1281. wherein he endeauored to force all Abbots,
and other exempted persons to come to the said Council, but (says Matthew
Westminster) the Abbotts of VVestminsters, S. Edmonds-Bury, S. Albanes, and of
Waltham appealed from him to the Pope, without any mention of the King, which
had been injurious unto him, if he had taken himself to have had authority,
and that supreme, in Ecclesiastical affairs.

15. Furthermore in the year of Christ 1295. being the 22. of King Edwardes
reign, Diverse Bishoprics disposed of by Popes under K. Edward the first.
when the foresaid Robert VVinchelsey was first chosen Archbishop of
Canterbury, the said King sent him to Rome to be confirmed, and consecrated by
Pope Celestinus the fifth, which soon after gave over the popedom to
Bonifacius the eight. And three years after that again, to wit 1298. the
Bishopric of Ely being void, and the greater part of the Monks having
chosen the Prior of their Covent for Bishop, the other party chose John
Langhton the Kings Chancellor, who going to Rome by the Kings favor and
co^mendatio^, to plead his cause before Pope Boniface, could not prevail, nor
yet the Prior, but that the said Pope gave the Bishopric of Ely to the Bishop
of Norwich, and the Bishopric of Norwich to the Prior, and the Arch-deaconry
of Canterbury to the Kings Chancellor.

16. Moreover in the year 1305. when Pope Clement the fifth a Frenchman,
borne in the Diocese of Bordeaux, was made Pope, and came into France in
person, first of all others translating the Sea of Rome to Auinion, where it
continued seauenty years, King Edward sent Ambassadors unto him, the Bishops
of Lichfield and Worcester, together with the Earl of Lincoln, King
Edvvardes devotion toward the first Pope in Auinion.
presenting unto him: Singula vtensiliae (says Matthew of Westminster) quibus
ministraretur ei in Camera, and in mensa, omnia ex auro purissimo. All
necessary plate for the service of his chamber, and table of most pure gold.
And at the same time he sent two new Bishops elected for York, and London, to
be confirmed by him: Quos dimisit ad propria cons^^^^^tos: (says our Author)
whom the said Pope Clement sent home again with their confirmation. King
Edward accused the Archb. of Canterbury unto the Pope.
And finally when not long after, the King fell out with the forsaid Archbishop
of Canterbury Robert VVinchelsey, for that he had showed himself again not so
forward to follow his will in all things: Dictum Robertum Cantuariensem (says
Walsingham) apud Dominum Papam accusauit Rex Anglia. The King of England did
accuse the said Robert Archbishop of Canterbury, unto Pope Clement the fifth,
that he was combyned with his enemies, etc. for the which the said Archbishop
was cited to appear before the Pope, and suspended from the execution of his
office, quousque de sibi impositis legitime se purgaret: until he should
lawfully purge himself, of the imputations laid against him by the King.
Whereby we see what authority this King did acknowledge to be in the Pope and
Sea of Rome.

17. We read also, that when in the year 1299. King Edward was passed over
with a great army into Flanders, and did destroy that Country by fire and
sword, Pope Boniface sent two Cardinall-Legates to entreat him, that he would
be content to make truce for two years, VVestmonast. eodem anno.
to the intent that peace in the mean time might be concluded, adding
further-more says our Author: paenam excommunicationis, and interdicti
terrarum suarum: the pain of excommunication and Interdict of his countries,
if he yielded not thereunto: Sed Rex perpendens, etc. consensit in treguas
indictas (says he) the King considering well all circumstances, etc. did
consent unto the truce appointed by the Pope. And whereas the next year after,
by other messengers sent unto him in Canterb. the said Pope Boniface desired
him to put at liberty John King of Scotland, which he had in hold, assuring him
that the King of England should le^se nothing by this: The great respect borne
to the Sea of Rome by King Edward.
Eorum petitioni Rex condescendens, respondit, se ipsum loannem, tanquam
seductorem, falsum, and periurum ad Papam missurum. The King condescending to
their petition, made answer, that he would send the said John, as a false, and
perjured deceauer, unto the Pope to be punished by him. And so he did, and they
carried him into France with them.

18. And when afterward in the year 1301. King Edward was busily attent to his
wars in Scotland, and Pope Boniface informed by the grievous complaints of the
Scottish-men, that K. Edward did them injury, wrote and gave in commission to
the Archbishop of Canterbury, by an express messenger named Humbert, to go
unto the King, and will him to desiste, and to remit the justice of the matter
to be examined and tried by the Sea Apostolic; anyd though the said King for
the present, took the matter very grievously, and swear that he would
prosecute his said enterprise to the uttermost: yet a little while after in the
same year, he sent the Earl of Lincoln, An Embassadge sent by K. Edward to
excuse himself to the Pope.
and Sir Hugh Spencer to the said Sea Apostolic, to show the right of his
cause, and what injuries he had received at the Scots hands: Iusuper and
Dominum Papam deprecarentur, ne mendacij fabricatoribus sinum aperiret: And
that moreover they should beseech the Pope, that he would not open his bosom
(of belief) unto the Scottish-men that devised lies; whereunto the Pope
hearkening, wished notwithstanding that the King for his cause would give the
truce, for a time, by him assigned, whereunto the King yielded.

19. And when in the year following the said Pope Bonifacius upon instance of
the said Scottish-men, wrote more earnestly to K. Edward in this affayre,
alleging that Scotland was in the protection of the Sea Apostolic, yea and
that it apperteyned also to the temporal right of the Church (by submission
belike of the Prince and inhabitants thereof at that time made) the King
gathering a Parliament at Lincoln, determined therein first to write himself to
the Pope about this matter, and then that the lay-nobility and people should
write another letter somewhat more earnestly to the same effect. The Kings
letter began thus: Sanctissimo in Christo Patri, Domino Bonifacio, Thomas
VValsingam. in an. 1308.
diuina prouidentia Sancta Romanae, and vniuersalis Ecclesiae summo Pontifici:
Edwardus Dei gratia, Rex Angliae salutem and deuota pedum oscula beatorum. To
the most holy father in Christ Boniface, by Gods providence supreme Bishop of
the holy Roman, and universal Church: Edward by the grace of God, King of
England sends greeting and the devout kissing of his blessed feet. By which
title we may see, in what estimation he held the Pope at that day: The manner
of vvriting of K Edward and his nobility to P. Bonifacius.
and albeit in that letter he does protest, that he does not send this his
justification for his pretense to Scotland, in form of judgment, to have it
tried by the Sea Apostolic, as making any doubt thereof, but only to inform
his Holiness conscience: (which he does very largely, beginning from the coming
of Brutus himself into England) yet does he conclude beseeching him, not to
believe the informations of his adversaries, and emulators: Sed Statum nostrum
and iura nostra Regia supradicta habere velitis, si placet, paternis affectibus
commendata. That it may please you to have our State and Kingly right before
laid down, recommended to your fatherly affection.

20. But the Earls and Barons, and lay nobility of the land, that wrote a
several letter to the Pope, as before has been said, were more earnest in
defense of the Kings title, saying: Math Vestmonaster. and Thom. Valsing in an.
1301. and 1302.
Manu tenebimus cum toto posse, totisque viribus, etc. We will hold and defend
the same, with all our power and forces, nor will we permit our King, though he
would, to leave of this title. Quocirca Sanctitati Vestrae reuerenter and
humiliter supplicamus, etc. Wherefore we do reverently, and humbly make
supplication to your Holiness, that you will defend our said King, that is a
devout son of the Catholic Roman Church, as also his rightes, libertyes,
customs, and laws, and permit him to continue therein without diminution, or
molestation, etc. Given at Lincoln 1301.

21. And by all this now, we may perceive the state of things in our country
at that time, as also the sense and judgment of K. Edward, and his realm
about this our controversy of spiritual, and Ecclesiastical authority. And
that if this King did use sometimes, some rigorous dealing toward the Clergy,
it was not for that he doubted of their spiritual authority, King Edward's
laws in prejudice of the Clergy of England.
or esteemed the same to be in himself; but partly upon his forsaid necessity
of war, and partly for the emulation conceived against them, by the laity for
their wealth, and other such causes. And as for the laws which he made in
their prejudice, as that of Mort-main, whereby is prohibited that any thing
shall pass ad manum mortuam: that is to say, to any of their communityes that
pay not tribute to the King, without the Kings special license, and some other
laws in like manner for restraint (as it seemed) of their external
jurisdiction, in certain affairs; it proceeded of the same emulation, and
complaints of the subjects, begun in the time of King Henry the third, as you
have heard, and continued in this man's days, as also in the days of diverse of
his succesors. But this is nothing to our question in hand, though M. Attorney
has nothing else but such matter as this, as presently you shall see: for now
shall we pass to his objections under this King, which are four of very small
moment, as by handling will appear.

The Attorney.
Vide 3 Edo. 5. ^^.
In the reign of K. Edward the first, a subject brought in a Bull of
excommunication, against another subject of this Realm, and published it to
the Lord Treasurer of England, Ass pl. 19. Brook tit. praemunire pl. 10. Note
this was vva ^y the common-lavv of England before any statute made.
and ^his was by the ancient common law of England adjudged treason against
the King, his Crown, and dignity, for the which the offender should have been
drawn, and hanged, but at the great instance of the Chancellor and Treasurer,
he was only abiured the Realm for ever.

The Catholic Divine.
22. This case related out of Brooks Report (if so it be there, for I have
not the book) is but a particular case, and showed only de facto, and not de
iure: whereas M. Attorneys book notwithstanding is entitled De iure, as often
I have, and must still put him in mind. True it is, that he notes here in the
margent, that this was done by the Common Law of England, before any Statute
made. But what reason can he bring, or any man imagine, why we should believe
this, to wit, that this fact of bringing in a Bull of excommunication from
Rome, against a subject in those days, should be adjudged treason by the
ancient Common Law of England. For a man may demand, what is that Co^mon-law,
or ancient Co^mon-law, not made by Statute, nor introduced by any common
custom that can be proved? How was it made? By whom? where? at what time?
upon what occasion? For to avouch a Common Law, Co^mon-lavv must have some
birth or beginning
and ancient common law without beginning, author, cause, occasion, or record
of the introduction thereof, is a strange Metaphysicall contemplation; for that
laws do not grow up without beginning, but must needs be made or admitted by
some Prince or people. And whereas we have showed from time to time, that all
our English Princes and people, have been Catholics from their first
conversion, unto this Kings time, and uniform also in this point of
acknowledging the spiritual jurisdiction of the Sea of Rome, and nothing more
ordinary among them, then censures, and excommunications from Rome, when
necessity seemed to require; how could this ancient common law come in ure
among them, yea, and be ancient in K. Edward the first his time, contrary to
the grounds, and practice of the religion then in use and ever before, and no
mention ever made thereof in all antiquity, till ^ow by M. Attorney, and that
only in the air, as you see?

23. Moreover we read in Matthew of Westminster, that when this King Edward was
in his most heat against the Clergy, for denying him the half of their rents
and goods, as before has been said, which they did upon the prohibition of Pope
Bonifacius, he fearing least some men might bring in an excommunication against
himself, and them of the Clergy that yielded to pay the same, and thereby had
bought his protection again; he only forbad: VVestmonasteriensis an. 1197.
Subpaena incarcerationis, ne quis contra ipsum Regem, and ces qui iampridem
suam protectionem quaesierant, excommunicationis sententiam promulgaret,
prouocatione sacta pro se ad Romanam Curiam, and pro ipsis. He prohibited under
pain of imprisonment, A clear overthrow of M. Attorneys assertion.
that no man should publish my sentence of excommunication against the King
himself, or those that had newly sought his protection; yea his Majesty made a
provocation, or appeal also, as well for himself, as for them that stood on
his side, to the Court of Rome. So as if the King, by special decree of his
own, appointed only the pain of imprisonment, for such as should publish any
sentence of excommunication against himself, and for himself also appealed to
Rome; it is not likely, that the ancient Common-lawes of England had made it
treason before, against the King, his crown, and dignity, to publish an
excommunication against a subject, that was a thing most usual in those days.

24. Well, it may be that for repressing the unquiet spiritts of some
particular subjects (that upon light occasions and false suggestions, would
procure Bulls of excommunication from Rome) some order might be taken at that
time, for severe punishment of them, that rashly without showing the same to
Judges appointed for that purpose, should publish the said Bulls in England, In
what sense the publishing of a Bull might be punished in K. Edward's days.
as we see also at this d^y to be observed in Spain, Naples, Sicily, France,
and other Catholic Realms, where no man may publish such things, without a
view and Placet of the Magistrate appointed to that effect; and this not for
denying, or restrayning the said authority of the Sea Apostolic, but for
keeping peace, and orderly proceeding among subjects, as is pretended, and for
better enforming his Holiness, if false suggestions have been given. And that
some like order might be at this time in England, may appear in part, by
another objection, which M. Attorney has afterward in the life of K. Edward
the 3. saying: that in an attachement upon a prohibitio^, the defendant
pleading the Popes Bull of excommunication of the plaintiff; the Judges
demanded of the defenda^t, if he had not the certificate of some Bishop within
the realm, testifying the exco^municatio^, etc. Reportis fol. 15. 31. (...) ^.
tit. ^^com. 6.
Whereby it may appear, that private men were obliged to show their Bulls unto
some Bishop before they published the same.

25. But howsoever this be, it is evident by this very Report of M. Attorneys
text of Common Law cited by himself out of the one and thirtith year of King
Edward the third (which was many years after this other case) that the
bringing in, or serving of a Bull of excommunication against a particular
subject, was not held for treason in those days. Neither did the judges, make
any such inference, which is like they would have done, if it had been treason
against the King, his Crown, and dignity, by the ancient Common-lawes of
England in the time of K. Edward the first, above fifty years before the later
case fell out. And thus much for law; though it might be, that de facto in
those days of suspicion, when K. Edward feared excommunication, as you have
heard, some man, ad terrorem, might be so sentenced by some chief Iusticer, or
Judge, as would be ready to pleasure the King in all things, as most of them
were, though yet the party were not executed, as here is confessed; or else
that there was some other particular aggrauant circumstance in this fact,
which here is not set down, though it may be also, that the Reader shall find
somewhat thereof in M. Brooks book if he look it over, out of whom this
objection without all circumstance is so barely cited. And thus much of this
first instance: Now let us contemplate the second, as wise (no doubt) as the
former.

The Attorney.
The said King Edward the first presented his Clerk to a benefice, ^ instance
within the province of York, who was refused by the Archbishop for that the
Pope by way of provision, had conferred it on another. The King thereupon
brought a Quare non admisit. 15. Edouar. tit. Quare non admisit. 7.
The Archbishop pleaded that the Bishop of Rome had long time before provided
to the same Church, Vide 39. Edou. 3. 20.
as one, having supreme authority in that case, and that he durst not, nor had
power to put him out, which was by the Popes Bull in possession. For which his
high, contempt against the King, his Crown and dignity, in refusing to execute
his Sovereigns commandment, fearing to do it against the Popes provision,
by judgment of the Common Law, the lands of his whole Bishopric were seized
into the Kings hands, and lost during his life, which judgment was before any
Statute, Note.
or Act of Parliament was made in that case. And there it is said that for the
like offense, the Archbishop of Canterbury had been in worse case, by the
judgment of the Sages of the law, then to be punished for a contempt, if the
King had not extended grace and favor to him.

The Catholic Divine.
1. answer.
26. Here again is another case or two de facto, whereof M. Attorney will needs
infer de iure. The Archbishop of York his lands, (says he) were seized by
the King, and lost during his life, for that he admitted not to a benefice,
within his Diocese, a Clerk presented by the King, whereas the same benefice
had an incumbent before put in by the Popes provision, according to the custom
of those days, which incumbent the said Archbishop pleaded, that he could not
put out: and for this high contempt against the King, his crown, and dignity,
in refusing to execute his sovereigns commandment (says M. Attorney) by
judgment of the Common Law, he lost the lands of his whole Bishopric; But
here I would ask M. Attorney, what high contempt could this be against the
King, his crown, and dignity, if the Archbishop pleaded that he could not do
it, either in right, or in power? Not in right, for that nothing was more
received at that time in England, then for the Bishop of Rome to provide
certain benefices in England, and not only benefices, but also Bishoprics,
and Archbishopricks, as before in the life of this King, and his ancestors
has been declared. And as for power, no marvel if the Archbishop durst not
use violence in those days, against the Popes provisions, whereby he might
incur excommunication; for so much as the King himself so greatly respected
the same, and made such diligent premunition, least my such excommunication
should come against him, as in the answer to the former instance has been
declared.

17. And besides this, if the Archbishop did put the matter in plea to be
trayed, and to the Kings writ of Quare non admisit, did yield so reasonable a
cause, Co^mon-lavves imagined but not extant.
as is here touched, and that the King himself had admitted diverse Bishops and
Archbishops by like provision of Popes: how, and with what reason can M.
Attorney call this answer of the Archbishop, so high a contempt against the
King, his crown, and dignity? Or how could the Common Law condemn the same
with so great a punishment? And still I must demand what is this Common Law?
by whom was it made? how came it in? where is it founded, either in reason,
use, consent of the people, or authority of law-giuers? For if it consist in
none of these, but only in the particular will and judgment of the Prince
himself, never so passionate, and in the approbation and execution of these
Sages, which here M. Attorney mentions; then any thing that displeased the
said Prince, may be called high contempt against his person, crown, and
dignity. And so may be justified all the most passionate actions, not only of
this King Edward before recited, but of all other Kings whosoever. And by the
same means M. Attorney makes his ancient Co^mon-law, (which often he calls
our birthright, and best birthright) to be nothing else in effect, but the
Princes pleasure from time to time, and the execution of his Sages, which
commonly in those ancient times (for I will speak nothing of our days) were
to wise and Sage, to withstand the Princes will in any thing.

28. Sure I am, that in this particular fact of seasing Bishops lands and
temporalityes, upon any offense or displeasure taken by the King; as it has
been used by some English Princes in their anger, so has it bin condemned also
in diverse Parlaments, laws, and Statutes: as in the first year of King Edward
the third where it is thus expressed. Anno ^. Edouards ter^^i stat. 2. cap. 2.
Because before this time, in the time of King Edward, Father to the King that
now is, he by evil Counselors, caused to be seized into his hands, the
temporalty of diverse Bishops, with their goods, Seasing of Bishops lands.
and cattle etc. The King wills, and grants that from hence forth it be
not done etc. Anno. 14. Edo. 3. stat. 3. pro Clero.
And again in the 14. year of the same reign: We will and grant, for us,
and for our heirs, that from henceforth, we shall not take, nor do to be
taken into our hands, the temporalities of Archbishops, Bishops, Abbot etc.
without a true, and just cause, according to the law of the land, etc.

29. And to the end that M. Attorney may not say, that this case of his is
excepted; it follows in an other Statute in the 25. year of the same King,
saying: Whereas the temporalities of Archbishops and Bishops, have been
oftentimes taken into the Kings hand, for contempt done to him upon writts of
Quare non admisit, and for diverse other causes etc. The King wills and
grants in the said Parliament, that all Justices shall from henceforth
receive for the contempt so judged, reasonable fine of the party so condemned,
according to the quantity of the trespass, and after the quality of the
contempt, etc. How Bishops might be punished for not admitting the Kings just
presentatio^.
Which last words may be thought to be added, for that the King had right to
present to diverse benefices at that time, as particular patron thereof ex iure
patronatus, for that the said benefices were fouuded, or erected by himself, or
his ancestors: and in those cases, the Bishops not admitting such Clerks, as
he presented, might do some injury or trespass against him, and therein show
contempt, worthy some fine, or for-faite, which the law does here appoint;
especially for so much, as it is be ore recorded that Pope Innocentius the 4.
presently upon the first Council of Lions, wrote, as you have heard in the
life of K. Henry the third, that he would not let by his provision, Supra cap.
praeced.
the right of any patron in presenting to any benefice, whereof he had the
aduowson, or Ius patronatus.

30. And as for the other example alleged here by M. Attorney, for
strengthening his instance, of the Archbishop of Canterbury, saying: that for
the like offense the Archbishop of Canterbury had been in worse case, by the
judgment of the Sages of the law, then to be punished for a contempt, if the
King had not extended grace, and favor to him. If he understand the
displeasure taken against Archbishop VVinchelsey before mentioned, by K.
Edward, for resisting his demand of the one half of all Ecclesiastical
rents, for which before we have heard out of Matthew of Westminster, that all
his lands and goods were seized into the Kings hands: you have heard also, how
the same King afterward repented both that, and other like facts of his, and
asked pardon publikly with tears. But if he mean the other offense again
after this, when he accused the said Archbishop VVinchelsey to the Pope, and
caused him to be called to Rome, and to be suspended from his office, as before
we have declared: then does this case make directly against M. Attorneys
conclusion. For that the King acknowledged the Pope to be a superior Judge,
The Archbishop of Canterbury deprived of his spiritual jurisdiction by Q
Elizabeth: anno. 1580.
over English Bishops above himself; and then was the judgment of those Sages
named by M. Attorney, that thought him so deeply to have offended in
acknowledging the Popes authority, far from the purpose. And howsoever it
were, clear it is, that the King seized only upon temporalityes of the
Bishops, and took not upon him to deprive them of their spiritual
jurisdictions, as Queen Elizabeth did, when she fell out with M. Grindall her
Primate and Archbishop of Canterbury whom she by her Ecclesiastical authority
deprived of his jurisdiction, and appointed Commissaryes of her own in diverse
Countries, to execute the same jurisdiction as immediate from her self, which
this K. Edward did not, nor any of his Predecessors or Successors, until K.
Henry the 8. and thereby showed, that they pretended nothing of their spiritual
authority: and so this example, or instance of seasing upon te^poralties,
either by right or wrong, proves nothing for M. Attorney his purpose. Let us
pass then to his 3. insta^ce.

The Attorney.
Concerning men twice married (called Bigami) The statu^e of (...) an (...)
understood and in what sen^ should ^e received and allou^ed h^ere.
whom the Bishop of Rome by a Constitution made at the Councelll of L^ons has
excluded from all privilege of Clergy: whereupon certain ^relates (when such
persons have been attainted for fello^s) have prayed, for to have them delivered
as Clerks, which were made Bigami before the same constitution It is agreed
and declared before the King, and his Counsel, that the same co^stitution
shall be understood in this wise: that whether they were Bigami before the same
constitution or after, they shall not from henceforth be delivered to the
Prelates, but justice shall be executed upon them, as upon other lay people.

The Catholic Divine.
31. About this instance, taken out of a Statute made in the 4. year of K.
Edward the first, it is first to be noted: that albeit, mention be made here
only of the late constitution of the Council of Lions under Pope Gregory the
tenth concerning Bigamies, or those that are twice married; yet is the thing it
self of more antiquity in the Catholic Church, as may appear throughout the
whole title De Bigamis non ordinandis, in the first book of Decretalls, Lib.
1. Decretalium Gregory. tit. 21.
that is to say, that such as have been twice married may not take holy orders.
But yet for that there was a doubt, whether such men having primam tonsuram, or
minores ordines, and thereby made Clerks, might enjoy the privileges of
Clergymen, for their persons, The Decree against Bigamy.
and goods, suites in law, and the like, which could not be decided but by
Ecclesiastical Judges: this controversy (I say) which included many branches
and consequences, especially for England, was defined in the said Council of
Lions, and the definitive sentence, or decision was in these words: In 6 Decre
alium ^^ ^ tit. de Bigamis.
Begamos omni priuilegio Clericali declaramus esse nudatos, and corrections
forisae cidaris addictos, consuetudine contraria non obstante: ipsis quoque sub
anathe mate prohibemus defer tonsuram vel habitum Clericalem. We do declare,
that all such as have been twice married, are deprived of all privilege of
Clergymen, and are subject to the correction of the temporal Magistrate,
notwithstanding any custom to the contrary: And we do forbidd them also under
pain of excommunication, that they do not bear Ecclesiastical tonsure, nor
Priestly habit or apparel of Clergymen.

32. Which decision or declaration of the said general Council coming forth,
presently there arose a doubt in England, whether such Bigamies, as had borne
that attire, and tonsure before that time, and were now in present necessity,
to use the privilege of the Clergy, The true state of the case and doubt risen
in England.
for delivering themselves out of the secular justice hand, ought to have the
same or no; for that it might be presumed, that the Council meant only of
these Bigamyes, that should bear the habit afterward. Unto which opinion, as
to the more pious and pitiful, the Bishops inclining, demanded to have
delivered unto them, as Clerks, all such fellons, as had bin Clerks or taken
for Clerks before the Council. But the King, and his Counsel were of an
other opinion, to wit, that Pope Gregory his decision was in general terms,
and excepted none, neither before, nor after, and thereby understood and meant
to exclude all.

33. This is the case, and this is the decision thereof. And now let the
discreet Reader judge, whether this example makes more for M. Attorneys
purpose, or against him; for that here the King and his Counsel do stand more
strictly to the obseruaunce of the Popes decree as it lies, then those Bishops
themselves, (who would have had these Bigamyes delivered unto them as Clerks)
and therefore urge to have it punctually and exactly observed. And for that men
of reason might marvel, why M. Attorney, a man of such account in the law,
has brought in such an instance, so impertinent to his purpose, he seeks to
remedy the matter, by this note in the margent: Observe (says he) how the King
by the advice of his Counsel, expounded how the said Council of Lion should
be understood, and in what sense it should be received, and allowed here. A
poor commentary and shifte of M. Attorney.
And why is all this diligent commentary think you? Forsooth to the end, that
you may imagine, that the King and his Counsel took themselves to be above
the Pope, and general Council of Lions, for that they took upon them to
expound, and admit the said Counsels decree. By which argument M. Attorney,
may prove also, that Archbishop Peckam of Canterbury calling a Sinod (as before
you have heard) of his Bishops Suffragans, and other Prelates, for receiving,
publishing, and observing the said decrees of the same Pope and Council, the
very next year after it was held, did think themselves to be above the said
Pope and Council, and to have authority over them, for that they received,
allowed, and expounded the same decrees. And does not every man see the folly
of this kind of reasoning?

34. And yet you must note further, that for better bringing in of this
argument, M. Attorney, straineth the text extremely in three or four things,
to make place for this his note. For whereas in the latin text of the Statute
(for K. Edward the first put forth in latin, and so is it extant until this
day) it is said: Quidam Praelati s^^quam Clericos exigerunt sibi liberandos,
etc. Certain Prelates did require, or exact, to have such Bigamies delivered
freely unto them as Clerks, which were made Bigannies before the said
constitution; M. Attorney says: Certain Prelates have prayed to have them
delivered: whereas between exigere and rogare, to exact, and pray, is a great
difference in this case.

35. And again where it is written in latin: Concordatum est and declaratum,
coram Rege and Consilio suo, quod constitutio illa intelligenda fit, quod sieve
effecti fuerunt Bigami ante praedictam constitutionem, sieve post, de catero non
liberentur Praelatis, imo fiat de ijs iustitia sicut de Laicis: M. Attorney to
aggrauate the Kings accord and declaration, How M. Attorney straineth the
^ext to help himself.
over that of the general Council, putterh it down thus: It is agreed and
declared, before the King and his Counsel, that the same constitution shall be
understood in this wise. Whereas the Latin speaks in the present tense, It is
to be understood, nor has it the words, in this wise. And where M. Attorney
says: They shall not from hence forth be delivered, but justice shall be
executed upon them, as upon other lay men: those shalls b^ not in the Latin,
but rather that they may, or must not be delivered unto Prelates, but that
justice be done upon them, as upon lay men. So that herby you see the labor
that M. Attorney takes to draw a little water to his mill, and yet that
nothing comes but puddle, that drives not but choaketh the same. Let us see
his fourth instance, whether it be of any more weight or moment than the rest.

The Attorney.
In an act made at the Parliament holden at Carleile in the 25. 4 instance.
year of the said King Edward the first, It is declared, that the holy Church
of England was founded in the state of Prelacy, within the Realm of England,
by the King and his progenitors, etc. Statutum de anno. 25. Edou^. 1. Carlisle.
vide 20. Edouar. 3. tit. Essom. 24.
For them to inform the people in the law of God, and to keep hospitality,
give alms, and do other works of charity, etc. And the said Kings in times
past, were wont to have their advise, and counsel for the safe-guarde of the
Realm, when they had need of such Prelates and Clerks so advanced. The
Bishop of Rome usurping the signories of such benefices; did give, and grant
the same benefices to Aliens, Nota. The first atte^pte was to usurp upon such
Ecclesiastical things as appertayned to the Clergy of England, who at that
time stood in great awe of the church of Rome.
which did never dwell in England, and to Cardinals, which might not dwell
here, etc. in adnullation of the state of the holy Church of England,
desherison of the King, Earls, Barons, and other nobles of the Realm, and in
offense, and destruction of the laws, and rights of this Realm, and against
the good disposition, and will of the first founders: It was enacted by the
King, by assent of all the Lords, and Communalty in full Parliament; that the
said oppressions, grieuances, and damage in this Realm, from thence forth
should not be suffered, as more at large appears by this Act.

The Catholic Divine.
36. This Parliament of Carliele which M. Attorney ascribes to the 25. year of
King Edwardes reign, The answer to the fourth Instance of M Attorney.
both in his latin and English columns, I do imagine to be an error, in place
of the 35. for that I find no Parliament held upon the five and twentieth, in
which year King Edward was partly in Scotland, and partly in Flanders, and
there kept his Christmasse in the City of Gaunt. But upon the 35. year, which
was the last of King Edwardes reign, there was a Parliament held at Carliel
upon the Octaues of S. Hilary. In which Parliament there was such a declaration,
and complaint made, as here it set down: that the Bishoprics and benefices
being often given to strangers by the Popes provisions, who residing not in
England, nor keeping hospitality, nor being able to preach, or teach, for that
they wanted the English language, the Church of England, Inco^ueniences by
promoting strangers in England.
and poor people thereof did suffer much inconvenience thereby, and for that the
Bishoprics and Prelacyes of the said Church, were founded ordinarily by Kings
and Princes of the said land, they said it was reason, that they, as Patrones,
should present English men to the same.

37. And these complaints which now we have heard, began in diverse former
Kings days, especially under King Henry the third, and were continued under
this man, and his Successors; but most of all urged under King Edward the
third, and King Richard the second, by whom greater restraints were made,
until the Sea Apostolic and our Kings came to a certain form of agreement,
as in other countries and Kingdoms also they did, though in different sorts,
how benefices should be provided, to wit, Diverse agreeme^ts for provision of
Benefices.
by election of the Deane and Chapter in some, and by Kings and Princes
nominations in others, as also by provisions of Bishops in lesser preferments:
Wherein notwithstanding the said Sea Apostolic retained diverse gifts to it
self, as in sundry countries is seen at this day, by use and practice.

38. Well then the States of England at this time said and decreed, that the
abuses of bestowing English benefices upon strangers, were not to be suffered;
especially such as had been newly brought in by one William Testaw, sent
thither out of France by Pope Clement the fifth, West monast. anno. 1307.
for so testifyeth Matthew Westminster that was then living, whose words are
these: The King held a Parliament at Carliele, wherein greater complains, then
ever before, were made of the oppression of Churches and Monasteries, and many
extorsions used by one Master William Testaw the Popes Clerk, Remedy sought
from the Pope himself.
to whom commandment was given by the assent of the Earls and Barons, that
he should not use like extorsion for the time to come. And moreover it was
ordained that for obteyning remedy, VValsing. Ibidem.
certain messengers there assigned should be sent to the Pope. And the very
self-same thing writes Thomas VValsingam. And this is all the remedy,
mentioned by these men to have been taken at that time, to wit, supplication to
the Pope himself, that he would put thereunto convenient redress, which well
declares the respect borne to that Sea.

39. And albeit this Statute here mentioned by M. Attorney may be supposed also
to have passed at that time; yet may it appear by the words of other Statutes
after, in the time of King Edward the third, See statute anno. 25. Edouards. 3.
that the same was not put in ure until his days, as in his life we shall
show more particularly. And what makes all this now for M. Attorney? or what
rather does it not make against him? For here the whole Parliament of Carliele
acknowledginge the Popes spiritual authority, The statute of Carleile makes
nothing for M. Attorney.
as appears by their manner of writing unto him, complained of certain
abuses, or excesses, streching themselves in a certain sort, as they
pretended, to temporal commodityes, and sought remedy thereof from himself. And
can any thing be more clear against M. Attorney then this? Surely at the
bar, he durst not for his credits sake plead in this manner, and much less
should he do it in a book, wherein the speeches remain longer to the view of
the reader, then do fleeting words to the hearer at the bar. But enough of
this. M. Attorney pleads well where he has truth and substance for him; in
this cause both do fail him: and what then can he do, but cast shadows, as
here you see that he does?

OF KING EDWARD THE SECOND, Which was the tenth King after the Conquest.. 11.
This King began his reign an. 1307. and reigned 19. years to wit, until
1326.
40. Much less is needful to be said of this King, then of the former, both
for that his reign was shorter, and much more troublesome in temporal
affairs, which gave less place to spiritual: and now also our Authors, that
were wont to note more diligently such matters, do in great part fail us.
For that Matthew of Westminster ends with King Edward the first, as the other
Matthew Paris before him, did with this man's father K. Henry the third; and
Roger Houeden before him again with K. John; and William Nubergensis and
Petrus Blesensis before them, with K. Richard^ and William of Malmesbury,
Henry Huntington, as also Florentius VVigorniensis with his continuance,
Ancient English vvriters when the end.
made an end of their historyes partly under K. Stephen, and partly under K.
Henry the first: so as now downe-ward from this King Edward the second, we
shall only have Raynulph of Chester, and Thomas VValsingam for the most ancient
writers of this time that does ensue, who yet are nothing so copious or
diligent, as diverse of the former.

41. This Edward therefore second of that name, and surnamed of Carnaruan, for
that he was borne in that town of Wales, when his Father lay with an army in
those parts, to reduce that country to subjection, as he did, who being of
the age of twenty three years, when his father dyed upon the borders of
Scotland in the year 1307. and receiving two special things in charge (says
VValsingam) from his Father, under pain of his curse: VValsing, in (...). 1307.
The first, that the should prosecute presently and end the enterprise began
against Scotland, before he went to London or procured to be crowned: the
second that he should not touch or waste, but send to the holy land, a
certain sum of money, which his said Father had laid together for the
assistance of that war, to the which he had purposed to go himself in person,
if he had lived, Stow in Edouardo p. ^^ ^ine vita.
(Whereunto John Stow adds a third in these words: His father charged him
on his curse, that he should not presume to call home Pierce of Gaueston, by
common decree banished, without common consent etc.) Notwithstanding all these
admonitions and threats, this careless young Prince performed no one thing of
the three, but got himself presently into France, and there was married in
Bullen, The ill success of King Edvvardes marriage ^n France.
unto Lady Isabell, only daughter of Philip the fourth, surnamed the fair,
King of France, and in that marriage, and triumph thereof, spent the foresaid
money, which prospered afterward accordingly: for that this marriage and wife
was the cause and occasion not only of his overthrow, and miserable ruin, but
of all the wars in like manner, that ensued for many years after, between
France and England. For that she being the only daughter and heir, as has
been said, to the King of France, her son Edward the third, in her title began
first the said wars, which brought finally the loss, not only of that which
was gotten of new, but of all the rest, that we had before in France, and she
taking a deep disgust with her said husband for his disordinate affection to
Pierce Gaueston (whom presently after his fathers death he recalled from
banishment) the two Spencers and others misliked by her, and the greater part
of the Realm: she finally after many troubles, wars, insurrections, and
great store of Noblemen cut of and destroyed on both parts, prevailed against
the said King her husband; and having on her side the authority of her young
son the Prince, and all his followers, did put down the said King, deprived
him of his crown, set up her young son in his place, committed the other to
prison, where soon after he was pitifully murdered. And these are the
varietyes of worldly fortunes, these the frailtyes and vncerteintyes of earthly
Greatness; And where King Edward placed all his pleasure, from the same spring
issued forth the beginning and progress of all his misery.

42. But as for his religion and judgment therein, notwithstanding all other
his errors in life and behavior, that it was constantly Catholic, according
to that which he had received and inherited from his Ancestors, no doubt can
be made at all. For that the whole State of his realm, touching
Ecclesiastical affairs, remained as he found it, and as it had continued in
the times of his progenitors; and that the Bishops of Rome, had general
authority over England in his days, not only in mere spiritual jurisdiction:
(which all the Bishops of England professed to receive from him) but also in
external disposing, when he would, of Bishoprics and other Prelacies,
notwithstanding all the complaints made in his Fathers, and Grandfathers times
about that matter, may be made evident by many examples.

43. For first we read that in the year 1311. when Pope Clement the fifth in
a Council at Vienna in France, upon many grave and urgent causes, The
suppression of the Knights of the Temple.
as was pretended and alleged, did put down the whole order of knights
called Templarij (for that their first institution was, to have care to defend
the Temple of Jerusalem against infidells) and did appoint their lands (which
were many and great) to be given to an other newer order which then begun,
named Hospitalary, for that they had the care of the hospitals, wherein
Pilgrims were received; (which now are the knights of S. John of Malta) and
albeit this matter were of such importance and consequence, for that the
persons were many, and of nobility, and their possessions great, as has been
said: yet was that Decree obeyed in England without resistance, and the persons
deprived, and put to perpetual penance in a Council at London anno 1311. and
their said lands and goods given to the other sort of knights, and confirmed
by Parliament in London 13. years after, VValsi^gam in. storia Ed^u^r^ 2. anno
1311. and 1^24. ^o^dor and Stow Ibidem.
to wit, in the year of Christ 1324. which was the 17. of King Edwards reign,
as VValsingam and others do testify, which well declares what the Popes
authority was at that day in England.

44. Again we read that in the year 1319. which was the 12. of this Kings
reign, great war being between England and Scotland, King Edward had
procured that Pope John the 22. should send two Cardinall-Legates into England,
to examine the matter how it stood, and to punish by Ecclesiastical Censures,
that party, that should be found stubborn and repugnant to reason: Where upon
finally, having heard both sides, and finding Robert Bruise King of Scotland, to
have offered iniuryes to the King of England, Recourse made to the Pope by
England and Scotland in their greatest controversies VValsing. anno. 1319. and
1323.
they pronounced sentence of excommunication against him, and put the whole
Kingdom under interdict: For releasing whereof the said King Robert, and the
State of Scotland 4. years after, sent a solemn embassage to the Pope, to wit,
the Bishop of Glasco and Earl of Murray, which being understood by King
Edward, he sent also a messenger on his behalf, to contradicte the same. And
albeit him Ambassador (says our Story) in dignity were but a simple Priest,
yet so many reasons, and accusations he alleged against them or K. Edward
and his c^u^e as the Scottish Ambassadors ^^ld obtain no release at that
time. And this for the Popes au^^^^^^y in those days for public affairs.

45. But as for private matters of England, especially the disposing of
Bishoprics, confirmation, and inuestitures of all Bishops, (...) notorious,
and might be declared by infinite examples, that ^ remained now, as before
under all other Catholic Princes. For among other points we read, that when
in the year of Christ 1312. Robert VVinchelsey Archbishop of Canterbury dyed,
the Monks of that place according to the custom, chose by the liking and
procuration of the King, one Thomas Cobham, a man of eminent learning and
virtue, who going to Auinion in France, The ^. of Canterbury made by the Popes
provision.
where Pope Clement the fifth lay at that time, to receive his confirmation and
inuestiture, as the manner was in those days, the said Pope told him, that
long before in the other Archbishops life, he had reserved the collation of
that Archbishopricke to himself, for that time, and thereupon pronounced that
election to be void, adding further this consideration; that England being ^^
that day in great troubles and disgust, for that many Lords and Barons had
showed their mislike against the King, and the King against them: it was
needful to have in that place of Canterbury, a man of great credit and
experience in such affairs; and therefore named one William Reynoldes Bishop
of Worcester, and Chancellor of the Realm at that day, and presently sent
him both his inuestiture, and pall; wherewith the King and Queen being greatly
contented, were present at his consecration, and so he lived and governed 19.
years after in that Sea, with great commendation. So as we see that the
restraint of Papal provisions made at Carliele under this man's father was not
yet put in practice.

46. And the like reseruatio^ we read that Pope John the 22. made of the
Bishopric of Winchester afterward in the year 1320. and thereby did disanull
the election made by the Monks of that place, with consent of the King, and
placed another of his own choice, which the King also after some time
admitted; So as this was very ordinary in those days. We read likewise that
in the year 1324. a Parliament being called at London, and King Edward growing
now, by evil counsel of the Spencers and others, into great disorder, he
caused one Adam Bishop of Hereford, that favored not his proceedings, to be
arrested of treason, and brought forth publickely to be tried, laying to his
charge that he had ^^ceaued, and favored diverse of those Barons, which had
taken arms against him. But the forsaid Archbishop of Canterbury, and his
brethren Bishops seeing this disorder, made first humble supplication to the
King, that he might be tried according to his place and degree, and that not
preuayling, they required the same by law, according to the liberties and
privileges of the Church, The Bishop of Hereford taken from the bar by
Ecclesiastical authority.
confirmed by Magna charta, and other laws of the Realm. Whereupon he was
delivered to the custody of the said Archbishop of Canterbury: but afterward he
being called for again, by the instigation of such as were his enemies, and
carried to the bar, the said Archbishop of Canterbury, and the other of
York, with ten other Bishops went thither in judicial manner, with their
crosses borne before them, commanding under pain of excommunication, that no
man should stay him, or lay hands on him, and so took him away to the
Archbishops custody again. Whereby we may see, in what vigor Ecclesiastical
power was at this day in England. And albeit the King being in passion, did
storm greatly thereat, and seized presently upon all the said Bishops goods
and lands, as he had done upon those of the Bishop of Lincoln, and of others
before: yet could he not deny, but that this was law and justice, which the
Bishops did, according to the Ecclesiastical privileges of the Realm,
whereunto the King himself, and all his ancestors in their coronations, had
solemnly sworn. For breaking whereof it may be presumed, that so great a
punishment fell upon him, as soon after ensued, to the horror of the whole
world, by deprivation both of his Kingdom, and life. And so much of him. Now
let us see what instance M. Attorney can draw from him to his purpose. It is
but one, and thus it runs in his own words.

The Attorney.
47. Albeit by the ordinance of Circumspecte agatis made in the 18. year of
Edward the first, and by general allowance and usage, the Ecclesiastical
Courts held plea of tithes, obuentions, oblations mortuaries, redemptions of
pennaunce, laying of violent hand^ upon a Clerk, defamations, etc. yet did not
the Clergy think themselves assured, The statute of Edw. 2. articuli ^l^^i
cap. 36.
nor quiet from prohibitions purchased by subjects, until that King Edward
the second by his letters parents under the great seal, in, and by consent of
Parliament, upon the petitions of the Clergy, had granted unto them to have
jurisdiction in these cases. The King in a Parliament holden in the ^. year of
his reign, after particular answers made to their petitions, Eos the ordinance
of circumspecte agatis ^do. 1. so this effect.
concerning the matter above said, does grant and give his Royal assent in
these words: We desiring, as much as of right we may, to provide for the state
of the Church of England, and the tranquillity and quiet of the Prelates of the
said Clergy, to the honor of God, ^y this statute of the ^. of Ed. 2. and 15.
of Edw. 3. cap. 6. 31. E. 3. cap. 11. and by other statutes heretofore
mentioned; the jurisdiction of the Ecclesiastical courts i^ allowed and
warranted by consent of Parliament in all cases, wherein they now have
jurisdiction, so as these laws may be justly called the Kings Ecclesiastical
laws, or the Ecclesiastical laws of England.
and the amendment of the State of the said Church, and of the Prelates and
Clergy, ratifying and approving all, and singular the said answers, which
appear in the said act, and all, and singular things in the said answers
contained; we do for us, and our heirs grant, and command that the same be
inuiolably kept for ever; willing, and granting for us, and our heirs, that
the said Prelates, and Clergy, and their Successors for ever, do exercise
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, in the premises, according to the tenor of the
said answer.

The Catholic Divine.
48. If a man would ask M. Attorney in this place, why he has brought in this
instance, and what he would prove thereby, I think verily he would be much
graueled in answering, especially if we respect his principal Conclusion,
that by this and like presidence Q. Elizabeth might take upon her supreme
authority Ecclesiastical: for that by this narration, nothing else is
declared, but that a certain abuse being crept in, that when any external
matter, seeming any way to belong to temporalityes, was handled in
Ecclesiastical Courts, and by Ecclesiastical Judges, the party that feared,
or suspected his own cause, would inform the Kings Courts, that the matter
belonged to them, and thereupon would get out a prohibition from the Chauncery,
to sursease in that cause, until it were tried, to which Court it belonged. By
which deceytfull, and malitions proceeding of some, much trouble was procured,
and many causes rested indetermined, both in the one, and the other Court:
Statut. de Consult. editum an. 24. E. 1. The explication and true meaning of
the former provision.
for so says the Statute it self made in the time of King Edward the first
this man's Father, in these words: Whereas Ecclesiastical Judges have
oftentimes surceased, to proceed in cases moved before them, by force of the
Kings writ of prohibition, etc. to the great damage of many, as the King has
been advertised by the grievous complaints of his subjects, etc. For this cause
many orders and Statutes were made, under all three Edwards for remedying of
this abuse; as for example under Edward the first, the foresaid Statute has
this determination: That the (...) or chief Justice of the King for the time
being, if they see that the case (...) be redressed by any writ out of the
Chauncery, but that the spiritual (...) ought to determine the matters; that
then they shall write to the Ecclesiastical Judges, before whom the case was
first moved, to proceed therein, notwithstanding the Kings prohibition unto them
before.

49. And to like effect is this other ordination here mentioned by M. Attorney
of Circumspecte agatis: whereby is ordained that temporal Judges shall use
themselves circumspectly in meddling with causes that belong to spiritual
courts. (...) ^^d^^ations (...) anno. 5. Edouardi. 2.
And to the same effect is this Statute here alleged under King Edward the
second, as also this other set down in these words: They that purchase
prohibition, and attachement against the Ordinaryes, of a thing that belongs
not to the lay Court, shall yield damages to the Ordinaryes, by the award of
the Justices. And yet further to the same effect, it was decreed by King Edward
the third after this manner: (...) 18. (...). ^. cap. 5.
That no prohibition go out of the Chauncery, but in case where we have the
conusaunce, and of right ought to have.

50. And finally to pass no further in this, the Statute made in the 9. year
of this King entitled: Articuli Cleri: Articles of the Clergy, containing
sixteen branches, do apperteyne to this affair, to show, Different Courts
show different origin of authorityes.
and declare what causes do belong to the spiritual court, and what to the
temporal, and whereof both the one and the other may take conusaunce; and
consequently in what matters, the Kings prohibition may go forth, or not: all
which is clearly against M. Attorney his purpose. For if the temporal Prince,
were properly head of the one and the other court, and fountain both of the
one and other law, and jurisdiction; this ado needed not, but that the King
might indifferently dispose of all.

51. But consider I pray you, M. Attorneys note, or commentary in the margent,
whereby he would seem to answer our former demand, why he brings in this
instance. By these statutes ( says he) the jurisdiction of the Ecclesiastical
Courts, is allowed and warranted by consent of Parliament, in all cases wherein
they have jurisdiction: so as these laws may be justly called the Kings
Ecclesiastical laws, or the Ecclesiastical laws of England. So he. And you
will easily see herby, how much he delights himself in this new witty
invention of his own, so often repeated by him, whereby he would make the Popes
Canon-lawes, to be the King of Englands laws, for that they are admitted and
obeyed in England^ of which sylly consequence, I have oftentimes made mention
before, M. Attorneys common refuge refuted.
showing the weakness and incongruity thereof. For that by this reason the self
same Canon-lawes received, and admitted by all particular states of
Christendom, may be said to be the peculiar laws of every particular state.
And if this be a superiority, as M. Attorney would infer, to admit, and allow
another Princes laws, then is every particular state of Christendom above the
Pope and General Counsels, which made these laws. Wherefore as well in this,
as in all the rest, we see the weakness of M. Attorneys cause: and so we shall
pass to other Princes, that do follow, leaving this disasterous K. Edward the
second, who soon after fell into a pitiful plight of calamity, being deprived
both of his Crown, and life for his ill government, and his young son placed
in his room, as our historyes at large do declare.

OF K. EDWARD THE THIRD, And K. Richard the second his Nephew, and Successor:
And what instances or arguments M. Attorney draws from their two reigns,
which continued between them for seauenty years. CHAP. XII.
THESE two are the Kings, above all the rest, from the beginning unto K. Henry
the 8. under whose government, M. Attorney gathers and lays together most
objections, to prove the small respect they had, or used in certain cases and
occasions, and at some times, toward the Sea Apostolic, and Ecclesiastical
power thereof; for that they made most restrictions by penal laws, These 2.
Kings made most restraints.
and punishments against the practice and use thereof, in certain cases mixed,
as they presumed, and conjoined with temporalityes, or affairs of the State,
and so not merely Ecclesiastical.

2. For albeit before this, there had been great murmurings and complaints, as
you have seen, from the time of K. Henry the 3. and his father King John,
against some part of the exercise of the Popes authority, in bestowing
benefices and Bishoprics upon strangers; as also of the often reserving the
collations of the chief to himself, and his Court, of demanding, and
granting tithes, and contributions upon the English Clergy, as well for his
own, as other public necessityes: yet find we not hitherto, any express
penal law put in ure and practice (though mention be found of one made at
Carleile under K. Edward the first, the 2. year of his reign) to this effect,
for restrayning provisions, and other ordinances from the Court of Rome, and
the execution thereof by English subjects, until under these two Kings, Edward
the 3. and Richard the 2. and not by the former, until after many years of
his reign, when by his continual wars with France and Scotland, his
temporal necessityes and other respects drew him thereunto. And some men do
note that the lamentable ends of both these Kings (whereof the worst seemed to
some to be that of King Edward, though he died in his bed) together with
infinite bloodshed afterward by their successors, divided in their own
bowels, upon the controversy of Lancaster and York, did easily show how
ungrateful to all mighty God this breach of theirs, The punishment of these
two Princes and their posterity for their violence used toward the church
and violence used with their Mother the holy Church was, though it might seem
to them, and some others also, that it was either in temporal matters, or in
Ecclesiastical conjoined (as has been said) with temporalities; and that
besides, they were urged thereunto by important clamours of their people,
partly upon emulation against the Clergy, and partly upon some abuses and
aggreiuances, as they pretended in their supplications and declarations to the
Popes themselves about these affairs, pretending to hold still (as no doubt
they did) their inward faith, belief, devotion, and obedience to the Sea
Apostolic, though outwardly they were forced to take the way of redress,
against some excesses; which they did.

3. And now we have already heard, the foresaid complaints oftentimes iterated
in the lives of the former Kings; but especially under Henry the third, and the
two precedent Edwards, that ^^sued him, which being continued under this third
of the same name, he being a warrior, and having thereby all ways commonly
great need of money, was induced at length for increasing his own temporal
wealth, to lay hands upon the spiritual; especially such as was wont to go out
of the Realm to the Court of Rome, or accrue to strangers that had benefices,
or Ecclesiastical livings within the Realm, both religious and other. To
which consideration he had these particular motives peculiar to his time and
state, that he having for some years before proclaimed himself King of France,
and taken the Arms and Title of that Kingdom upon him, as due unto him by
succession, for that he was next heir male in blood to King Philip the 4.
surnamed the fair, that by his mother Queen Isabel was his Grandfather, and
all the Popes at that time being Frenchmen, Particular motives of K. Edward
3. for proceeding as he had.
and lying at Auinion in France for seauenty years together, and the most
part of the Cardinals and Court being in like manner of the same nation, that
were ordinarily provided by the Popes of benefices and Bishoprics in England,
and thereby not fit, as was pretended, to teach, preach, or reside there: King
Edward, besides the regard of other inconveniences, entered into jealousy also
of state, thinking that these men were enemies to his pretenses in France, and
thereupon was the more pricked, to make the prohibitions and laws, which he
did.

4. But yet writing first thereof to the Pope himself in most humble, and
dutiful manner, requesting redress and remedy immediately from that Sea, as
by his letters yet extant does appear; VValsingam in vit. Ed. 1. anno. ^341.
upon this occasion (says Walsingham) for that Pope Clement the 6. which once
had been Archbishop of Roane in Normandy, a man of eminent learning, but of
profuse liberality, made provisions unto two French Cardinals, for their
maintenance of two thousand marks a year upon Bishoprics and Abbeys in
England, without the Kings knowledge or consent, wherewith he being much
offended, commanded first the Procurators of the said Cardinals, to surcease
and depart the land upon pain of imprisonment, and then wrote unto the said
Pope, that famous letter (says our Author) for the liberty of the Church of
England, which he and others do set down; The Title whereof is this,
Sanctissimo in Christo Patri, ac Domino, Domino Clemanti, diuina prouidentia
Sacrosancta Romana, and Vniuersal^^ (...) Summo Pontifici, Edwardus eadem
gratia Rex Francia, and Anglia, etc. ^^^uota pedum oscula beat^rum. The Kings
letter to Pope Clement the sixth.


5. This is the Title, and inscription of his letter, whereby we may see, what
account he made of the Sea Apostolic, and Bishop thereof. And in the
prosecution of the said letter, he lays down first how all the Bishoprics,
Prelacyes, The complaint and reasons against provisions from Rome.
and benefices (...) England being founded by the devotion of Christian Kings,
^ishops and Noblemen thereof, to the end that the people might be instructed,
the poor releiued, the Churches served, the Princes assisted by Counsel, and
help of the said Prelates: (according to that we have heard touched before in
the Statute of Sup. 35. ^. ^.
Carliele under this man's Grandfather, and otherwise often repeated upon other
occasions) all these good ends were said now to be euacuated, by that the Sea
Apostolic reserving the coll^tions of such spiritual livings, to the Court
of Rome, unfit men; and strangers for the most part, were preferred, and
thereby Englishmen discouraged and damnified, the patrons of benefices deprived
of their right of presentation, and many other such inconveniences ensued.

VValsingam (...) vita Edouards. 3.
6. Wherefore considering all these points (says the King) P^^sata etiam
deuotionis plenitudine, quae domus nostra Regia, and Clerus, and ^^pulus dicti
Regni perstiterunt hactenus in obedientia Sedis Apostolica, etc. Considering
also the fullness of devotion, wherewith our Kingly family, as also the Clergy
and people of our Realm have p^^seuered hitherto in the obedience of the Sea
Apostolic; it seems right, that you, as a Father providing for his
children, should with paternall affection, alleuiate the burdens of your said
children, and permit for the time to come, that Patrons of benefices may have
that solace, as to present fit persons, without impeachment to the said
benefices, whereof they are patrons; and that Cathedral Churches, and others of
the said Kingdom may be provided of Pastors, The humble supplication of King
Edward to the Pope before he made his restrictio^s
by free elections, etc. Wherefore we ^^seech your Benignity, to vouchsafe, even
for the honor of God, and salvation of souls, and for the taking away of the
foresa^^ scandals and offenses, to put quickly some whole-some temperament unto
these matters, to the end that we, who do ^^^rence, as we ought to do, your
most holy person, and the holy Roman Church, in paternae vestra dilectionis
dulcedine quie scam^^ may rest in the sweetness of your fatherly love toward
us. (...) ^^ ^^lissimus, ad regimen Ecclesia Sua Sancta, per tempora prospera
and lon^^^. The most high God preserve you, to the government of his holy
Church for many and prosperous years. Given at Westminster the 26. day of
September, upon the 4. year of our Reign over France, and 27. over England.

7. Here we see with what respect to the Sea Apostolic, King Edward
pretended to make the restraints, which he made of provisions from Rome: and to
show more his confidence and acknowledgement toward the said Sea, he sent soon
after the very same year, unto the said Clement the 6. a most honorable
Embassage by Henry Earl of Lancaster and Derby, King Edvvardes great embassage
unto the Pope.
as also the Earls, Spenser, and Stafford, together with the Bishop of Oxford,
to treat with the said Pope, and lay before him the right which he pretended to
the Crown of France, though not in form of judgment, or to put the matter in
trial (says Walsingham) but as to a father and friend; he having 4. years
before that, written largly of the ground of his said right, unto this man's
predecessor Pope Benedictus the 11. and to the whole College of Cardinals,
himself being then at Antwerpe, upon the 16. of July. Anno Domini 1339. and 13.
of his Reign.

8. His epistle to the Pope had the same title, which the other before; and
that to the Cardinals; Amabilium Deo patrum Sacrosancta Romana Ecclesiae
Cardinalium Collegio venerando, etc. In the prosecution of which letter to the
Pope after a large demonstration of his title, he has these words. Non igitur
apud vestrae viscera misericordia and Sanctitatis, locum inueniat detrahentium
informatio amula, etc. Let not therefore the emulous informations of
detractors, King Edward's protestation of obedience for himself and his.
find place in the bowels of your mercy and Holiness, against such a son of
yours, as by hereditary right of all his progenitors, does and will for ever
immoueably persist in your obedience, and in the obedience and grace of the
Apostolic Sea, etc. And we do intimate this process of our justice (to the
said Crown of France) and of the injury done against us, by detayning the
same, unto the pre-eminence of your holy Highness, that by your supreme, and
holy measure of right and equity, (whereunto belongs upon earth to open and
shut the gates of heaven, and to whom appertains the fulness of power, and
supereminency of tribunal) you will favor our right so much as reason
requires; Parati semper ne dum a vestro sancto cunctis presidente iudicio, imo
and a quo^i^ alio de veritate contrarij, si quis eam nouerit, humiliter
informati. We being ready always to be humbly informed of the truth of the
contrary, not only from your holy judgment, which governs all, but from any
other, that knows the same.

9. So K. Edward to the Pope at that time, concerning his great controversy of
France. And albeit he was never wholly deuoid of the ielousies and suspicions
before mentioned, that those French Popes did favor more his enemies the Kings
of France, then himself; and did assist them also oftentimes with graunts of
great pecuniary succors, upon the Clergy, as himself in some letters does
complain: yet did he never for this, loose any inward respect, reverence or
obedience to the said Sea Apostolic: No, nor did the said Sea cease for many
years after, to use her ancient custom of providing Bishoprics, and
Prelacies in England, though commonly they were Englishmen only. As for
example, the very next year after, to wit, 1344. and 18. of King Edwards
reign, The contin^ance of the Popes pro^^^^^ in England.
the said Pope Clement made Bishop of Norwich one William Bate-man, that had
been Auditour of his Palace and Court in Auinion. And in the year 1362. Pope
Vrbanus the fifth made Bishop of Lincoln by his provision, one John
Buckingham, and of Chichester one William Lynne, and King Edward admitted the
same without resistance. And four years after that again, the same Pope, upon
the death of Simon Islep Archbishop of Canterbury gave that Bishopric by his
provision to Simon Langtham, that was Bishop of Ely, and translated John Barnet
Bishop of Bath from that Sea, to Ely, and one M. John Harwell, being commended
greatly by Prince Edward of Wales to the said Pope, was admitted by him, to
the said Bishopric of Bath; as also William Wickham, bearer of the Kings
privy signet, VValsing in vita Ed ^. an. 1366.
was preferred by the said Pope, unto the Bishopric of Winchester, Domino
Rege procurante (says Walsingham) that is, King Edward procuring and laboring
for the same.

10. And two years after this again, in the year 1368. we read, that the
foresaid Simon Langtham, being made Cardinal by Pope Vrbanus, and thereupon
resigning his Archbishopricke of Canterbury, the Pope by his provision, gave
the same to William VVriothesley Bishop of Worcester; and the foresaid Lynne
Bishop of Chichester, he translated unto the Bishopric of Worcester; and
unto the Church of Chichester, Diverse other examples.
he promoted one William Road. In all which we read not, that K. Edward made
any difficulty. And the very next year after this again, we find registered,
that the same Pope provided the Churches of Norwich, Hereford, and Exce^^^ of
Bishops by his own provision; only it is said of the later of the three, quod
Thomas Brangthingham fauore literarum Domini Regis Edwardi, ad Exoniensem
Ecclesiam promotus est. Thomas Brangthingham was promoted by the Pope, to the
Church of Excester, through favor of the letters of K. Edward.

11. And finally this matter went on in this manner, until toward the later
end of K. Edwards reign, when he growing old and feeble, as well in judgment,
as in body, and matters depending most upon his son John of Gaunt, who was a
disorderly man in those days, and much cried out upon, by all the
Commonwealth, as may appear by that he was afterward deposed by Parliament
from al government (though it lasted not long) and showed himself enemy to the
State of the Clergy, as soon after he well declared, by the imprisoning of
William Wickham Bishop of Winchester, assayling Courtney Bishop of London,
favoring the famous heretic John VVickcliffe at his beginning publicly, and
other such signs and demonstrations: at this time (I say) being the 47. of the
reign of K. Edward, The law of praemunire.
according to Walsingham, or 49. according to Polidor, (though the book of
Statutes does appoint in the 25. and 27. years of the said Kings reign) were
the Statutes made (or perhaps begun to be put in execution) against recourse to
Rome, except in causes of appellation, and against provisions of benefices to
be gotten or procured from thence, and not at home, by the patrons thereof. Rex
Edwardus (says Polidor) primus omnium de Consilij sententia, indixit immanem
illis paenam, qui in posterum impetrarent vbiuis gentium Anglicana sacerdotia a
Romano Pontifice, aut causas, nisi per appellat tonem, ad eundem deferrent,
etc. Polidor. hist. Angl. lib. 19.
Lex prouisionis sieve de Praemoneri vocitatur. King Edward first of all other
Kings, by the sentence of his Counsel, did decree most horrible punishment
unto those, that for the time to come, should in any part of the world,
obtain English benefices from the Pope of Rome, or should carry any causes
unto him, but only by appellation. The law is called the law of Provision, or
Praemunire.

12. And the same Author adds further, that Pope Gregory the 11. hearing of
this law, took the matter greiuously, and wrote to King Edward for the
reuocation thereof: but there ensuing presently a great schism in the Church of
Rome, which endured almost 50. years, until the time of Martin the 5. King
Edward also not living many years after, and the disordinate government of his
Nephew K. Richard the 2. with the tumultuation of the VVickcliffians
succeeding, nothing was done therein. And yet does it appear by Walsingham,
that upon that very same year of 1374. which was the 48. of K. Edwards reign,
A concordate between the Pope and K. Edw. for provisions.
there was a treaty begun in the month of August, at Bruges in Flaunders,
between Ambassadors sent both from the sorsaid Pope Gregory, and King Edward,
to treat of these points, and that the said treaty endured almost two years:
Et tandem (says he) concordatum est inter eos, quod Papa de catero,
reseruationibus beneficiorum minime vteretur; and quod Rex beneficia per
literas (Quare impedit) vlterius non conferret. At length it was agreed between
them, that the Pope for the time to come, should not use reseruations of
benefices to himself; and that the King should no more bestow benefices by his
writ of Quare impedit.

13. Thus much writes Walsingham, and touches no other points; which yet
probably may be presumed, to have been treated at that time, and namely that the
Kings for the time to come, should have the nominations of Bishops, and the
Pope only the confirmation and inuestiture, except in certain cases, as
afterward we have seen practiced, not only in England, but in most Catholic
Kingdoms round about: but this by concession and agreement of the Sea
Apostolic it self, without any least intention in the said Princes, to deny
the supreme spiritual power, and authority of the said Sea; and much less to
take it upon themselves, as M. Attorney would infer that they did, out of
these pieces of Statutes, which he alleges for that purpose. Whereunto now we
shall answer briefly, as they ly in this book.

M. Attorneys objections out of the Reign of King Edward the third.. I.
14. For that these objections are many, and little pertinent, as you will see,
to the many conclusion which he should prove, that this King did take supreme
spiritual authority and jurisdiction upon him. And for that the grounds of all
that is here objected, have been discussed and answered, Supra. cap. ^. ^. 4.
in that we have set down before; and this book grows to more length then
was purposed at the beginning; and finally for that the law-book^^ (...) cited,
of collections and observations by later authors (which books I have not by
me) are of small authority to our purpose: I shall pass over the said
objections, with the greatest breuity that I can, remitting me for the most
part, to that which before has been said, and answered.

The Attorney.
An excommunication by the Archbishop, 1. instance 16 ^. 3. (...) excom. 4.
albeit it be disanulled by the Pope or his Legates, is to be allowed; neither
ought the Judges, give any allowance of any such sentence of the Pope, or his
Legate.

The Catholic Divine.
15. This assertion I do not see how it can be admitted for true, as it lies;
for so much as no author makes mention, 1. Answer.
that K. Edward did ever deny absolutely the Popes authority, to excommunicate
by himself, or by his Legates in England, especially upon the 16. year of his
reign, as here it is noted in the margent, when he was most devout to the Sea
Apostolic, and wrote the humble letter before mentioned, the next year
after, according to the date of the said letter, as you have heard: only there
might be this accord between them, for more authority of the said Archbishop,
and peace of the Realm; that when he had given forth any excommunication, no
annullation thereof from the Pope (which might perhaps be procured by false
suggestion) should be admitted or executed, until the Pope were informed of
the truth, and this is used also in other Catholic Kingdoms, at this day.

16. And it were to much simplicity, to imagine that English men in those
days, admitting the Archbishops excommunication, as here they do (and for
confirmation thereof we do read in Walsingham that upon the year 1340.
VValsing. in vita Edou. 3. anno. 1340.
and 14. of King Edwards reign, John Stratford Archbishop of Canterbury,
threatened the said King to excommunicate all his counsel, if he amended not
certain points, wherein they offered injury to Clergy men) it were simplicity
(I say) to think that the said Archbishops excommunication, could not be
controlled by that of the Pope, from whom they acknowledged the said Archbishop
at that time to have his spiritual authority, if he had any at all. For from
whence should they imagine him to have it? for that the Kings, as we have seen,
had not so much as the nomination or presentation of Archbishops in that
season, but only the Popes, and much less their induction, confirmation, or
inuestiture. Whereupon it must needs follow, that he which gave them spiritual
jurisdiction, had greater and higher jurisdiction himself, though in some cases
by agreement, not to be used, as before has been said.

The Attorney.
^ instance.
It is often resolved, that all the Bishoprics within England, were founded by
the Kings progenitors, and therefore the aduowsons of them all belong to the
King, and at the first they were donatiue: In the Reign of Ed. 3.
and that if an incumbent of any Church with Cure die, if the Patron present not
within six months, the Bishop of that Diocese ought to collate, to the end
the Cure may not be destitute of a Pastor. If he be negligent by the space of
six months, the Metropolitan of that Diocese shall confer one to that Church:
and if he also leave the Church destitute by the space of six months, then the
Common Law gives to the King, as to the supreme within his own Kingdom, and
not to the Bishop of Rome, power to provide a competent pastor for that Church.

The Catholic Divine.
^ Answer.
17. Is it be true which M. Attorney has so often repeated before, that the
Conusaunce, and deciding of Ecclesiastical causes, do not appertain to the
Common Law, and that the provision or induction of Clerks to benefices, and
giving them spiritual jurisdiction over the souls of those that be within the
compass of that benefice, be of the number of those causes, which I take to be
set down in like manner by M. Attorneys own pen before, under the names of
admissions and institutions of Clerks: Snpr^. fol 9.
then how can it be true, which here is said, that the Common Law gives to
the King, as to the supreme, to provide competent Pastors for that, or those
Churches, that within the space of a year and half, are not provided by the
particular patron, Diocesian, or metropolitan? Or where is this Common Law?
How, or when did it begin (as often elsewhere I have demanded)? Either by use,
or statute, or common agreement between the Prince and people? For none of
these have we heard of hitherto, under former Kings, though for presenting and
nomination to benefices, we have oftentimes said, that there is no difficulty,
but that the temporal Prince, may present in such benefices, or Bishoprics,
as he is patron of, either founding the said benefices, or by particular
concession of the Sea Apostolic unto him; as we have showed more largly
before in the life of K. William the Conqueror, and before him again under
K. Edward the Confessor, to whom the Sea of Rome in those days, gave
spiritual jurisdiction also, in some cases, over the Abbey of Westminster,
and some other places of his Realm.

18. But that the Common Law should dispose of these things, The common law
cannot determine who shall give cure of benefices with spiritual authority
belonging thereunto.
and especially give spiritual jurisdiction to the King over benefices; (for so
must the meaning of M. Attorney be, if he delude not his Reader with
equivocation of words) this (I say) is both contrary to his own rule before
set down, and much more to reason. For that to give Ecclesiastical
iurisdictiom, is much more, then to have the conusaunce of Ecclesiastical
causes: which he denying to his Common Law, in diverse places of his book, as
before we have seen, cannot in reason ascribe to the other.

19. Wherefore though we grant this graduation here set down, as good and
conueuient, that if the particular patron do not present within six months,
nor the Ordinary, or Metropolitan within their times prescribed, the Prince as
supreme governor of the Commonwealth to see all things done in due order, may
present, as if he were patron, to the said benefice; yet first this cannot come
originally from the Common Law, for the reasons alleged. Secondly this
proves no spiritual jurisdiction at all in any presentor, but only power of
presentation, which may be in any man that has Ius patronatus allowed by the
Church and head thereof, as before has been said. This instance makes against
M. Attorney himself.
Thirdly much less does this prove supreme authority spiritual in the Prince,
as M. Attorney would infer, which is evident among other reasons by this: For
that the Prince when he does present in this manner, by lapse of time, or
omission of others, is the last in power of presentation, after the
Metropolitans and Bishops; which yet should be first, if he were supreme in
that sort of authority, and that the matter went by rigor of law, and not by
composition and agreement. And finally for that the Prince in this case cannot
put in a Pastor immediately from himself, giving him spiritual jurisdiction over
souls; but must present him to the Bishop or Metropolitan, to be induced by
him, and endued with that jurisdiction: which he should not do, if his own
authority spiritual were greater then the said Bishops or Archbishops. And so
we see that M. Attorney proves nothing by this allegation against us, but
rather against himself.

The Attorney.
3. Instance
The King may not only exempt any Ecclesiastical person fro^^^ the jurisdiction
of the Ordinary, but may grant unto him Episcopal jurisdiction, 17. ^. 3. 23.
as thus it appears there, the King had done of ancient time to the
Archdeacon of Rick-mond.

20. E 3. en^o^^^ 9.16. E. 3 tit. b^^u. 66. 21 E. 3.6 ^. H. 7. 14. F^^z. Na. br.
All religious or Ecclesiastical houses whereof the King was founder, are by the
King exempt from ordinary jurisdiction, and only visitable and corrigible by
the Kings Ecclesiastical commission.

The Abbot of Bury in Suffolk was exempted from Episcopal jurisdiction, by
the Kings Charter. 2. Ed. 3. ^^t. excom 6. 21 E. 3. 4. fol. 4.


The King presented to a benefice, and his presented was disturbed by one that
had obtained Bulls from Rome, for which offense he was condemned to perpetual
imprisonment.

23. E 3. l. Ass pl. 75.
Tithes arising in places out of any parish the King shall h^^e, for that he
having the supreme Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, is bound to provide a
sufficient Pastor, that shall have the Cure of souls of that place, which is
not within any Parish. And by the common laws of England it is evident, that
no man unless he be Ecclesiastical, or have Ecclesiastical jurisdiction can
have inheritance of tithes.

27. Ed. 3. fol 84. Fitz Na. Br. fol. 34.
"The King shall present to his free Chapels (in default of the Deane) by
lapse, in respect of his supreme Ecclesiastical jurisdiction. And Fitz-herbers
says, that the King in that case, does present by lapse, as Ordinary.

The Catholic Divine.
The Answer to the first and second 26. (...).
20, Here be diverse particulars briefly touched, which I shall answer with
like breuity, especially for so much as they are but notes, and observations
out of particular collections of Law-writers, and not Laws nor Statutes
themselves. First then it is denied, that in the time of this K. Edward the 3.
his reign, either he, or any other Prince temporal, could exempt any
Ecclesiastical person from the jurisdiction of his Ordinary Bishop, and much
less grant unto him Episcopal jurisdiction, as of himself, and by his own
power: only he might procure it by his suite to the Sea Apostolic, King
Ed^vard did not give Episcopal jurisdiction
as before has been showed, under K. Edward the Confessor, and other Kings
before the Conquest, and diverse after also, namely K. Henry the third and his
children. And whatsoever is said here to the contrary for those days, is
either ^ror or mistaking, for that it was common Catholic doctrine ^^ that
time, as it is now, that Episcopal jurisdiction cannot be given by (...), but
by him that has it eminently, and with superiority in himself: Supra cap. 2.
and 3.
which must be by ordination, commission, and descent from The Apostles, to whom
it was given in Capite, as before we have declared to descend down by
succession, and the said ordination and imposition of hands to the worlds end
upon Bishops, Prelates and Pastores, by lawful subordination the one unto the
other: which cannot fall upon any lay Princes, that have not this ordination
Ecclesiastical, as every man of judgment, and void of passion, will easily
see and discern. And the example before alleged of the great Christian
Emperor Valentinian the elder, The saying of the Emp. Valentin. Supra cap. 4.
that professed himself to be vnum de populo and non de Clero, one of the lay
people, and not of the Clergy, and consequently not to have authority to judge
among them (and much less to give or exercise spiritual jurisdiction) does
show what the faith and practice of the Catholic Church was in this point,
above twelve hundred years gone.

21. Heerby then it is evident how those religious houses, whereof King Edward
was founder, Supra cap. 6.
and namely the Abbey of Bury (which is the 3. objection) were exempted by the
Kings Charter from Episcopal jurisdiction, to wit, the King procured the same
first from the Sea Apostolic, and then confirmed it by his Charter, as by
many examples you have seen diverse precedent Chapters of this Book, and namely
under King Edward the Confessor, King Edgar, King Kenulph, and King Inas before
the Conquest.

22. If one was condemned to perpetual imprisonment for disturbing the Kings
presentation by the Popes Bulls, it is a question de facto, as you see, and
not de iure: and such might the Kings anger or offense be, as he might also be
put to death for it (some Judges never wanting to be ready to satisfy Princes
pleasures in such affairs) and yet this does not prove the lawfulnes of the
fact. And we have seen before, that this King Edward the 3. upon the 48. year
of his reign, promised the Pope that he would never use more that manner of
proceeding by his writts of Quare impedit, whereby it is like, this man was so
greiuously punished.

23. The instance of tithes allotted to the King for maintenance of a Pastor,
To the 4.
in places without the compass of any parish is a very poor and triflying
instance. First, for that those places, that are out of all Parishes, are to be
presumed to be very few; and secondly what great matter is it, if so small a
thing be left in depossto with the King, for use of the incumbent that is to
ensue. We have seen in our days, that tithes and rents of the Archbishopricke
of Toledo (for example in Spain) being valued at three hundred thousand
Crowns by the year, Trifling obiectio^s.
were depositated many years together in the Kings hands that last dyed,
whiles the Archbishop Caranca was called to Rome, and imprisoned there, upon
accusations of heresy, and other crimes laid against him: and in the end
sentence being given, a great part of that money was granted to the said King
by the Sea Apostolic, for his wars against Infidels. And yet does not this
prove that the King of Spain had this by any spiritual jurisdiction of his
own, but by concession of the Sea Apostolic.

To the 5.
24. And whereas M. Attorney says here, that by the common laws of England it
is evident, that no man unless he be Ecclesiastical or have Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction, can have inheritance of tithes. I would ask him first, how he
proves that the King of England had these tithes by inheritance, and not by
ordination, agreement, or conuention. And secondly how his Common law can
determine, that no man may enjoy tithes, but he that has Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction: whereas before in the 9. leaf of his book, he makes tithes to
be an Ecclesiastical cause, and out of the Conusaunce of the said Common Law.

To the sixth
25. And finally his last inference, that for so much as the King is to present
to his free Chapels in default of the Deane, by lapse, that this is done in
respect of his supreme Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, is altogether childish.
For that first, to present, includes no Ecclesiastical jurisdiction at all,
and much less supreme; and may be exercised by mere laymen, Supra cap. 7.
as before has been declared at large under King William the Conqueror.
Secondly for the King to present to his free Chapels, was as much to say in
those days, as that those Chapels being made free, and exempted by
privileges and franquises from the Sea Apostolic (for otherwise they could
not be freed from jurisdiction of their Ordinary) the King presented unto them,
by virtue of the Canon Law, and commission of the said Sea Apostolic, as
founder thereof.

26. And thirdly, that he presented after the Deane, and by lapse only, and not
in the first place, signifies plainly, that his jurisdiction in that point
(if presentation may be called jurisdiction, as in some sense it may) was less
then that of the Deane. And so Fitzherberts words are to be understood, that in
that particular case the King presented by lapse, as ordinary, that is to say,
whereas in other benefices, when the patron, or party to whom the election,
nomination, or presentation first and chiefly appertains, presents not
within such a time, the Ordinary may present, as having (by composition) the
second right, M. Attorneys case plain against himself.
or power in that case, and after him the Metropolitan, and last of all the
King. Here in the case of Free Chapels (whereof the King is presumed to be
founder) after the Deane, which has the first right (and this by no other
means, then by co^cession of the Sea Apostolic in those days) the King by
privilege of the same Sea, had right to enter in the second place instead of
the Bishop, which proves the quite contrary to M. Attorneys conclusion: for it
shows that the King had not supreme Ecclesiastical jurisdiction in the case
proposed, but secondary, and subordinate to that of the Deane. But let us see
further.

The Attorney.
An excommunication under the Popes Bull is of no force to disable any man
within England, and the Judges said, The 4. Instance. 30. E. 3. l. ass. pl. 19.
32. H. 4. 16 14 H. 4. 14. 8. H. 6. fol. 3. 35. H. 6. 42. 28 H 6. 1. 7. Ed. 36
14. 11. E. 4. 16 Fitz. Na. Br. fol. 64 E. vide 9. E. 4. fol. 3. hereafter fol.
11. It ought to be determined in the Ecclesiastical Courts of England. 21. E.
3. tit. exco^ 6.
that he that pleads such Bulls, though they concern the excommunication of a
subject, were in a hard case, if the King would extend his justice against him.
If excommunication, being the extreme and final end of any suite in the Court
at Rome, be not to be allowed within England; it consequently follows that by
the ancient Common-laws of England, no suite for any cause, though it be
spiritual, rising within this Realm, ought to be determined in the Court of
Rome; Quia frustra expectatur euentus, cuis effectus nullus sequitur: and that
the Bishops of England are the immediate officers and ministers to the Kings
Courts.

In an attachment upon a prohibition, the defendant pleaded the Popes Bull of
excommunication of the Plaintiff: the Judges demanded of the defenda^t, if he
had not the certificate of some Bishop within the Realm, testifying this
excommunication; to whom the Counsel of the defendant answered, that he had
not, neither was it, as he supposed, necessary; for that the Bulls of the Pope
under lead were notorious enough: but it was adjudged that they were not
sufficient, for that the Court ought not to have regard to any excommunication
out of the Realm: and therefore by the rule of the Court, 31 ^. 3. tit. Aid
de Roy 103.
the (...) was thereby disabled. Reges sacro oleo vncti, sunt spiritualis
iurisdictionis capaces.

The Catholic Divine.
27. All that is here said against the acceptance, or admittance of the Popes
Bulls for excommunication in England (for of this only as speech in this place)
if it be meant of this K. Edwards time only (as according to the argument it
must, The Answer.
and we have seen that under former Kings the contrary was always in
practice) how then does M. Attorney talk here again of his ancient
Common-lawes? For if it began first under this King, then was it a new law, and
not ancient: and if further we find no Decree or Statute thereof at all in
this Kings life, as hitherto we have not, nor does M. Attorney cite, or quote
any, then might it be a matter only de facto of some Judges, who according to
the current of that time, and as they should see the King affected, pleased or
displeased with the Popes of those days, would reject, or admit their Bulls at
their discretion. And then do you see, upon what goodly ground, M. Attorney
infers his conclusion; that if the Popes Bulls of excommunication were not
respected in those days, it consequently follows, that by the ancient
common laws of England, no suite for any cause, though it be spiritual, rising
within this Realm, might be determined in the Court of Rome. And why so? For
that the Popes excommunication was not obayed in England.

28. But I would ask him whether no sentence could be given, without
excommunication? Or whether to such as believed the Popes authority in those
days, it were sufficient in conscience, that the said excommunications were
not admitted by some Judges in their tribunals? Or at leastwise no judicial
notice taken of them, except they came notified also from some Bishop, as the
second Case here set down does touch, and thereby insinuates the solution of
the whole riddle, to wit, that Judges were not bound under this K. Edward, to
take public and Judicial notice of any Bull of excommunication come from
abroad, Bulls from Rome not admitted except they come certifyed from some
Prelate at home.
and presented by any private person, except the same came notified from some
Bishop in authority within the Realm. Which caution is used also at this day,
in diverse other Catholic Countries round about us, for avoiding trouble,
deceit, and confusion, to wit that Bulls and other authentical writings from
Rome, must be seen, and certified by some persons of authority within the
Realm, before they can be pleaded in Court, or admitted generally.

29. To the last instance, that Kings anointed with sacred oil, are capable
of spiritual jurisdiction, S^^ Sup. cap. 7.
we deny it not, but grant with the great Ciuill-lawyer Baldus before
mentioned, and all Canonists, that diverse cases of spiritual jurisdiction, may
be granted by the Sea Apostolic unto anointed Kings, and so often it has
been done; especially to Kings of England, as former examples, have declared,
namely of K. Edward the Confessor. Kings are capable of ecclesiastical
jurisdiction by commission.
But this assertion of capacity, and ability, to receive some sort of
spiritual jurisdiction, if it be committed unto them; does not prove that they
had the said jurisdiction in themselves, or of themselves, by virtue of their
Crowns, or annoynting, as M. Attorney would have men believe. But let us hear
further.

The Attorney.
Where a Prior is the Kings debtor, and ought to have tithes of another
spiritual person; The ^. Instance. 38. ass. pl. 30.
he may choose either to sue for subtraction of his tithes in the
Ecclesiastical Court, or in the Exchequer, and yet the persons, and matter
also was Ecclesiastical. For seeing the matter, by a mean, concerns the
King, he may sue for them in the Exchequer, as well, as in the Ecclesiastical
Court, and there shall the right of tithes be determined. And Fitzh. in his
Not. Br. fol. 30. holds, that before the Statute of the 18. of E. 3. cap. 7.
that right of tithes were determinable in the te^porall Courts, See the stat.
of 15. E. t. c. 4. 31. E. ^. c. 11.
at the election of the party. And by that Statute assigned to be determined
in the Ecclesiastical Court, and the temporal Court excluded thereof. And the
Courts of diverse manners of the Kings, and of other Lords in ancient times,
had the probates of last wills and testaments; and it appears by the 11. Hen.
7. fol. 12. that the probate of testaments did not appertain to the
Ecclesiastical Court, but that of late time they were determinable there: so
as, of such causes, and in such manner, as the Kings of the Realm, by general
consent and allowance have assigned to their Ecclesiastical Courts, they have
jurisdiction by force of such allowance.

The King did by his Charter translate Canons secular into regular, 38. Ass.
pl. 22.
and religious persons, which he did by his Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, and
could not do it, unless he had jurisdiction Ecclesiastical.

The Abbot of Waltham died in the 45. year E. 3. and one Nicholas merit was
elected Abbot, 46. E. ^. tit. pramunure. 6.
who, for that the Abbey was exempt from ordinary jurisdiction, was sent to
Rome to be confirmed by the Pope. And because the Pope by his constitutions had
reserved all such collations to himself, he did recite by his Bull, that he
having no regard to the election of the said Nicolas, gave to him the said
Abbey, and the spiritualties and temporalties belonging to the same, of his
spiritual grace, and at the request (as he fained) of the King of England This
Bull was read, and considered of in Council, that is, before all the Judges of
England; and it was resolved by them all that this Bull was against the laws of
England, and that the Abbot for obtaining the same, was fallen into the Kings
mercy, whereupon all his possessions were seized into the Kings hands, as more
at large by the said Case appears.

Where the Abbot of Westminster had a Prior and Covent, who were regular, 49.
E. 3. l. Ass. pl. 8.
and mort in law; yet the King by his Charter did divide that corporation, and
made the Prior and Covent a distinct and capable body, to sue, and be sued by
themselves.

The Catholic Divine.
30. The first case of this instance about tithes and probates of testaments,
The Answer.
is a very trifling thing to prove M. Attorneys great conclusion, of supreme
authority Ecclesiastical to be in the temporal Prince and his Courts. For as
these things, and like other, are in part belonging to spiritual
jurisdiction, in that they concern benefices; the wills and ordinations of
dead men for the benefit of their souls, and the like, partly also belonging
to temporal, Some things may belong to different courts in different respects.
in that they include temporalities and worldly substance, they may in
different respects appertain also to different Courts, and so they do in
other Catholic Countries at this day: and namely for probates of testaments,
in no other Country (perhaps) besides England, are they limited only to the
Bishops spiritual Courts. About which we have the foresaid Statutes of
Circumspecte agatis under K. Edward the first, and of Articuli Cleri under K.
Edward the 2. and diverse other Ordinations under this King Edward the 3. But
how proves all this M. Attorneys principal conclusion? And how far of is this
from inferring supreme Ecclesiastical jurisdiction to be in the temporal
Prince? Is it not strange, that such a man as M. Attorney, would allege such
toys? But let us go forward.

31. If K. Edward did translate by his Charter, the Canons secular into
regular, as here is said, we must presume he did it (as before you have heard
K. Henry the 2. to have done it at Waltham) by authority of the Popes Br^ue,
confirmed by his Charter, Supra in (...). ^.
and not otherwise. For as well could K. Henry the 2. have do^e it of his own
authority, if it had been annexed to his Crown, at this K. Edward the 3. And
therefore seeing the other observed the Canons of the Church, and presumed not
to do it of himself, but by the Popes license and Charter, and ratified by his
own, it may be presumed that this King did the same, for so much as the same
Canon Law stood still in force. And so it may be suspected, that this case has
somewhat omitted covertly that should appertain to the full declaration thereof.

32. The other case also of Nicolas Morris chosen Abbot of Waltham, that went
to Rome and got his inuestiture there, by reservation of the Pope, and not by
his election in England, Why the Abbot of VValtam was severely punished.
fell out at that very time, as here is noted, when the contention was most
in heat between the King and French Popes, about reservation of benefices, to
wit, upon the 4. of the Kings reign, the said Popes agreeing soon after to
use no more the said reseruations. So as no great marvel of the Judges of
those days, did move the King to make some demonstration of special offense
against this man, the controversy being then in handling: but this is an
instance de facto and not de iure.

33. Lastly the case of the Abbot of Westminster made, by the Kings Charter,
a distinct body, capable to sue, and to be sued, was a temporal privilege,
which any Prince might give to a Covent, if it were commodious for them, and
they willing to accept thereof: and if not, they would have reclaimed in those
days, and have appealed to the Sea Apostolic for remedy, as the use and
right was at that time, and as oy diverse examples appears of Appellatio^s
made against the King himself, during his reign; as namely that of the Bishop
of Ely, recounted at large by Walsingham in the year 1348. and others.

34. The six instance consists of certain Statutes, The ^. Instance.
made in the 25. 27. 28. and 38. years in the reign of K. Edward the 3.
against prouisious and prouisers from Rome, reseruations of Bishoprics and
benefices by the said Sea, undue appellations, unjust citations, infamations or
molestations of men by Censures from thence. All which I think not good to set
down at large as they lie in the Statute book, for that they are ouerlonge,
but breiflie rather to allege the sum thereof, which is sufficient for the
point it self of our controversy. First then it is said: That in consideration
of the many inconveniences and hurtes, that seemed to ensue to the
Commonwealth, as well Clergymen, as secular, by such as went to Rome, and
there by false suggestions, and other such procurements, unworthily got unto
themselves benefices, they being either strangers, not able to preach, and
teach, or else, if Englishmen, yet unfit for their learning, or manners, and
that thereby particular patrons were deprived of their right of presenting, etc?
The sum of the first restraint about Provisions.
It was ordained upon the 25. year of this Kings reign, to punish the
persons, that being subject to the King, should attempt, or do this without
the Kings license, or knowledge of the Realm. And so the decree of Parliament
was, that whosoever hereafter should attempt, or procure any such provisions,
Stat. 25. E. 3. de prouisoribus.
he should be out of the Kings protection, whereby every man might lawfully
kill him, etc.

35. And in the same Parliament, the like, and many other inconveniences are
represented against reseruations of benefices, by the said Sea Apostolic, and
Bishops thereof, whereupon it is decreed, by the King, and his great men, and
Commons, that the said reseruations shall not be suffered, or admitted for the
time to come, as a thing not due to the Sea Apostolic; But that all
Archbishops, Bishops, and other dignities, and benefices Electorie in England,
shall be permitted to free election, as they were granted by the Kings
progenitors, founders thereof, and the ancestors of other Lords, that had
founded any such benefices, and might have reserved to themselves, as Patrons,
and founders, the presentations there unto.

36. Moreover Complaint being made by diverse of the Kings people, that many
were greatly troubled, and drawn out oftentimes of the Realm, by unquiet and
litigious people, that made appeals to Rome, to answer to things, whereof the
Conusaunce pertained to the Kings Court, etc. It was assented, and accorded by
the King, and by the great men, and Commons, that whosoever should draw any man
out of the Realm, in plea, whereof the Conusaunce pertained to the Kings
Courts, should incur the danger of Praemunire. And finally: that no man
presume to cite, sue, vex, molest any by Censures procured from the Popes
Court, against any, for observing these laws, and like other ordinances, upon
pain of severe punishment, etc.

37. To all which we answer, The Answer.
that diverse circumstances may be considered about these Statutes, Ordinances,
and Decrees, as well of the times, and persons, as of the occasions, causes,
and manner of doing. And to begin first with the last; it may be, that either
all, or some part of these restrictions might be made by some kind of consent
or toleration of the Popes themselnes, upon the often representing of the
inconveniences, which we have seen before made by diverse Princes, from K. Henry
the 3. down-ward, and the answers as well of Innocentius the 4. as other Popes,
that the said inconveniences should be remedied. And to the same effect puts
down Walsingham this K. Edwards letters, Agreement between the King and Pope
about prouisio^s.
at several times, to sundry Popes for that end. And upon the year 1373.
which was the 47. of his reign (long after the making of these Statutes) he
sent again to Gregory the 11. to entreat his consent, and good will to the
same. Rex Edwardus (says Walsingham) eodem anno misit Ambassiatores ad Dominum
Papam, rogaus c^m, etc. The same year K. Edward sent Ambassadors to the Pope,
praying him, that he would be content to surcease from providing benefices in
England, and that Clerks might enjoy their rights to Ecclesiastical dignities
by elections, as in old time they were accustomed. So as here we see,
VValsing. in vita (...). an. 1371.
that the King pretended right by ancient custom, in these affairs: Neither
did this Pope altogether deny it. For Walsingham adds: super quibus
articulis nuncij a Papa certa recepere responsa, etc. upon which articles the
Kings messengers received from the Pope certain answers, of which they should
inform him at their return, and that nothing should be determined, until the
King had written again his mind more fully unto the said Pope. And then in the
next year after he says, as before you have heard, that the Pope, and the
King were agreed upon these, and like points.

38. And if this were so at this time, then may it be presumed also, that
before upon the 25. year of his reign, when he first made those Statutes of
restraint, he had also some secret consent, or conniuency of Pope Clement the
6. or Innocentius the 6. that immediately ensued him, to the same effect: at
least wise, for the ceasing of provisions and reseruations, except only upon
great and weighty causes, (for in such cases we find, that they were used also
afterward) and that ambitious, busy, and troublesome people, that should
deceitfully procure such provisions, or rashly and unjustly appeal, or molest
men with Citations, Censures, and the like, should be punished. See S. Bernard
a^ (...), ^l. 2. de Consideracione ad Eugeni^^.
And this was a thing so needful oftentimes, as S. Bernard himself, that lived
under King Henry the first, and writing to Pope Eugenius, that had been his
scholar, of the great abuses of troublesome appellatio^s in his days, wishes
him, as on the one side to admit all due appellations, which of right were made
unto him, and to his tribunal, from all parts of the world; so on the other
side, to punish them that made them unjustly.

39. All which being considered, together with the time before noted, wherein
K. Edward made these restraints, to wit, when he had great wars in France for
challenge of the Crown, and no small jealousy with the Popes, Cardinals, and
Roman Court, as being all, or the most part French at that day, and residing
in Auinion in France; the continual clamours also of his people, much
exaspered by certain particular abuses, and excesses of some Ecclesiastical
officers: Of the reasons and manner of co^cluding these restraints by K. E. the
3.
the marvel is not so great, if he took some such resolution, as this de
facto, at least for satisfying especially of the laity, who were most instant
in the matter; Yea and by whom only, it seems to have been done. For that in
none of these Statutes is mentioned expressly the consent of the Lords
spiritual; but of the King, and Great men ( Magnatum in Latin) and of the
Communalty, which is repeated in every of the forsaid Statutes, except one,
where is said. The King by the assent, and express will, and concord of the
Dukes, Earls, Barrons, and the Commons of this Realm did determine, etc not
mencioning at all the Bishops, Archbishops, Abbots, and other Ecclesiastical
Prelates, that had right of suffrage in those Parlaments; and consequently, how
far this probation de facto does prove also de Iure, I leave to the Reader to
consider.

40. Only we conclude, that howsoever this was, either by right or wrong, for
the manner of determining; certain it is, that King Edward did not thereby
diminish any way his opinion, or judgment of the Popes spiritual authority:
King Edward's restraints diminished not his dew respect to the church
as may appear by all his other actions writings to the same Sea afterward,
and of his respective carriage and behavior, not only toward the Popes, but
to his own Clergy also in England, in all matters belonging to their
superiority Ecclesiastical. In proof whereof, upon the very selfsame 25. year
of his reign, wherein the former Statutes of restraint were decreed against
such of his subjects as should offend therein; he made another Statute
entitled. A confirmation of all libertyes, granted the Clergy. An. 2^. E. 3.
^tat. 3. Stat. ^. cap. 1.
And after ward upon the 31. year, another Statute entitled. A confirmation
of the great Charter, and of the Charter of the Forest. Which great Charter
containing the privileges, 42. E. 3. ^. 1.
libertyes, and superiority of the Church, is confirmed by him again in the
42. year of his reign, by a particular Statute. And finally upon the 50.
year, which was the last before he died, he made another Statute entitled
thus. ^he libertyes of the Church confirmed. So as all the former restraints,
were pretended for particular cases only, mixed with temporaltyes, and for
remedy of some excesses and inconveniences, without detraction of any thing
from the acknowledged supreme power of the Pope and Sea Apostolic, in mere
spiritual matters.

41. And how far then, is all this that is alleged here by M. Attorney, from
proving that K. Edward the 3. did hold himself for supreme head of the Church,
even in spiritual and Ecclesiastical matters? Or that his restraints before
made in the cases set down, might be a president, or warrant, either de
facto, or de iure to Q. Elizabeth, to K. Henry the 8. or K. Edward that
followed him, to deny wholly the Popes authority, and take it to themselves?
And so much of this K. Edward the 3. whose religion and judgment, though it
were ever Catholic, as has been said; yet was his life and actions many
times disordinate and violent, The disordinate life of K. Edward the third.
as of a soldier and warrier; and this not only against the liberties of the
Church, but against the precepts of good life and government also. The first
appears by a long reprehension written unto him, with threatening likewise of
excommunication from John Stratford Archbishop of Canterbury, upon the year
1340. wherein he does set down the many greiuances, VValsing. in vita
Edouardi 3. an. 1340.
which he did lay upon the Church unjustly. And for the second, it may be
understood, as well by the same narration of the foresaid Archbishop, wherein he
said to the king, admonishing him of his fathers miserable end: Fere corda
populo terra amisistis. You have almost lost the hearts of all the people of
the land. As also the same is evident by the general testimony of our
historiographers, who make the later part of his reign to have been very much
disordered, and thereby also unfortunate and miserable, as may appeer by these
words of Walsingham, who having much commended other graces in him, says:
Luxus tame^ and motus suae carnis lubricos, etiam in aetate senili non
cohibuit, etc. he did not even in his old age, restrain the luxurious and
frail motions of his own flesh; being much allured hereunto, as is said; by
the incitation of a certain dishonest woman, named Alice Pierce, that was with
him unto the end of his life, and was cause of hastening the same. And it is
greatly to be noted, as in the former part of his reign, all things went
prosperously with him; so toward the later end in his old age, through the
demerit of his sins, all fell out contrary, etc.

OF KING RICHARD THE SECOND, The tweluth King after the Conquest. I.
This King reigned 12 years from 1377. to 1399.
42. Next after the death of K. Edward succeeded his Nephew K. Richard the 2. for
22. years, son of Prince Edward surnamed the Black Prince, who died not long
before his father. The child was but an eleven years old when he took the
Crown, and of very great expectation, but that youth wealth, and commaundrie
in that age, with adulation, and perverse counsel of licencious people, The
causes of K. Richardes disorders.
that are wont to accompany that state and condition of Princes, drew him
aside to his own pitiful ruin in the end; and would God, in his life,
conversation, and government, he had as well held the stepps and wisdom of
his ancestors, as he did in the outward maintenance of their religion, and
obedience toward the Sea Apostolic: for that (probably) it would have
preserved him from the miseries whereunto he fell; though it be true also,
that dissolution of life, does commonly bring with it contempt or neglect, or
less estimation of religion: whereunto this man, and some that were about him,
had the more occasion given them, by the profane, and wicked doctrine of
VVi^k^liffe and his fellows, that prevailed much in these days, and brought
many of the Common people to such fury and contempt of all religion, as their
strange tumults, and raging rebellions, under their Captains, wat Tyler, Jack
Straw, and other like unruly rulers, do well declare.

43. But yet the external face of religion, and practice thereof, received and
established from the times of all former Kings, was continued also by him; and
in particular, it is to be noted, that no one King, did ever more often
confirm and ratify the liberties of the Church, then he, which is as much to
say, as to establish the opposite negative proposition against M. Attorney,
professing heerby, that he had not supreme authority in causes Ecclesiastical,
King Richard often confirmed the libertyes of the church.
for so much as the libertyes of the English Church did expressly consist in
this, that Churchmen, and Church Matters, and all spiritual and
ecclesiastical affairs, were a distinct government from the temporal, and
subordinate only among themselves, the one degree to the other, and all
mediately to the Sea Apostolic, and Bishops thereof.

44. For proof then of this, that King Richard did confirm and maintain, all
the days of his reign, these libertyes, franquises, and privileges of the
Church, and of Clergymen, appears by his own Statutes: As for example, by
the first Statute made in his first year, with this title. A confirmation of
the libertyes of the Church: and the second Statute made in his second year
has the same title, and subject; as also has the first Statute of his third
year, and first of his 5. and first of his 6. and first of his seventh year.
And so in like manner shall we find the very first Statutes of his 12. and 21.
years, to contain the same confirmation.

45. And if I should stand upon the enumeration of particular examples, The
practice of Church-libertyes by Clergymen under K. Richard the second.
of the practice of these libertyes in Clergymen of those days, it would be
ouerlonge, as namely, how all Bishops, Archbishops, Abbots, and other Prelates,
elected according to the agreement before taken, repaired to the Bishop of Rome
for their confirmations, and could not exercise any part of their offices,
until they had the same. And albeit according to the former decrees of the 25.
and 27. years of K. Edward the 3. confirmed also in the 13. and 16. years of
the reign of this King, reseruations of benefices, or provisions immediately
from the Court of Rome were not admitted (which little imports our
controversy with M. Attorney) yet this, which includes the maine ground and
substantial foundation of all acknowledgement of supreme spiritual power,
remained still untouched, to wit, that no Bishop, Archbishop, or other Prelate,
by whomsoever he was presented, chosen, or nominated, could, or can at this
day, have spiritual jurisdiction, but either mediate or immediate from the
Pastor of the Sea Apostolic. And this point did K. Richard maintain and
defend all days of his life, which is the principal point, as has been said,
of acknowledging the sovereign authority of the Sea Apostolic in spiritual
affairs, for that other things are but dependence of this, as annexed sequels.

46. And I might allege here diverse particular examples of King Kichards
respective proceedings toward both the Sea of Rome and Clergy of his Country:
as namely in the first, whereas Pope Urban the 6. being truly, Respect borne by
King Richard to the true Pope.
and Canonically elected Pope in Rome, and afterward against him, the
Archbishop of Arles in France being chosen for Antipope by a faction of
French-Cardinals, that named him Clement the 7. King Richard stood zealously
with the said true Pope, and not only made a Statute in Parliament, that
whosoever should be obedient to any other person, as Pope, but only to Pope
Urban, 2. Rich. 2. cap. 7.
should be out of the Kings protection, and his goods seized, as the words of
the Statute are; but also some years after that again when the said Pope
Urban had appointed Henry Bishop of Norwich, to be his Captain general, to
pass over into Flanders, and by force, to constrain the said schismatic
Pope to surcease that division; the said King not only allowed, but assisted
also that enterprise.

47. And as for the Clergy of his Realm, and their spiritual jurisdiction,
how much he respected it, appears by that the Archbishop of Canterbury, King
Richard obeyed the Censures of the Church.
and some other Bishops, that assisted him; having publicly pronounced the
sentence of excommunication, upon the year 1379. against certain persons,
that had broken the privileges of Sanctuary in the Church and Monastery of
Westminster, and shed blood therein, for taking out a certain person in the
Kings name; the said King albeit, he was thought to have been the abetter
^hereof, yet did he finally obey the said Censures, and soon after in the same
year at his Parliament of London, it was ordained (says Walsingham). Quod
immunitates, and priuilegia Ecclesia VVestmonasteriensis illibata manerent:
that the libertyes, VValsing. an. 1379.
and privileges of the Church of Westminster should remain whole and
inuiolate.

48. Wherefore now to answer the instance or objection which M. Attorney
alleges out of the foresaid Statute of the 16. year of this King, M.
Attorneys Instance out of this K. Reign.
where the law of Praemunire, the loss of goods, and lands, and other
punishments are appointed for such, as do procure process, and sentences of
exco^municatio^, which touched the king their Lord, against him, his crown,
and his regalitie, etc. as larglie you may see it set down in the whole
Statute out of M. Attorneys book. The crown of England not subject to any in
temporalityes.
I answer that whosoever shall attentively read the whole contexture of this
Statute, with that which before we have set down, both in this, and in the
precedent kings life, he shall see that this Statute does rather make against
M. Attorneys purpose of supreme spiritual jurisdiction, then any way for
him. For that first of all, the very proposition to the Parliament does
concern temporal power, and not spiritual, saying: that the Crown of England
has been at all times free, and only subject to God immediately, and to none
other, and that the same ought not in any thing, touching the majesty or
regalitie of the same Crown, be submitted to the Bishop of Rome, nor the laws
and Statutes thereof to be taken away or mablect by him, etc.

49. This then being the proposition of the Commons, which is evidently to be
understood of temporal regalitie, and things thereunto belonging, the
temporal Lords assented absolutely unto it. But the Archbishop, Bishops,
Abbots, and other Ecclesiastical Prelates, that made the chief, and highest
part of the Parliament, distinguished; yea made protestations (as the Statute
says) that it was never their meaning (to wit either in K. Edwards days or
now) to say that the Bishop of Rome might not excommunicate Bishops, or make
translation of Prelates from one Sea to another, after the law of holy Church:
yet if this should be done at any time, in great prejudice of the King or his
realm, as that sage men, or Counselors should thereby be drawn from him,
without his knowledge, or against his will; or that the substance, and
treasury of his Realm, should be in danger to be destroyed, by sending out
money or giving it to his adversaries, or other like inconveniences ensue
against the Kings state and realm indeed; then they did grant, that this
might be esteemed against the Kings regalitie, etc. whereby we see in what
sense, and with what limitation, they did yield to such like Statutes in those
days, In what sense the Bishop yielded to the statute of Praemunire.
pressed by the importunity of the lay party, but yet far from the meaning
of M. Attorney, who would have men think, that heerby they confessed K.
Richard to be Head of the Church, which himself expressly denies in his
forenamed Statute in favor of Pope Urban, whom he calls the only true head
of the Church, and for such commands him to be obaied and respected, under
the pains before mentioned. And so much of K. Richard, who not long after fell
into great misery, and lost both his commaundry and life, and came to a
pitiful end, full of affliction and desolation, as our histories do testify
and set forth at large.

OF THE THREE KING HENRYES OF THE HOUSE OF LANCASTER, The fourth, fifth and
sixth, who reigned for the space of threescore years: And what is observed out
of their reigns, concerning our Controversy with M. Attorney. CHAP. XIII.
AFter the three Edwards before mentioned, under whom the first restraints were
made for the exercise of certain external points of Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction, as you have heard; and after the pitiful end of their successor,
and inheritour K. Richard the 2. entered and ensued in the Crown three Henry's
of the line of Lancaster, who had variable success in their lives and
temporal affairs, though in religion, and particularly in this point of our
controversy, about spiritual power and jurisdiction, they were all one.

K. Henr. 4. reigned 13. years, from 1399. to 1412.
2. King Henry the 4. being Duke of Lancaster, and son of the often fore
named John of Gaunt, that was the fourth son of K. Edward the 3. seeing the
disorderly government of K. Richard the 2. his Cosen germa^, and the auersion
of his peoples affection, from him for the same cause, came out of France,
where he lived in banishement, raised powers against him, pursued and took his
person, caused him to be deposed by Parliament, and himself chosen in his place
with great applause of the people, which yet turning away from him soon after
again, he was forced for his safety and defense not only to make away the
same K. Richard in Pomfret Castle, but also to take arms, suppress, and cut
of the greatest and chiefest men, that had aided and assisted him to gain the
said Kingdom. Stow in Kent. 4.
And finally after a troublesome reign of 13. years, he died, using these
words before his death, as they are registered by Stow, and others: I sore
repent me, that ever I charged my self with the Crown of this Realm, etc.

3. King Henry the 5. his eldest son succeeded him, for the space of ten
years; H. ^. reigned ten years from 1412. to 1422.
and though he were a most excellent Prince, warlike, and fortunate, and gained
the possession of almost the whole Kingdom of France: yet had he great
difficultyes notwithstanding, both therein, and by domestical conspiracyes, not
only the Lollards, and VVickliffians, Richard Earl of Cambridg Henry lord
Scroope treasurer. Edmond Earl of March etc.
but his own nobility also, kindred, and chief officers, conspiring against
him, and seeking his overthrow. And finally, when he was in the very midst,
and heat of his wars and Conquest, and his life and health most desired, both
by himself and others, he died with much affliction of mind in France, leaving
a little child of his own name, that was but eight months old, to preserve,
and defend that which he had gotten, but could not, as the event proved.

4. This young infant then, borne as it were a King, H. 6. reigned 18 years
from 1422. to 146^.
of two so great Realms, and crowned in Paris it self, which no other King of
England ever was before or since, drew out a long reign, for almost forty
years, but entangled with many aduersityes, and varietyes of fortune, in which
he lost first all his States of France, not only such as his Father had gotten
by dint of sword, but other likewise which his progenitors had inherited by
lawful succession of blood, and then by little and little, leesing also at
home his kindred, and trusty friends, that by Civil wars were cut of, he lost
at length his Kingdom, being twice deprived thereof, and finally his life and
progeny, and became a pitiful example of Princely misery: and so this line of
Lancaster, entering by Gods designement, as it seems, to punish the sins of
the former line of Edwards, and Richard before mentioned, and especially that
(as many think) of their rough proceeding with the Church, now were punished
also themselves, by another line of York, for continuing the said rigorous,
and prejudicial laws against the privileges, and franquises thereof, Polidor.
lib. 12. Hist. Aug^. in Hen. 6.
which was written to K. Henry the 6. by Pope Martyn the 5. as Polidor notes,
and he promised reformation therein; but the thing depending of consent of
Parliament, was never effected, nor that good motion put in execution.

5. But yet that all these three Kings of the house of Lancaster were
perfectly, and zealously Catholic, no man can deny; and infinite arguments
are extant thereof, yea and of this point also in particular, of their
acknowledgment and reverence of the sovereign spiritual authority of the
Bishop of Rome in the Church of Christ. And therefore King Henry the fourth,
considering the great hurtes and scandals, that had ensued for many years
together by schism of Anti-Popes in the Sea Apostolic, was so careful, and
diligent, to procure and assist the General Council indicted at Pisa in
Italy, for the extinguishing thereof; as not only he sent learned Prelates upon
his charges thither, to help and assist the said Council, as namely Robert
Bishop of Salisbury, and other learned men, but wrote very pious letters also
both to Gregory the 12. that was the true Pope, and to all his Cardinals, by a
special Embassadge of his own, persuading the said Pope by diverse godly and
prudent reasons, to persist in his mind and promise of giving over the
Popedom, as the other Antipope called Benedictus the 13. had in like manner
promised. Of which his letter to the said Pope he making mention in another to
the foresaid Cardinals says: VValsing. in vita Henriei 4. an. 1490.
Cupientes ostendere quem zelum habuimus, and habemus, vt pax detur Ecclesiae,
etc. we desiring to show what zeal we have had, and have, that peace be given
to the Church, we have by consent of the States of our Kingdom sent our
letters unto his Holiness, etc.

6. And when this Council of Pisa took no great effect until five years
after, when in the time of his son K. Henry the 5. the general Council of
Constance in Germany was appointed for the same effect, the said son K. Henry
the 5. following his Fathers piety heerin, caused the Archbishop of Canterbury,
Henry Chychley, to call ^^^^t a Council in England, to choose fit English
Prelates to be sent to that Council; and so were chosen, not only the
foresaid Bishop of Salysburie sent before to Pisa, English Prelates sent to the
Council of Co^stance.
but Bath and Hereford also, together with the Abbot of Westminster, Prior of
Worcester, and other famous learned men, to whom the King added for his
Ambassador, the Earl of VVarwycke to accompany them thither, where the said
schism being extinguished, by the deposition of three that pretended to be
Popes, and Martyn the 5. being established in that seat, the whole Christian
world was put in peace thereby.

7. And for that in the same Council, the heresies of VVickcliffians and
Lollards were especially condemned and anathematized, the same decrees were
presently admitted, and put in execution in England, by the zealous
commandment of the said K Henry the 5. though his father K. Henry the 4. and
the whole State had prevented that decree, by making temporal laws, in
confirmation of the Canonical and Churches laws, for the punishment of the
said Lollards and VVickcliffians that denied the Popes Supremacy, Laws for
executing of Lollard and vvicklifists.
and caused many of them to be burneed; and so did K. Henry the 6. also,
during all the time of his reign: whereby as by infinite other things that
might be alleged, their belief and judgment in that behalf is sufficiently
declared; though in respect of some temporal inconveniences, and the
inclination of their people, upon former complaints, they recalled not the said
restraints, laws, or ordinances made by their progenitors, whereof now we shall
speak more particularly, in answering the instances alleged by M. Attorney
our of their reigns.

Instances alleged out of the Reign of King Henry the fourth, the thirtenth
King after the Conquest.. I.
The Attorney.
8. It is resolved that the Popes Collectors, First Instance.
though they have the Popes Bulls for that purpose, have no jurisdiction within
this Realm: and there the Archbishops, and Bishops, etc. of this" Realm, are
called the Kings spiritual Judges. 2. H. 4. fol. 9.


The Catholic Divine.
It is to be considered who resolved this, and upon what ground, The Answer.
for it may be there was some agreement taken between the Pope and the Realm
in that behalf, concerning the Collectors authority, as in other Catholic
Countries also at this day, we see there is: Neither had the said Collector
by his office, any ordinary jurisdiction, but extraordinary only by
particular commission. How Bishops may be called the Kings spiritual Judges.
And commonly those collections were made cum beneplacito Principis, with the
good liking of the Prince, where they are made. Archbishops and Bishops may
be called the Kings spiritual Judges, for that they are his subjects, as
Peers and principal members of the Realm (as before has been declared) and
do live under his protection, Supra cap. ^.
but not as though they received their spiritual authority or jurisdiction
from him; for then might he execute the same authority and jurisdiction by
others also which are no Bishops, as by his Chancellor and temporal Judges,
giving them the same jurisdiction, which no man would affirm in that time, as
lawful. But let us see his second Instance.

The Attorney.
2 Instance Fitz. Not. (...). 269.
9. By the ancient laws Ecclesiastical of this Realm, no man could be
convicted of heresy, being high treason against the allmighty, but by the
Archbishop and all the Clergy of that province, and after abiured thereupon,
and after that newly convicted, and condemned by the Clergy of that province in
their general Council of Convocation. But the Statute of 2. H. 4. cap. 15.
does give the Bishop in his Diocese, This had a resemblance to an. Attainder
of treason, ^herin there must be first an ind4ctment by one Jury and a
conviction ^y another. 11. H. 4. 37.
power to condemn an heretic, and that before that Statute he could not be
committed to the secular power to be burnt, until he had once abiured, and was
again relapsed to that, or some other heresy. Whereby it appears that the
King by consent of Parliament, directed the proceedings in the Ecclesiastical
Court, in case of heresy, and other matters more spiritual.

The Pope cannot alter the laws of England.

The Catholic Divine.
The Ans^^re.
Why does not M. Attorney set dov^ne those ancient laws Ecclesiastical of this
Realm. Will he say that they were any other, then the Common and Canon laws of
the Roman Church in those days? He cannot with any probability. And as for the
matter here touched, that no man could be convicted of heresy, but by the
Archbishop, Two condemnation not ever necessary in case of h^resy.
and all the Clergy of that Province, and after abiured, and then newly
convicted, and condemned again by a general Council of Convocation, etc In
some points he hitteth right, but in other not. For when any new heresy is
discovered, it must be judged and condemned by some such Synod or Council, as
here is mentioned, if the head of the Church have not condemned it before. But
when the heresy is condemned, it was never necessary to call such Synods or
Council, for conuicting of every particular man, that shall be accused of that
heresy: and much less was it needful, that there should be two several
conuictions, the one before abiuration, the other after: (except in such as
were relapsed) for what if the heretic should stand stiffely to it, upon his
first conviction, and would not abjure, but defend his heresy? did the
anncient laws Ecclesiastical of England (think you) forbid him in this case
to be punished? I think not.

10. But M. Attorney has a note in the margent, whereat I cannot but marvel,
for that he hearing in this place, out of the old sense of our ancient laws,
heresy to be held for high treason against God, and that (as he supposes) it
must be twice convicted, which is only true in relapse, says in the margent.
This had a resemblance to an Attainder of treason, wherein there must be first
an indictment by one Jury, and a conviction by another. But I deny this
resemblance to be of any moment for the form of proceeding, though for the
thing, I grant, that heresy is truly treason against God; but this double
conviction here mentioned by two Iuries, M. Attorneys marginal note reproved.
has little or no similitude with the other of relapsed heresy, where the
party is first permitted to abjure his first fault and not punished, except he
offend the second time in the same: Which yet I persuade my self M. Attorney
will not allow in humane treasons against the Prince, that he must twice
iterate his fault, before he can be punished, and so the parity or similitude
holds not.

11. But now to the principal point; where the Attorney says that the
Statute of K. Henry the 4. does give the Bishop in his Diocese, power to
condemn an heretic, and that before that Statute, he could not be committed
to the secular power to be punished, until he had once abiured, and was again
relapsed, etc. and that heerby it appears, that the King directed
Ecclesiastical proceedings etc. Diverse errors are here couched together,
and then if ignorance be the inseparable twynne of every error (as M. Attorney
in his Preface holds) you know what will ensue.

12. First then it is presumed in this assertion, that no heretic could be
put to death in old time, except he were relapsed, that is to say, had once (at
least) abiured his heresy, and fallen unto it again: In Cod. l. Manicheos l.
Arriani l. Quicunque and apud Paul. Diacon. l. 14. and 16.
which is false. For that albeit such people were most of all to be punished,
for their perjury, and inconstancy; yet other also that never abiured, if they
stood obstinate, might by ancient laws, as well Civil, as Canonical be
punished by death; as in the Civil is auerred by the particular laws, and
ordinations of Theodosius, Valentinian, Martian, Justinian, and other Christian
Emperors, extant in the Code. And in the Sea cap. ad abolendum, and cap.
exco^municamus extra. de haeret. and in 6. de heret. cap. Super co.
Canon law in like manner, is determined by diverse definitions there to be
seen, that incorrigible heretics are to be delivered over to the secular
power, to be punished by them, whether they be relapsed or not relapsed, though
more the relapsed. And all this was before the Statute of K. Henry the 4. which
did nothing else, but allow, and confirm the use, and exercise of the said
laws. For so it appertained unto him, as King of the Realm, to consider
whether the exercise of these Ecclesiastical laws, have any inconvenience
against the State, or no.

13. And moreover, where it is here said, that the Statute of K. Henry gives
the Bishop, power in his Diocese to condemn an heretic, as though before he
had it not by Canon Law, is another gross error. For that this fact of K.
Henry was nothing else but an approbation of a more ancient decree made before,
by Pope Gregory the 9. extant in the Decretals of the Canon Law in these words.
6. Dec^et. l 5. (...). 2. de licreticis.
Quoniam Episcoporum numerus, etc. For that the number of Bishops appointed by
ancient Canons, for the degradation of Clergymen, cannot always so easily
come together, we grant unto you ( Archbishop of Rhemes) that when any
Priest, or Clerk, being within holy Orders, is either to be given over to the
secular Court, to be punished for heresy, or perpetually to be walled up, you
calling together the Abbots, and other Prelates, and religious persons, and
learned men of your Diocese, which you shall think good, may alone degrade
him in their presence, you being his Bishop, etc.

An. 1227.
14. This was the Decree of Pope Gregory, above two hundred years before King
Henryes Statute, for giving license to every Bishop within his Diocese alone,
with the help of his learned counsel, and other assistance here mentioned, to
condemn, degrade and deliver over to secular power any obstinate heretic
relapsed, or not relapsed: Decree of Pope Gregory the nynth about proceeding
against heretics.
(though such as were not relapsed, and acknowledged their faults, might be
dealt withal more mildly, as by walling or shutting them up, as here is
mentioned) And that this Decree of Pope Gregory was an exception, or
privileged form of proceeding from the ancient Canons, that appointed a
certain precise number of Bishops to be called together for the deposition of
Deacons, Priests, and Bishops, appears by the words thereof, that do mention
the said Canons, which you may see in the body of the Canon Law, cited out of
the Council of Carthage, Causa. 15. q. 7. c. Si quia tumidus. ex con. 1.
Carthag.
above twelve hundred years past. So as M. Attorneys inference, that heerby K.
Henry took upon him to direct the proceedings of the Ecclesiastical Court in
cases of heresy, has no substance in it at all, for so much as you see it was
directed by the Canon law long before K. Henry was borne.

15. Wherefore to his last instance, that the Pope cannot alter the laws of
England: I answer it is true, touching temporal laws, for they are to be
made, or altered by the English Prince and Parliament: but Ecclesiastical laws
of the Church, if they be positive, and not divine, he might in all those
ancient times, upon just causes alter, as I think M. Attorney will not deny;
and then by good consequence, if it be true, which every where he strives to
prove that Ecclesiastical laws, though made by the Pope, are laws also of
England, and may be called English laws, when they are admitted in England;
How the Pope in old time might alter English laws.
it follows (I say) against himself in this assertion, that the Pope might
alter the laws of England, in that he might alter those Canon-lawes, that were
admitted in England, and thereby made English laws.

The Attorney.
1. The Judges say, 3 Instance 1. H. 4. fol. 69. 76.
that the Statutes which restrain the Popes provisions to the benefices of the
aduowsons of spiritual men, were made, for that the spiritualty durst not in
their just cause, say against the Popes provisions; so as those Statutes were
made, but in affirmance of the common laws.

2. Excommunication made by the Pope, 14. H. 4. f. 14. vide 20. E. 3. l. ass
pl. 19. before vide 13. E. 3. Certificat. 6. vide 20. H. 6. 1. 35. H. 6. 42. 7.
E. 14. Fitz. Na. Br. 46. ff. 14. H. 4. 14.
is of no force in England, and the same being certified by the Pope, into any
Court in England, ought not to be allowed; neither is any certificate of any
excommunication auailable in law, but that is made by some Bishop in England;
for the Bishops are, by the common laws, the immediate officers and ministers
of justice to the Kings Courts in causes Ecclesiastical.

3. If any Bishop do excommunicate any person for a cause, that belongs not
unto him, the King may write unto the Bishop, and command him to assoile, and
absolve the party."

4. If any person of religion obtain of the Bishop of Rome to be exempt from
obedience regular, or ordinary, Statut. de 2. H. 4. cap. 3.
he is in case of Praemunire, which is an offense (as has been said) contra
Regem, Coronam, and Dignitatem suam.

The Catholic Divine.
Answer to the first.
16. I have conjoined three or four objections together, for that indeed all
make not the due weight of one. Wherefore to the first I answer, that little it
imports to our controversy, what those Judges said, why the Statutes were
made against the Popes provisions in affirmance of the Common-laws: for this
may be said of every new Statute whatsoever, that it is made in affirmance of
ancient Common Law; albeit the said law (supposed to be common) no where
appear, nor any reason, proof, or probability be alleged why it should be
Common Law, before that fact or Statute appeared: So as this Common Law, is now
by M. Attorney made so common, as it comes to be Ens transcendens, embracing
all that is, or can be devised by any of his Judges, or Reverend Sages, or
rather he makes it Ens rationis, or a mere Chymera, that (as Logitians hold)
has no essence or being at all a part rei, but only in imagination. For seeing
that the Popes provisions had endured in England for so many ages before, as
all do, and must grant: how may the common law be presumed all that while, to
have been against the same, and yet no mention ever made thereof; These are
moral impossibilityes, to say no more.

To the second.
17. The second point does answer it self, and we have touched the same before,
that by agreement in England, the Popes Bulls of Excommunication, when they were
sent, should not be admitted ordinarily, but by the certificate of some Bishop
of England, for preventing the frauds, or false suggestions, which particular
men might use therein. Whence Bishops courts have their authority.
And whereas M. Attorney here again says, that the Bishops are by the Common
laws, the immediate officers and ministers to the Kings Courts in causes
Ecclesiastical, he runs again to his old Chymera of imaginary Common
laws. For where is this Common Law, that makes Bishops to be officers, and
ministers to the Kings Courts in causes Ecclesiastical? For if the Common Law
or Judges thereof cannot so much as hear, or take conusaunce of any spiritual
causes belonging to Bishops Courts, as R^portes fol. 8. and 9.
often M. Attorney affirms in this his book; how much less can it, or they
by virtue thereof, appoint Judges, or make them officers in those spiritual
Courts, which have their authority from the Canon and not Common laws?

To the third.
18. To the third objection little answer is needful: For who sees not but
that every King in his Kingdom, may command all ^^^es of people to do their
duty, and to surcease from wrong. And so, if a Bishop for a cause not belonging
unto him, should excommunicate any, the Prince may command him to absolve
(...) party, whom unjustly he has excommunicated, if the injustice be so
apparent, as here is presumed. But M. Attorney should have proved, that the
King himself might have absolved him, as in truth he might, if he had Superior
authority to the Bishop in Ecclesiastical causes: The King may command the
Bishop to do his duty.
as he may absolve immediately by himself, all that are censured, or sentenced,
adjudged, or condemned by his Chancellor, lay Judges, or temporal officers,
and ministers: nor has he need to send the party, to be assoiled by them, or
to will them to do it, as here he does the Bishop; but might do it himself,
or by some other, giving him authority thereunto, which yet never King of
England did attempt before King Henry the 8.

19. To the 4. branch is answered, To the fourth.
that by good reason it was agreed, that no religious man, having made his vow
of obedience in England, should seek to Rome for exemption thereof, without
proposing his causes first in England it self; for that otherwise, upon false
informations and suggestions of the party against his Superiors, many troubles
and inconveniences might follow by such exemptions: and this is that which is
touched in the Statute it self here alleged, affirming; that no man shall go
to Rome for that which may be determined in England, etc. And now consider (I
pray you) what all these four instances laid together, do weigh in poyse of
good reason. But let us see further.

20. A fourth instance of M. Attorneys is taken out of a Statute of the 6.
year of K. Henry the 4. Instance.
where the commons do again make complaint of other new aggreiuances by the
Court of Rome, to wit, that such as are to be preferred to Bishoprics,
Archbishopricks and other Prelacyes, cannot be admitted, until they have
compounded with the Popes Chamber, Stat. 6. H. 4. 1.
for paying of the first fruits of the said benefices, and other duties
required; whereupon the King (says the Statute) by the advice, and assent of
the Great men of his Realm in Parliament (and note that he names not here the
spiritual Lords) did ordain, that whosoever should pay hereafter to the said
Chamber, or otherwise for such fruits, and services, greater sums of money,
then had been accustomed in time past, should incur the forfaiture of as much,
as they may forfaite toward the King etc. So says the Statute.

The Answer.
21. And now here I would ask the discreet Reader, whether M. Attorney
overthrows not himself, by alleging such matters as these are? For here
King Henry allows manifestly the repair to Rome of Bishops, Archbishops,
Abbots, and other Prelates, for their induction and admittance to their
dignityes, which he would never do, if he had taken himself to have supreme
authority Ecclesiastical in that behalf, of giving them spiritual
jurisdiction immediately from himself. And albeit he do bind them to pay at
Rome no more then the ordinary accustomed paiments, for such their admittance:
(thereby perhaps to induce the said Court of Rome, Against brybing in Rome and
other like abuses.
to ask no more of them, when they should understand that it was forbidden
unto them to pay it) yet does he allow not only their recourse to Rome in such
affairs, but to make likewise the ordinary payments, which were accustomed to
be paid in old times past, according to the words of the Statute; which is
sufficient to prove our purpose, and ouer-throw M. Attorneys. And thus much for
the time of K. Henry the 4. For as for an other instance alleged by M.
Attorney containing a prohibition, that Bulls for exemption of tithes from
Parish Churches, should not be put in execution, for that the effect thereof is
repeated again in the next objection out of the reign of K. Henry the fifth,
one answer shall serve for them both.

Out of the reign of K. Henry the fifth, that was the fourtenth King after the
Conquest.. II.
The Attorney.
The first insta^ce of the Attorney. Stat. de 3. H. 5 cap. 4.
In an act of Parliament, made in the third year of K. Henry the 5. it is
declared, that whereas in the time of K. Henry the 4. Father to the said King,
in the 7. year of his reign, to eschew many discordes, and debates, and
diverse other mischeifes, which were likely to arise and happen, by cause of
many provisions then made, or to be made by the Pope, and also of license
thereupon granted by the said late King; amongst other things, it was
ordained, and established, that no such license, or pardon so granted, should
be auailable to any benefice, full of any incumbent, at the day of the date of
such license or pardon granted: Nevertheless diverse persons having provisions
of the Pope, of diverse ^^n^fices in England, and elsewhere, and licenses royal,
to execute the same provisions, have by color of the same provisions,
licenses, and acceptations of the said benefices, subtily excluded diverse
persons of their benefices, in which they had been incumbents by a long season,
of the collation of the very patrons spiritual to them duly made to their
intent, to the final destruction, and eneruation of the states of the same
incumbents: The King willing to avoid such mischeifes, has ordained, and
established, that all the incumbents of every benefice of holy Church, of the
patronage, collation, or presentation of spiritual patrons, might quietly, and
peaceably enjoy their said benefices, without being inquieted, molested, or any
ways greiued by any color of such provisions, licenses and acceptations. And
that all the licenses, and pardons, upon, and by such provisions, made in any
manner, should be void, and of no valor. And if any feel himself greiued,
molested, or inquieted in any wise, from thenceforth by any, by color of such
provisions, licenses, pardons, or acceptations; that the same molestors,
greiuers, or inquieters, and every of them, have and incur the pains and
punishments contained in the Statutes of Prouisors before that time made, as by
the said Act appears.

The Catholic Divine.
22. This Statute makes as little for M. Attorneys purpose, of supreme
authority spiritual, The Answer.
as any of the former: and I have set it down at large, to the end you may
see, what small store of stuff he has to furnish his book, when he fills
paper with such impertinencyes: for that the whole subject of this Statute
tends only to the reform of certain abuses in some quarreling and
troublesome people, who meaning to molest others, that were in quiet possession
of their benefices, went to Rome, and there framing many complaints,
calumniatio^s, and accusations against them, and against the lawfullnes of
their having those benefices, and pretending that the due collation thereof
appertained to the Sea Apostolic for diverse respects, This statute makes
nothing for M. Attorney.
demanded only that the same Sea would give her right unto them, and so got
out provisions oftentimes to that effect: which provisions it seems by the
words of this statute, that K. Henry the 4. was content they should run, and
gave royal licenses for the same, and that the title should be tried, not
withstanding the prohibitions of such provisions made under K. Edward, and King
Richard, as you have heard (and all this makes against M. Attorney.) But now
K. Henry the 5. being informed of the inconveniences, that ensued thereof, and
that diverse incumbents were thereby excluded of their benefices, and the patrons
spiritual of their presentatio^s; ordained, that for the time to come, no such
incumbents, or patrons, should be disquieted, or molested, by color of such
provisions from the Pope of benefices, that are not actually void, or by
virtue of licenses from the King for prosecuting the same. This is the Statute,
and you see how little help M. Attorney gets by it. But let us see another
instance out of this Kings reign, as wisely alleged as the former.

The Attorney.
Statut. de 2. H. 5. ^. 7. L^llardy a ^olio. For as Cock^e is the (...) of the
Corn, so is heresy the destruction of true religion.
"A Statute was made, for extirpation of heresy and Lollardy, whereby full power
and authority was given to the Justices of peace, and Justices of assise to
inquire of those that hold errors, heresies, or Lollardy, and of their
maintainers, etc. And that the Sheriff, or other officer, etc. may arrest and
apprehend them.

Infoelix lolium, and steriles dominantur auena.
Virgil. Et careant lolijs, oculos vitiantibus, agri.
Ovid. Statut. de 2. H. 5. c. 1.
The King by consent of Parliament, gives power to Ordinaries to inquire of the
foundation, erection, and governance of Hospitals, other then such as be of the
Kings foundation, and thereupon to make correction, and reformation, according
to the Ecclesiastical law.

The Catholic Divine.
23. If M. Attorneys store-howse of arguments were not extreme poor and
empty; he would never allege such matter as this is, for demonstratiue
proofs, The Answer.
which before he promised us in his Preface. For out of the later example, that
Ordinaries are appointed to inquire of the foundation, execution, and
government of Hospitals, what can be deduced for M. Attorneys purpose, or
against us? For so much as the foundation, erection, and government of
Hospitals were for the most part mere temporal things, except some
privileges granted unto them by the Sea Apostolic.

24. And that in the former example, Justices of peace and assise were
commanded by the King to inquire after Lollards, VVickcliffians, and such
other heretics, it was to apprehend, and imprison their persons, and not to
judge of their heresies, which belonged to their Bishops and Ordinaries, as you
have heard. And some cause might be also of this special commission for
Judges, and Justices to assist Bishops (and so no doubt it was) for that the
said Lollards, Why te^porall Justices meddled with Lollards.
and VVickcliffians had not only been troublesome, and dangerous to the
State, under the reigns of King Richard the second, and Henry the 4. but unto
the person and life of this man also some months before this Statute, by
conspiring his death, VValsing. in vita He^ri^s 5.
and raising a dangerous rebellion in S. Giles field by London as both
Walsingham, and other autho^s do report: and therefore no marvel, though
authority be given, as here is said, that the Sheriffs and other Officers
may a^^est and apprehend them: and what makes this for M. Attorneys purpose?

25. But further, I cannot but marvel, at his note in the margent. Lollardy
(says he) is of lolio, which signifies Cockle, for as Clockle is the
destruction of the corn, so is heresy of true religion, and then does he
bring in two several verses, the one of Virgil, and the other of Ovid about
lolium, Whence the name of Lollards was taken.
showing himself thereby a good grammarian, though yet in the thing it self he
was much deceived. For that Lollards and Lollardy being a particular sect of
heretics, are not derived from the latin word Lolium, signifying cockle or
darnel, as the very deriuation it self might easily show; but of the first
author thereof named Gualter Lolhard a German, about the year of Christ 1315.
as Tritemius in his Cronicle declares: and is larglie showed in a book some
years past set forth in our English tongue by a Catholic writer, The three
conuersions of England. part. 2. ^ap. 9. nu. 31. and cap. 19. number. 34. 35. etc.
For in his book, of Acts and monuments page 419.
which if M. Attorney had read, he might easily have avoided this gross
mistaking. From which also, I marvel, that his affection to the men, had not
somewhat withheld him, for that they were of his religion, and not cockle, but
good corn, if we believe his great historiographer, and divine, John Fox, who
sets them out not only for good Christians, but for Saints and martyrs in
his books of Martyrologe, Acts, and Monuments. But thus these men agree
together.

Out of the reign of King Henry the sixth, the fiftenth King after the
Conquest.. III.
26. Out of this Kings reign which endured most Catholiklie, for near 40.
years, though unfortunately, through wars, sedition, and broiles of the
Realm, M. Attorney finds only these three poor instances ensuing,

The Attorney.
^. H. 6 fol. ^.
Excommunication made and certified by the Pope, is of no force to disable any
man within England, and this is by the ancient Common laws, before any
Statute was made, concerning foreign jurisdiction.

9 H. 6. fol. 16.
"The King only may grant, or license to found a spiritual incorporation.

1 H. 6. 1^.
In the reign of K. Henry the 6. the Pope wrote letters in derogation of the
King and his regalty, and the Churchmen durst not speak against them, but
Humfrey Duke of Gloucester for their safe-keeping, put them into the sier.

The Catholic Deuyne.
To the first.
27. To the first has been answered diverse times before, that it appears to
have been an agreement at that time in England, that the Popes Bulls of
excommunication should not be published by particular men, but with the
certificate of some Bishop for more authority, etc. as it is now also used in
diverse Catholic Countries, Bull^ could not be promulgated without the
certificate of a Bishop.
for avoiding the frauds and practice of particular inquiet people, that by
false suggestions get Bulls, etc. But that this was by the ancient Common laws
before any Statute made, has no probability at all, as by the whole Course
of our ancient Catholic Kings has been declared. And it grows now
somewhat loathsome and ridiculous, to see M. Attorney run so often to this
common Chymera of ancient Common-lawes, without showing any, or any
likeli-hood, that any such were, or could be in ancient times amongst our
ancestors, for that their religion, devotion, sense, and judgment ran wholly
to the contrary in those days. Whereupon it follows, as often we have said,
that if a Common Law could not be made, admitted, or authorized without some
common consent of Prince and people; it is impossible, that such common laws
should then be, as M. Attorney does frame here to his fancy, upon every
occasion that pleases him.

28. That the King only may grant license to found a spiritual
incorporatio^, may be understood in two sorts. First that the said
incorporation, To the second.
cannot be made, or erected within his dominions, or founded with lands,
goods, or rents, without his leave, and license, and this we deny not.
Secondly that the said spiritual incorporation should have her spirituality
from the King, that is to say, her spiritual and ecclesiastical privileges
of being such an incorporation belonging to the Church: And this we have seen
by the practice of all times in England both before, and after the Conquest to
have been ever sought and received from the Sea Apostolic, See Supra cap. 6.
whereof we have a particular demonstration set down before in the 6. Chapter
of this our Answer.

29. The last which he obiecteth of the fact of Humfrey Duke of Gloucester, to
the third.
that cast (as he says) the Popes letters into the fire for their
safe-Keeping, is rather a jest than an argument. And I marvel M. Attorney, a
man of his degree, would bring it forth, and print it also for an argument,
whether the thing be true or false. For if it fell out, as here is noted in the
margent, upon the first year of King Henry the 6. his reign, when the King
was but eight months old, and the said Duke his uncle Governor of the Land;
and in his chiefest ruff, who afterward came thereby to so pitiful a ruin,
both of himself, his friends, and the Realm; every man may see what force
this jest may have, which yet I have not read in any other author besides M.
Attorney, and so to him I leave it.

OF THE REIGN OF FOUR ENSVING KINGS, TO WIT, Edward the fourth, Edward the
fifth, Richard the third, and Henry the seventh: And how conform they were
unto their ancestors in this point of controversy, which we have in hand.
CHAP. XIIII.
THe line of Lancaster being put down, and removed from the Crown, by the
deprivation and death of K. Henry the 6. and his son, as before you have
heard; there entered the house of York, K. Ed. 4. reigned.12. years, from 1460.
to 1483.
with no less violence of arms, and effusion of blood, but rather more, then
the other family had done before by taking to it self the Crown from the head
of K. Richard the 2. For that Edward Duke of York, by dint of sword, inuesting
himself of the scepter, by the same maintained it, though with much trouble,
fears, and iealousies, for the space of 22. years, and then thinking to leave
it quietly to his son Edward the 5. (though with protestation and oath at
his death, as Sir Thomas More records, Sir Thom. More in ^it. Richards.2.
(...) ^.
that if he could as well have forseene the vanity of that ambition, as now
with his more pain then pleasure he had proved, he would never have won the
courtesy of men's knees, with the loss of so many heads) the same was taken
from him soon after, together with his life, by the cruel ambition of
Richard Duke of Gloucester, brother to the deceased King; so little motion made
his oration and protestation against ambition at his death, in the heart of
him, that was so furiously set upon the same, and desired to be in his place.

2. This man entering then, with such boisterous and unnatural iniquity of the
slaughter of two of his Nephews, Richard 3. reigned from 14^3. to 1485.
continued that violent government, for two years and some what more, though
with many afflictions, both inward, and outward, and finally lost it again
with the loss of his life; and proved with a shorter experience, then his
brother King Edward had done before him, how much more pain then pleasure,
that place brought to the violent possessor, especially if injustice go with
it, which is the chief origin, and fountain of all disasterous small success.

3. This man therefore being taken away by the sword of Henry Earl of
Richmond, called afterward King Henry the seventh, he held the same for 24.
years, K Henry the seventh reigned from 1485. to 1509. to wit 24. years.
with different success in different times: for that the former part of his
reign wanted not waves and sourges, and some troublesome motions, as in reason
it could not, so many great tempests, and fierce storms having inquieted the
sea before. But the later part of his reign was more calm, mild, and sweet,
he having partly by his offspring and lineage, and partly by his marriage
stopped that great breach, and inundation of miseries, that brake into our
Realm, by the division of the two howses of Lancaster and York, and partly
also by his prudent moderation, and government of the Crown, so calmed and
quieted men's minds, humors, and passions, as they took delight to live in
peace; and in this state he left his Realm to his heir, and successor King
Henry the eight.

4. These four Princes then, succeeding each one the other in the Crown of
England, and holding the same between them for the space of 50. years
together, excepting one or two, though one of them were not crowned, but ought
to have been, which was King Edward the fifth, All four Princes agree in our
controversy.
and another was crowned that should not have been, to wit King Richard the
third; howsoever otherwise in regard of lineage, family, faction, pretention, or
succession they were opposite or different one from another in affection,
judgment, or action, for temporal affairs: yet in profession of religion,
were they all one; all, and every one of them professing the same faith, and
holding the same form of Christian Catholic religion, which all their
ancestors had done, both before and after the Conquest. And this not only in
other matters, but in the very point also of our controversy, concerning the
practice and acknowledgement of the sovereign spiritual authority of the
Church and Sea Apostolic of Rome; which may briefly, besides all other means,
be demonstrated by these reasons following.

The first proof.
5. First for that none of them was ever noted for the contrary, which they
would have been, either by friends or adversaries, if any such occasion had been
given by them; especially in that great and bloody contention, between the two
houses of York, and Lancaster, wherein both parts did desire to have the
favor and approbation of the Sea Apostolic, and good opinion of the Clergy
at home. And if any least sign, or signification had been given by any of these
Princes, of different judgment or affection in this behalf; their adversaries
would have urged the same presently, to their prejudice and disgrace, which we
read not to have been done.

The second proof.
6. Secondly the practice of the said authority and jurisdiction of the Sea
Apostolic used under these Kings, as under all former, except only the manner
of execution in two or three particular cases, before mentioned, that were
conjoined with temporalityes, does evidently convince the same: as namely that
all English Bishops, Archbishops, and other Prelates, being elected or
nominated to any dignity, had ever their Bulls and confirmation from Rome, and
the Metropolitans their palls. The Archbishops also of Canterbury, that lived
with these Kings, Thomas Bewser, John Morton, Henry Deane, and William Warham
(who was the last Catholic Archbishop that held that Sea immediately before
Thomas Cranmer.) All these (I say) besides other points of testifying their
obedience, and subordination to the said Sea, did according to the ancient
style of their Catholic predecessors, write themselves Legates of the Sea
Apostolic, as may be seen in Fox, Fox in his acts and Monuments.
and other Protestant-writers, in relating their commissions, in sitting upon
heretics, etc.

7. Thirdly the said John Fox does set down in his story of Acts and
Monuments more wickcliffian Sectaries and Lollards to have been condemned and
burned under these Princes, The third proof.
then commonly under any other before; which Sectaries (as is known) did
principally impugn the spiritual authority of the Sea of Rome; Foxie vita
Edonar.4. ^uhar. 3. and Honrisi 7.
which thing it is likely the said Princes would not have done, or permitted,
if they had been evil affected themselves that way. And the said Fox in the
end of King Henry the 7. his life, does set forth many painted and printed
pageants of the Popes Greatness in those days, more then ever before.

8. And finally not to labor more in a matter so manifest, The fourth proof.
and clear of it self; there was never more intercourse between England and
Rome for spiritual affairs, then under these Princes, to wit for inductions,
and inuestitures to all spiritual jurisdiction, as has been said, for
dispensations, indulgences, interpretations in doubtful matters, privileges,
franquises, and Charters for confirmation of Churches, Chapels, Colleges, or
Monasteries that were builded: diverse Embassages also were sent to Rome, and
special Legates were sent to England upon particular urgent occasions. And as
these kings had allwaies their Orators, ledgers in that Court, so had the Popes
of that time their ordinary Nunci^s, yea and Collectors also of their
temporal commodities in England, as we may read in Polidor, Polidor. in vita
Hen. 7.
who, among others comme^deth highly the learned Cardinal Hadryan, who had been
the popes Collector, under K. Henry the 7. as himself also was, under K. Henry
the 8. This then may be sufficient, for some general notes and proofs of
this truth: for that to prosecute particulars in this Kind, were over tedious.
Now then shall we pass to peruse and answer briefly the instances, which M.
Attorney cites out of the reigns of these Kings, as little to his purpose as
the former.

Instances out of the reign of K. Edward the fourth, the sixtenth King after
the Conquest.. I.
The Attorney.
6. In the reign of K. Edward the 4. the Pope granted to the Prior of S.
John's, The first instance.1. H. 7.20.
to have Sanctuary within his Priorie, and this was pleaded and claimed by the
Prior; but it was resolved by the Judges, that the Pope had no power to grant
any Sanctuary within this Realm, and therefore by judgment of law the same
was disallowed.

The Catholic Divine.
M. Attorney repeateth still the word Law, to show thereby that he is a lawyer,
The answer.
and delights in the word that has been so beneficial unto him; but yet
alleges here no law at all, nor can he do. For what law is that, by iugment
whereof the Sanctuary of S. John's Church in London granted by the Pope, was
disalowed, for so much as all other Sanctuaries had, and have from that Sea,
their franquises, and liberties? Was it Common Law, or Canon and
Ecclesiastical? Not Ecclesiastical. For that all such law depends from
thence, and consequently cannot be supposed to have disanulled the Popes
authority in granting Sanctuary. Common law if it were, it must appear how it
came in, by whom it was admitted, by what right it came to have conusau^ce of
this Ecclesiastical cause, which M. Attorney so often has denied before to
apperteyne to his Common Law, whereof ensues that either those temporal Judges
exceeded their limits in handling this cause, or that there was some temporal
circumstance therein that brought it into that Court.

10. And surely it may be that this Sanctuary pretended by the Prior of the
Knights of S. John's in London, might not only be the ordinary Sanctuary of
their Church and appurtenances thereunto (which all Churches have by Canon law
more or less) but also of some greater circuit, How the cause of Sanctuary
might be handled by temporal Judges.
round about their said Church and habitatio^; which (they being Knights and
souldiars) might importe some inconveniences to the common wealth by occasion
of contentions, fights, and brawles that might there fall out, the temporal
officers having no access by reason of the said pretended Sanctuary. And so
this case not being mere spiritual, but mixed also with temporal interest of
the Commonwealth, the common Judges, until the matter were better discussed
and resolved in ecclesiastical right, might put difficulty about the
admission or execution of the said privileges, without the Kings express
consent. And this is answered, according to M. Attorneys allegation (supposing
it to be sincere) not having by me the books, as before I have said, out of
which he has taken the same, the view whereof no doubt would discover more,
therefore I recommend the examination to the Reader, that may have commodity to
see, and read the places. But let us see another Instance of two more of his,
out of this Kings reign.

The Attorney.
The second Instance 9. E. 4 ^. vid^ Fuz.
There it appears that the opinion of the King's Bench had been oftentimes,
that if one spiritual person, sue another spiritual man in the Court of
Rome, for a matter spiritual, where he might have remedy before his Ordinary,
that is the Bishop of that Diocese within the Realm; Quia trabit ipsum in
placitum extraregnum, Na. Br. fol. 44. H. agreeing heervvith. Note
incurreth the danger of a Praemunire, a hainons offense, being contra
legiantiae suae debitum, in contemptum Domini Regis, and contra ^oronam, and
dignitatem suas. By which it appears how greiuous an offense it was, against
the King, his Crown, and dignity, if any subject, although both the persons,
and cause were spiritual, did seek for justice out of the Realm, as though
either there wanted jurisdiction, or justice was not executed in the
Ecclesiastical Courts within the same, which as it has been said, was an high
offense contra Regem, Coronam, and dignitatem suas.

The Catholic Divine.
By this instance a man may greatly suspect, that M. Attorney deals not
sincerely, but amplifieth and exaggerateth matters to his purpose. The Answer.
But howsoever this be, clear it is, that he deals not substantially. For
here only the note alleged, says that the opinion of the King's Bench had
been oftentimes, that if one spiritual, or Ecclesiastical person, should sue
another in the Court of Rome, when he might have remedy before his Ordinary at
home, he incurreth the danger of a Praemunire; for that he draws a Plea out
of the Kingdom without necessity. Well then: this is but the opinion of some
temporal lawyers of the King's Bench, that a man that should do this, should
be in danger of a Praemunire, for that he draws a Plea out of the Kingdom,
when he might have sufficient remedy by his spiritual Judge at home. And this
is according to the Statutes before made, under King Edward the third, and
Richard the second, as you have heard, that matters may not be carried to Rome,
at the first instance, but by way of appellation, when they cannot have justice
at home. And this takes not away the Popes authority, as you see, but rather
confirms the same, and punishes only disorderly people, that will vex, and
trouble men, with citing them to Rome without necessity.

12. Which being so, you will see, how frivolous M Attorneys exaggeration is
here, in painting out unto us with so great an hyperbole of words this haynons
offense, against the duty of loyalty, in contempt of the King our Lord, and
contrary to his crown and dignity, etc. And why is all this ado? For that
(says he) a subject of the realm does seek for justice out of the Realm in
spiritual causes, as though there wanted jurisdiction or justice within the
Realm, which is an high offense contra Regem, coronam, and dignitatem suas.
Whereto I answer, that what high offense it may be against suas (here twice
repeated in the English, but corrected by the Latin Interpreter) I know not,
but sure I am, that against King, Crown or Royal dignity it can be none, no
more in England then in other Catholic Kingdoms round about us. And the
reason here alleged by M. Attorney excludes all appellations between
subordinate Courts, as well within the Realm, as without, if it should be
admitted and taken for good. Wherefore when he writes in the margent, Note, as
though some great argument were alleged for his purpose, It is a note that he
has small store of substance to note, when he stands so much upon such a toy.

The Attorney.
The third Instance.
In the Kings Courts of Record, where felonies are determined, the Bishop or
his deputy ought to give his attendance, to the end that if any, that is
indicted, and arraigned for felony, do demand the benefit of his Clergy, 9 E.
4.28.
that the Ordinary may inform the Court of his sufficiency, or insufficiency,
that is, whether he can read, as a Clarke, or not, whereof notwithstanding the
Ordinary is not to Judge, but is a minister to the Kings Court, and the Judges
of that Court, are to Judge of the sufficiency, or insufficiency of the party,
whatsoever the Ordinary do inform them, and upon due examination of the
party, may give judgment against the Ordinaryes information: For the Kings
Judges, are Judges of the cause.

The Catholic Divine.
The answer.
13. I am content to admit any judges in this cause, whether it be not
impertinent to M. Attorneys purpose, to bring in this instance. For howsoever
he goes about in words to dazel this case, yet is it evident, that for so
much, as the Church by her privilege of Superiority, takes out of the hands
of temporal justice, men condemned to die for felony, only for that they can
read like Clerks, though they be no Clerks indeed (for if they were, and had
but so much as primam tonsuram, VV^o must judge whether a fellon deserve the
benefit of Clergy.
they could not be held, nor judged by that Court as often before has been
showed) it is evident where the eminency of authority lay in those days, to
wit, in the spirituality, above the temporaltie: and vain it is to stand upon
other trifling circumstances, whether the Bishops deputy sent to demand the
liberty of those felons by law, did give attendance upon the Kings Courts, or
no; or whether he, or the Judges that were laymen, must judge of this
sufficie^cy or insufficiency; whether the fellon did read as a Clarke, or not.
For if the temporal Judges must discern thereof, as M. Attorney auerreth, then
in vain was the Bishops Deputy called thither, without whom it might have been
done by the Judges alone. But if he were of necessity to be called thither, and
upon his oath, to pronounce, si legit vt Clericus, and that upon his verdict,
the Judge must give sentence to admit the fellon to the benefit of Clergy, and
thereupon to have pardon of his life, and to be delivered unto the Bishops
prison, as of higher authority: then is it manifest, that this instance
impugneth rather, then helps M. Attorneys assertion, as commonly do all the
rest, when they are well examined.

The Attorney.
The Popes excommunication is of no force within the Realm of England. The 4
Instance.


In the reign of King Edward the 4. a Legate from the Pope came to Calls, to
have come into England, 12. E 4. fol. 16.
but the King and his Counsel would not suffer him to come within England,
until he had taken an oath, that he should attempt nothing against the King or
his Crown; and so the like was done in his reign to another of the Popes
Legates, and this is so reported in 1. H. 7. fol. 10.

The Catholic Deuyne.
14. The first part of this instance, about the validity of the Popes
excommunication, has oftentimes been answered before, The answer.
what circumstance, and conditions were agreed upon, to be observed in the
execution thereof, for avoiding inconveniences, that came by false suggestions
of some troublesome people, and among other, S^a 16. Rich. 2. cap. 5.
that it should allwaies be directed to some B^s^op, whose certificate should
be required for the lawfvllnes thereof, How the Popes excommunication had
place or not place in England under K. Ed. the 4. 2. Rich. 3. for. 22.
as before has been showed out of the 3. year of K. Edward the 3. and has
appeared also before out of King Richards Statute, where all the Bishops
expounded themselves, that it was not meant to derogate by that Statute from
the Popes authority, to excommunicate, etc. And in this very place, and next
words after this present instance, has M. Attorney another instance out of
King Richard the 3. in these words. It is resolved by the Judges, that the
judgment of excommunication in the Court of Rome, should not bind, or
prejudice any man within England at the Common Law. Whereby is clearly declared
the meaning of the former cause, to wit, that the popes excommunication, which
is a spiritual sentence, or punishment for spiritual affairs, may not
prejudice temporal all suites at the Common Law in temporal matters; and it
is not much sincerity in M. Attorney, to alleadg these parcells of his Judges
determinations so nakedly, as he does, without distinction, or explication, to
the end his simple Reader may be put in error thereby.

15. The other instance of the Popes Legate stayed at Calls, and not suffered
to come into England, until he had taken an oath to attempt nothing against
the King, or his Crown; shows that King Edward rather doubted, and feared
his authority, then contemned or denied the same; especially he being in that
controversy about the Crown, as then he was, and the Pope interposing his
spiritual authority, between K. Henry the 6. and him. And as well he might
allege the example of the Popes messenger detained in Calls, by
commandment of King Phillip, and Q. Marie, when he brought the Cardinals hat,
from Paulus 4. to Friar Peto, Why Catholic Kings somtymes prohibited the
entrance of the Popes Legates.
for that the said Princes would not suffer him to come into the Realm, until
they had otherwise informed the said Pope by their Ambassadors in Rome, that
the same was not expedient. And yet did not this prove, that they either
contemned the Popes authority, or thought this sovereignty of spiritual
jurisdiction to be in themselves. And it is a case, that often falls out in
the affairs of Catholic Princes with Popes, when they doubt any thing will
proceed against them from the said Sea Apostolic, to keep off the execution,
or notification thereof by what means they can, until matters be compounded.
And we have had many examples thereof before, namely in the reigns of K. Henry
the 2. K. John. K. Henry the 3. and two King Edwards following him, who fearing
excommunication, were vigilant in prohibiting, that no messenger from Rome
should enter the Realm without their license, which was an argument rather of
their esteem, then disesteeme of that place, and power.

Out of the reign of K. Henry the seventh, who was the nyntenth King after
the Conquest.. II.
In the reign of K. Henry the 7. the pope had excommunicated all such persons
whatsoever, The fifth Instance. 1. Henr. 7.10.
as had bought alume of the Florentines, and it was resolved by all the Judges
of England, that the Popes excommunication ought not to be obaied, or to be
put in execution, within the Realm of England.

In a parliament holden in the first year of King Henry the 7. for the more
sure, and like reformation of Priests, Clerks, and religious men culpable,
St^tut. de 1. H. 7. c. 4.
or by their demerits openly noised of incontinent living in their bodies,
contrary to their order; it was enacted, ordained and established by the advice and assent of the Lords spiritual and temporal, and the Commons in the
said Parliament assembled, and by authority of the same, that it be lawful to
all Archbishops, and Bishops, and other Ordinaries having Episcopal
jurisdiction, to punish, and chastise Priests, Clercks, and religious men,
being within the bounds of their jurisdiction, as shall be convicted before
them by examination, and lawful proof requisite by the law of the Church, of
aduowtry, fornication, incest, or any other fleshly incontinency, by
committing them to ward and prison, there to abide for such time, as shall be
thought to their discretions convenient, for the quality, and quantity of
their trespass. And that none of the said Archbishops, Bishops, or Ordinaries
aforesaid be thereof chargeable, of, to, or upon any action of false or
wrongful imprisonment, but that they be utterly thereof discharged in any of
the Cases aforesaid, by virtue of this Act.

Rex est persona mixta, because he has both Ecclesiastical and temporal
jurisdiction. 10. H. 7. 18.


By the Ecclesiastical laws allowed within this Realm, a Priest cannot have
two benefices, or a bastard can be a Priest, 11. H. 7. 12
but the King may by his Ecclesiastical power, and jurisdiction, dispense with
both of these, because they be Mala prohibita, and not Mala per se.

The Catholic Deuyne.
The Answer. To the first point.
16. Here are three or four instances, for breuityes sake laid together in
one, as also, for that they are of so small substance, as they deserve not to
be handled a part. For as to the first, concerning the buying of alume of the
Florentines, who does not see, but that it is a temporal case, wherein the
Realm of England, or Merchants thereof being interessed, the State might
pretend just cause to differ the admission, or execution of the Popes
sentence of excommunication, touching that affair, until they had better
informed him of the truth, or justice of the cause in their behalf: For this
is used ordinarily by all Catholic Princes and States even at this day.

To the second point.
17. The second objection about the punishment of Priests and Clergymen, by
their Bishops and Archbishops, has nothing in it at all, that may make for M.
Attorneys purpose. For that here is not given by Parliament, any new spiritual
jurisdiction to Bishops and Archbishops, but some temporal enlargement is
granted to the same. As for example, that they may not only suspend, and
excommunicate, and punish by their spiritual censures, such licentious persons
of life; but may corporally punish them also, by imprisonment and other ways,
as here is set down. And least any in such cases might make recourse unto the
temporal magistrate, saying that they were imprisoned wrongfully, and contrary
to the common secular laws of the Realm, this refuge is cut of by this
Statute, and absolute power given to Bishops and Archbishops, The great
authority of English Prelates.
to punish in such cases, as well corporally, as spiritually: whereby also
appears that such delicts of Clergymen, were in those days to be inquired
of, and punished only in the Bishops Courts, and not in the temporal, which
was a dignity, and no small pre-eminence of the Prelates of England, above many
other Countries, who neither then, nor now, have the like absolute pre-eminence
in all things, as before has been showed. For that diverse cases, and causes do
appertain only to spiritual Courts in England, which are handled also by
secular magistrates in sundry other countries; as namely that of Testaments,
and the like. And this is to be ascribed to the special piety, and devotion of
our Catholic Kings and Country.

To the third point.
18. As for the third point wherein M. Attorney says: Rex est persona mixta,
adding this reason, because he has Ecclesiastical and temporal jurisdiction;
Whosoever makes this instance, either M. Attorney, or some other author of
his, he little seems to understand what is needful to induce Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction; whereof he may need more at large in the second Chapter of this
book. And as for the person of a King, How a King is persona mixta.
it may be named mixed in some other respects; as namely for that a King is
anointed, and thereby has somewhat of a Clergyman also, though absolutely he
be a layman, as you have heard before the great Christian Emperor Valentinian
profess of him self, Quod erat vnus de populo: that he was a layman, and not
a Clergie-man. Supra^ cap. 4.
He is likewise head of the whole Commonwealth, wherein are members, both
Clergy, and laymen, as before has been said; and in that respect, is he head
of both parts, and consequently mixed, or common to them both. But all this
induces not necessity of spiritual jurisdiction, except it be committed unto
him, Supra cap. 2.
from the Church, and Prelates thereof, in whom originally it is, as in the
forenamed place we have abundantly declared.

19. And the like we answer finally to the fourth and last objection, To the
fourth point.
wherein it is said, that the King may dispense with a bastard to be made
Priest, and with a Priest to have two benefices, and this by his
Ecclesiastical power and jurisdiction. The matter must be distinguished, that
the King may dispense, or give his consent in these cases, for so much as
touches the Common wealth, or may be hurtful unto it, and no otherwise;
which is to say, so far forth as it may importe, or prejudice the
Commo^-wealth, that bastards not inheritable should be Priests, Bastardy a let
to priesthood.
or one Priest hold many benefices. But then this dispensation is not by any
jurisdiction spiritual, as M. Attorney would infer, but temporal only of
the Prince, as he is head of the Common wealth. For as concerning spiritual
dispensation appertaining to conscience, for so much as the prohibition that
Bastards shall not be ordained Priests, was not made first by temporal
Princes, but by the ancient Did. 56. cap. 1. etc. 1. and vl^. de filijs
presby and 6. Decret. tit. 11. cap. 1.
Canons of the Church, none can dispense properly therein, but he that is
spiritual head of the whole Church, or some other by his commission.

20. And by the same reason (for that spiritual jurisdiction over souls,
which is the jurisdiction of him that has a benefice, cannot be truly given,
or delivered to any man, but by him that has it in himself, to wit, some
Prelate of the Church, that has it from the fountain of succession from the
Apostles, Supra. ^ 2.
as before has been declared) it follows that none which has not this
jurisdiction, Who can dispense with plurality of benefices.
by this means in himself, can give any benefice to any man, and much less
two, or many benefices, that is to say, spiritual jurisdiction over many
flocks to one man, except he only, that has superior and mediate spiritual
jurisdiction over the said flocks, and their souls. And heerby we see, that
standing in the principles, and grownds before set down, and manifestly
proved, M. Attorneys instance is to no purpose at all, to the effect and sense
wherein he would have it understood.

21. And this shall suffice for this place, and for the reigns and lives of
all Christian Princes of our Realm, that lived in union, and conformity of
one religion, and acknowledgment of one supreme authority spiritual of the Sea
Apostolic of Rome, from the first to the last, that is to say, from King
Ethelbert, that received the first grace of our conversion to the Christian
Catholic Roman religion, unto King Henry the 7. inclusiue, who being the
last, and nearest English auncestour to his Majesty that now is, K. Henry the 7
dyed and lived in the religion of all his ancestors.
and succeeding after above a hundred and twenty English Kings of the same
religion, ended happily also his life and reign therein, without any change or
alteration. And if this son had followed the same course, and held it out to
the end, as he did for two parts of three of his reign, he had been thrice
happy; but Gods providence, for his, and our sins permitted otherwise: We
shall therefore see briefly the manner, means, occasions, motives, and events
thereof in the ensuing Chapter.

OF THE REIGN OF K. HENRY THE EIGHT, And of his three children, King Edward,
Queen Mary, and Queen Elizabeth: And how the first innovation about
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, was made, and continued in their days. CHAP. XV.
NOW are we come unto the time wherein great change indeed, and alteration was
made in our Country by particular Statutes, and National laws (so far forth
as a perpetual, and universal received truth by national and temporal
decrees could be altered) in the foresaid point of spiritual and
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction. For that K. Henry the eight, after two parts of
three, of his reign, wherein he had not only acknowledged and practiced,
according to the use of all his predecessors, but singularly also defended,
and propugned by public writing, the Catholic consent of all Christendom,
concerning the Sovereignty of the Sea of Rome therein; did at length upon
certain occasions of particular distaste, anger, and exasperation, falling out
between Pope Clement the 7. and him, about the divorce of his wife Queen
Catherine, daughter of Spain, The causes of alteration in the time of K. Henry
the 8.
and the marriage of Lady Anne Bullen in in her place (to neither of which the
said Pope would consent) make strange innouations by little and little, as
first threatening and the said Pope, then substracting some of his authority,
and giving it to others, and finally taking all unto himself. Which devise
being once begun, was continued after his death, by the governors of his young
son King Edward, though with less probability and appearance of truth, as
before has been noted, and then rejected again by his daughter Queen Mary,
who restored the same whence it was taken, but reassumed, though in a different
devise of words, Supra. 6. 2. and 3.
by his second daughter Q. Elizabeth, that least of all was capable of it, as
in precedent chapters has been declared. So as here, though M. Attorney does
every where talk of ancient laws, and common consent, there is neither
anquity, unity, conformity, consent, or continuance of any moment to be
found; which will better appear by that we have briefly to touch of each one
of these Princes reigns in particular.

Of King Henry the eight, who was the twentieth King after the Conquest.. I.
K. Henry the 8. reigned from the year 1509. to 1546. to wit 3^. years.
2. This Prince succeeding his father King Henry the 7. in the flower of his
youth, when he was but 18. years of age, but adorned with many rare graces,
both of mind and body, took the scepter in hand with as great expectation of
his people, and neighbors round about him, as ever did Prince of our land
before, or after him: and for the space of more then 20. years performed the
same in all points of an excellent Prince, both in peace, and war, until he
fell into that unfortunate, and fatal breach with his wife, and Queen, and
disordinate appetite of the other, that succeeded her; whereupon ensued all
those strange and unexpected mutations which afterward were seen, one thing
giving occasion, and making way to the other, as the events declared.

3. But among all other points of Catholic doctrine, no one was more observed
by this King, while he remained in his ancient peace of mind, then that of his
due acknowledgment, subordination, and respective correspondence with the Sea
Apostolic; which being in his days begun to be impugned, together with many
other points of Christian religion, by Martyn Luther an Apostata Friar of
Germany, and his followers: K. Henry's book against Luther. anno Domini 1521.
King Henry out of his great zeal and fervor toward the said religion, and
Sea Apostolic, took upon him to write a special learned book in defense
thereof against the said Luther, which book he sent to Rome, presenting it to
Pope Leo the tenth, subscribed by his own ^and (which I have seen) by a
special Ambassador for that purpose, Doctor Clerk Bishop of Bath and Wells,
that made an earnest speech and eloquent oration at the delivery thereof, in
protestation and commendation of his Kings high and resolute zeal in this
behalf; all which being extant in print, I remit the Reader thereunto, for his
better satisfaction.

4. Only I cannot pretermit to recite in this place, some of his words which he
uses in that book in defense of the Popes Ecclesiastical Supremacy, which
himself afterward upon new passions rising, so greatly impugned. Thus then he
wrote against Luther in those days: Non tam iniurius ero Pontifici, vt anxie
and solicit de eius Iure disceptem, tanquam res haberetur pro dubia, etc.
Henr. 8. in defens. Sacram. contr. Mart. Luther.
I will not offer so much injury unto the Pope, as earnestly and carefully to
dispute here of his right, as though the matter might be held in doubt: it is
sufficient for that which now we have in hand, that his enemy ( Luther) shows
himself so much to be carried away with passion and fury, as he takes all
faith and credit from his own sayings, clearly declaring his malice to be
such, as it suffers him neither to agree with himself, nor to consider what
he says. So be.

5. And then after a large confutation of Luthers fond opinion, and furious
assertion, that the pope neither by divine or humane law, but only by
usurpation and Tyranny, had gotten the headshipp of the Church, K. Henry uses
two stong reasons and arguments against him, among other, to repress his
maddnes therein. The first of general consent from antiquity, saying: Negare
non potest, etc. Luther cannot deny, Henr. ibid.
but that all the faithful Christian Churches at this day, do acknowledge
and reverence the holy Sea of Rome, as their mother and Primate, etc. And if
this acknowledgment is grounded neither in divine nor humane right, how has it
taken so great and general root? How was it admitted so universally by all
Christendom? When began it? how grew it to be so great? And whereas humane
consent, is sufficient to give humane right at least, how can Luther say, that
here is neither divine nor humane right, where there is, and has been for time
out of mind, so universal humane consent? etc. K. Henryes argument of
antiquity and consent of the Popes supremacy
Certe si quis rerum gestarum monumenta reuoluat, inueniet iam olim, protinus
post pacatum orb^m plerasque omnes Christiani Orbis Ecclesias obtemperasse
Romana, etc. Truly if a man will look over the monuments of things, and times
past, he shall find that prefently after the world was pacified ( from
persecution) the most part of Christian Churches did obey the Roman: yea and
the Greek Church also, though the Empire were passed to that part, we shall
find, that she acknowledged the Primacy of the same Roman Church, but only
when she was in Schism. And as for S. Hierome though he were no Roman; yet
did he in his days ascribe so much authority and pre-eminence to the Roman
Church, as he affirmed that in matters of great doubt, it was sufficient for
his faith, to be allowed, and approved by the Pope of Rome, etc. This is the
first argument urged by King Henry of antiquity and consent.

6. Another he alleges of impossibility, for the Pope to have attained by
force and Tyranny, to so great authority, as he had, according to Luthers
calumniation; the effect is this. Cum Lutherus tam impudenter pronunciet, etc.
Whereas Luther so impude^tly does affirm, that the Pope has his Primacie by
no right, neither divine, nor humane, but only by force and Tyranny, I do
wonder how the mad fellow could hope to find his Readers so simple, or
blockish, as to believe that the Bishop of Rome, K. Henry's argument of
impossibility.
being a Priest, unarmed, alone, without temporal force, or right either
divine or humane (as he supposed) should be able to get authority over so
many other Bishops his equals, throughout so many and different nations, so
far off from him, and so little fearing his temporal power: or that so many
People, Cities, Kingdoms, Commonwealths, Provinces, and Nations would be so
prodigal of their own liberty, as to subject themselves to a foreign Priest
(as now so many ages they have done) or to give him such authority over
themselves, if he had no right thereunto at all.

7. But what shall I stand to dispute with Luther in this matter? Or what
imports it, what he says or believes therein, for so much as through anger,
and envy, he knows not himself what he thinks or says, but declares well
the saying of the Apostle to be true in himself: Cor ipsius insipiens
obscuratum, itaditumque in reprobum sensum; 1. Cor. 13.
That his foolish heart is darkened, and delivered over unto a reprobate sense.
So King Henry, pronouncing, as you see, a heavy judgment against Luther now,
and himself afterward, when he fell into the same darkness, and not only
obscurity of understanding, but inconstancy also of proceeding, which here so
eagerly he obiecteth to Luther, for this he writes of him. Quis non eius
miretur inconstantiam, etc. who will not wonder at Luthers inconstancy, for a
little before, he wrote in his books, that the Papaltie, though it were not by
divine right, yet was it by humane, to wit by humane consent for the publik
good of the Church, and thereupon condemned and detested the sect of the
Hussites in Bohemia, for that they had cut themselves off from the obedience of
the Roman Sea, affirming that they sinned damnably, whosoever obaied not the
Pope. K. Henryes innectiue against the inco^stancy of Luther.
This he wrote very lately (since his fall from Catholic religion) but now
he is run into that, which then he so much detested. And like inconstancy he
has showed in another point also, which is; that having preached of late in a
certain Sermon to the people, that the Popes excommunication was to be
obaied, and patiently be borne, as a medecin in a disease. When himself
afterward was most worthily excommunicated, he took that sentence of the Pope
so impotently, as seeming to be mad, or fallen into rage, he brake forth into
such contumelious speeches, and blasphemies, as no Christian ears can abide to
hear the same: so as by his fury he has made it evident: Eos qui pelluntur
gremio matris Ecclesia, statim furijs corripi, atque agitari daemonibus. That
those which are cast out from the lap of their mother the Church, are taken
presently with suries, and vexed with devils. Thus far K. Henry, and much more
to this effect, which for breuityes sake I pretermit.

8. And now let us with grief of mind, and some terror of conscience, look
over, and reflect upon that which happened afterward unto this King himself,
and into what extremes of passion and choler he fell in his writings and
Statutes against this very Supremacy of the Pope (when he was excommunicated by
him) which here he defends against Luther, though in other points of
doctrine he remained still opposite to Luther, even unto his dying day.

9. It is worthy the noting also, what mutability and inconstancy he used, not
only in the whole thing (to wit, in d^^^ing the Popes Supremacy) but in the
very manner also of falling into that extremity. For first, for many years
after the writing of this his book, which was in the year of Christ 1521. he
continued so devout and obedient to the said Sea of Rome, as no King in
Christendom more, as may appear by the mutual good offices of love, and
friendship, that passed between them. An. 1527.
And when six years after this again, Rome was spoiled by the army of the
Duke of Burbon, and Pope Clement the seventh held as besieged in the Castle of
S. Angelo, no King or Prince of Christendom was more forward in the aid of the
said Pope, then K. Henry of England; Good offices of K. Henry continued to the
Pope after the vvriting of his book.
as may appear by his great, and famous Embassadge sent that very year into
France by Cardinal Wolsey about that matter, in the year 1527. to draw the
King of France into the association of that aid and help.

10. And when again the next year after, King Henry began to move his doubt
or question about the lawfullnes of his marriage with Queen Catherine, he
referred the whole matter to Rome, and procured Judges to be sent from thence,
as namely Cardinal Campegius, that was directed from Rome the selfsame year
into England for Legate, with like commission for Cardinal Wolsey to be joined
with him, as deputyes from Pope Clement, to hear, and judge the matter, before
whom sitting in judgment, both K. Henry and Queen Catherine being cited
personally to appear, they made their appearance in the Church of the
Black-Friars in London, in the month of April anno Domini 1529. which was the
one and twentieth of King Henryes reign. And albeit King Henry being offended,
that by this means of these two Legates (the Pope accepting of the Appeal of
Queen Catherine, and recalling the matter to himself) he could not have his
will, did put from his favor soon after Cardinal Wolsey, when the other was
departed, and brought him to the miserable end which is well known, By what
degrees K. Henry fell to breach with the Sea of Rome.
yea and condemned for his sake, the whole Clergy of England, in a Praemunire,
that is to say, the loss of all their goods, which afterward they redeemed
with a submission, and payment of a hundred thousand pounds, for that they had
acknowledged the said Cardinals Legantine authority, which himself had procured
from Rome; yet did not he for this, surcease to send other Ambassadors to
continue the solicitation of the same suite of divorce, in the said Court of
Rome: and namely among others, Doctor Stephen Gard^^^, the Kings chief
Secretary, soon after made Bishop of Winchester, who was sent thither (as
Stow and others do testify) presently after the departure of Cardinal
Campegius in the same year 1529. Neither did King Henry leave of to hold his
Ambassadors, Lawyers, and Procurators there about this matter, for two or
three years after this again, until he saw there was no hope to get his
divorce by that means; and on the otherside was resolved to marry the Lady Anne
Bullen whatsoever came of it, and so did in the year 1533. and 24. of his
reign.

11. Thus then you see the beginning and progress of the cause of King Henryes
breach with the Sea Apostolic, which probably would never have been, if he
could have obtained his will that way; but falling into despair thereof, took
resolution to cut the knot, which otherwise he could not undo. But the manner
of his proceeding may be best seen by two Acts of Parliament set down here by
M. Attorney the one of the 24. the other of the 25. year of King Henryes
reign: The first breach with Rome.
for that in the former, which was in the year of his marriage with Lady Anne
Bullen, as has been said, Reports fol. 28.
he prohibited all appeals in causes Ecclesiastical to the Court of Rome,
reducing all spiritual authority of determining the same unto the body
spiritual of the English Clergy; for so the words of the statute are: The body
spiritual of the English Church (says he) having power, when any cause of the
law divine happened to come in question, or of spiritual learning. etc. to
declare, and determine all such doubts, and to administer al such offices, and
duties, as to their rooms spiritual did appertain, without the intermedling
of any exterior person, or persons, etc. Stat. de. 2^. H. 8. All committed to
the body of the English Clergy.
Whereby it appears, that by this Statute he reduces all spiritual power to
a certain community of the Ecclesiastical body of England; but in the second
Statute, that followed in the year after, against suing for licenses,
dispensations, facultyes, graunts, rescripts, or delegacyes to Rome, he seems
to establish all authority in the Archbishop of Canterbury, that was then
Thomas Cranmer, newly made by himself for allowing of his marriage with Lady
Anne Bullen; for so he says in the statute: That the Archbishop of Canterbury
for the time being and his successors, shall have power and authority from
time, to time, by their discretions, to give, grant, and dispose, by an
instrument under the seal of the said Archbishop, unto the King, and unto his
heirs and successors Kings of this Realm, as well, all manner of such
licenses, dispensations, All committed to the Archb. of Canterbury.
compositions, facultyes, graunts, rescrips, delegacyes, instruments, and other
writings for causes not being contrary, or repugnant to the holy scriptures,
and laws of God, as heertofore had been used, and accustomed to be had, and
obtained by the King, or any his most noble progenitors, or any of his, or
their subjects at the Sea of Rome, or any person, or persons by authority of
the same, etc.

12. Lo here King Henry gives authority to the Archbishop of Canterbury, to
give unto him (to wit, to King Henry himself, and his successors Kings of
England, and their subjects) all dispensations, which they were wont to ^^ke,
and obtain at the Popes hand: so as here, he acknowledges, that in former
times, that authority belonged to the Pope, K. Henry subjected himself to the
Archb. of Canterbury.
and that his ancestors and progenitors were of that opinion; but that now he
being offended with him, he would take it from him, and bestow it upon the
Archbishop of Canterbury, subiecting himself and his inheritours, to ask, and
obtain the said dispensations at his hands, and his successors, which was (as
you see) to make Archbishop Cranmer Pope, and not himself for this year, as
the whole body of the English Clergy was for the year past.

13. And whereas it is evident that King Henry gave this authority to Cranmer
for dispensing etc. to the end he should dispense with him for marrying of the
said Lady Anne Bullen; it seems strange, that he would use this so ridiculous
circuyt, as first to give authority by Parliament to Cranmer, to be able to
dispense with him (to wit with King Henry the giver) and would not take
immediately, either by himself, or by Parliament, authority to himself, to
dispense with himself. The gradation used by K. Henry is assuning the supremacy.
But it is well seen, that he had some remorse, or shame-fastnes therein at the
first beginning, though the very next year after he amended the matter, or
rather made it worse by assuming it to himself. For calling another Parliament
upon the 26. of his reign, he made the first Statute of all, with this Title:
An act concerning the Kings Highness to be Supreme head of the Church of
England, and to have authority to reform, and redress all errors, heresies,
and abuses in the same. Whereby you may see, what gradation was used in this
matter, or rather mystery, giving this power first to the Community of the
English Clergy, secondly to the Archbishop of Canterbury, and thirdly to
himself; and all this in three distinct years immediately following one the
other.

14. And now, if men's everlasting salvation must depend upon these mutations of
spiritual jurisdiction, as no doubt they did in thousands of our Country at
that time; and if the eternal wisdom of our Savior Christ has left no more
certainty, A confideration of importance.
for direction of our souls, by spiritual government and authority, then
this of our English Parliament, which changes so often and easily, as you have
heard, upon every Princes particular inclination; then are we (doubtless) in a
pitiful plight: for that (as has been declared before) of the certainty of
this spiritual power, for binding or loosing of our sins, for Sacraments,
instructions, directions, and all other spiritual helps, and assistance in
this life, depends the surety of our everlasting salvation, or damnation in
the life to come.

15. But to go forward a little further in this matter, now we have King Henry
head of the Church, and M. Attorney, no doubt, is glad thereof for helping of
his cause, though it help it but little or nothing at all, it being the first
example that ever could be given thereof in England, or elsewhere throughout the
Christian world, and so much the more to be misliked, if we believe John Calvin
in his sharp reproof of this attempt, Calvin. comment. in cap. 6. Amos.
which he calls Tyrannical, and Antichristian. But M. Attorney (perhaps)
will not care for Calvin or Beza, or any of their followers in this point, for
that it makes not to his purpose. Well then, he must notwithstanding grant
this in all reason, that if this supreme authority spiritual was well and
rightly, and by gods direction, spirit, and allowance taken upon himself, by
King Henry; then is it likely, that he was guided also by the same spirit
afterward in making his decrees, laws, and ordinances for directing, and
governing the English Church by that authority, and especially for reforming,
K. Henry as supreme head condemned the Protestants religion for heresy.
and redressing of all errors, heresies, and abuses therein, according to the
special title of his said authority before set down; whereof it follows, that
when upon the 31. year of his reign, which was five after the said authority
given him, he calling a Parliament, determined six main and principal
articles of protestant religion to be heresies, to wit: See statut. an. 31.
H. ^. cap. 14.
The denial of the real presence: of the communion under one kind only: That
Priests may marry: That vows of chastity may be broken: That private masses
are not lawful: That sacramental, or auricular confession is not necessary;
appointing them that should hold any of these heresies (so condemned by him)
to be burned as notorious heretics: it follows (I say) that this was decreed
by him out of the same spirit, and direction of god; for that otherwise, his
Ecclesiastical supremacy had been to small purpose, if there were no certainty
in his determinations, or that God would permit him to err so grossly in so
importa^t a business as this was for the whole Church of England, so soon after
he had ginen him his said supreme authority Ecclesiastical.

16. And that this was done by him against the Protestants with great
deliberation, consultation, advise, and maturity in the fullnes of his power
Ecclesiastical, appears well by the words of the Statute, which are these:
Where the Kings most excellent Majesty, is by gods law, supreme head
immediately under him, of his whole Church of England, intending the
conservation of the same Church, in a true, sincere, and uniform doctrine of
Christ's religion, calling also, to his blessed, and most gracious remembrance,
With what mature deliberation K. Henry as head of the church condemned the
Protestants.
the innumerable commodities which ensue of concord, and unity in religion,
etc. has therefore commanded this his most high Court of Parliament to be
summoned, as also a Synod of all the Archbishops, Bishops, and other learned
men, to be assembled, etc. for a full, and persect resolution of certain
Articles proposed (which are the former six); his Majesty also most graciously
vouchsafing in his own Princly person, to descend, and come into his said high
Court, and Council, and there like a Prince of most high prudence, and no
less learning, opened and declared many things of high learning and great
knowledge touching the said Articles, matters, and questions; whereupon after
great, and long deliberate disputation and consultation, had, and made; it was
finally resolved, as before, etc.

17. Thus you see, how maturely this matter was done, and resolved by the new
head of the English Church, and his Counsel: which resolution not
withstanding, I presume, M. Attorney and those of his religion will not well
allow a part rei; though for his authority, they may not deny it, according
to their own grounds, in that he did contradict therein the Popes: and so in
this respect they seem to be but in pitiful plight, for that neither the
one, nor the other head serves well their turns. And with this we shall
leave King Henry the 8. who in all the rest of his reign (which, as has been
said, was but the third part after his spiritual headship, of that he had
reigned before, in acknowledgment of the Popes Supremacy) his Decrees,
Ordinances, and actions though they were inconstant and variable; yet were they
all (except this only controversy of the Popes authority) against
Protestants, and their religion, as appears both by his solemn condemning
and burning of John Lambert for denying the Real presence, the next year
after this Statute was made; An. 1540.
as also of Anne Ascue and others, upon the last year of his life, An. 1546.
for the same heresy, and of many others for other Protestant-opinions; so as
I do not see how M. Attorney can much glory in this first headshipp of his
Church of England, The headship of K. Henry fitteth not M. Attorney.
especially that being true, which Bishop Gardener preached, and protested
publicly at Paul's Gross in Queen Mary's time, that K. Henry dealt with him a
little before his death for reconcyling himself to the Pope, by restoring to
him his authority again, if with his honor it might be brought to pass, but
before this could be treated he died, and thereby was frustrated of his good
purpose therein.

The answer to certain Instances of M. Attorney out of this reign of K.
Henry the eight.. II.
18. And this might suffice for King Henry's reign, but only that M. Attorney,
A doubt moved by M. Attorney and sl^nderly ansvvered.
upon the recital of certain of the said Kings Statutes made by himself, for
his own spiritual Supremacy, (which I hold not needful for me to stand to
answer) he moves a doubt, and answers the same in such sort, as is worthy
of consideration. His doubt is, that for so much as K. Henry was now declared
head of the Church, and all Ecclesiastical jurisdiction taken from the Pope in
England, and in English affairs; what shall become of the Canons, or Canon law,
together with the Constitutions and Ecclesiastical Ordinances depending of
the Church of Rome, Reports fol. 32.
whereby the spiritual Courts of England were wont to be governed? you shall
hear his answer in his own words.

The Attorney.
If it be demanded (says he) what Canons, Constitutions, Ordinances, and
Synodals Provincial are still in force within this Realm? I answer, that it
is resolved, and enacted by authority of Parliament; that such as have been
allowed by general consent, and custom within the Realm, and are not
contrariant or repugnant to the Laws, Statutes, and Customs of this Realm,
nor to the damage or hurt of the Kings prerogative Royal, are still in force
within this Realm, This appears by the resolution of all the Judges in 7. H.
^ lib. Keylvv. ^o. 18. And this was long before any ^ct of (...) was made
against forra^ne Jurisdiction ^^ K. Henry 8.
as the Kings Ecclesiastical laws of the same. Now, as Consent, and Custom
has allowed those Canons; so no doubt by general consent of the whole Kealme,
any of the same may be corrected, enlarged, explained, or abrogated. For
example, there is a decree, that all Clerks that have received any manner of
Orders, greater or smaller, should be exempt pro causis criminalibus before
the temporal Judges. This decree had never any force within England. First,
for that it was never approved, and allowed of by general consent within the
Realm: Secondly it was against the laws of the Realm, as it does appear by
infinite presidents. Thirdly it was against the prerogative and sovereignty of
the King, that any subject within this Realm, should not be subject to the
laws of this Realm.

The Catholic Divine.
19. Here you see two points touched in this answer: First the resolution it
self, and then the confirmation thereof by a special example. The resolution is
very ambiguous, doubtful, and uncertain, if you consider it. For he says,
that such Canonical laws are to be still in force, as were allowed by
general consent, not contrariant to the laws, statutes, and customs of this
Realm, nor importe any damage to the Kings prerogative Royal.
Ecclesiastical laws made subject to every particular man's calumniation.
And what are these think you? And how uncertain a rule is this prescribed
for laws, whereby matters of conscience must be determined? Who may not say in
his own case, or others; this Canon, or Constitution, though it be of never so
ancient Councels, or Decrees of the Church, (for of such consists the
Canon Law) was never allowed by general consent of England; this is
contrariant to some Statute or Custom; this imports damage to the Kings
prerogative Royal: and so indeed by establishing this new headship, the whole
body of Ecclesiastical regiment was overthrown, though M. Attorney to salve
the matter, says; that the said Canonical laws should remain still in force
(with the restrictio^s aforesaid) as the Kings Ecclesiastical laws; which is
as much to say, as that these Canon-lawes that were made by general Councels,
National or Provincial Synods, and by the Popes of Rome themselves, shall not
remain as their laws, but as the Kings laws, for that he retains them: of
which poor refuge I have spoken often before, how weak and idle it is.

20. But now for his particular example, chosen out to prove that the general
Canonical laws of the whole Church received throughout Christendom, may be
corrected, and enlarged, explaned and abrogated by a particular Country (which
is contrary to the common Maxim, A great untruth that Clerks were not
exempted from temporal Judges.
that no law can be abrogated, but by the same authority, by which it was made
and allowed, or greater) I cannot but marvel, that he would insist upon the
exemption of Clerks from secular tribunals, no one thing in all the libertyes
and privileges of the Church and Churchmen, being more ordinary, not usual,
nor generally received, then this; though M. Attorney presumes to affirm
here, that this Decree had never any force within England, which seems to me
so manifest an untruth, as I marvel he would affirm it so flattly. For, to
let pass all that I have said before in the second Chapter of this our
confutation, for the confirmation of the exemptions of Clerks, their persons,
and goods, out of the Decrees of ancient Christian Emperors, that ratified
the Church-Canons in that behalf, and the conformity thereunto of our
Christian Kings before the Conquest, handled in the 5. and 6. Chapters of this
book; besides this (I say) the assertion of M. Attorney may evidently be
overthrown by all the laws, use, and custom since the said Conquest; and
namely, and expressly by the laws of the Conqueror himself, recited before by
me in the 7. Chapter of this answer, which were continued by all the said
Conquerours posterity, until the time of King Henry the 3. when written
Statutes had first their beginning and namely that of Magna Charta, by which
laws and Statutes the said privilege and exemption was often and ordinarily
ratified and confirmed.

21. As for example, in the third year of King Edward the first, son to the
said King Henry, the Statute speaks thus: VVestmon. 1. cap. 2. an. 3. Ed. ^.
when a Clerk is taken for guylte of felony, and is demanded by the Ordinary,
he shall be delivered to him, according to the privilege of holy Church, on
such peril, as belongs to it, after the custom aforetymes used, etc. Behold
the contradictory words to M. Attorneys, that said this decree had never any
force, nor was approved in England. The instance also of Bigamyes alleged
before by M. Attorney, Two instances against M. Attorney under K. Edward the
first.
and answered by us in the 11. Chapter of this book, under the reign of this
King Edward the first, does evidently confirm that which we say, and refuteth
M. Attorney. For that the Kings Counsel refusing there to deliver certain
felons demanded by the Prelates, in respect only that they were Bigamyes, or
had been twice married, and thereby were excluded, by the general Council of
Lions, from the privilege of Clergymen; this (I say) does show, that before
that Council, Bigamyes also had that privilege by the Latin words of the law,
wherein it is said: Praelati tanquam Clericos exig^runt sibi liberandos: Statut.
de bigamis cap. 5. an. 4. Ed. 1.
These prelates or Bishops did exact, or require those felons to be set free
unto them, as Clerks; and does manifestly declare, that they demanded it by
the known law of the land, generally received in those days.

22. And conform to this, under King Edward the second, son to the former
Edward, Articuli Cleri cap. 15. an. 9. Ed. ^.
we find the law to speak in these words, A Clerk flying to the Church for
felony, to obtain the privilege of the Church, if he affirm himself to be a
Clerk, shall not be compelled to abjure the Realm, but yielding himself to
the law of the Realm, shall enjoy the privileges of the Church, according to
the laudable customs of the Realm heretofore used. So there; where you see
that this was no new thing in those days.

23. And I might ad to this, diverse other like Decrees of the succeeding Kings,
as namely of King Edward the third, in the 18. and 25. years of his reign,
18. Ed. 3. pro Cler. cap. 2. and 25. F. 3. pro Clero cap. 4. and 5. and 4. H.
4. cap 2.
and of King Henry the 4. in the 4. year of his reign, under whom it is
written in the records of Canterbury Church, that the Archbishop Arundel seeing
this ancient privilege of the Clergy to have been somewhat weakened by former
Kings, he dealt with the said King Henry effectually, and obtained, says the
Register, vt vetus Cleri praerogatiua, per Regem renouaretur, ne Clerici ad
Regium tribunal raperentur. That the ancient prerogative of Clergymen might
be renewed by the King, Harp^s^l ex Ar^h^^^ Cantuar. sae^ul. ^5. cap. 9. in
vita Thomae Arundellij.
that Clerks should not be drawn to the Kings tribunal. And this was a point
so notoriously known in England in those days, as when upon the year 1405.
in the said King Henry the fourth his reign, the Archbishop of York Richard
Scroope, together with some others of the nobility, had risen in arms against
him, and the King in his choler would needs have him condemned and executed
(as he was) Gaston the chief Justice (as Harpesfield notes out of the said
Bishops life, and the addition of Poli-chronicon) Gaston chief Justice refuted
to sit in judgment upon an Archbishop.
knowing that by the law, he could not be condemned by a secular Judge, refused
to sit upon him, and so he was condemned by Sir Raph Euers, and Sir William
Fulthrop knights, authorized thereunto by the Kings armed commission; whereof
the Clergy greatly complaining, Pope Innocentius the seventh excommunicated
the doers, and denounced to K. Henry, by the Archbishop of Canterbury, that he
would proceed in like manner against himself, if he gave not good satisfaction
in that behalf, but he dying soon after, and a great schism thereupon ensuing
in the Roman Church, nothing was done.

24. But much auncienter then this, we might allege diverse examples out of
the reigns of King Henry the 3. and Edward the 3. whereof we have made mention
also in part before, treating of their times, as of one Peter Ri^all, who had
been Treasurer to King Henry the 3. Paris an. 1234. sub. Henr. 3.
and being apprehended by the Kings commission and to be sent to the Tower,
said to him thus, as Matthew Paris writes. Domine, Clericus sum, nec debeo
incarcerari, vel sub Laicorum custodia deputari. My liege, I am a Clerk, and
therefore I ought not to be imprisoned, nor to be kept under the custody of
Laie-men. The King answered. Te, vt laicum hactenus ges^isti, a te igitur, vt a
laico, cui meum commisi thesaurum, exigo. Clerks delivered from secular Judges
in King Henry the third his time.
Thou have borne thy self hitherto as a laie-man, and therefore, as of a
laie-man, to whom I committed my treasure, I exact an account of the same. And
for that he was found with armor under his Clergy attire, both for this, and
because the Archbishop of Canterbury there present, seemed not willing to
answer for him, he was sent to the Tower, yet after two days (says our
author) he was delivered again thence by the said Archbishop, and carried to
Winchester, and there left in the Cathedral Church.

25. And some five years after that again, one Raph Briton, a Clerk and
Cha^on of S. Paul's Church, who likewise had been K. Henry's Treasurer, Idem.
An. 1239.
being accused to the said King of diverse crimes touching treason, and by his
commission to the Mayor of London, apprehended and sent to the Tower, was by
the instance of the Clergy, urging their said privilege, dismissed. Rex
dictum Ranulsum (says Paris) licet inuitus, solui, and in pace dimitti
praecepit; the King though unwilling, commanded the said Raph to be let forth
of prison, and peaceably dismissed. So as this exemption was no new thing at
that time, as M. Attorney would have it seem. And of King Edward the third,
above a hundred years after that again, Thomas Walsingham alleges this
confirmation of the said privilege in his time: VValsing. in vita Edouardi
tertij an. 1344.
Quod nullus Clericus sit arrei ratu^ coram Iustitiarijs suis, sieve ad sectam
suam, sieve parts, si Clericus suae Clerimoniae se submittat, dicens, se
membrum Ecclesiae Sanctae non debere ipsis Iustitiarijs respo^dere. That no
Clerk may be arraygned before the Kings Justices, at the suite of the said
King, or of any other party, if the said Clerk do submitt himself to his
Clergy, affirming, that he being a member of holy Church, ought not to
answer to the said Justices. So Walsingham. And this shall be sufficient to
meet with the assertion of M. Attorney to the contrary: and herewith shall we
end our speech of King Henry the eight.

Of King Edward the sixth, the one and twentieth King after the Conquest.. III.
King Edward the sixth reigned six years from 1547. unto 1553.
26. This young Prince being but a child of 9. years old, when his father King
Henry died (as often has been said) was by his Tutors and Governors,
especially his Uncle Earl of Hartford (after made Duke of Somerset) and some
others that followed his appetite in the desire of innovation about matters of
religion, declared Head of the Church, under the same style, as his father had
been before, and by that headship and pretense thereof, they took to themselves
authority to make that change, which after ensued, partly to the opinions of
Luther, and partly of Zuinglius (for Calvin was not yet so famous, or forward
in credit for some years after) and to overthrow and alter in effect all that
King Henry by his headship had ordained, and established before, concerning
religion, as may appear by the several and particular repeals of the most
part of all his Statutes, touching that affair, See statut. an. 1. and 2.
Edouardi sexts.
except only this of his departure from the Pope, and obedience of the Sea
Apostolic.

27. But yet one principal declaration, and important constitution they added
in this matter (as before has been touched) Supra Cap. 3.
above that of King Henry (according to the saying, facile est inuentis addere)
and this is, that whereas the Father K. Henry taking from the Pope his
accustomed jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, did transfer it unto his Clergy of
England, and afterward declaring himself Spiritual head of that Clergy, did
consequently infer, he was head of the English Church also in spiritual
matters, yet did he not explain from what origin properly, this spiritual
power did flow: which point the said Governors of the child-King Edward did
interpret and decide, Spiritual jurisdiction could not be derived from the
child-king
showing that all spiritual jurisdiction, power, and authority over souls, by
loosing or binding of sins, or other spiritual actions, in Bishops,
Prelates, and Priests, proceeded, and was derived from this young child, who
yet notwithstanding, as each man may consider, was not of years to have perfect
use of reason for disposing so much as temporal matters, and how much less in
spiritual. For so affirms plainly S. Paul to the Galathians. Galat. 4.
Quanto tempore haeres par^ulus est, nihil differt a seruo, cum sit Dominus
omnium, sed sub tutoribus, and actoribus est, vsque ad praefinitum tempus a
Patre. All the time that the heir is young, or under age, though he be Lord of
all by inheritance, yet does he differ nothing from a servant or bound-man (in
subjection) but is under Tutors, and Administrators, until the time of his age
appointed by his Father. So the Apostle.

28. And if then this young King had not yet authority, as of himself, to
dispose of any temporal affairs, which are of much less moment; we may
easily consider, what may be thought of spiritual, and Ecclesiastical, that
require more the use of reason, and judgment, for exercising of jurisdiction
therein, then does the other. But you will say (perhaps) that the same Tutors,
and Administrators, that governed him in secular, and Civil affairs, might
take upon them also jurisdiction in the spiritual likewise: An eu^sio^ refuted.
and so the Duke of Somerset (for example) with his assistants, might be
secondary or Vicar-heads of the Church of England under him for the time, to
absolve, or bind sins, determine of heresies, dispose of Sacraments, and the
like.

29. But to this ^s easily answered, according to the principles set down in
the second Chapter of this book, that for so much, as all temporal power is
given first of all by God, in the law of Nature unto the people or multitude,
who thereby have authority to transfer the same to what manner of government
they like, either Monarchy, or other; it follows also, that the
Commonwealth that had authority to choose, or appoint the state of Kings to
reign over them, had, and has power to give sufficient authority in like
manner, to Tutors and Administrators, Different origens of te^porall and
spiritual anthority.
to govern the said Commonwealth in temporal affairs, during the time of
their Kings minority or nonage: But that the origin of spiritual power
coming not by this way of the people, nor being given to them at all, but
immediately by Christ our Savior to his Apostles, and their Successors,
Bishops and Prelates, by lawful Ordination and Succession of Priesthood, and
imposition of hands to the end of the world; no temporal Tutors, or
Administrators could rightly get into this authority, except they were first
made Priests, and this also by Caluins opinion and assertion, as well as ours,
as See Supra cap. 2. and 3.
before has been declared.

30. By this then we see, how; and by what assurance this headship of the
Church, and supreme Ecclesiastical authority thereof, passed from the Father
to the son, which was such, as it liked not M. Attorney to allege any one
Statute of this man's time against us, though all in deed were made against us,
and against the said Father, as may be easily imagined, considering the
Current of that time. And the very first of all was in favor of Luthers
opinion, about the Stat. 1. Ed. 6. cap. 1.
Real presence, which afterward they changed into that of Zwinglius. They
changed also twyce their Stat. 2 and 3. Ed. 6 and 5. and 6. cap. 1.
Communion book, and form of service and Sacraments: first upon the second
and third years of King Edwards reign, and secondly upon the 5. and 6. as
appears in the particular Statutes of those years. They repealed a great
number of K. Henry's Statutes, as by name concerning treasons Stat. 1. Ed 6.
cap. 11 and 12.
and heresies. They repealed his famous Statute for Preco^tracts St^t. 2. and
3. Ed. 6. cap 23.
in marriages; as also dissolved diverse of his ^tat. 7. Ed 6. cap. 2.
Courts, that he had set up. And finally they respected nothing the said King
Henry's headship, nor his prescription or direction therein, but follow^d their
own for the time that their power endured: And yet all was published under the
name of the Gospel, and New reformation, established by negotiation in
Parliament, as though the matter had proceeded from very sound and founded
Ecclesiastical authority. And this for that time, whereof M. Attorney
alleging no one example against us, I have no further need to enlarge my self.

Of the reign of Queen Mary, the two and twentieth Princess after the
Conquest.. IIII.
Queen Mary reigned six years from 1553. to 15^^.
31. As M. Attorney does pre^ermitt the memory of Queen Mar^e without
mentioning her at all; so could I have done also, but that my purpose is to
pass through the reigns of all our Princes, without ouerpassing of any. And
it may serve also to our purpose, to consider thereby the broken and
interrupted succession of this new headshipp in the Father, son, and
daughters. For as the Father by his Act, had contradicted all his ancestors
Kings of England before him, from the beginning of their Conversion unto his
days; so his son, though succeeding him in the participation of that act,
yet contradicted him in all the rest that he decreed, touching matters of
religion, Queen Mary restored all to the ancient use again.
by virtue of that headshipp after him: and then came the elder daughter, who
co^tradicted them both, and restored all to the ancient state again, wherein
it had continued throughout the race of al her ancestors progenitors of
England and Spain, for a thousand years and more. So as here M. Attorneys
prescription can be very small, for so much as his whole third thereof was
broken and cut of by Q. Marie, and consequently he must begin again with Q.
Elizabeth's reign, as the fountain of all his deduction.

32. And for so much as Queen Marie having, as a devout, obedient, and
Catholic Princess, returned al things belonging to religion, to their
ancient state and condition, wherein her Father found them, and her
Grandfather left them, she repealed, and mortified all such Statutes of
innouations and new devises, as she found to have been made upon any
occasion, or fancy what soever, during the time of her said Father and
brother, reducing her self in obsequium fidei, to the humble obedience of that
only faith, which had been held, and practiced in Christ's universal Church,
and namely also in England, from the beginning unto her said Fathers days;
punishing likewise diverse of the heads and authors of those new innouations and
alterations, that had been made: and mamely and above others, the chief author
and instrument of all, Thomas Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury, Thomas Cranmer
the first heretical Archb. of Canterbury.
who entering Catholikly, as was thought, into that dignity, was the first
Archbishop that ever failed, or dissented in his faith from the rest, or from
the obedience, and subordination to the Sea Apostolic, and so by gods
judgment, came to be a stange example of a miserable end, to be burned
publikly for his heresies; and for that in particular, against which his noble
and learned predecessors, Lanfrancus, Anselmus, and other Archbishops of
Canterbury, had foughten most famously, above other learned men, when it first
sprang up in Berengarius, the first author and inuentor thereof, in the days of
William the Conqueror; I mean, the denial of the Real presence in the
blessed Sacrament, which of all other heresies, was most hateful unto him, for
whose sake, Cranmer first of all declined to schism and heresy, I mean King
Henry the eight; yea and to himself also for a time, after the others death, as
may appear by the foresaid first Statute, made chiefly by his authority, in
the first year of King Edwards reign, in favor of the said Real presence
against the Sacramentaryes.

33. All which being so, every man may behold what ground, or certainty there
was in those days, or is now, for men to leave the Catholic known religion,
and cast the salvation of their souls upon such alterations, as these were.
For that after Queen Mary, who had restored all to the ancient state, as has
been said, came her younger sister Queen Elizabeth, a Lady of some five and
twenty years of age, who by little and little altered all again, agreeing in
all points neither with the one, nor with the other, neither with them that had
made the former alterations, but brought in a new and distinct form and
fashion of beleiuing and worshipping God, peculiar to it self in diverse points,
and differing from all in some. Of which innovation by the said younger sister
against the elder (they being the only two Queens that ever have reigned in
their own right within our land, since the beginning of Christianity) we shall
now pass to speak a few words, and so end this whole discourse of our English
Princes, and their religion.

Of the reign of Queen Elizabeth, who was the three and twentieth Princess
after the Conquest, and last of King Henryes race. v.
Q. Elizab. reigned 45. years from 1558. unto 1603.
34. This Lady being the daughter of King Henry and Queen Anne Bullen, coming
to reign after the foresaid Queen Mary her sister, was persuaded to resume,
and take to her self that supreme spiritual power and jurisdiction, which
Queen Mary her elder sister had refused, and caused to be restored to the place
and persons, from whom it was taken by her Father and brother. And I say she
was persuaded thereunto, for that it is the opinion of many men that knew her,
What moved Q. Elizabeth to make a new change.
and conuersed with her, both before and after her entrance to the Crown, that
she had neither great desire to take it at the beginning, nor opinion that she
might do it; but only that she was told, it was necessary to her present state
at that time, in regard of diverse Popes sentences past against her
legitimation, Pope Clement 7. and Paulu^ ^.
and the lawfullnes of her Parents marriage, and the pretense of the Queen of
France and Scotland at that time, upon (...) supposed desect, to the Crown of
England, as due to her, ^^ough the others illegitimation.

35. For remedy of all which, it was made a matter necessary, that she should
take the said authority Ecclesiastical from the Pope and Sea of Rome, and
place it in her self, especially when by negotiation of some that desired the
change, it was brought about, that the Parlame^t should offer it unto her under
this plausi^^ Title of, An Act for restoring to the Crown the ancient
jurisdiction of the (...) Ecclesiastical and spiritual; and the act it self
so cunningly, and ^^^ertly penned, as before has been said, as throughout the
same ^^re is not found so much as once mentioned or named, The head of the
Church, which euery-where is iterated and urged in the Statutes, that gave the
same power to her Father and brother; but in steed thereof, comes in the
devise before mentioned of Supreme Gouernesse, with authority to visit,
reform, correct errors, heresies, c^^ses etc. Crafty dealing to move the
Queen to accept of the supremacy.
And all this for sweetning the matter (as a man may say) to this Lady at the
beginning, who (besides the other reason of Caluins mislike and reprehension
thereof before mentioned in King Henry the eight) had little opinion, or
appetite of the matter in those days, not being ignorant (for that she was of
excellent wit) how strange a thing it would seem in the world, to have one of
her sex Supreme in sacred and Ecclesiastical matters, i^ ijt ^ua sunt ad Deum,
to use S. Paul's words in this case, that is to say, in those things, that are
to be handled with God for men, or between God and man.

36. But being told by some in good sadness at that time (and M. Attorney
offers to stand to it now) that this authority was no new thing, or (to use
his words) not a Statute introductorie of a new, but declaratorie of an old,
Adulatory speeches for imbarking the Queen.
and that the same was conform to the ancient laws of England, acknowledged,
and practiced by all her ancestors, Kings of the same, and that the difference
of her sex, as they had qualified the matter, and couched their words, did
hinder nothing at all the acceptance of this authority; she was content to
let it pass, and admit thereof for the time, though I have been most
credibly informed, by such as I cannot but believe therein, considering also
her forsaid sharpenes and pregnancie of wit, that upon diverse occasions
(especially for some years after the beginning of her reign) she would in a
certain manner of pleasantnes jest thereat herself, saying: Look what a head
of the Church they have made me.

37. And to the end that no man may imagine, that these things, and some other,
which here I am to touch of the good disposition, this deceased Princess had
of her self, toward Catholic religion at the beginning of her reign, and
for diverse years after, if she might have been permitted to her own
inclination, are feigned; I do affirm upon my conscience, in the sight of him
that is author of all truth, and severe revenger of all false-hood, that
nothing hereof is invented, or framed by me, but sincerely related upon the
undoubted testimonies of such as reported the same, out of their own
knowledge. As for example that not long before the death of Q. Marie, a
commission being given to certain of the privy Counsel, to go and examine
the said Lady Elizabeth at her house of Hat-field, The speech of Lady Eli^^^
vvi^^ (...) of Q. Mary's (...) Cou^sellours.
not far from London, when other matters had been debated, she taking occasion
to talk with one of them a part in a window, said unto him with great
vehemency of spirit, and affliction of mind, as it seemed, laying her hand
upon his: Oh Sir! and is it not possible, that the Queen my sister, will once
be persuaded that I am a good Catholic? Yes, Madame, quoth the Counselor,
if your Grace be so indeed, God will move her Majesty to believe it.
Whereupon the said Lady both swear and protested unto him, that she did as
sincerely believe the Roman Catholic religion, as any Princess could do in
the world: and in proof thereof, alleged the order of her family, which was
to hear mass every day, and the most of them two, one for the dead, and the
other for the living. And this has the said Sir ^ an^^ ^nglese^d.
Counselor oftentimes related unto me and others, he being a man of great
gravity, truth, and sincerity in his speeches.

38. And conform to this, I have seen a letter written in Spanish from the
said house of Hat-field, unto K. Philip then in Flaunders, by the Count of
Fer^^, afterward Duke, and then Ambassador for the said King in England, which
letter was written upon the 16. day of November in the year 1558. when Queen
Marie being now extreme sick, The Duke of Fer^^ his letter to be seen in the
K. of Spaine^ (...) A^^hiuiu^ ^^^hetov^n^ of Ciman^a^.
and annealed, and out of all hope of life, he went to visit the said Princess
Elizabeth from his Master, and relates all the conference, and speech he had
with her, and her answers to diverse points concerning her future government,
with his opinion of the same, both in matters of (...) and religion: concerning
the latter whereof, though he discovered in her a great feeling and
coffeehouse of certain proceedings against her, in her sisters time, and
thereupon did fore^^some troubles like to ensue to some of them, that had been
in ^^fe government, and namely to Cardinal Poole, if he had lived: (...)
wrtieth he, that for the Principal points of Catholic faith ^^en in
controversy, he was persuaded, she would make no great ^^teration, and in
particular he affirms, that she protested unto unto him very sincerely, that
she believed the real presence in the Sacrament, after the words of
consecration pronounced by the Priest.

39. Which relation of this noble man is much consirmed by that which was
written to the said Queen herself, some six or seven years after, Doct.
Harding in his epistle to the Queen. an, 1565.
by Doctor Harding in his dedicatory epistle before the confutation of the
English Apology of the Church of England, upon the year 1565. wherein he
commends her liking of her more sober preachers: both always heertofore
(says he) and specially on Good Friday last openly by words of thanks,
declared, when one of a more temperate nature then the rest, in his sermon
before your majesty, confessed the Real Presence. So he. And that this
opinion, and affection stayed and perseuered with her, even unto her old age by
her own confession, I have for witness another Worshipful knight yet alive,
who upon the truth of his conscience has often protested unto me, that having
occasion to walk, and talk with her, and to discourse somewhat largely of
foreign matters (for that he was newly come from beyond the seas) in her
garden at White Hall, not above five or six years before her death, and
relating unto her among other things, An other protestation of Q. Elizabeth
about the Real presence.
the judgment and speeches of other Princes concerning her excellent parts, of
learning, wisdom, bewty, affability, variety of languages, and the like; but
especially the speeches of certain great Ladies to this effect, upon viewing
of her picture; the said knight seeing her to take much contentment therein,
and to demand still greedily what more was said of her, he thought good
(asking first pardon) to ad the exception that was made by the said Ladies, to
wit, how great pity it was, that so rare a Princess should be stained with
heresy, whereat her Grace being much moved, as it seems, answered: And do
they hold me for an heretic? God knows what I am, if they would let me
alone; and so avouched unto him in particular, that she believed the Real
presence in the Sacrament, with other like protestations to that effect.

40. And sundry years before this again, there being sent into England from
France, one Monsieur Lansacke of the French King Counsel, that was Steward in
like manner of the Queen-mothers household (as before has been mentioned) he
was wont to recount, Q. Elizab. conference with Mo^sieur Lansack.
and testify after his return, with great asseueration, that having had
confident speech with the Queen of England, about matters of religion, she told
him plainly that which before we touched about her spiritual Supremacy, to
wit, that she knew well enough that it belonged not to her, but to S. Peter,
and his Successors, but that the people, and Parliament had laid it upon her,
and would needs have her to take, and bear it. Adding moreover her Catholic
opinion about other points in controversy also, and namely about Praying to
Saints, affirming that every day she prayed herself to our Blessed Lady. And so
far forth had she persuaded this to be true to this French Counselor, as he
did not only believe it, and report it again with great confidence, but was
wont to be angry also, with such as should seem to make doubt of the truth
thereof: among whom, for one, was a worshipful gentleman of our own Country
yet living, that resided then in that Court, and had often conference with the
said Monsieur Lansacke about the matter.

41. And by all this we may see, that the said Queen was drawn to many things
against her own inclination, and much resistance she made at the beginning,
for diverse days, to admit any change of religion; and thereupon presently even
before her Coronation, she caused proclamation to be made, that none should
preach (says Stow) but such as should be appointed; and that no rites, or
ceremonies used in the Church should be altered, but as it was in her own
Chapel; and this, to prevent such innouators, as she knew would presently be
doing, if they were not prevented: against whom she would often speak bitterly
and contemptuously in secret with certain To the old L. Mo^t^gue. The Earl of
Southampton and others. Q. Elizab. own inclination toward Catholic
religion.
noble men, whom she knew to be Catholic, complaining of their importunity,
and signifying her own good affection toward Catholic people, and that she
was urged on, by those other, far beyond her own inclination; which she
declared in like manner by keeping the Cross, and crucifix of Christ in her
Chapel for diverse years, against the bitter exclamations of the said
turbulent people, whereof the forenamed Doctor Harding gives testimony also in
his said epistle dedicated to herself saying: Your constant bearing and
upholding of the banner, and ensign of our redemption (the image I mean of
Christ crucified) against the enemies of his Cross; your Princely word
commanding a Treacher, that opened his lewd mouth against the Renerend use of
the said Cross in your private Chapel, to retire from that ungodly
digres^^^, unto his text of holy scripture, etc. does well show your good
inclination. D. Harding vbi supra.
So he.

42. And all this I have thought good (omitting many other things to this
effect) to mention in this place, for some part of excuse (if it may be) of
the many and greiuous afflictions laid upon her Catholic subjects afterward
by her authority, for profession of the said faith and religion, which herself
at the beginning seemed not to mislike. And surely her example may be a
dreadful president, how far, and daungerously Princes may be led by art, and
importunity of others, if they be not wachfull to resist them at the
beginning. Q. Elizab. drawn to great extremityes against her Catholic
people.
For that this Princess, notwithstanding her mild and gentle disposition,
which you have heard, was drawn on by little and little, to make more greiuous
Statutes, Decrees, and Ordinances, against that part of her subjects (which
might have been held united unto her) then ever (perhaps) did Prince before her,
either Pagan or Christian, against any sort of malefactors whatsoever.

43. And of this, let the multiplicity of statutes extant against them be
witness, the death of so many Priests, and others of that religion, yea of her
dearest and nearest in blood, that then was living, together with the
imprisonments, vexations, and tribulations of innumerable good subjects for
that cause; which brought her finally, after many troubles and terrors,
distrusts and iealousies, to that melancholic afflicted state of mind, wherein
she died. All which had been avoided, if (to use her own phrase) they would
have let her alone, and left her to her own disposition, and mylde
inclination; but now the accoumpt must remain unto herself.

44. And so to conclude, for so much as these Statutes, which M. Attorney does
mention here to have been made by her against Catholics, and principally
against the spiritual jurisdiction of the Sea of Rome, and branches thereof,
did not so much proceed of her own proper inclination and disposition, if we
belief the former testimonies, as of other men's instigation; or if they did,
they were made in defense of her own Ecclesiastical Supremacy newly taken, or
laid upon her: it shall to be needful for me to answer them so particularly,
as I have done the rest before cited, saving only to certain erroneous
assertions, and iniurions asseuerations added by M. Attorney himself in his
enumeration and declaration thereof, which we shall perform in the next ensuing
Chapter, and conclusion of this whole work.

CERTAIN EXPOSTVLATIONS WITH M. ATTORNEY ABOUT EVIL PROCEEDING, And iniuryes
offered to sundry sorts of men in this his Book of Reports, especially
toward the end thereof: Together with the Conclusion of the whole work.
CHAP. XVI.
ALbeit in the beginning and first entrance of this my answer, I promised (and
so I presume has been performed) to hold a mild, and respective course of
temperate writing throughout the same; yet drawing now toward an end, and
finding M. Attorney to imitate the motion of natural bodies, who the nearer
they come to their Center, the more vehemently they move, that is to say, to
be so much the more bitter, eager, and injurious to Catholics, as he draws
nearer to the vpshot of his Work, and designed Center of their damage, hurt,
and prejudice; M. Attorneyes injurious conclusio^^.
I am forced in this place, somewhat also to sharpen my pen, for repelling so
many, manifest, and undeserved injuries; which craftily he goes about in his
last conclusion to couch upon them: but yet retaining still our former measure
of moderation and friendly dealing, so far as the nature and circumstance of
the business may bear and permit; intituling this Chapter, rather of
Expostulations, then accusations on our behalf, which for that they concern
diverse sorts of men, we shall handle distinctly, under the several ensuing
Paragraphes.

THE FIRST EXPOSTVLATION, In the behalf of Recusant Catholics of England
greiuously injured by the Attorney.. I.
2. To the end you may better judge of the equity of this our first
expostulation, I think it best to set down the iniquity of the Attorneys
false charge in his own words, which are these, in the 34. and 35. leaves of
this his 5. part of Reports, wholly directed to their hurt, and prejudice.
From the first until the eleventh year (says he) of the late Queen
Elizabeth's reign, no person of what persuasion of Christian religion soever,
at any time refused to come to the public divine service celebrated in the
Church of England, A false ^harge of ^he Attorney.
being evidently grounded upon the sacred and infallible Word of almighty
God, and established by public authority within this Realm. But after the
Bull of Pius Quintus was published against her Majesty in the said 11. year of
her reign, etc. all they that depended on the Pope, obaied the Bull, disobaied
their gracious and natural Sovereign, and upon this occasion refused to come
to the Church, etc.

3. Here you see two things boldly affirmed: First that in 11. years after
Queen Elizabeth's coming to her Crown, no person of what persuasion soever in
Christian religion, did at any time refuse to go to Church, until the Bull of
Pius Quintus came forth against her. The second, that upon this occasion,
Catholics not holding the Queen for their lawful Princess (for so afterward
he often expounds himself) refused to come to Church. Both which points, if
we can show to be most manifestly false, and the second also calumnious, what
shall we say of M. Attorney in this behalf, that presumes so confidentlie
to put such open untruths in print?

4. First then, for the former point, not only many Catholics in the first
eleven years by him prescribed, did refuse publicly to come to the
Protestants Church, but many Puritans also, from the very first entrance of
Queen Elizabeth to her Crown, and so is it testified by public authority of
diverse books, set forth by order and approbation of the Bishops of England
themselves these years past against the said Puritans, recounting the
beginning, offspring, and progress of that Sect, and faction, one of them
wri^^ng thus: See the book of Dangerous Positions l. 2. c. 2. imprinted at
London an. 1191.
Upon the return of Goodman, VVhittingham, and Gylby, with ^he rest of their
associates from Geneua to England, although it greiued them at the heart, that
they might not bear as great a ^way here in their several Consistories, as
Caluyn did it Geneua, etc. yet meddled not they much in show with matters of
this discipline, but rather busied themselves about the apparel of ministers,
ceremonies prescribed, and in picking of quarrels against the Communion book,
etc. Thus writes he of the first Gene^ian English preachers, that returned
from thence to England after the Queens reign: and that for these quarrels
against the Common, and Communion-booke, they refused to come to the
Protestants Church in those days, as much as Catholics, it is evident. But
yet you shall hear it affirmed plainly and distinctly out of the same Author
quite opposite to M. Attorneys asseveration, though he be of his religion, if
yet he have made his choice.

5. For the first ten or eleven years of her Maiestyes reign ( says he)
through the peevish frowardnes, Ibid. l. 3. a. 1.
the outcries, and exclamations of those that came home from Geneua, against
the garments prescribed to ministers, and other such like matters, no man of
any experience is ignorant what great contention and strife was raised, in so
much as their Sectaries divided themselves from their ordinary co^gregations,
and meeting together in private howses, in woods and fields, had, and kept
there, their disorderly and unlawful Conuenticles: which assemblees
(notwithstanding the absurdnes of them in a Church reformed) M. Cart-wright
within a while after took upon him in a sort to defend, etc. So he. The
first recusancy of Puritanes.
And thus much for Puritanes, whom if M. Attorney will grant to be of any
persuasion what soever in Christian religion: he then must needs grant also,
that he was much o^ershott in this his first so general a Proposition,
affirming, that none of what persuasion soever, did at any time refuse within
that compass to go to Church. But let us see, how we can overthrow the same
in like manner, concerning Catholics, of whom principally he meant it.

6. He that shall but cast back the eye of his memory, upon the beginning of
Queen Elizabeth's reign, and shall consider how many Archbishops, Bishops,
Deans, Archdeacons, Heads of Colleges, Chanons, Priests, Scholars, Religious
persons of diverse sorts, and sexes, Gentlemen, Gentle-weomen, and others, did
refufe openly to conform themselves to that new change of Religion then made,
and published by authority of the said Queen, at the beginning of her reign;
will marvel how, and in what sense, and whether in jest or earnest, sleeping
or waking, M. Attorney set down in writing so general a negative assertion.
For that he shall see so many conuictions thereof, as there be particular
witnesses of credit against him in that behalf. And truly, it seems, that
either he was an infant, or unborn at that time, and has understood little of
those affairs since, or else forgot himself much now, in affirming so
resolutely a proposition refutable by so infinite testimonies.

7. For if he look but upon Doctor Sanders Monarchy in latin in his 7. book,
where he handles the matters that fell out upon the first change of religion
in Queen Elizabeth's days, he shall find 14. Bishops at least of England only,
besides ten more of Ireland and Scotland, Ho^ many Catholics were Recusants
from the beginning
together with Doctor Fecknam Abbot of Westminster, Father Maurice Chasey,
and Wilson Priors of the Carthusians, 13. Deans of Cathedral churches, 14.
Archdeacons, 15. heads of Colleges, almost 50. Chanons of Cathedral churches,
above eightscore other Priests, whereof diverse were Doctors, or Bachlers of
divinity, Civil, and Canon Law, deprived from their livings, and offering
themselves, either to voluntary banishment abroad, or to imprisonment and
disgrace at home, for maintenance of Catholic religion, to omit all the rest
of the lay sort, both of the Nobility, Gentry, and others, that stood openly to
the defense of the same Religion: All which did refuse to go to the
Protestant-seruice, even in those first days; which is testimony enough, to
convince the open, and notorious falsity of M. Attorneys assertion, that no
person of what persuasion soever in Christian religion, did at any time refuse
to go to Church: though I deny not, but that many other besides these,
throughout the Realm, though otherwise Catholics in heart (as most then
were) did at that time and after, as also now, either upon fear, or lack of
better instruction, or both, repair to Protestant-Churches; the case being
then not so fully discussed by learned men, as after it was, whether a man with
good conscience may go to the Church and service of a different Religion from
his own, which releiueth little M. Attorneys affirmation. And so this shall
suffice for the first point.

8. In the second point, being no less notoriously untrue then the first, he
offers the said Catholics much more injury, in affirming, that upon this
occasion of the Bull of Pius quintus against Q. Elizabeth they first refused to
go to the Church, as not holding her for true and lawful Queen: insinuating
thereby another consequence also, much more false and malicious then this, to
wit, that the same may be said and understood of Recusant Catholics at this
day, in respect of his Majesty that now is. But the untruth of this assertion
is most manifest, both by that we have showed before, that great multitudes of
Catholics refused even from the beginning to go to Protestant-Churches, See
the book entitled Reasons of Refusal.
though then the matter was not much urged against them; as also by this other
reason, for that their holding the Queen, for true, or unlawful, was, and is
impertinent to the matter of going to Church: Nay, their holding her for not
Queen (if any so did) did rather disoblige, then oblige them to this recusancy.

9. The reason heerof is, for that one principal cause binding them in
conscience not to go to the service of a different, or opposite religion to
their own, was the precept and commandment given by the said Queen, that
all should repair to the said service, to show their conformity etc. For that
the obeying of this precept in matters of religion (they offering themselves
otherwise to go to any Church for temporal matters) was a kind of public
denying their own faith: As for example; if in Persia at this day, or other
places of different Religion, Christians living there should of their own
curiosity go sometimes to the Churches or Moscies of that Country, to hear
and see only what is there done, though not to pray or worship; or (which is
less) should carry or wear their Turbant or Mohammedan habit, it were not so
great a matter of offense; but if the King, or Emperor should command the
same to be done in attestation of their conformity of religion, Consider well
this reason.
now this precept does make it much more unlawful, though yet if he were not
true King indeed, nor true magistrate that should make such a precept, but some
private man of his own authority; every man sees, that it would rather
diminish, then increase the obligation of recusancy, And so M. Attorney, when
he affirms that Catholics first began their recusancy of going to Church,
upon this persuasion that Queen Elizabeth was not lawful Queen, he alleges
circstuma^ce that might rather, in some sort, facilitate their going, then
increase their obligation to the same recusancy. For that her precept and
commandment binding them not at all, as not Queen, they were freed thereby
of that obligation, as before has been said, springing of this head of Royal
commandment.

10. This then is the first great injury, which M. Attorney offers unto
Recusant Catholics, interpreting their recusancy to be of malice and
treasonable hearts, rather then of band of conscience, Reports ^ol. 37.
which injury he often iterateth in the current of his discourse, saying after
many other accusations heaped together, in this sort: False and Injurious
calumniations.
In all this time, no law was either made, or attempted against them for their
recusancy, though it were grounded upon so disloyal a cause, as has been said.
And again a little after talking of the penal laws, made against them for the
same recusancy, he says: That it was a mild, and merciful law, considering
their former conformity, and the cause of their revolt. But I having showed
now, that there was no such general conformity before, and consequently no
revolt, and much less any such cause of revolt, as he faineth to himself; the
untruth of these charges, and the wrong done thereby to innocent men, is made
evident and manifest.

11. Neither does M. Attorneys exorbitant humor contain it self here, but
being once entered into the field of insolent inuectiues and exaggerations
against the said recusant Catholics, he vaunteth, and triumphs, as though
he had them under him at the bar ready to be condemned, where no man must
speak in their behalf, but himself only against them without reply, or
contradiction. And therefore after a long enumeration of matters both
impertinent, and little important to the cause in hand, he writes thus: fol.
3^.
And there upon Campian, Sherwyn, and many other Romish Priests being
apprehended and confessing that they came into England to make a party for the
Catholic cause, when need should require, Manifest slanderous untruths.
were in the 21. year of the said late Queens reign, by the ancient
Common-laws of England, indicted, arraygned, tried, adjudged, and executed for
high treason, etc. fol. 39.
And again not long after he makes this conclusion: By this, and by all the
Records of indictments, it appears that these Jesuits and Priests are not
condemned, and executed for their Priesthood and profession, but for their
treasonable, and damnable persuasions and practices, against the Crowns and
dignities of Monarchs, and absolute Princes. etc. Thus he.

12. But here I would ask, may not a man of his calling be ashamed, to put in
print so manifest untruths, even then, when there are so many hundreds yet
alive, The protestations M. Campian. Shervvyn and others at their deaths.
that were at the said arraignments, trials, condemnations, and deaths of the
said Blessed men, Campian, Sherwyn, and the rest, who not only protested on
their souls, and everlasting salvation at their last hour, to be guyltlesse
in all accusations laid against them, except only their Orders of Priesthood,
and profession of faith, but upon racks also stood thereunto, and defended the
same so clearly at the bar, with many reasons, proofs, and demonstrations,
as most of those that stood round about, and heard their Pleas, yea Protestants
also by name, did think certainly, when the Jury went forth to consult (and did
offer likewise to lay wagers thereon) that at least Father Campian, and his
company, the first day should have been quitted.

13. And as for the ancient common laws of England, whereby M. Attorney says
they were condemned, we have showed now often before, that this is but a word
of Course with him, and that there be no such Commo^-laws extant, not ever
were, or could be under Catholic Princes against Priests, before the breach
of King Henry the 8. and that this is but an Idaea Platonica of the Attorneys
invention, M. Attorneys Idaea Plat^nica of ancient Co^mon-lavves.
to cover and color matters withal: whose soul (truly) I do love so dearly,
as I would be very sorry he should entangle the same with the blood of those
godly men, that suffered before he came to age, to undergo that dangerous
burden of pleading against them. He may leave that charge to his Ancients,
especially to him, that had his office at that time, who being yet living (as I
suppose) has both that, and many other such heavy reckonings to answer for,
at the time appointed by the common Judge of all, whom I beseech most humbly
to facilitate that account unto him, and others interessed therein; as this also
of calumniating Recusant-Catholickes to M. Attorney, they being the only people
of that profession, that most ought to be pitied, and charitably dealt withal;
for that they suffer only for not dissembling in their consciences: which if
they would do, as the sin were damnable to themselves, so were it nothing
profitable or auailable to the State, or Prince, to have external conformity,
without inward consent, judgment, will, or love. And so much of the ground of
this first expostulation, pretermitting many other things, which might be
complained of, in this boisterous stream, and torrent of M. Attorneys
accusations against them.

14. And yet one thing more I may not pretermit, which is, to admonish his
conscience, if it have aures audiendi, hearing ears (which by our Saviors
speech appears that diverse consciences have not) to look to one special
obligation above the rest; which is, that having ended, and put in print this
his Book, and presented the same in person to his Majesty, A scruple ^f
con^^ie^ce vr^^d upon ^ Attor^ey.
and showed the principal drift, and parts thereof, and thereby made some
strong impressions against the said Recusant-Catholickes, as well appeared by
his said Majesty's speeches, and discourse that day at dinner, when the said
book was brought forth; his obligation (I say) is, (and this both in
conscience and honor) that finding himself now mistaken, ouershot, or deceived
in some of his said principal Reports, and principally in this about
Recusant-Catholicks, he is bound to present also this Answer to his said
Majesty, for manifestation of the truth, and releiuing the said Catholics of
the unjust accusations laid against them, as he did present his own book of
the said charge. And in this point I will remit me to the judgment, and
censure of the best, and most learned Deuines of all Christendom at this day,
either Protestants or Catholics, whether restitution of fame, justice, or
innocence violated by him, be not in this case necessarily to be made: Quia non
dimittitur peccatum, nisi restituatur ablatum.

15. As for example, if M. Attorney in presenting his book to his Majesty,
and laying open the same, did say, Lo Sir, here is all this rank of English
laws, to prove that the Kings of this land, did, and might from time to time,
take upon them Supreme spiritual jurisdiction, no less then Queen Elizabeth
did by peculiar Act of Parliament, in the first year of her reign: if he used
this or the like speech (as I have been informed that he did) and that now it be
proved, Untrue informations of M. Attorney unto his Majesty.
that no one of those laws nor al put together, do prove that Conclusion: and
if he affirmed moreover, that by the said ancient English-laws, whosoever did
not ascribe Supreme spiritual authority to Queen Elizabeth, did deny the
perfection of temporal Monarchy in her, and consequently were guilty of
treason, or Laesae Maiestatis, which no ancient English-law ever spoke, or
meant, but all the contrary.

16. If in like manner he told his Majesty (as he did) and made him believe
that it was true, that no person, of what persuasion soever in religion, did
refuse at any time, for the first eleven years of the Queens reign, to go to
the Church, and that, then their motive was, for that they held her not for
Queen: If these suggestions (I say) and assertions were then made, and lest
imprinted in the royal mind and memory of his majesty, and now are proved to
be far otherwise, I am content, as I said, to remit my self to any learned
Divine whatsoever, that knows what cases of Conscience do mean, to
determine what M. Attorneys obligation of restitution is in this behalf.

17. Neither may he solace himself (as I think he will not) in this point,
thinking that these are but venial sins for Purgatory, August. in Enchiridio
c. 67. 68. and 69. Lib. de fide and operibus c. 14. 15. 16. and Lib. 21. de
Ciuit. De^. c. 21. and in psalm. 80. and alibi.
and to be purged in the transitory fire, if he omit these restitutions: for
that S. Augustine in many places expressly excepteth and excludes the same, and
says that sins of this quality (committed against charity) are for
hellfire, and not for the transitory purging fire, if they be not amended and
satisfied for in this life: and to that sense interprets he the place of S.
Paul 1 Cor. 3. If any man buyld upon the foundation, which is Christ, not gold
and silver, but wood, straw, and chafe, his works shall burn, etc. And thus
much of this first expostulation.

THE SECOND EXPOSTVLATION In the behalf of all English Catholics in
general.. II.
18. As the former expostulation was in the name of Recusant-Catholickes
especially, for that the charge most concerned them in particular; so now am I
to adioyne some few lines more in behoof of all Catholics in general, that
prosesse, or defend the said religion by word, or pen, either at home, or
abroad, whom M. Attorney accuses in his Preface not only of Error, and of
her inseparable twynn, Ignorance: (to use his phrase) but of intolerable, and
miserable malice also, if it were true, as it is not, to wit, Supra in Praefat.
that they impugn the known truth against their own consciences, and this
either upon coffeehouse for not attaining their ambitious and unjust
desires, or for deserved punishments and disgraces, justly laid upon them by
the State for their vices and wickedness. False causes devised of Catholics
constancy.
To which unjust and uncharitable charge, though I have answered somewhat
before in the Preface, and first Chapter of this book; yet do I remember to
have made promise also in that place to say somewhat more in this, for giving
satisfaction in that behalf to all charitable and indifferent people,
especially in this point, that our standing out against the current of the
present time (to use M. Attorneys phrase) is not either of so gr^sse ignorance
and lack of instruction, as he would have men to believe by his often
repetition thereof (and so I presume will in part appear by this our answer
to his Book) or of ambitious desires frustrated, which Catholic English men
of all other sorts of people, can best be content, and have best learned by
their sufferings in these our days to moderate, and lay aside, so that i^
other points their consciences were not racked, galled, and molested: and
finally much less of punishments, and disgraces received from the Sat for
their vices, and wickedness: in which Kind it may be auerred (I ween) by good
records, that fewer have been, and are punished for those causes, then of any
other sort of men, or religion whatsoever.

19. Wherefore laying aside all passion, and animositie of part-taking and
sincerely to join frank issue with M. Attorney in this point; we say and
affirm, out of the testimony of a good conscience in the sight of him that
sees all hearts and cogitations, that his accusations and charges are false in
this behalf, and that our only stay and stopp from not running with him, and
others, in this their prosperous Current of the present time, is the bar of
conscience only, Only conscience stays Catholics from follovving M.
Attorneys current.
which if we could remove, or he for us, who would not be glad to take part
of so fair and pleasing fortunes, as he and others enjoy by that Current. And
we might also, every man in his degree and rank, according to the merit,
quality, talent, and industry of each one of us, enjoy our parts thereof, if
this obstacle of conscience were not: or if the only fear, and dread of
almighty God, and his judgment, did not terrify us from breaking through the
same by violence of will, against the testimony of our said consciences and
judgment.

20. The same God also does know, how great a grief it has been, and is unto
us in respect of the world, that we have not been able to conform our selves
in these external things, concerning the profession of our religion, unto the
judgment, taste, and will of our temporal Prince and State, being withholden
and terrified from it, by those two known threats of our Savior, and his
Apostle; the one telling us, Luc. 12. Romans 2.
that if we deny, we shall be denied; the other, that our consciences must
be the sole witnesses to condemn, or deliver us at the last day, which
consciences we finding to repine and resist, are forced to hearken unto them
now, to the end they may stand for us and not against us at that day.

21. And if the judgment of ancient Christian writers, and Fathers, and
namely Eusebius in the life of our Constantine the Great, Eus^b. l. 1. c. 11.
histo. Eccles.
that lived with him, was good in commending so highly his Father Co^sta^tius,
for that being yet a Pagan, he more esteemed those Christians throughout his
government, The judgment of Constantius touching such as dissembled in religion.
that professed freely their religion, and refused to do against the same at
his commandment, then he did the other that dissembled, and obaied, and
thereupon he rejected the one, and favored the other, as more sincere people,
and more to be trusted by him, that were so trusty, and faithful to their
God, and his religion: if this (I say) were a good censure and judgment, I do
not see, how this other of M. Attorney can stand upon any ground of reason, or
Christian charity, that qualifieth so greiuously, or rather calumniateth so
egregiously the religious standing of Catholic people, in the moderate
defense, and excuse of their said consciences.

22. But here perhaps he may demand, or some body for him, what great
reasons we have for this obstacle of our judgment, for not conforming it to
his, and others in this behalf. Whereunto, though sufficiently has been
alleged before in the Answer to his Preface; yet now may some two or three
points, or considerations be further added in confirmation thereof, among
almost infinite that might be produced. Some points of consideration.
And the first may be that which hitherto we have treated in this book with
M. Attorney, concerning the continuance of that religion for which we stand,
throughout the whole race, and course of our Christian English-Princes, State,
and Realm, from the beginning of our first conversion, unto our time. All
which Kings and Queens, Counselors, Nobility, Archbishops, Bishops, Doctors,
Universities, Lawyers, and Sages of all sorts, were for so many ages by one,
and the self-same religion, profession, and belief, directed and saved, if
any were saved: that is to say, by the selfsame means, doctrine and Sacraments
of our ancient Catholic English Church continuing until K. Henry 8. time
which Church professed the very same faith and belief in like manner, as in
another special The book of three co^uersions.
book has been declared, whereby all other Christian nations had been directed
and saved, for those other ages, which went before our English conversion after
Christ's assension.

23. New then this being so, I would ask any reasonable indifferent
Englishman, whether we have just cause to stand in, and for this religion or
not, and whether if himself were now ready to die (for that is the time, when
men do judge with less passion) and had laid before his eyes the everlasting
joys of heaven on the one side, and the eternal pains of hell on the other,
to be lost, or gained, by his election; whether (I say) he would adventure
rather to go in company and join himself with this large, and venerable
body of old English Catholics, among whom there are recorded by histories
to have been so many admirable men, both for learning, An important
deliberation.
, wisdom and sanctitye of life; or leaving these to take part, and receive
his portion with such later people of the same nation, as have divided
themselves from the other. And when M. Attorney in good probability of reason,
shall substantiallie answer me this demand, it may doubtless be a great
motive unto me, and others to draw us to the current of this present time; but
in the mean space we must stand fast, least we fall into the torrent of
brimstone, if we go against our consciences, by which we must be judged,
and every man damned, or saved thereby, as out of the Apostles testimony
before has been declared. Romans 2.


24. And thus much for standing in our old religion. Now for passing to a new,
there is another obstacle also, that greatly withholdeth us, and this is, that
when we shall have left this old religion, so begun, so established, so
confirmed, so promised by God to endure to the worlds end, so generally
received, so vniuersalli-continued, as has been declared, we cannot tell to
what other sort, sect, or part of religion to pass with any probable
security, or certeynty at all, why we should rather adhere to one sect then
to another. For when once we lea^^ the said Catholic religion, so grounded,
as you have seen, there is no one substantial reason a part rei, No
substa^tiall reason can be alleged why we should rather be of one religion
then of an other.
that can be assigned by any man living, never so learned, why he should
more, or rather follow one part, profession, sect, or new opinion then
another. As for example, if to a man that upon any offense, disgust, scandal,
error, anger, interest, leuity, or the like, (for these are the ordinary
motives of changes) breaks from the ancient Catholic Romain religion;
there should represent themselves unto him five or six of the principal newest
sects, and sorts, that profess different religions in our time (all under the
name of the Gospel) as namely of Lutheranes, either ridged or soft, of
Anabaptists, Trinitarians, new Arrians, Zwinglians, Cal^^nists of both sorts,
to wit Puritans and other: (all which have their different positions,
professions, articles, faiths, Churches, conuenticles, in these our days) and
if he should demand of five or six distinct Doctors of these new-ghospellers,
what substantial reason, or infallible ground they can allege wherewith to
persuade him, that he ought to take their particular parts, or be of their
several sects, the one above the other; or why themselves, and each one of them,
is rather of the one sect, then of the other, seeing all profess gospel, and
scriptures: In this case (I say) they can yield him no other reason but this,
that each man assures himself, that he, and his part do allege, and
understand the scriptures better then the rest, which depending only (as you
see) upon the private judgment, and persuasion of each one in particular (for
other proofs he ca^ bring none, except the stand upon assurance of his
particular spirit, which every one of the other sects will do in like manner)
it brings no assurance at all, being only founded upon each man's opinion,
choice, and election, The definition of heretics.
which properly is heresy: for that heretics (as ancient Fathers do
define) are nothing else but choosers, who leaving the universal rule of faith
delivered unto them by tradition of the common Church, do choose unto themselves
several paths, and opinions to follow.

25. Whereas then, no ground at all can be yielded by any reason, wit, or
learning of man, why we should be rather of one new profession then another,
after we have left the old received throughout Christendom, and that in the
old, we stand not ech-man upon his particular judgment to believe this or
that, No ground or stay in sects or new opinions.
but upon the general testimony, tradition, voice, use, and authority of the
universal Christian Church called Catholic, (as August. contra Epistolam
Fu^dom. cap^ 4. Cyrill Ca^ech. 1^.
S. Augustine and others say) not only by her friends and followers, but also
by her enemies: this being so (I say) we have great cause to look before we
leap, as the proverb is, and to consider well where we shall land, or how we
shall come to shore, before we leave the shipp wherein we are, or do
adventure into M. Attorneys new Current, or any other, that has no stay, but
may carry us further with the stream, then we can stay our selves
afterward, when we would. And thus much of this consideration.

26. A third is (which also shall be the last in this place) that terrifieth
us no less, then any of the former two, and this is the name and dreadful
voice of heresy, sect, or schism, so common now in these our days, and so
ordinary in every man's mouth; as each one of different opinions, esteems the
other for Heretic, Sectarie, or Schismatike; which notwithstanding, if we
consider the course, and sacred sense of holy scripture, especially for the
new testament, as also the judgment, feeling and meaning of all ancient
Fathers, How great and grievous the sin of heresye is.
and of the whole primitive Christian Church in their days; we shall find to
be the most greiuous accusation, most odious, dangerous, and damnable
imputation to be accoumpted an heretic or sectary, that can possibly be
imagined or laid upon any Christian in this life; yea that all other crimes
laid together, which by man's malice, or diabolical induction can be
committed, are not equal to this only crime of heresy: for so do all
learned Catholic Deuines hold and determine in their general positions of
this matter, as may be seen in one for all, in the Sum of S. Thomas, ^.
Thom. ^2. q. 10. ^^. 6.
where setting down first that infidelity against God (which is the highest
crime of all other) has three kinds, or members under it, Paganism, Iudaisme,
and Heresy, the said Doctor making the question, which of these three is the
greatest sin, determines upon very substantial grounds and reasons, that
albeit in some respects, to wit, in regard of the greater multitude of
Christian articles which Pagans and Jews do deny more them heretics do:
yet in malice, which makes the principal point of sin, and draws on more
grievous damnation, heresy is a greater infidelity, then is, either
Paganism, or Iudaisme, and consequenly more damnable; which I leave here to
prove, and confirm out of the conformity of holy scriptures, Tit. 4.
as that of S. Paul to Titus: that an heretical man is subverted and damned by
his own judgment, and other such places. It is sufficient for settling our
dread and fear in this behalf, that the whole consent of Schoole-Doctors,
upon this alleged article of S. Thomas., do agree, that it is more
dangerous and damnable to fall into heresy, then to be a Jew, or Pagan.

27. With which severity of Censure, do concur also fully the ancient
Fathers of the Primitive Christian Church, whose sentences were o^erlonge to
cite in this place, but you may see a short view thereof gathered together
upon another occasion, in a certain In the beginning of both the Examens of
Fox his Calendar.
book lately set forth, where the consenting words of the most principal
said ancient Doctors are laid together, affirming that who soever by schism
or heresy is cut of from the faith and co^mmunio^ of the general known
Catholic Church, is most certainly to be damned, and cannot be saved,
though he should otherwise live never so well, pray never so much, give never
so great alms, have never so god inte^tio^ other wise; yea though he should
offer his life, shed his blood and suffer never so many torments for Christ,
his name, love, and religion.

28. This then being so and adjoining yet further to this consideration,
another general position of our said learned Deuines which is, as the foresaid
renowned Doctor S. Thomas sets it down, that whosoever in any one least
article of Catholic religion, does run into heresy, or beleiueth not the
said article, as he should do, D. Thom. 22. quast. 5. art. 3.
but obstinately rather impugneth the same, he leeseth his whole faith not,
only in that point which he discrediteth, but in all other points also, which
he believed before, and persuadeth himself to believe still: this (I say)
being so, which the said learned Schole-Doctor proves by evident arguments,
and demonstratiue grounds to be true, M. Attorney may imagine, what stay and
repugnance we may have out of the fear of our consciences in this behalf,
easily to make new choice, or changes of religion in these days. For as if a
learned, and experie^ced Physician should come, and show out of ancient
reading, that there were a Kind of most deadly, and dreadful sort of plague,
or Epidemia to be feared, and fled above all the rest when it comes, for that
no hope of life, or escape can be given from it; A similitude to be weighed
and considered.
and that withal he should affirm, that now the said plague, began to be
common in such and such places, yea so common, as many men did contemn it and
make it but a jest, though all perished with it that fell into it; as in this
case (I say) wise-me^ would look about them, hearing that so pestilent and
perilous infectio^ were on foot in their days: so much more in this other
infection of the soul, leading most certainly to everlasting death and
damnation (as all the most learned spiritual Physicians of Christ's holy Church
have ever taught us) have we reason to be careful, timorous and vigilant what
we do, and what change we make, whither we go, and from whence we depart,
the saying of S: Athanasius being so dreadful, in his Creed, Athanas. in
Symbol^.
that whosoever does not believe, and hold the Catholic faith wholly and
entirely, absque dubio in aeternum peribit, shall without all doubt perish
everlastingly.

29. And S. Augustine after him, having set down unto his friend
Quod-vult-Deus a catalogue of the most chief and known heresies, August. lib.
^^^^^esi u^ (...) Quod. (...) Deum
and erroneous opinions, noted against heretics from the Apostles time to his
days (whereof diverse are expressly raised again by new gospellers in these our
times, as there you may see, in that he writes of Aerius, Aetius, Iouinian,
Vigilantius, and others) he comes lastly to affirm and conclude in the end
of that book, ^ severe ^^ntence (...) Augustine a^^^lt the (...) heresies that
^ay be.
that as it is damnable to hold any one of those heresies there by him set
down; so was it not sufficient to salvation to be free only from those, for
that there might be other opinions discrepant also from the Catholic
belief, lurking in corners which he had not heard of: and moreover there
might other new spring up from time to time: Q^^rum aliqua^ (says he)
quisquis tenuerit, Christianus Catholicus esse non potest: Of which; whosoever
shall hold any one (and let us mark any one) he cannot be a Christian
Catholic, and consequently cannot be saved in S. Augustines judgment.

30. And for so much as now in all this controversy between M. Attorney and
us, we have showed his opinions and assertions to be so different from those
of all our English Christian Commonwealth, from the beginning unto our times,
which we on the other side have showed to be truly Catholic, and common to
the whole Christian world besides; all men of indifferency will consider, what
reason we have in making such stay as we do, from passing lightly to his
Current, and how little reason he has, or had to charge us so deeply and
injuriously, that our stay was upon so evil and odious causes, as before he
charged us. And thus much of this second expostulation.

THE THIRD EXPOSTVLATION, In the name of all moderate and peace-louing subjects
whatsoever.. III.
31. My third complaint or expostulation with M. Attorney is yet more general,
as concerning not only all sorts of Catholics whatsoever, but other men in
like manner of any profession in Christian religion that are wise, moderate,
peaceable, and desirous of the tranquillity of the Prince and State where they
live, who out of their prudence, easily do foresee, cannot but incur danger
of perturbation by immoderate exasperation of minds, The perils that arise by
the insolency of some private men.
when particular men (otherwise not loved but rather hated, or enuyed for their
extraordinary fortunes, riches, and aduauncements) do pass to such
insolency of speech and beuauiour, as they seek to draw whole multitudes
into disgrace and danger, by unjust oppresion. We know, and may remember out
of our histories, what general exulceratio^ of hearts have risen in former
years against Huberts de Burgo, Gauestons, Spe^cers, Mortimers, Veares,
Scroops, Catesbies, Ratcliffes, Louels, Empsons, Dudleys, and other upon like
occasions, for that they were thought, or suspected to incite the Prince under
whom they lived, to the undeserved hurts and ruins of many others.

32. And surely what M. Attorney has performed, or attempted in this
behalf, partly by his injurious speeches at the bars where he pleads,
partly by this his Book, and other means, against so great a multitude of his
Majesty's Subjects, as the Catholic party and their well-willers are, both
at home and abroad; is not heard to consider: for so much, as he makes their
very belief, or act of understanding, Men brought into despair forget all
reason and duty.
which lies not in their hands to alter at their pleasure, to be disloialtie
and treason (as before has been showed) and consequently that against their
wills they must be traitors. Whereof ensues again another consequence worse
then this, which is, that when men see themselves urged, egged, and pressed in
matters that lie not in their own hands to remedy, and this also as they
persuade themselves, not so much by the inclination of the Prince, as by the
importunity and insolency of others, that being wanton with wealth, delight
themselves in other men's vexations; this persuasion (I say) when once it
enters into the head of multitudes in any commonwealth, drives men to
extreme impatience, and utter despair of redress; the only remedy whereof, is
none other, but to prevent the occasion it self.

33. And (truly) it may be probably hervpon inferred (and so it is also thought
of diverse at home and abroad) that this Book of Reports of M. Attorneys
coming forth at the time when it did, and beating to the end, which before we
have seen, presented also particularly to his Majesty, The exul^^ration (...)
M. Attorneys book.
as has been said, and much praised by the same, accompanied also at that time
with no small multitude of other afflictions laid upon the Catholic people,
throughout all parts of our Realm, and many more threatened, and expected
daily by them: this (I say) together with the circumstance of the
authorsperson, eyed greatly for his extraordinary wealth and ouerflowing
fortunes, might be some cause of furthering of this late most dangerous and
lamentable attempt in our own Country, so greatly noysed, and talked of at
his day, throughout the Christian world.

34. Wherefore the sum of this my expostulation with M. Attorney is, that he
being otherwise a wise, and learned man (as in his profession I take him to
be, by his preferments) and not insolent, or cruel by nature (as willingly I
incline to believe) would at such a time, as he saw so great a multitude of
Catholic people greiuously afflicted for their religion, come forth with so
odious and new drift against them, A pro^^ise not ^^^forma^le.
as this is, adding affliction to the afflicted, and endeavoring to prove
against them that which he neither has done, nor ever will be able; to wit,
that the very profession of their religion implies disloyalty to their
temporal King and Prince. Which thing, albeit some other lighter companions,
leuioris armaturae milites, ministers (to wit) of diverse sorts, have not
sticked injuriously to cast out: yet for a man of M. Attorneys place and rank,
to affirm it so seriously, and to promise also Demonstratiue proofs thereof, by
the ancient Common-laws of our Realm, was a matter of far more impression,
and must needs work more dangerous, and greiuous exulceration of minds, which
is the ordinary effect of such insolency and importunities.

35. Well (gentle Reader) I will entertain thee no longer with these
expostulations to M. Attorney, and others, that by his authority and example,
have, or may urge the like odious argument: Whereof some already have begun to
tread his stepps, not only by suggesting and urging that which so hurtefullie
was suggested to K. Roboam, against the bearing somewhat with his afflicted
people, 3. Regu^. 12.
but also by urging, and exulcerating other odious points, that drive to
desperation, as before has been said: and consequently I must needs conclude
with the saying of the Prophet, against such makers of division: Vae ij^ qui
dispergunt: Isa. 13. The danger and damage of disperso^
woe be to them that do disperse and divide, to wit, the sheep from their
shepherd, the children from their father, the people from their Prince, the
subjects from their King, and one sort of subjects from the other; whereas all
were to be held together, tolerated, suffered, united, entertained,
cherished, and comforted as much as may be, for that in the multitude, love,
union and affection of the subjects, stands the riches, wealth, strength
comfort, honor, and security of the Prince, as all men will confess.

36. And with this will I end all this whole discourse and Answer of mine to
M. Attorney, The final Conclusion of the whole.
beseeching almighty God, that it may work that effect with him, and others,
for their true light and understanding in the controversy we have in hand,
which is necessary for their, and our eternal good: for I am contented to
leave for my last words of this book those, wherewith M. Attorney thought best
to end also his, which are: That miserable is his case, and worthy of pity,
that has been persuaded before he was instructed, and now will refuse to be
instructed because (...) will not be persuaded.

FINIS.
Faults escaped in the Printing.
Page 12. lin. 38. for axagg^ration Read exaggeration. Page 17. lin. vlt. for
circumfetence read circumference. Page 20. l^n. 3. for know read known. Page
26. lin. 14. Medi^ation read Mediation. Page 36. lin. 9. in some copyes Pater
nu^c read Pater tuus. Page 40. lin. 2. for sun read sum. Ibid. lin. 3. for
is read as. Page 47. lin. 24. Ruland shire read Rutland-shire. Page 52. lin. 7.
for is read it. Page 54. lin. 5. Canoinst read Canonist. Page 65. lin. 13. for
Orae read Oro. Page 66. lin. 17. for some read son. Page 73. lin. 13. purpose
all add at all. Page 74. lin. 38. we are profess add to profess. Page 75.
lin. 23. for excude read exclude. Page 82. lin. 34. for the in Church read in
the Church. Page 85. lin. 6. for be being read he being. Page 86. lin. 39. for
preath read preach. Page 99. lin. 22. for the Rome read to Rome. Page 100. lin.
36. for hea-magistrate read heathen magistrate. Page 102. lin. 4. that the
vvrote read that he wrote. Page 109. lin. 24. for precedessors read
predecessors. Page 117. lin. 12. for religions read Religious. Page 118. lin.
14. for men desires read men's desires. Page 122. lin. 33. for quetting read
quietting. Page 129. lin. 11. for endevving read endowing. Page 152. lin. 12.
for Tyrus read Cyrus. Page 168. lin. 31. own his words read his own words,
Page 177. lin. 25. for bad read had. Page 191. lin. vlt. in some copyes, for
hape read have. Page 208. lin. 39. for s^ruiued read suruiued. Page 209. lin.
10. for her read his. Page 225. lin. 20. for the read she. Page 229. lin. 26.
for aginst read against. Page 254. lin. 36. has said add has been said. Page
270. lin. 26. for my read any. Page 275. lin. 10. for pecular read peculiar.
Ibid. lin. 22. for thera^ut read therabout. Page 278. lin. 35. for began read
begun.

In the Margentes.
Page 17. for controsies read controversies. Page 85. for lavvoy read laws.
Page 146. for had read bad. Page 383. for Castus read Calixtus. Page 180. for
25. read 35. Page 132. for having read reigning.

It may please thee (gentle Reader) of thy curtesy to pardon these, and other
like faults (if any shall be found) and consider with thy self the
difficultyes we have in using the help of strangers herin.

A TABLE OF THE PARTICVLAR MATTERS CONTAINED IN THIS BOOK.
A.
ABbyes and Monasteryes founded in England by Religious Catholic Princes.
Cap. 6. a number. 37. vsque ad number. 49. Abbey of Euesham privileged from Rome.
cap. 6. number. 42. Abbey of S. Albans founded by K. Offa. cap. 6. number. 43. The
privileges and exemptions of the same. ibid. Abbey of Glastensbury privileged
by Pope John the thirtenth. cap. 6. number. 45. Abbey of Westminster privileged
at the petition of K. Edward the Confessor. cap 6. number. 47. and 48. Abbot of
Waltham punished, and why? cap. 12 number 29. and 32. Absurdityes of
Statute-decrees in Parliament about spiritual power given to secular Princes.
cap. 3. n. 6.7.18.19.20. 21. 22. 23. and 24. Absurdity of a woman's Supremacy in
spiritual matters. cap. 4. number. 27. Absolution of K. Henry the second by the
Popes Legates. cap. 9. nu 12 and 13. S. Adelmus Bishop of Sherborne his voyage
to Rome. cap. 6. number. 40. His book of Virginity. ibid. n. 42. Adelnulph King
of England his confirmation of Peter Pence to Rome cap 6. number. 71. Agreement
between the Pope and K. of England about Provisions of Ecclesiastical
dignityes in England, cap. 12. number. 12. and 39. S. Ambrose his judgment of
spiritual power. cap. 2. n 25. and 26. His combattes and conflictes with the
Emperor and Empress about Church-affayres. ibid. n. 27.28. and 29.
Ancient-Fathers directions how to find out truth. cap. 1 n. 17. and 18. Their
freedom of speech to Emperors. cap. 4. n. 4. 5. and 6. S. Anselme Archbishop
of Canterbury his commendations. cap. 8. number. 2. His pall brought from Rome by
the Popes Legate. ibid. number. 4. His plain dealing with K. William Rufus. ibid.
number. 5. His reconciliation with K Henry the first. ibid. number. 11. Appellations
to Rome about Controversies that fell out in England. cap. 6. n. 49. 50. and
deinceps. Appeal of K. Henry the second to the Pope, about the controversy of
the death of S. Thomas of Canterbury. cap. 9. n. 11. Appeals from K. Richard
the first, to the Pope. cap. 9. number. 23. Appeal of Richard Archbishop of
Canterbury to Rome against K. Henry the third, cap. 10. number. 17. Archbishop of
Canterbury accused to the Pope by K. Edward the first. cap. 11. number. 16.
Archbishop of Canterbury deprived of spiritual Jurisdiction by Q. Elizabeth.
cap. 11. number. 30. Archbishop of York put to death by commandment of King
Henry the fourth. cap. 15. number 23. Arguments of K. Henry the 8. against Luther
for the Popes Supremacy. cap. 15. number. 5. 6.7. and deinceps. Assertions of
Protestants, and the foundation thereof. Prefac. number. 7. S. Athanasius his
severe reprehension of the Emperor Constantius. cap. 4. number. 8. M. Attorney
his imagined ignorance. cap. 1. number. 12. His condemnation of
controuersy-wryters, ibid. number. 26.27.28. and 29. His time of study in law.
ibid. n. 34. His absurd propositions and arguments refuted. cap. 3. per totum,
and deinceps per totum librum His arguments and shifts returned upon himself.
cap. 4. number. 9 and 12. His new devise to make Ecclesiastical laws the Kings
laws. ibid. number. 13. and 14. M. Attorney challenged. cap. 6. n. 28. Iniuryes
offered by him to many in this his book cap. 16. per totum His false charge of
Catholics. ibid. number. 2. His injurious and slanderous calumniations. ibid.
number 10. His manifest and notorious untruths. ibid. number. 11. His Idaea
Plaetonica of ancient comon-lawes. ibid. number. 13. His false information of his
Majesty that now is. ibid. number 15. and 16. His promise not performeable. ibid.
number. 34. S. Augustines severe sentence against heretics and heresies. cap.
16. n. 29. S. Augustine of Canterbury his successors by appointment from Rome.
cap. 6. number. 20. Authority spiritual and temporal, and the difference thereof.
cap. 2. n. 4. and 5. Authority Episcopal greater then Imperial. cap. 2. number.
25. Authority spiritual given unto Q Elizabeth by Parliament. cap. 3. number. 3.
The absurdityes and inconveniences thereof ensuing. ibid. number. 4. and 5.
Authority of Bishops Courts, from whence it is derived. cap. 13. number 17.
Authority of English Prelates, when England was Catholic. cap. 14. n. 17.
B.
Bastardy a let or hinderance to Priesthood. cap. 14. number. 19. S. Benedict of
Northumberland his voyage to Rome for privileges of his monastery. cap. 6.
number. 39. Benefices collated by laymen. cap. 7. number. 26. and 29. S. Bertulph
his monastery privileged from Rome cap. 6. number. 39. Bigamy. cap. 11. number. 30.
and 31. A statute thereof by K. Edward the first ibidem. Doubts therabout raised
in England. ibid. number. 31. and 32. Bishops made in England by the Popes
authority. cap. 6. number. 21. and 22. Bishops lands seized into the Kings
hands, and why? cap. 11. number. 28. Bishops how they might be punished for not
admitting the Kings just presentation. cap. 11. number. 29. Bishop of Hereford
taken from the bar of secular Court, by Ecclesiastical authority. cap. 11.
number. 46. Bishops and Prelates of England sent to the Council of Constance in
Germany. cap. 13. number. 6. Bishops how they may be called the Kings spiritual
Judges. cap. 13. n. 8. Bishops Courts from whence they have their authority.
cap. 13. number. 17. Bishops how far they may be commanded by the King. cap.
13. number 18. Birthright of laws. c. ^. n. 18.22. and 23. Birthright of
Englishmen is Catholic Religion. cap. 1. number. 26. Bodies to the King, and
souls to the Priest. cap. 4. number. 5. Book of K. Henry the 8. against Luther
in defense of the seven Sacraments. cap. 15. number. 3.4. and 5. Breach of King
John with the Sea Apostolic, and occasion thereof. cap. 9. number. 57. Breach of
K. Henry the 8. with Pope Clement the 7. and how the same began. cap. 15. number.
4.5.6. and 7. Bulls from Rome not admitted in England, except they came
certified from some Prelate at home, and why? cap. 12. number. 28. and cap. 13.
number. 27.
C.
Calixtus the Pope his meeting with Henry the first in Normandy, cap. 8. n.
14. Campian, and his fellow-martyrs protestations at their death, cap. 16. number.
12. Canon-lawes, how they were received in England. cap. 14. number. 17. Canutus
K. of England his confirmation of Peter Pence to Rome. cap. 6. n. 72.
Catholic Religion the birthright of Englishmen cap. 1. number. 26. Catholics
falsely charged by M. Attorney. cap. 16. number. 2.3 and deinceps.
Catholicke-Recusants from the beginning of Q. Elizabeth's reign. cap. 16. number.
7. Catholics falsely accused of inconstancy. cap. 16. number. 18. Caudrey the
Clerk his case. cap. 3. per totum. Causes of K. Henry the 8. his falling out
and breach with the Sea Apostolic. cap 15. number. 1.2. and 3. Ceadwalla K. of
the VVestsaxons his pilgrimage to Rome. cap. 6. number. 83. His baptism there and
death. ibid. Celestine Pope his letters to the Realm of England. in absence of
K. Richard the first, cap. 9. number. 33. Charters for Church-priuiledges before
the Conquest and after, cap. 5. number. 2. 3. and 4. and deinceps. and cap. 8.
number. 23. The beginning of the Great-charter under K. Henry the third, cap. 10.
number. 6. Church-libertyes confirmed by K. Richard the second. cap. 12. number. 43.
S. Chrysostomes judgment of spiritual power, cap. 2. number. 21.22.23. and 24.
Civil wars in England under King Henry the third. cap. 10. number. 12.
Clergymen subject to the Civil Magistrate in temporal affairs, cap. 2. number.
33. and 34. But not in spiritual. ibid. number. 35. Clergie-mens persons exempted
from secular power. cap. 2. number. 26. and 37. Clerks ever exempted from
temporal Judges. cap. 15. number. 20. Collations of benefices by laymen, cap. 7.
number. 26. and 29. Comparison between Catholic sand Sectaryes, cap. 1. number. 13.
and 14. Commodityes or discommodityes of municipall laws, cap. 1. number. 20.
Comon-lawes birthright, cap. 1. number. 22. and 23. Complaints against strangers
beneficed in England, cap. 10. number. 21.22. 23. and deinceps. Remedies sought to
the Pope therefore. ibid. number. 23. Controuersy-wryters condemned by M. Attorney,
and why? cap. 1. number. 26.27. 28. and 29. Controuersy-writers against their
conscience, cap. 1. nu. 32. and who they be. ibid. number. 35. Constantius the
Emperor reprehended by Bishops. cap. 4. number. 6.7. and 8. Confirmation of
Church libertyes in England by diverse Kings before and after the Conquest.
cap. 5. number. 7. and deinceps. and Cap. 8. n. 23. Conquest of Wales by K.
Edward the first, cap. 11. number. 9. Conversion of diverse Kingdoms in England
one after the other. cap. 6. number. 15. Condemnation of Protestants doctrine by
K. Henry the eight, cap. 15. n. 15. and 16. Conscience the cause that
Catholics follow not M. Attorneys current, cap. 16. number. 19. and 20.
Constantius the Emperor his judgment touching such as dissembled in Religion.
cap. 16. number. 20. Council of Constance in Germany. cap. 13. number. 6. English
Prelates sent thither, ibid. Courts spiritual and temporal, and their
difference. ca 4. nu. 11. and deinceps. Courts spiritual superior to
temporal. ca. 10. number. 30. Cranmer the first heretical Archbishop of
Canterbury. ca. 15. nu. 32. Burnt at Oxford for his heresies. ibid. Crosses
erected by K. Edward the first. ca. 11. number. 6. Crown of England not subject
to any in temporalityes. ca. 12. nu. 48.
D.
Decrees and Ordinances of Pope Formosus for the Church of England. ca. 6. number.
59. Decree against Bigamy. ca. 11. nu. 31. Decree of Pope Gregory the ninth
about proceeding against heretics, ca. 13. number 14. Decrees of K. Henry the
eight his breach with the Sea Apostolic, ca. 15. number. 11. and 12. Despair
causes forgetfulness of all reason and duty: and why? ca. 16. n. ^2.
Demonstrations before the Conquest against secular Princes Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction in England, cap. 6. per totum Deposition of Stigand Archbishop of
Canterbury, ca. 7. number. 9. Difference of Courts, and what it proves, ca. 4.
number. 11. Difference of laws, and lawmakers before the Conquest. ca. 6. number.
^. Difference of Courts show difference of origin and authority. ca. 11. nu.
50. Directions of ancient Fathers how to find out Truth. ca. 1. nu. 17. and
18. Dispensations of most importance procured alvvayes from Rome, cap. 6. number.
^4. and 35. Dissension betvveene Protestants and Puritans, and why? Prefac. n.
18. and 19. Dissimulation in Religiou how dangerous, cap. 16. number. 20. Doubts
raised in England concerning bygamy, cap. 11. number. 32.
E.
Ecclesiastical laws, made to be the Kings laws by M. Attorney. cap. 4.
nu. 13. and 14. Ecclesiastical weighty matters always referred to Rome by
our English Kings, cap. 6. number. 19. Edgar K. of England his speech for the
reformation of the Clergy, cap. 6. number. 87. and 88. His piety and devotion
toward the Sea of Rome, ibid. S. Edmund Archbishop of Canterbury threatens
K. Henry the third if he obayed not, cap. 10. number. 37. K Edward the Confessor
his confirmation of Peter Pence to Rome, cap. 6. number. 73. K. Edward the first
surnamed Long-shanke, cap. 11. number. 3. His devotion, ibid. number 4. His works
of piety, ibid. His Conquest of Wales, ibid. number. 9. His mutability in keeping
Church-priuiledges. ibid. number. 11. His violent proceeding against the Clergy,
ibid. number 12. and 13. His ever obedience to the Sea of Rome in mere spiritual
things, ibid. number. 14. and 17. His devotion toward the first Pope in Auinion
in France, ibid. number. 16. His accusation of the Archbishop of Canterbury to the
Pope, ibid. number. 16. His laws in prejudice of the Clergy, ibid. number. 21. K.
Edward the second his evil success of marriage in France, cap. 11. n. 41. K.
Edward the third his restraints against the Clergy of England, cap. 12. number. 1.
and 2. His punishment for the violence used toward the Church, cap. 12. nu.
2.3.39. and 40. Motives that induced him thereto, ibid. number. 3. His great
embassage to the Pope, ib. number. 7. His protestation for obedience to the Sea of
Rome for himself and his, cap. 12. number. 8. His disordinate life, ibid. number.
41. K. Edward the fourth his reign over England, cap. 14. number. 1.2.3. and
deinceps. K. Edward the sixth his reign, cap. 15. number. 26. His Supremacy of
the Church of England declared by the Protector his uncle, ibid. S. Egwyn
Bishop of Worcester his monastery of Euesham, cap. 6. number. 42. His voyage to
Rome, ibid. and nu. 79. Elections of Bishops 4. kinds. cap. 7. number. 32.
Eminency of spiritual power above temporal, cap. 2. number. 19. England made
tributary to Rome, cap 6. number. 67. and cap. 9. number. 62.63. and 64. Entrance
into England denied to the Popes Legates, and why? cap. 14. n. 13. and 15.
Error what it is, and how it extends it self, cap. 1. per totum. Error how
it differs from Ignorance, cap. 1. number. 8. and 9. Euesham-Abbey in
VVorcester-shire builded by S. Egwyn, cap. 6. number. 42. The same privileged
from Rome, ibidem. Eustachius K. Stephens son, his violence used against
Clergymen of York, cap. 8. number. 35. Excommunications practiced by the
Apostles, cap. 2. number. 15. Exemption of Clergymen from secular power ex iure
diuino, cap. 2. number. 37. Item by Imperial laws, ibid. n. 38 By particular
Kings and Princes, ib. number. 39. Exemptions granted by diverse Popes to pious
works in England before the Conquest. cap. 5. number. 10. Expostulations with
M. Attorney, about iniuryes offered to many, in his book of Reports, cap. 16.
per totum. Exulteration of M. Attorneys book of Reports, cap. 16. number. 33.
F.
Father Campian, and his fellovv-martyrs injured by M. Attorney, cap. 16. n.
11. Their protestations at their death, ib. number. 12. Founders of pious works
had authority ordinarily to give Charters for privileges and exemptions
thereof, cap. 8. number. 23. Foundation of Abbeys and Monasteryes in England before
the Conquest, cap. 6. a number. 37. vsque ad 49. Franquises and privileges of
Churches and monasteryes procured from the Pope, cap. 6. number. 37.38.39. and
deinceps. Freedom of speech in the ancient Fathers to Emperors, cap. 4. number..
4. 5. and 6.
G.
Geffrey K. Richard the first his brother made Archbishop of York, cap. 9.
number. 35. His deposition from his bishopric, ibid. number. 45. Again restored,
ibid. number. 46. Glastenbury-Abbey privileged from Rome at the petition of K.
Edgar, cap. 6. number. 45. God the author of all lavvfull power, cap. 1. number. 1.
and 2. Gods miraculous actions in the old testament ascribed to Christ, cap. 4.
number. 30. Government of women in spiritualityes, and absurdity thereof, cap. 4.
n. 19. 20.21. and 22. Great-Charter for Church-priuiledges began by K. Henry
the third, cap. 10. number. 6. S. Gregoryes commission to S. Augustine of
Canterbury, cap. 6. nu. 12. and 13. S. Gregory Nazianzens discourse about the
nature of spiritual and temporal Jurisdiction, cap. 2. number 4. Grounds of
spiritual authority. Prefac. number. 6. Grounds of Protestants assertions,
Prefac. number. 7. Of Puritans ibid. number. 8. Of Catholics, ibid. number. 9.
Grounds in sects and new-opinions, what they are, or can be? cap. 16. n. 25.
Gualter Archbishop of Roane Governor of England, cap. 9. n.; 4. and 42. His
disgust and appeal against King Richard the first. ibid. number. 47. Guide to
salvation, Pref. number. 5.
H.
Head-ship of spiritual matters not possibly in a woman, cap. 4. number. 26. The
absurdityes that would follow thereof. ibid number. 27. K. Henry the first his
reign over England, cap. 8. number 8. His good beginning. ibid. number. 9. His
resignation of inuestitures, ibid. number. 14. His conference with Pope Calixtus
in Normandy. ibid number. 14. His acknowledgment of the Popes supremacy. ibid.
number. 21. K. Henry the second his reign out England. cap. 9. a number. 1. vsque ad
n. 22. His temporal greatness. ibid. number. 2. His lamentable end. ibid. number.
6. Laws attempted by him against the Church. ibid. number 7. Made legate of the
Pope in England ibid number 9. His humility to the Sea Apostolic, cap. 9. number.
10. His appeal to the Pope, about S. Thomas of Canterbur^ death. ibid number. 11.
His purgation and absolution by the Popes Legate. ibid. n. 12. and 13. His
letter to the Pope in great affliction. ibid. n. 14. ^^ The straytes whereunto
he was driven ibid. number. 19. His penance at the body of S. Thomas of
Canterbury. cap. 9. number. 19. K. Henry the third his temporal homage done to
the Sea Apostolic. cap. 10. number. 3. His beginning of the Great Charter for
Church privileges. ibid. number. 6. His conference with K. Jews of France.
ibid. number. 9. His obedience and subjection to the Popes, cap. 10 n 19. His
letter to Pope Innocentius. ibid. number 21. His statutes in favor of the Clergy.
ibid. number. 27. His obedience to the Bishopp of London in spiritual matters.
ibid. number. 34 and 35, Also to the Deane of Paul's, ibid. number. 38. K. Henry the
4. his reign. cap. 13. n. 1. 2. 3. and deinceps. His condemnation and
execution of the Archbishop of York. c. 15. n. 23. K. Henry the seventh his
reign over England. cap. 14 n. 15. 16. and deinceps. His statute for
reformation of the Clergy. ibid. His devotion and obedience to the Sea of Rome
until his death. ibid. n. 21. K. Henry the 8. his good beginning. cap. 15. n.
1. and 2. His book against Luther. ibid. number. 3.4 and 5. His arguments therein
for the Popes supremacy. ibid number. 5. 6. and dein. His inuectiue against
Luthers inconstancy. ibid. number. 7. His good offices to the Pope continued for
many years. ibid. n. 9. The beginning of his breach with the Pope. ibid. n.
10. and 11. His taking upon him the Supremacy. ibid number. 13.14. and 15. His
condemnation of Protestants religion. ibid. n. 15. Heretics their pretense of
singularity of knowledge. cap. 1. n. 5. 6. and 7. Heresy, how great and
grievous a sin. cap. 16. n. 26. Hubert Earl of Kent Chief Iusticer of
England. cap. 10. number. 34. His disgrace with the King. ibid. His taking of
Sanctuary. ibid. Hunting and hawking disliked in English Bishopps and Prelates.
c. 9. n. 45.
I.
Ignorance what it is. cap. 1. number. 10. Ignorance how it differs from error.
ibid. n. 10. and 11. Ignorance negative and priuitiue. ibid. number. 10. and 11.
Ignorance voluntary and inuoluntary. ibid. number. 11. and 12. Inas King of the
VVestsaxons his letters in favor of the Pope. cap. 6. n. 69. His Pilgrimage to
Rome for devotion. cap. 6. n. 82. Inconveniences by strangers promoted to
Ecclesiastical dignityes in England. cap. 11. number. 36. Remedies thereof sought
from the Pope. ibid. n. 38. Iniuryes offered to diverse sorts of men by M.
Attorney his book. cap. 16. per totum. Insolency of some private men, and
perils that often arise thereby. cap. 16. number. 31. Invasion of Abbey-landes or
goods, forbidden under pain of damnation. cap. 5. number. 11. and 12. Inuectiue
of K. Henry the 8. against Luthers inconstancy. cap. 15. number. 7. Inuestitures
to Benefices desired by Princes, denied by Popes. cap. 7. n. 34. The beginning
thereof by secular Princes. cap. 8. number. 16. Inuestitures resigned by K. Henry
the first. cap. 8. number. 14. Inuestitures granted only by permission of the Sea
Apostolic. cap. 8. number. 17. K. John of England his variable state in
government. cap. 9. n. 48. and deinceps. His obedience to the Sea of Rome.
ibid. number. 50. and 51. His piety in the beginning of his reign. ibid number. 53.
His humility and liberality. ibid n. 54. His breach with the Church of Rome and
occasion thereof. cap. 9. n. ^7. His indignation against Clergy me^. ibid. number.
58,59. and 60. His offer of subjection to the Mores. ibid. number 62. His
reconciliation with the Sea of Rome. ibid. number 62. and 63. His death. ibidem.
n. 66. Jurisdiction spiritual and temporal and the dependence or independance
the one of the other. cap. 2. n. 6. and 7. Iurisdiction-spirituall, internal
and external. cap. 2. n. 16. Ins, how far the word extends. cap. 1. number.
3.
K.
Key of knowledge cap. 6. number. 32. Kings capable of Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction by commission. cap. 12. n. 29. King how he is Persona mixta. c.
14. number. 1^. King Edward the Co^fessor his Charters and privileges for
Church-libertyes. cap. 5. n. 15. and deinceps. Item his subjection to the Pope.
ibid. number. 16. 17. and 18. King Edward the first excommunicated by Pope
Formosus. cap. 6. n. 57. King Edvvyn of Northumberland demanded Bishops from
Rome. c. 6. nu. 22. Privileges granted unto him by Pope Honorius. ibidem.
King Edgar his reformation of the Clergy of England by authority from Rome.
cap. 6. number. 27. King Ceadwalla of the VVestsaxons his going to Rome and death
there. cap. 6. number. 40. King Ethelbert of kent his Charter for Church
privileges. cap. 5. number. 11. His dependence of the Sea of Rome. cap. 6. number.
20. King Inas his laws in favor of the Pope. cap 6. number. 69. His Peter Pence
paid to Rome. ibid. number. 68. King Kenulphus his Charter for Church privileges.
cap. 5 number. 3. and 4. His letter and humble petition to Pope Leo. cap. 6. number.
30. and 32. King Offa of Mercia his attempt against Jurisdiction of the Sea of
Canterbury. cap. 6. number. 29. King Offa the younger of Mercia his Confirmation
of Peter Pence to Rome. cap. 6. n. 70. King Osway of Northumberland his
embassage to Pope Vitalianus for an Archbishop into England. cap. 6. n. 24.
King of Spain his Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in Sicily. cap. 15. number. 20.
Knights of the Temple suppressed in England. cap. 11. nu. 43.
L.
Lanfranke chosen Archbishop of Canterbury cap. 7. n. 4. His letter to Pope
Alexander the second ibidem. Laws Ecclesiastical not made, but received by
secular Princes. cap. 1. n. 4. Lawes-birthright. cap. 1. number. 18. and 19. Laws
municipall, and their antiquity. cap. 1. n. 19. Their commodityes and
discommo^^^^^^. ibid. number. 20. Lawes-canon, and how they were first received
in England. cap. 4. n. 17. Law-Ciuill and what it is? c. 4. n. 24. Law of
Nature. cap. 4. number 25. Law Evangelical. cap. 4. number. 29. Laws municipall of
England. cap. 4. number. 39. Laws made before the Conquest by secular princes
concerning Ecclesiastical jurisdiction. cap. 6. n. 3. 4.5.6.7. and deinceps.
Laws Ecclesiastical not made by Princes but by Prelates in England. c. 6. n.
9. Laws attempted by K. Henry the second against the Church of England. cap.
9. n. 7. Laws of K. Edward the first in prejudice of the Clergy of England.
cap. 11. number. 21. Law of Praemunire, and beginning thereof. cap. 12. n. 11. and
12 Laws Ecclesiastical subject to every man's particular calu^niation. c. 15.
n. 19. Legates of the Pope forbidden entrance into England, and why? cap. 14.
number 13. and 15. Leopold Duke of Austria his imprisoning of K. Richard the
first. cap. 9. number. 39. Lollards heretics in England. cap. 13. n. 7. Laws
for their apprehension and execution. ibid. number. 7. and 23. Their name and
origin. ibidem. Luther impugned by K. Henry the 8. Cap. 15. number. 4. 5. 6. and
deinceps. His inconstancy inueighed at by the same King. ibid. number. 7.
M.
Missions into England by authority of the Pope cap. 6. number. 33. Monasteryes
and Abbeys founded in England before the Conquest. cap. 6. a number 37. vsque ad
49. Monasteryes and Churches privileges procured from Rome. cap. 6. n. 37. 38.
and 39. Monastery of S. Bertulphes and the privileges thereof. cap. 6. number. 39.
Motives that endured K. Edw. the 3. to proceed so violently against the Church
of England, cap. 12. number. 3. Mounsieur Lansackes conference with Queen
Elizabeth, cap. 15. number. 41.
N.
Name of Lollards from whence it is derived cap. 13. number 23, and 24. M.
Attorneys ridiculous Etimology thereof. ibid. number. 22. Nature and conditions of
spiritual and temporal jurisdiction expressed by S. Gregory Nazianzen. cap.
2. number. 4. Nicolas Morris Abbot of Waltham punished by K. Edw. the third, and
why. cap. 12. number. 29. and 32. Nouelty of Q. Elizabeth's supremacy misliked by
Puritans and Protestants. cap. 4. number. 41.42.43. and deinceps.
O
Oath of Supremacy exacted first of all by Queen Elizabeth. cap. 4. number. 52.
and 53. Oath of K. Stephen for the maintenance of the libertyes of holy Church
of England. cap. 8. n. 27. Obedience of Clergymen due to the Civil Magistrate
and how. cap. 2. number. 33. and 34 Obedience of K. Edward the Confessor to the
Popes of Rome in his time. cap. 5. number. 16.17. and 18. Occasion of the breach
of K. John with the Sea Apostolic. cap. 9. number. ^7. Occasions of K. Henry the
8. his breach from the pope. cap. 15. numero. 10. and 11. Offa King of the
Mercians his confirmation of Peter Pence to the Sea of Rome. cap. 6. number. 70.
Ordinances and decrees of Pope Formosus for the Church of England. cap. 6. number.
59. Origens of spiritual and temporal jurisdiction different. cap. 15. number.
29. Osius his resolute speech to Constanti^s the Emperor cap. 4. number. 7.
P.
Palles of the Archbishops of England accustomed to be taken at Rome. cap. 7.
n. 11. S. Paul's esteem of spiritual Power given unto him and other the
Apostles and their successors. cap. 2. n. 13. and 14. His eager reprehension of
vvomans superiority in the Church. cap. 4. n. 32. Peace of the Church, what it
is? cap. 7. number. 16. Pascalis the pope his letter to King Henry the first, cap.
8. number. 10. Penance of K. Henry the 2. at the body of S. Thomas of Canterbury.
cap. 9. number. 19. Peter Pence paid to Rome, and the beginning thereof. cap. 6. n.
67.68. and 69. The same confirmed by K Offa. ibidem. number. 70. Also by K.
Adelnulph. ibid. number. 71. In like manner by K. Canutus the Dane. ibid. number. 72.
By K. Edward the Confessor. ibidem number. 73. Item by K. William the Conqueror.
ibid. number. 74. And by other kings until K. Henry the 8. ibid. number. 75.
Perils that often rise by the insolency of private men. cap. 16. number. 3^.
Pilgrimage to Rome for devotion by diverse of our English kings cap. 6. number.
76.77. and deinceps. Plurality of benefices and who can dispense therewith.
cap. 14. number. 20. Points commendable in a good pastor. cap. 4. number 37. Pope
Honorius his privileges to K. Edwyn of Northumberland. cap. 6. n. 22. Pope
Formosus his excommunication of K. Edward the first before the Conquest. cap.
6. number. 57. His decrees and Ordinances for the Church of England. ibid. number 59.
Pope Pascalis his letter to K Henry the first. cap. 6. number. 10. Popes
provisions in England for Ecclesiastical liuinges to strangers. cap. 12. n. ^.
Power and the author thereof. c. 2. n. 2. Power spiritual and temporal and the
different ends thereof, cap 2. n. 3. and 4. and deinceps per totum caput. Power
spiritual of the Church and pastors thereof. cap. 3. n. 10. Power spiritual
more eminent than temporal. cap. 2. n. 19. Praemunire, and the first beginning
of that law. cap. 12. n. 11. Privileges and franquises of Churches and
monasteryes procured from the Pope. cap. 6. n. 37.38. and deinceps. Privileges
of the Abbey of Euesham. cap. 6. n. 42. Of the Abbey of S. Albans. ibid. n. 43.
Privileges of Glastenbury-Abbey from Rome. cap 6. number. 45. Privileges of
Westminster procured by K. Edward the Confessor. cap. 6. number. 47. Privileges
of Ecclesiastical men in temporal courts. cap. 7. n. 18. and alibi
saepissime Promotion of strangers to Ecclesiastical dignityes in England. cap.
10. number. 21. and 22. and cap. 11. number. 36. The inconveniences thereof to
Englishmen. ibidem. Protestants doctrine condemned by K. Henry the 8. cap. 15.
number. 15. Provisions against bribing at Rome. cap. 13. n. 21. Provisions of
Ecclesiastical liuinges in England made by the Pope. c. 12. n. 5. The
Co^plaintes thereof by Englishmen. ibidem. The continuance of the same in
England. cap. ibid. n. 9. Agreement therabout made between the Pope and the
King. cap. ibid. n. 21.
Q.
Queen Eleanour Mother to K. Richard the first her journey to Sicily cap. 9.
number. 29. Her return by Rome and business there with the Pope. ibid. number. ^. Her
complaints and petition to Pope Celestinus. ibid. number. 39.40. and 41. Queen
Elizabeth's spiritual authority given her by Parliament. cap. 3. number. 3. and 4.
The inconveniences and absurdityes that follow thereof. ibid. n. 4. 5. and 6.
and cap. 4. number. 27. Her singularity in that point. ibidem. number. 28. Her
supremacy mistiked by Protestants, and Puritans. cap. 4. number. 41. 42. 43, 44.
45. 46. 47. and 48. Causes that moved her first to accept of the Supremacy.
cap. 15. number 35. and 36. Her conferen^e with Sir Fran. Inglefield. ibid. number
37. Item with the Count of Feria, the Spanish Ambassador. ibid. number. ^^. Her
protestation about the Real-presence in the Sacrament. ibidem n 39. Her
Conference with Mounsieur Lansacke the French Ambassador. ibidem. number. 41. Her
own inclination toward Catholic Religion. ibid number. 42. How she was drawn
to great extremes and cruelty against Catholics. cap. 15. number. 43. Queen Mary
her reign. cap. 15. n. 3^. Her restoring of Catholic Religion in England.
cap. 15. number. 31. and 32.
R.
Reasons that show william the Conrour to have always acknowledged the Sea of
Rome. cap. 7. number. 8.9.10. and deinceps. Recourse to Rome presently after
Englands Conversion about Ecclesiastical affairs. cap. 6. number. 10,11. and 12.
Recourse to Rome by the Kings of England and Scotland in their greatest
Controuersyes. cap. 11. number. 44. Recusancy of Puritans, and the first cause
thereof. cap. 16. number 5. Recusancy of Catholics from the beginning of Q.
Elizabeth reign. cap. 16. number. 7. Reformation of the English Clergy by King
Henry the 7. cap. 14. number. 15. Relics sent to King Osway of Northumberla^d by
Pope Vitalianus. c. 6. n. 24. Resignatio^ of inuestitures by K. Henry the
first. cap. 8. number. 14. Restraintes of exercising the Popes Authority in
England, and how the same were first made. cap. 2. number. 41. and cap. 10. number.
25. and cap. 12. number. 35. King Richard the first his reign c. 9. number. 22. 23.
and deinceps. His misfortunes ibid. number. 23. His behavior and oath at his
Coronation. ibid. number. 25. His voyage to Jerusalem. ibid. number. 26. and 27. His
kingdom commended to the Popes protection. ibid number. 27. His mother sent from
Rome to Sicily. ibid. number. 30. His letter to Pope Clement the 3. ibid number. 31.
His captivity in Austria. ibid. number 38. K. Richard the second his disorders and
cause thereof. cap. 21. number. 42. His confirmation of Church-libertyes. ibid.
number. 43. His obedience to the Church Censures. ibid number. 47.
S.
Sanctuary granted by the Pope to S. John's Church in London. cap. 14. number. 9.
Denied by the temporal judges. ibid. number 10. Scruple of Conscience urged upon
M. Attorney. cap. 16. number. 14. Sectaryes not any way compared to Catholics
and why? c. 1. n. 13.14. and 15. Sectaryes their vain comendation of Truth.
cap. 1. number 16. Singularity of knowledge in heretics. cap. 1. number. 5. 6. and
7 Statute in Parliament for giving spiritual authority to Q. Elizabeth. cap. 3.
number. ^. ^^. ^ 19. The absurdityes that thereof ensue. ibid. number. 5. 6. and 7.
and number. 19.20. 21. 23. and 24. Statutes of K. Henry the 3. in favor of the
Church. cap. ^0. number. 27. Statute of Merton made by K. Henry the 3. cap. 10.
number. 39. Statute of Bigamy anno 4. Edouardi 1. cap. 11. number. 30. Statute of
Carliele made in the reign of King Edward the first. c. 11. n. ^9. Statute
against Lollards. cap. 13 n. 22. and 23. Statute for reformation of the Clergy.
cap. 14. number. 15. K. Stephen his reign over England. cap. 8. number. 25. His oath
for the libertyes of the Church. ibid. number. 27. His inconstancy by evil
counsel. ibid. number. 28. His violence used against Clergymen. ibid. His
citation and appearance before the Bishops. ibid number. 31. Stigand Archbishop of
Canterbury deposed. cap. 7. number. 9. Strangers their promotions to
Ecclesiastical dignityes in England, and inconveniences thereof. cap. 10. number.
21. 22. and 23. and cap. 11. number. 36. Remedies sought thereof from the Popes of
those times. ibid. number. 38. Supremacy Ecclesiastical not possibly in a woman.
cap. 4. number. 26. and 27. Supremacy assumed first by K. Henry the 8. cap. 15.
number. 13.14. and 15. Also by K. Edward the 6 ibid number. 26. Item by Q. Elizabeth.
ibid. number. 34.35. 36. and 37. Suppression of the kinghtes of the temple. cap.
11. number. 43. Sin of heresy how great and greiuous. cap. 16. number. 26 and 27.
T
Tenantes of the Church privileged.
(...)
