A TRVE and plain declaration of the horrible Treasons, practiced by William
Parry the Traitor, against the Queens Majesty. The manner of his Arraignment,
Conviction and execution, together with the copies of sundry letters of his and
others, tending to diverse purposes, for the proofs of his Treasons.

Also an addition not impertinent thereunto, containing a short collection of
his birth, education and course of life.

Moreover, a few observations gathered of his own words and wrytings, for
the farther manifestation of his most disloyal, deuilish and desperate purpose.

At London by C.B.

Cum priuilegio.

A true and plain declaration of the horrible Treasons practiced by William
Parry against the Queens Majesty, and of his conviction and execution for the
same. The second of March 1584. according to the account of England.
THIS William Parry, being a man of very mean and base parentage, but of a
most proud and insolent spirit, bearing himself always far above the
measure of his fortune, after he had long led a wastefull and dissolute life,
and had committed a great outrage against one Hugh Hare, a gentleman of the
Inner Temple, with an intent to have murdered him in his own Chamber, for the
which he was most justly convicted, seeing himself generally condemned with
all good men for the same and other his misdemeanors, he left his natural
Country, and gave himself to travail into foreign parts beyond the seas.
In the course of this his travail, he forsook his allegiance and duetifull
obedience to her Majesty, and was reconciled, and subjected himself to the
Pope. After which, upon conference with certain Jesuits and others of like
quality, he first conceived his most detestable Treason to kill the Queen
(whose life God long preserve:) which he bound himself by promise, letters,
and vows, to perform and execute, and so with this intent he returned into
England in January 1583, and since that did practice at sundry times to
have executed his most deuilish purpose and determination: yet covering the
same so much as in him lay with a veil and pretense of great loyalty to her
Majesty.

Immediately upon his return into England, he sought to have secret access
to her Majesty, pretending to have some matter of great importance to reveal
unto her: which obtained, and the same so privately in her Highness palace at
Whitehal, as her Majesty had but one only Cou^seller with her at the time of his
access, in a remote place, who was so far distant, as he could not hear his
speech. And there the^ he discovered unto her Majesty (but shadowed with all
crafty and traitorous skill he had) some part of the conference and proceeding
as well with the said Jesuits, and other ministers of the Popes, as
especially with one Thomas Morgan a fugitive, residing at Paris, who above all
others did persuade him to proceed in that most deuilish attempt, (as is set
down in his voluntary confession following,) bearing her Majesty
notwithstanding in hand, that his only intent of proceeding so far with the
said Jesuits, and the Popes ministers, tended to no other end, but to
discover the dangerous practices devised and attempted against her Majesty by
her disloyal subjects and other malicious persons in foreign parts: albeit it
has since appeared most manifestly, as well by his said Confession, as by his
dealing with one Edmond Neuil Esquire, that his only intent of discovering the
same in sort as he craftily and traitorously did, tended to no other end, but
to make the way the easier to accomplish his most deuilish and wicked purpose.

And although any other Prince but her Majesty (who is loathe to put on a hard
censure of those that protest to be loyal, as Parry did,) would rather have
proceeded to the punishment of a subject that had waded so far, as by oath
and vow to promise the taking away of her life (as he to her Majesty's self
did confess:) yet such was her goodness, as in stead of punishing, she did
deal so graciously with him, as she suffered him not only to have access
unto her presence: but also many times to have private conference with her, and
did offer unto him upon opinion once conceived of his fidelity toward her,
(as though his wicked pretense had been as he protested, for her service) a
most liberal pension.

Besides, to the end that he might not grow hateful to the good and
well-affected subjects of the Realm, (from whom he could in no sort have
escaped with safety of his life, if his deuilish purpose had been revealed)
her Majesty did conceal the same, without communicating it to any creature,
until such time as he him self had opened the same unto certain of her
counsel, and that it was also discovered, that he sought to draw the said
Neuill to have been a party in his deuilish and most wicked purpose.

A very rare example, and such as does more set forth the singular goodness
and bounty of her Majesty's princely nature, then commend (if it be lawful
for a subject to censure his Sovereign) her providence such as ought to be in
a Prince and person of her Majesty's wisdom and quality. And as the goodness
of her Majesty's nature, did hereby most manifestly show itself to be rare in
so extraordinary a case, and in a matter of so great peril unto her own
royal person: so did the malice of Parry most evidently appear to be in the
highest and extremest degree, who notwithstanding the said extraordinary grace
and favor extended toward him, did not only persuade the said Neuill to be
an associate in the said wicked enterprise: but did also very vehemently (as
Neuill confesses) importune him therein as an action lawful, honorable, and
meritorious, omitting nothing that might provoke him to assent thereunto.

But such was the singular goodness of Almighty God, (who even from her
Majesty's cradle by many evident arguments has showed him self her only and
especial protector) that he so wrought in Neuils heart, as he was moved to
reveal the same unto her Majesty, and for that purpose made choice of a
faithful Gentleman and of good quality in the Court, unto whom upon Monday
the eight of February last, he discovered at large all that had passed
between Parry and him, who immediately made it known to her Majesty:
whereupon her Highness pleasure was, that Neuill should be examined by the
Earl of Leycester, and Sir Christopher Hatton: who in the evening of the same
day did examine him, and he affirmed constantly all which he had before
declared to the said Gentleman.

In the mean time, her Majesty continued her singular and most Princely
magnanimity, neither dismayed with the rarenes of the accident, nor appauled
with the horror of so villainous an enterprise, tending even to the taking away
of her most gracious life, (a matter especially observed by the Counselor that
was present at such time as Parry after his return did first discover unto her
Majesty his wicked purpose, who found no other alteration in her countenance,
then if he had imparted unto her some matter of contentment,) which shows
manifestly how she reposeth her confidence wholly in the defense of the
Almighty. And so her Majesty, following the wonted course of her singular
clemency, gave order that Parry the same Monday in the evening (though not so
known to him) should be sent to Master Secretaries house in London, he being
then there, who according unto such direction as he received from her Majesty,
did let him understand, that her highness (in respect of the good will she knew
he bare unto the said Parry, and of the trust that Parry did outwardly profess
to repose in Master Secretary,) had made especial choice of him to deal with
him in a matter that concerned her highly, and that she doubted not, but that
he would discharge his duty toward her, according unto that extraordinary
devotion that he professed to bear unto her.

And thereupon told him yt her Majesty had been advertised that there was
somewhat intended presently against her own person, wherewith she thought he
could not but he made acquainted, considering the great trust that some of her
worst affected subjects reposed in him: And that her pleasure therefore was,
that he should declare unto him his knowledge therein: and whether the said
Parry himself had let fall any speech unto any person (though with an intent
only to have discovered his disposition) that might draw him in suspicion, as
though he himself had any such wicked intent. But Parry with great and
vehement protestations denied it utterly, whereupon Master Secretary, the
rather to induce him to deal more plainly in a matter so important, declared
unto him, that there was a gentleman of quality every way as good or better
then himself, and rather his friend then enemy, that would avouch it to his
face: yet Parry persisted stubburnly in his former denial and justification of
his own innoce^cie, and would not in any respect yield that he was party or
privy to any such motion enterprise or intent. And being lodged yt night at
Master Secretaries house, the next morning he desired earnestly to have some
further speech with Master Secretary: which granted, Parry declared to him
that he had called to remembrance that he had once some speech with one Neuil
a kinsman of his (so he called him) touching a point of doctrine contained in
ye answer made to the book, entitled, The Execution of Justice in England,
by which book it was resolved, that it was lawful to take away the life of a
prince, in furtherance of the Catholic religion: but he protested that they
never had any speech at all of any attempt intended against her Majesty's
person. Which denial of his (at two sundry times after so much light given
him) does set forth most apparently both the justice and providence of God:
His Justice, for that (though he was one of a sharp conceit) he had no power
to take hold of this ouerture, thereby to have avoided the danger that Neuils
accusation might bring him into by confessing the same, as a thing propounded
only to feel Neuils mind, whom before he had reported unto Master
Secretary he found a person discontented, and therefore his confession might
to very great purpose have served to have cleared him self touching the
intent: his providence, for that of his great mercy he would not suffer so
dangerous and wicked a member to escape and to live to her Majesty's peril.

The same day at night, Parry was brought to the Earl of Leycesters house, and
there eftsoons examined before the said Earl of Leycester, Master
Uicechamberlaine, and Master Secretary: he persisted still in his denial of
all that he was charged with. Whereupon, Neuil being brought before him face
to face, justified his accusation against him. He notwithstanding would not yet
yield to confess it, but very proudly and insolently opposed his credit
against the credit of Neuil, affirming that his No was as good as Neuills Yea,
and as by way of recrimination objected the crime to Neuil himself. On the
other side, Neuil did with great constancy affirm all that he had before
said, and did set down many probable circumstances of the times, places, and
manners of their sundry conferences, and of such other accidents as had
happened between them in the course of that action: whereupon Parry was then
committed to the Tower, and Neuil commanded by their honors, to set down in
writing under his hand, all that which before he had delivered by words: which
he did with his own hand, as follows.

Edmund Neuil his declaration the x. of February* 1584. subscribed with his
own hand.
WIlliam Parry the last summer, soon after his repulse in his suite for ye
Mastership of S. Katherines, repaired to my lodging in ye white Friars, where
he showed him self a person greatly discontented, and vehemently inueighed
against her Majesty, and willed me to assure my self, that during this time
and state, I should never receive contentment. But since, said he, I know you
to be honorably descended, and a man of resolution, if you will give me
assurance, either to join with me, or not to discover me, I will deliver unto
you the only means to do your self good. Which when I had promised him, he
appointed me to come the next day to his house in Feuter Lane: and repairing
thither accordingly, I found him in his bed, whereupon he commanded his men
forth, and began with me in this order. My lord, said he, (for so he called
me) I protest before God, that three reasons principally do induce me to enter
into this action which I intend to discover unto you: The replanting of
religion, The preferring of the Scottish Title, and The advancement of
Justice, wonderfully corrupted in this Common wealth. And thereupon entered into
some discourses, what places were fit to be taken to give entrance to such
foreign forces as should be best liked of for the furtherance of such
enterprises as were to be undertaken. And with these discourses, he passed the
time until he went to dinner: after which, the company being retired, he
entered into his former discourses. And if I be not deceived, (said he) by
taking of Quinborough Castle, we shall hinder the passage of the Queens ships
forth of the River. Whereunto when he saw me use no contradiction, he shook
me by the hand, Tush, said he, this is nothing: If men were resolute, there
is an enterprise of much more moment, and much easier to perform: An Act
honorable, and meritorious to God and the world. Which seeing me desirous to
know, he was not ashamed to utter in plain terms, to consist in killing of
her Majesty: wherein, says he, if you will go with me, I will loose my life,
or deliver my Country from her badde and tyrannous government. At which
speeches finding me discontented, he asked me if I had read Doctor Allens
book, out of which he alleged an authority for it. I answered, No, and that
I did not believe that authority. Well said he, what will you say, if I show
further authority then this, even from Rome it self, a plain dispensation
for the killing of her, wherein you shall find it (as I said before)
meritorious. Good cousin, said I, when you shall show it me, I shall think it
very strange, when I shall see one to hold that for meritorious, which another
holds for damnable. Well, said Parry, do me but the favor to think upon
it till to morrow: and if one man be in the town, I will not fail to show
you the thing it self: and if he be not, he will be within these v. or six
days, at which time if it please you to meet me at Chanon Row, we may there
receive the Sacrament to be true each to other, and then I will discover unto
you both the party, and the thing it self. Whereupon I prayed Parry to think
better upon it, as a matter of great charge both of soul and body. I would to
God, said Parry, you were as perfectly persuaded in it as I am, for then
undoubtedly you should do God great service.

Not long after viii. or x. days, (as I remember) Parry coming to visit me at
my lodging in Herns rents in Holborne, as he often used, we walked forth into
the fields, where he renewed again his determination to kill her Majesty,
whom he said he thought most unworthy to live, and that he wondered I was so
scrupulous therein. She has sought, said he, your ruin and overthrow, why
should you not then seek to revenge it? I confess, quoth I, that my case is
hard, but yet am I not so desperate as to revenge it upon my self, which must
needs be the event of so dishonest and impossible an enterprise. Unpossible,
said Parry, I wonder at you, for in truth there is not any thing more easy:
you are no Courtier, and therefore know not her customs of walking with small
train, and often in the garden very privately, at which time my self may
easily have access unto her, and you also when you are known in Court. Upon
the fact we must have a barge ready to carry us with speed down the river,
where we will have a ship ready to transport us if it be needful: but upon
my head, we shall never be followed so far. I asked him, How will you
escape forth of the garden? for you shall not be permitted to carry any men
with you, and the gates will then be locked, neither can you carry a Dagge
without suspicion. As for a Dagge, said Parry, I care not: my Dagger is enough.
And as for my escaping, those that shall be with her, will be so busy about her,
as I shall find opportunity enough to escape, if you be there ready with the
Barge to receive me. But if this seem dangerous in respect of your reason
before showed, let it then rest till her coming to S. James, and let us
furnish our selves in the mean time with men and horse fit for the purpose:
we may each of us keep eight or ten men without suspicion. And for my part,
said he, I shall find good fellows that will follow me without suspecting
mine intent. It is much, said he, that so many resolute men may do upon the
sudaine, being well appointed with each his Case of Dagges: if they were an
hundredth waiting upon her, they were not able to save her, you coming of the
one side, and I on the other, and discharging our Dagges upon her, it were
unhappy if we should both miss her. But if our Dagges fail, I shall
bestirre me well with a sword ere she escape me. Whereunto I said, Good
Doctor give over this odious enterprise, and trouble me no more with the
hearing of that, which in heart I loathe so much. I would to God the enterprise
were honest, that I might make known unto thee whether I want resolution. And
not long after, her Majesty came to S. James, after which, one morning (the
day certain I remember not,) Parry revived again his former discourse of
killing her Majesty, with great earnestness and importunity persuading me to
join therein: saying he thought me the only man of England like to perform
it, in respect of my valor, as he termed it.

Whereupon, I made semblance as if I had been more willing to hear him then
before, hoping by that means to cause him to deliver his mind to some other
yt might be witness thereof with me, wherein nevertheless I failed. After all this, on Saturday last, being the sixth of February, between the hours of
five and six in the after noone, Parry came to my chamber, and desired to
talk with me a part, whereupon we drew our selves to a window. And where I had
told Parry before, that a learned man who^ I met by chance in the fields,
unto whom I proponed the question touching her Majesty, had answered me that
it was an enterprise most villainous and damnable, willing me to discharge my
self of it: Parry then desired to know that learned man's name, and what was
become of him, saying after a scornful manner, No doubt he was a very wise
man, and you wiser in believing him: and said further, I hope you told him not
that I had any thing from Rome. Yes in truth, said I. Whereunto Parry said,
I would you had not named me, nor spoken of any thing I had from Rome. And
thereupon he earnestly persuaded me eftsoons to depart beyond the seas,
promising to procure me safe passage into Wales, and from thence into Britain,
whereat we ended. But I then resolved not to do so, but to discharge my
conscience, and lay open this his most traitorous and abominable intention
against her Majesty: which I revealed in sort as is before set down.

Edmund Neuil.


AFter this confession of Edmund Neuil, William Parry the 11. day of Febr.
last, being examined in ye Tower of London, by the Lord Hunsdon, Lord
Governor of Barwicke, Sir Christopher Hatton knight, Uicechamberlaine to her
Majesty, and Sir Francis Walsingham Knight, principal Secretary to her
Majesty, did voluntary and without any constraint by word of mouth make
confession of his said Treason, and after, set it down in writing all with
his own hand in his lodging in ye Tower, and sent it to the Court the 13. of
the same, by the Lieutenant of the Tower. The parts whereof concerning his
manner of doing the same, and the treasons wherewith he was justly charged are
here set down, word for word as they are written and signed with his own hand
and name, the 11. of February. 1584.

The voluntary confession of William Parry, in writing all with his own hand.
The voluntary confession of William Parry, Doctor of the Laws (now prisoner
in the Tower) and accused of Treason by Edmund Neuil Esquier, promised by him
(with all faith and humillitie) to the Queens Majesty, in discharge of his
conscience and duty toward God and her. Before The Lord Hunsdon, L.
Governor of Barwicke, Sir Christopher Hatton knight, Vicechamberlain, Sir
Francis Walsingham knight, principal secretary, the 13. of February. 1584.
Parry.
IN the year 1570* I was sworn her Majesty's servant, from which time until
the year 1580. I served, honored, and loved her with as great readiness,
devotion and assurance as any poor subject in England. In the end of that
year, and until Midsomer 1582. I had some trouble for the hurting of a
Gentleman of the Temple. In which action I was so disgraced and oppressed by
two great men (to whom I have of late been beholden) that I never had
contented thought since. There began my misfortune, and here follows my
woeful fall.

In Iulie after, I labored for license to travail for three years, which
(upon some consideration) was easily obtained. And so in August, I went over
with doubtful mind of return, for that being suspected in religion, and not
having received the Communion in 22. years, I began to mistrust my
advancement in England. In September I came to Paris, where I was reconciled
to the Church, and advised to live without scandale, the rather for that it was
mistrusted by the English Catholics, that I had intelligence with the
greatest counselor of England. I stayed not long there, but removed to
Lions (a place of great traffic) where, because it was the ordinary passage
of our nation to and fro between Paris and Rome, I was also suspected.

To put all men out of doubt of me, and for some other cause, I went to
Millaine, from whence as a place of some danger (though I found favor there)
after I had cleared my conscience, and justified my self in religion before ye
Inquisitour, I went to Uenice. There I came acquainted with father Benedicto
Palmio, a grave and a learned Jesuit. By conference with him of the hard state
of the Catholics in England, and by reading of the Book De persecutione
Anglicana, and other discourses of like argument, I conceived a possible mean
to relieve the afflicted state of our Catholics, if the same might be well
warranted in religion and conscience by the Pope, or some learned divines. I
asked his opinion, he made it clear, commended my devotion, comforted me in
it, and after a while made me known to the Nuntio Campeggio, there resident
for his holiness. By his means I wrote to the Pope, presented the service,
and fued for a Pasport to go to Rome, and to return safely into France.
Answer came from Cardinal Como, that I might come, and should be welcome. I
misliked the warrant, sued for a better, which I was promised: but it came not
before my departure to Lions, where I promised to stay some time for it. And
being in deed desirous to go to Rome, and loathe to go without countenance,
I desired Christofero de Salazar, Secretary to the king Catholic in Venice,
who had some understanding by conference, of my devotion to the afflicted
Catholics at home and abroad, to commend me to the Duke di Noua terra,
Governor of Millan, and to the County of Oliuaris Embi, then resident for the
king his master in Rome: which he promised to do effectually for the one, and
did for the other. And so I took my journey toward Lions, whither came for me
an ample Passeport (but somewhat too late,) that I might come and go in verbo
pontificis per omnes iurisdictiones ecclesiasticas, absque impedimento. I
acquainted some good fathers there, of my necessity to depart toward Paris
by promise, and prayed their aduises upon diverse points, wherein I was well
satisfied. And so assuring them that his holiness should hear from me
shortly, it was undertaken, that I should be excused for that time.

In October I came to Paris, where (upon better opinion conceived of me
amongst my Catholic country men) I found my credit well settled, and such as
mistrusted me before, ready to trust and embrace me. And being one day at the
chamber of Thomas Morgan a Catholic Gentleman (greatly beloved and trusted on
that side) amongst other gentlemen, talking (but in very good sort) of
England, I was desired by Morgan to go up with him to another chamber, where
he brake with me, and told me that it was hoped and looked for, that I should
do some service for God and his Church. I answered him I would do it, if it
were to kill the greatest subject in England: whom I named, and in truth then
hated. No no, said he, let him live to his greater fall and ruin of his house:

It is the Queen I mean. I had him as I wished, and told him it were soon
done, if it might be lawfully done, and warranted in the opinion of some
learned divines. And so the doubt once resolved (though as you have heard I was
before reasonably well satisfied) I vowed to undertake the enterprise, for the
restitution of England to the ancient obedience of the Sea Apostolic. Diverse
divines were named. Doctor Alleine I desired, Persons I refused. And by chance
came Master Wattes a learned Priest, with who^ I conferred, and was ouerruled.

the book made in answer of The execution of the English Justice was
published, which I must confess has taken hard hold in me, and (I fear me)
will do in others, if it be not prevented by more gracious handling of the quiet
and obedient Catholic subjects, whereof there is good and greater store in
England, then this age will extinguish. Well, notwithstanding all these doubts, I
was gone so far by letters and conference in Italy, that I could not go
back, but promised faithfully to perform the enterprise, if his holiness
upon my offer and letters would allow it, and grant me full remission of my
sins. I wrote my letters the first of January 1584. by their computation,
took advise upon them in confession of Father Aniball a Codreto a learned
Jesuit in Paris, was lovingly embraced, commended, confessed, and communicated
at the Jesuits at one altar with the Cardinals of Vandosmi, and Narbone,
whereof I prayed certificate, and enclosed the same in my letter to his
holiness, to lead him the rather to absolve me, which I required by my
letters, in consideration of so great an enterprise undertaken without promise
or reward. I went with Morgan to the Nuntio Ragazzoni, to whom I read the
letter and certificate enclosed, sealed it, and left it with him to send to
Rome: he promised great care of it, and to procure answer: And so lovingly
embraced me, wished me good speed, and promised that I should be remembered at
ye altar. After this I desired Morgan, that some special man might be made
privy to this matter, lest he dying, and I miscarying in the execution, and
my intent never truly discovered, it might stick for an everlasting spot in
my race. Diverse were named, but none agreed upon for fear of bewraying. 7 This
being done, Morgan assured me, yt shortly after my departure, the L. Fernehurst
(then in Paris) should go into Scotland, and be ready upon the first news
of the Queens fall, to enter into England with 20. or 30000. men to defend the
Queen of Scotland, (whom, and the king her son, I do in my conscience
acquit of any priuitie, liking, or consent to this, or any other bad action,
for any thing that ever I did know.) I shortly departed for England, and
arrived at Rye in January 1583. from whence I wrote to the Court, advertised
some, that I had a special service to discover to ye Queens Majesty, 8 which I
did more to prepare access and credit, then for any care I had of her person,
though I were fully resolved never to touch her (notwithstanding any warrant)
if by any devise, persuasion, or policy she might be wrought to deal more
graciously with the Catholics then she does, or by our manner of proceeding
in parliament means to do, for any thing yet seen. I came to the Court,
(the^ at Whitehal,) prayed audience, had it at large, and very privately
discovered to her Majesty this conspiracy, much to this effect, though
covered with all the skill I had: she took it doubtfully, I departed with
fear. And amongst other things, I cannot forget her Majesty's gracious speech
then uttered touching the Catholics, which of late, after a sort I auowed in
parliament: she said to me that never a Catholic should be troubled for
religion or supremacy, so long as they lived like good subjects. Whereby I
mistrusted that her Majesty is borne in hand, that none is troubled for the
one or the other. It may be truly said that it is better then it has been,
though it be not yet as it should be.

In March last, while I was at Greenewich (as I remember) suing for S.
Katherines, came letters to me from Cardinal Como, dated at Rome the last of
January before, whereby I found the enterprise commended, and allowed, and my
self absolved (in his holiness name) of all my sins, and willed to go forward
in the name of God. That letter I showed to some in Court, who imparted it to
the Queen: what it wrought, or may work in her Majesty, God knows: only
this I know, 9 yt it confirmed my resolution to kill her, and made it clear in
my conscience, that it was lawful and meritorious. And yet was I determined
never to do it, if either policy, practice, persuasion, or motion in
parliament could prevail. I feared to be tempted, and therefore always when I
came near her, I left my dagger at home. 10 When I looked upon her Majesty,
and remembered her many excellencies, I was greatly troubled: And yet I saw no
remedy, for my vows were in heaven, my letters and promises in earth, and the
case of ye Catholic recusaunts, and others little bettered. Some times I said
to my self, Why should I care for her? what has she done for me? have I not
spent 10000. marks since I knew her service, and never had penie by her? It
may be said, she gave me my life. But I say (as my case stood) it had been
tyranny to take it: And I fear me it is little less yet. If it please her
graciously to look into my discontentments, I would to Jesus Christ she had
it, for I am weary of it. And now to come to an end of this tragical
discourse: In July I left ye Court, utterly rejected, discontented, and as her
Majesty might perceive by my passionate letters, careless of my self. I came
to London: Doctor Alleins book was sent me out of France: 11 it redoubled my
former conceits: Every word in it was a warrant to a prepared mind: It taught
that Kings may be excommunicated, deprived, and violently handled: It proves
that al wars civil or foreign undertaken for Religion, is honorable. Her
Majesty may do well to read it, and to be out of doubt (if things be not
amended) that it is a warning, and a doctrine full dangerous. This is the book
I showed, in some places read, and lent to my cousin Neuil (the accuser) who
came often to mine house, put his finger in my dish, his hand in my purse, and
the night wherein he accused me, was wrapped in my gown, six months at least
after we had entered into this conspiracy: In which space her Majesty, and
10. Princes in several provinces might have been killed. God bless her
Majesty from him: for before Almighty God I joy and am glad in my soul, that
it was his hap to discover me in time, though there were no danger near.

And now to the manner of our meetings. He came to me in the beginning of
August, and spoke to me in this or like sort. Cousin, let us do somewhat,
since we can have nothing. I offered to join with him, and gladly heard him,
hoping because I knew him to be a Catholic, that he would hit upon that I
had in my head: but it fell not out so. He thought the delivery of the Queen
of Scotland easy, presuming upon his credit and kindred in the North: I
thought it dangerous to her, and impossible to men of our fortunes: He fell
from that to the taking of Barwicke: I spoke of Quinborough and the Navy,
rather to entertain him with discourse, then that I cared for those motions,
my head being full of a greater matter: 12 I told him that I had another manner
of enterprise, more honorable and profitable to us, and the Catholics common
wealth, then all these, if he would join in it with me, as he presently vowed
to do: He pressed to know it, I willed him to sleep upon the motion: He did
so, (and belike overtaken) came to me the next morning to my lodging in London,
offered to join with me, and took his oath upon a Bible, to conceal and
constantly to pursue the enterprise for the advancement of religion, which I
also did, and meant to perform: the killing of the Queen was the matter.

The manner and place, to be on horseback, with eight or ten horses, when
she should ride abroad about S. James, or some other like place. It was once
thought fit in a Garden, and that the escape would be easiest by water into
Shepey, or some other part: but we resolved upon the first.

This continued as agreed upon many months, until he heard of the death of
Westmerland, whose land and dignity (whereof he assured himself) bread belike
this conscience in him to discover a Treason in February, contrived and agreed
upon in August. If it cost him not an ambitious head at last, let him never
trust me. He brought a tall gentleman (whom he commended for an excellent
Pistolier) to me to Chanon Row, to make one in the match: but I refused to
deal with him, being loath to lay my head upon so many hands.

Master Neuil has (I think) forgotten, that he did swear to me at diverse
times, that all thaduancement she could give, should serve but for her
scourge, if ever time and occasion should serve: And that though he would
not lay hand upon her in a corner, his heart served him to strike off her head
in the field. Now leaving him to himself, this much (to make an end) I must
confess of my self, I did mean to try what might be done in Parliament, to
do my best to hinder all hard courses, to have prayed hearing of the Queens
Majesty, to move her (if I could) to take compassion upon her Catholic
subjects, and when all had failed, to do as I intended. If her Majesty by
this course would have eased the^, though she had never preferred me, I had
with all comfort and patience borne it: 13 but if she had preferred me without
ease or care of them, thenterprise had held.

Parry.
GOd preserve the Queen, and incline her merciful heart to forgive me this
desperate purpose, and to take my head (with all my heart) for her better
satisfaction.
AFter which, Febru. 14.
for the better manifesting of his Treasons, on the xiiii. of February last,
there was a letter written by him to her Majesty, very voluntarily, al of his
own hand, without any motion made to him. The tenor whereof, for that which
concerns these his traitorous dealings, is as follows.

A Letter written by Parry to her Majesty.
YOur Majesty may see by my voluntary confession, the dangerous fruits of a
discontented mind: and how constantly I pursued my first conceived purpose in
Venice, for the relief of the afflicted Catholics, continued it in Lions,
and resolved in Paris, to put it in adventure, for the restitution of England,
to the ancient obedience of the Sea Apostolic. You may see withal how it
is commended, allowed, and warranted in conscience, divinity, and policy, by
the Pope and some great Divines: though it be true or likely, that most of our
English Divines (less practiced in matters of this weight) do utterly mislike
and condemn it.

The enterprise is prevented, and conspiracy discovered, by an honorable
Gentleman my kinsman, and late familiar friend, Master Edmund Neuill, privy
and by solemn oath (taken upon the Bible) party to the matter, whereof I am
hardly glad, but now sorry (in my very soul) that ever I conceived or
intended it, how commendable or meritorious so ever I thought it. God thank
him, and forgive me, who would not now (before God) attempt it (if I had
liberty and opportunity to do it) to gain your kingdom. I beseech Christ
that my death and example may as well satisfy your Majesty, and the world, as
it shall glad and content me.

The Queen of Scotland is your prisoner, let her be honorably entreated, but
yet surely guarded.

The French King is French, you know it well enough, you will find him
occupied when he should do you good, he will not loose a Pilgrimage to save
you a crown. I have no more to say at this time, but that with my heart and
soul, I do now honor and love you, am inwardly sorry for mine offense, and
ready to make you amends by my death and patience. Discharge me A culpa, but
not A paena, good Lady. And so farewell, most gracious, and the best natured
and qualified Queen, that ever lived in England. From the Tower, the 14. of
February. 1584.

W. Parry.


Febru. 18.
AFter which, to wit, the xviii. of February last past, Parry, in further
acknowledging his wicked and intended Treasons, wrote a letter all of his own
hand in like voluntary manner to the Lord Treasourer of England, and the
Earl of Leicester, Lord Steward of her Majesty's house, the Tenor whereof is
as follows.

William Parrys Letter to the Lord Treasourer, and the Earl of Leycester.
MY Lords, now that the conspiracy is discovered, the fault confessed, my
conscience cleared, and mind prepared patiently to suffer the pains due for
so heinous a crime: I hope it shall not offend you, if crying Miserere with
the poor Publicane, I leave to despair with cursed Caine. My case is rare and
strange, and, for any thing I can remember, singular: a natural subject
solemnly to vow the death of his natural Queen, (so borne, so known, and
so taken by all men) for the relief of the afflicted Catholics, and
restitution of religion. The matter first conceived in Venice, the service, (in
general words) presented to the Pope, continued and undertaken in Paris, and
lastly commended, and warranted by his holiness, digested and resolved in
England, if it had not been prevented by accusation, or by her Majesty's
greater lenity and more gracious usage of her Catholic subjects. This is my
first and last offense conceived against my Prince or Country, and does (I
cannot deny) conteyne all other faults whatsoever. It is now to be punished
by death, or most graciously (beyond all common expectation) to be pardoned.
Death I do confess to have deserved: life I do (with all humility) crave,
if it may stand with the Queens honor, and policy of the time. To leave so
great a treason unpunished, were strange: To draw it by my death in example,
were dangerous: A sworn servant to take upon him such an enterprise upon such
a ground, and by such a warrant, has not bin seen in England: To indict him,
arraigne him, bring him to the Scaffolde, and to publish his offense, can do
no good: To hope that he has more to discover then is confessed, or that at
his execution he will unsay any thing he has written, is in vain: To
conclude, that it is impossible for him in time to make some part of ame^des,
were very hard, and against former experiences. The question then is, whether
it be better to kill him, or (least the matter be mistake^) upon hope of his
amendment to pardon him. For mine own opinion (though partial) I will deliver
you my conscience. The case is good Queen Elizabeth's, the offense is committed
against her sacred person, and she may (of her mercy) pardon it without
prejudice to any. Then this I say, in few words, as a man more desirous to
discharge his troubled conscience, then to live. Pardon poor Parry, and
relieve him: for life without living is not fit for him. If this may not be, or
be thought dangerous, or dishonorable to the Queens Majesty (as by your
favors, I think it full of honor and mercy) then I beseech your Lordships
(and no other) once to hear me before I be indicted, and afterward (if I must
dye) humbly to entreat the Queens Majesty to hasten my trial and execution,
which I pray God (with all my heart) may prove as honorable to her, as I hope
it shall be happy to me, who will, while I live, (as I have done always) pray
to Jesus Christ for her Majesty's long and prosperous reign. From the Tower
the 18. of February. 1584.

W. Parry.


ANd where in this mean time Sir Frauncis Walsingham Secretary to her
Majesty, had dealt with one William Creichton, a Scot for his birth, and a
Jesuit by his profession, now prisoner also in the Tower, for that he was
apprehended with diverse Plots for invasions of this Realm, to understand of
him, if the said Parry had ever dealt with him in the parties beyond the Seas
touching that question, whether it were lawful to kill her Majesty, or not:
the which at that time the said Creichton called not to his remembrance: yet
after upon better calling it to mind, upon the xx. day of February last past,
he wrote to Master Secretary Walsingham thereof voluntary, all of his own
hand, to the effect following.

W. Creichtons letter. Febr. 20.
RIght honorable Sir, when your Honor demanded me if M. Parry did ask me,
If it was leason to kill the Queen, in deed and verity, then I had no
remembrance at all thereof. But since, thinking on the matter, I have called to
mind the whole fashion of his dealing with me, and some of his Arguments: for
he dealt very craftily with me, I dare not say maliciously. For I did in no
ways think of any such deseine of his, or of any other, and did answer him
simply after my conscience and knowledge to the verity of the question. For
after that I had answered him twice before, Quod omnino non liceret, he
returned late at Even by reason I was to depart early in the next morning
toward Chamberie in Sauoye where I did remain, and being returned out of the
Closse within one of the classes of the College, he proponed to me of new the
matter, with his reasons and arguments. First he alleged the utility of the
deed for delivering of so many Catholics out of misery, and restitution of
the Catholic religion. I answered, that the Scripture answers thereto,
saying, Non sunt facienda mala, vt veniant bona. So that for no good, how
great that ever it be, may be wrought any evil, how little that ever it be.
He replied that it was not evil to take away so great evil, and induce so
great good. I answered, That all good is not to be done, but that only, Quod
been and legitime fieri potest. And therefore, Dixi, Deum magis amare aduerbia
quam nomina. Quia in actionibus magis e^ placent been and legitime, quam bonum.
Ita vt nullum bonum liceat facere, nisi been and legitime fieri possit. Quod in
hoc casu fieri non potest. Yet said he, that several learned men were of the
opinion, Quod liceret. I answered, that they men perhaps were of the opinion,
that for the safety of many in soul and body, they would permit a particular
to his danger, and to the occult judgment of God: Or perhaps said so,
moved rather by some compassion and co^miseration of the miserable estate of
the Catholics, not for any such doctrine that they did find in their books.
For it is certain, that such a thing is not licit to a particular, without
special revelation divine, which exceeds our learning and doctrine. And so
he departed from me.

Out of the prison in the Tower, the xx. of February. Your Honors poor
seruitour in Christ Jesus. Will. Creichton prisoner.


Februa. 20.
ANd where also the same Parry was on the same xx. day of February examined by
Sir Frauncis Walsingham knight, what was become of the letter contained in his
confession to be written unto him by the Cardinal de Como, he then answered,
that it was consumed and burnt: and yet after, Februa. 21.
the next day following, being more vehemently urged upon that point in
examination (because it was known that it was not burnt) he confessed where he
had left it in the Town: whereupon, by Parrys direction it was sent for where
it had been lapped up together with other frivolous papers, and written upon
the one side of it, The last will of William Parry, the which letter was in the
Italian tongue as hereafter follows, with the same in English accordingly
translated.

Amon Signore, Mon signor Guglielmo Parri.
MOn Signore la Santita di N.S. ha veduto le lettere di V.S. del primo con la
feed inclusa, and non puo se non laudare la buona disposittione and risolutione
che scriue di tenere verso il seruitio and beneficio publico, nel che la
Santita sua lessorta di perseuerare, con farne riuscire li effetti che V.S.
promette: Et accioche tanto maggiormente V.S. sia aiutata da quel buon spirito
che l'ha mosso, le co^cede sua Beneditione, plenaria Indulgenza and remissione
di tutti li peccati, secondo che V. S. ha chiesto, assicurandossi che oltre il
merito, che n'hauera in cielo, vuole anco sua Santita constituirsi debitore a
riconoscere li meriti di V.S. in ogni miglior modo che potra, and cio tanto
piu, quanto che V.S. vsa maggior modestia in non pretender niente. Metta dunque
ad effetto li suoi santi and honorati pensieri, and attenda a star sano. Che
per fine io me le offero di core, and le desidero ogni buono and felice
successo.

Di Roma a.xxx. di Gennaro. M.D.Lxxxiiij. Alpiacer di V. S. N. Cardinale di
Como.
Al Sig. Guglielmo Parri.

Cardinal de Comos letter to Will. Parry, 30. Ianu. 1584. by account of Rome.
MOnsignor, the Holiness of our Lord has seen the letter of your Signorie of
the first with the assurance included, and cannot but commend the good
disposition and resolution which you write to hold toward the service and
benefit public: wherein his Holiness does exhort you to persevere, with
causing to bring forth the effects which your Signorie promises. And to the
end you may be so much the more helped by that good spirit which has moved
you thereunto, his Blessedness does grant to you plenarie indulgence and
remission of all your sins, according to your request. Assuring you, that
besides the merit that you shall receive therefore in heaven, his holiness
will further make himself debtour to reknowledge the deseruings of your
Signorie in the best manner that he can. And that so much the more, in that your
Signorie uses the greater modesty in not pretending any thing. Put therefore
to effect your holy and honorable thoughts, and attend your health. And to
conclude, I offer my self unto you heartily, and do desire all good and happy
success.

From Rome the xxx. of January 1584. At the pleasure of your Signorie, N.
Card. of Como.


Febr. 22.
Upon al which former accusation, declaration, confessions and proofs, upon
Monday the xxii. day of February last past, at Westminster Hall, before Sir
Christopher Wray knight, chief Justice of England, Sir Gilbert Gerrard knight,
Master of the Rolls, Sir Edmund Anderson knight, Chief Justice of ye common
plees, Sir Roger Manwood knight, Chief Baron of the Exchequer, Sir Thomas
Gaudy knight, one of the Justices of ye plees before her Majesty to be holden,
and Will. Perriam, one of the Justices of the common plees, by virtue of her
Majesty's Commission to them and others in that behalf directed: the same Parry
was indicted of high Treason, for intending and practicing the death and
destruction of her Majesty, whom God long prosper, and preserve from all such
wicked attempts. The tenor of which indictment, appears more particularly in
the course of his Arraignment following.

The manner of the Arraignement of William Parry the xxv. of February, 1584. at
Westminster, in the place where the court commonly called the Kings Bench, is
usually kept by virtue of her Majesty's Commission of Oyer and Terminer, before
Henry L. Hunsdon governor of Barwicke, Sir Francis Knolles Knight, Treasorer
of the Queens Majesty's household, Sir James Croft Knight, Comptroller of the
same household, Sir Christopher Hatton Knight, Vicechamberlaine to her Majesty,
Sir Christopher Wray Knight, Chief Justice of England, Sir Gilberte Gerrard
Knight, master of the Rolls, Sir Edmund Anderson Knight, chief Justice of the
Common Plees, Sir Roger Manwood Knight, chief Barron of the Eschequer, and Sir
Thomas Hennage Knight, Treasorer of the Chamber.
FIrst, three Proclamations for silence were made according to the usual
course in such cases. Then the Lieutenant was commanded to return his
precept, which did so, and brought the prisoner to the Bar, to whom Miles
Sands Esquire, Clerk of the Crown said, William Parrie, hold up thy hand,
and he did so. Then said ye Clerk of the crown, Thou art here indicted by the
oaths of xii. good and lawful men of the County of Middlesex, before Sir
Christopher Wray Knight, and others which took the Indictment by the name of
William Parry late of London Gentleman, The Indictment.
otherwise called William Parry, late of London Doctor of the law, for yt thou
as a false traitor against the most noble and Christian Prince, Queen
Elizabeth thy most gracious Sovereign and liege Lady, not having the fear of
God before thine eyes, nor regarding thy due allegiance, but being seduced by
the instigation of the devil, and intending to withdraw and extinguish the
hearty love and due obedience, which true and faithful Subjects should
bear unto the same our Sovereign Lady, did at Westminster in the County
of Middlesex on the first day of February, in the xxvi. year of her Highness
reign, and at diverse other times and places in the same County, maliciously,
and traitorously conspire and compass, not only to deprive and depose the
same our Sovereign Lady of her Royal estate, title and dignity, but also to
bring her highness to death and final destruction, and sedition in the Realm
to make, and the government thereof to subvert, and the sincere religion of
God established in her highness dominions to alter and subvert. And that,
whereas thou William Parry, by thy letters sent unto Gregory Bishop of Rome,
did signify unto the same Bishop thy purposes and intentions aforesaid,
and thereby did pray and require the same Bishop to give thee absolution,
that thou afterward, that is to say, the last day of March in the xxvi. year
aforesaid, did traitorously receive letters from one called Cardinal de
Como, directed unto thee William Parry, whereby the same Cardinal did signify
unto thee, that the Bishop of Rome had perused thy letters, and allowed of
thine intent, and that to that end he had absolved thee of all thy sins,
and by the same letter did animate and stir thee to proceed with thine
enterprise, and that thereupon, thou, the last day of August in the xxvi. year
aforesaid, at Saint Giles in the fields, in ye same County of Middlesex,
did traitorously confer with one Edmunde Neuill Esquire, uttering to him
all thy wicked and traiterous devises, and then and there did move him to
assist thee therein, and to join with thee in those wicked treasons aforesaid,
against ye peace of our said Sovereign Lady the Queen, her Crown and
dignity: What say thou William Parry, art thou guilty of these treasons
whereof thou stand here indicted, or not guilty?

Then Parry said, Parries answer to the indictment,
Before I plead not guilty, or confess my self guilty, I pray you give me
leave to speak a few words: and with humbling himself, began in this manner.
God save Queen Elizabeth, and God send me grace to discharge my duty to
her, and to send you home in charity. But touching the matters that I am
indicted of, some were in one place, and some in another, and done so
secretly, as none can see into them, except yt they had eyes like unto God,
wherefore I will not lay my blood upon the Jury, but do mind to confess the
indictment. It contains but the parts that have been openly read, I pray you
tell me? Whereunto it was answered, that the Indictment contained the parts he
had heard read, and no other: whereupon the Clarke of the Crown said unto
Parry, Parry, thou must answer directly to the indictment, whether thou be
guilty or not.

Then said Parry, Parrie confesses that he is guilty of all things contained
in the indictment.
I do confess that I am guilty of all that is therein contained: And further
too, I desire not life, but desire to die. Unto which the clarke of ye Crown
said, If you confess it, you must confess it in manner and form as it is
comprised in the Iudictment. Whereunto he said, I do confess it in manner and
form as the same is set down, and all the circumstances thereof. Then the
confession being recorded, the Queens learned counsel being ready to pray
judgment upon the same confession, Master Vicechamberlaine said, These
matters contained in this indictment, and confessed by this man, are of great
importance: they touch the person of the Queens most excellent Majesty in the
highest degree, the very state and weldoing of the whole common wealth, and the
truth of Gods word established in these her Majesty's dominions, and the open
demonstration of that capital envy of the man of Rome, that has set him
self against God and all godliness, all good Princes and good government, and
against good men. Wherefore, I pray you, for the satisfaction of this great
multitude, let the whole matter appear, that every one may see that the matter
of it self is as bad as ye indictment purporteth, and as he has confessed.
Whereto in respect yt the Justice of ye Realm has bin of late very impude^tly
slau^dered, al yielded as a thing necessary to satisfy the world in
particular, of yt which was but summarily comprised in ye indictme^t, though in
the law, his confession served sufficiently to have proceeded thereupon unto
judgment. Whereupon the Lords and others the Commissioners, her Majesty's
learned Counsel, and Parry him self agreed, that Parrys confession (taken the
xi. and xiii. of February 1584. before the Lord of Hunsdon, master
Vicechamberlaine, and master Secretary,) and Cardinal de Como his letters,
and Parrys letters to the Lord Treasourer and Lord Steward, should be openly
read.

And Parry, for the better satisfying of the people and standers by, offered to
read them him self: but being told that the order was, the Clerk of the
Crown should read them, it was so resolved of all parts. And then master
Vicechamberlaine caused to be showed to Parry his said confession, the
Cardinals letter, and his own letter aforesaid, which after he had
particularly viewed every leaf thereof, he confessed, and said openly they
were the same.

Then said master Vicechamberlaine, Before we proceed to show what he has
confessed, what say you, said he to Parry, is that which you have confessed
here true, and did you confess it freely and willingly of your self, or was
then any extort means used to draw it from you?

Surely said Parry, I made that confession freely without any constraint, and
that is all true, and more too: for there is no treason that has been since
the first year of the Queen any way touching religion, saving receipt of
Agnus dei, and persuading of others, wherein I have not much dealt, but I have
offended in it. And I have also delivered mine opinion in writing, who ought to
be successor to the crown, which he said to be treason also.

Then his confession of the eleventh and thirteenth of February, Parrys
confession of his treasons was red by his own assent.
all of his own hand writing, and before particularly set down, was openly,
and distinctly red by the Clarke of the crown. And yt done, ye Cardinal di
Como his letter in Italian was delivered unto Parrys hand, by the direction of
Master Vicechamberlayne, which Parry there perused, A letter of Cardinal di
Como to Parry, also red.
and openly affirmed to be wholly of ye Cardinals own hand writing, and the
seal to be his own also, and to be with a Cardinals hat on it: And himself
did openly read it in Italian, as before is set down. And the words bearing
sense as it were written to a Bishop or to a man of such degree, it was
demanded of him by Master Vicechamberlayne, whether he had not taken the
degree of a Bishop? He said, No: But said at first, those terms were proper
to the degree he had taken: and after said that the Cardinal did vouchsafe
as of a favor to write so to him. Then the coppie of that letter in English as
before is also set down, was in like manner openly red by the Clarke of the
Crown, which Parry then acknowledged to be truly translated.

And thereupon was showed unto Parry his letter of ye xviii. of February,
Parrys letter of the 18. of Febru. to the L. Treaso. and the Earl of Leycester
red.
written to the Lord Treasorer, and the Lord Steward: which he confessed to be
all of his own hand writing and was as before is set down.

These matters being read openly for manifestation of the matter, Parry prayed
leave to speak: whereto Master Vicechamberlayne said, If you will say any
thing for the better opening to the world of those your foul and horrible
facts, speak on: but if you mean to make any excuse of that which you have
confessed, which else would have been and do stand proved against you, for my
part, I will not sit to hear you.

Then her Majesty's Attorney general stood up and said, It appears before
you my Lords, yt this man has been indicted and arraigned of several most
heinous and horrible treasons, and has confessed them, which is before you of
record: wherefore there rests no more to be done, but for the Court to give
judgment accordingly, The Queens Attorney requires Judgment.
which here I require in the behalf of the Queens Majesty.

Then said Parry, I pray you hear me for discharging of my conscience. I will
not go about to excuse my self, nor to seek to save my life, I care not for
it, you have my confession of record, that is enough for my life: And I mean
to utter more, for which I were worthy to die. And said, I pray you here
me, in that I am to speak to discharge my conscience.

Then said Master Vicechamberlayne, Parry, then do thy duty according to
conscience, and utter all that thou can say concerning those thy most wicked
facts.

Then said Parry, My cause is rare, singular and unnatural, conceived at
Venice, presented in general words to the Pope, undertaken at Paris,
commended and allowed of by his Holiness, and was to have been executed in
England, if it had not been prevented. Yea, I have committed many treasons, for
I have committed treason in being reconciled, and treason in taking absolution.
Parry had for his credit before time said very secretly, that he had been
solicited beyond the seas to commit the fact, but he would not do it, wherewith
he craftily abused both ye Queens Majesty, and those two Counselors whereof
he now would help himself with these false speeches against most manifest
proofs.
There has been no Treason since the first year of the Queens reign
touching religion, but that I am guilty of (except for receiving of Agnus Dei,
and persuading as I have said:) And yet never intended to kill Queen Elizabeth.
I appeal to her own knowledge and to my Lord Treasorers and Master
Secretaries.

Then said my Lord Hunsdon, Have thou acknowledged it so often, and so plainly
in writing under thy hand, and here of record: and now, when thou should
have thy judgment according to that which thou have confessed thy self
guilty of, do thou go back again, and deny the effect of all? How can
we believe that thou now fayest?

Then said Master Vicechamberlaine, M. Vicechamberlaines speeches, proving
manifestly Parrys traitorous intentions.
This is absued. Thou have not only confessed generally, that thou were guilty
according to the indiceme^t, which summarily, and yet in express words does
conteyne that thou had traitorously compassed and intended the death and
destruction of her Majesty: but thou also saydest particularly that thou were
guilty of every of the Treasons contained therein, whereof the same was one in
plain and express letter set down, and red unto thee. Yea, thou saydest that
thou were guilty of more Treasons too besides these. And did thou not upon
thy examination voluntaryly confess, how thou wast moved first thereunto by
mislike of thy state after thy departure out of the Realm, And that thou
did mislike her Majesty for that she had done nothing for thee, How by
wicked Papists and Popish books, thou were persuaded that it was lawful to
kill her Majesty, How thou were by reconciliation become one of that wicked
sort, that held her Majesty for neither lawful Queen, nor Christian, And yt
it was meritorious to kill her? And did thou not signify that thy purpose
to the Pope by letters, and receiuedst letters from the Cardinal, how he
allowed of thine intent, and excited thee to perform it, and thereupon
did receive absolution? And did thou not conceive it, promise it, vow
it, swear it, and receive the Sacrament that thou would do it? And did
not thou thereupon affirm, that thy vows were in heaven, and thy letters and
promyses on earth to bind thee to do it? And that whatsoever her Majesty
would have done for thee, could not have removed thee from that intention or
purpose, unless she would have desisted from dealing as she has done with
the Catholics, as thou call them? All this thou have plainly confessed:
and I protest before this great assembly, thou have confessed it more plainly
and in better sort, then my memory will serve me to utter: And say thou now,
that thou never mentest it?

Ah said Parry, your honors know, how my Confession upon mine examination
was extorted.

Then both the Lord Hunsdon and Master Vicechamberlayne affirmed, that there
was no torture or threatening words offered him.

But Parry then said, that they told him, that if he would not confess
willingly, he should have torture: whereunto their honors answered, that they
used not any spech or word of torture to him.

You said, said Parry, that you would proceed with rigor against me, if I
would not confess it of my self.

But their honors expressly affirmed, that they used no such words. But I will
tell thee, said Master Vicechamberlayne, what we said. I spoke these words, If
you will willingly utter the truth of your self, it may do you good, and I
wish you to do so: If you will not, we must then proceed in ordinary course
to take your examination. Whereunto you answered, that you would tell the
truth of your self. Parry reproved of false speeches, and so by himself also
confessed.
Was not this true? which then he yielded unto.

And hereunto, her Majesty's Attorney general put Parry in remembrance what
speeches he used to the Lieutenant of the Tower, the Queens Majesty's Seriant
at Law, Master Gaudie, and the same Attorney on Satterday ye twentieth of
February last, at ye Tower, upon that he was by them then examined by order
from ye Lords: which was, that he acknowledged he was most myldely and
favorably dealt with, in all his examinations, which he also at the Bar then
acknowledged to be true.

Then Master Vicechamberlayne said, that it was wonder to see the magnanymitie
of her Majesty, which after that thou had opened those traiterous
practices in sort as thou have laid it down in thy confession, was
nevertheless such, and so far from all fear, as that she would not so
much as acquaint any one of her highness privy Counsel with it, to his
knowledge, no not until after this thine enterprise discovered and made
manifest. And besides that which thou have set down under thine own hand,
thou did confess, that thou had prepared two Scottish Daggers, fit for
such a purpose: and those being disposed away by thee, thou did say that an
other would serve thy turn. And with all, Parry, did thou not also
confess before us how wonderfully thou were appauled and perplexed upon a
sudden at the presence of her Majesty at Hampton Court this last Summer,
saying that thou did think thou then saw in her, the very likeness and
image of king Henry the seventh? And that therewith, and upon some speeches
used by her Majesty, thou did turn about and weep bitterly to thy self?
And yet did call to mind that thy vows were in heaven, thy letters and
promises on earth, and that therefore thou did say with thy self, that
there was no remedy but to do it? did thou not confess this? the which he
acknowledged.

Then said the lord Hunsdon, The L. of Hunsdons speeches conuincing Parry
manifestly of his treason.
Say thou now, that thou did never mean to kill the Queen? did
thou not confess, that when thou did utter this practice of treachery to
her Majesty, that thou did cover it with all the skill thou had, and
that it was done by thee, rather to get credit and access thereby, then for
any regard thou had of her person? but in truth thou did it, that
thereby thou might have better opportunity to perform thy wicked
enterprise. And would thou have run into such fear as thou did
confess that thou were in, when thou did utter it, if thou had never
meant it? what reason can thou show for thy self? With that he cried out in
a furious manner, I never meant to kill her: I will lay my blood upon Queen
Elizabeth and you, before God and the world: and thereupon fell into a rage
and evil words with the Queens Majesty's Attorney general.

Then said the lord Hunsdon, This is but thy popish pride and ostentation,
which thou would have to be told to thy fellows of that faction, to make
them believe that thou die for popery, when thou die for most horrible and
dangerous treasons against her Majesty, and thy whole country. For thy laying
of thy blood, it must lie on thine own head, as a just reward of thy
wickedness. The laws of the Realm most justly condemn thee to die out of
thine own mouth for the conspiring the destruction both of her Majesty, and
of us all: therefore thy blood be upon thee, neither her Majesty, nor we at
any time sought it, thy self have spilt it.

Then he was asked what he could say, why judgment of death ought not to be
awarded against him.

Whereto he said, he did see that he must die, because he was not settled.

What meanest thou by that, said master Vicechamberlaine. Said he, look into
your study, and into your new books, and you shall find what I mean.

I protest (said his honor) I know not what thou meanest: thou do not well
to use such dark speeches, unless thou would plainly utter what thou
meanest thereby. But he said, he cared not for death, and that he would lay
his blood amongst them.

The L. chief Justices speech to Parry.
Then spoke the lord chief Justice of England, being required to give the
judgment, and said, Parry, you have been much heard, and what you mean by
being settled, I know not, but I see you are so settled in popery, that you
cannot settle your self to be a good subject. But touching that you should say
to stay judgment from being given against you, your speeches must be of one of
these kinds, ^^ther to prove the Indictment (which you have confessed to be
true) to be insufficient in law, or else to plead somewhat touching her
Majesty's mercy, why Justice should not be ^^^e of you. All other speeches
wherein you have used great liberty, is more then by law you can ask. These
be the matters you must look to, what say you to them? whereto he said nothing.

Then said the lord chief Justice, Parry, thou have been before this time
indicted of diverse most horrible and hateful treasons, committed against thy
most gracious Sovereign, and native country: the matter most detestable, the
manner most subtle and dangerous, and the occasions and means that led thee
thereunto, most ungodly and villainous. That thou did intend it, it is most
evident by thy self. The matter was the destruction of a most sacred and an
anointed Queen thy sovereign and mystresse, who has showed thee such favor,
as some thy betters have not obtained: yea, the overthrow of thy country
wherein thou were borne, and of a most happy common wealth whereof thou art a
member, and of such a Queen, as has bestowed on thee the benefit of all
benefits in this world, that is, thy life, heretofore granted thee by her
mercy when thou had lost it by Justice and desert. Yet thou her servant,
sworn to defend her, mentest with thy bloody hand to have taken away her
life, that mercifully gave thee thine when it was yielded into her hands. This
is the matter wherein thou have offended. The manner was most subtle and
dangerous beyond all that before thee have committed any wickedness against her
Majesty: For thou making show as if thou would simply have uttered for
her safety the evil that others had contrived, did but seek thereby
credit and access, that thou might take the apter opportunity for her
destruction. And for the occasions and means that drew thee on, they were
most ungodly and villainous, As the persuasions of the Pope, of Papists and
Popish books. The Pope pretends that he is a pastor, when as in truth he
is far from feeding of the flock of Christ, but rather as a woolfe seeks
but to feed on and to suck out the blood of true Christians, and as it were
thirsts after the blood of our most gracious and Christian Queen. And these
Papists and Popish books, while they pretend to set forth divinity, they
do in deed most ungodly teach and persuade that which is quite contrary both
to God and his word. For the word teaches obedience of subjects toward
Princes, and forbids any private man to kill: but they teach subjects to
disobey Princes, and that a private wicked person may kill. Yea, and whom? a
most godly Queen, and their own natural and most gracious sovereign. Let
all men therefore take heed how they receive any thing from him, hear or
read any of their books, and how they confer with any Papists. God grant
her Majesty, that she may know by thee, how ever she trust such like to come
so near her person. But see the end, and why thou did it, and it will
appear to be a most miserable, fearful and foolish thing: For thou did
imagine, that it was to relieve those that thou call Catholics, who were
most likely amongst all others to have felt the worst of it, if thy deuilish
practice had taken effect. But since thou have been indicted of the treasons
comprised in ye indictment, and thereupon arraigned, and have confessed thy
self guilty of them, the Court does award, The form of the judgment
against the traitor.
that thou shall be had from hence to the place whence thou did come, and
so drawn through the open city of London upon an hurdle to the place of
execution, and there to be hanged and let down alive, and thy privy parts
cut off, and thy entrals taken out and burnt in thy sight, then thy head to
be cut off, and thy body to be divided in four parts, and to be disposed at
her Majesty's pleasure: And God have mercy on thy soul.

Parry nevertheless persisted still in his rage and fond speech, and ragingly
there said, he there su^moned Queen Elizabeth to answer for his blood before
God: wherewith, the Lieutenant of the Tower was commanded to take him from the
bar: and so he did. And upon his departure, the people stricken as it were at
heart with the horror of his intended enterprise, ceased not, but pursued him
with outcryes, as, Away with the Traitor, away with him, and such like:
whereupon he was conveyed to the Barge, to pass to the Tower again by water:
and the Court was adiorned.

After which, 2. Martii. W. Parry the traitor executed.
upon the second day of this instant March, William Parry was by virtue of
process in that behalf awarded from the same Commissioners of Oyer and
Terminer, delivered by the Lieutenant of the Tower early in the morning, unto
the Sheriffs of London and Middlesex, who received him at the Tower hill, and
thereupon, according to the judgment, caused him there to be forthwith set on
the hurdell. From whence he was drawn thereupon through the midst of the
City of London, unto the place for his execution in the Palace at
Westminster: where, having long time of stay admitted unto him before his
execution, he most maliciously and impudently, after some other vain
discourses eftsoons and often delivered in speech, that he was never gyltie of
any intention to kill Queen Elizabeth, and so (without any request made by him
to the people to pray to God for him, or prayer publicly used by himself for
ought that appeared: but such as he used, if he used any, was private to
himself) he was executed according to the judgment. And now for his intent,
how so ever he pretended the contrary in words, yet by these his own
writings, confessions, letters, and many other proofs before here expressed, it
is most manifest to all persons, how horrible his intentions and Treasons
were, and how justly he suffered for the same: and thereby greatly to be
doubted, that as he had lived a long time vainly and ungodly, and like an
Atheist and godless man, so he continued the same course till his death to
the outward sight of men.

Here ends the true and plain course and process of the Treasons, arrest,
arraignement, and execution of William Parry the Traitor.
An addition not unnecessary for this purpose.
FOrasmuch as Parry in the abundance of his proud and arroga^t humor, has
often both in his confession, and letters, pretended some great and grievous
causes of coffeehouse against her Majesty, and the present state: It shall
not be impertinent, for better satisfaction of al persons, to set forth
simply and truly, the condition and quality of the man, what he was by birth
and education, and in what course of life he had lived.

This vile and traiterous wretch was one of the younger sons of a poor man,
called Harry ap David: he dwelled in Northwales in a little village called
Northoppe, in the Cou^ty of Flint: there he kept a common ale house, which was
the best and greatest stay of his living. In that house was this Traitor
borne, his mother was the reputed daughter of one Conway a Priest, Parson of a
poor Parish called Halkyn in the same county of Flint: his eldest brother
dwells at this present in the same house, and there keeps an ale house as
his father did before him. This traitor in his childehood so soon as he had
learned a little to write and read, was put to serve a poor man dwelling in
Chester, named John Fisher, who professed to have some small skill and
understanding in the law. With him he continued diverse years, and served as a
Clerk, to write such things, as in that trade which his mastervsed, he was
appointed. During this time, he learned the English tongue, and at such times
of leisure, as the poor man his master had no occasion otherwise to use him,
he was suffered to go to the grammar Schole, where he got some little
understanding in ye Latin tongue. In this his childhood, he was noted by such
as best knew him, to be of a most villainous and dangerous nature and
disposition. He did often run away from his master, and was often taken and
brought to him again. His master, to correct his perverse and froward
conditions, did many times shut him as prisoner in some close place of his
house, and many times caused him to be chayned, locked, and clogged, to stay
his running away. Yet all was in vain: for about the third year of her
Majesty's reign, for his last farewell to his poor master: he ran away from
him, and came to London to seek his adventures. He was then constrained to
seek what trade he could to live by, and to get meat and drink for his
belly, and clothes for his back. His good hap in the end was to be
entertained in place of service above his desert, where he stayed not long,
but shifted himself diverse times from service to service, and from one master
to another. Now he began to forget his old home, his birth, his education,
his parents, his friends, his own name, and what he was. He aspired to
greater matters, he challenged the name and title of a great gentleman, he
vanted himself to be of kin and alied to noble and worshipful, he left his
old name which he did bear, and was commonly called by in his childhood, and
during all the time of his abode in the country, which was William ap Harry
(as the manner in Wales is.) And because he would seem to be in deed the man
which he pretended, he took upon him the name of Parry, being the syrname of
diverse gentlemen of great worship, and hauiour. And because his mothers name by
her father a simple priest, was Conway: He pretended kindred to the family of
Sir John Conway, and so thereby made himself of kin to Edmund Neuil. Being thus
set forth with his new name and new title of gentleman, and commended by some
of his good favorers, he matched himself in marriage with a widow in
Southwales, who brought him some reasonable portion of wealth. She lived with
him but a short time, and the wealth he had with her lasted not long: it was
soon consumed with his dissolute and wastfull manner of life. He was then
driven to his wonted shifts, his creditors were many, the debt which he owed,
great, he had nothing wherewith to make payment, he was continually pursued by
Serieants and Officers to arrest him, he did often by sleightes and shifts
escape from them. In this his needy and poor estate, he sought to repair
himself again by a new match in marriage with another widow, which before
was the wife of one Richard Heywood. This matter was so earnestly followed by
himself, and so effectually commended by his friends and favorers, that the
sisly woman yielded to take him to husband: a match in every respect very
unequal and unfit: her wealth and yearly liuelihood was very great, his poor
and base estate worse then nothing, he very young, she of such age, as for
years she might have been his mother. When he had thus possessed himself of
his new wives wealth, he omitted nothing that might serve for a prodigal,
dissolute, and most ungodly course of life. His riot and excess was
unmeasurable, he did most wickedly defloure his wives own daughter, and
sundry ways pitifully abuse the old mother: He carried himself for his
outward port and countenance (so long as his old wives bags lasted) in such
sort, as might well have suffised for a man of very good hauiour and degree.
But this lasted not long, his proud heart and wastfull hand had soon powered
out old Heywoods wealth. He then fell again to his wonted shifts, borrowed
where he could find any to lend, and engaged his credit so far as any would
trust him. Amongst others, he became greatly indebted to Hugh Hare, the
gentleman before named. Who after long forbearing of his money, sought to
recover it by ordinary means of Law. For this cause Parry conceived great
displeasure against him, which he pursued with all malice, even to the seeking
of his life. In this murtherous intent, he came in the night time to M. Hares
chamber in the Temple, broke open the door, assaulted him, and wounded him
grievously, and so left him in great danger of life. For this offense he was
apprehended, committed to Newgate, indicted of burgularie, arraigned, and
found guilty by a very substanciall Jury, Party condemned for burgularie,
pardoned of the Queen.
and condemned to be hanged, as the Law in that case requires. He standing
thus convicted, her Majesty of her most gracious clemency, and pitiful
disposition, took compassion upon him, pardoned his offense, and gave him his
life, which by the Law and due course of Justice he ought then to have lost.
After this he tarried not long, but pretending some causes of coffeehouse,
departed the Realm, and traueiled beyond the seas. How he demeaned himself
there from time to time, and with whom he conuersed, is partly in his own
confession touched before. This is the man, this is his race, which he feared
should be spotted if he miscarried in thexecution of his traitorous enterprise,
this has been the course of his life, these are the great causes of his
coffeehouse.

And whereas at his arraignement and execution, he pretended great care of the
disobedient popish subjects of this Realm, whom he called Catholics, and in
very insolent sort seemed to glory greatly in the profession of his pretensed
Catholic religion: The whole course and action of his life shows plainly,
how profanely and irreligiously he did always bear himself. He vaunted,
that for these two and twenty years past he had been a Catholic, and during
all that time never received the Communion: yet before he traueyled beyond the
Seas, at three several times within the compass of those two and twenty
years, he did voluntarily take the oath of obedience to the Queens Majesty,
set down in ye statute made in the first year of her highness reign, by
which, amongst other things, he did testify and declare in his conscience,
that no foreign prince, person, prelate, state, or potentate, has or ought
to have any jurisdiction, power, preeminence, or authority, Ecclesiastical or
Spiritual, within this Realm, and therefore did utterly renounce and forsake
all foraine jurisdictions, powers, and authorities, and did promise to bear
faith and true allegiance to the Queens highness, her heirs and lawful
successors.

With what conscience or religion, he took that oath so often, if he were then
a Papist in deed, as sithence the discovery of his treasons he pretended, let
his best friends the Papists themselves judge. But perhaps it may be said,
that he repented those his offenses past: that since those three oaths so taken
by him, he was twice reconciled to the Pope, and so his conscience cleared, and
he become a new man, and (which is more) that in the time of his last travel,
he cast away all his former lewd manners: that he changed his degree and
habit, and bought or begged the grave title of a Doctor of law, for which he
was well qualified with a little grammar school latin: that he had plenary
indulgence, and remission of all his sins, in consideration of his
undertaking of so holy an enterprise as to kill Queen Elizabeth, a sacred
anointed Queen, his natural and Sovereign Lady: that he promised to the
Pope, and vowed to God to perform it: that he confirmed the same by receiving
the Sacrament at the Jesuits, at one Altar with his two beaupeeres, the
Cardinals of Vandosme and Narbone: and that since his last return into
England, he did take his oath upon the Bible to execute it. These reasons may
seem to bear some weight in deed amongst his friends the Jesuits, and
other Papists of state, who have special skill in matters of such importance.

But now lately in the beginning of this Parliament in November last, he did
eftsoon solemnly in public place take the oath before mentioned, of
obedience to her Majesty. How that may stand with his reconciliations to the
Pope, and with his promises, vows, and oath to kill the Queen, it is a thing
can hardly be warranted, unless it be by some special privilege of the
Popes omnipotency.

But let him have the glory he desired, to live and die a Papist. He
deserved it, it is fit for him, his death was correspondent to the course of
his life, which was disloyal, perjured, and traitorous toward her Majesty,
and false and perfidious toward the Pope himself, and his Catholics, if
they will believe his solemn protestations which he made at his arraignement
and execution, that he never meant nor intended any hurt to her Highness person.
For if that be true, where are then his vows which he said were in heaven, his
letters and promises upon earth? Why has he stolen out of the Popes shop so
large an Indulgence and plenarie remission of all his sins, and meant to
perform nothing that he promised? Why was his devotion and zeal so highly
commended? Why was he so specially prayed for and remembered at the Altar? All
these great favors were then bestowed upon him without cause or desert: for
he deceived the Pope, he deceived the Cardinals, and Jesuits, with a false
semblance, and pretense to do that thing which he never meant.

But the matter is clear, the conspiracy, and his traitorous intent is too
plain and evident: it is the Lord that revealed it in time, and prevented
their malice: there lacked no will, or readiness in him to execute that
horrible fact. It is the Lord that has preserved her Majesty from all the
wicked practices and conspiracies of that hellish rabble: it is he that has
most graciously delivered her from the hands of this traitorous miscreant. The
Lord is her only defense in whom she has always trusted.

The Printer to the Reader.
WHEN I had taken in hand, and began the printing of this treatise or
declaration aforesaid, a gentleman of good understanding and learning, came to
me, and being made acquainted by me with the former treatise, he said, that
he had by conference with diverse that were at the araignement of this traitor,
where also he himself was present, collected together the whole proceeding
against him, and had also attained to the view of all his co^fessions, his
letters, and other writings there published against him: by all which, he had
gathered into a short Treatise most manifest proofs of the horrible treason
intended by the Traitor against her Majesty.

And although the former treatise does at length manifestly declare the same,
yet I required this Gentleman my friend, to grant me the copying of his
collections, which he was willing to do: And so I have been bold, for the
more ample satisfaction of every reader, to add the same hereunto. Wherein
also (gentle Reader) thou shall find inserted these Figures, 1.2.3.4. etc.
till 13. And the like in the Traitors own Confession, by which is noted the
principal points of the drift of this most horrible Treason.

A few observations gathered out of the very words and writings of William
Parry the traitor, applied to prove his traiterous coniuration, with a
resolute intent, imagination, purpose, and obstinate determination to have
killed her Majesty, our most gracious sovereign: whom the Lord has saved,
and ever may he save by his mercy.
THis W. Parry the traitor, 1. confesses to have conceived the treason at
Venice, by conference with Ben. Palmio, of whom he still thinks so well, as
he can not but speak of him with reverent mention, whereas, if he had never
thought, or did now forethinke the Treason, he would rather curse the time
that ever he met with such a bloody and treacherous ghostly father. Well, this
grave and learned Friar Palmio (says he) made the matter clear in religion
and conscience, and commended the Traitors devotion. This treason Parry so
apprehended, as he wrote presently to the Pope, presenting the service. 2
Returned to Paris, he conferred with Morgan, vowed to perform it for
restitution of England, etc. 3 Being dissuaded (as the credible man writes) by
Wats, he replied that he was gone so far, as he could not go back, but
promised faithfully to perform thenterprise, if ye Pope would upon his
offers and letters allow it, and grant remission, etc. Where this by the way
is to be noted, that if the opinions of these English Priests (as he will
needs make us believe) were differing from the Pope, and our English Jesuits,
varying from Jesuit Palmio and other beyond sea Jesuits, in the question of
murdering a Prince: some of them at least would have given loyal intelligence
of such a treason conceived and nourished in that man, who had made so many
privy both beyond and on this side the sea, and could not be dissuaded from
his purpose, but ever departed with a resolution contrary to these cold
disswaders. It were no good policy to trust this popish Traitor, but rather
to suspect all Pope-created Priests to be of the same mind with their supreme
head, and all English Jesuits to consent with forreyne Jesuits their fellow
members. They be all of one order and vow, they have one superior, and if
they had detested this fact in deed, some of them, seeing the wretch to
persist, must needs have bewrayed it, and not to suffer him to go on headlong
in such a sin, leaving her royal person to the will and malice (as much as in
them lay) of a murdering Ruffian. But to prove his intent with continuance and
growing of the same, 4 again he writes letters to the Pope, in Ianu. 1584. by
that account, took advise upon them in confession of An. Codreto, was
commended, again confessed, took the Sacrament (verily cruentum sacramentum,
and sacrificium cruoris) at the Jesuits, at one altar, with the Cardinales of
Vandosmi and of Narbone. Hereof he had certificate to the Pope, which he sent
enclosed in his letters to his Holiness, to lead him to absolve him, which he
required in consideration of so great an enterprise undertaken without reward.
5 The letter and certificat he read to Ragazzoni, and left with him to be sent
to the Pope, who wished him good speed, promising he should be remembered at
the altar. 6 He doubts, least if Morgan died, and he miscarried in thexecution
(as he did, God be thanked, and choked in the halter, notwithstanding their
remembrance at the altar) and his intent never truly discovered, that is to
say, that he did it for the Catholics, it might be a spot in his race. Mark
here the very word intent in his own confession. Morgan assures him, that
the lord Fernehurst should go into Scotland, and be ready to enter upon the
first news of our Queens fall. Thus much for his intent beyond Sea, and
before his coniuration discovered.

Upon his arriual in England, he wrote to Court, that he had a special service
of discovery to the Queen: but with what intent, let his own words speak,
more to prepare access and credit, then for any care had of her person.
Admitted to her gracious audience, he discovered the coniuration, yet in what
manner? let him self say, even covered with all the skill he had. This intent
was with deep Treason: for as he says, so he did, he disclosed only so much
as he thought good and necessary to ground in her highness a settled
confidence toward him, whereby he might effect his traiterous intent with
better opportunity, and his own safety. He be ^^ayed himself so far as he
might cover his chief drift, many principal things concealed, nothing of lord
Fernehurst with (...) Scottish forces, etc. Receiving from the Pope himse^^^^
commendation and allowance of his enterprise, of encouragement and plenarie
indulgence by no meaner (...) ^^rdinal di Como, though he showed the letter to
(...) ^aiestie, not for any care of her person, but for his better a^^esse and
credit, as the rest, yet let his own words tell what his intent was at the
very receiving and showing the ^ame setter: Forsooth (says he) this letter
confirmed (...) ^esolution to kill the Queen, making it clear in his (...)
science, as a thing lawful and meritorious.

Now is his intent grown a resolution, not doubtful, but clear in conscience,
not alone lawful, but meritorious* Papa dixit, a Cardinal is Nuncio: Wh^^
other thing is this, then for ye Pope and his Cardinals, like another Antoninus
Commodus, to make one Inter sicarios ^ glaediatores? The devil enforcing thi^
traitors heart (...) ^xecute his intent, he was troubled looking upon the
^ueene, and remembering her excellencies, yet he saw no remedy, his vows were
in heaven, his letters and promises on earth. Yea, he strove to cloze his (...)
at these excellencies, and obstinated his heart by seeking reasons to quench
all sparks of humanity and allegiance arising in his thoughts. For thus
reasons he against his conscience, Why should thou care for her? what has
she done for thee? have thou not spent ten thousand marks, etc. What more
deuilish intent could possess a traitor, then to labor to suppress a small
remain of conscience abhorring to kill so excellent a personage, which God
stirred up in his thoughts to his iuster comdemnation? D. Allens book
redoubled his former conceits, every word was a warrant to a prepared mind.
See how the smoothe words of that Catholic book are enterpreted and
conceived. One spirit occupies the Catholic reader with the Catholic
writer, and therefore can best expound the writers sense in his readers mouth,
even to be a book fraught with emphaticall speeches of energeticall
persuasion to kill and depose her Majesty, and yet does the hypocrite writer,
that traitor Catholic, dissemble and protest otherwise. Parry suffering
repulse in a suite for S. Katherins, communeth with M. Neuill, recommendeth the
enterprise as honorable and profitable to the Catholic common weal. Being
prejudiced in opinion of Allens book (as before) he commends it, and
delivers it to Neuill, thereby to work the same vile intent in him which it
had already confirmed in himself. He took now an other oath upon the Bible,
after the manner of a Protestant, to pursue thenterprise, and meant (he says)
to perform it, so far forth as the place and manner of doing was appointed.
This second coniuration he never bewrayed in six months, till accused by
Neuill, and then at first denied it. Finally to declare his height of malice,
he says, if the Queen had preferred him never so greatly, yet must this
bloody enterprise have holden, except she had relieved the Catholics. Was
this no intent, which neither benefit nor bounty could stay? which neither
fear of God, nor reverence of excellency could repel? which neither dread
of punishment, nor tract of time could remove? Did he conceive it, confer
and advise of it, vow himself to the execrable service, present and offer it,
harden his heart against others disswasions, beat back contrary motions of
his own conscience, go so far as he could not go back, promise it
faithfully, receive a Church Sacrament thereupon, make certificat thereof,
propound himself the end and reason of his intent, discourse upon the
contingent sequel, preventing the spot of his race, receive letters of
allowance, commendation, encouragement, and absolution, could he vow in
heaven, and promise on earth, could he do all this in a thing which he meant
not? Could he resolve and confirm his resolution of a thing which he intended
not, yea, could he intend and mean (for all these be his own words) that
which he never meant nor intended? could he redouble his conceits, and have a
prepared mind for that he intended not? would such a crafty traitor
practice with others by perswasiue speech, and traiterous book, in such a
matter, as the only broching thereof must capitally endamage his kinseman and
friend, and withal lay his own head in his friends hand? and yet
notwithstanding, either he meant this treason, either else he little loved his
friend, to tempt him so dangerously, whom yet, he says, he loved so, as to
suffer his finger in his dish, and his hand in his purse. But, which is above
all, would any man swear again on the Bible, appoint time and place, conceal
it with as much peril as if he had done it, would he deny it, would so
ambitious a man discontent himself with all preferment, for that chieuing of
that which he meant not? was this mischievous course begun and continued, a
long time, at home and abroad, in many kingdoms, communicated with many
persons, of several nation and quality, as Pope, Cardinal, Nuntio, Friar,
Priest, Kings Secretary and Ambassadors, all this while not meant? Was it
frankly and voluntarily confessed meant, finally, recorded by pleading guilty
in manner and form with all circumstance, and yet could he dye an innocent
for intent? All this falling upon no simple man, but upon one, not now the
first time holding up his hand at bar, and upon a Doctor of law, the very
hoode whereof is able to give a man more judgment, then to slip without light
in all these things. I know not how he may be excused, without strong
suspicion of the excuser. And if a Prince may not judge a wicked servant out of
his own mouth, nor determine an offense by two or three mouths, it were a
notable world for Traitors and murderers, thus to have all proceedings set
loose, as well of our common Laws, which condemn upon all evidences, as of ye
civil laws, which give capital sentence upon confession only: yea, Moses
wisdom is ouerreached, and Christ's equity in his Evangelical parable
against the lewd servant not using his talent is eluded. All this is also
ratified by voluntary letters of his to her Majesty apart, and to her
honorable Counsel. And if any Italianate Papist, nevertheless will needs
believe this repugnancie of his last speeches, let him yet take this one note
of him, whereby to consider how credible a man he crediteth. Either Parry
meant this monstrous murder according to his vows in heaven, and sworn
promises in earth, and so dyed a desperate Traitor, protesting the contrary in
his last words upon his soul and damnation: or else was he perjured, to the
foul abuse of Pope and all popery, most execrably profaning Gods name by
promising, swearing, vowing, etc. that which he meant not. Necessarily
therefore must he perish upon perjured treason, or wrecke upon desperate
deieratio^. Nothing auoydes this Dilemma, but a Popish Bull of Dispensation,
which if he had, I know not how Princes may not as safely suffer Woolues and
Bears come to their presence, as such Papists. And very like it is that Parry
had a special Bull, either else was it comprehended in his Indulgence, that he
might take oaths contrary to his Catholic conscience, as he did the oath of
Supremacy in beginning of the last Parliament. Which, if his coniuratours had
not bin privy with what intention he did swear, he never durst have taken it,
least they should have now bewrayed him as a man sworn against the Pope,
therefore not to be trusted. But the truth is, this Papist Parry was both a
Traitor, and a manifoldly perjured Traitor, etc.

Imprinted at London by C. B.

Cum priuilegio.

A prayer for all Kings, Princes, Countries and people, which do profess the
Gospel: And especially for our sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth, used in her
Majesty's Chapel, and meet to be used of all persons within her Majesty's
Dominions.
O Lord God of hosts, most loving and merciful father, whose power no
creature is able to resist, who of thy great goodness have promised to grant
the petitions of such as ask in thy sons name: we most humbly beseech thee
to save and defend all Princes, Magistrates, kingdoms, countries and people,
which have received and do profess thy holy word and Gospel, and namely this
Realm of England, and thy servant Elizabeth our Queen, whom thou have
hitherto wonderfully preserved from manifold perils and sundry dangers, and of
late revealed and frustrated the traiterous practices and conspiracies of
diverse against her: for the which, and all other thy great goodness toward
us, we give thee most humble and hearty thanks, beseeching thee in the name
of thy dear son Jesus Christ, and for his sake, still to preserve and
continue her unto us, and to give her long life and many years to rule over
this land. O heavenly father, the practices of our enemies, and the enemies of
thy word and truth, against her and us, are manifest and known unto thee.
Turn them, O Lord, if it be thy blessed will, or overthrow and confound them
for thy names sake: suffer them not to prevail: take them, O Lord, in their
crafty wiliness that they have invented, and let them fall into the pit which
they have dug for others. Permit them not ungodly to triumph over us:
discomfort them, discomfort them, O Lord, which trust in their own multitude,
and please themselves in their subtle devices, and wicked conspiracies. O
loving Father, we have not deserved the least of these thy mercies which we
crave: for we have sinned and grievously offended thee, we are not worthy to
be called thy sons: we have not been so thankful unto thee as we should,
for thy unspeakable benefits powered upon us: we have abused this long time of
peace and prosperity: we have not obeyed thy word: we have had it in mouth,
but not in heart: in outward appearance, but not in deed: we have lived
carelessely: We have not known the time of our visitation: we have deserved
utter destruction. But thou, O Lord, art merciful, and ready to forgive.
Therefore we come to thy throne of grace, confessing and acknowledging thee to
be our only refuge in all times of peril and danger: and by the means of
thy Son we most heartily pray thee to forgive us our unthankfulness,
disobedience, hypocrisy and all other our sins, to turn from us thy heavy
wrath and displeasure, which we have justly deserved, and to turn our hearts
truly unto thee, that daily we may increase in all goodness, and continually
more and more fear thy holy name: so shall we glorify thy name, and sing unto
thee in Psalms and Hymns, and spiritual songs: and thy enemies and ours,
shall know themselves to be but men, and not able by any means to withstand
thee, nor to hurt those whom thou have received into thy protection and
defense. Grant these things, O Lord of power, and Father of mercy, for thy
Christ's sake, to whom with thee and thy holy spirit, be all honor and
glory for ever and ever. Amen.

A prayer and thanksgiving for the Queen, used of all the Knights and
Burgesses in the High Court of Parliament, and very requisite to be used and
continued of all her Majesty's loving subjects.
O Almighty and most merciful God, which do pitch thy tents round about thy
people, to deliver them from the hands of their enemies, we thy humble
servants which have ever of old seen thy salvation, do fall down and
prostrate our selves with praise and thanksgiving to thy glorious name, who
have in thy tender mercies from time to time saved and defended thy servant
Elizabeth our most gracious Queen, not only from the hands of strange
children, but also of late revealed and made frustrate his bloody and most
barbarous treason, who being her natural subject, most unnaturally violating
thy divine ordinance, has secretly sought to shed her blood, to the great
disquiet of thy Church, and utter discomfort of our souls: his snare is hewn
in pieces, but upon thy servant does the crown flourish. The wicked and blood
thirsty men think to devour Jacob, and to lay waste his dwelling place: But
thou, (O God) which rulest in Jacob, and unto the ends of the world, do
daily teach us still to trust in thee for all thy great mercies, and not to
forget thy merciful kindness showed to her, that fears thy name. O Lord we
confess to thy glory and praise, that thou only have saved us from
destruction, because thou have not given her over for a pray to the wicked: her
soul is delivered, and we are escaped. Hear us now we pray thee, (O most
merciful father) and continue forth thy loving kindness toward thy servant,
and evermore to thy glory and our comfort, keep her in health, with long
life, and prosperity, whose rest and only refuge is in thee, O God of her
salvation. Preserve her, as thou art wont, preserve her from the snare of the
enemy, from the gathering together of the froward, from the insurrection of
wicked doers, and from all the traitorous conspiracies of those which privily
lay wait for her life. Grant this, O heavenly father, for Jesus Christ's sake,
our only mediator and advocate, Amen.

Io. Th.

A Prayer used in the Parliament only.
O Merciful God and Father, forasmuch as no counsel can stand, nor any can
prosper, but only such as are humbly gathered in thy name, to feel the sweet
taste of thy holy spirit, we gladly acknowledge, that by thy favor stands
the peaceable protection of our Queen and Realm, and likewise this favorable
liberty granted unto us at this time to make our meeting together: Which thy
bountiful goodness we most thankefully acknowledging, do withal earnestly
pray thy divine Majesty so to incline our hearts, as our counsels may be
subject in true obedience to thy holy word and will. And sith it has pleased
thee to govern this Realm by ordinary assembling the three estates of the
same: our humble prayer is, that thou will graffe in us good minds to
conceive, free liberty to speak, and on all sides a ready and quiet consent
to such wholesome laws and Statutes, as may declare us to be thy people, and
this Realm to be prosperously ruled by thy good guyding and defense: so that
we and our posterity may with cheerful hearts wait for thy appearance in
judgment, that art only able to present us faultlesse before God our heavenly
Father: to whom with thee our Savior Christ, and the holy Spirit, be all
glory both now and ever. Amen.

Imprinted at London by C. B.

Cum priuilegio.


