THE MOVS-TRAP.

MORDENTEM MORDEO*


Vni si possim, posse placere sat est. Printed at London for F. B. dwelling at
the Flower de Luce and Crown in Pauls-churchyard. 1606.

To his no little respected friend little JOHN BVCK, I dedicate this my little
Book.
Sirrah Jack, it fares with me, as with a fearful and faint-hearted
Souldior, that being danted at the brunt of Wars, would feign betake himself
unto his heels; or as some humorous or fantastic Painter, who falling in
dislike with his own workmanshippe, dasheth out that in a moment, which he
framed not in a month. I once was willing to publish these idle rimes, which
then I reckoned without mine host (as thinking on the Suruayors, but not
controulers hereof) for to their doom and indignation I either must submit my
self, or yield to be beaten with mine own Incke-horne. Alas you see it is but
the silly Mouse, I only aim at, for any greater or more venomous vermin, I
leave them altogether to the cunning Rat-catcher, (my little trap being much
too weak and unable to hold them.) Thy counsel gentle John) comes now to late
in this extremity or rather ambiguity of difference, that should have held my
peace (thou wile say) till mine accusers had brought their actions; whereunto I
might better have pleaded, Non est factum, then rashly thus in Publicum
proripere: But seeing that which is done, cannot be now undone, I must
adventure the worst that may come, Semel insaniuimus omnes, and there is my rest.
Farewell.

Thine in the prodigallity of his Loves sincerity. H P

To the plaine-dealing Reader.
HOnest friend, and good fellow, (for so durst I call a very good man's Son)
howsoever others may take exceptions; if any such there be, it is ten to one I
know them not, or at lest desire not to be known of them, for to none such
offer I these abortiue lines, that either are of curious apprehension, famous
profession, or austere disposition. But then may they come upon me with that
old saying of Quam quisque norit artem, with nec Suitor vltra crepida^: it is
true, i will not deny but that every fool may make a rhyme, though for my own
part, I no more profess the one, then willingly would assume the other. I
could have said Right Courteous, worthy, and respected Reader, but that you
know were to insinuate; which in a preface of so plain consequence I hold
most frivolous and unnecessary: Howbeit with some it is as usual as salt and
spoons before meat. But you may see I meddle not with you, or any so judicious
Audience. To thee my therefore kind familiar, and old acquaintance, I trust I
shall not need use many complementes (a word more stale the^ Mackarel in
July) which if it but relish in thy mouth near so little (I mean if it but
iumpe with thy worste conceits) I care not: At least do but suspend what thou
immaginest, and it shall suffice. Farewell.

The Mouse-trap.
Ad Curiosum.
ANd why the Mouse-trap, quoth my Caualyer?
and looking further (says) What have we here*
Faith neither Physic, nor Philosophy,
affected Proze, or learned Poesy,
The homespun russet, suteth some that wear it,
and many brave it out, that ill may bear it:
I neither treat of stout Themistocles,
nor use I choice or quaint Hiperboles,
Only unfold by way of borrowed rhyme,
some few fantastic humors of our time:
Wherein (if ought that's pleasing) may content thee
take it: If not, suppose no harm was meant thee,
and good enough.
Faults escaped in Printing.
Epigram. 1. for their, read his. ep. 35. for lights, alights, ep. 50. for as,
are. ep 51. for he, she. ep 57. for, but (prouiso,) but (with prouiso) ep. 62.
for daily, duly. ep. 70, leave out for. ep. 92. leave out good. Ibid, for have,
had.

The Mouse-trap.
Epigram. 1.
LVseus that once lay with his Mistress maid,
And (fearing much to have the matter known)
Went to his fellow, whom he friendly praide,
To counsel him, as were the case his own:
He that more cunning knew what should be done,
Took this advantage for their better speed.
To finish that which the other had begun;
But then alas, she proou'd with child indeed:
And made the Woodcock (who did first bewray it)
Stand to the reckning, that could better pay it.
2.
NIsa, who from her window glaunst her eyes,
saw Mopsus come, as fast as foot could trot:
For joy whereof, upon her bed she lies,
(as who should think, she slept and saw him not.)
'Twas very strange, unless she meant herein,
Her eyes should not be open unto sin.
3.
WHen Caeus was accused of a rape,
for stealing secretly to his maids bed:
He hardly could the doom of law cape,
(had he not thus the matter colored.)
That took his oath (nor did he swear amiss,)
He went not to his maids bed, for 'twas his.
4.
Ask Fiens how his luck at Dicing goes,
Like to the Tide (says he) it ebbes and flows:
Then I suppose his chance cannot be good,
for all men knows, it is longer ebb then flood.
5.
YOung Codrus Landlord to his fathers rents,
which happy time (long looked for) does expire,
Addresseth him with these abilliments,
as least beseemes the son of such a Sire.
And thus he gallants it some year and more,
Until his Tenants thrust him out of door.
6.
A Scoffing mate, passing along Cheap Side,
incontinent a gallant Less e^pied:
Whose tempting breasts (as to the sale laid out,)
incites this youngster thus to gin to flour.
Lady (quoth he) is this flesh to be sold?
no Lord (quoth she) for silver nor for gold,
But wherefore a^ke you? (and there made a stop)
To buy (quoth he) if not? shut up your shop.
7.
BRisco that gallant yongster keeps his bed,
as faining to be sick, but (wot you why?)
Not of an ague, or an aching head,
no burning fever, or French malady.
Tush, none of these can half so much molest him,
As yonder flat-cap soole, that would arrest him.
8.
Jesus how strange you make it Mistress Jane,
Will you not know your quondam tried friends?
Remember since you lodged in Pudding lane;
Shall former kindness merit no amends?
I say no more: well may you change your name,
But once a whore, you should be still the same.
9.
MOunsier Flemingo, fraught with Angels store,
Would see fair London, never seen before:
Where (lodging with his Mistress but one night,)
had (ere he parted) put them all to flight.
10.
FIne Mistress Delia defies the man,
That proffers less to her then golden fees:
What, think you her some common Curtizan,
That will her credit or her custom leese?
In faith sir no: But ere you shall go hence,
She will for once, accept of eighteen pence.
11.
BRutus, that brave and complete Caualier,
Who thus of late in Fleet Street flourished*
Thought then no pleasure or expense too dear,
But see how soon the case is altered.
As that constrained to divide the street,
He now betakes himself unto the Fleet.
12.
MAdam Rugosa knows not where to find,
one chambermaid of ten, that likes her minds
But still my Lord (on proof of comely charge)
Prefers them to his Seruing-men in marriage.
13.
THe times are waxen dead with Dalila,
who (since the Term) has had but little sturring,
Then was he sought-to more then Helena,
And Gallants gallopt then in Coaches hurring.
But now she speaks with all that please to call,
Lo thus her trade does Termely rise and fall.
14.
FAunus for feats of Fencing bears the Bell.
for skill in music on each instrument:
For dancing, caruing, and discoursing well,
with other sundry gifts more excellent.
But striving still to make his credit stronger,
The Tailor will not trust him any longer.
15.
LAwrence has loved his Mistress full seven year,
(served her I should say) yet nere durst come near
So much as kiss her glove, or tie her shoe,
Think you your M^stris ( Lawrence) should you woe?
16.
I Pray Sir, did you note on Sunday last,
how richly Rubin was apparrelled?
Well may he be compared to a blast,
or liked to one that is metamorphised.
For on next morning (ere the day did dawne,)
All that he wore, and more, was laid to pawn.
17.
WHat means Rosamond to walk so late,
when no man can d^cerne her face or feature:
(But by her habit may preiudicate,)
she is some fair, or rather famous Creature.
Oh good Sir, understand that in the dark,
One man of twenty may mistake the mark.
18.
I Asked Brusus, why he takes that pains,
To trot in Term time for so little gains:
His answer was, that such as stand on wooings,
must howsoever, seem to have some doings.
19.
LOrellos wife is lately brought a bed,
(as luck would have it) of a goodly boy:
The hopeful issue of her maidenhead,
And only lewell of the fathers joy.
Well (God forgive them that may think amiss,)
But sure as death, the Child is none of his.
20.
TVsh hang it: have at all (says Curio,)
Comes not deuce ace, as soon as six and three?
Who would not rather, half his lands forgo,
Then be out dared, by such a one as he.
But thus he speaks (his father scant yet cold,)
And never means to live, till he be old.
21.
SOto is lately gone to Sturbridge fair,
whose little takings, makes the Gull despair:
'Twere good some friend of his, would tell the Mome
his wife has had takings enough at home.
22.
HOw comes it, Druso lives unmarried,
that whilome was a suitor to so many;
Alack, his love has still miscarried,
And he (misled) was never loved of any.
I doubt the grief of such remembrance past,
Will cause the Cockscombe hang himself at last.
23.
HOw like you little Dol in her deep ruff,
seems she not now as proper as the best?
You think you may command her: marry muffe?
she scorns the motion: fough that were a jest.
Because she sold her wares so cheap of late:
Must they be always prised at that rate?
24.
THis makes Menalcas muse above the rest,
to see how quaint my Lady is a dressed:
For from the girdle upwards (durst he swear,)
she does the shape of very man appear.
25.
GAllus that greatest Roost-cock in the rout,
swells as big as Bacchus did with Wine:
Like to a Hulke, he bears himself about,
and bristels as a Boar, or Porpentine.
It Is not his locks that makes him look so big,
For all men knows he wears a Periwig.
26.
NOw fie upon thee Coward Nemius,
that often have pulled thy Ladies stockings on:
Yet still were bashful, not so venturous,
as scarce so much, her leg to look upon.
Who comes so near fair game, and lets it pass,
(At least vnproou'd) approues himself an Ass.
27.
YOung Lady Flora, when she first did wed,
was then but careless of her Husbands bed:
Which want of years made her esteem as light,
yet with her Seruing-man would dance all night.
28.
It Is strange to see, how pure, precise, and neat,
Rufinus walks in his ruffe-set band:
Who will (forsooth) no flesh on Fridayes eat,
but still on nice and curious points does stand.
Ask him wherefore, he gives you ghostly reason,
But then his whore comes never out of season.
29.
GVydo has goodly lodgings that he lets,
to Gentlewomen of the better sort:
Nor cares he how little gain he gets,
so they approved be of good report.
But still he lights upon some lawless Trull,
That by her sleights Guydo is made a gull.
30.
WOuld any deem Dacus were now the man,
who was not worth of late a wooden Can?
Doubtless his skill in something does surpass,
but his Red nose is still the same it was.
31.
I Wonder when our Poets will forbear,
to write against Citizens their honest wives:
Who (though unknown to me) yet durst I swear,
they never wronged man in all their lives.
Put case their husbands pocket (you know what)
Must they on Stages needs be pointed at?
32.
Persuade not Romulus to take a wife,
who is to wedlock sworn an enemy:
And ever vows to lead a single life,
which he accoumpts most honest purity.
Besides a thousand reasons that constraines him,
Amongst the rest a Merchants wife maintains him.
33.
DAmon his Dick has not these three years seen,
nor knows where he has concealed been:
Was it not strange, that they so iumpe should meet,
both at a bawdy house in Turnebull-street?
34.
I Cry you mercy sir, I knew you not,
thus Courtly Metamorphised of late:
The Country questionless has you forgot,
you brave it out with that ma^estick state.
As (but I now recall whose son you were)
You might have passed for some Nobles heir.
35.
POntus is posting hetherwards apace,
to dine with diverse that in Fleetstreet meets him,
But see the lucklesse chance of such a case,
as soon as he alights, the Sergeant greets him,
So that the burden he should have defraid,
Was wholly now, upon mine Hostess laid.
36.
RVfus is wondrous rich, but what of that?
he lives obscurely like a water Rat:
And his apparel, which he seldom buies,
are such as Houns-dich and Long-lane supplies.
37.
Mistress Finetta, for her ready wit,
is much admired, and beloved of many,
B^t this one fault of hers confounds it,
she will devide, and jesting scoff at any.
Which by an ill accustomed use comes on her,
And yet there is one that plays as much upon her.
38.
MOunsier Montanus is no little man,
of vnaprooued valor to his foe:
Persuade, or woo him, with what words you can,
heel be revenged, all the world must know.
But when he found one with his wife in bed,
For fear, or shame, he durst not show his head.
39.
CElso but newly wedded, does repent,
and means to be diuorst incontinent:
Alas (poor Celso) knewst thou not before,
she ever was, and will be still a ( --)
40.
A Knot of Knaves are early met together,
consulting where to break their fast that day:
Each well prepared, said no matter whether,
for none amongst them had wherewith to pay.
At length an honest gull, that knew them not,
Came in by chance, and needs would pay the shot.
41.
CVtbert our Cobbler can no more forheare,
to take Tobacco, then to live unknown:
He drinks all whiffes at least, and learnes to swear,
by Heavens: his oaths and humors are his own.
But adding hereunto a pot or more,
He stands to nothing which he spoke before,
42.
CLitus with clients is well customed,
that has the laws but little studied:
No matter Clitus (so they bring thee fees)
how ill the Case, and thy advise agrees.
43.
FIe, would you offer Wynifrid that wrong,
as to attempt her Virgin chastity?
Well wotteth she, you cannot love her long,
and (which is worse) the world may it epsy.
Which (once revealed) she wete quite undone,
And yet at length chaste Wynifride was wone.
44.
PHilo is wondrous jealous of his wife,
and urges terms of shrewd suspicion:
But knows not him the causer of his strife,
yet will he yield to no condition.
For more he vexed is that knows it not,
Then if you horn him to his face God wot.
45.
SIsley and Kate are gone to frollick it,
late in the evening with their Tom and Kit,
What luck had they to buy their sport so dear,
that in the morning must have whipping cheer.
46.
SVch were those Epigrams of elder times,
done by that rare and matchless Martial:
As what is now written, are but idle rimes,
(compared to him) that did surpass them all.
Not Virgil, Homer, Horace, Iuuenal,
Nor all the rest were like to Martial.
47.
MIstrisse Morinda is more coy then wise,
but fair she is, and that most richly fair:
Her husband bears it out (let that suffice)
and all defects is able to repair.
But yet I wonder they should so excel,
That have been banckrout, all the world can tell.
48.
NIlus that Niggard, spends much in wast,
true: for he keeps a Drab, yet seems she chaste:
Who (least a wife from Lymbo should enlarge him,)
at all times serves his turn, but more does charge him.
49.
WHy should Hipolito be mal-content,
with that which pleases fortune to alot:
He thinks it not perhaps indifferent,
that some take ease, whiles other toil and trot.
Besides, will any man of patience,
Be called a Cuckold in his own defense?
50.
WHat tell you me of such a Pesant Groom,
that scrapeth up together so much thrift:
Which he obscures within some desert room,
and basely lives unknown by any shift.
His looks as Characters of his descent,
sprung from the loins of some mechanic Syte:
That never knew what civil usage meant,
but to be only rich does still aspire:
Spur such a one in ought but in his trade,
And you shall soon perceive hele prove a lade.
51.
PEter has lost his purse, but will conceal it,
Least he that stole it, to his shame reveal it.
52.
LIeutenant Lentulus lives discontent,
and much repineth at the want of wars*
For when his credit, coin, and all is spent,
what should he do, but idly curse the stars.
Content thee Lentulus with thine estate,
That were not idle when thou ^^^als^ the plate.
53.
MArcellus museth how to spend that day,
wherein it likes him not to see a play:
But then he falls in some worse place I doubt,
and stays so long till he be fired out.
54.
PRiscilla proves most dainty of a kiss,
when she entreated, wooed, and courted is:
Lord how she simpring sits, and minceth it,
in very deed Sir, she will not eat a bit.
As full of manners as of modesty,
True* if her virtue be hypocrisy.
55.
OLd doting Claudus does in have desire,
with beauteous young Penelope to wed:
Whose frozen appetite is set on fire,
Until the match be thoroughly finished.
Indeed as good dispatch, as make delay,
That must be horned on his wedding day.
56.
SIgnior Fantasmus nere such pleasure found,
in any thing, as in a deep mouthed hound:
Small was that pleasure, when upon one day,
he lost his hair, and hunted all away.
57.
Have you not heard of Mounseir Maximus,
that lives by lending without interest:
Yes, yes: but ( Prouiso tells you thus)
you must assure your lands, for such request.
Which done, you will find that inconvenience,
As better 'twere the Devil had fetched him hence.
58.
WHen Cacus had been wedded now three days,
and all his neighbors bad God give him joy:
This strange conclusion with his wife assayes,
why till her marage day she proved so coy.
(Quoth he) we man and wife in manner were,
a month before, then could we have repented?
Alas (quoth she) had I not cause to fear,
how you might conster it (had I consented.)
Fore God (quoth he) 'twas well thou did not yield,
for doubtless then my purpose was to leave thee*
Oh Sir (quoth she) I once was so beguild,
and thought the next man should not so deceive me.
Now out alas (quoth he) thou breedst my woe:
Why man (quoth she) I speak but quid pro quo.
59.
TAssus has learning, but no ready wit,
For drink and dotage daily drowneth it.
60.
WHere has Sir John so long been resident,
leaving his pensive Lady all amort:
Who will not say (woe worth such time misspent)
(for grief whereof she has no list to sport.
But leave her not again in such a plight,
Least (out of mind) she prove more out of sight.
61.
SAm swore an oath, that those late Lotteries,
were mere deceits, and idle mockeries:
For of a hundred, if he two did pluck,
the slanders by would say, 'twas Cuckolds luck.
62.
SIluanus boasts of those debts he owes,
as who should think, his credit then was such:
But all his substance, valued now (God knows)
amounts not to the twentieth part so much.
Tush, that is no debt which (due) thou still delayest,
But what with honest care thou daily payest.
63.
HEard ye not yet of Captain Ferdinand?
that was so wont to swagger and earowse:
He lodges now no longer in the Strand,
but is removed thence to such a house:
Where all his best acquaintance that he knows,
Will not redeem the one half of what he owes.
64.
CAstus (of all sins) makes most conscience,
that men should thus with chastity dispense:
She that weds him, must have his maidenhead*
at least may chance to bring a fool to bed.
65.
NAy see if Momus yet can cease to flout,
how should he choose, his mere conceits are such?
It Is good sir: I Will not say you are a lout,
(but may not one presume to think as much?)
I doubt, when we have both done what we can,
The best will scarce prove good Gramatian.
66.
SHall Simon Suckegge, simple Simkins son,
be matched with beauty for his little pelf?
Much better were the Lobcock lost then won,
unless he knew how to behave himself.
But this has ever been the plague of it:
That such are loved more for their wealth then wit.
67.
FEstus that feasted long on delicates,
now such fantastic fulsome diet hates:
Is it not reason he should spare at last,
that has consumed more then all in wast?
68.
Brave minded Medon can no more endure,
to live in England, then to brook the lie*
Tush, your temptations cannot him allure,
he scorns them as an idle mockene.
Urge him no more, I tell you 'twill but grieve him:
For here his means no longer may relieve him.
69.
NAy good Sir, give us leave at least to know you,
was not your father once a man of trade?
You now are rich: I know who may beshrow you,
that for your sake, were younger brothers made.
(Hark in your ear: it is not the wealth you have,
Can shield you from the scandal of a Knave.
70.
PIso has stolen a silver Boul in jest,
for which (suspected only,) not confessed:
Rather then Piso will restore the boull,
boldly aduentureth for to damn his soul.
71.
But may they swell with envy till they burst,
(so thou be rich,) let others fret then fill:
The Fox much better fares being cursed,
and those that threaten, have least power to kill.
It cannot be thy trade should ever fall,
That have already got the Devil and all.
72.
MArcus that had a fair (but wanton) wife,
by whom, all hope of issue was in vain:
Thought it a hellish and ungodly life,
to reap no fruit, but labor still for pain.
At length expecting (what he found by chance)
and wisely seeing (what he would not see.)
Steps him aside with smiling countenance,
as if his luck were such as it should be.
Was it not wit (think you?) well go thy ways,
Thou more deseruest then a Martyrs praise.
73.
CRasus of all things loves not to buy,
so many books of such diversity:
Your Almanac (says he) yields all the sense,
of times best profit and experience.
74.
PAulus a Pamphlet does in proze present,
unto his Lord ( The fruits of idle time:)
Who far more careless, then therewith content.
wished he would convert it into rhyme.
Which done (and brought him at an other season,)
Said, now it is rhyme, before nor time nor reason.
75.
TIb took an oath, that Tomisin was no maid,
who angry bad bear record what she said,
As good have published it with Trumpets blown,
as call for witness in a case so known.
76.
WHen Milo means to spare, then spends he most
let him but come where sport or gaming is,
His humor cannot hold till all be lost,
and never thinks he has done amiss.
For thus resolved, Milo cares not whether,
He pay the one half or lie for all together.
77.
SIr, can you tell where my young master lives,
that was surnamed here the Prodigal,
He that so much for his silk Stockings gives,
till naught is left him to buy boots withal.
Oh blame him not to make what show he can,
How should he else be thought a Gentleman.
78.
PHilippus flouteth at such ragged rimes,
that much distasting, tax not these his times:
Indeed I judge him much more better seen,
in other trades that he has trained been.
79.
YOung Mistress Joyce her husband does solicit,
to hire a garden-house near to the fields:
Which with her gossip she might weekly visit,
(for some thing must she have that comfort yields)
I fear this Bower of weekly recreation,
Will prove a place of daily occupation.
80.
BIndo has lost his wife he knows not where,
and frantic seeks her all the street throughout:
Take courage ( Bindo) and be of good cheer,
to morrow shall thou find her, there is no doubt.
To morrow came, deserved she to be shent,
That brought him home enough to pay his rent?
81.
SIlus has sold his Crimsen Satin suit,
and needs would learn to play upon the Lute
It Is well done ( Silus) for such suits soon wast,
whereas thy skill in Lutes will ever last:
82.
WHen Rose had reckned her full time at large,
she then bethinketh whom to nominate:
That might partake with her ensuing charge,
at length with wisdom more considerate.
She gesseth none (among all the rest) so fit,
As is the Parish Priest to father it.
83.
It Is known how well I live says Romeo,
and whom I list I Will love or will despise:
Indeed it is reason good it should be so,
for they that wealthy are, must needs be wise.
But then it is known you make most use of that,
Which better minds contemn, and spurn thereat.
84.
MEcus is now become a frugall Sire,
that spends no more then nature does require:
And yet his wife will prove a Traveler,
although but once a year he lie with her.
85.
THe humor of Tobacoo (and the rest,)
wherein our gallants took their chief delight:
Is daily had (me thinks) in less request,
and will (I fear) in time be worn out quite.
For now each Pesant puffes it through his nose:
As well as he that is clad in velvet hose.
86.
THe wicked reap what other men do sow,
But Cuckolds are excepted (that you know.)
87.
THe world is well amended with Sir Hugh,
since from the time he was a Shepherd swain,
And little dreamed then (I may tell you)
he should be made one of the Knightly train.
But (for his substance answers not his will,)
As good have dreamt or been a Shepherd still.
88.
MVsco, that always kept with policy,
what he had scraped since his infancy:
Scarce one year wedded (for he needs would marry)
has taken Ludgate for his Sanctuary.
89.
ZAnthus that wise and cunning Sophister,
lies now in Lymbo for a small offense:
Who when he came before the officer,
had not one word of wit to free him thence,
Why thus it fares, when he should best dispute,
The Devil or some ill Plannet strikes him mute.
90.
WHo brutes it Mistress Parnell is no maid*
and will not answer such discourtesie?
She scorns the very worst that can be said,
and stands so much on her v^rginitie.
As flatly to their teeth she does retort it,
presuming none so vile that will report it.
91.
DIck Swash (or Swaggring Dick) through Fleetstreet
with Sis and Bettrice waiting at his heels (reeles)
To one that would have taken the wall, he swore,
do thou not see my punck and Paramoure?
92.
DAcus has damned himself on due regard,
from Tauernes, Plays, Tobacco, and from wine,
Swearing hele live like John of Paul's Churchyard,
at least will sometimes with good Duke Humfry dine.
Twere well done ( Dacus) have thou power to do it.
But Dice and Drabs (I fear) will hold thee to it.
93.
VRbanus that committed an offense,
with a young country less (poor silly fool)
To salve his credit soon conueyes her hence,
unto a Garden-house, or vaulting-schoole.
Where now (unloaded of that lucklesse ill,)
and all dispatched (save the household charge:)
The goodman-Bawd, or Pander, (which you will)
brings him no ticket, but a Bill at large.
Item, for Pipkins, Pap, and other things,
amounting all to twenty marks or more*
And this alowd into his ears he rings,
pay Sir (quoth he) for shame discharge your score.
Vrbanus loath to be proclaimed a gull,
was willing to compound in any wise:
But yet not tending his demand at full,
said, he had seen the Lions once or twice.
The Lions answers he, that may be true,
but think you thence to merit any praise:
Each Rustic may the Lions daily view,
have you not seen the Dragons in your days?
No (quoth Vrbanus) that I must confess,
Then said the Pandar, you must pay no less.
97.
MAgus would needs forsooth this other day,
upon an idle humor see a play:
When asking him at door, that held the box,
What might you call the play? (quoth he) the Fox.
In goes my Gen-man (who could judge of wit)
And being asked how he liked it:
Said all was ill, both Fox and him that played it,
But was not he think you a Goose that said it?
95.
NAso is hurt, but how none can suppose,
Least being drunk, so fell and broke his nose.
96.
CAll Danus knave, he straightwayes draws his sword
and makes you prove as much, or eat your word*
But if you call him honest Rogue or Jew,
he hugges you then, for giving him his due.
97.
HAnd off sir Sauce-box, she is no meat for Grooms,
or common wights of base born parentage:
Alas your lean expense fits Alehouse rooms,
that with Maid-Malkin holds equipage.
Because Sir Tristram late entreated me,
You would (forsooth) be thought as good as he.
98.
QVintus has laid a wager of a Crown,
heel make a rhyme with any man in town:
For none (thinks he) may Quintus skill surmount,
Who can both write and read, and cast account.
99.
A Health (says Lucas) to his loves bright eye,
which not to pledge, were much indignity:
You cannot do him greater courtesy.
then to be drunk and damned for company.
100.
WE make our Epigrams, as men taste Cheese,
which has his relish in the last farewell:
Like as the purest liquor has his leeze,
so may you harshly end the tale you tell.
The Tail (of all things) some men aim at most,
Those that had rather fast, may kiss the post
And there is an end.
EPILOGVS.
THus have I waded through a worthless task,
Whereto (I trust) there is no exceptions taken:
For (meant to none) I answer such as ask,
it is like apparel made in Birchin lane.
If any please to suit themselue^ and wear it,
The blame's not mine, but theirs that needs will bear it.

