BOAZ AND RVTH BLESSED: OR A SACRED CONTRACT Honored with a solemn
Benediction.

BY BARTHOLOMEW PARSONS B. of Divinity and Rector of Ludgershall in the County
of Wiltes.

I have received commandment to Bless, and He has Blessed.

Number. 23.20. The friend of the Bridegroom, which stands and hears him,
rejoices greatly because of the Bridegroomes voice.

Ioh. 3.29. OXFORD Printed by John Lichfield, for William Web Ann. D. 1633.

TO MY MVCH RESPECTED FRIENDS Mr Peregrine Thistlethwaite the younger, Esquire,
and Mris Dorothy Thistlethwaite his wife.
GEnerous Sr, at the time of your happy Nuptials, when your friends and
invited guests filled you with presents of all sorts, I amongst the rest had
provided such as I have to give you, even this poor spiritual mite to have
been cast in amongst your other great gifts, had not the lot of that box of
ointment powered on our Saviors head in some sort fallen upon it. But as little
Currents by being stopped, rise higher and swell to greater streams, so this
not finding vent then to run for that hour, is now swollen to that bigness
to become a Torrent and run some longer time. The Press is now become as the
MidWife to deliver this Child, which was then come to the birth, had there bin
strength to bring forth. Yours it was then in the preparation, and yours it
must be now in the dedication, it being at first intended for you, could in no
good fashion purchase any license of Alienation to be conveyed from you. In it
you may see that as stronger blessings then ordinary were powered on the head of
Joseph that was separate from his brethren Genesis 49.26. so most powerful and
prevalent blessings are powered on the head of her that was separated from her
brethren and fathers house, and joined to the God of Israel, had professed
that he should be her God and his people her people. Ruth. 1.16. even of Ruth a
Moabitesse, who has the privilege not only to be admitted into the
Congregation of Gods people Deuteronomy. 23.3. The Hebrew Rabbis say that they have a
tradition of Moses from Mount Sinai that the males of the Ammonites and
Moabites not the females are forbidden to enter into the Congregation of God.
Maimony.
but also the Honor to have the Savior of the world come of her according to
the flesh, and to be named in the line of his Genealogy Mat. 1.5. and of Boaz
as godly in life, as mighty in wealth Ruth. 2. And when such great and good
persons bless such godly persons, they are blessed in deed, when such
faithful and holy elders sitting in the gate bless in the name of the LORD
such religious and devout Proselites, it avails very much Jam. 5.16. yea and
they shall be blessed, as Jsaacke said of his blessing Jacob, Genesis 27.33. How
much more then may you both be confident, that you shall receive blessing from
the LORD upon this your conjugal union both of names Peregrine Thistlethwait
Dorothy Thistlethwait.
and houses, since ence Deus est in vtroque parente, you are true Israelites on
both sides, neither of you new Proselites drawn out of Paganism or Idolatry,
but may with an holy boasting glory as Paul does for Timothy, 2 Timothy 1. of an
unfeigned faith that dwelt first in their Grandmothers and Mothers, and not only
so, but also in your line and generation on both sides? neither is your match
like the marrying together of the thistle in Lebanon with the Cedar in Lebanon
2. King. 14.9. an unequal conjunction, but like the joining together of
Jsaacke and Rebeckah, two persons of one kindred and family (yet Without
breaking down the Pales of degrees prohibited) of two Cardui benedicti, that
may grow into a multitude and an holy seed in the LORD. God has already
begun to make good this blessing upon you in giving you seed, and if you
fear him and keep his commandernents and dwell together in conjugal unity,
having one heart and one soul, he will command his blessing and life for ever
more, you the wife shall be as a fruitful vine, your children like olive
plants round about your table, and you shall see your childrens children and
peace upon Israel. I give you then this gift willingly, and desire you to
accept it lovingly, following that divine rule, it is accepted according to
that which a man has, and lay it up not only in your chest but also in your
hearts. And the God of Heaven prosper it to you, that it may be a faithful
Monitor to you and speak words whereby you and your children may be saved,
which shall be the Crown and rejoicing of him that longs after you in the
bowels of Jesus Christ, and desires to be esteemed

Your serviceable friend in Christ Jesus BARTH: PARSONS.

Ruth. 4.11. The Lord make the woman that is come into thine house like Rachell
and like Leah, which two did build the house of Israel do thou worthily in
Ephratah, and be famous in Bethlem.


THE Children of this World like to fishes that are in Salo, sine sale, in the
salt water without any salt taste in the^ in the midst of the holiest and
heavenliest actions and places cannot put of the shoes of their carnal
affections, Exodus 3.5. but have too frequently their thoughts and tongues
exercised about their worldly and wicked affairs, and even then and there out
of the evil treasures of their hearts, bring forth that which is evil Luke
6.45. Ezekiells auditors even whilst they were sitting before him to hear his
words and showing much love with their mouths, have their hearts going after
covetousness Ezekiel. 33.31. And whilst our savior was dividing to his hearers
the bread of life, one of the company rashly and rudely interrupteth him, about
speaking to his brother to divide the inheritance with him. Luke 12.13. so
hardly can they which are accustomed to evil do any good Ier. 13.23. even in
the best times and places: but on the other side, the children of light shine
still as lights in the world Phil. 2.15. have sursum corda in civil as well as
in sacred businesses, and out of the good treasures of their hearts bring forth
good things Luke 6.45. whether they are eating or drinking or whatsoever they
are doing, Gods glory is their aim and end 1. Cor. 10.31. in all these things
eructat cor, their heart is still enditing of some good matter Psalm. 45.1. a
divine sentence is ready in their lips Prove. 16.10. and their mouth upon every
occasion is speaking of wisdom, and their tongue talking of judgment Psalm.
37.30. Let them but pass by the mowers in the field they open their mouth in
an holy prayer that may minister grace to the hearers, and say, the blessing of
the Lord be upon you, we bless you in the name of the Lord Psalm: 129.8. let
them but come to the reapers and their lips are full of grace, they say with
that good man Boaz, the Lord be with you Ruth. 2.4. In the same spirit, in the
same steps do the Elders, and all the people of Bethlehem walk here. Being
called upon to be witnesses about some civil passages of buying of lands by
Boaz, and purchasing of Ruth to be his wife, to raise up the name of the dead
upon his inheritance verse. 9.10: they are not only ready to do this good
office of bearing witness, all the people that were in the gates, and the
Elders said we are witnesses, but also bless them in the name of the Lord,
power out a most solemn and effectual fervent prayer to the Lord the father
of lights from whom comes down every good and perfect gift to prosper the
intended matrimony of this present couple with blessings befitting their
married estate, the Lord make the woman etc. Now our Savior when he would feed
the people with the bread that perishes brake it into pieces Mark. 8.6. that
every one might have his portion conveniently, I will then be a follower of
him, and as becomes a faithful and wise steward in Gods house, divide these
words aright, that every one may the better have his portion of spiritual food
out of them. In this faithful and charitable prayer then (I call it so because
Necessitas cogit orare prose: charitas fraternitatis hortatur pro alio Chrysostom.
Necessity compels a man to pray for himself, but charity exhorts him to
pray for others. We may observe the parts and points: 1. The petitioners that
find in their heart to pray this prayer as David speaks, 2. Sam. 7.27. all
the people that were in the gate and the Elders. 2. To whom they make their
prayers even to him of whom all things come 1 Chr. 29.14. the Lord, the Lord
make, 3. For whom, for the parties here purposing matrimony, the woman
severally, and the man severally. 4. For what are the petitions for them. 1.
For the woman the Lord make the woman that comes into thine house like to
Rahell and Leah which two did build the house of Israel. 2. For the man and
do thou worthily in Ephratah, and be famous in Bethlehem, or that thou may
do worthily etc. The first occurring circumstance that stands in the door
of the text like Abraham in the door of his tent, is of the persons
petitioning and praying, all the people that were in the gate, and the Elders,
they will not only be witnesses of the contract, but petitioners also for the
contracted, they will not only testify the covenant made between the parties,
but also sanctify it with their prayers. I may say then to all that are present
or any way pertinent to this worthy and weighty work of contracting and
marrying in the Lord, as our Savior to the lawyer about a work of mercy Luke
10.37. vade and fac similiter, go and do likewise, pray for the peace and
prosperity of the parties to be married, not with formal but with hearty
acclamations, not with a superficial God give you joy, but with a solemn and
substantial benediction of the parties, and invocation of the most high God
possessor of heaven and earth, to bless them out of Zion, that they may see
the good of Jerusalem all the days of their life and that they may see their
childrens children and peace upon Israel Psalm. 128.5.6. The God of heaven in
his blessing of Adam and Eve; the first married persons, in whose loins we
then were all of us, ( and God blessed them Genesis 1.28.) has showed us what is
good and what he requires of us, even to be followers of him herein as dear
children Ephesians. 5.1. And in this good and old way did the generations of old
walk. Abraham's eldest servant and ruler of his house, being sent by him to his
country and to his kindred, to take a wife unto Isaacke, when he comes to the
place, begins first with prayer to the Lord of his Master Abraham, to send
him good speed that day, and to show kindness unto his Master Abraham Genesis
24.12. And when the Lord God of his Master Abraham had led him to the house of
his Masters brethren, and had prospered his journey and he had obtained
Rebeccah to be wife unto his Masters son, her brother, mother, and friends
solemnly bless her at his departure, and say, Thou art our sister be the
mother of thousands of Millions, and let thy seed possess the gates of those
that hate them Genesis 24.60. And when Isaacke being stricken in years sent Jacob
to Padan-Aram amongst his kindred to find out a wife, he prays seriously for
his prosperous success, God almighty bless thee and make thee fruitful, and
multiply thee, that thou may be a multitude of people, and give the blessing
of Abraham to thee, and to thy seed with thee Genesis 28.3.4. And that (...)
marriage Psalm endited at Solomon's taking to wife of Pharaohs daughter being
an eminent type of the spiritual. marriage between Christ and his Church,
does omnia fausta precari, pray for all happiness to the married parties, is
full of supplications for them, benedictions of them, and prophetical
predictions of happiness unto them Psalm. 45. And if all things must be done in
the name of the Lord, Col: 3.17. much more must this great thing be begun in
the name of the Lord, if (...) every creature or ordinance of God must be
sanctified with prayer 1 Timothy 4.5. much more must this solemn ordinance of his
be blessed and sanctified with prayer. It is a good rule given by Mark the
Eremite (...), prayer must be the Usher of all our actions. But how are these
last and worst days whereinto we are fallen, degenerated from this holy course?
Happily we may hear a formal and superficial acclamation of God give you
joy, drap out of some few men's mouths at such times and meetings. But most men's
unsanctified mouths at such times, like puddle waters, that being stirred send
forth noisome sent, breath our nothing but such corrupt communications as may
rather minister grief then grace to the hearers, and which might better befit
the unchaste bed of fornication in the stews, then the undefiled be dde of
honorable matrimony in the house, and from the abundance of their polluted
hearts, they belch forth such unclean and unsavory words as may make their
ears to tingle that hear them: They cannot speak the language of Canaan at
such times, any holy and heavenly prayers, but the language of Ashdod ribals
and scurrilous jests, filthy and foolish talking which are not convenient, as
the Apostle speaks Ephesians. 5.3. And as David said of the slanderous tongue Psalm.
52.4. thou love all devouring words o thou deceitful tongue: so may I of
theirs, thou love all defiling words, o thou vain and unclean tongue; The
marriage meetings with them are never well seasoned or celebrated unless they
be filled with filthy discourses, and obsceane songs, and of a Bride house a
Brothell house as the Idolatrous Jews turned Bethell, Gods house, into a
Bethauen, an house of vanity, Hos. 4.15. They countenance not Gods ordinance
with their holy apprecations, but rather confound the married parties with
their horrible prophanations, and fill their faces with shame, as though with
Zimri and Cosbi, they were taken in an unclean act, Numb: 25. and the language
of the whorish woman, come let us take our fill of love until the morning, let
us solace our selves with loves, Prou: 7.15. is nothing so impure, as many of
their unchaste songs and discourses such a world of iniquity is in men's tongues
to defile this sacred business with.

Now if it become all the people to pray at such times, much more are prayers
comely in the mouths of the Priests of the people, if it be good for the
Elders that are in the gate to pray for the married persons, much more is it
good for the Elders of the Church to pray for them, and bless them as they are
commanded to pray over the sick Iam. 5. And this we press and praise not as
making the Ecclesiastical benediction of the Priest the very essential form
of matrimony, as most of the Popish writers do, (for then all matrimonies in
the world without this benediction should have been no better then
fornications, utterly void for want of an essential form) but as requiring it
for a solemn and public testification of the matrimonial consent, and a
benediction of the parties publishing their consent, and entering into the
covenant of God. For howsoever in foro interiori, in the court of the
conscience, it be a true marriage where there is a free and full consent of
the parties before lawful witnesses, and cannot absolutely be made void for
want of a benediction given in the Church, yet in foro exteriori, in the
external court, by evident deduction out of holy writ, and by the laws of the
Church and most Commonwealths, it is no lawful nor laudable marriage, which is
not confirmed and blessed in the face of the Church. Paenes nos occultae
conjunctiones, id est, non prius apud Ecclesiam professae, juxta maechiam and
fornicationem periclitari judicantur. says Tertullian lib. de pudicitia cap.
4. With us secret marriages, that are not solemnized first in the Church, are
esteemed fit to be questioned as adulteries and fornications: And though
Tertullian be very ancient, yet this benediction in the face of the Church is
ancienter, came into it from the beginning, even in the first hundred year
after our Savior: Platina in the life of Soter Bishop of Rome, who lived in
the year of Christ 174. refers it to him and says he ordained it, Ne
legitima haberetur vxor nisi cui sacerdos ex instituto benedixisset, that none
should be accounted a lawful wife, but whom the Minister had blessed according
to the ordinance; But yet this rite of benediction is more ancient. For
Euaristus who was Bishop of Rome in the year of Christ 97, in an Epistle to
the Bishops of Africa found in the first Tome of the Counsels, and in the
Decrees cap. 30. q. 5. speaks thus of it, Aliter legitimum vt a Patribus
accepinius, and a sanctis Apostolis etc. Marriage is not otherwise lawful, as
we have received it of the Fathers, and as we find it delivered by the
Apostles, unless in its proper time it be Ecclesiastically blessed by the
Priest with prayers and oblations as the manner is, wedlockes so made are
lawful, if they be otherwise undertaken, there is no doubt but they are
adulteries, or dwellings together, or whoredoms, or fornications rather then
marriages that are lawful. And Tertullian again in his second book to his
wife the 9 chapter says, Vnde sufficiam ad enarrandam faelicitatem ejus
matrimonij, etc. How can I sufficiently set out the happiness of that marriage
which the Church makes, the communion confirms, the Angels declare to be
sealed, and the father counts ratified. And S. Ambrose for his time in his 70
Epistle says, Conjugium velamine sacerdotis and benedictione sanctificari
oportet. Marriage must be sanctified with the Priests putting on a veil and
benediction: Synesius coming to be Bishop of Cyrene, and professing that he
would still hold his wife with his Bishopric, mentions this custom, Mihi
and Deus ipse and leges, ipsaque Theophili sacra manus vxorem dedit: God
himself, and the laws, and the holy hand of Theophilus has given me a wife:
Therefore I declare to you all, and would have it witnessed, that I will not
forsake her. Nicephorus lib. 4. hist. Eccles. cap. 55. And the fourth Council
of Carthage in the 13 Canon says, When the Bridegroom and the Bride are to
be blessed of the Priest, let them be presented by their parents, or those
that have the charge of the wedding. Both the laws, Ecclesiastical, and
Imperial are full of Canons and Constitutions, that none should wed privately,
but benedictione a sacerdote accepta public, Cap. null. cap. and qu. ijsdem.
Receiving the Priests benediction publicly, nisi sacerdotum precibus
matrimonium corroboratum fuerit, unless the matrimony be confirmed by the
Priests prayer, which is the constitution of the Emperors Leo and Alexius
Comnenus. The heretical Anabaptists then and schismatic Brownists
professing themselves to be wise, become fools in condemning this ancient,
needful, and laudable rite of public blessing in the face of the Church, the
new married persons in the name of the Lord, as though there were no more
required in contracting for a wife then in bargaining for a horse, only to
shake hands and come together.

But we have eaten so much of the honey of this first point (the persons
petitioning here) as is sufficient for us, Prove. 25.16. I come therefore to the
next branch, to whom they petition and pray, the Lord make] And indeed on whom
should they call for the marriage blessing but on him who is the father of
mercies, and God of all comfort, 2. Cor. 1.3. From whom comes down every
good and perfect gift, Iam. 1.17. But on him, of whom, and through whom, and to
whom are all things: Rom: 11.36. In whose hand is power and might, and in whose
hand it is to make great and to give strength unto all, and of whom all things
come, 1. Chr. 29.11.12. Whose blessing alone makes rich, Prove. 10.22. and of
whom whosoever are blessed they shall be blessed, Gen: 27.33. who^ should they
have in heaven but the Lord to call upon, Psalm. 73.25. And who can show us any
good unless he lift up the light of his countenance upon us, Psalm. 4.6. King
Darius Parasites made both a flattering and a bloud-sucking law, (like the
Image that Pliny speaks of, that had both a frowning and a smiling looks)
That no man should ask any petition of any God or man for thirty days, but of
him, and this could not be changed according to the law of the Medes and
Persians which alters not. Dan. 6.7. But it is an immutable and inviolable
law established in the high Court of heaven, not for thirty days but from the
beginning, till time shall be no more, that none of the household of faith
should ask any petition either for the blessings of heaven above, or the earth
beneath, or for any spiritual blessings in Christ Jesus, of any of the sons
of men in earth, or the sons of God in heaven (I mean the company of the
blessed Angels, or the spirits of just men made perfect) but only of the LORD
our Father and Redeemer whose name is everlasting, Isa. 63 16. Call upon me in
the day of trouble, Psalm. 50.15. and if upon him; whom should they have in
heaven but him. And it is surely sealed unto us with the bond of a double oath,
verily, verily, I say unto you, Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my
name, not the Father and me in the holy Angels and blessed Saints name, he
will give it you, Ioh. 16.23. Here I might reap that which the holy Ghost has
sowed, that this Father of lights, and fountain of all blessings is to be
sought and sued to in all our necessities, but I will only hoc agere, prosecute
opus diei in die suo, the work of the day in its right time and keep my self
within the sphere of Marriage not turning either to the right or left hand. In
their asking of God a blessing on these married parties here, they plainly
profess marriage to be of his ordinance and institution. For God as at the
beginning, Genesis 1. so now blesses only the work of his own hand; that which
he has ordained and instituted and not any of the works of darkness, or of
Satan the prince of darkness. It should imply a very contradiction, that God
should condemn marriage as a work of the flesh, in which state men cannot
please him, and yet bless Adam and Eve at the first ( God blessed them and
said, increase and multiply, Genesis 1.28.) and these here, and other married
persons in future times in the Church. Out of his holy mouth cannot proceed
blessing and cursing of the same state of life. Marriage then is his ordinance,
and the work of his hands, and ordained by him non communiter sed singulari
modo, not after the common fashion of his other works, but after a singular
manner. For he did not only ordain it in that holy place of Paradise, and in
that time when Adam stood upright, as he was created after the image of God in
holiness and righteousness, but in the institution of it, first as it were
consulted about the making of woman, and ordaining of it, It is not good that
the man should be alone, I will make him a help meet for him, Genesis 2.18. As
before he had deliberated about the making of man, ( let us make man in our
Image, after our likeness Genesis 1.20.) and did not make him with a words
speaking, as he did the other creatures, therein showing not the infirmity of
the workman, but the excellency and dignity of the work, according to that of
Saint Basil homil: 10. hexameron, de nullo operum, This word let us make, is
written of none of the works which God had formerly made, but all things are
made by Gods bare word and commandment Learn therefore o man, how much thou
only art esteemed, for God did not think it fit to join thy generation to the
common commandment of the creatures, as a matter of vulgar price. After this
God put his consultation and decree in execution, in forming the woman with his
own hands, and when he had formed her, in bringing her to the man, in joining
them together, in blessing them, and publishing the law of matrimony, therefore
shall a man leave his father and mother and cleave to his wife and they shall
be one flesh Genesis 2.24. in all which tanquam in expressis tabulis we may see
the finger and ordinance of God. Therefore Theophilact in Epitome divinorum
dogmatum(...)says, God has not only fashioned the woman, but he also joined
her to the man, according to the law now in practice. He brought her to the
man, and he himself was the betrother and giver of her in wedlock as also he
brought a certain gift to the wedding, his blessing. And the man as soon as
she was brought to him acknowledges her spiritu prophetico, by the spirit of
prophecy, to be of Gods forming and ordinance, Adam said, this is now bone of
my bone, and flesh of my flesh, she shall be called woman because she was taken
out of man Genesis 2.23. yea after the fall, he had so much light still to
acknowledge her to be Gods gift, he calls her the woman that thou gave me
Genesis 3.12. And least then it might be thought, that man's sin had made void
Gods ordinance, God both still kept on foot this his ordinance, even when he
denounced to the serpent, that the seed of the woman should break his head,
and to the woman, in sorrow shall thou bring forth Children, thy desire shall
be to thy husband and he shall rule over thee Genesis 3.15.16. (whereupon Adam
calls his wives name Eve because she was the mother of all living verse. 20.)
and also after the flood fully renewed his Charter to Noah and his sons,
blessing them and saying be fruit full, multiply and replenish the face of the
earth Gen, 9.1. Qui been eruditi sunt in fide Catholica, noverunt quod Deus
fecerit nuptias, They that are well instructed in the Catholic faith, know
that God has ordained marriage August: tract. 9. in Ioh. Connubium non est ex
colluvione peccati, sed ex institutione Dei, Marriage comes not from the
corruption of sin, but from the ordinance of God. Fulgen: de statu viduarum
ep. 2.

And when this ordinance was much defiled by rash divorces, marrying of many
wives, and wandering lusts, our Savior upon the Pharisees tempting him about
divorces, revoketh and refers all to the first institution, have ye not read
that he which made them at the beginning made them male and female, and said
for this cause shall a man leave Father and Mother and shall cleave to his
wife, and acknowledge that still to be Gods ordinance, and the married parties
to be joined together by God Mat. 19.4.5.6. And to give a real demonstration
hereof after he was baptized in Jordan and invested into the office of the
Mediator, he vouchsafes not only his presence at a wedding, but also honors
it with the first miracle that ever he wrought Ioh. 2. Quomodo non crunt
venerabiles nuptiae etc. Epiphan. lib. 2. haer. 67, how shall not marriage be
honorable and obtain the kingdom of heaven, when our savior was called to a
marriage that he might bless it? For if he had refused to go to a wedding,
then he had been a dissolver of marriage, but now he comes to a wedding that
he might stop their mouths that spoke against the truth. Ipse rogatus ad
nuptias etc. (Aug: in quaest. vet. and nov. test. quaest, 127) Christ being
entreated disdained not to go to a wedding, and not only adorned it with his
presence, but also bestowed that which was wanting to mirth; for it is written,
that wine makes glad the heart of man. And that he might show that he did this
according to the will of God his father, he answered the Jews about divorces,
saying, that which God has joined together, let no man put asunder. Marriage
then is Gods ordinance, the marriage covenant is Gods covenant Prove. 2.17. it
is he that prepares and appoints the wife for the husband, and the husband
for the wife, Abraham says to his servant, the God of Heaven shall send his
Angel before thee, and thou shall take a wife to my son Genesis 24.7. and the
servant prays that the Damsel that gives him and his Cammels water may be
the woman whom God had appointed for Isaacke ver. 14. And the Angel tells
Tobias of Sarah that should be his wife, she was appointed unto thee from the
beginning Tobit. 6.17. And it is God that knitteth their hearts one to another
in love, It was of the Lord that Sampson loved and desired the woman of Timnah
Iud. 14.4. Hence then may the tongue of the learned speak a word in season,
for the stopping of those foul mouths that shoot out their arrows even
bitter words, either against the state of matrimony to disgrace it as
miserable, or against the ordinance it self to condemn it as sinful and
abominable. For the first we have a generation in the world, who seem wise in
their own eyes, if they can boldly calumniate, and smite with the tongue this
state and kind of life as most wretched: The old heathens invectiues, fill
their mouths with vain reasonings and janglings against it (...); say they
with Menander Marriage is the uttermost of misery and with Epicharmus (...)
etc. there are but two good days with a woman, when a man marries her and
when a man burieth her, and with another Satyrist, (...) etc. every woman is
bitterness and she has but two good times, one in the bed another in the
grave, with Ovid Faemina nulla bona est etc. No woman is good, but if a good
wife has happened to any one, I know not how an ill thing is become good, and
with Plautus in paen. act. 1. Negotij qui sibi volet vim comparare, navim and
mulierem, haec duo comparato etc. He that will get him store of business, let
him get (...) these two things, a ship and a wife, for no two (...) more
business: and with Menander in (...) 13. deipnos. cap. 13. In pelagus (...),
etc. thou throwest thy self into (...) business, not the Lybucke or Aegean
sea, where (...) scarce three ships are cast away, but, (...) ^xorem servatur
prorsus nemo, no man that marries a wife escapes. So whilst they could not
or would not distinguish between the abuses and faults of the married persons,
and the lawfulness, happiness, and commodity of the state it self, Satan
has been a lying spirit in their impure mouths, and like mills that cannot
grind but with foul water, they have poured out floods of exclamations
against the state it self.

But as though this were too little, there has risen in the Church it self, a
worse generation of those heretics that speaking perverse things, nay lies in
hypocrisy, and having their consciences seared with an hot iron 1. Tim. 4.
have called good evil, light darkness here, this ordinance of God, the
institution of Satan, and have condemned marriage as altogether unlawful in
any, which the Holy Ghost has commended to be honorable in all Heb. 13.5. I
will not spend the time in mentioning, nor tire your ears with hearing the
names of that rabble of heretics, that in the primitue Church belched out
these blasphemies, that marriage and procreation was of the devil, and that
the married persons were excluded from all hope of heaven or happiness to
come. Let their memory perish with their heresy; and let Gods word be true and
every man a liar. And Antichrist of Rome (of whom Daniell prophesied that he
should not regard the desire of women, Dan. 11.37. that is, he should simulare
castitatem vt plurimos decipiat, counterfeit chastity that he might deceive
very many, as Hierome upon that place interprets it) with his false prophets,
that they might commend the single life of their votaries, and compel their
Clergy to it, have set their mouths against heaven in vilifying the ordinance
it self. Pope innocent in his third Epistle, can find out these texts against
marriage of the Clergy, be ye holy because I am holy, The state of marriage
then by this reasoning is unholy, and, to the unclean and unbelievers nothing
is clean, and they that are in the flesh cannot please God, all married
persons then are in the flesh and unpleasing to God. And is it not a wonder
that Cardinal Bellarmine himself in this clear light of learning and the
Gospel, would defend that which the Pope spoke in the dark time of ignorance,
Non male dici possit de coniugatis, qui sunt in carne non possunt placere Deo.
It may not amiss be said of married persons, they that are in the flesh cannot
please God, de sacram: matr: cap. 5. And c. Nupt. 32. qu. 1. the same Pope like
an excellent Arithmetician and Divine too reasons thus, The Scripture said of
the first, 3.4.5. and 6. day when God had finished the work of every day, and
God saw that it was good, but it is not said so of the second day, signifying
that the number of two is not good which does divide from union, and figureth
the marriage covenant, whereupon all the creatures that enter the Arc of Noah
by two are unclean: see we not what a deep mystery he has found in the
number of two against marriage, and he reasons there, that if lay men must
abstain from their wives for a time, that they may give themselves to prayer,
much more ought Priests who must pray and sacrifice daily, abstain from such
company, which Bellarmine secondeth, and supposes again lib. de Cler. c. 18.
actus coniugalis hominum reddit totum carnalem et ineptum ad divina, the
matrimonial act makes a man wholly carnal, and unfit for divine things, and
cap. 19. Matrimonium vehementer, etc. Matrimony vehemently hinders
earnestness in praying, powerfulness in preaching, and care of the poor. And
lastly to fill up the measure of their iniquity, they say, that a Priest
sins more grievously in marrying a wife, then in committing fornication, and
keeping a concubine, Coster Enchirid. and that a Digamus which has had two
wives successively, is rejected from priesthood, but not a fornicator, because
Digamy, is more forbidden then adultery or keeping a concubine Bellar: de cler.
cap. I say therefore with Michaell the Archangell imperet illis Deui, the Lord
rebuke them Jude the 9 verse, for casting dung in the face of his ordinance.

But to pass on further into the waters of the sanctuary, we shall find that
these people and Elders of Bethlehem do all things well here, for that they
take every good occasion of prayer, it is well, we should pray without ceasing
1 These: 5.17. that they call upon the Lord here, seeking to the fountain and
not digging to them, cisternes, that can hold no water, it is good and comely,
whom should they call upon but the Lord who is worthy to be praised and prayed
unto Psalm: 18.3. that they pray for Boaz and Ruth, the persons intending to
enter into the covenant of God, it is their charity that seeks not her own
alone but the Good of others 1 Cor. 12. as all the members of the mystical
body of the Church have the same care one for another 1 Cor. 12.25. and pray
one for another Iam. 5.16. Now the persons for whom they pray and the blessings
for which they pray, that they may be blessed with, are so involved and linked
one with another, that they cannot be disioyned in the handling, these
blessings are several. 1 For tho woman the Lord make the woman that is come
into thine house like Rachell and like* Leah, which two did build the house of
Israel, wherein we have 1. The woman described by a special effect, the
woman that is come into thine house. 2. The blessing it self both expressed,
that she may be like Rachell and like Leah, and also explained wherein it
should consist, which two did build the house of Israel. The woman here is
first of all described unto us by a special effect and called the woman which
is come into thine house] The wives place then is to be in the house with the
husband: Isaak brings Rebeckah into the same tent with him, when she
becomes his wife, Genesis 24.67. David fetched Bathsheba into his house, when he
took her to wife, 2. Sam. 11.27. Nay she is not only to be received into the
house, but also into the heart and bosom, she is the wife of the bosom, Deuteronomy.
13.6. Set me as a seal upon thine heart, says the Church to Christ, Cant 8.6.
And the husband must love the wife, as Christ loved the Church, Ephesians 5.25.
The soul of Jonathan (whose love to David was wonderful passing the love of
women, 2. Sam. 1.26.) was knit with the soul of David, and David loved him as
his own soul, 1. Sam. 18.1. if this pair of friends had (...), one soul in
two bodies, how much more is it and ought it to be so in the married pair, and
if it be good and pleasant for brethren to dwell together, Psalm. 133.1. how
much more is it good and pleasant for them that are no more twain but one
flesh to dwell together, seeing they make but one body, it is monstrous that
vnum corpus sit in duobus locis, that one body should be in two places. The
wife that was made of the rib of man, and made to be an helper before him,
must be collateral and conversant with him, have individuam vitae
consuetudinem, an inseparable society of all her life with him, which is the
very definition of marriage, and agreeable to that Apostolic Canon, Let not
the wife depart from the husband, 1. Cor. 7.10. with her the husband must
rejoice, and be ravished always with her love, Prove. 5.18.19. and if they must
love together, they must live together, Vbi amor ibi oculus, where the love
goes there the eye desires to be looking still, she is his companion, Mal.
2.17. and so must cohabite together with him and not break company, according
to that likewise ye husbands dwell with them, 1. Pet. 3.7. The harlots feet
abide not in the house, but she is without and in the streets, Prove. 7.11.12.
but the virtuous woman looks well to the ways of her household, Prove. 31.27.
and chaste women must be keepers at home, Tit. 2.5. It is a duty imposed on
married women to guide the house, 1. Tim. 5.14. and so to bide in the house.
That which Saint Hieronie said of the Monk out of his Cell, Monachus in oppido
piscis in arido: A Monk in the street is like a fish on the dry land, is true
of them, a woman gadding from house to house, from place to place, is like a
fish out of the water, his proper element. Plutarch in quaest. Romans qu. 29.
relates that the Romans had a custom not to suffer the Bride to go over the
threshold, but to carry her over, and the Boetians, to burn the Axeltree of
the Cart before the door on the marriage day, both which rites were
memorandums to them that they must be housekeepers. The Tortoise and the Snayle
that carry their shells upon their backs, are the Emblems and Hieroglyphics
of a good wife, that must carry her house upon her back. Non sunt inventa
aeque dulcia nomina, etc. (Bernard. sermon. 7. in Cant.) there are not found
names alike sweet to express mutually the sweet affections of the word and the
soul, as the Bridgroome and the Bride, for they have all things common,
nothing proper, nothing divided from themselves, there is one inheritance to
them both, one house, one table, one bed, yea one flesh.

Hear this then all ye married, both low and high, rich and poor, take heed,
O thou woman, that thou be not a follower of Vashti king Assuerus wife, who
refused to come into her husbands company at his commandment, Est. 1.11.12.
nor of the harlot, who forsakes the guide of her youth, and forgets the
covenant of her God, Prove. 2.17. And take heed likewise, O thou man; that thou
forsake not the wife of thy youth, who is thy companion and the wife of thy
covenant, Mal. 2.14. Conjunction est a Deo divortium and separatio a Diabolo.
The joining together of man and wife is of God, their sundring and separating
is of the Devil.

Now this clause, The woman that comes into thine house] is like the littke
cloud that Eliahs servant saw no bigger then an hand, which yielded a great
rain, 1. King. 18.44. many doctrines might drop from hence as the rain, Deuteronomy.
32.2. but I will pitch upon one necessary thing, if it be the man's house (into
thy house) if he be the (...), Master of the house, then she ought to line
peaceably with him in his own house, it is noted a thing monstrous and
unnatural that a man's enemies should be they of his own house, Mic. 7.6. and
much more that a man's capital enemy should be the wife of his own house and
bosom, if God made men to be of one mind in an house, as our vulgar
translation has it, Psalm. 68.6. much more is it of his ordinance that man and
wife should be of one mind in an house. Lot would have nothing done to the
Angels (strangers as he thought) that were come under the shadow of his
roof for protection, and much more should the master of the house be safe
under the shadow of his roof from the poisoned darts of his wives tongue.
David aggravateth the sin of Rechab and Baanah in murdering Ishbosheth, in
that they did it in his own house, wicked men have slain a righteous person in
his own house, 2. Sam. 4.11. and it adds to the impiety when the wife of the
house becomes a brawling woman in the house of society, as the Hebrew phrase
is, Prove. 21.9 If the man should not be like a Lion to his people, and servants
in his house, Ecclus, 4.30. much less should the wife be like a Lioness to
the man in his own house, which is his Castle, as we say in our native
proverb: The Scripture phrase says of David, that he sat in his own house,
and the Lord gave him rest from his enemies round about, 2. Sam. 7.1. and of
Nebuchadnezzar, that he was at rest in his house, Dan. 4.4. The house then is
the place of rest, and not to be disquieted by her that should rest in the
bosom. Every house divided against it self shall not stand, Mat. 12.25.
especially if the wife be against the husband and the husband against the
wife, the fall of it will be as great as the fall of that house on which the
rain descended and the winds blew and beat, Mat. 7.27. And if the man must
live joyfully with his wife all the days of his life, Eccl. 9.9. she must not
live contentiously with him, Falices ter and amplius, quos irruptatenet copula,
nec vllis divulsus querimoniis, suprema citius solvit amor die.

Thrice happy they and more then that,
Whom bands of love so firmly ties
That without brawles till death them part,
It Is vndissolved and never dies.
It is memorable that Pliny (in a letter to Gemnius, lib. 7.) reports of
Macenius that he lived with his wife 39 years without brawling: And Publ:
Rubenius or Rubevis Celer would have it written on his grave, Cum Caia Ennia
vxore, vixit annos 43 menses octo sine querela. He lived with Caia Ennia his
wife 43 years 8 months without any quarrel. And Silvius Paternus on his wives
tomb in the territory of Nismes, Cum qua vixit annos 33 sine vlla animi
laesura: with whom he lived 33 years without any hurt or breach. I think few
such inscriptions can be found, written on tombs in our dismal and
contentious days. The old heathen when they sacrificed on the marriage day,
threw away the gaul from the rest of the sacrifice, to signify that in
wedlock strife and anger should ever be absent. Plato de praecept, conjugal.
otherwise it is not coniugium sed coniurgium, as one said when he had married a
contentious wife, not wedding but chiding or warring, not marrying but jarring.
And it was wittily spoken by him that said, Non placet miht domus, in qua
Gallina cantat, Gallus tacet. I like not the house wherein the Hen croweth and
the Cock is silent. Abraham Benesra the Rabbin observes that in the Hebrew
names (...) and (...) is found the name (...) or Jehovah, who is the former of
the woman and author of marriage, and that this name temaineth in marriage as
long as they love and live peaceably (for then the peace of God is with the^)
but if they forget piety toward God, and peace one toward another, then Gods
name is gone, and there is nothing but (...) and (...) the fire of contention
here, and the fire of confusion hereafter. Quibus conjugium infaelix contigit
(Aristot in Rhetor.) They that are unhappily wedded, are deprived of the better
half of their happiness. And there is a French proverb, Non esse faeliciter
natum, qui non sit faeliciter maritatus: That he is not happily borne that is
not happily wedded. Pineda on Job observes out of Cyprian, Austin,
Chrysostom, Prosper, and Gaudentius, that the Devil would not destroy Iobes
wife being a foolish, that is, a wicked woman, as he did his children, but left
her to vex him the more, Vt novum calamitatis genus inde viro existeret, that
by her a new kind of calamity might be heaped on her husband. The contentions
of a wife are a continual dropping, Prove. 19.13. and 27.15. and it is better
to dwell in the corner of the house top, then with a brawling woman in a wide
house, Prove. 19.9. and 25.24. both which Solomon repeateth twice for failing,
nay It is better to dwell in the will dernes then with her, Prove. 21.19. S.
Austin thought he could not compare an ill conscience to any thing better then
to a bad wife (and he uses the comparison so often that it seems he liked
it, for we find it in Psalm. 33. and 35. and 45.) to a bad wife, both which
suffer him not to rest, are with him in cubiculo and cubili, both in his
chamber and in his bed, nec fugere nec fugare licet, as Lipsius says, a man
can neither fly from them, nor make them fly from him. And Jesus the son of
Sirach, who not only gathered the grave sentences of wise men, but uttered some
of his own full of understanding and wisdom (in praefat. libri) complains
most pathetically of a contentious wife, I had rather dwell with a Lion and a
Dragon, then to keep house with a wicked woman, Ecclus, 25.16. All wickedness
is but little to the wickedness of a woman, let the portion of a sinner fall
upon her, verse. 19. As the climbing of a sandy way is to the feet of the aged,
so is a wife full of words to a quiet man, verse. 20. a wicked woman abateth the
courage, makes an heavy countenance, and a wounded heart, ver. 23. I say then
with S. Paul, unto the married I command, yet not I but the Lord, let not the
wife depart from the husband, 1. Cor. 7.10. for she is come into his house to
be an helper meet for him, let there be no strife between them in the house,
for they are more then brethren, one flesh, and one soul in two bodies; If
they love peace and would feign see good days, let them live in peace, and
refrain their tongues from speaking of evil one to another. Let there be in
her tongue, kindness, meekness, and comfort, Ecclus, 26.23. that she may
rejoice her husband, and that he may fulfill the years of his life in peace,
Ecclus 26.2. And then the God of peace shall be with them, and the peace of God
which passes all understanding, shall keep their hearts and minds through
Christ Jesus. Phil. 4.7.

But it is high time that I should go on forward to the loins in these waters
of the sanctuary, come to the matter it self prayed for on the behalf of the
woman here, which is both expressed, like Rachel and like Leah, and also
explained wherein it should consist, which two did build the house of Israel,
for nulla similitudo currit quatuor pedibus, no similitude agrees in all
respects, but is limited in some particulars wherein the proportion lies. They
builded Israel then, in that by themselves, and their two handmaids, given to
their husbands, they raised it from Jacob alone to twelve populous and mighty
Tribes, as an house from a low foundation is raised up in goodly and* lofty
superstructions and buildings of walls, windows, turrets, and the like. For so
the holy Ghost in the original tongue is delighted to set out the generation
of mankind, and procreation of children, by the name and comparison of
building, The ribbe which the Lord God had taken from the man, builded (made)
he a woman, Genesis 2.22. with special care, art and fit proportion. And so where
Nathan in 1. Chron. 17.10. says to David, the Lord will build thee an house,
in 2. Sam. 7.11. where the same story is again mentioned, he says, the Lord
will make thee an house. So Sarah being barren her self, and praying Abraham
to go in unto her maid says, it may be I may be builded by her, that is,
obtain children by her Genesis 16.2. And he that refused to marry his brothers
wife to raise up unto his brother a name in Israel, is called a man that will
not build up his brothers house Deuteronomy. 25.9. And so God says of that faithful
Priest that he would stir up unto himself in Elias place, that he would
build unto him a sure house 1 Samuel 2.35. that is, bless him with a plentiful
posterity successively without failing. They builded the house of Israel then,
in that by their fruitfulness, they were a notable Seminary of Plants growing
up in the Church and common wealth of Israel. And it is all one, as if they
had prayed for Ruth in Isaacks words praying for Jacob, God almighty bless
thee, make thee fruitful, and multiply thee, that thou may be a multitude of
people, and give thee and thy seed the blessing of Abraham Genesis 28.3.4. They
pray then that she may be blessed with fruitfulness, the original and
primary blessing of marriage at the beginning, God blessed them and said
increase and multiply, Genesis 1.28. The maine end and scope then that persons
entering into this covenant of God, the marriage band must aim at, is that they
may build Israel, that out of their loins may issue seed to be profitable
members of the church and commonwealth. for hinc coebi planta^tur and etrra
fundatur, out of marriage is heaven filled, and the earth established. Sarah
being barren her self, desired issue though it were by her maid, that so she
might in some sort obtain the end of wedlock, the marriage blessing Genesis
16.2. And fair Rachell being fruit less, thinks her self but a dead
stock, Give me Children or else I die, will needs have children though it be
but by a deputy Genesis 30.2.3. Rebeckas friends at her sending away to Isaacks
wife, dismiss her with this solemn blessing respecting the true end of her
marriage be thou mother of thousands of millions Genesis 24.60. And when their
blessing prevailed not effectually, but after marriage she was barren, Isaacke
entreated the Lord for her, that she might conceive Genesis 25.21. Hannah Elkanahs
wife having her womb shut up by the Lord, with bitterness of soul and
weeping sore prays unto the Lord to give unto her a man-child for increase of
the Church and that she may give him unto the Lord 1 Samuel 1.11. Tobias in his
prayer on the marriage night with his wife says, thou know Lord that I take
not this sister for lust but uprightly or as the vulgar has it sola
posteritatis dilectione, for love of posterity only Tobit, 8.7. and St Paul
requiring that the younger women should marry, bear children 1. Tim. 5.4.
makes the end of marriage to be procreation and bearing of children. It is one
of the many blessings wherewith Solomon is blessed at his marriage, In stead of
thy Fathers, shall be thy children Psalm. 45.16. And it is a grand blessing that
God powers out upon the married man fearing the Lord, that his wife should be
as the fruitful vine, by the sides of his house, his children as the olive
branches round about his table that he should see his childrens children Psul:
128.3.6. God made woman at the first, and he, made but one, though he had the
residue or excellency of spirit, and made her the wife of the covenant with one
man, that he might seek out a godly seed Mal. 2.15. a seed that should be
members of his Church principally and secondarily of the common wealth.
Christiani tantum procreandorum, etc. Christians marry wives only for
procreation of Children, whereas others take them for their pleasures sake,
Instin Martyr in Apolog. pro Christ. ad Antomn. nuper: And Clemens Alexandrinus
lib, 2. paedag. cap. 10. says, Qui matrimonio iuncti sunt ijs scopus est, etc.
The scope and purpose of them that are joined together in matrimony is the
procreation of children, and their end that they may be good children, and a
little after there, the married man plants and sowes for God, for God said
increase and multiply, whom we must obey, and again in his lib. 2. Stromat: he
notably expresses this end of marriage (...) etc. Men must marry altogether,
both for their country sake, and for succession of children, and the perfection
of the world as much as in them lies. Matrimonium ex hoc appellatum est, etc.
(says August. lib. 19. con: faust. cap. 26. Matrimony was hence named, because
a woman ought to marry for nothing else but that she may become a mother, and
again lib. 2. de adulter: coning. ad Pollent: cap. 12. he says propagatio
filiorum etc. The propagating of Children is the first natural and lawful
cause of marriage: And Ambrose cited in the cannon law c. pudor 32. qu. 2.
says Pudor est faeminis nuptiarum praemia non habere, etc. It is a shame to
women when they have not the reward of marriage, who marry only for this end,
and the Civil law L. Librorum says, Parents liberorum procreandorum animo
and voto vxores ducunt, Fathers marry wives with a purpose and desire of
procreating children. And Lombard the Mr of the sentences as fully to this end
as the best, says lib. 4. Sentent. distinct. 30. l. d. Finalis causa
matrimonij contrahendi, etc. the principal final cause of contracting
matrimony is increase of children, for for this God ordained marriage amongst
our first parents, to whom he said increase and multiply.

I say then here with the Psalmist Psalm. 50.22. Consider this ye that forget
God, and your duty to God herein: How many are there amongst us that in their
marrying do not so much as dream of marrying to build up Israel, to beget a
Godly seed to the Lord, to be plants growing up in his church and commonwealth?
Nay do they not rather say and wish in their hearts, that the womb of their
companion may be shut up, that they may live at ease, and be free from
providing for their family and posterity? do they not in their sense cry out,
blessed are the wombes which never bare, and the paps which never gave suck?
Luk: 23.29. Some there are that only respect a fair face and a glorious
outside (noe matter how foul and leaden she be within) like the son of God
in the old world who saw the daughters of men that they were fair and took
them wives of all which they chose Gen: 6.2. These remember not what a
vanishing shadow they catch after; For favor is deceitful and beauty is
vain, but a woman that fears the Lord she shall be praised Prou. 31.30.
Florem decoris singuli carpunt dies Sen: Every day croppeth somewhat from the
flower of beauty, and again in Hippol: Anceps forma bonum mortalibus, etc.
beauty is an uncertain benefit that mortal persons have, a short gift for a
little time. And Greg. Naz. says excellently in his 3. orat: pulchritudo
corporis, temporis and morbi ludibrium: beauty of body is the mock of time and
sickness. And another Poet to the full, vitrea gemmula, fluxaque bullula,
candida forma est, nix, rosa, ventus fumus and aura nihil, Bern. Banhusius
Epigram: lib. 4. A fair form is nothing but a iemme of glass, a fading
bubble, snow, arose a dew, a wind, smoke, air, nothing. But all this will
sound best to us out of the mouth of a golden trumpet of the Church, St
Chrysostom in orat: de pulchrit. and de faemina, vides venustam mulierem,
fulgidum habentem oculum, when thou see a fair woman, that has a twinkling
eye, and a smiling face, a look pleasant, attractiue and amiable, such as
puts thy heart into an heat and sets on firethy desire; think that that
which so ravisheth thee, is naught else but earth, and that the fire which
burns thee is but dung, and then will thy fury be assuaged. Raise up the
skin of her face, and thou shall see all the vileness of that goodly show.
Stay not upon the outward mask, but pierce with the eye of thought into that
which is within, and what else shall thou see there but bones sinews and
veins? But this is not enough, Remember that beauty changes, grows old, and
withers, that the quickness of the eye waxes dead, that the cheeks grow
hollow, that all that fair flower passes away. See what is that makes thee
(as it were) a beast. It is ashes, dust and filth, that burns thee. For what
is the substance of this beauty that thou see but snot, spittle, corrupt
blood, and the juice of rotten nourishment? What comes there out of the ears,
out of the eyes, out of the nose, out of the mouth? And if these evacuations
and ordinary defluxions of excrements should cease, and that the breast, the
liver, and brain should leave to purge themselves that way, all this goodly
show declineth and decays, the skin withers, and the eyes sink into the
head.

Some again only respect money and mucke, marry wives as Judas betrayed his
master with Quantum dabitis Mat. 26. and as the Shechemites received
circumcision, only to get a booty and enrich themselves, shall not their
cattle and their substance and every beast of theirs be ours? Genesis 34.23.
quaerenda pecunia primum, money is the mark that they principally shoot at, be
she virtuous or vicious, wise of foolish, fair or foul, young or old, equal
or unequal for them, they little regard, so she come as Balacks messengers did
to Balaam, with the reward of divination in her hands Numb. 22. These are not
of the mind of him who being asked why he would not marry a richwife answered
vxori nubere nolo meae: I will not be married to my wife. Insolens malum est
vxor dives says Plaut. in Aul. A rich wife is an insolent mischief, and
another says Argentum accepti, dete imperium vendidi. I took money and sold my
rule for her dowry. And in this kind the transgression is doubled, when this
first and fairest end of marriage, procreation, is frustrated and evacuated by
lust and lucre meeting together, either when an old silicernium, being like
Bazzillai the Gileadite 2. Sam. 19. must yet marry with a young woman, or an
old doting dame, must have lust when she is old (which seemed unnatural to
Sarah Genesis 18.) and be married to a young man in the flower of his youth, let
the young parties in this case bethink themselves how far short they come of
the sons of Onan Genesis 23.8. and the old, whether it were not better for them
to say with Naomi Ruthes mother in law I am too old to have an hus band (or a
wife) for the analogy is all one Ruth. 1.12. and she spoke it when she was past
procreation. Cum seen nupta, says Plautus in Mi. glor. She that is married
with an old man, is neither married, nor alas a widow. The Greek tongue, by
a fine elegancy of speech calls such wedlocks (...) marriages and no
marriages, and Clemens Alexandrinus lib. 2. Paedag. c. 10 to this purpose, non
coire ad procreationem, etc. Not to come together for procreation, is to wrong
nature. Therefore nature to children does not yet grant any wives, to old
persons is denies marriage. Plutarch in his Solon reports a memorable saying
of that Tyrant Dionysius, when his mother being old and past procreation, had
desired him to bestow her upon a husband, which was, that he had often by
tyranny overthrown the laws of the City, but that he could not violate the
law of nature by placing her in marriage. Luther in his commentary on Genesis cap.
25. speaking of such unequal matches says Qui docuit vetulas and dominas etc.
to them who marry old women and their mistresses for wealth or glory, God give
the cup of passion as Bernard speaks, because they symply, seek wealth and
glory not procreation of children, and yet they are not to be rejected for
their reverence and glory of marriage. St Augustine lib. 9. degen. ad. lit.
cap. 3. disputes the quaestion how this is to be understood that the woman was
made to be an helper for man and resolves probabiliter at least that it was
propter silios procreandos for procreation of children as it was said to them
at the beginning, increase and multiply, or if it were not so, to what end was
she made an helper, if to till the earth with him, there was yet noe business,
that the man should need help, and if he did, another male, who would have
been a better help, should have been made. And so I may say of comfort, if
he were weary of solitariness. For how much more conveniently would two
friends dwell together for conversing and conferring, then a man and a woman?

I have feasted or rather satiated you with full dishes upon all the
particulars hitherto, I will now but gather up the fragments on that which
remains, which is the matter that they pray for on the behalf of Boaz the
man entering into the covenant of matrimony, and do thou worthily, or (as some
read it) and that thou may do worthily in Ephratah, and be famous in
Bethlehem, or as it is in the Hebrew, proclaim thy name: in Bethlehem. In
which they pray for two things for him: 1. for a noble and notable action to be
performed by him, that he may do worthily virtuously and courageously in his
place and calling: 2. for an event to follow thereupon, that honor and renown
may follow his good deeds, as the shadow does the body, and be famous or
proclaim thy name in Bethlehem. Now Ephratah and Bethlehem diversified in name
are all one in thing, one city so called conjunctim, jointly together as Mic.
5.2. But thou Bethlehem Ephratah though thou be little among the thousands of
Judah, yet out of thee shall he come forth unto me, that is to be ruler in
Israel, or diuisim apart as here do worthily in Ephratah and be famous in
Bethlehem; for the first thing which they pray for him, the action that he
should perform, the Hebrewe phrase will bear both these readings, either, get
riches in Ephratah, or do worthily, virtuously, courageously in Ephratah; For
so in the same sense the very same phrase is found of necessity, Deuteronomy. 8.17.
where Moses straightly forbids that after Gods bringing them into that
plentiful land described these verse. 7.8.9. and that abundance of wealth
mentioned verse. 12.13. they should say my power, etc. and so all the 17, and
18, verse. So again Job uses this phrase in this sense, chap. 31.25. If I
rejoiced because my wealth was great, for that it must be read so, not because
my virtue or courage was great, the words following show, and because mine hand
has found or gotten much. And so in this phrase in the second chapter here, v.
1. Boaz himself is called a mighty man of wealth. Again some times this
phrase in the Hebrew tongue must be read do worthily, virtuously, and
courageously. So it is better read of Solomon's virtuous woman, after all her
good and glorious deeds many daughters have done virtuously, then many
daughters have gotten riches but thou surmountest them all, Prove. 31.21. though
the phrase in hebrew will bear both senses. So 1. King, 1.52. Where this very
phrase is, it must be read, if he will show himself a worthy man there shall
not an hair of him fall to the ground, not if he will show himself a rich
man. And here again cap. 3. v. 11. Boaz tells Ruth in this phrase, all the
city of my people does know that thou art a virtuous woman, not a rich woman,
for she was a poor gleaner of corn. Now to come to the Text, I read here
rather do wortihly, virtuously, and courageously in Ephratah, then, get wealth
in Ephratah: for first Boaz had wealth enough already, he was a mighty man of
wealth, cap. 2.1. they need not pray for wealth for him. Secondly the honor
and good name which they pray for to him in the last clause is rather a
consequence and reward of doing worthily and courageously, then of getting
wealth and riches. Their prayer then is that he may be strong and courageous to
do according to Gods law, as Joshua is commanded, Ios. 1.6.7.9. That he may
be strong and of a good courage to fulfill the statutes and judgments of the
Lord without dread, or dismaying, as Solomon is exhorted by David his Father,
1. Chr. 22.13. and that he might walk worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing
Col. 1.10. Ephesians: 4.1. and that then for a fruit and a good name may attend upon
him and be famous, or proclaim thy name in Bethlehem, much might be said upon
all these points and parts, but I must conclude and contract: Amongst the
Romans there was none other way to the temple of honor, but through the temple
of virtue, and amongst us Christians, virtue must be the high way to honor,
godliness to obtain a good name; by faith, which is the ground of wedding,
and which works by lone, Gal. 5.6. The Elders obtained a good report, Heb:
11.2. and by continuance in well doing glory is to be sought for, To. 2.7.
(...), etc. good deeds give occasion of good words, and it was wittily answered
by Agesilaus to one that asked him how he might get glory, Si dices optima,
facies autem pulcherrima, by speaking good words and doing good deeds. Gloria
virtutis comes est, vt corporis vmbra, is memorem famam, qui been fecit habet,
says the Poet, Glory attends virtue as the shaddowe follows the body, he
that does well has a lasting fame. I know that Regium est cum benefeceris,
male audire, Kings (and all Christians too) must look to be reported ill of,
when they have done well in this world, to pass through honor and dishonor;
evil report and good report, 2. Cor. 6.8. to have all manner of ill speeches
spoken against them falsely for Christ and their profession sake, Luc. 6.22.
yea to have their names cast out as evil for the son of man's sake. Luc.
6.22. But as the Hebrews took joyfully the spoiling of their goods knowing
that they had a better and an enduring substance in heaven, Heb. 10.34. So must
we be comforted against the traducing of our names by miscreants here on earth,
knowing that our names are written in heaven, Luc. 10.20. and that if we
overcome Christ Jesus will write upon us the name of his God, and the name of
the city of his God, the new Jerusalem and his own name, Rev. 3.12.

FINIS.

