THE PENNILES PARLIAMENT OF Threed-bare Poets: OR, All mirth and witty
Conceits.

PRINTED At London for William Barley, and are to be sold at his shop in
Gracious street near Leaden Hall gate. 1608.

Here begins the Penniles Parliament of threed-bare Poets.
FIrst of all, for the increase of every Fool in his humor, we think it
necessary and convenient, that all such as buys this Book, and laughes not
at it before he has read it over, shall be condemned of Melancholy, and be
adjudged to walk over More-fieldes twice a week in a foul Shirt, and a pair
of Boots, but no Stockinges.

It is also agreed upon, that long Bearded men shall seldom prove the wisest;
and that a Niggards purse shall scarce bequeath his Master a good Dinner: and
because Water is like to prove so weak an element in the world, that men and
women will want Tears to bewail their sins, we charge and command all
Gardners to sow more store of Onions, for fear Widows should want moisture
to bewail their Husbands Funerals.

In like manner we think it fit, that Red-wine should be drunk with Oysters:
and that some Maidens shall blush more for shame, then for shamefastnes: But
men must have care, least conuersing too much with Red-Petticoates, they
bannish their Hair from their heads, and by that means, make the poor
Barbers beggars for want of work. (...) (...) that shall know his own father.

I^ shall be lawful for some to have a Pal^e in their (...) such (...), as
they shall ^have more then (...) they (...) Pay for (...), as they shall (...)
in other (...) Wife from their (...) some such a stopping in their Hearts, as
they shall be utterly obstinate to receive Grace: some such a (...) in their
(...) as they shall be enemies to good counsel some such (...) Moses, as no
Feast shall escape without their Companies: and some shall be so Needy, as
neither Young Heirs shall get their own, nor poor Orphans their Patrimony.

Also, it is (...) and Decreed, that some shall be so (...), as they cannot
Step but (...) some so cons^ed in (...), as they shall keep never a good
thought to bless themselves: some so disguised in purse, as they (...) it
fatal to (...) one Penny to buy their dinners on Sundays: some so (...), as
they count wrong fast ^ea^ing the (...) of their occupation.

But amongst other Laws and Statutes by us here establishes, we think it
most necessary and convenient, that Pou^ shall kill (...) Poultry by custom,
thou their. (...) May^es can sell with a Good Conscience: also it is ordered
and agreed upon, that B^ke^s, Woodmongers, But there is, and Bre^^ers, shall fall
to a mighty Conspiracy, so that no Man shall either have Bread, Fire, Meat, or
Drink, without c^^dite or ready Money.

Sicaphants by the Statute shall have great gifts, and Good and Godly Labors
shall scarce be worth thanks: it is also thought necessary, that Maids about
midnight shall see wondrous visions, to the great hart-griefe of their Mothers.

Furthermore it is marked and set down, that if Lawyers plead poor men's
causes without money, westminster Hall shall grow out of custom, to the great
impovershing of al Nimmers, Lifters, and Cutpurses. Those that sing bases shall
love good drink by authority: and Trumpeters that sound trebles shall stare by
custom: Women that wear long Gowns, may lawfully raise oust in March: and
they that keep a Temperate Diet shall never die on surfets.

In like manner it shall be Lawful for Saylors and Soldiers, to spend at
their pleasures, what they get by their Sword: and if the Treasurer pay them
any thing beyond count and reckoning, if they buyld not an Hospital therewith,
they may Bestow it in Apparel by the statute.

It is further established and agreed upon, that they that drink too much
Spanish Sack, shall about July be served with a Fiery faces: but Oh you
Ale-knightes, you that devour the Marrow of the Malt, and Drink whole Aletubs
into Consumptions; that sing Queen Dido over a Cup, and tell Strange News over
an Ale pot: how unfortunate are you, who shall Piss out that (...)

It is further agreed upon and establish, that many strange events shall happen
in those houses, where the Maid is predominant with her Master, and wants a
Mistress to look narrowly unto her.

Also we think it convenient, that some shall take, their Neighbors bed for
their own: some the servant for the Master: and (if Candles could tell tales)
some will take a Familiar for a flea. Also we think it meet, that there
should be many Fowlers, who in stead of Lackes will each Lobcokes: and many for
want of wit shall sell their Freehold for Tobacco pipes, and red petticoats.
Likewise we think it convenient that there should be many Takers; some would
be taken for wise men, who indeed are very Fools: for some will take crake
Angels of poor debtors, and a quart of Malmesie when they cannot get a pottle.

But stay a while, whether are we carried, leaving the greatest Laws
vnpublished, and establishing the less; therefore we enact and ordain as a
necessary Statute, that there shall great contentions fall between Soldiers
and Archers, and if the fray be not desided at a p^t of Ale and a black
Pudding, great bloodshed is like to ensue: for some shall maintain that a
Turk can be hit at twelve score Pricks in Fiendsbury fields, Ergo, the bow and
shafts wan Bullen: other shall say that a Potgun is a dangerous weapon against
a Mudwall, and an enemy to the painters work: amongst these controversies we
will send forth our commission to God Cupid, being an Archer, who shall deside
the doubt, and prove that Archery is Heavenly, for in meditation thereof, he
has lost his eyes.

Oh gentle fellow Soldiers, then leave your controversies if you love a Woman,
for I will prove it, that a Mince Pie is better than a Musket; and he that dare
gainsay me, let him meet me at the Dagger in Cheap with a Case of
Pewter-Spoones, and I will answer it: and if I prove not that a Mince-pie is
the better Weapon, let me Dine twice a Week at Duke Humpheries table.

It is furthermore established, that the four (...) at the Cards, shall
suddenly leap from out the bunch, and Desperately Pranke about the new
Playhouse, to seek out their old Master Captain Crop-eare: also it is
thought meet, that some men (in these days) shall be polliticke beyond
reason, and write more in one line, then they can prove in an age.

Furthermore it shall be Lawful for some to Study which way they may walk to
get them a Stomach to their meat, whilst other are as careful to get meat to
put in their bellies: likewise there shall be great persecution in the
Common-meale of Kitchin-fees, so that some desperate Woman shall boil, try,
and sees poor tallow to the general commodity of all the whole company of
Tallow Chandlers.

Alas, alas, how are we troubled to think on these dangerous times? for
Tailors, by Act of Parliament may Lawfully invent new fashions: and he that
takes Irish Aquauite by the Pint, may by the law stumble without offense, and
break his Face: and it shall be thought convenient, that some be so desperate
bent, as they shall go into my Lord Majors Buttery when all the Barrels be
full, without either Sword or Dagger about them: many Men shall be so
Ventrously given, as they shall go into Petty-coate lane, and yet come out
again as honestly as they went first in.

In like manner it shall be lawful for Tems Water to Cleanse as much as ever it
did in times past: and if the Brewers of London buy store of good Malt, poor
Burgemen at Queene-hiue shall have a whole Quart for a penny: Saint Thomas
Onions shall be sold by the rope at Billinsgate by the Statute: and Semsters in
the Exchange shall become so Contionable, that a man without offense, may Buy a
Falling Band for twelve pence.

It shall be lawful for Smithes to love good Ale, and if it be possible to
have a Frost of three weeks long in July, men shall not be afraid of a good
ster at Midsommer: Porters Baskets shall have authority to hold more then they
can Honestly Carry away: and such a Drought shall come amongst Cans at
Bartholmew Fair in Smithfeeld, that they shall never continue long filled.

The Images in the Temple Chuch (if they rise again) shall have a Commission
to dig down Cha^ing Cross with their Fauchions: and Millers by Custom
shall have small mind to Morning Prayer, if the Wind serve them in any Corner
on Sundaies: Those that go to Wars and can get nothing, may (...) Home Poor
by Authority: and those that Play fast and loose with women's Apron-stringes,
may chance make a journey for a Winchester Pidgion: for prevention thereof,
drink every morning a draught of Noli me tangere, and by that means, thou
shall be sure to escape the Physicians Purgatory.

But amongst all other Decrees and Statutes by ^s here set down, we ordain
and command, that three things (if they be not parted) ever to continue in
perpetual amity, that is a Lo^se in an old Doublet, a painted Cloth in a
Painters shop, and a Fool and his Babble.

Furthermore it shall be lawful for Bakers to thrive by two things: that is,
Scores well paid, and Millers that are honest.

Physicians by other men's harms, and Churchyardes by often Burials.

Also, we think it necessary for the Commonwealth, that the Sammon shall be
better soulde in Fish-streete, thou the Beer shall be at Willinsgate.

And Hartes-ease amongst the company of Hearbewines, shall be worth as much
money as they can get for it by Statute.

It is further enacted and agreed upon that th^se that run four score Mile a
foot on a Winters day shall have a sore thirst about seven of the clock in
the evening.

And such as are inclined to the Dropsy, may be lawfully cured, if the
Physicians know how.

Also we ordain and appoint, that (if there be no great store of Tempests)
two halfee-peny loaves shall be sold for a penny in White-chappell.

Chaueers Books (by act of Parliament) shall in these days, prove more
witty then ever they were before: for there shall so many sudden, or rather
sodden Wits step abroad, that a flee shall not friske forth, unless they
cemment on her.

O what a detestable trouble shall be among women about four score and ten
years old, for such as have more Teeth about them, then they can well use,
shall die for age, if they live not by miracle.

Also it shall be lawful for Bees, if the Summer show not, to go on
Pilgrimage, and fly so far in one day, as who so sets up a land mark wheye
the first light, shall come to us and have a pound weight of Gold for his
diligence and labor.

Moreover, we think it necessary, that those that have two eyes in their
head, shall sometimes stumble: and they that can neither write nor read may as
boldly forswear themselves, as they that can.

And it shall be lawful for Almanacke makers, to tell more lies then true
tales.

And they that go to Seas without Victuals, may suffer peunurie by the
Statutes.

In like manner, it shall be lawful for any man to carry about him more Gold
then Iron: if he can get it?

But they that are given to sullen complexion (if they be Females) must be more
circumspect: for if they repent their hidden sins too much, they may chance
catch heaven for their labor.

Therefore let Maidens take heed how they fall on their backs least they
catch a forty weeks favor.

And he that has once married a Shrew and by good chance bury her, beware
how he come into the stocks again.

Further it shall be lawful for those that be Rich, to have many Friends: And
they that be Poor, may by authority keep Money, if they can get it honestly.

Also, we command and charge all such as have no Conscience, to do their
worst, least they die in the Devils debt: As for the rest they that have more
money then they need may help their poor Neighbors, if they will.

In like manner it shall be lawful for such as are subject to het that Rewmes
to drink cold drink. And those that have a mind to enrich Physicians, to be
never without diseases.

Also, Soldiers that have no means to thrive by plain dealing, may by the
Statute swallow down an ounce of the strro^ of Suttletie every morning: And if
they cannot thrive that ways, we think it necessary, that four times in
the year, they go a fishing on Salisburie plain.

Furthermore, for the benefit and increase of foolish Humors, we think it
necessary, that those our dear friends which are sworn true Seruitours to
women's Pantables, should have this order set down, that you suite your selves
handsomely against Goose feast: and if you meet not a fair Less betwixt
Paul's and Stratford, that day, we will bestow a new suite of Satin upon you,
so you will bear all the charges.

But as for your dear firendes and Scholars, thus much we favor you, for
you shall dine upon Wit by authority: and if you pay your Hostess well: it is
no matter though you score it up till it come to a good round sum.

In like manner, it shall be lawful for Maids milk to be good Physic for
^^b'd heels: and a cup of Sacks to bedward, a present Remedy for the Rhewme,

Such as are sick in the Spring, may take Physic by the Statute: And those
that are cold, may wear more Clothes, without offense.

It is best to ride, in long iourneyes, least a man be weary with going a
foot: And more comely to go in broken stockings, then bare legged.

Further it shall be lawful for some to be leave, because they cannot be (...).

Some by the Statute, shall love (...) p^ssing well, because they can come by
no other meals and other some super it with an Egg at dinner, that dare a
manfully set upon a shoulder of Veale in the after^.

Some shall be sad when they want Money: and in love with Widows rather for
their wealth, then their honesties.

It is also thought necessary, that some shall suspect their Wives at home,
because they themselves play false abroad.

And some love Bowling Allies better then a Sermon.

But above all other things, Spirits with Aprons shall much disturb your
sleeps about midnight.

Furthermore, it shall be lawful for him that marries without Money, to find
four bare Legs in his Bed: And he that is too prodigal in spending, shall
die a beggar by the Statute.

In like manner we think it necessary, that he that is plagued with a cursed
wife, to have his pa^^ broke quarterly, as he pays his rent.

Likewise, he that delights in subtlety, may play the Knave by custom: And
he that has his complexion and courage spent, may eat Mutton on Fasting
days by the Law.

And to conclude, since there are ten Precepts to be observed in the Art of
Scoulding, we humbly take our leave of Duke Humfries Ordinary, and he take us
to the Chapel of Ill Counsel where a quart or two of ^ne Trinidado, shall
arm us against the Gunshot of Tonge-mettle, and keep us safe from the
assaults of Sir John Find-fault, Vale, my dear Friends, till my next returns.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London for W. Barley, and are to be sold at his shop, in
Gracious street. 1608.


