ABBA FATHER: OR, A PLAIN AND short direction concerning Private Prayer.

Also, SUNDRY GODLY ADmonitions concerning Time, and the well using of it.

By ELNATHAN PARR, Minister of the Word.

Romans 8.15. Ye have received the spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry, Abba
Father.

Ephesians. 5.16. Redeem the time because the days are evil.

LONDON Imprinted by F. K. for Samuel Man, and are to be sold at the sign of
the Swan, in Paul's Churchyard. 1618.

TO THE VERY HONORABLE and most worthy Lady, the Lady Jane Cornwaleys, wife to
the very Noble and Religious Gentleman, Master NATHANAEL BACON, Esquire, Grace
and Peace.
Prayer is the true Christian proper element, without which he can no more
live, then without fire: Breath is the instrument of the life of the body;
Prayer is the breath of the soul: I have observed in many a difficulty of this
breathing, which I have endeavored according to my simple skill, something to
remedy by this direction.

I humbly desire your Ladyship to give it leave to pass under your worthy
Name: I confess it can be no ways useful to you; but it may be to weaker
Christians, who are yet as babes newly beginning to cry, Abba Father.

Herein I present my thankful mind to your Ladyship, whose great favors and
encouragements, my deserts can never equal. I daily pray for your Ladyship,
that as God has highly advanced your Name on earth for godliness, so he would
in the time appointed, glorify your soul in heaven, for the merits of your
Jesus.

Your Ladyships devoted servant in all humble observance, ELN. PARR.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER, increase of all good gifts.
TO condemn a set form of prayer, argues want of sobriety and wisdom. In
public prayers in the Congregation it is necessary to have a prescribed form
called Liturgy, or Divine Service, which for more ease of memory is to be read
out of the book. The ancientest Fathers (in the peace of the Church) have by
their practice so judged it: many Councels have approved it, and the best
reformed Churches follow it.

As for private prayer of one Christian alone, it is more expedient that it be
uttered without a book; and the most complete performance of that duty is,
when a Christian is able not only to repeat and apply to his own soul and
conscience a prayer conceived by another, but also upon fit matter, and heads
suitable to the occasion, to conceive and utter prayers of his own. Yet seeing
there are many to whom God has not given memory and understanding fitting, to
express in a continued speech the desires of their hearts; for such have I
written this direction.

The reason why I have undertaken this business, considering there are so many
good Prayer-bookes in every man's hand, is, first, because, though it be
commendable to use a book, yet it is more comfortable to pray of our selves,
whose wants may be such, as that we shall hardly find them sufficiently
expressed in any book: for every man is best acquainted with his own heart.

Secondly, a man may be cast into prison, and his book taken from him: how
uncomfortably must he needs pass his time, if he cannot pray without his
book. The book cannot be used in the dark, when we may have just occasion to
pray. The book may be forgotten, or lost: but if thou attainest this gift,
thou can never loose it, unless thou loosest thy self.

For these reasons I commend this Treatise to thee, which I could have
amplified further, and it may be, clothed it with a more elegant style. But I
aimed at thy profit, remembering that I directed beginners, for whom shortness
and plainness are most fitting.

If thou profitest by this which I here propound to thee; praise God: and in
thy prayers forget not him, who has at least endeavored to further thee. If
thou profitest not; yet I have done my good will, for the which I desire thee
to love

Thy true friend in Jesus Christ, Eln. Parr.

Abba Father. OR A PLAIN AND short direction concerning private Prayer.
PRayer is a holy conference of a godly mind with God, whereby believing, we
ask things necessary, and give thanks for benefits received.

Prayer is either Mental only, or Vocal also, this 1. Extraordinary, or 2.
Ordinary, this 1. Public, or 2. Private, this 1. Less private with the
family. 2. More private, by one alone.





Public is that which is used in the public Congregation, by the Minister
with the people.

Private is that which is used by private persons in private places; of this is
this present Direction.

It is a great blessing, that God will vouchsafe to attend and receive our
devotions poured forth in any private place.

Great Personages require places suitable to their Greatness: but thy great God
respects not the place, how mean so ever, but the necessity of his servant.

Where there is a Jeremy, a Daniel, or a Jonas; a dungeon, a Lions den, the
belly of a Whale are godly Oratories.

But remember, that never any man prayed well privately, who contemned or
neglected the public prayers in the Church.

For the comfortable performance of this private service, two things are to be
considered:

viz. 1. Preparation. 2. Execution.


Preparation is an holy and considerate fitting our selves for this duty.

This is necessary in a threefold respect.

1. Of the person before whom we present our selves, which is the Almighty. 2
Of the importance of the thing it self, which is a special part of divine
worship. 3 Of the consequence of this duty, which is the obtaining of things
needful, for this and a better life.
Unto this preparation seven things belong.

1 First, a fit place, which must bepriuat Ma. 6.5.6.
: Christ himself went into a mountain alone to pray Ma. 14.23.
: and into a solitary place Mar. 1.35.
. So Peter went up to the upper part of the house Act. 10.9.
: not but that it is lawful to pray every where 1. Tim. 2.8.
. But priuacy is to be chosen, that being sequestered from company, we may the
more fully descend into our own hearts, and be the freer from ostentation and
hypocrisy, and from discursation and wandering of mind.

2 Secondly, a fit time. All times are for this exercise Ephesians. 6.18. 1. These.
5.17.
; even the night is a sweet time for prayer, as David's midnights practice Psa.
119.62.
, and our Saviors whole nights spent in prayer Luke 6.12. Lam. 2.19.
do testify.

Thou can not always, but at certain set times speak to great men: but
thou may always speak to thy God.

Yet for set and ordinary prayer, some choice of time would be used: I think it
to be most comfortable to begin and end the day with prayer; as the ordinary
sacrifice of the Jews, was morning and evening instituted by God.

3. Thirdly, a freedom of mind from thoughts of the world, and the affairs
thereof: for earthly things are heavy, and their thoughts depressing, which
hinder the asce^t of the mind to God.

4 Repentance and a holy purpose of obedience Psalm. 26.6. and 66.18. Esaias 15.1.
1. Tim. 2.18. 1. John. 3 22.
. They must needs distrust to receive that which they desire, who purpose not
to do that which God requires. The cry of our vnrepented-for sins, is louder
then the cry of our voice. As in a wound a plaster preuailes not, while the
iron remains within; so neither prayer, while sin rankleth within.

5. Fifthly, Reading; I would advise that before prayer, there might be reading
of a Chapter in the Bible, or a Psalm, if business permit, both for the
increase of knowledge, and for the better calling home of the mind to the
business in hand.

6 Sixthly, Meditation. The Prayers called Eiaculations, which are sudden
liftings up of the heart to God, upon manifold occasions occurring every day,
come not within this consideration: but set prayer requires sometime to be
specially employed this way. As the Musician first tunes his Instrument, before
he play upon it: so both the mind would be put in frame, and the matter
forethought, when we petition to God.

Do no temporal business rashly: more especially when thou speak to God,
be not rash with thy mouth, Eccles. 5.1.
lest thou take Gods name in vain; which many times comes to pass by vain
repetitions, by words, idle, improper, and: without sense; when we dare so
suddenly enter into this action.

Meditation therefore is necessary, which must be five fold.

1 Of the Majesty of God no move reverence. As mortal men endure not the
saucy and vnrespectfull carriage of suitors: so GOD much more requires, that
we should serve him in fear Psalm. 2.11.
, as David in fear will worship toward his holy Temple Psalm. 5.7.
.

2 Of his mercy, power, and truth, to breed confidence; for he that doubts,
receives not James 1.7.
.

3 Of the excellency of the benefits we desire, to make us willing; which are
the favor of God, forgiveness of sin, sanctification, and eternal life.

4 Of our own necessities and wants to make us fervent: for as tart sauces
sharpe^ the stomach; so the due pondering and sense of our wants, whets off the
dull bluntness of our affections, and sets an edge on them to prayer.

5 Of the words and whole frame of our speech, that we may offer a reasonable
sacrifice, and pray with understanding. 1. Cor. 14.14.15.


7 Seventhly, Religious fasting is a notable help to prayer, and is often
commended to us in the Word; which is either public or private.

Private is a voluntary abstaining from dinner or supper, or both, as our
bodies will bear, and from all delicacies for one day or more, undertaken to
make us the more fit for prayer, and the severe practice of repentance.

But this is a preparatiue and help for extraordinary, not for ordinary prayer.

When there is occasion of this, remember three things.

1. The time of the use of it. 2. The ends of the use of it. 3. The conditions
of the use of it.
1 The time is, first, either of some great calamity; secondly, or of
extraordinary repentance for some special sin; thirdly, or when we desire to
obtain some special grace.

2 The ends in fasting are two:

First, a fitting our selves to prayer, that we may be the more lively and
earnest.

Secondly, that it may be a help and a testimony of our sorrow for sin, and
of our humiliation before God Psalm. 35.13.
.

3 The conditions are three.

1 That it be not superstitious, for in it self it is no part of GODS
worship. The Kingdom of heaven is not in meat and drink Romans 14.17.
.

2 That it be not with the opinion of merit; for whether we eat or eat not,
we are neither the more nor the less acceptable to God 1. Cor. 8.8.
.

3 That we fast from sin, otherwise our fasting is Pharisaicall, not
regarded Esa 58.5.6 Ier. 14.12.
.

Thus much of preparation, now of the other part, which is execution.

In the execution or performance of this duty of prayer, I consider two
things, 1. The matter, 2. The form.


The matter of our prayers must be only that which is according to Gods
revealed will 1. Ioh 15 14.
, the sum whereof is comprised in that divine form, left unto the Church by
our Savior Christ, called the Lords Prayer, and may be reduced to three heads.

1. Gods glory, with the removing of the co^traries. 2. Our own salvation,
with the removing of the co^traries. 3. The use of this life. with the removing
of the co^traries.
The form is either 1. Inward or 2. outward.


First, to the inward, six things are requisite.

1 Sincerity of our desires, that we pray not for fashion like hypocrites, but
with honest hearts.

2 Feruency. Such prayers obtain James 5.16.
, which he is not worthy to do, which asks in that manner, as he cares not
to receive. GOD loves an importunate beggar. Prayers are Incense which must be
offered with fire.

3 Faith, whereby we certainly believe and expect the performance of our
requests. God is provoked when we beg that which we look not to receive: our
faith is grounded;

1 On the promise, truth and power of him who has promised.

2 On the fatherly affection of God; for if he be our Father, he will much
more then our earthly fathers give us good things Luke 11.13.
.

3 On the merit of Christ, which is infinite.

4 Patience, whereby we willingly submit our selves to Gods will, both in regard
of the things we ask, and of the time and means of receiving.

Things that directly concern Gods glory, and are necessary to salvation we
must expect absolutely: but things transitory, with this condition (if God see
them to be good for us). Better knows the Physician what is good for the
sick, then the Patient: yea many times he blesses us exceedingly, in not
doing our will, but his own.

Wish not that to be granted which thou will; but labor thou to will that,
which it pleases God to grant.

It is less grievous not to obtain that which thou will, then to will that
which is not fit for thee to obtain.

For the time; we must not prescribe unto God, but wait upon him.

5 Perseverance: God sometime deferres the gra^ting of our requests; not that
he despises us, but for our exercise, that we may be the more earnest till,
and the more thankful when we have received. Things dearly bought are dearly
esteemed.

Sometime God grants us not that we ask, but that which is better, as in the
example of Paul 2 Cor. 12.7.89.
.

Grace to stand in temptation, is better then deliverance. And faith is a surer
rule of our exauditio^, the^ our sense.

6 Charity: to pray for others as well as for our selves: for the King and
Queens most excellent Majesty's, and for their children, and for all men 1.
Tim. 2.1.2.
, for our very enemies and persecutors Mat. 5.44.
, as did our blessed Savior Luke 23.34.
, and the Proto-martyr Saint Stephen Act. 7.60.
: for wicked men, as Abraham for Sodom Genesis 18.
. If he for Sodom, where was but one Lot, much more we for Jerusalem, wherein
are so many the sons and daughters of God.

He that is not with men in the charity of Brethren, shall not be with God in
the number of sons. These only can cry Abba Father, and are heard.

The whole Church prays for thee, pray thou for it.

The outward form is in two things, 1 Compositio^. and 2 Disposition.


1 Compositio^ is either 1 Of the gesture of the body. or 2 Of words, to
express the meaning of our mind.


1 For the first: A diverse gesture is described, not prescribed in the word:
The Publican stood Luke 18.13. Mar. 11.25.
: Eliah sat 1. Kin. 19.4.
: Hezekiah lay Esa. 38.2.
: Peter and Paul kneeled Act. 9.40. and 20.36.
: Moses and Aaron fell on their faces Number. 16.22.
: Solomon stretched out his hands 1. King. 8.22
: our Savior lift up his eyes Ioh. 11.41.
: the Publican cast them down, and also smote his breast Luke 18.13.
: David and Christ wept Psalm. 6.67. Heb. 5.7.
.

Of all these diverse gestures, I commend for ordinary, these:

1 A comely and reverent kneeling, which is a sign and help of our
humiliation. The rude and unmannerly leaning, lying along, and sitting of many,
especially at public prayers, is worthy to be censured, and argues an
irreligious heart.

2 A lifting up of the hands and eyes; a sign and a help of our considence
and feruency.

3 Sometime a casting down of the eyes, and smiting the breast; to signify
and help our deiection, and shame for our sins and unworthiness.

4 Tears also and groans would exceedingly become our prayers and praises,
more then Jewels and Pearls our bodies: Tears are treasured up in the Lords
bottel Psalm. 56.8.
; and are forcible. Psalm. 39.12.
.

As these, and the like gestures issue from the fervent desire of the heart: so
they reflect upon the soul, whose invisible affections, by these visible
actions are the more inflamed.

2 For the composition which is of words; it must be remembered, that words are
not simply necessary to private prayer: as appears in the example of Moses
Exodus 14.15.
and Anna 1. Sam. 1.13.
. For prayer is not a lip-, but a hartlabour; and God hears the heart Romans
8.27.
. But it is very convenient to use words.

1 Because the tongue was created principally for this use.

2 Because speech moves the senses, being to the devotion of the mind, as
bellows are to the fire.

3 Because it keeps the thoughts from wandering.

In framing the speech, words may not be affected; but plain, apt, and
significant: Fine words, and eloquent phrases are not that wherein God
delights; but reverence, contrition, faith, and the groaning of the spirit, how
homely soever the words be.

Strive more to pray with feeling, then to be eloquent. We use eloquence to
persuade men; we pray not to persuade God; but

1 To show our obedience, because he has commanded this service.

2 To testify our faith; that we depend on him, and expect from him all good
things.

3 That we may be fit to receive according to our need.

Prayer is a golden chain, which God lets down from heaven; when we lay hold
of it, we think we draw God to us; but indeed, we are by it drawn up to him.

Eloquent praying is lawful, if it be not affected: but verbal prayers are
exceeding dangerous.



In which we consider, 1 An orderly placing of the parts. 2 An inlargment of
them.


1 Order is bea^^^full, and very necessa^^ lest we use idle repe^^tions and
be confus^^^ things to be auold^^ when we speak bes^^^ wise men, much m^^^
when we speak to^^^ infinite God. Forwa^^ of observing Order, (...) go
forward and ba^^^ ward, after an vncom^ly manner, unseasonably repeating over
the same things; faring like hounds at a loss; and having unadvisedly begun to
speak, know not how wisely to make an end.

This kind of praying ^n some degree comes ^^der the censure of ^abling.

Some think that we must never pray, but upon the sudden and ex^raordinary
instinct and potion of the Spirit. This is a fancy, and those which practice
^his, cannot avoid the ^^conueniences named. ^esides, the multiplici^e of our
wants; the slipperinesse of our memory; the slownesse of our conceit; the
darkness of our understanding; the wandering of our thoughts, and the
imperfection of our utterance, require son^fore-thoughts of th^^ which we are
to speak^ all which weaknesses are by meditation and order much relieved.

God is the God of order, and likes not negligence or unadvisedness in his
service. Do thou study to serve him.

As the wise Preacher speaks not at all ad^^^ture whatsoever comes on his
tongues end, but prepares in his mind the general parts and heads of his
exhortation: so do thou in praying, lost thou offer the sacrifice of fools.

As the Carpenter being to build a house, ^^ewes not his timber at adventure;
but before hand proiects in his mind the several rooms and parts; and
accordingly prepares his timber; and lays not sparres in the foundation, nor
groundsels, and studs in the roof; but fits every one in his proper place,
according to the model and plot fore-conceiued in his mind: So my advice is,
that before thou prayest; thou should in thy mind, first propound to thy
self, certain general place and heads of prayer with their order; which to
be contrived in the 1. which in the 2. which in the third place, with
fore-casting of some comely transitions, as doors to pass from one part to
another. Secondly, all the several things which thou would mention in thy
prayer, to be with discretion ranged under their right and proper Generals, as
for example: All things concerning faith, to be referred to that Petition
which is for faith: and which concern repentance, to be marshalled in that
Petition which is for repentance, and so of the rest.

The general heads or places in ordinary private prayer would be these at the
least:

1 Confession of sin. 2 Petition, 1 For pardon. 2 For faith. 3 For
repentance. 4 For direction in our personal calling. 5 For perseverance. 6 For
the Church.
3 Thanksgiving for benefies rece^^ed, which are 1. Spiritual, as Election,
with the effects, 1 Vocation 2 Iusti^^^^^^ 3 San^ti^^^on. 4 Hope of
^^rification.
2 Temporal, 1 Creation. 2 Pro^dence in 1 Health. 2 Liberty. 3 Food. 4
Raiment. 5 Friends. 6 Manifold de^^rances etc.



And so to conclude with petition for preservation in the night o^ day
following, as is the occasion.

I bind no body to this order, but this (...) take to be plain for beginners.

I have referred thanksgiving to the last place, which may be indifferently
used in the first: it matters not, so it be not forgotten.

Observe thine own heart: if thou find a cheerfulness and rejoicing for
benefits received, then it is not unsitting that thanksgiving should be in
the ^^st place: If thou find thy heart more affected with grief for sin,
then if thou please, let confession of sin, and desire of pardon* precede
Wait upon God wi^^ an honest and reuer^^^ heart, and the anno^^ting will help
thy (...) firmities, and teach th^^ to cry, Abba Father.

An example of the parts before propounded in their order.
O Lord,

1 I confess; that I am a vile sinner.

2 I beseech thee of.

1 Pardon by Ies^^ Christ.

2 O Lord, give me faith, that I may fee^^ this pardon liuelily in my heart.

3 And I beseech thee ^^ue me true repen^ance to amend my ^icked life, that my
^aith may be seen in the fruits of holy obedi^nce.

4 And whereas thou have called me to this estate and calling (...) Direct me
therein I ^umbly pray thee, by ^he wisdom of thy spirit, and furnish me with
such necessary gifts, that I may discharge my duty to thy glory, the good of
others, and the comfort of mine own soul.

5 And because Satan is a deadly enemy, and I am weak; O Lord, I beseech the
forsake me not in (...) hour of tentation; (...) stablish my heart in grace,
give me perseverance in goodness, and in the end victory by Jesus Christ.

6 This which I beg for my self, I humbly crave for thy whole Church upon
earth; that it may please thee to perform all thy promises to thine elect, and
to bring us all to thy heavenly kingdom.

all thy love, and for all my benefits spiritual, and temporal, thereby
^estowed upon me. And I humbly entreat thee to preserve me in safety this
night, through my Lord Jesus Christ, to whom, etc. or, in whose name, etc.
praying in the words of the Lords prayer.

The same with the thanksgiving in the first place.
O Lord, I humbly thank thee for all thy favors spiritual and temporal, of
the least of which I am most unworthy, by reason of my great sins: for I
confess that I am a vile sinner, etc.

The enlargement of these parts follows.
Before we particularly s^^^k of enlargeme^t, be thou admonished of 2. things.

1 Fervent praying, though short, is more accepted, then long praying with
coldness

The Publicans prayer Luke 18.13.
was short in words, but full of sense and desire; of more worth with God, then
all the long prayers of the Pharisees: for God measures not our devotions by
the length, and by the outward habit of words, but by the inward meaning of
the spirit.

So our blessed Savior in the garden Mat. 26.39.42.44.
, used but few words, but his desire, and the gronings of his spirit (wherein is
the power of our prayers) were unutterable.

He that uses many words, without the desire of the heart, speaks indeed,
but prays not: for prayer is the desire of the heart, crying, Abba Father;
words but the expressing of this desire.

The noise of our lips, without the voice of the heart, is no more a true
prayer, then ringing of belles, or babbling of a Parrot.

As a body without a soul, much wood without fire; a bullet in a gun, without
powder; so are words in prayer without spirit.

Prayers are as gold; in a little quantity of words, there must be a great
value of spirit.

He that is fervent in the spirit, prays much, though he speak little.

2 Secondly, when thou prayest, let thy words follow thy desire.

If thou find a dullness of spirit, and coldness of thy affections; be the
shorter; and conclude with a groaning of the spirit for thy drowsinesse, and
with a lifting up thy heart to God, that he would look mercifully upon thee,
and quicken thee. Let this be an occasion to humble thee the more; and it will
be a means to work thee to more liveliness and feruency the next time thou
presentest thy self before God. And if thou be truly humbled, it will
drive thee to God, and thou will think long till the time come about, wherein
thou may complain and pour forth thy heart before him.

If thou find a viuacity and cheerfulnes of mind, and the desire of thy
heart to be strong and fervent, prompting thee with matter and words; conclude
not thy prayers and praises too soon, but let thy soul take her fill of
celestial delicacies in her familiar conference with God.

If the desire of the heart be weak and faint, it is not to be wearied and
oppressed with words.

The enlargement of the several parts in prayer is either 1. General or 2.
Particular.


The general is that which in common belongs to all the parts, and it is
twofold.

1 The using of some description of God whom we invoke, from his Attributes,
Promises, Effects, etc. Such a beginning has the Lords Prayer, Our Father
which art in heaven Mat. 6.9.
. Thus began our Savior in the Garden Mar. 14.36
Abba Father, all things are possible unto thee. Thus lehosophat begins his
prayer 2. Chron. 20.6.7.8.9.10.
. Thus Peter and John Acts 4.24.25.26.
: look the places which are to long to be transcribed.

Such description is to be used in the beginning of our Prayers, for the
helping of our faith and assurance in which we ought to pray, and may also be
well used in any of the several parts when we would stir up faith.

2 A begging of audience. So David Psa. 5.1.2.3 Psalm. 102.1.2. Psalm. 140.1.2.
. Both these are excellently used by Hezekiah 2. Kings 19.15.16.
. This also may very fitly be used in the conclusion of our prayers; as thus
Daniel most passionately and fervently ends Dan 9.17.18.19.
.

The particular enlargement is of each part by it self.

The arguments ordinarily serving hereunto, are the causes. The effects. The
subjects. The adjuncts. The contraries. Similitudes and comparisons.
Distributions. Testimonies.

There are certain ornaments also not to be neglected, for the polishing and
beautifying our speech in prayer, as,

1 Comely transitions and passings from one part to another.

2 Exclamations; when we speak of the goodness of God, thus, How great is thy
goodness to them which fear thee Psalm. 31.19.
! When we speak of the promises, thus; How sweet are thy promises to my mouth
Ps. 119.103
! When we speak of our own wretchedness, thus; O wretched man that I am To.
7.24.
! etc.

3 Interrogations: as when David lay under a great affliction of mind, and
cried out: Will the Lord absent himself for ever? And will he show no more
favor? Is his mercy clean gone for ever? Does his promise fail for evermore?
Has God forgotten to be merciful? Has he shut up his tender mercies in
displeasure Ps. 77.7.8.9
?

The power of these Interrogations? Who is able to express it? Whose heart
ake^ not in the very reading of them? How do they increase our feeling, and
raise our desires!

4 Options or wishes; as if we beg for grace to obey God according to his
comma^dements, thus; O that my ways were directed to keep thy statutes Psalm.
119.5.
.

5 Vows and promises, thus; Psalm. 51.12.13.
Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation, and uphold me with thy free Spirit.
Then will I teach transgressors thy ways, etc. And again; Verse. 14.
Deliver me, O God, and my ^ongue shall sing aloud of thy righteousness. And
again; Verse. 15.
O Lord open thou my lips, and my mouth shall show forth day praise. So also;
Psalm. 119.33.34.
Teach me, O Lord, the way of thy statutes, and I will keep it unto the end:
Give me understanding, and I will keep thy Law; yea, I will observe it with
my whole heart.

6 Ingeminations; thus David also prays, Psalm. 94.1.2.
O Lord God the Auenger, O God the Auenger, show thy self; exalt thy self, O
Judge of the world, etc.

And diverse others of this nature, which a devout heart will easily find out:
and to this purpose, I am persuaded, its very helpesfull to be familiarly
conversant in the Psalms, because David was a man of all other, of inflamed
affection^, and most excelling this way.

He that desires to make trial of this plain direction, and to profit by it,
may be much helped by two things.

1. Let him endeavor soundly to understand the principles of Religion; or else
he shall never be able to tell what to ask of God. 2 Secondly, if he can
write, let him make a book of clean paper, and in sundry leaves, write in the
top the particular parts of prayer, with their several branches, allowing a
whole leaf to each part and branch; and then whatsoever excellent and special
phrase or sentence he reads or hears of any of those parts or branches,
let him refer it to his proper leaf and place. Which course if it be taken,
and these pla^^s diligently studied, and now and then reuised and read over,
will (in my opinion) much enable a man upon any occasion to pray with
understanding, either alone, or with others to their desired comfort.
If any shall think this way to be too busy, and to require too much pains, I
desire them to remember, that no excellent thing can be attained without
labor; which, how great soever it should be, should not be grutched, for the
attaining a faculty in this exercise, which is the refuge, and refreshing of
the soul: one of the chiefest pieces of a Christians armor Ephesians. 5.18.
, and the means whereby all good things are sanctified to our comfortable use
1 Timothy 4.5.
.

Seven year is holden but a convenient term, to learn the children of men
earthly manual trades; let not the child of God account twice so long time to
be too much, to learn the heavenly Art of outward crying Abba Father.

Here follow some examp^^ of the rules of general (...) particular enlargement
^^fore delivered, (for a taste) to a young beginner.
The general enlargement, from a descript^^ of God, Description from
and begging of Audience, thus:

O Title.
Almighty God the Effect.
Creator of heaven and earth, and my most merciful Title.
Father in Jesus Christ, which have graciously Promise.
promised to hear thy children when they pray unto thee; O Begging of Audience.
Lord I beseech thee accept, hear, and grant ^^e supplication of thy ^^ruant
by Jesus Christ; (...) such like.

Examples of particular enlargement.
1 Confession of sin may be enlarged, first, ^y the Adiunct; 1. The adi iunct.
secondly, by a distribution of sin; thirdly, by the effects, etc. Thus,

O Lord, I confess that I am a vile sinner.

First, being ashamed to look up unto heaven, and unworthy to live upon earth.

Secondly, 2. Distribution.
for I am guilty of the sin of Adam, and more also I have committed actual
transgressions without number, in breaking thy most holy commandments,
omitting my duty, and doing the contrary; many sins of ignorance (which I
plead not to excuse, but to condemn my self, who ought to have known thy
will), and often of knowledge, which wounds my soul to remember.

Thirdly, 2. Effect.
O Lord in thy justice I have deferued such plagues both bodily and spiritual,
temporal, and eternal, which thy righteous omnipotency can inflict upon
abominable sinners. Or such like.

2 Petition for pardon may be enlarged.

First, by an ingemination.

Secondly, by the effects adorned with exclamation.

Thirdly, by the contrary.

Fourthly, by a testimony adorned with inrerrogation.

Fifthly, by the meritorious cause. Thus.

First, 1. Ingemination.
O Lord pardon, O Lord forgive, O Lord be merciful.

Secondly, 2. Effects with exclamation.
blessed is the man whose iniquity is forgiven, and whose sin is covered.
Blessed is the man that obtains thy favor.

Thirdly, 3. Contraries.
O Lord enter not into judgment with thy servant, reward me not according to
my ill deserving. Turn away thine anger, and make thy joyful countenance
shine into my soul.

Fourthly, 4. Testimony with interrogation.
is it not thy promise to pardon sinners that seek thy favor? and to help
them which call upon thee? O make good thy promise unto thy servant. Dear
Father, for Jesus Christ his sake.

Fifthly, 5. Meritorious cause.
remember his obedience, his passion, his blood, the price whereby I am
ransomed, and be reconciled, remitting all mine offenses, or such like.

2 Petition for faith may be enlarged.

First, from the efficient cause.

Secondly, from the contrary.

Thirdly, from the effects, adorned with vowing, etc. Thus,

First, 1. Efficient cause.
O Lord I beseech thee work in me by thy holy Spirit faith to believe the
pardon of my sins. It is not in my power to believe, it must be thy work in
my soul.

Secondly, 2 Contrary.
make me to believe, good Father, and help my unbelief*

Thirdly, 3. Effect with vowing.
grant me a feeling of thy love in my heart, and that peace which passes all
understanding, then will I confidently come before thee, and praise thee with
joyful lips, or such like.

3 Petition for repentance may be enlarged.

First, from the cause.

Secondly, from a distribution adorned with exclamation.

Thirdly, from the contrary.

Fourthly, from a comparison. Thus,

First, holy Father, 1. The cause.
grant that my faith may show it self in the sanctification of my life.

Secondly, 2. Distribution with exclamation.
and to this end I humbly beseech thee renew in me thy decayed image, and give
me true repentance, that I may turn from all my sins, to serve thee in
holiness and righteousness all the days of my life. Make me to understand
mine own vileness, that I may earnestly pray for renouatio^: Ah wretch that I
am! though I know my self to be an horrible sinner; and that I have ten
thousand times deserved damnation; yet such is the flintinesse of my heart,
that I am not sensible of my dangerous and fearful estate.

Thirdly, 3. Contrary.
Abba Father, all things are possible to thee; manifest, I pray thee thy
gracious power upon my heart, in mollifying the hardness of it. Make me to
relent and to have remorse. Work in me a godly sorrow, and such hatred of all
sin, that I may for ever abominate it.

Fourthly, 4. Comparison.
and grant dear Father, that I may be able as zealously to follow thy
commandments, as ever I have delightfully followed and fulfilled mine own
unlawful desires: or such like.

4 Petition for direction in our personal calling may be enlarged.

First, from the cause.

Secondly, from the contrary.

Thirdly, from the effect.

Fourthly, from the Adiunct, thus.

First, O Lord in as much as thou have ordained, that we should all live in
some honest calling, and that therein we should show forth our faith and holy
profession. I humbly entreat thee to direct me in this my vocation. (...)

Secondly, Lord make me conscionable, and to abhor idleness. Bless my
labors; grant that the world carry not away my heart, but that I may so care
for the things of this life, that I forget not that I am called to thy
Kingdom. O make me so to live as one, who through thy goodness expects that
heavenly inheritance.

Thirdly, let my life be to thy glory, the good of others, and mine own
eternal comfort.

Fourthly, and in as much as thou have appointed the Cross to thy Disciples; I
beseech thee to sanctify whatsoever trouble it shall please thee to lay upon
me, and to give me patience, and such contentedness with thy holy will, that
it may not draw me from thee, but unto thee, and that under the same I may have
cause to rejoice in the experience of thy favors through Jesus Christ my Lord:
or such like.

5 Petition for perseverance may be enlarged.

1 From the cause.

2 From the adiunct.

3 From the contraries, when special instance may be made of that special
corruption which we are most subject unto: thus,

1 O Lord let it be thy good pleasure, 1. Cause.
continually to watch over me, and to preserve me in the zealous performance of
my duty to the end of my days, which without thy help I cannot do.

2 For the days are evil and dangerous, 2. Adiunct.
the occasions and examples of sin are infinite; Lord keep me in the faith,
that I fall not away, and preserve me from the sins of these times.

3 And more then this, 3. Contrary.
Satan is my deadly enemy, seeking to devour my soul, and I am weak, O Lord
thou know: Dear Father, confound Satan, and confirm my faith: so bridle
him, that he may not have power over me: so strengthen me, that I may be
always able to resist and repel him: when thou shall think it good to suffer
him to tempt me, O Lord forsake me not: fail not of thy promised help, that
I may not fail in my faith and obedience: make me to prevail, and by the
might of thy spirit, to have victory in Jesus Christ. And whereas I am
compassed about with many infirmities, specially with (...) O Dear God and
Father, strengthen me here, and give me power to rule and govern my
affections, and to subdue them all to the obedience of thy holy word, through
Jesus Christ my Lord. Or such like.

6 Petition for the Church may be enlarged, 1 Generally. 2 Particularly.


1 Generally, by desiring the fulfilling of all the promises made unto it; as,

1. Defense.

2 Destruction of enemies.

3 Conversion of the elect.

4 Confirmation of the converted.

5 Comfort of the afflicted, by Common calamities of Body Mind
Special, as persention.


In affliction of body, as sickness.

1 That God would sanctisie it to the furtherance of their repentance.

2 That he would give them patience.

3 That he would recover them, if it be his will: if otherwise,

4 That he would prepare the^ for a peaceable departure.

In affliction of mind, that God would,

1 Pardon their sins.

2 Give them repentance.

3 Increase their faith.

4 Defend them from Satan, and,

5 Give them an happy issue.

In Persecution, that they may be

1 Assisted with the holy spirit, and that they may

2 Boldly glorify God, in witnessing to the truth, even with the loss of
their lives.

2 Particularly, by making mention of the Churches of England* Scotland, and
Ireland that God would,

1 Pardon our crying sins.

2 Hold back his heavy judgments deserved.

3 Continue his Gospel.

4 Preserve our dread Sovereign Lord, King James, our Noble Queen the hopeful
Prince (...) etc.

5 Bless the Honorable Council, Nobility, Gentry, Judges, Justices; the
Ministers of the Word and Sacraments; the Comminalty. And here we are to
remember our families, parents, friends; yea our very enemies, etc.

2 Thanksgiving may be enlarged by an enumeration of benefits, according to
the distribution of them before mentioned; and may be notably amplified, by the
contraries, in considering how miserable we should be, in the want of those
blessings, all or some, etc.

In the conclusion we may remember to ask preservation for the day or night
following^ aptly falling into it (...) from the mention of the benefits
bestowed upon our bodies, in the thanksgiving

1 For the day, taking occasion by similituder* to desire grace to walk
soberly as in the day.

2 For the night, by similitude to desire to be preserved from the works of
darkness, and from eternal death, and that God would give protection, and
comfortable refreshing.

Both for night and day to be amplified from the shortness of ^ife, and
suddenness of death; and to add something for preparation thereunto. For the
life of a Christian ^ought to be a continu^ll meditation of death. And thus
reverently to shut up all with the Lords prayer.

A SHORT PRAYER according to the same order, gathered out of diverse places of
holy Scripture; by which, as by a p^terne, may be conceived, both the manner,
and the use of a Note-booke, to be made and kept of those things which we
read, concerning the several parts of Prayer.
O The preface in a description of God; and a begging of audience.
Lord my God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ Ephesians. 3.14.
; I beseech thee have respect to the prayer of thy servant, and to his
supplication, to hearken to the cry, and to the prayer which thy servant
prays before thee this day 1. Kin. 8.28.
. Confession of sin.
O my God, I am ashamed, and blush to lift up my face to thee my God: for ^ine
iniquities are increased over my head, and my trespass is grown up unto
heaven Ezra 9.6.
. 1. Petition, for pardon.
O Lord forgive Dan. 9.19.
, and cause thy face to shine upon thy servant, for the Lords sake Dan. 9.17.
. Take away all mine iniquity, and receive me graciously; so will I render the
calves of my lips Hos. 14.3.
. 2. For says.
O stir me up to take hold upon thee Esa. 64.7.
. I believe Lord, help my unbelief Mark. 9.24
, and increase my faith Luke 17.5.
Seal me to the day of Redemption Ephesians. 4.30.
, and shed abroad thy love in my heart, by thy holy spirit Romans 5.5.
* I humbly beseech thee. 3. For repentance.
Turn me O Lord unto thee, and I shall be ^^^ned Lam. 5.21.
. Create in me a clea^^ heart O Lord, and rene^^^ right spirit within me Psalm.
51.10.
. (...) take the stony heart out (...) my body, and give me (...) heart of
flesh, that I wi^^ walk in thy flatutes, (...) that I may be thy ser^^^ and
thou may be my (...) for evermore Ezech. 11.19.20.
. 4. For direction in our personal callings.
A^^ whereas thou have ca^^^ me to this estate (... (...) Good Lord grant
(...) grace, therein to works (...) which is good Ephesians. 4.28. 2 These. 3.12.
, with q^^^etnesse, and to eat mi^^^^owne bread, showing all good conscience,
that I may adorn the doctrine of God my Savior in all things Tit. 2.15.
. and in as much as thy disciples must take up the ^rosse and follow thee Mat.
16.24.
. I way thee, Dear Father, strengthen me with all might, through thy glori^^^
pow^e, unto all pati^^ce and long suffering, with ioyfulnesse Col. 1.11.
. 5. For perseverance.
And because Satan as a r^ring ^^ion, seeks to devour (...), O my God, tread
down ^atan under my feet Romans 16.20.
; stablish me in every good word and work 2. These. 17
, and preserve my whole spirit; soul and body, blameless, unto the coming of
our, (...) Jesus Christ. 6. For the Church.
Do good thy good pleasure to (...) on, and build the mall^^^ thy Jerusalem
Psalm. 51.18
. Good (...) preser^^ thy little flock^^ whom th^n have pr^^^^ the kingdom
Luke 12.32.
. Thanksgiving.
I th^^^ thee O Father, Lord* (...) heaven and ^arth Mat. 11.25.
, th^^ thou have, deliu^red, (...) from the power of dar^^^, and translated we
into (...) kingdom of thine (...) Sa^ue. O Lord, thou (...) been my God from
my ^^^ther ^w^mbe Psa. 22.10.
Thou (...) ^^pt me unto this, d^^^ thy pr^^^dence, thou (...) given me bread
to (...) clothes to put on (...) 28.20.
. I h^^^ly praise thy name, and I beseech thee, make me dwell (...) safety Psalm.
4.8.
, under the shadow of thy wings Psalm. 17.8.
, this day (or night) through Ie^is Christ; in whose name, etc. Or, to whom
with thee O Father. Amen.

Thou may also make use of the Lords Prayer, excellently to this purpose.
IT was given for a pattern, and special direction to the Church upon earth,
how to pray.

There can be no better direction: for if we require wisdom; wisdom it
self endited it: if perfection; it comprehends all the kinds of all things to
be prayed for: if order; the method is divine: if perspicuous breuity; so much
could not by any onely-created understanding be compacted into so little: if
force and power, there can be none more effectual, then that, which Jesus
Christ, the Word of the Father, has left and commended to his Church.

If thou would profitably use it, Observe bese things.

1 Learn throughto understand it.

2 Bear in mind the ^uerall petitions, with ^^e it order.

3 Note down in thy memory, as thou were before directed, these graces thou
crauest in ^uery petition, giving the^ their proper place, in thy book, in thy
memory, and in thy prayer.

4 Fourthly, take due knowledge of thy wants in every petition; under their
several heads setting down the phrases and things thou meetest with all
concerning them. And specially note upon thy heart, and imprint in it the
graces thou most want, and the wants which most do trouble thee
Principally, meditate of those graces, and labor to be humbled with the
feeling of those wants.

To help thee to spell (...) this lesson out of the Lords Prayer.
After a description of God, as before, keeping the petitions with their order,
in thy mind, thou may enlarge the^ ^us.

The 1. Petition: Hallowed be thy name.
1 Here thou may how how God has commanded, and it is our duty to glorify
his name, in regard of our

First, Creation.

Secondly, preservation; but specially in regard of our

Thirdly, Redemption.

2 Then acknowledge,

First, thy negligence and carelessness this way.

Secondly, thy pride, in seeking thine own glory more then Gods.

Thirdly, thy want of zeal.

Fourthly, such sins whereby thou have dishonored God most, causing his name
thereby to be blasphemed.

Thirdly, Desire grace, ye thou may, chiefly in all thy thoughts, words, and
deeds, propound to thy self to glorify God, and to respect his glory more then
even the salvation of thy soul.

The 2. Petition: Thy Kingdom come.
1 Enlarge this, by a mourning of thy soul unto God, for thy bondage under
sin and Satan, amplified from the consideration

First, of our first Creation.

Secondly, of our present traitorous, and rebellious disposition, by the power
of original sin, which has wholly possessed all parts of body and soul.

2 Desire that God would

First, rescue and redeem thee out of the power of Satan, and sin.

Secondly, that he would by his spirit rule in thy heart, casting out the
strong man, and dividing his spoils.

Thirdly, that he would make the affections subject to the regiment of his
spirit, and renew thee according to his image.

Thou may make this the place of repentance.

3 Here thou may remember the Church, the kingdom of Christ.

The 3. Petition: Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven.
1 Here confess and bewail,

First, thy readiness to do thine own will, yea the will of Satan, making
these the rule of thy life, and not the will of God.

Secondly, thy ignorance of Gods word, which is the copy of his will.

Thirdly, thy negligence in hearing of it.

Fourthly, thy contempt showed in continuance in known sins, after admonition.

2 Then desire grace.

First, to deny thy self.

Secondly, to understand the word.

Thirdly, to love and reverence it more.

Fourthly, to make it the rule of thy life, in as much as it is the scepter of
Christ's kingdom.

Fifthly, that thy conversation may be in heaven, after the example of the
Angels.

Sixthly, whatsoever be the will of God for thee to do or suffer, that thou
may always with patience and contentation say: Thy will be done.

The 4. Petition: Give us this day our daily bread.
1 Here acknowledge that thy life, preservation, and all good things come from
God.

2 Confess and bewail thy

First, covetousness.

Secondly, thy unjust dealing, to enrich and maintain thy self.

Thirdly, Matthew. 6.
thy distrust in the good providence of God, who feeds the fowls, clotheth
the Lillies.

Fourthly, thy earthly and worldly mind that cannot savor ought but earth and
earthly things.

3 Then desire,

First, the providence of God to watch over thee for thy preservation and main
tenance.

Secondly, faith to rest upon God in all estates and not upon the means.

Thirdly, not to use unlawful means.

Fourthly, that God would bless his gifts unto thee, and that thou may use
them soberly and comfortably.

Fifthly, thou may here make use of the direction concerning thy personal
calling.

5 Petition; Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive, etc.
1 Here make use of the confession of sin, and petition for pardon, for faith
and repentance according to the former direction.

2 Here also desire a charitable heart toward thy neighbors, as thou desire
to be forgiven, so to forgive others, and to be ready to grant the pardon thou
crauest.

6. Petition; Lead us non into tentation: but deliver us from evil.
Here desire strength against Satan his tentations, and against all things,
whereby thou may be drawn from faith in God and holy obedience, making use
of that which is in the Petition for perseverance according to the former
direction.

And for conclusion, as our Savior concludes with a kind of praise to God, so
do thou.

The heads of thankfulness thou may make the graces which God has given thee,
according to every petition.

First, for making thee in any measure studious of his glory.

Secondly, for giving thee his Spirit.

Thirdly, for his word.

Fourthly, for his providence over thee; Creating Preserving
thee

Fifthly, for pardon of sin: Justification, Sanctification, etc.

Sixthly, for strength in any tentation.

If thou will bestow some time and study to practice according to this, I
cannot but be persuaded, that thou shall find much benefit, which God grant.

To conclude, I would admonish a learner, of five things.

First, enter not upon the practice here commended, till thou have these
general proiects perfect in thy head, or some other.

Secondly, in the mean time make use of some good praier-book, and out of it
get by heart such prayers as best befit thy devotion and necessities; or if thou
can not read, use some others help to read the^, or repeat them to thee;
at least neglect not to say upon thy knees reverently the Lords prayer: always
provided, that thou well understand the meaning of every petition, or otherwise
thou shall take GODS name in vain.

Secondly, give not over this course, though thou find it hard, but overcome
the difficulty with thy diligence and pains. To give over a good exercise for
difficulties, argues idleness and sloth.

All good things are hard to us, because of our corruption, and prayer of all
holy exercises the hardest: we must force nature.

Children learn not to speak perfectly in a day, or a month; much less can
we cry Abba Father perfectly and distinctly upon the sudden.

Redeem some of the time thou bestowest upon thy pleasures and vanities, and
bestow it this way; it shall never repent thee.

Fourthly, remember that the Pharisees could make excellent prayers, and the
Reprobate can ^^ie Lord, Lord.

A wicked man may attain thus far, as to make prayers very notable: but with
feeling and in faith to cry Abba Father, a wicked man cannot. This is prayer,
and a certain token of Adoption, the other is not.

Fifthly, labor to have grace in thy heart; and whatsoever thou ask in
prayer, practice in life.

He that prays for the pardon of his sins, and for grace to live well, and
yet neither endeavors to avoid sin, or to practice piety, mockes God, and
shall not go unpunished.

Live as thou prayest, that thou may live ever.

So be it.

PSALM. 66.18. If I regard wickedness in my heart, the Lord will not bear me.

2. TIM. 2.19. Let every one that calls on the name of Christ depart from
iniquity.

Now to the only wise God, who is able to do above all we ask or think, the
Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, be praise in the Church throughout all
generations for ever. Amen.

FINIS.
Short and godly Admonitions concerning Time, and the v^^ of ing^^^ered out of
Ephesians. 5.16.
Redeeming the Time; because the days are evil*
Here are two par^^ An exhortation, To (...) d^e^^ the Ti^^. A reason: Because
(...) days are evil.


Redeeming the time.
TIme is the measure of Motion.

Opportunity is that part of time which is fittest for our affairs.

This is meant here, as it is the measure of good motions, called also
occasion, season, due time.

It is the beauty of things; for every thing is beautiful in his time Eccles.
3.11
.

Meats are welcomest, when they are in season; so a word spoken in due season
is comely Prou. 25.11
; Even a refreshing of the weary soul Esaias 51.4.
.

As some imprison truth in unrighteousness Romans 1.18.
, so do, they time Hierome.
.

It is charity to redeem time, by righteousness.

Opportunity of time is a rich commodity; the covetousness of it to do
well, is an honest covetousness.

As Merchants Augustine.
observe carefully the seasons of buying in, and venting their Merchandise, so
buy thou and redeem time to do good.

They that loose time, are the greatest loosers, and wastfullest prodigals; for
of all other possessions, two may be had together: but two moments of time
cannot be possessed together.

This precious commodity is most out of request with great and rich men; who
consume and mispend time, as fast as their unthrifty children do their
inheritances.

Idleness, vanity, and neglecting the precious time, is the disease of great
and rich men, as they say the Gout is: these can find time, to dally, to court,
to be riotous, etc. but not to pray and serve God; therefore for the most part,
they are most poor in the best things.

Time is the price of time; when thy profit, thy pleasure, thy vain delights,
thy lusts, call thee after them: exchange time for time.

As thou give thy money for meat, and apparel; so give these things to
purchase the time of prayer, and weldoing.

Solomon says, Buy the truth Prou. 23.23
: but Pilate says; What is truth John 18.38
? so Paul says, buy the time: but our profane wretches say, What is time? let
us spend it, say they, as though it were little worth.

Time is Gods creature, he allows thee no time to be vain and wicked: but
he gives thee time, that thou may repent and do good. Make thy advantage of
it.

Of the time thou bestowest, in prayer, singing of Psalms, reading the
Scriptures, and good books, and in doing good, it shall never repent thee. But
time otherwise spent, will one day torment thy conscience.

Thou must give account for time; on this moment depends eternity; of
blessedness if it be well; of misery, if it be ill employed.

It is great wisdom to know the time, and to redeem it Ephesians. 5.15.16
.

The men of Isachar were in great account with David, because they had
understanding of the times, to know what Israel ought to do; so are they in
great account with God, 1. Chr. 12.32
who regard and use the season of well doing.

When a poor man begs of thee, then have thou occasion to show thy charity:
when thou art in tentation, to show thy faith: when thou art iniuried, to show
thy patience: when thou hear or see men offend, to show thy zeal: when
there are public meetings for the worship of God, to show thy devotion, etc.

Loose not such fair opportunities of weldoing to glorify God.

The time of grace and of the Gospel is an accepted time, eue^ the day of
salvation. While the door is open, enter into the Kingdom of heaven.

While thou have the light, believe in the light; and walk in the light, that
thou may be the child of light. Ioh. 12.35.36


To day if thou will hear his voice, harden not thy heart Psalm. 95.7.
Repe^^ while it is called to day Heb. 3.13.
?

The time is short 1. Cor. 7.29.
: the art of weldoing is long: the work is great: the laborers are lazy: the
Master is at hand: It remains that we use the world as though we used it
not, and that we redeem the time of prayer, and of the practice of godliness.

Occasions are headlong; and once past, not to be recovered. The tide taries
for none: take time while it is offered: while you have opportunity, do good
unto all; to thy self, to others, specially to them which are of the household
of faith Gal. 6.10.
.

The 5 foolish virgins came to late, and were shut out Mat. 25.10.11.12.
. Jerusalem in her day took no knowledge of the things belonging to her peace,
and was destroyed Luke 19.42.
. Esau came not in time, and lost the blessing, but found leisure enough to
cry bitterly Genes 37.33.34.
.

Our life is as a Fair: Nazian.
when the Fayre-day is over, there is no buying the things thou need: so
when this life is ended, there is no time of repentance. Repent now; for in
death no man remembers God, says David Psalm. 6.5.
.

As in war, so in death, we are not permitted to err twice: often do well,
that thou may once die well, and thou shall be happy.

Live every day, as if it were thy last; and as at the last day thou will wish
thou had, or rejoice, thou have lived.

Examine thine hours every day: how many do thou spend in eating and
drinking? how many in sleeping? how many in dressing and trimming thy painted
sheath? how many in doing nothing? how many in doing that which is ill? how few
or none in prayer and weldoing?

How ill tenants are we to our grand Lord? we hold all of him, but we think
little of yielding and paying at our due time.

We receive all our time from God, and like unthankful wretches, serve him
with the least part of it, and that commonly the last and refuse.

A Heathen Emperot Titus, the son of Vespasian. Hierom on the sixth to the
Galathians.
accounted that day lost, in which he did no good. How many days have thou
lost? Account thou likewise that a lost day, in which thou becommest not better
then thy self.

He that most redeemeth the time, lives long, though he fulfill not much
time; and he which is an hundred years old, if he have redeemed no time of
doing good, has been (but has not lived) long Seneca.
.

The Usurer sels time to men, and the devil steals time from men. He tells
the Papists of Purgatory: that painted fire, yields but a cold comfort: for by
this means he leads them to hell in a string: He tells our gallants, that
its time enough to pray and repent when they are old: And by this means, they
spend so much time in evil, that they leave none for repentance, prayer, and
for using means to save their souls.

As does the Usurer, so does the devil; the Usurer gives the young Nouice fair
words, till he has broken his day, and forfeited his lands* so does the
diuel-stroke us, till by continuance in sin we are hardened and past recovery.

Pray to day, repent to day: thou art not sure of to morrow; he that is not
ready and fit to day, will be less to morrow.

Thy life is like a vessel of weak wine, which is quick and lively at the
first broching: but flat and ill tasted when it is tilted.

Will thou draw out the first, and best of thy life to the devil, in following
drunkenness, whoredom, and thy lawless lusts? and the^ give the dregs to
God, which are fit to be poured out to the hogs?

Is it a time then, first to begin to live, when thou art ready to die? then
first to seek God, when thou come to thy brothes, and spectacles? when
understanding, memory, sight, hearing, and senses fail.

For the most part, they which defer the season of seeking God till age; are
then justly given over to him who^ they have served in their youth, which is
the devil.

Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth; while the evil days come
not, nor the years draw nigh, when thou shall say, I have no pleasure in them
Ecclesi. 12.1.
. Thus did Samuel 1. Sam. 1.28
; and Timothy 2. Tim. 3.15.
: God delights in such.

Art thou old, and have trifled out thy Time, neglecting the opportunity of
knowing and serving God? Despair not, but repent; and be the more careful to
redeem the Time that remains.

Let it suffice, that in the Time past of thy life thou have walked as a
Heathen, in abominable wickedness: But now the end of al things is at hand; be
sober therefore and watch unto prayer 1. Pet. 4.3.7.


Do here, as thou do in thy journey. If thou have ouer-slept thy self in
the morning; thou make the shorter bait, and spurrest the harder on: so now,
put thy best leg before, make speed, lest thou be benighted, and shut out
with the dogs and Sorcerers, and whoremongers, Revel 27.15
, etc.

Because the days are evil.

Time, is called Days, because it is counted by Days.

Days are not evil in themselves, and as they are a necessary appertenance to
the frame of this world, 2. Tim. 3.1.2. etc.
which is Gods building: but they are so called, from evil persons, and things
Mat. 6.34.
which are in those days.

The time is evil, when we which live in such Time are evil; and when by our
evil of sin, the evil of punishment is deservedly inflicted upon us. Which
punishments no marvel if they continue, when that continues in us, which
deserves to be punished.

The days are evil: then great need to use Prayer: for it shall come to
pass, that whosoever calls upon the name of the Lord, shall be safe Joel
2.32. Romans 10.13.


Many men cry out, that the world was never worse, saying, O the Times! But are
not the Times the worse for thee? If thou be wicked and profane; it is thou
which make the^ so bad. Complain not of the Times, but of thy self, and
amend the Times by thy amendment.

Achan made it an evil day to the Israelites, by his sin Joshua 7.
; and Moses made it a good day by his prayers Exodus 17 11


Would thou see many days, and good? keep thy tongue from evil, and thy
lips from speaking guile: depart from evil, and do good, seek peace and ensue
it Psalm. 34.12.13.14.


As a noble Roman Lucullus.
turned a dismal day, into a successful, by his valor: so turn thou evil
days into good, by thy goodness.

The worse the Days and Times be, the more precious let be every opportunity
of welldoing.

As in times of derth, the poor man picks up every kernel of corn that
falls beside: O (says he) It Is dear, none must belost: so lose thou not one
crum of Time, wherein thou may have occasion to do good: For the days are
evil.

A man that should in the time of famine give his corn to the hogs, were
worthy to be hanged up at his gate; so art thou worthy to loose the reward of
weldoing, which throwest away the opportunities thereof.

There are millions in hell, who if they had it, would give all the wealth in
the world, for one days opportunity of repentance, which they despised and
foreslowed, when they lived upon the earth.

As the Be, so soon as ever the Sun breaks forth, flies abroad to gather
honey and wax; so be thou ready to every good work Tit. 3.1.
, waiting the occasion thereof.

Many say, that they have no Time to learn to pray, to hear the word, etc.
The voice of a beast. Have thou a time to eat, to sleep, to live? Have thou
Time to dance after the devils pipe? and can find no Time to learn
godliness?

Many say they would have prayed, heard, etc. but that they had impediments?
Redeem now the time, and step over impediments.

He that observes the wind shall* not so^^^ and he that is afraid (...) every
cloud, shall n^^^reape Ecclesi. 11.4
: so he that will not do good because of impediment^ shall never do good for
so long as there is a devil, and a world, and an unregenerate part^^ there
will be impediments, even a thousand when thou would do good, and a
thousand furtherances when thou would do evil.

If Paul had censed to preach at Ephesus, because, of impediments, when such a
door was opened unto him 1. Cor. 16.9.
, he had lost the comfort of ^^ring there so famous Church.

The more are the ad^ersaries and impediments, be thou the more ^atchfull upon
all occa^^ons of doing good.

The days are evil, and (...) men are evil that ^^ue in these days. La^our
thou to be good; and so to live, as thou would wish to be ^ound living,
when Christ shall come to judgment.

Pray, pray, pray; Repent, repent, repent: Blessed is that servant, when his
Lord when he comes shall find (...) doing Mat. 24.46.
. Amen, Am^^

ROMANS 13.11.12. Now it is high time awake out of sleep.

The night is far sp^^^ the day is at hand; let (...) therefore cast off the
(...) of darkness, and put (...) the armor of light.

FINIS.

