THE MASTIVE, OR Young-Whelpe of the Olde-Dogge.

Epigrams and Satyrs.

Horat: -- Verba decent iratum plena minarum.

Mondeo Mordentem a mastiff dog with a banner in its mouth

LONDON, Printed by The: Creed, for Richard Meighen, and Thomas Jones, and are
to be sold at S. Clements Church, without Temple Row* (...)

TO THE UNIVERSAL READER.
GEntle, or if Churlish howsoever its no great matter, (though I persuade my
self there are not many amongst you can be so dogged as will but offer to bite
at me, especially if ye knew how loath I would be known to become your
Debtors, above all others.) But to the purpose; I promised not long since, to
busy my self no more with these bastard kind of commodities, mary it was with
a Prouiso, unless I otherwise were urged by such, as finding themselves perhaps
agreeued, that I last forgot them, will now perforce incite me thereunto, for
more assured manifestation of my remembrance: Whom but to point at in
particular, were to lay open their imperfections, whose viler parts (for old
acquaintance) I rather may be thought to take pity of: (and yet could I wish
to have your Clarke distinguished from your Sexton, by more then wearing a pen
in his ear) Sed praestat tacere, suadeas. For any other more barbarous or
fowle-mouthed Mungrells, that have bin louder barking then the rest: I Will not
defile my hands by giving such the least of chastisement, but leave them
peremptorily to the lashing Doggewhipper for those Curres provided.

But now, may some guilty-conceited- Cooks-combe take himself wilfully by the
bottle-Nose, saying: I aim at him particularly; and so have color for what I
do.

If any such will needs so gald-backt prove, as cannot choose but kick and
wince without rubbing, or but at the sound of a Curry-combe only, let them (by
my consent) be sadled for Iades, without dressing, and get the Scratches, till
the Farrier give them over. In brief, I would be thought as guiltless of
blaming, as I was careless of the lines composing: Which if they please; why
so: if otherwise, I will not warrant them to be better worth: and so Farewell.

H. P.

Author pro seipso.
Look naught for here of Writers commendation:
I Will not be thought one of their Fauour-winners:
Which would to Lamenesse seem but supportation,
Or as an Offering made for Young-Beginners.
Who knows not, Tauernes painted Posts, and Signs,
Are but the attractiues to deceitful wines?
Ad Bibliopolam.
PRinter or Stationer, or what ere thou prove,
Shall me record to Times posterity:
I Will not enjoin thee, but request in love,
Thou so much deigne my Book to dignifie;
As first it be not with your Ballads mixed,
Next, not at Play Houses, among Pippins sold:
Then that on Pasts, by the Ears it stand not fixed,
For every dull-Mechanicke to behold.
Last, that it come not brought in Pedlers packs,
To common Fayres, of Country, Town, or City:
Sold at a Booth among Pinnes and Almanacks;
Yet on thy hands to lie, thoult' say tw'er pity;
Let it be rather for Tobacco rent,
Or Butchers-Wiues, next Clensing-weeke in Lent.
EPIGRAMS.
A CVLINA AD CVRIAM.
LIXA, that long a servile Groom has been,
Will now no more the man be known or seen*
And reason good, he has that place resigned,
Witness his Cloak throughout with velvet lined:
Which by a Parradox comes thus to pass,
The greazie Gull is turned a gallant Ass.
Fiant, quae fata volunt.
Ask swaggring Saltus, Why he bears such sway?
He Will answer thus; Things must be as they may.
Ask, How he comes so drunken day by day?
Again says he, Things must be as they may.
Ask him the reason, Why no debts he will pay?
The same replies, Things must be as they may.
Ask, Why so seldom he desires to pray?
Still he concludes, Things must be as they may.
Thus see you Saltus nothing else will say;
Should he be damned, It must be as it may.
Tempus edax rerum.
HEywood was held for Epigrams the best,
What time old Churchyard dealt in verse and prose
But fashions since are grown out of request,
As Bombast-Dublets, Bases, and Round-hose.
Or as your Lady, may it now be said,
That looks less lovely then her Chamber-maide.
Foemina; Quid non?
WHat dares Gallantus for his Wench not do?
Though it concern the hazard of his neck:
Ask what she will, or have a mind unto,
He straight procures, and brings her at a beck.
Bid him go rob a Goldsmiths shop for Plate,
Stabbe him that calls her by the name of Puncke;
Beat Constables, or Watch for walking late,
Undo a Bawd, or make a Pander druncke:
In brief what is it, that may to pleasure woo,
But brave Gallantus for his wench durst do.
Leui, leuiora.
MAdam Fenestra, fearful of her Diet,
Feeds by no means on flesh that is tough or old:
Which brings her queazie stomach out of quiet,
And therefore pickes on purest can be sold;
Of least-growne Lamb, and tendrest Beef that is big,
The whitest Cow-calfe, and the youngst Sow-pigge.
To John of Paul's Church-yarde.
TO thee (Brave John) my book I dedicate,
That wilt from A-Iax, with thy force defend it:
And counterchecke each Cocks-combs spleen and hate,
That not good language, or good looks shall lend it.
Thou placed art as Sentinel, to quail
Those secret Foes, our dangers shall pretend:
Making their Top-sailes, Flagges, and Bonnets veil,
Like to the Blocke-house ouer-gainst Graues-ende.
And to conclude, mauger their worst of spite,
Durst bid the proudest of them all go --
Subito responsio leui.
A Doctor being ask't what means he knew,
Were such as best to opening Physic drew:
He not to seek, for sudden answer says,
There Is nothing better then a Bunch of kayes.
Animosus, pediculosus.
MATHO from Sea has such a purchase brought,
As is not frequent, or of each man sought:
Which to divulgate, Matho proves not nice,
Nothing, God damn him, but Outlandish Lice.
Detur quod meritum.
SOTVS must now prove Checquer Clarke at least,
That thereto has bin trayn'd twelve years and more:
Nay, in good sadness, he is much more increast,
Considering what he has been heretofore:
Why may not Sotus then in case so clear,
Boldly demand his Calves head every year?
Secreta nostra nobis.
TASSVS from Temple Stayres by water goes
To Westminster, and back to Temple rows:
Belike he loves not trot too much the street,
Or surbait on the stones his tender feet:
Tut come, there is something in it must not be known:
But Sir, beleeu't, The debt is not his own.
Tua logice nostra.
LVCAS on's Lady lays a foul objection,
Saying she wears not her own complexion.
But then her Ladyship may say he lies,
Is It not her own I pray you which she buyeth?
Vsus promptos facit.
RACHEL at first would rail upon her man,
That scarce knew how to bear himself before her:
Nor almost which way look or hold her Fan,
But now (thanks Fortune) finely can come over her.
Si nihil attuleris ibis, etc.
WAT told his wife how much he late had straid,
Yet feign would notwithstanding pardoned be:
To whom she ragingly replyde and said,
Think with not standing (Slave) to answer me?
Has then your Pinnace in those Ports been landing,
And now puts in prouisoes, notwithstanding?
Indomitis ferendum.
MArtinus overmuch commends his mare
To be the best man ere laid leg upon*
Were not for one defect (a fault that is rare)
She Is only subject to oblivion:
That stumbling headlong in her course amain,
So soon forgets, as down she falls again.
Tempora promoribus.
Pluck off your Bonnet, you Sir in the feather,
And learn to know when Officers pass by:
Think you all men hayle fellows met together?
You would be taught to be more mannerly.
Tut, say you knew him nere so well before,
Will that be now excuse sufficient?
Or say his pleasure be to keep a whore,
Dare you presume he lives incontinent?
Non nosti Summis vitium preualet?
Et omne maius minus continet?
Domi, and for as Idem.
CIuis at Court being lately bid to dinner,
Had thought to make his stomach lost a winner:
But sitting down when each had taken his place,
The meat was gone ere Ciuis could say Grace.
Whereat quoth he, a man may boldly say,
From hence the rich are empty sent away.
Plus Canis ictus amat.
CReta that closely could her secrets cover,
Feigned to be jealous of her loathed Spouse;
Which he believed (God wot) and more did love her,
Presuming, London not her like allows.
Well, go thy ways (thought I) hold on thy trade,
Thou Art even the truest he whom God nere made.
Rosa omnibus olet.
ROSE is a fair, but not a proper woman:
Can any creature proper be, that is common?
Caelat sua crimina Sanctis.
CVRTA has now no color or evasion,
To meet or frolic as time late permitted,
Because her husband bars up all occasion,
That for such pleasures and advantage fitted:
Keeps her from going to her child at nurse,
Denies access unto her Garden-house:
For which she gives him many a bitter curse,
And swears, she not esteems his threats a Louse.
The best escape her cunning can devise,
Is once a week to Blacke-fryers exercise.
Curanda primum praesentia.
LETTICE that late was so resolved to marry,
On more advice will now this tweluemonth tarry:
How should she sooner else indeed dispose
Of the young Bastard wherewithal she goes.
Latot Anguis in herba.
WHen Capring- Cosmo comes from dancing School,
He first commands the Maid pluck off his Hose:
Next bids her bring a Cushion and a stool,
On which (she kneeling) rubbes his feet and toes.
That done, he calls for's nightcap and his gown,
Fearing the cold might catch him unaware;
Nor more will walk forth (says) that day in town,
Whence you may guess, he has no Coin to spare.
But that is not it, Cosmo to bed is gone,
Causing his shirt be washed that has but one.
Manus manum fricat.
BAlbus his Tennants will no more pay rent,
Till for their wives he first give them content:
Is It reason Balbus without Coin disbursing,
Get them with child, and nere allow for Nursing?
Grave Condimentum, etc.
TWo Gossips lately in contention grew,
Which of the twain liu'de greatest in esteem:
And less the substance of the other knew,
Whereby her credit might the better seem.
Quoth one of them, it is known my charge is such,
In vinegar and mustard every year:
Indeed quoth the other I supposed as much,
What a deuowring saucie Drabbe you were;
But (which is worse) I hear your Neighbors talk,
The skore runs yet with Chandlers on the chalk.
Belluinus quotidianus.
DAcus approues, and stoutly stands upon it,
There Is not a man in Middlesex out drinks him:
And thereto dares he lay all is substance on it*
He breathes not mortal, one to one that sincks him.
For Sir beleeu't, there is no day comes about,
But Dacus drinks himself a Hogs-Head out.
Vtcunque, si des mutuo.
WHen Dicke wants money, he desires to borowe,
No more then (da^me him) he will repay to morrow.
Doceat experientia.
KAte still complaynes her Mother does her wrong,
Causing her keep her mayden-head so long:
For judge (quoth she) your self, if at my stature
You felt not then the fame instinct of nature!
Non propria, quae Maribus.
SAy Besse (quoth Brutus) if thou love me, so;
If not, why so: tush Brutus, thus much know:
Since she to love in Common first began,
She loved not thee: thou art no Common man.
Non omnibus idem.
YOung Lalus deals on light commodities,
Of choysest Gyrles he safely can bring forth:
But yet respectlesse proves to peoples eyes,
As if he were some great man's son of worth.
Consorts with Gallants, stands on's reputation,
Eats of the best and daintiest can be sold:
Scorns to be ranckt with men of occupation,
That are not Gentiles like himself enrold.
Ask how he lives; he tells the vulgar sort,
By play, by knowledge, travel and commerce,
Of which he makes a sad and long report,
Which they think simply, without more rehearse:
But to the wise and worthy understander,
He prostrate proves your private sports-Commander.
Omnia tempus habent.
HOw comes it Doll lives so demure of late,
That whilome used to frollicke with her friends?
Oh, she has changed it seems her former state,
And to be civil for awhile intends:
Would any mad Wench presently on marriage,
Prove her self pack-horse for each common carriage?
Irati, Implacabiles.
DIcke with his Dogs in such an outrage grew,
As which was next him he to hanging drew:
Who looking fearful, feign would backwards gather*
Nay, up thou go ( quoth Dicke) and th'wert my Father.
Tempus edaxrerum.
FLaminio wears an everlasting Suit,
That would (says he) all Fashions yet confute:
Were not so greazy, and so staind with Wine,
Which he has dropped upon since ninety nine.
In cauda venenum.
THat Finch the Goldsmiths has a fair young wife,
It needs no doubt; there is none but might her love:
Then were not shame and pity of her life,
If from a Gold-Finch she a Wag-taile prove?
Nemo omnibus horis sapit.
CVcullus, careful of his reputation,
Chose evermore your priuat'st sporting house:
Which least might bring his name in defamation,
Or to succeeding times prove dangerous:
But see how well he could occasions quench,
And yet be taken with a Begger-wench.
Multi videntur and non sunt.
CAll Clinias Coward, he outrageous than;
Dares to adventure life with any man.
Provided he be not's superior,
His underling or base inferior,
Nor yet his fellow: for says Clinias,
Should any of these evils come to pass,
It Is ten to one the quarrel never ends;
If I kill him, he will kill me by his friends.
Or if my Vassal; conquest is not much,
Anoble mind disdaines to fight with such:
And if my fellow; Wisdom tells too late,
True fellowship consists in Love, not hate:
Bring Clinias one that is not of these three,
And then to fight there is none so bold as he.
Frustravocaueris Heri.
DIcke had but two words to maintain him ever,
And that was Stand, and after Stand, Deliver;
But Dick's in Newgate, and he fears shall never,
Be blessed again, with that sweet word Deliver.
Post gaudia luctus.
THree Tradesmen and their wives went all to Dover,
To see the Monuments of Julius Caesar:
From whence to Paris would they next post over,
And not dissuaded be by King nor Keysar:
But spent two hundred pounds on idle motions,
That now in Ludgate live by men's devotions.
Rumpit suo pondere pordus.
Jane from the Justice cannot be acquitted,
Whose Son has deeply upon her committed.
Filius ex puluere Patris.
MIlo grew sick because his Dad left giving,
In which consumption he had dyed outright,
Had not his death at last put him in living,
By which good fortune he is dubbed a Knight.
Unhappy Son, to draw that vital breath,
Who like a Pelican live by his death.
In Zoylum.
ZOylus, I hear you take my Rymes in snuff,
Cry fie, t'ls Ribaldrie, or some such stuff:
But Zoylus know, I scorn to deal with you;
He writes foul stuff that treates of your base crewe.
Vera filia Patris.
WHy strives young Gallatea, for the wall?
If needs you will know the cause (quoth. one) you shall:
Her Father was a Maeson, and they say,
It makes her Ladyship lean much that way.
Cupiens culpare, nescit.
DOrus disdaines these Epigrams I make,
Saying they savor not of ought that is in them:
Nay, which is more then that, he will undertake
They are but stinking stuff ere you begin them:
And yet before (quoth he) they favored not:
See how the buzzard talks he knows not what!
Malium optanti gratum.
A Wanton Dame that of her Spouse repented,
(Because he would her now and then displease,)
Was told by one (which made her much contented)
That he was hanged or drowned beyond the Seas:
Who dreading naught, ask't what might worse ensue,
For this she thought was too good to be true.
Virescit curua Senectus.
CLaudus with age and sickness long declining,
That had a Letcher been in time of yore:
Spying a Less pass by him; spoke thus whyning,
To one that led him, There Is a lusty Whore.
Commune diuersorium Meritrix.
IF Phoedra were but half so chaste as fair,
So kind as coye, and but so wise as witty:
She would the ruins of her House repair,
That rent and torn, lie prostrate near the City.
Where all that travel, and are come from far,
May freely enter without bolt or bar.
Saltim videri cupit.
SIgnior Fantasmo that Capricious youth,
Posting to London, lights upon these Rimes:
And tells the Stationer for simple truth,
They are but froth and excrements of times.
Who for his purpose no such Pamphet needed;
And (but an Ass) had long ere now proceeded.
Frustralaues Aethiopum.
POntus that poor and quondam scuruie Scribe,
Raised from the rust of rude rascallitie:
Now proling proves the proudest of his Tribe,
Yet still a Cullion will he live and die.
Ex ouibus opes.
THat Notus should so nearly live it was strange,
Who died the richest Merchant used the Exchange:
Yet on the matter was no Merchant nether,
His substance came by Sheepe-skinnes altogether.
Domina dominatur Ancillae.
MAud with incessant terms reuiles her maid,
Have not been warnd (quoth. she) of this before?
How often have I this geere upon thee laid,
Say; Can deny't? Art not an arrand whore?
Yes (quoth. the Maid) forsooth it is partly true,
Else should I be more honest thought then you.
Admoniti foelices.
MAtura weary of the Country life,
Complains her Husband nere to London brought her:
That has this twelue-month proved his honest wife,
And not consented scarce to one that sought her.
But bids him roundly herewith look unto it,
Be he a Tinker next that comes shall do it.
Causidici non semper beati.
LEntus the Lawyer prays the Term were ended,
That has not for this fortnight got one Fee:
Nor ought effected as his hopes intended,
And yet in Commons must for custom be:
But if his takings still prove such as these,
Let them (quoth. Lentus) pack to Hell that please.
Stant quae probatae.
GOrgonius surfeit may with cordial food,
Able, revive him, and restore his blood:
But alls in vain, no Phisicks Art will do it,
His wife before any Doctor dares stand to it.
Funis multorum Finis.
LAnista many Sons adopted had,
Whom still he vs'de to title as his own:
And they as duly likewise called* him Dad,
But were on sudden all dispersed unknown.
Till when Lanista walking Holborne, spide,
Two of his Brood in Carts for Tyborne bound:
Who to their Sire with woeful Farewell cride,
No more may we your Sons on earth be found.
Yea (quoth. Lanista) goes that way the game?
I knew not erst what of my Sons became.
Durum telum necessitas.
LAurence his light and late made Sommer-weede,
Will now this winter stand him in no steed:
But must be forthwith forced, though nere so loath,
To chop with Brokers for a suit of cloth.
Ebria, minus curiosa.
LVxurio to accomplish his desire,
Makes his Wench drunk, would you the cause enquire?
He Is so deformd, as not a common-Punck,
But would detest him, if she were not drunck.
(...) Charae nimis voluptas.
Sir Ralphe resolves to leave this Coourt-like state,
And live in the Country at a lower rate:
Is it not reason he be close and near,
That has but bare one hundred marks a year?
Besides the money which his Knighthood spent him,
Not yet repaide, that so long since was lent him?
Vt Tempora, Mores.
IN Times of yore, was neither Bond nor Bill,
For each would then his word, by word fulfill:
Till when crept in this strange Catastrophe.
As some for conformation, wrote Per me.
Which now say Scriueners, non est ita mos,
It must be Noueriut per presents nos.
Nuptiae post Nummos.
THere was a Time when Men for love did marry,
And not for Lucre sake, as now we see:
Which from that former Age so much does vary,
As all is for what you will give? or naught must be.
So that this ancient word called Matrimony,
Is wholly made A matter now of Money.
Sero vocaberis Heri.
LVke that in Lattine lately scorned to look,
Would now read English, might he have his book.
Tonsores minus ditiores.
CVthert admires how Lawyers get so much,
And that his commings in should not be such:
Who has been known a Poler and a Shauer
These forty years, yet nere could prove a Sauer.
Sublata causa tollitur, etc.
MArcus has all mad company forsworn,
All sorts of of wine, all women's vain enticing:
All exercise, all pleasures quite forborne;
All hunting, hawking, bowling, carding, dicing,
His Purse (the maine of all) has taken infection,
And all that Doll can do moves no erection.
Pro causa vt supra.
GAlfridus takes Tobacco all in snuff,
Who nere could any from his nosthrills puff;
Since the Low-Countrey-warres of late consigned him,
To leave at least his Smelling-sense behind him.
Ebrius dissimulans.
BAttus (though bound from drinking wine of late)
Can thus far with his Oath equivocate:
He will not drink, and yet be drunk ere noone,
His manner is to eat it with a spoone.
Tandem potiuntur Achiui.
Zanthus was zealous bent, but could not please
His Lady Mistress, he so long had served:
Nor by his best attendance once, but ease
Or stay his stomach, if he should have starued.
Till forced with Famine, found her in that snare,
Which since to silence Zanthus takes his share.
Fronti, nulla fides.
DOll in disdain, does from her heels defy,
The best that breathes shall tell her blacks her eye:
A and that it is true she speaks, who can say nay?
When none that looks on it, but will swear it is gray.
Minus domi Hystriones.
Mistress Fardella feared she should conceive,
Before the time in wedlock state could linck her:
Which would Fardellas fortunes quite bereave,
Therefore resolved, on sudden does bethinck her.
Against when the Midwife might in childbed lay her,
To shrowde a while, for shelter with a Player.
Nondum Doemone dignus.
TAgus was told had got the Devil and all,
In that his substance did so much excel:
It may (quoth. Tagus) prove in time I shall,
Get what is sufficient, though not thrive so well.
Non semper inscipiens.
KEster can court his Mistress, would you knew it,
Wear hansom clothes, pledge healths, or break a jest;
Drink drunk with any man, and never spue it,
Or take Tobacco with the prowdst and best.
Had they but kept him one ye are more at's Grammar,
You should have found him then no Ninthammer.
Lauds cum labe.
Caius commends his Sister many ways,
To be the myrror of admired praise:
Were not for two foul reasons that ensue,
She Is sometimes drunck, and plays the double (w.)
Fas per inscipientem.
WHo dares say Doltus speaks barbarism,
That schollerlike can make a Syllogism?
Can cap a Verse which may deserve commend,
And has his Grammar rules at's fingers end.
Can write a Pistell to his Dad in Lattin,
And one day hopes to wear a suit of Satin.
Yea, make his mother blessed that ere she bore him,
For of his age, few yet have gone before him:
I mean for Tallnes of his lymbs and bone,
At grass time next, full grown to twenty one.
Experientia nimis.
WAt will no more in Wedlock bands be tide,
That thereof has too much experience tryde:
And durst a Noble to a nutshell wage,
The next Wife makes him fall in surplusage.
Non omnia pusssumus omues.
THough Petrus nere could Epigrams compose,
Not is your perfect Poets Imitator:
Yet well the world may see he writes in Prose;
Ergo no Cobbler, but a true Translator.
Nequicquam Vencri verba.
WIll wooes his wench with words of Eloquence,
Praying he might her corpse enthalamize:
And of his love impart that influence,
Which with her liking best may simpathize.
She, who regardlesse at his speech does spurn,
Says; It Is not words of Art must serve her turn.
Optimus in pessimis.
VAlesco mounts upon the wings of Fame,
For an admyr'd report and matchles name:
That Courting can convince your coyest Punck,
And drinck e're midnight healths yet not be drunck.
Diaboli poenitentes.
COme; What shall's do (quoth. Ned) this afternoon?
That has at Noddy neither lost nor won:
There Is not a Play (says he) worth looking on,
And Mistress Moll from Clarkenwell is gone.
Troth let us do once what no man would conjecture,
Turn honest for an hour, and hear a Lecture.
Vltra posse negatur.
HIstrix has felt himself long ill at ease,
But thereof durst not to the world complain;
Hoping the times would all things well appease,
And eke restore his former health again,
But it would not do: so that perforce aduizde.
Histrix (God help him) must be circumcis'de.
Infirmis experientia.
OLd Cresus stands upon his tackling stout,
He can as well as ere he cold hold out:
To whom his wife says, men may laugh that win,
Pray tell me Sir, Can you as well hold in?
Viliora Vtiliora.
POdrus but practiced when he first was young,
To write and read, and cast up some Accounts:
Nor cares a louse (says he) for the Lattine tongue,
Which would not gain him half that now amounts.
For if (quoth. Podrus) Shoo-makers excel,
Why may not then our Cobblers do as well.
Qui Latrans, modo mordens.
BLandus I hear will prove a Byter known,
That gently used of late to fawn and cogge:
If Blandus then, be such a byter grown,
What kin is Blandus to my Mastyf-dogge?
Viuit vt edat.
WHen Gluto goes to dine at th'Ordinarie,
To slay his stomach eats a crust and drinks:
Then call's for victuals, swears he cannot tarry,
Which till it comes, a month each minute thinks:
Then sits him down, and takes the highest place,
Puts salt on's Trencher, cuts a loaf in twain,
And nere remembers ought of saying Grace,
The sight of meat so captiuates his brain:
Whereto he lurching, so about him lays,
As must suffice him for at least two days.
Stimulat, ignota Cupdo.
SVsan, for spite she could not be espouz'd
Before her Sister, who is three years younger,
Resolved her self at last, from dullness roused,
To tell her Mother she could stay no longer;
Nor all this while her time had so misspent,
But that she knew no sooner what it meant.
Opinio mayor Veritate.
IEnkin that jealous lived without deserts,
Was told by one his Wife had worthy parts:
At which he ten times more outrageous swore,
How should her parts be known, she not a ()
Aperit sua crimina somnis.
IVdith is grown (God bless her) such a Bride,
For face and feature, and in truth excells:
Worthy to solace by the best man's side,
Throughout that Street and Parish where she dwells:
Were not for one defect, confounds all this,
She uses nightly in her bed to --.
In Rosa Spina.
YOung Mistrisse Ioice is, without jesting, fair;
How can she choose, having a flexen hair?
A neck so white, and a more pleasing eye
Then any Wench you lightly can epsy.
Vide, tace.
SEruus has seen his Ladies secrecies,
Which for his ears he durst not patronize,
Much less presume to make least enterprise,
Only to whistle may the tune suffice.
Non suo se pendebit Capistro.
PAulus no Purse about him loves to carry,
Least to himself he should prove accessarie,
For much spent charges, which were merely lost,
Knowing he shall be drunk at others cost.
Suam nouit Infirmitatem.
Josephus craved he might have conference
With Parnell in her chamber all alone;
But Parnell prayed she might therein dispense,
For in her chamber must she talk with none:
Partly through fear she should be won with pelf,
But most because she durst not trust her self.
Hoc proprium nobis.
FRancis has got a vain and foolish use,
Practiced so long, as now he cannot leave it;
Which grew at first by being too profuse
In his expenses, (so you must conceive it:)
For well the reckning may you pay without him,
So seldom bears he purse or coin about him.
Huic habeo non tibi.
Fie on thee Milo, how the poor abhor thee,
That still wilt answer them, I have not for thee:
When all thy kindred knows, who thee condemn,
Thou have it for thy Drabs, but not for them.
Idem per huiusmodi.
A Nice young Dame that longed for dainty Cates,
With her that sold them thus expostulates:
My Nose (I hope) shall be my Cook (quoth she)
Mine Arse (quoth the other) may your Kitchen be.
Aut cast, aut caute.
RAchell has reason not to live in Common,
Thereby to show her self a noted sinner:
But rather like a close and civil woman,
That to the Game seems still a young beginner:
And not detected of her whorish life,
May prove in time some honest Tradesmans wife.
Oscula qui sumpsit, etc.
Jack still abiures it to his commen dation,
He Is yet a maid without equivocation;
That being wooed by Wenches would resist them,
And never dealt with any but he kissed them.
Plus scaelera nocte.
SIl. for his Wives sake much Tobacco sells,
That must assist him daily in his shop:
And occupy her self in nothing else,
But Pipes for Gentlemen to sill and stop:
Which she neglects not whiles the day gives light,
And burns them as occasion serves at night.
Viuens, mortuus.
MOunseir Scuerus since his Office lost,
Wherein he lived of late a great Commander,
Walks discontented like the angry Ghost
Of proud Tarquinius, or Pope Alexander:
Whom fates envying, should from vpstart rise,
So pulled him down, as now he living dies.
Et penna and poculo.
COlambus executes his Masters place,
Where he has plodding been twice ten years space:
But simple howsoe'r the world may think him,
There Is not a Clarke among twenty dares out drink him.
Patientia Vendicta.
CVcullus evermore will carry sway
Over his wife in strangers company:
And on her lips his loathed fingers lay,
Which patient she puts up in policy:
But with her self resolved in secret vows,
To p y him next day soundly on the brows.
Foenum, dum coelum cerenum.
TRocus in Tauernes twice a day must bowze it,
And belch Tobacco on his Clients purses:
No matter Trocus, it is thy place allows it,
Though like the Fox 'canst not escape from curses.
Who ever saw that Clarke like thee deputed,
But had his fingers with purloyne polluted?
Pulchrior infaelicior.
FIne Mistrisse Fedra famously accounted,
Minding for recreation take the air,
went in her Coach through London bravely mounted,
(For what should Fedra of the Fates despair?)
Strange and admirde, which might amaze the hearer*
That her own horses must to Bridewell bear her.
Secundae cogitationes meliores.
A Pamphlet was of Proverbs pend by Polton,
Wherein he thought all sorts included were:
Until one told him, Bate w'an ace quoth Bolton:
Indeed (said he) that Proverb is not there.
Vt nasus, notus.
Old Publius Naso has compoz'd a Play,
Of such a plot, as few or none that view it
But will avouch he writes not every day,
Nor as the times of late (I would you knew it)
The best in London pays for his invention,
Known to be simply such as needs no mention.
Ad Lectorem.
REader, these Epigrams long since composed,
Should here by my consent have been disclosed:
Much less at latter Lammas com'd in print,
Had not the Stationer or the Devil been in it.
Grauidae formidiores.
DArkas cannot endure to see a Cat,
A breast of Mutton, or a Pigs head gaping:
A Bear, a Bull, a Weazle or a Rat,
No, nor the skreeking noise of Kettles scraping:
Yet could embrace a naked Cariball,
And nere be moved or frighted once withal.
Confess, and be hanged.
TOm stretched his neck for stealing of a Mare,
And yet I Will prove he was not hanged for stealing:
For had he not been taken unaware,
And so convicted by his own revealing,
He might have escaped the Gallows, gone his way,
And still remained a Thief until this day.
Fama Alimentum.
DAcus could give good words, what ere was due,
Whereby his credit less in question grew,
Till base-borne Tapsters, without fear or grace,
Must call him Banckrout before his neighbors face.
Omnia venalia Romae.
CAcus at first durst scarce kiss Mistrisse Anne,
But could at last to give consent assail her:
Who more respecting's money then the man,
Ask't (having pur'st it) Are you not a Tailor?
How? 'sfoot (quoth Cacus) then for coin I see,
Tailors with Gentlemen must equal be.
Aliqui fructus maturiores.
FReta, the forward'st of ten thousand Gyrles,
Wished she had been at fourteen made a Page:
To have attended upon Lords and Earls,
That under Knights had served at younger age.
Edificium latrocinium.
A Tennant by his Lease being bound to build,
Of Timber-loggs his Landlord had beguiled,
Which he perceiving, 'gins with threats discuss,
The danger of the Law that used him thus.
Alas (quoth he) 'twas done for my relief,
Besides, you know Sir, Building is a thief.
Nocte latent menda.
MIstrisse Roxana by no means endures
The Curtains of her Bed or Window drawn;
Which to her eyes (says she) much hurt procures,
And therefore hides them with a veil of Lawne.
But if you needs will have the truth revealed,
Her Nose that is sunk of late must be concealed.
Stante te stabit vxor.
LIppus the Banckrout has a bounsing Wife,
That would be chaste, were he but half so wise:
And yet the Buzzard, for avoiding strife,
Lives in a Lane obscured from watchful eyes.
Tut, Lippus be content, and bear withal,
For if thou can not stand, she needs must fall.
Leuia perdit quo lucret maiora.
AWager on a Knight, of late was tried,
He should not bear ten pounds from out Cheapeside,
Unless some Citizen help with his hands,
To whom already he was bound in bands.
Which well the Knight perceived, else nere had done it,
So that he lost his wager, and yet won it.
Puduit sua damnareferre.
SVch ill success had Dick at Dice last night,
As he was for st next day play least in sight:
But if you love him make thereof no speeches,
He lost his Rapier, Cloak, and velvet Breeches.
Strenuis, videri satis.
WHen boasting Bembus challenged is to fight,
He seems at first a very Devil in sight:
Till more aduizde, will not defile hands,
Unless you meet him upon Callice sands.
Chara nimis amicitia.
MIlo thinks much I should his love inherit,
Saying, it is more then my deserts can merit:
Indeed he speaks Probatum est unto me,
For it is so great as it would in time undo me.
In lingua, Patria.
PEtrus espying late a youth pass by,
Richly appareld, whom he knew but poor:
Began to censure with him doubtfully,
Whether it were the same he saw before.
Till hearing him, in's language lay the law,
Was sure it was then the self-same Cornish-daw.
Saepius soluas si saltabis.
PLanus his money paid would feign be quiet,
That pensive erst grew then more vexed with woe:
As scarce it could permit him time to diet,
For posting bout each office too and fro.
Who for'st to dance attendance durst not rest,
Until the PIPE has plaide Quietus est.
Crescit furore Impudentia.
TOruus will yet again exceptions take,
And swears that by's drink heel not endure these Rimes:
Fie Toruus, let not men for manners sake,
Be made acquainted with thy shameful crimes.
But thowlt allege the Bastard is not thine,
I should not keep't then, if the case were mine.
Visu, si non Auditu.
PRudence, reproou'd for walking in Moorefields,
Straight from her Apronftrings this reason yields:
Though Women more then Men are thence debard,
It Is reason some be seen, because not heard.
Fumus inimica Formae.
MAdam Ventosa careful of her health,
In haste post haste the Country air desires:
Sweating she will not endure for Londons wealth,
Another winter of these Sea-cole Fires.
Whose noisome fume worst then the soulst infection,
Had almost spoyld her Ladyships complexion.
Cliricus natura.
Old Tristram thought it well and wisely done,
With an Exchequer man to place his Son:
But Tristram had therein of wit no spark,
To spoil so good a Clown for such a Clarke.
Multorum Pignora pondus.
PIgnus the Broker pil'de up has his Hall,
With pawnes of persons Alphabeticall:
Kept as his prisoners, and his own does deem them,
Till Bankroutes, Beggars, Bawdes, and Drabbes redeem them.
Arbora per Fructus.
FIne Mistress Phippes, a proper Friend of mine,
Wore on her breast a paper Valentine:
Who by a Mad cap one day being met,
Asked her, Fair Lady, Is this House to Let?
Maguis mirabile.
SAltus so many sorts of Suits would wear,
As once a week, he must be new invested:
Which made him proudly to the world appear,
(For nere was Saltus until now Arrested.)
Strange on a sudden that a man of might,
Should breechlesse live, obscured from out of sight.
Alienis Fortunatus.
PRodus the Scriuener many a pound has spent,
Upon procurements by him caused been lent:
But with Prouiso, will he first indent,
You must in Prasto, give him good content,
Potens in poculis.
GEorge will avouch it upon deep foundation,
That drinking store of wine has made him wiser,
And more expert in matters variation,
As he is become a kind of wits demser;
How he may cheating gull his Friends with Oaths,
And fetch his Tailor off for more new clothes.
Nimis docuit Consuetudo.
Old Fucos Board is often replenished,
But naught thereof must be diminished:
Unless some worthles upper dish or twain,
The rest for service still again remain.
His man that vs'de to bring them in for show,
Leaving a dish upon the bench below:
Was by his Master (much offended) blam'de,
Which he as brief with answer bluntly fram'de;
'Tath been zo often broft avore this day,
As now chad thoft it zelfe had known the way.
Par pari refert.
TObie with his wife, at Ticktack often plays,
Who much ore-seeing, takes her many ways:
And yet he proves the greater ouerseer,
She could, but will not ask him, Why not here?
Rogandum coactus.
FEssus desires all suits of Law might cease,
For being Outlawed, feign would live in peace.
Sere Poenitentia seue.
A Seriant that fell sick took late remorce,
On many Prisoners he had plagued by force:
And now would free them from the Counter-hole,
But that Toe late; thinks it will not help his soul.
Non Morbus, sed Dolor.
A Doctor told his Patient Omphida,
The pain she felt was a Scyatica:
Which she not perfect how to nominat,
Mistaking; Cries: Oh my Certificat!
Nullum stimulum Ignauis.
CAecus awak't, was told the Sun appeard,
Which had the darkness of the morning cleard:
But Caecus sluggish thereto makes reply,
The Sun has further far to go then I.
Ad Momum.
CEase prithee Momus, bite thy malice in,
Tut man, I know thou have a devilish wit:
Able to poze the wisest of thy kin,
But Momus then thou should not boast of it.
Or say, thou work the worst thou can intend,
That done, go hang thy self, and there is an end.
Humilis Sublimis.
KAte, seeming curious in her conversation,
Scorns you should kiss her hand or tie her shoo:
Which she accounts as great an imputation,
As any worst of wrong you else can do.
So high she vaunts her self above the Skies,
And yet full lowly on a Straw-bed lies.
Seruus dominatur Domino.
SVsan has served this year and half for naught,
Making still good, things broken, stolen, or lost:
Which with her wages must anew be bought,
That do amount unto no little cost.
But Susan now has found a means for all,
What time her Mistress goes abroad (old Trot)
To yield herself unto her Masters call,
And make him Father what another got.
Who rather chose, then Law the Case should handle,
To pay a hundrd pounds for soap and candle.
Tandem aperta Reelusa.
BEttrice debard from sport, with one that loved her,
Was kept severely under bolt and lock:
Who notwithstanding when occasion moved her,
Crept forth at th'window, nightly in her smock.
But from her Father forty weeks conceald it,
Until the Bastard cride, and so reueald it.
Suauiora Digniora.
YOung Mistress Minea finds her self agrieued,
In that her Husband keeps her not in fashion*
And therefore will by others be relieved,
Who on such creatures take far more compassion.
No flesh she fears to feed on out of sight,
Knowing her good man picks the bones at night.
Venditur vt Emitur.
DArcas will do with Knight or Gentleman
What shall be reason, more then which she dares not:
And that is as much as any woman can,
Unless be such as for her credit cares not.
Then if these pleasures without fear ensue,
What thereto longs (quoth. Darcas) pray judge you?
Meritrix absente Marito.
SVsan with sundry cunning slights and tricks,
Gulls her Good Man that dominering swaies:
Nor will her eyes other objects fix,
Whiles in her company the Cockscomb stays.
Who gone, she cannot for her life refrain,
But needs must laugh, till down she falls again.
Nocte latent mende.
WHen bounsing Bettrice minded is to sport,
She closely steals out of her doors at night:
And couets most among strangers to resort,
That least may be discernd by Candlelight.
For chief respects which might her much disgrace,
Besides her Perriwigge, and pocky face.
Ad Iohannem Bradshaw, Seaccariensem.
NOt that to me thou ere were Friend or Foe,
Nor that I seek hereby t'insinuate:
Nor that thou would the world thy worth should know,
Which I Will not blaze, nor yet expostulate.
Only repute thee one amongst those Clarks,
Against whom my Mastiue neither bytes nor barks.
In Obitum alicuius.
Lampus extinct at last in Ashes lies,
Who when he lived did naught but Gormandize:
On choycest cheer, and Bolles filled to the brim,
Which fed him fat, for worms that feed on him.
Plus decus Honori.
PIerce grown to years, maintain's a Page at's heels
That must attend, and tell him what is a clock:
When he from Trulls and Tauernes homeward reeles,
And in short time consumed and spent his stock.
Yet biddes provide against night some other toye,
Whiles belching he repose his head that is giddie;
Then waking calls, Fill some Tobacco Boy:
That done, Go see if Supper be made ready.
Which he not having wherewith to discharge,
(Nor daring futher run upon the score:)
Entreats the Vintner with discourse at large,
Upon his Cloak to lend him so much more.
Nor means he thence till midnight part away,
And keep his bed until next Quarter day.
Efficit prostrata, nummus.
When Jacques from The Exchange goes home to sup,
And finds his Wife drunk on her pillow laid:
He patiently prepared to put it up,
Encounters with black Kate his Kitchen maid:
Who tells him, she will no longer serve his turn,
Unless his Master-ship more crowns disburse,
And therefore bids him make her not forsworn,
But presently dispatch and draw his purse:
Which done, she flatly to her business falls,
And nere arises till her Mistrisse calls.
Subita, magis quaerenda.
MAt. with his Man late set on meriment,
And therewith trying by some trick to flout him:
Spying his Dog that to sir-reuerence went,
Ask't if he had not Pen and Ink about him.
Yes, said his man (and wherefore makes he doubt?)
To write (quoth's Master) what my Dog lays out.
Pecunia, virum.
A Usurer waxt worth ten thousand pound,
Which with extortion he had gayn'd of late:
For purchase should of certain Lands be bound
Unto a Knight that knew not his estate:
But to a Scriuener dwelling near him goes,
And for advise therein his counsel takes,
Knowing he could the truth thereof disclose:
Who whispring in his ear, this answer makes,
You need not Sir, the matter further scan,
For I Will assure you he is a right good man.
Plus mendax, Mendicus.
DAcus gives out for payment of his debts,
He shall a wondrous wealthy Widow wed:
Which amongst his Creditors much hope begets,
That constant are 'twill be accomplished.
Mean while young Dacus takes up ten times more,
Tells them the marriage day is short at hand,
When he will no less then double all restore,
Which need no question now of Bill or Band.
But Dacus makes it a more gulling toy,
Then that old Cosenage of new Englands-ioy.
Detur laus digniori.
MIstrisse Marina amongst some Gossips sat,
Where Faces were the subject of their chat:
Some lok't too pale, some seemed too fiery red,
Some brown, some black, and some ill fashioned.
Good Lord (quoth she) you all are much too blame,
Let Us love and praise the Maker of the same.
Her Chamber-mayd who heard her, standing by,
Said, Then love me, for that you know was I.
Nil perdunt mendici.
I Ack's wondrous sick, who thinks he shall go mad,
And lose his wits (a thing Jack never had:)
Take comfort man, if that be all thou fear,
A groat will pay thy loss when wits are dearest.
Formosa foetida.
I Met with Martha, and fayn'd would have kissed her,
who turned her cheek, which made me that I mist her:
She spared her lips, because her breath was tainted,
And I her cheeks, because I feigned them painted.
Since then at first, we had no better greeting,
Your hand (quoth I) shall serve at our next meeting.
Materia pro forma.
LVcina has a Love whose name is Goose,
A propper Lad, well borne, and wondrous spruee:
She likes the man, but cannot brook his name,
If that be all (sweet Luce) you are too blame.
The man you may commit into your hands.
For why, the Babes he gets may prove all Swans,
Sero, si non subito.
LOrellus by the Law condemned to dye,
Sent his sick water to a Doctor nigh:
And proffered him an hundred pound for's pain,
If by his Art he might but's life obtain.
The Doctor understanding of his crime,
Wil'd him with patience to endure a time;
And fend again when the Moon was in the change,
Mean while Lorelius must to Tiburne range.
Tria, vertit in vnum.
FEstinus now in have resolves to thrive,
Ere Christmas next, and honestly will wiue:
Swears by his locks he will ramble then no more,
But keep him close to's wife, and's friend, not's whore.
Insooth Festinus, 'twere discreetly done,
For having charge, to have all three in one.
Secretasua sibi.
LEttice has left the town: but who knows why?
Some say to take the air, and see a friend:
I heard as much; but knew it was a lie,
Her business tended to another end.
No Doctor here can cure her, she is so ill,
Old Mother-Midwife has therein more skill.
Pluma, quid leuius?
WHat if Pondexus Wife be light? how then?
Must she be taunted at by every Jade?
This is the fault of foolish vain women,
That will be diuing in their neighbors trade.
Pon: is a Feather-maker, and by right
His Wife, like to her Wares may prove as light.
Ad Samuelem.
MY sute's to you (Sam) 'pray deny it not:
If you remember't, you a Bracelet got
From your sweet Mistrisse; 'faith restor't again,
Twill do her pleasure now: for to be plain,
She has so great a loss had in that kind,
As in the world she knows not where to find
One silly hair of her own simple breed;
Then help her now, that help you at your need.
A malo ad peius.
PRiscus though nere so poor, yet herein joys,
He once was Captain of the Roaring-boyes:
And worthy then durst challenge as his due,
The chiefest place amongst those damned crew,
That with vnbutning could carouse a quart,
Drink drunk, and sober, six times ere he part:
Knock at cach Gate at midnight on command,
And make the Porter stand with cap in hand,
Supposing him a man of that regard,
As scorns to pass not giving good reward.
When he (poor Rascal) but a rambling goes,
And now in Limbo lowzy lies, God knows.
Dubitat men's conscia recti.
WHy should Sir Pandrus so impatient be,
As needs he will call in question who I am:
That durst presume on such a one as he,
To write a Satyr or an Epigram.
Let me Sir Pandrus, tell you this for true,
I am not such a slandrous knave as you imagine.
Nemo odit quod nescit.
YOung Fawnus spends thrice forty pounds a year,
True Demonstration that he will nere be thriftie:
But what need Fawnus Fates or Fortunes fear,
That's yet not fourteen, and his Dad past fifty.
Who simply pard'ning any worst of merit,
Will nere his first borne Bastard disinherit.
Sine Flamma combustus.
MArcus came up to see the Monuments,
The Tower, the Lions, and the new Exchange:
The Waterworks, and lofty London-Rents,
With other sights, that seemed to Marcus strange.
But among the rest that likewise did abound,
Nere thought on Fyre-works, which he first here found
Vritur Impertunitate.
A Lusty Less, but loose, not worth the naming,
went down the stairs whereon she feared to stumble
And holding in her hand a Candle flaming,
Was by a jolly Lad intic'de to iumble.
Who when at first he began her roughly handle,
Away she cride: Now fie how you abuse me:
And therewith vowing, swore: Now by this Candle,
I Will burn you Sir (if thus you strive to use me.
He blew the Candle out, to break her vow,
But she performd her Oath; imagine how.
Facilis Generosus.
WHo says Humfridus is not gentle borne?
Did not Crispinus beat him the other morn?
And he it gently took, without resisting?
Then let him pass, and leave your further jesting.
He that for blows has half so good disgestion,
Must needs prove Gentleman without all question.
Dulee Bellum inexpertis.
MOunsieur Securus, proud as any he,
Pray's still for War and brave Hostility:
But he is no better then a barking Dog,
Or rather as a painted skipping Frogge,
That bragges it out with borrowed bravery,
War is no color for such knauerie.
How can he think to hurt his Enemy,
When all his Weapons are at Surgerie?
In Amorosum.
HAd I not vowed almost to write no more,
Spruce (Amorosus) I could not forbear:
To tell the world how like a common-Whore,
Thou spend'st each morn in trimming of thy hair.
Which having done, and finished nere so soon,
Thou look no better then a wild Baboone.
Perplunias Anser.
SEe how young Rufus walks in green each day,
As if he nere was youthful until now:
Ere Christmas next this greene-Goose will be gray,
And those high burnisht Plumes in's Cap will bow.
But yet you wrong him, since his purse is full,
To call him Goose, that is so young a Gull.
Ad Momum.
MOmus, you told me late I did not well,
Seeming as 'twere my little wit to sell:
Why man, the Egyptians sold their babes for gain,
And may not I the Infant of my brain?
But well I wot thou wilt set it soon at naught,
And say the Child is better fed then taught.
Peace Momus, peace, either thy good word lend it,
Or come and take my room till thou can mend it.
Et Puella, and Foemina.
LVcina's years runs on so smooth and even,
That at sixteen she seeemes but as eleven:
Yet mark how strange the time had her beguilde,
Who proved a Mother being but a Child.
Omnibus hoc Vitium.
AN honest Constable that made search of late,
And found a fellow with a wench in Bed:
Wished he himself had been Associate,
And therefore kindly bad them both God speed.
Be sure (quoth, he) I Will not descrie your lurking,
Let Nature (that is so well prouok't) be working.
Prodit se lingua.
A Country Butcher late with Oxen passes,
Hard by a Dame that kept a shop of glasses:
Who lisping chides him with words finicall,
Thirra remove your Ballocks from my Stall.
Whereat the Butcher smiling makes a stop,
But she with anger, blushing leaves her shop.
Admonita peior.
PRiscill does plainly to the world appeal,
Since Women that deal plain, are Baladiz'd:
She Will with her Husband no more plainly deal,
Or among plain dealing people be comprised.
Dum friget, calescit.
WHo doubts but Susun when she first bore sway,
Had for one night a French Crown pitch and pay;
But who so simple now, knows not the reason
She took not Diet, nor the Sweat in season.
Asinus ex Asino.
GRillus outrageous grew with self conceit,
Dreaming of late he was transformd an Ass:
And waking, needs would to the world repeat,
That it for certain truth came so to pass.
Who thus besotted, forthwith gins to bray,
Attempteth eke like Banks his Horse to dance,
Runs to the Stable there to feed on Hay,
Strives to Coruet, Cariere, Kick, Wince and praunce,
But since that Grillus, nothing so much fears,
As the appearance of his Asses ears.
Non dulce, quod vtile.
TVrdosus train de in the Nocturnall Trade,
Which we by Title of Gold-finder call:
With often infusion such escapes had made,
As causd his Master (much displeasd withal)
Say thus in rage Thou a Iakes-Farmer prove?
A Cobbler (knave) would thee much more behoue.
To my Booke-seller.
THy Books (I doubt not) but will all be bought,
Though nere so bitter for the Title thought:
To putrifactious Ulcers that abide,
The strongest Medicines must be applide.
Yet may be well enough endured: all which,
Are but as Worme-wood given to kill the itch.
Nnda Veritas.
YOung Mistress Sisley, and her Sister Kate,
Scorns to be thought with tricks t'equiuocate:
Therefore says plain, if twere not true they swore,
Let each be censurd for an arrant Whore.
Soluat vtcunque Senex.
OLd Squinto deals with his Wench not like a stranger
Though comes perhaps but once a Week, or so:
It Is known he keeps her still at Rack and manger
Whether she love or loath him yea, or no.
He pays for all she spends, and eats, or drinks:
Allows her Horse and Coath to ride at pleasure,
Yea what she best for recreation thinks,
That bids her use, and choose again at pleasure.
Thus does the Dotard dull and detestable,
Make others do what he himselfe's not able.
Sperare liceat Infidelibus.
THat Luscus has no Lattin it is no Lie,
Nor that he writes false Ortographye,
Yet passes for a Checquer Clearke we see,
And hopes this Term to purchase many a Fee.
Nay more he hopes to prove an Officer,
If case (quoth he) our Vicar does not err:
Who well remembers in his Proverbs says,
The weak in Knowledge, may be strong in Faith.
Casta, quam nomo rogauit.
Why tempt you me (quoth. Win) with words unchaste?
Or do you love to spend your breath in wast?
I am not Sir, the Wench you take me for,
But scorn the motion, and your words abhor.
It Is known how well I live without disgrace,
And therefore chosen have this private place.
Where, since the time we may not long inherit,
Your Welcome must be therefore as you merit.
Alas (good Sir) you are to me a stranger,
But that is all one, when you are free from danger
I am persuaded (though your years be young)
You have a subtle and enticing tongue,
Able to tempt a Woman go astray,
Should she not have the grace to say you may.
Fie, who would trust these men upon their words?
The world among twenty scarce one true affoords.
But to give each his due, I must confess,
You nere as yet have wronged me more or less.
Nay, pray for bear, my Maid hears all your wooings,
She knows I am not used unto such doings.
You talk of matters worth as much as naught,
But not a word what Money you have brought.
Nor ever dream you at what charge we live,
That for our Lodgings thus much weekly give.
Which such as you (alas) nere think upon,
That once have had your pleasures, and are gone.
What, will you Sir dispatch and make an end?
Come: you shall see I Will use you as a Friend,
And as befits a man of your estate,
Nor love I many words expostulate.
Believe Sir, as you are a Gentleman,
I took no handfell since the Term began.
Then in a manner think your self so spedde,
As purchase may my second May denhed.
Which though I say it, and do not use to flout,
Good Knights have sude for often, and gone without:
What Is there? Two shillings six pence? mary musse:
You think belike we are some common stuff:
Yes, in good time, it were more then fit I grant ye,
You need but ask and have, yes Sir I waunt ye.
I thought as much how franck you were before,
Dee use to give your Hackney-Iades no more?
Twer good you kept it still Sir and were going,
Assure your self I am not for your mowing,
Nor any man's that me so basely scan,
My Maid gets so much of each Seruing-man.
Make you no difference pray twixt her and me*
Or must we both alike reputed be;
Well Sir is that the main you will disburse?
Or have you no more Money in your purse?
The time I spend about this idle chat,
May loose and hinder me I know not what.
Pish; yet more doing? pray Sir hold your hand,
And jest with those you boldly may command.
Had I not thought you one of better proof,
You nere should entered have within my roof.
A man of your sort, sparing his expense?
I pray Sir hold me not I must go hence.
But ere I part, know without more relate,
A French Crown is my least and lowest rate.
Which if you have not, you may leave some pawn,
Nor will I to a dodkin less be drawn.
But scorn for thrice as much I tell you true,
Thus prostitute my self, were not to you.
Tut, nere tell me you will come again and pay,
I have too often been us de with such delay.
Nor talk of Oaths as promise once gone hence,
We love the Present, not the Future Tence.
You know my mind: the'res now no more to say;
Do this, or here is the Door* and there is the way.
-- Cetera deficiunt.
Men's conscia recti.
RAlph told his Mistress he had done with her,
Which she conceived at worst and called him knave
Threatening to bring him before an Officer
Where she the advantage of the Law might have.
Indeed (quoth. Ralph) I nere presumd so on you,
Till now you pleasd' to take the Whore upon you.
Hypocrita videatur.
PVllus supposes none observes his haunts,
Of stealing secretly unto mine Aunts,
Without his Page; Oh Sir it might be said,
He else were seen to kiss the Kitchin-Mayde.
Or suffer Sisse or Susan search his Hose,
Which to the world his Page might chance disclose.
Tut Pullus can such after-claps remove,
Et si non cast, tamen caute prove.
For nere of him was yet more seen or hard,
Then of blind George, or John of Pauls-Church-yarde.
Melius sit per Deputatum.
A Clyent that to London came for Law,
In right of Land which some had sought withdraw
Finding his Advocate gone forth a mile,
Propounds the Case unto his wife the while.
Who soon deciding it without expense,
Told him the fault was in his Evidence.
Cedendum necessitati.
FRauciscas swears he will be no more forsworn,
No more will Swagger, Surfeit, or be drunck:
No more his locks will wear at length but shorn,
No more converse or sollace with his Punck.
No more chaste Widows, Maids, or Wives abuse,
No more leawd Songs, or bawdy terms repeat:
No more Tobacco midst of Dinners use;
No more detract, lie, flatter, cogge, or cheat.
For true it is, Time now has better taught him,
Since late that scuruy Woodstreet-Counter caught him.
Nescit Stultus irasci.
COdrus a Country Clown, well worth the naming
Fell amongst Gamesters late to learn their vice:
That (soon entreated,) drawn was into Gaming,
And gulld of all his Gold, with cheating Dice;
Which Codrus seeing, half in anger swore,
They nere from him should gain one penny more.
Viuitur ex Fumo.
FVscus grows fat, yet feeds on naught at all,
How lives he then to any Creatures thincking?
Oh Sir, by precepts Metaphysicall,
For know that Fuscus deals in naught but drinking,
No food at all his Fancy can provoke,
But wholesome liquor, and a Pipe of Smoke.
Ad Conscium, Epilogus.
NOw what says Conscius to these scuruy Rymes,
Are they not basest most absurd abuses?
Had not been better by a thousand times,
To Have spent thy sixe-pence upon other uses?
Come, thou art an Ass, nor can by Approbation,
Say yet precisely where the Saddle wrings:
Only do feel by natures inclination,
The more a Horse is galld, the more he flings.
Hark in thine Ear, if this thou think disgrace,
Next time I Will ride thee through the Marketplace.
SATYRS.
Magnis, peccata minus.
Ye nimble Satyrs, that with howling strain,
Belch out the poysoned' Canker ye contain
Of Earths pollution, and the worlds offense,
Maskt and obscured with secret vile pretense;
You that delight to torture men alive,
And through the channels of destruction diue;
Avaunt, dispatch, and look ye not protract,
To bring to light, each heinous horrid act.
What? Stand ye fearful of men's outward features?
Or dread ye shadows but of painted Creatures
Whose seeming outsides only made for show
Assume the substance which themselves not know;
Or is it because you scorn to dignifie
The lewd ambition of proud bastardie;
Where can ye find within Earths continent,
Men of that rare refined Element
Who fearing to be damnd or checked for blame,
Are more less subject unto sin then shame;
But so delight in lewdnes to excel,
As they prove Devils before they come to Hell;
Drunck with the dregs of sinnne insatiate,
Appearing Monsters most adulterate.
Careless of Bliss, of Conscience, or of Soul,
Till glut of guiltines their deeds control:
And they with Vleers so infected are,
As every limme is blemished with a skarre
Of shameless, lewd, and loathed iniquity,
Sprung from the loins of lust and infamy.
Nursed with the milk of that infectious evil,
Which thus has made them Chiildren for the Devil.
And now swolln big with blushlesse Impudence,
Presume their greatness may with Jove dispense.
prescribing to themselves those rules of reasons,
As must accord with their own times and seasons.
What Is he that is drunck, or sursets (having wealth)
But will allege it is Physic for his health.
That Venus sports and Carnal appetite
Are for euacuation requisite.
That murder rape and incest (threatening ruth)
Are all but held as idle toys of Youth.
Mischiefs that pleasures bring who would prevent,
There Is time (say they) hereafter to repent.
Or that their best of deeds are done too late,
If to be damnd it be predestinate.
Some Woolues in Sheep-Skinnes wrapped against such men bark,
And care not what themselves do in the dark.
Yet chiefly are or daind to rule the rout,
Because their Office herein bears them out.
Who knows not Greatness may dispense with Laws,
There Is no resistance in a rich man's cause.
For those bewitching Objects, Gold and pleasure,
Are Plutoes Agents that augments his treasure.
And do persuade us, there is no Hell but fear,
No life, nor joy, nor pain, but this life here.
The weak ones ^anting grace straight follow this,
Credulity in ill, robbs man of bliss.
Man wrongs his Maker by his want of merit,
Sin gives a sharp edge to a Satyrs spirit.
Pyde Vanity, th'inticing bayte for Fools,
Muffles our Knowledge, to intrappe our Souls.
The world grown Aged, should prepare to end,
But Nature so against reason does contend.
As Light of Knowledge is put out by time,
And to be virtuous now is held a crime.
For those seven Sciences their grounds of Arts,
Have evermore possessed their sacred parts.
Which seven wide steps unto Damnation,
Deciph'red are in order one by one.
First, Selfe-lou'd Pride, the Idol of the Court,
Is Plutoes Agent dressed to make him sport.
And that misshapen Monster Drunkenness,
Is his sworn Taster to the Furies mess.
Next horrid Murder, makes his veins to swell,
And is as Butcher to the King of Hell.
Covetousness is his chief'st Officer,
And Envy forreine-States Interpreter.
Sloth is his Chamber-groome, and makes the Bed
To Lust, his Sodomitick Ganymed.
Thus Pluto spends the TIME amidst those Reuills,
That first for pleasure were deuiz de by Devils.
Who surfeiting at length, made drunk with mirth,
Casts up those Monsters to defile the Earth
That with weak Frailty, lickes those vomits up,
For Plutos Nectar, which must fill his Cup.
These Hellish Statesmen, these foule-killing sins,
To follow here on Earth who so begins.
And means to practice, as they come but near him,
Well may he know GOD, but he cannot fear him.
Trahit sua quemque Voluptas.
Howl on ye Satyrs, whilst I sit and mark,
How woluish-Enuie at my Muse does bark.
Backbite, detract, rail, slander, and revile,
With words of hatred and uncivil style.
First comes a Statesman to the Stationer,
And many better Books he passing over,
By chance finds this, whereon he reads a while,
Then bytes the lip, then frowns, then gives a smile,
And to the Seller says such fiery brains,
Should warm the prison to reward their pains.
Becomes it any man of his profession,
Reprove us of our manners or transgression?
Away goes he; Next comes my gallant Dycer,
His ordinary stomach is more nicer,
Who asks for new Books; this the Stationer shows him:
Straight swears it is naught unless the Poet knows him.
Nor will he read a Line: this Fortunes Mynion,
Likes for sooth nothing but his own opinion.
The mending Poet takes it next in hand,
Who having often the Verses ouer-scand.'
O filching straight, does to the Stationer say,
Here Is four lines stolen from forth my last New-play.
And that he will swear even by the Printers Stall,
Although he knows it is false he speaks in all.
Then comcs my Innes-of-Court-Man, in his Gown,
Cries Mew, what Haekney, brought this wit to town.
But soon again my gallant Youth is gone,
Minding the Kitchen more then Littleton.
Tut, what cares he for Law, shall have enough,
When Is Father dies, that Cankard Miser-Chuffe.
Put him a Case in Ploydon then who will,
That being his, plod you on Law-Bookes still.
Next comes by my Familiar, yet no Spirit,
Who forces me his Friendship to inherit.
He sees my Book in Print, and straight he knows it,
Then asks for the Book, and the Boy shows it.
Then reads a while and says, I must commend it,
But sure, Some Friend of his for him has pend it.
He cannot write a Book in such a fashion,
For well I wot it was nere his Occupation.
Besides by Checquer-Clarks, that often have seen him,
I nere could hear of Schollership was in him.
Twere good to poze him but to have it known,
Or it is no matter, let it even alone.
Next after him, your Countrey-Farmer viewes it,
It may be good (says he) for those can use it.
Show me King Arthur, Beuis, or Sir Guye,
Those are the Books he only loves to buy.
Well, that he likes and walks. Then comes a Devil,
With sober countenance, and Garments civil.
A Puritan, or pure one, choose you whether,
(For both as one makes selfsame sense together.)
He looks on some, and finding this the next,
With very sight thereof his mind is vexed.
Fie ont't (says he) that any man should buy,
Such Books profane of fained Poetry,
That teaches vice, worse then your Plays on Stages,
And is a shame to old and future Ages.
To loving Brother-hoods Community,
That are defilde by such impuritie.
Away retires my fained Publican,
And after him next comes my Seruing-man.
Who calls for new Books, here is one says the Boy,
He reads, and tells him, tut, this is a toy,
And nere will please our Maids that take delight,
In books of Ladies or some valiant Knight.
Those witty works buys he, and thence he passes,
Next him comes my Scholaris, among those Asses;
Who scarce vouchsafes his eyes thereon to glance,
Or reading but a line or two by chance.
Must on it straight way strive to break a jest,
(As who shall know he is wiser then the rest.)
His wit that made this, well may beg by Pattln,
I Will nere allow that good which has no Lattin.
Besides, how ever I disdain to read him,
Unless I knew what House or College bred him.
Lo thus my Batchellour of little Arts,
Will needs (presage it is naught) and so departs.
At length comes-by my Mungrell homespun Clarke,
Whose Antique gesture I beseech you mark.
No sooner this my Book in hand he sees,
But rubs his elbow, shows his butter teeth,
And says, Is It English? then let him alone,
For other language (tells you) learnt he none.
But knows by whom this Epigram was made,
He Is just says he a man of mine own Trade.
Then on the sudden falls his courage down,
Finding a Clarke translated from a Clown.
Which having read, n'ere asks him how they sell,
But steals away, and shames to bid Farewell.
Last comes my scoffing Friend of scowring wit,
Who thinks his judgment boue all Arts does sit.
He buys the Book, and hastes him to the Play,
Where, when he coms, and reads, Here Is stuff does say.
Because the lookers on may hold him wise,
He laughs at what he likes, and then will rise,
And takes Tobacco; Then about will look,
And more dislike the Play, then of the Book.
At length is vexed he should with charge be drawn,
For such slight sights to lay a Suit to pawn.
A Number more like Addle brains as these,
I could give Physic to for their disease.
But better subjects shall employ my pen,
Then the Low-minded muddy dross of men,
That wrong our labors by their duller spirits,
And judge us by their hate, not by our merits.
I tax no one particular with crimes,
That can find fault at my Satyricke Rimes.
Good men will love me, whiles the bad I lose.
He that speaks always truth, is sure of Foes.
Sic Transit gloria Mundi.
Mark and you love me, who is yond marching hither,
Some brave Low-countrey-Captain, with his feather
And high-Crownd-hat, see into Paul's he goes,
To show his Doublet and Italian Hose.
The whiles his Corporal walks the other I Will,
To see what simple Gulls he can beguile,
In hope of purchase, for if such he meet,
They follow must his Captain through the Street.
Where the poor Gulls before this Leader stand,
With lowly reverence, and their Hats in hand.
Houering an Idol, for true worth it self,
Because he keeps him brave with wrong got-pelfe.
But note this Gallants Genealogy,
Then shall you see his birth and progeny.
His Father lived by gaming to defraude,
His Mother was an Ale-wite and a Bawd.
Yet does this Outside so deceive men's sight,
As oftentimes he is taken for a Knight.
But Farewell Captain, and now note this man,
This griping Mammon that does all he can
To be on Earth Great Plutoes-Treasurer,
And when he dies, in Hell an Officer.
This Slave in Cash has forty thousand pound,
Yet such a wretch there breaths not on the ground.
His Parents in their lives, gave him their state,
But he returned their loves with matchless hate.
(...) That like a Pelican to do him good*
He nourisht was by sucking of their blood.
And now possessed of all they had before,
Unnaturally against them shuts his Door.
Yet now this Monster lives to do more evil,
Lurking here still a Ledger for the Devil.
The next to him comes Prodigality,
A Townesmans Heir strowting in bravery.
This Fool makes Suppers for Whores, Bawds, and Cheators,
Yea, lends them money, but to call them Debtors.
Nere looks to hate' again: Cousnage defeat him,
When he wants Money at his need, they beat him.
No wonder, for he more deserves by half,
It Is good enough for such a golden Calfe.
Of whom a man may truly prophecy,
His end will be diseased Beggerie.
Next a penurious Miser wretch comes forth,
That owes his belly more then he is worth.
Yea, feign would feed out of the Prisoners basket,
Were not for fear, or shame, he durst not ask it.
Yet has his Shop and Cellers stufft with Wares,
Which to make profit of he only cares.
Nere breaks the interest that thence redounds,
But is as provident in pence as pounds.
Who to save charges feign would woolward go,
But that he doubts the world thereof should know.
Tut, penny sau'de (says he) is penny got,
Spend they that mean to beg, I like it not.
If labor or prevention can it let,
Heel' not in Fleet or Counter lie for Debt.
No, no, such Husbands as are worldly wise,
Will spend no more then nature shall suffice.
As not to drink more then their brains can carry,
For fear their judgments from their wits should vary.
A thousand Cautions more he might infer,
To make him prove a damned Usurer.
Adding still Interest to the principal,
Till in the end he hang himself for all.
But note what sober Citizen comes next,
That like a Preacher will expound a Text.
And tell what danger comes by doing evil,
Speak like a Saint, and do worse then a Devil.
For Gold heel' wrong his Father, cheat his Brother,
And yet these faults reproues he in an other.
Who under cloak of Civil policy,
Presumes to cover all his villainy.
Pluto takes pride to see these plants so flourish,
Who as his Children he desires to nourish,
And takes them home when they have spent their prime
Least tarrying long they should corrupt more time.
But wherefore rippe I up those dregs of men,
That wrongs true labor and a Satyrs pen.
To treat of Wars or Actions to be done,
Let next the Current of your Channells run.
A Paradox in praise of War.
PEACE thou Corrupter of Mortality,
Mother of shame and base security.
Whose beggerd womb so many Bastards brings,
Three parts must starve, the rest like demie Kings,
Reign 'ore their Brothers, all malign their birth,
To have one Father, yet are Slaves on Earth*
Aid me ye powers, whose influence got you Fame,
To rippe the womb of peace, and show her shame,
Peace makes a fair show, but it is foul within,
Peace like to Rivers, feeds a Sea of sin.
Let War in Foreign Lands hunt drowzie Peace.
And in a just cause man's renown increase.
It Is wholesome War dissolues the course of sin,
Men best repent, when dangers near begin
To show their Faces'; but whiles peace does hold,
Our strength is weak, and our Devotion cold.
Safety from worldly danger makes men think,
They that stand fast on earth shall never sink.
The Countrey-Myser that his gold preserues,
To feed him fat whiles many thousand starues,
Is thus occasiond by this slothful peace,
Which lessens virtue to make vice increase.
It Is searelesse Peace makes pleasure man's chief God,
We want both sight and feeling of Wars rod.
That Land more happy is that War does nourish,
Causing the world in better state to flourish.
For danger makes us fear a sudden end,
Fear saddes the soul because it did offend.
The fear of danger makes each man prepared,
And of his ill past life to have regard.
Danger calls Conscience to a strict account,
Repentance makes a heavy soul to Mount.
It Is soft security lulls men in sin,
That only covet but Earths joys to win.
It Is idle Peace that breeds in us such faction
As kills at home, for want of Foreign action.
The Valiant man does hence his Fame increase,
Maintains himself by wars, grows poor by peace!
Hence flows the fountains of detected vice,
Sloth, Lust, Deceit, and filthy Avarice.
Extortion, Usury, and gains Excess,
Gryping the Living of the Fatherless.
So they by use or fraud their bags may fill.
In show of goodness they will commit all ill.
Cheat their own Brother to gain worldly dross,
And make them poor by Law, that such dares cross.
For this all-wishing- Gold is of that force,
As muffles Justice, and exiles Remorce.
Gold in these times can turn the wheel of Fate,
And make them best beloved deserves most hate.
Gold can make peace join hands of deadly Foes,
Gold can make war again wound peace with blows:
It Is peace that makes this Indian Gold adored
This golden Calfe Idolatrizde, abhorred.
Gold in the soul breeds such an alteration,
As men desire it more then their salvation.
Some cut men's throats for Gold, commit all evils,
Gold makes them Gods on Earth, and in Hell Devils.
It Is pursie Peace that makes it of such price,
And is the Mother of all sin and vice.
Making us prone to all security,
Which thus proceeds through times security.
Peace makes Religion faint, and not regarded,
Virtue a Beggar, Learning unrewarded.
Strange new Damnations, drowzie Peace begins,
And now the world well knows the worst of sins,
Which through security do so increase,
As endless plagues are matched still with Peace.
Plura sequerentur.
The faults escaped in the Printing (or any other omission) are to be excused,
by reason of the Authors absence from the Press, who thereto should have given
more due instructions. Which the rather was neglected because the Book (being
long since finished) is as you see but lately published. Amongst the rest (not
least to be reformed) in the last leaf of the Epigrams, in stead of the word
Ballocks, read Ballackths, and in steed of having, read saving. Besides other
scurrilities, which should have been left out.


