A Double Catechism, one more large, following the order of the common
authorized Catechism, and an exposition thereof: now this second time
published: the other shorter for the weaker sort: both set forth for the
benefit of Christian friends and wel-willers.

By Richard Bernard, Master of Arts, and Preacher of Gods word at Worsop in
Nottingham-shire.

1. TIM. 4. 1. 2. I charge thee before God, and before the Lord Jesus Christ,
which shall judge the quick and dead, at his appearing, and in his kingdom,
preach the word, be instant in season, and out of season.

r. Pet. 2. 2. As newborn babes desire that sincere milk of the word, that
ye may grow thereby.

CAMBRIDGE, Printed by John Legate. 1607.

To the right Worshipful the towardly young Gentleman, and of great good
hopes, M. William Cavendish, son and heir to the right Honorable William,
Lord Cavendish, increase of all true honor and happiness is most heartily wished.
RIGHT Worshipful, it is written of one, a kings son, that he asked 3.
things at Gods hands, outward prosperity, inward comforts, and such glory as
should be neither false nor fained. What more to be happy? The first of these
you have by birth, and your parents wealth and honor: the second, Solomon tells
you, how you may have, by the getting and keeping a good conscience, which is a
continual feast: and the third is purchased for you by Christ, if you by faith
can take hold of him, by whom (which is the true and greatest glory) we are
made the sons of God, and coheires with him of the Paradise of God, and the
unspeakable joys thereof. All these three must concur to make a man blessed:
no happiness in the first without the second: no soundness in the second to
abide without the third. Loose Christ, a dew conscience comforts: and outward
goods and honor without inward health of grace, is an estate carnally of
estimation, but indeed hopeless of the Saints blessed condition. Great wealth,
and noble birth, without the souls spiritual breath, is as a ship under
full sail in a tempestuous Sea without stern or Pylote: a case most
dangerous: more like it is there should be shipwreck, than that it should
come in safety to the haven. Your ship is not yet at the sea, you are but
launching out, hitherto you have lain in harbor: balance your soul with
sound knowledge, and holy affections before you adventure: take with you your
provision, and be sure you season your flesh with the salt of Gods word, lest
it corrupt at sea, and you want necessaries, and be forced to go a shore before
you come unto your determined place.

Solomon tells us, that the young man which cheareth his heart up in the
days of his youth, to walk in the evil ways thereof, and in the sight of
his eyes, must know, that for these things God will bring him to judgment: and
therefore he advises him to remember his Creator in the days of his strength,
before the time come, when he shall confess, that sin has as much left him,
as he it. Surely, Sir, if you betimes, as I hope you do, remember the Lord, and
seek him, as David said to the child Solomon, he will be found of you: which
he of his mercy grant: but if you forsake him, he will forsake you; which God
of his goodness forbid. The advancement of Joseph amongst Pharaoes Princes,
and Daniels honor above the great Bassaes of Babylon, may show you the truth
of the one: and that young man's miserable end, beautiful Absolon, and David's
dear son, may ratify the certainty of the other. Gods favor is the
fountain of bliss, and in those only he delights that fear him.

The good tokens of your good affection toward me, and toward the preachers
of Gods word, the love you do show to further the passage of the Gospel, both
in word and liberal deeds, has moved me to offer this my labor unto you:
both to testify my thankfulness, and to manifest unto the world our good
hopes of you, which I desire that you may daily occasion by holy fruits of
obedience to be justified of many, to Gods glory and your own welfare.

The Lord Almighty protect you and that honorable house whereof you are, and
enlarge the name thereof, as with earthly renown, so ever much more with
spiritual blessings, that it wishing well to the Israel of God, peace and
mercy may be upon it: and the loving countenance of God now shine upon all
therein, that heartily desire the welfare of Sion, and the peace of Jerusalem
for ever.

Amen.
Worsop, the 28. of November. Your Worships every way ready in all things in
Christ Jesus, Richard Bernard.

The Catechism.
Q. HOW many things are needful for you to understand, that you may know
both God and your self?

A. These 6. things: I. rightly to conceive of God what he is, by his word and
works: II. to understand the creation: III. man's misery by the fall: IV. our
redemption: V. our sanctification: VI. the certainty of our glorification.

Of God.
Q. Who made you?

A. God. Esa. 42. 2. Genesis 26. 27.

Q. What a one is God?

A. God is a spirit. Joh. 4. 24. Holy. Exodus 15. 11. Just. Exodus 34. 6. and
Merciful. Exodus 34. 7.

Q. How many Gods are there?

A. But only one God, Deuteronomy. 6. 4. yet three persons, Mat. 3. 16. 1. Ioh. 5. 7.

Q. Which are the three persons?

A. The Father begetting, the Son begotten, and the Holy Ghost proceeding, 2.
Cor. 13. 13 Mat. 28. 19. and these three are God. Ioh. 1. 1. 1. Ioh. 5. 7. Act.
5. 3. 4.

Q. Which of these three became man?

A. The second Person, Jesus Christ, both God and man. Esa. 9. 6. Heb. 2. 17.

Of our Creation.
Q. Of what did God make man?

A. His body was of dust, the woman's of Adams ribbe, Genesis 2. 7.

Q. What a one did God make him?

A. Both good. Genesis 2. 31. holy and righteous. Gen 1. 26. Ephesians. 4. 28. Col. 3. 9.

Q. What was then man's estate and happiness?

A. It was the state of innocence, without sin or misery, and to God was he
acceptable, Genesis 1 27. 31. and 2. 25. and 1. 28.

Of man's fall and misery.
Q. Are you now such a one by birth, as he was by creation?

A. Alas no: I am by nature full of sin, Ps. 51. 5. Job. 25. 4. 5. 6. Romans 3.
from verse. 9. to 19. and so most miserable. Job 14. 1. 2. Romans 5. 14. Ephesians. 2.
1. 2. 3. Romans 3. 23. and 2. 8. 9. and to God detestable, Psalm. 11. 5. Gal. 3.
10. Mat. 7. 23. and 25. 41.

Q. What is sin?

A. The breaking of Gods commandments, by thought word, or deed. 1. Ioh. 3. 4.

Q. How many commandments are there?

A. Ten. Deuteronomy. 10. 4. divided into two Tables. Deuteronomy. 4. 13.

Q. Which be the commandments?

A. I am the Lord thy God, etc. Exodus 20. Deuteronomy. 5. 6.

Q. Do these ten command or forbid but only what is there set down in
show?

A. No: they command or forbid, all the kinds contained under the same thing
mentioned and all the causes, with occasions thereunto. 1. Ioh. 3. 15. Mat. 5.
28. 32.

Q. Are they a prayer?

A. No, nor so to be used: they are a rule for me to live after, and do teach
me my duty to God, and my neighbor. Deuteronomy. 6. and 31. 12. Psalm. 119. 105.
Eccles. 12. 13. Mat. 22. 37. 39.

Q. What is your duty toward God?

A. My duty toward God, is to believe in him, to fear him, and to love him,
etc. 2. Chron. 20. 20. Eccles. 12. 13. Mat. 22. 37.

Q. What is your duty toward your neighbor?

A. It is to love my neighbor as my self, etc. Mat. 22 39. Romans 13. 9.

Q. Can ye keep the commandments, and not offend God nor your neighbor?

A. No: I break them every day, in thought, word, and deed, hating both God
and my neighbor by nature. Ps. 14. 1. 2. 3. Romans 8. 7. and 1. 30. 2. Cor. 3.
5. Tit. 3. 3.

Q. What is then now your state, and what deserve you by thus offending God?

A. I am in the state of corruption and do deserve Gods curse, which is
eternal destruction of body and soul. Deuteronomy. 27. 26. Mat. 25. 41. 46. Gal. 3.
10.

Of man's redemption.
Q. What are you in this case to do?

A. To cry unto God for mercy, and seek for deliverance. Luke 15. 17. Psalm.
51. 1. 2. etc.

Q. Are you of your self able, or is there any good in you to move God, to set
you free?

A. No indeed, Romans 3. 10. and 7. 18. Luke 17. 10. 2. Cor. 4. 4. Ephesians. 2. 8. 9.

Q. Then who does redeem you?

A. Only Jesus Christ, Romans 7. 25 2. Cor. 5. 21 Romans 5. 19. Gal. 2. 20. and 3.
13.

Q. What is Jesus Christ?

A. He is the eternal Son of God, Mat. 17. 5. Heb. 1. 23. a King to govern
us, Ps. 2. 6. Mat. 28. 18. a priest to offer for us, Ps. 110. 4. And a Prophet
to teach us, Deuteronomy. 18. 18. Esa. 61. 1. Mat. 17. 5.

Q. What believe you concerning him in the Articles of the Creed?

A. I do believe, that he was conceived by the holy Ghost, etc.

Q. What is this to you?

A. I do persuade my self hereby, that his purity is for my corruption, his
obedience for my transgression, his death for my debt, and his ascension for my
eternal salvation. 1. Cor. 1. 30. Phil. 3. 20.

Q. But as God made all, will so Jesus Christ also save all?

A. No verily, many shall be damned, few shall be saved, Mat. 7. 13. 14. only
the elect, which take hold of Christ by a lively faith. Ioh. 3. 16. 36. Mar.
16. 16.

Q. What is this lively faith?

A. It is a true persuasion of my heart, grounded upon Gods promises, Ephesians. 3.
17. Rom, 4. 21. that Jesus Christ is given to me, Ioh. 3. 16. and the merits of
his death and passion, are as truly mine, as if I my self had wrought them. 2.
Cor. 5. 21. Romans 8. 1.

Q. How come you by this faith?

A. From my effectual calling by the word preached, and the work of Gods
spirit. Act. 13. 48. Romans 10. 14. 15. Ephesians. 1. 13.

Q. Where is set down the sum of your becefe?

A. In my Creed, I believe in God the Father Almighty. etc.

Q. Are these a prayer, or so to be used?

A. No: it teaches me what to believe concerning God and his church.

Q. What good has Gods Church, the true believers above the rest of mankind?

A. They are in the state of grace, they have communion with Christ, and one
with another, the forgiveness of sins, the glorious resurrection of the
body, and life everlasting.

Of sanctification.
Q. How may it appear, that you have this faith, and also these benefits?

A. By my sanctification.

Q. Who does sanctify you?

A. The holy Ghost, Romans 15. 16.

Q. What is sanctification?

A. It is a making new of the whole man, whereby he daily dies to sin, and
increases in holiness and righteousness, Ephesians. 4. 23. 24. Gal. 5. 24. 1.
These. 4. 1.

Q. What grace proceeds from this sanctification?

A. True repentance, leaving that which is ill with hatred, and performing new
obedience with gladness of heart continually, Ier. 31. 19. Act. 26. 20. Ps.
119. 10. 113. 115. 136. 14. 34. 35. 44.

Q. What estate now stand you in, being sanctified and penitent?

A. I am in the blessed estate of grace, wherein if I continue, I shall
inherit eternal life, Tit. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. Romans 11. 22. Mat. 10 22. 2. Tim. 4.
8.

Q. Why has God thus made, redeemed, sanctified, and hitherto preserved you?

A. To serve him truly all the days of my life, Ephesians. 2. 10. Tit. 2. 11. 12.
Luke 1. 74. 75.

Q. How must God be served?

A. Only after his will revealed in hss written word, Deuteronomy. 30. 8. 10. and 4.
2. 2. Cor. 4. 6.

Of our strengthening in the state of grace, for the certainty of our
glorification.
Q. Js it needful for such as are elected, and once called, justified, and
sanctified, that they should continue still in using means to salvation?

A. Yea truly: else they will fall away, Pro. 29. 18. 2. Chron. 15. 2. Heb. 3.
12. 13.

Q. What things must you continue in to assure your self of salvation, and to
grow strong in the way of life?

A. Jn the knowledge of Gods word, Psalm. 11. 2. Act. 2. 42. 2. Pet. 1. 19. Ioh.
10. 27. 28. in faith, Joh. 3. 36. in love to the godly, Ioh. 13 35. 1. Ioh. 3.
14. in obedience, Ezech. 36. 26. Psalm. 15. 5. Ier. 32. 39. 40. in patient
suffering for Christ. Romans 8. 17. Iam. 1. 12. in a longing after Christ's
coming, 2. Tim. 4. 8. in sincerity without hypocrisy, which will appear by
my appealing to God in these things, Ioh. 21. 15.

Of the Sacraments.
Q. Has God given any helps, and commanded farther any other means besides
the word, for the strengthening of us herein?

A. Yes, these two: Sacraments, and Prayer.

Q. What is a Sacrament?

A. An outward sign and seal of invisible graces.

Q. How do the Sacraments strengthen you?

A. By a reverent using and meditating of them rightly understood, as signs
representing Christ, and his benefits, and sure seals of his covenant with
us, Genesis 9. 9. to 18. and 17. 9. 10.

How many Sacraments are there?

A. Only two: Baptism, and the Lords Supper, 1. Cor. 10. 1. 2. 3. 4. Mat. 28.
19. and 26. 29. 27. 1. Cor. 11. 23. 24. 25.

Q. What is the sign, and the thing signified in Baptism?

A. The sign is water, and the grace is the blood of Christ, by which I am
washed from my sins, Act. 2. 38. and 22. 16.

Q. What are the signs and things signified in the Lords Supper?

A. The signs are the bread and wine: the things signified, are the body and
blood of Christ, 1. Cor. 11. 23. 24. 25.

Q. Why come you to receive?

A. To strengthen my faith, and to keep in remembrance Christ his death, till
his coming again, Romans 4. 11. 1. Cor. 11. 26.

Q. What ought you to do before you come?

A. Prepare my self by examination, 1. Cor. 11. 28.

Q. What ought you to come with, to the Sacrament?

A. With four things: 1. knowledge both of my misery, Gods mercy, and the
doctrine of the Sacrament. 2. with faith in Jesus Christ, Heb. 11. 6. 3. with
repentance for all my sins, Esa. 1. 10. 11. 14. 15. 16. 4. with hearty love
unto my neighbor, Mat. 5. 23.

Q. What if you come unprepared without these?

A. I come unworthily, I am guilty of the body and blood of Christ, 1. Cor.
11. 27. I do ear and drink my own damnation, verse. 29. God may punish me,
verse. 40. and the devil may enter into me, as he did unto Judas, and bring me
to destruction of body and soul, Ioh 13. 27.

Of Prayer.
Q. What is Prayer?

A. It is a right, hearty, and faithful request made unto God, in the name of
Jesus Christ, 1. Ioh. 5. 14. Romans 8. 26. Iam. 1. 6. Ioh. 14. 14. and 15. 16.
Mat. 3. 17.

Q. Can or does every one pray, that utters words, and uses a form of
prayer?

A. It is a special gift to Gods children, and such only pray, as have
knowledge what to ask, a hearty desire in asking, and faith to believe.

Q. What direction of prayer have you?

A. The same which our Savior Christ taught his disciples, Our Father which
art in heaven, hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done in
earth, as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread: and forgive us our
trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. And lead us not into
temptation: but deliver us from evil. Amen.

Q. What desire thou of God in this prayer?

A. I desire my Lord God our heavenly Father who is the giver of all goodness,
to send his grace unto me, and to all people, that we may worship him, serve
him, and obey him; as we ought to do. And I pray unto God that he will send us
al things that be needful, both for our souls and bodies, and that he will be
merciful unto us, and forgive us our sins, and that it will please him to
save and defend us in all dangers ghostly and bodily, and that he will keep us
from all sin and wickedness, and from our ghostly enemy, and from
everlasting death. And this I trust he will do of his mercy and goodness,
through our Lord Jesus Christ: and therefore I say, Amen. So be it.

The first part of Catechism.
Of new birth.
Q. WHat is your name?

A. Channauel, God is gracious to us. Benalleuel. Love wholly the Lord with the
heart.

Q. Who gave you this name?

A. My Godfathers and my Godmothers, who with my father, brought me to the
Minister, into the congregation, to be baptized, and were especial witnesses
of the same, and professors of my faith and obedience to God for me.

Q. Why were you baptized?

A. That I might receive a badge of my Christian religion, and be admitted into
the Church, to live amongst the professors of Christ's name, and to be received
of them, and accounted as a member of Christ, the child of God, and an
inheritour of the kingdom of heaven, until I show the contrary.

Q. Whereby may you now be certain, that you are such a one indeed?

A. If I do what my Godfathers and Godmothers did make profession of for me.

Q. What did your Godfathers and Godmothers make profession of for you?

A They did profess three things in my name: the first was the forsaking of
the devil, and al his works, the pompes, and the vanities of this wicked
world, and all the sinful lusts of the flesh.

Q. What were you then bound to them, that you have promised to forsake them?

A. Yea verily, I am a bondslaue to Satan, by the corruption of my nature,
prone to all vice, having the seed of all sin in me, and do hate both God and
my neighbor.

Q. How can you then forsake this woeful state, and cease from any evil,
being thus bound and prone thereunto?

A. Not by any natural power in or of my self, but only by the grace of God,
when it is given unto me.

Q. Are you sure you have forsaken them, are you not deceived?

A. I am not deceived: for I hate unfeignedly, the works of the devil, the
worlds vanity, all the ungodly manners of every man: and I labor by all good
means, to die to all sin daily, loving the word of God, following it and all
godly examples, indeauoring to kill speedily every ill motion, but cherishing
the good in my heart, by meditation, vows, fasting, and prayer.

Q. But can you tell me, what are the works of the devil, the worlds
vanity, and the ill motions of the heart?

A. Whatsoever I, or any other, do think, speak or do, against the will of
God revealed in his word written.

Q. What has moved you to forsake the devil, the world, and the flesh?

A. For that I have learned, and do well perceive, by knowledge from the word
and mine own experience, that these three, be the only malicious, spiritual,
powerful, subtle, and continual enemies of my eternal felicity.

Q. What are the other things, that your Godfathers and Godmothers promised
for you?

A. Secondly, was the beleeeuing of all the twelve articles of my christian
faith, and the third was the learning diligently of Gods holy will and
commandments, and an obedient walking in the same, all the days of my life.

Q Where is this will of God to be learned?

A. Not from mine own fantasy, man's wisdom, traditions or examples of men,
but only out of the Scripture, which is the word written, by his Prophets and
Apostles, in the books of the old and new Testament, which is sufficient, to
teach us all things necessary, that we need to believe, for our salvation.

Q. What reasons have you to persuade your self, that this Scripture which
we hold, is the true word of God, and none other?

A. First, from the penmen, being many and most of them simple and plain
persons, who do mutually consent, setting down their own faults without
partiality. Secondly, from the matter, above natural men's reach; of man's
creation, resurrection, last judgment, and of the Trinity in unity,
prophecies also fulfilled in all circumstances. Thirdly, from the manner of
speaking, peremptorily reproouing, or allowing, without sinister respects.
Fourthly, from the effect, binding conscience, converting men, to hate even
life it self, for Gods glory. Fifthly, the miraculous preservation thereof,
with punishment of such, as seek to overthrow either it, or the professors
thereof. Lastly, that it ascribes all glory to God, the maine end which it
aymeth at.

Q. What means must you use to come to the saving knowledge of this word?

A. 1. Daily reading. 2. Learning the Catechism, the grounds of religion. 3.
Hearing the word with mind and affection, both read and preached publicly, by
Gods ministers. 4. Meditation in mind, to understand the doctrine gathered, and
in heart to affect the use made, after I have either read or heard it. 5.
Conference by asking of superiors and Ministers, by reasoning with equals, and
teaching inferiors, all in reverence and humility, to understand that I know
not, to be resolved in that I doubt of, and to call to memory, what I have
forgotten. 6. Continual prayer with practice of it in my particular calling.

Q. Do you think you are thus bound to forsake the devil, the world, and the
flesh, to believe in God, to learn to know and do his will, as they have
promised for you?

A. Yes verily, and by Gods help so will I endeavor to do, or else were I
unthankful to God my Father, that has called me into the state of salvation,
making me his child: and also unmindful of my sureties, that have so bound
themselves for me.

Q. But tell me if any undergo such a charge, how can any be surety to God
for you, that you should do as they have promised for you?

A. Being assured by faith, that the seed of the faithful are blessed, they
judging me charitably to be one of them, did promise by the grace of God
belonging unto me in Christ, and the means which they would use, J should
perform the same.

Q. What are the means which they have premised to use?

A. That I should be taught so soon as I shall be able to learn, what a
solemn vow, promise and profession, I. have made by them. II. That they will
exhort me to hear sermons, and to learn all things, which a Christian ought to
know for his souls health: but especially the principles of religion,
contained in these four: the Creed, the Lords prayer, the ten Commandments,
and the doctrine of the Sacraments.

The second part.
Q. Let us then see, whether they have used those means, and how you have
profited, rehearse the articles of your belief?

A. I believe in God the Father almighty, etc.

Q. What do you chiefly learn out of these articles of your Christian faith?

A. 1. J learn to believe, that there is a God, to believe God, and also in
him. 2. That he is but one in substance, yet distinguished into three, the
Father, Son, and holy Ghost, which distinction is in person, property, and
manner of working. 3. That this God has a Church, to which only he is truly
known, and by the same sincerely worshipped.

Q How can you be persuaded that there is a God?

A. 1. By his created works declaring, 2. by my conscience accusing: 3. by
judgments terrifying: 4. by order observed in all things: 5. by heathen
authors consenting: 6. By the Scripture confidently auouching the same.

Q. What is God? we cannot tell, there fore tell me what a one he is?

A. A spiritual substance, most holy, and of glorious majesty, infinite in
his being, as every where present; in wisdom, foreseeing and rightly
disposing all things: in power, doing what he list: in justice, punishing whom
he will justly: and in mercy, to save whom he pleases.

Q. How do you behold and conceive of this God?

A. Not by any bodily shape, but spiritually, by his word, as he has therein
manifested himself, and by his works, of creation, preservation and governing
every thing, according to his foreknowledge and appointment therein, to his
own glory.

Q. What believe you concerning God the Father?

A. That he is God Almighty, in order the first person in the Trinity,
begetting the Son from everlasting, of his whole substance: maker of heaven
and earth, men and Angels, and all things else very good, only by his word, of
nothing, at the beginning, in six days, and still by his providence preserues
the same, for my benefit.

Q. What was man especially made of?

A. Man consists of body and soul, the first man's body was made of the dust
of the earth, but our bodies come by generation, and are with his mortal: and
both his and all our souls by inspiration, and are immortal.

Q. What estate good man in by creation, and what a one did God make him?

A. In the estate of innocence, void of all sin, free from any punishment: and
was made after Gods image, that is, holy and righteous; having perfect
knowledge of God and his will, as much as was needful for him, and also
readiness of will, in hearty affection, with bodily strength, to fulfill the
same: and had withal the rule of all Gods creatures, made for his benefit.

Q. How then came you into this vvretched estate?

A. By the fall of Adam and Eve, my first parents, who wilfully disobeyed God,
by the devils enticement, infidelity and pride possessing their hearts, and
who stood and fell in the room of all mankind.

Q. How can our souls be sinful, that come not by propagation, but by
inspiration?

A. 1. For that his soul was deputy for all souls of men naturally begotten.
2. Because man sinned, and man, is not man, before body and soul be knit
together, which being conjoined, become together, as man, partaker of man's fall
and corruption

Q. Does any thing of that image of God remain yet in us?

A. Yes: 1. In the mind a certain general corrupt knowledge of nature,
concerning good and evil, to make us inexcusable, before God. 2. In the
conscience a power to reprove and repress in part unbridled affections. 3. In
will, though a free, yet a weak choice, in every natural and civil action.

Q. What evils do we receive by this fall?

A. 1. In the mind ignorance of heavenly things unaptness to learn them, or
to judge of them aright, but apt to learn evil, and to invent the same. 2. In
conscience impurenesse to excuse sin, not to accuse, being dead or benumbed:
and to accuse for well or ill doing. 3. In will, want of power, to will any
true good, but to resist it, and only to will that which is evil. 4. In
affection to hate good, and run after ill. 5. In body fitness to begin
sin, by receiving outward objects and occasions theteof by the senses, and
also to execute the same, when the heart has conceived it, in word and deed,
and this is called Original sin, which is in every man.

Q. Do all men continue in this sinful and cursed estate for ever?

A. No: but only the reprobate, whom God has not decreed to save, to
manifest his justice: for the elect, being predestinate to eternal life, are
in this world in their appointed time called effectually, through Gods word and
his spirit, justified, and sanctified, and so shall continue, in this estate of
grace, to be glorified, for that God will also show his mercy, and all for his
own glory.

Q. Are none of the reprobate, euor in the estate of grace and Gods favor?

A. No verily; though many of them, endued with the common gifts of the spirit,
may in outward appearance, for a time, seem to be of the elect, in the
judgment of the Church.

Q. Can any of the elect then be ever before God, in the state of damnation?

A. No indeed: albeit both before the conversion, and also after they be
called, they falling by infirmity, and lying a time in their sin, may
appear in show, to the Church, to be none of the elect: yet can they not fall
away, wholly nor finally.

Q. May not men then live as they list, sithence he being a reprobate, cannot
be saved, or an elect, he cannot be damned?

A. Not so: for that one elected cannot but use the means, which are ordained
for him to walk in, to make his election sure to himself: which whosoever does
not, cannot be saved.

Q. What believe you concerning God the Son?

A. That he is God, the second Person in the Trinity, Christ Jesus, the only
natural Son begotten of the Father, our Lord, made man, conceived and
sanctified by the holy Ghost, joining two natures into one person, borne,
according to the promise, of the Virgin Marie, who perfectly fulfilled the
law, humbled and suffered under Pontius Pylate, was crucified, bearing upon
him Gods curse, and hellish torments, who died and was buried, and being a
while held captive of death in the grave, he was exalted, and victoriously rose
again the third day, and is ascended up into heaven, and there he sits on the
right hand of God his Father, having all power in heaven and earth to rule and
govern his Church, where his manhood does and shall at all times, (though in
his Godhead he be present with me ever) remain, until he shall come from
thence, to judge us all, here on earth, both quick and dead at the last day:
which day cannot be now far off.

Q. Why should he need to be both God and man?

A. That he might be the only Mediator betwixt God and man, to satisfy for
sin, which neither the manhood by deserving, nor Godhead by dying alone could
do.

Q. Why is he called Christ?

A. To declare, that he was the promised Messiah, and to signify his offices,
that he was anointed, not with material oil, but with the gift of the spirit
without measure, to be our King, Priest and Prophet: from which name we are
called Christians, and are by him Kings, Priests, and Prophets.

Q. How is Christ a King?

A. He is King, not only as God, but as he is the head governing the Church,
without any general Vicar under him, by his word and spirit immediately, making
laws, and ordeining Ministers to the gathering together and preservation
thereof. 2. By destroying Satan, his Angels, unbelievers, idolaters,
heretics, Antichrist, and the whole kingdom of darkness.

Q. How is Christ a priest?

A. 1. By satisfying for all the sins of the elect, by his passion and
fulfilling of the law. 2. For that he makes prayer continually to God for
them.

Q. How is Christ a Prophet?

A. By immediately revealing from his Father, his word and means of salvation
contained in the same.

Q. Why is he called Jesus?

A. To signify that he is a Savior to every true believer: neither is there
any other means of ourselves, or by any orher, either in part or whole to
obtain salvation, but only by him alone.

Q. Why is he called Lord?

A. Because we owe all homage and duty in jove to him, for our redemption.

Q. What believe you concerning the holy Ghost?

A. That he is God the third person in the Trinity, proceeding from the Father
and the Son who spoke by the Prophets, dwelling in the faithful, sanctifying
them in part in this life, working by the word and holy motions, an utter
loathing of sin, and a hearty love of righteousness, leading them into all
truth, persuading them of Gods favor, teaching them in prayer, bearing them up
in temptation, quickening, renewing, and increasing his gifts in them: that
they may know, believe, love, and do that which is good: which he will perfect
fully in the life to come.

Q. Why did this God thus make, redeem, sanctify, and hereto preserve you?

A. That I might praise his name, in living godly, righteously, and soberly,
according to all his commandments, in my calling, in all things, whatsoever my
estate be, in this present world.

Q. What do you believe concerning the Church?

A. That it is but one mystical body, whether militant or triumphant, visible
or invisible, in heaven, or in earth, being a company of the Lords elect, holy
by Christ, catholic, gathered of the dispersed abroad, and having special
prerogatives above the rest of mankind, communion with Christ, and one with
another by the bond of the spirit, the forgiveness of all sins, the joyful
resurrection of the body, and life everlasting, whereof I believe my self to
be one, and therefore, that the same things belong also unto me.

Q. What are the marks of the true Church here on earth?

A. Inwardly faith and love, outwardly (besides the uncertain notes, of
universality, antiquity, and consent) these two: Christ's word truly preached,
his Sacraments rightly administered, whereto add, faithful prayer, and holy
discipline.

Q. Js the Church of Rome a true Church of Christ?

A. No: but of Antichrist the Pope, the chief teacher of the doctrine of
devils.

Q. What reason have you to disallovv that religion?

A. For that it is a false religion. I. The author is the devil. II. The
means used to uphold it, are unlawful: 1. deceived Councels. 2. unwritten
verities, and forged authors: 3. falsifying the Fathers: 4. corrupting
Scripture, by adding thereto. 5. by taking from it, by false interpreting: 6.
reteyning the people in ignorance, by forbidding to study the word, and
teaching it in an unknown tongue: 7. pretending revelations, and showing lying
miracles. 8. counterfeit holiness. 9. bloody persecution. III. The matter of
their religion is untruths, idolatry, heresy and novelties invented by man.
IV. The form in the service ridiculous, by foolish gestures: carnal, by
fleshly pompes and delights, their worship is by hypocrisy. V. The end to
advance men, by worshipping of Saints, and extolling man's power and merits. VI.
The benefit gotten thereby is nothing, because it keeps a man in the estate of
damnation: and allows the breach of all the ten Commandments. 1. To fear
God by men's doctrines. 2. To worship Images. 3. Magic and coniuring. 4.
Idol-seruice. 5. Treason against Christian Princes. 6. Assoyles for murderers.
7. Stews, and restraint of marriage. 8. Wages for no lawful labor, to
Masse-mongers, and for deceites. 9. To break an oath to a Christian made
lawfully. 10. That concupiscence is no sin. 7. Gods judgments, against many
of the most fiery professors thereof which is never seen to happen to
zealous and constant professors of the truth.

Q. What must be done to maintain the Church and to overthrow heresy, that
destroys the foundation, errors, corrupting religion, scismes, breaking the
peace of the Church, and vices, stayning our profession?

A. 1. To cleave only to the written word, which is both in time before, and
in authority above the Church, to judge all controversies in religion. 2. To
call sufficient men and ordain them Ministers to teach, allowing necessary
maintenance; but suffering no insufficient to creep in, or to abide still:
neither the able to live idly, by carelesnes, pride, or covetousness. 3.
That there be a godly order established and peaceably kept of every one,
without giving offense. 4. That there be a holy and right use continually of
true discipline, to admonish, suspend, and excommunicate obstinate offenders
whosoever they be.

Q. Are not the articles of your belief a prayer?

A. No: but only a sum of the Gospel: which is one part of Gods word,
containing the promises of salvation by Christ, and is also a rule by which I
must examine my faith.

Q. What mean you by faith?

A. Not faith to work miracles, which is past: nor historical, only
believing that to be true which God says: nor temporary, to know, profess,
and to teach Christ, fear to commit sin, sorrow after, to make satisfaction,
to destroy the wicked, to make many prayers, wishing heaven, and to live, for a
time, in show honestly, yet out of Christ: but justifying faith is here meant.

Q. What is justifying faith?

A. It is a gracious and true persuasion in my heart, grounded upon Gods
promises concerning Christ, whereby I do apply him and all his benefits to my
self, being assured, that he is my wisdom, strength, righteousness,
holiness, and redemption, and that what he has done, it is as well done for
me, as for any other: and so is mine, as if my self had done it.

Q. How came you by this faith?

A. By the holy Ghost, working the same inwardly by the outward ministry of
the Gospel preached ordinarily, and is by the same word, Sacraments, and
Prayer, confirmed, continued, and increased.

Q. What prosite reap you by this belief?

A. I a wretched sinner in my self, being pardoned of sin, and Christ given
to me; am in him the adopted son of God, and righteous before him, my heart
purged, my conscience quieted, my imperfect works do please him, all crosses
are for comfort and further to salvation: holy Angels tend upon me, heaven is
mine inheritance I am set at liberty from the curse of the law, Satan, the
world, and fleshly lusts, without fear of death, damnation, and hell fire.

Q. Has every one this faith, and so these benefits?

A. No: but only such as show repentance, the fruit of faith.

Q. What is repentance?

A. It is a true turning of my mind, will, and heart, wholly from the world,
the flesh and devil, unto God, with full purpose to attend carefully to the
counsel of his word and spirit, and through the whole course of my life,
readily and constantly endeavor to follow the same.

Q. What are the true tokens of this true repentance?

A. 1. A continual striving of the flesh and spirit. 2. A hatred of my former
vanities, avoiding occasion, company, counsel, or example to ill, with love
unfeigned to the contrary. 3. Increase of peace in conscience: with comfort in
affection for righteousness sake. 4. A joyful expecting and wishing Christ's
coming to judgment.

Q. May not a man that truly repents, fall afterward?

A. Yes indeed, and into the same sin, or some other.

Q. How then may a man be persuaded, that his repentance was then true
before?

A. 1. If this be of infirmity, feeling before, and in the committing a
dislike thereof: for after true repentance sin is never wholly committed. 2.
If that Godly sorrow follow, which is not either for earthly shame, temporal
punishments, hellish torments, or loss of heaven: but for displeasing God so
merciful a Father: and this is called renewed repentance.

Q. How should this appear to be true?

A. 1. By an utter loathing and condemning my self for the sin newly
committed, with desire and persuasion of pardon. 2. A godly anger and burning
zeal against my self, with taking revenge, vowing and practicing strictly the
contrary virtue for offending. 3. A watchful care and continual fear, lest I
fall afterward at any time again into the same.

Q. What may comfort a troubled conscience?

A. These things: 1. That God can pardon any sin. 2. That he will by promise
made, pardon every penitent. 3. That he which feels a true desire to leave
sin, and to please God; is bound to believe his sins are both pardonable
and pardoned. 4. That doubting of salvation, with fear to offend God, is a
sign of salvation. 5. No condemnation to such as are in Christ, and therefore
their sins cannot damn them. 6. Justification must not be judged after
sanctification, there is no perfection here, and the best children of God have
grievously fallen, and have felt this sting of conscience. 7. The assurance of
salvation must not be judged as men feel assurance in affliction, but by the
stabilitie of Gods promises, from former comforts and tokens of grace, but in
trouble from present desires only.

The third part.
Q. You said, that your Godfathers and Godmothers did promise for you, that you
should keep Gods commandments, tell me how many there be?

A. Ten, and are divided into two tables.

Q. What does the first table teach you?

A. The duty which I owe unto God in holiness, whom I must love, with all my
heart, with all my mind, and with all my soul, and with all my strength, set
down in the four first commandments, containing the matter, manner, end, and
time of Gods worship.

Q. What does the second Table teach you?

A. The duty which I owe unto my neighbor, which is every one in righteousness,
whom I must love, as my self, set down in the six last Commandments,
containing his dignity, life, body, goods, credit, and more spiritually all
of the^.

Q: Which be the Commandments?

A. The same which God spoke in the 20. of Ezodus, saying, I am the Lord thy
God, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage,
which is no commandment but the preface unto them.

Q. What is the first commandment?

A, Thou shall have none other Gods but me.

Q. What does this Commandment teach you?

A. To make choice of one, and the true God, to be my God, and not to take that
for God, which is not God by nature: the occasion whereof was the lusting after
strange gods.

Q. What are the things forbidden by this Commandment?

A. Ignorance of God and the truth, not to pray, distrust of God, impatiencie,
to fear, love, or joy in the creature more then in the Creator, to deny God,
or his word, power, presence, justice o^ mercy, openly or secretly in heart:
security without fear of God. The contrary is commanded.

Q. What is the second Commandment?

A. Thou shall not make to thy self any graven image, etc.

Q. What does this Commandment teach you?

A. I must neither worship false Gods, nor this true God with false worship:
but in spirit and truth as his word only teaches. The occasion of this Comman
was our foolish desire of a carnal worship, and a false conceit, to be able
to prescribe a manner of worship to God of our selves.

Q What things are hereby forbidden?

A. Idolatry, picturing of God, or Christ, Papistrie, will worship, good
intents without warrant, our own fantasies, men's traditions, worship of
Images, pilgrimages: not to destroy errors, heresies, and monuments of
idolatry. The contrary is commanded.

Q. What is the third commandment?

A. Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain, etc.

Q. What does this commandment teach you?

A. Not to bereave God of, his honor that is due unto him: but in all things
to give him his due glory. The occasion of this commanndement was our
readiness to abuse God, his name, word, and works.

Q. What things are hereby forbidden?

A. To think or speak of God, of his word, or works lightly or
contemptuously, without reverence: to swear by any thing but by God: or by
him, without a calling, in our ordinary talk, where neither Gods glory, our
brothers salvation nor magistrate requires it: to swear falsely. So
blasphemy, witchcraft, coniuring, and cursing: to deny the known truth: to
profess piety, and live wickedly: the contrary is commanded.

Q. What is the fourth commandment?

A. Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day, etc.

Q What does this Commandment teach you?

A. That every day in the week I prepare my self to keep the Lords day holy,
that when it comes it be not profaned, nor the public worship of God let,
but furthered by me and mine. The occasion of this commandment, our aptness
to fall from God, without daily means be used.

Q. What things are hereby forbidden?

A. To do unnecessary labors without godliness and charity, fayres,
iourneys, or vain sports eating and drinking, that may hinder devotion: not to
hear Gods word preached, or to hear carelessly, sleepily, with weariness, or
without purpose to amend. To omit meditation and conference. For ministers to
omit ordinarily the preaching of the word, to preach in a strange language
vaingloriously, falsely, hypocritically, flatteringly, or by constraint:
without cheerfulness for any to absent themselves negligently or wilfully
from the Sacrament, the contrary is commanded.

Q. What is the fifth commandment?

A. Honor thy father and thy mother, etc.

Q. What does this commandment teach you?

A. To preserve the dignity of every one by all means, that is any way to be
preferred, either by his place, age, or gifts: and that no ways I diminish the
same. The occasion of this commandment was our proud and envious nature, that
cannot abide to be under government, not to give men their due.

Q. What things are hereby forbidden?

A. Contempt of our betters, vnreuerent behavior toward them, by word, or
deed, to disobey their lawful commandments, counsels or advice. All treason
and rebellion. The contratie is commanded.

Q. What is the sixth Commandment?

A. Thou shall do no murder.

Q. What does this Commandment teach you?

A. I must neither hurt nor hinder either mine own life, or the life of my
neighbor: but by all means preserve the same. The occasion of this
commandment, was our impatiencie and uncharitable desire of revenge.

Q. What things are hereby forbidden?

A. Want of love, anger, malice, envy, g^udging, a frowning countenance,
desire of revenge, contention, railing, quarelling, mocking, offensive
ieasting, oppression, fighting, murder, any bodily hurt: to neglect to use
means of health, or to hinder the same: to be contentious, and not to seek
after peace. The contrary is commanded.

Q. What is the seventh Commandment?

A. Thou shall not commit adultery.

Q. What does this commandment teach you?

A. I must not any way hurt or impair the chastity of my neighbor, but every
way seek to preserve the same. The occasion of this commandment was our
lustful and fleshly nature.

Q What things are hereby forbidden?

A. Lustful desires, fornication, adultery, with all occasions hereunto:
idleness, wanton attire, a rolling eye, corrupt and dishonest talk, wanton
songs, lascivious pictures, unchaste plays, mixed dancing of men and women,
unseemly gestures and acts, and companying with wantons. The contrary is
commanded.

Q. What is the eight commandment?

A. Thou shall not steal.

Q. What does this commandment teach you?

A. That I must not any way hinder or diminish my neighbors goods, but by all
means preserve and increase the same. The occasion hereof was our couerous
nature, discontent ever with our present estate.

Q. What things are herely forbidden?

A. Pilfering and robbery, any way to take or keep that which is not ours
unlawfully: all theft with all occasions thereunto. Not to restore things
found, borrowed, or left only to be kept of trust: to give what is not thine,
either in whole or part. Not to live contentedly, all covetous desires,
idleness out of calling, or lithernesse in it: The contrary is commanded.

Q. What is the ninth commandment?

A. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.

Q. What does this commandment teach you?

A. That I must not diminish the good name or credit of my neighbor, whither
friend or foe, known or unknown: but carefully preserve the same. The
occasion of this commandment was our seditious nature.

Q. What things are herely forbidden?

A. Lying in jest or earnest, backbiting, slandering, revealing, secret
infirmities and private offenses before admonition, false witness, by adding
or detracting in words or sense: to take a doubtful matter in the worst part:
also all occasions to this sin, as envy, disdain, anger, selfeloue, to be
too suspicious, to be ready to receive a false report against our neighbor.
The contrary is commanded.

Q. What is the tenth commandment?

A. Thou shall not cover, etc.

Q. What does this Commandment teach you?

A. That I may not have once an unlawful lust to that which is my neighbors:
but for ever think good toward him. The occasion of(...)

Q. What is prayer?

A. It is a right request made only to God, in the name of Jesus Christ, by a
true believer, for such things as be lawful

Q. What rule have you to direct you in your prayer aright?

A. The same which our Savior Christ taught his disciples, called the Lords
prayer.

Q. Let me hear it.

A. Our Father which art in heaven, etc.

Q. How many parts are thereof this prayer?

A. Four: I. a preface: II. six petitions: III. a confirmation. IV. a
conclusion.

Q. Which is the preface?

A. It is contained in these words, Our Father which art in heaven.

Q. What learn you out of this?

A. 1. That a preparation must be made to pray. 2. It shows the properties of
true prayer.

Q. What must you aforehand prepare, in going to God to pray?

A. 1. I must prepare these 6. things. My mind to meditate of heavenly things,
before I set to pray, and understand that it is commanded and promised, what I
purpose to ask. 2. My heart, withdrawing it from former passions a while, to
affect earnestly with feruencie that I will ask. 3. My words to be uttered
aptly with the heart agreeing with the matter. 4. My behavior to a holy
reverence, considering Gods justice and majesty, and my wickedness and
baseness. 5. My faith, to apprehend as much as shall be necessary. 6. My hope
to wait without appointing God either the time, place, manner, or quantity of
the matter. 7. My will, to use afterward all the honest means appointed to
obtain the same.

Q. What be the true properties of prayer?

A. 1. That it be in true love: for we must remember to pray for all our
brethren not departed this life, for there is no Purgatory. 2. It must be
made only to God, for him only can we call heavenly Father, neither to Saints
nor Angels. 3. In the name of Christ, through whom only he is our Father by
adoption. 4. In faith: for that he is a Father, and will not deny his children.
5. Without a carnal conceit of God, vain babbling, or wandering thoughts: for
he is in heaven.

Q. Which be the six petitions?

A. Hallowed be thy name, etc.

Q. What do these teach you?

A. The sum of all the things which I can lawfully ask at Gods hand, for
body or soul: whereof the first three concern the glory of God, and the
latter three the good of man.

Q. Which is the first petition, and what desire you in it?

A. The first is, Hallowed be thy name: and I desire therein, in the first
place, that I and all other may acknowledge God so truly, in his word and
works, as in every of our thoughts, words, and deeds, he may be highly
worshipped and praised.

Q. Which is the second, and what desire you in it?

A The second is, Thy kingdom come: and desire that he will send us the
means, thus to honor his name, that is, his word and spirit: with all things
that do further thereunto* that so the elect may be gathered, and Christ come
to the last judgment to give us his kingdom of glory.

Q. Which is the third petition, and what desire you in it?

A. The third is, Thy will be done, and I desire, that as we have the means
to glorify him, so here we pray to do, not ours, but his will, as all his
commandments and word teaches us: and as the blessed Saints and Angels do in
heaven, heartily without hypocrisy, willingly without grudging, readily
without lingering, faithfully without sinister respects, joyfully without
murmuring, and constantly without wavering unto the end.

Q. Which is the fourth petition, and what desire you in it?

A. The fourth is, Give us this, etc. and I desire, that he will provide those
necessaries for our bodies, without which we cannot serve him: and that we may
depend patiently upon his providence, using diligent labor, and all honest
means to help our selves and others.

Q. Which is the fifth petition, and what desire you in it?

A. The fifth is, And forgive us our trespasses, etc and I desire, that he
would forgive all of us, friend or foe, our sins, lest they either hinder us
of the former mercies, or cause them to be taken from us: and that he will
persuade our consciences, that we are forgiven, by giving us grace to forgive
freely, and to forget those offenses, whereby in any thing, or any way, our
neighbors have been grievous unto us.

Q. Which is the sixth and last petition, and what desire you in it?

A. The sixth is, Lead us not into temptation, etc. and I desire, that as he
will pardon us, so he would also give us the gift of continuance, that though
we be tempted, yet may we overcome, and be delivered from sin and Satan, and
never fall again any more from God.

Q. Which is the confirmation?

A. For thine is the kingdom, etc.

Q. What learn you by this?

A. I do learn hereby two things: 1. that it is a reason, not to move God, but
to stir up our affections, and to strengthen our faith in asking.

Q. How does it this?

A. When it teaches me to acknowledge the kingdom to God our Father, that is,
his dominion and right over all: and that his power is the greatest to compel
all to do what he will, and as he will: and his glory the highest, which
himself maintains, and we seek above all.

Q. What is the second thing we learn?

A. 2. A thanksgiving and praising of God, which we ought to use in the end, as
the second part of prayer: which is done, in giving to God his own, the rule,
power, and glory, which we desire him to manifest by granting our petitions,
and we will acknowledge the same; not for a time, but for ever and ever.

Q. Which is the conclusion?

A. This word, Amen.

Q. What mean you by this word?

A. That I am persuaded by the aforesaid reasons, that my request is granted,
and shall be performed, as my father shall see it convenient for me and his
glory, in time and place. And therefore I say, it is so, or so it shall be,
which is Amen.

The fifth part.
Q. What is a Sacrament?

A. It is a visible sign and seal of invisible graces, commanded and
ordained with a promise by Christ in the Church, to be administered publicly,
by a lawful Minister, with the preaching of the word: which Sacrament with all
the rites thereof does represent and convey by proportion and relation, in the
present use, invisible graces, first, Christ, and then all his benefits, for
further assurance of the same things, which God has made by the promise of his
word, unto a true believer, who is with Christ by the holy Ghost, united and
made one.

Q. What mean you by Christ, and all his benefits?

A. Whole Christ, God and man, with his righteousness, justice, holiness, and
redemption: who as he is Christ, one person of two natures, is truly said to be
really present in the Sacraments, not properly in his humanity, but by the
communion of properties.

Q How may you be sure that you have received true benefit by the Sacraments?

A. If I do feel a dying to sin, and living unto righteousness, getting
strength, and also increasing therein daily, by the force of Christ's death and
resurrection.

Q. How many Sacraments are there?

A. Two and no more: Baptism and the Lords Supper.

What is Baptism?

A. It is the first Sacrament in the new Testament, by which such as are within
the covenant, are either washed, sprinkled, or dipped in the water, in the name
of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost.

Q. What is the outvvard sign and rite?

A. Water and washing.

Q. What is the invisible grace?

A. The blood of Christ which cleanses us of all sin, original and actual,
past and to come.

Q. Are we then no more sinners?

A. Yes in ourselves: for original sin still is sin in us, but we are
washed from it. because it shall not be imputed, nor any sin else unto me a
true believer.

Q. Who are to be baptized?

A. Not only such as be of years, that can and do testify their faith: but
also infants of either father or mother professing Christ and baptized: for the
promise of salvation belongs to them and to their children.

Q. Is baptism so necessary to salvation, that without it children cannot be
saved?

A. It is necessary, to all that may have it, but not of necessity, to such
as cannot rightly come by it: for not the want, but the careless neglect and
contempt thereof condemns.

Q. How often should we be baptized?

A. But once, for we may not be baptized again after true baptism: for being
once borne, we cannot be borne again naturally, nor spiritually.

Q. What is the Lords Supper?

It is the latter Sacrament in the new Testament whereby we are nourished and
preserved in the Church to eternal life.

Q. What be the outvvard signs?

B. Bread and wine.

Q. What be the things signified?

A. The body and blood of Christ.

Q. What are the rites?

A. The actions of the Minister and receiver.

Q. What are the actions of the Minister?

A. 1. To take the bread and wine into his hands. 2. to bless it. 3. To break
the bread, and power forth the wine. 4. to offer and give them to the receiver.

Q. What are the actions of the receiver?

A. 1. To take the bread and wine offered into his hand, 2. to eat the one,
and drink the other, and so digest and concoct them, as that they feel
nourishment to the body.

Q. What learn^ you by all these actions?

A. I am assured, that the visible actions of the Minister, does represent the
spiritual actions of God the Father to my soul, who has decreed his Son,
and elected him the Mediator, to have his body broked, and his precious blood
shed for me, being offered to all, but given only to the true believer, that
can by the hand of faith take hold of him: who shows as lively the virtue of
his death to preserve his soul, as the virtue of the bread and wine is felt to
nourish the body.

Q. (...) the bread turned into Christ's body, and is the wine into his very
blood?

A. No verily: for then, 1. it were no Sacrament, 2. it is against reason, 3.
against Scripture, 4. against an article of our Creed, 5. against the judgment
of anncient Fathers true writings, 6. against the judgment of reformed
Christian Churches, 7. against the opinion of holy Martyrs, who shed their
blood for the contrary, 8. it is against experience of our senses, that the
bread should be flesh, or wine, blood: neither is Christ's body in, with, or
about the same.

Q. Is there then no difference of this bread and wine, from that which we
use commonly?

A. There is no difference in the substance, but in the holy use* being at that
time set apart to be signs of Christ's body and blood.

Q. May every one offer to receive the will?

A. No: but only such: as come prepared, and be fit, that both are able in
knowledge to examine, and also by a good conscience will judge themselves,
whither they be in any measure prepared thereunto.

Q. What if you come unprepared?

A. I am an unworthy receiver, provoking Gods wrath against me, and so eat
and drink my own damnation.

Q. Who are those that ought not to come?

A. Open impenitent sinners, fools, mad persons, children, all that be of
years, and yet ignorant, not being able to try and judge themselves: and if
such profane ones do offer themselves, they are not to be admitted.

Q. What be those things whereof you must try and judge your selves?

A. I. Of my knowledge, concerning my miserable estate through sin, of Gods
mercy; and our deliverance by Christ, and the understanding of this Sacrament.
II. Of my belief in Christ, which I may do by the Creed. III. Of my
repentance toward God, for old and new sins, examined by his commandments.
IV. Of my brotherly love, which I do owe to every one, which I may try and
judge by my forgiving others, as I desire God to forgive me, and by my seeking
to satisfy whom I have offended of my knowledge either in word or deed.

Q. May any by omitting these duties be free from sin, if therefore they
will not receive the Sacrament with others?

A. No: for as to come unprepared is damnation, so to neglect to prepare for
any earthly occasion, is a great wickedness, such living in disobedience,
without repentance and charity.

Q. Why do you go to the Lords supper?

A. 1. To testify my love in obedience to God commanding. 2. To strengthen my
faith being weak. 3. To maintain and increase the holy communion and
fellowship of brotherly love amongst us the members of Christ and 4. to keep a
remembrance of his death till his second coming.

Q. How must you be exercised in the time of administration, and afterward?

A. I must. 1. meditate upon the death and passion of Christ, how grievously I
have sinned. 2. Gods endless mercy. 3. the unity and fellowship that is
amongst the true members of the Church with Christ, and one with another:
rejoicing in heart, and praising God therefore with the congregation.
Afterward 1. I must give alms to the needy brethren, and do other good works
of charity in token of thankfulness, that day especially, for so great a
mercy. 2. Grow from thenceforth in obedience, faith, and unfeigned love to my
lives end.

The sixth part.
Q. Can you briefly sh^vv me any rules to be observed, that you may do so, as
you have been taught?

A. I. Every morning before other business, I must 1. thank God for my
safety, 2. desire pardon of sin, 3. Gods further protection against ghostly
and bodily enemies.

II. I must know that, that day, and all other times after given me to live in,
are for more earnest repentance, increase of knowledge, faith, and practice of
godliness: and therefore of these continually I must be mindful, setting some
part of the day aside for reading, hearing, or meditating upon heavenly things:
that the vanities of the world short and uncertain carry me not away.

III. I must have, or else prepare my self to some particular calling, fit to
keep me from idleness, and to exercise the duties of religion, in which
calling must I be both honest, and profitable to others, to which 1. I must
betake me speedily that no time be lost. 2. to do therein as I would be done
unto. 3. to seek first in my labor Gods glory, then my own good with my
neighbors profit. 4. labor therein painefully and constantly, in adversity
using good means hoping for prosperity, in prosperity neglecting no humble
duties for fear of adversity. 5. my present estate I must account it ever the
best for me, and most for Gods glory. 6. I must not fear to spend where God
and charity requires, sparing from idle expenses, and only lay up, for the
time to come, wh^tsoeuer shall remain, when I have discharged necessary
duties, honestly and religiously.

IV. I must recreate my self sometime from my wearisome labor, when (...) see
need, which must be 1. at times convenient. 2. in things lawful. 3. short,
delightsome to the mind, and healthful for the body. 4. to make me more
cheerful to return to labor, and not to draw me to loiter and to idleness,
no end appointed to man nor beast.

V. I must warily see to mine own ways. 1. My thoughts and heart must 1. be
far from unlawful affection. 2. upon lawful things on earth moderate, and no
more then needs. 3. upon God and heavenly things often, fervently, and
reverently. 4 that I strive against self-love, thinking of my self basely;
and wax, by more and greater gifts, the more humble and less envious 5. On
others I must think highly, and charitably, judging well without suspicions
what I hear or see good in the^, receiving it with joy: and hoping of better
what I see or hear to be ill in them, taking doubtful words or deeds from
them in the better part. II. My eyes must be shut against objects to sin,
that they let them not into my heart, to stine up ill motions: but quick to
observe every good example and occasion to goodness. III. My ears must be
exercised in hearing the truth, good counsels, friendly admonitions, and godly
exhortations, but shut against flattery, lyings, slander, filthy and wicked
speeches. IV. My tongue must keep silent, unless just cause and convenient
time and place be to speak. In speaking the matter must 1. be gracious to
profit the hearers, and also necessary to be uttered. 2. in wisdom regarding
circumstances. 3. in sincerity to speak it from the heart. 4. speaking of God
and his word, it must be religiously and joyfully: of ourselves modestly: of
others lovingly. 5. to praise moderately without contempt: to disprayse meekely
showing love, to be constrained by necessity, rather then of will, to speak
of other men's faults, expressing sorrow in uttering. 6. to speak well of men in
absence, what good we know of them, and to defend them, and in presence without
flattery. 7. to use few words and effectual to the matter without
tediousness. 8. not to talk of needless matters, or which concern us nor,
as busi-bodies, neither of any thing, against religion, charity, common good,
or chastity. V. My behavior, 1. it must be lowly to superiors, 2. gentle to
inferiors, and 3. lovely to familiars. VI. My apparel it must be first for
necessity, and then for honest decency, as we are able, and agreeing with our
calling. VII. My diet must be 1. sparing, ordinarily a kind of fasting, rather
then a feasting. 2. taking my food with hunger and thirsting. 3. at seasonable
hours. 4. that thereby 1. my strength may be maintained and increased, 2. my
meditation and devotion nothing hindered. 5. that we be prepared in the
beginning may feel a necessity and pray to God: and in the end sufficient
refreshing, may thank God.

VI. J must take heed what company I keep with, 1. that J make my familiars
none but honest and religious, 2. that they be my equals in estate and place,
not superiors, to avoid suspicion of pride: nor too much inferior, least it
bring contempt. 3. that of these, not many, but one of all, I warily,
deliberately, and with much trial, choose my secret friend. 4. that in going or
keeping with any, J must ever purpose either to do good, or receive some.

VII. At night, the time of rest, 1. I must call to mind Gods benefits
received, either by preventing evil, or by bringing good upon me, to thank
him. 2. J must recount what I have done, either in evil to repent, or what
good I performed to judge either of my increasing or decaying in grace:
sorowing more for the duties omitted and sins committed, then joyful of any
good done. 3. In taking rest I must commit my self to God, by a devout and
faithful prayer, as thinking no more to rise. 4. to have my last thoughts of
heavenly things, by committing or recalling somewhat to mind, of I have either
heard or learned out of Gods word. 5. that I take sleep to refresh nature and
not to satisfy slothful flesh.

VIII. And last is, that all the week long I remember so to labor in my
calling, and dispose of my ordinary business, that I be prepared for the
Lords day to keep it holy: but especially at the end of the week, so that
when it comes, I may neither by them break it, or be hindered. Thus living to
God holly, to my neighbor charitably, and toward my self soberly, my
conscience shall be comforted, my weak brethren strengthened, the strong
confirmed, the wicked made ashamed, the devil confounded, and God greatly
glorified.

FINIS.

