A new and large discourse of the Travels of sir Anthony Sherley Knight, by
Sea, and over Land, to the Persian Empire.

Wherein are related many strange and wonderful accidents: and also, the
Description and conditions of those Countries and People he passed by: with his
return into Christendom.

Written by William Parry Gentleman, who accompanied Sir Anthony in his
Trauells.

LONDON Printed by Valentine Simmes for Felix Norton. 1601.

A new and large Discourse, of the Trauelles of Sir Anthony Sherley Knight, by
Sea, and over Land, to the Persian Empire.
IT has been, and yet is, a prouerbiall speech amongst us, that Travelers
may lie by authority; Now, whether this Proverb has had authority, from that
authority, which some Travelers have usurped (never by justice granted) to
lie; or whether their report (albeit most true) yet exceeding the belief of
those auditors that will believe nothing that falls not within their own
ocular experience, or probability of truth, squared by the same: whether (I
say) from one, or both of these grounds, this proverb has sprung, I am
uncertain: but certain I am, diverse there are (entiteling themselves
Travelers, for crossing the narrow seas, to the neighbor parts of Picardie
peradventure, or the low countries perhaps) from thence take authority to
utter lies in England (at their return) by retaile, which they have coined
there in gross. And as sure I am, that many honest and true Travelers, for
speaking the truth, of their own knowledge (for in the world are many
incomprehensible miracles of Nature) yet because it exceeds the belief of the
unexperienced, and homebred vulgars, they are, by them, concluded liers for
their labor. How could a man, from his birth confined in a dungeon or
lightlesse Cave, be brought to conceive, or believe the glory and great
magnificence of the visible, celestial, and terrestrial globes, with the
wonderful works of the great Author of Nature in the same? Nay, were such a
one suddenly transferred to the top of some mountain or lofty Turret in a
summers day, from whence he might behold the glory of the heavens, replenished
with that most admirable Cresset, who for his glittring and divine glory,
prouokes many nations of the world to perform divine adoration thereunto. To
see (I say) those resplendant and cristalline heavens ouer-cannoping the earth,
invested most sumptuously in height of Natures pride with her richest livery;
the particularities whereof, were they described according to the truth of
their nature, it might breed a scruple in the natural man, whether Man were
(for transgression) ever vnimparadized or no. And such a man, of whom I
speak, would (like a soul suddenly transferred, by the hands of Angels,
from earth to heaven) be beheauened with the joy he would conceive, by reason
of so glorious a prospect, and such soule-rauishing and sense-bewitching
obiectes. The application hereof is apparent: for were men merely homebred
(and in that respect but as the man confined to his Cave) abroad in the eminent
and oppulent places of the world, as also in the most remote and obscure
corners of the same, and there with insearching and well discerning eyes, to
behold the rarieties (surmounting admiration) therein included, he would (no
doubt) be rapt up with ceaselesse wonderment, or wondrous amazement at the
sight and consideration of them. For mine own part, I am resolved to make a
true relation of what mine eyes saw, not respecting the judgment of the
vulgars, but contenting my self with the conscience of the truth; besides
which, (I protest) I purpose to write nothing. This by way of preamble: now to
the matter.

Therefore, first landing at Vlishing, we were honorably received and
entertained, of sir Robert Sidney, lord Governor of that garrison: from whence
we went on foot to Middleborough, where we took a small hoy that carried us
that night to Sierichzee. From whence we then took our journey to Somerdicke:
From whence we likewise crosst the water the next morning, and at night we lay
at Brill. Hitherto we passed on foot, hiering poor soldiers to carry our
baggage, by reason that the frost was so great, that horses were not able to
pass, and the way unusual. From the Brill the next day we crosst the water;
and landing, we had wagons that conveyed us and ours to the Hage: where, no
sooner being alighted, but that sir Anthony (attended by us) went to visit his
Excellency, consociated with master Gilpin the Queens Agent thither, where
continuing not past an hour to complement with the Prince, he withdrew
himself to his lodging to repose himself: whither (not long after) his
Excellency and the States sent fifty great flaggons of wine, together with
his Pass through his Country, whereby he was to take conuoy as he thought
requisite. The next day to Leiden, so to Vtricke, to Dewborough, and then to
Collen, the passage whereunto was somewhat dangerous; by occasion whereof we had
sir Nicholas Parkers troop of horse to conuoy us thither; our company having
25. of his horses to ride on, and 25. more of his troup, besides the
cornetbearer to accompany us to Collen, which we did in 6. days, spending one
night merrily.

The next morning, sir Anthony giving the troop that were his conuoy a
bountiful reward, sent them back again; we taking our journey forewardes
through those parts of Germany, as Frankeford, Norembege, and so to Augusta,
altogether by coach. From whence we hired horses to pass the Alps, in
respect that it was not passable by coach. And from thence we were ten days
passing to Venice, whither we went, with resolution to aid the duke of Ferrara
in his wars against the Pope; who (good duke) fearing the Popes curse, gave
over the wars, as the Pope would: howbeit we remained in Venice ten weeks.
In which time, sir Anthony went to the Duke thereof, who entertained him with
all princely complement, sending him to his lodging, a roy all banquet of all
kind of confected sweet meats, and wine in great abundance; which
continued a long time. Who likewise commanded that we should have liberty to
see any thing in the city worthy the sight, which accordingly we saw, to sir
Anthonies no small cost; for in his rewards, he was there, and elsewhere, most
royal.

To write of the fashions and dispositions of the Germans and Italians, were a
matter not worth my pains, because it is so well known to all men, that
knows, or have read, or heard any thing: therefore I will go forward with our
journey, and write of matter more nouellous, and less known to my homebred
countrymen, for whose sake (chiefly) I have compiled this Discourse.

In May next following our departure from England, we set forwards from Venice,
in an Italian ship, which we had compounded with, amongst others, to convey us
to Aleppo; but by occasion of some iarres we had with some Italians
(passengers as we were) in the ship, they landed us in an Island of the
Venetians called Zanc, unto which place we were two and twenty days passing:
the captain assuring us, that we should have passed it in ten days, which
made us provide but for afteene days vittaile; those fifteen days being
expired, our vittaile quite spent, and having seven days travel further in
that ship, we could for money, nor by no means get any vittailes of those
unkind Italians, whereby we had bin very grievously distressed, but that
certain Persians (though Pagans by profession) being in the ship well
vittailed, and seeing the impious and dogged disposition of those Italians,
supplied all our wants for that seven days gratis. In which time, an Italian
in that ship, using some villainous and opprobrious speeches toward our
Queens Majesty, and the same not heard of by sir Anthony, nor any of his
company in two days after, but then made known by an Italian that attended
master Robert Sherly: whereof when sir Anthony heard, he forthwith caused one
of our company so to heat him with a billet, that it is impossible he should
ever recover it. In the performaunce whereof, he made a great outcry, whereupon
all the Italians were up in arms, being in number some three score persons,
and we but four and twenty. Howbeit, we were (with weapons drawn) pressed to
defend and offend. The captain of the ship thereupon demanded of sir Anthony
how any man durst intermeddle, in that kind, under his command? Whereunto sir
Anthony replied, that it was an injury, tending to the reproach and indignity
of his Sovereign, which he neither would nor could endure; and therewithal
told him, if he would subborne or abet him therein, the one side should welter
in their blood. And our side being rather desirous to prosecute this point with
swords, then with words. Sir Anthonies brother gave the captain a sound
box, which was very hardely digested, and much mischief had like to have
fallen thereon; but by means of certain Merchants in the ship, more fearful
of their goods then of the loss of their bloods (and yet fearful enough of
either) pacified (with much ado) both parties, Howbeit either part lived
watching and warding until they put us on shore, on the said Island of Zant:
where they left us hopeless (God wot) of going forwards or backewards. There
we continued ten days, in which time we hired a Greekish ship, being an open
boat, and very old, and full of dangerous leakes; yea so dangerous were the
leakes, that in eleven days (in which time we passed from Zant to Candia)
continually during all that time four men had as much toil as possibly they
could endure, to laue water out of this rotten boat: which was so weak, that
if even then we had had but ever so little rough weather, there had all
our hopes, together with our carcasses, perished, and we never have arrived at
Candia. Where we made our abode some twelve days, until our boat was
repaired, and made fitter to brook the seas. In which time, the Governor of
that I Will (being a Duke under the Venetians) sent for sir Anthony to his Palace
to dinner, who also sent to his lodging, a very great and costly banquet, and
likewise permitted us (in great favor) to pass round about the town, to see
the strength thereof; which was reasonable well fortified with ordonance and
other adjuncts of war, especially on that side that lay toward the sea: the
other parts not so strong, for the ditch about the Town was dry. The
Inhabitants of that town and Isle are (for the most part) Greeks, whose
manners and behauiors do verify our English proverb, which terms any man,
pleasantly disposed (by reason of wine, or otherwise) a merry Greek; alluding
to these Greeks, that always sit drinking and playing the good fellows
before their doors: some dancing arm in arm up and down the town: Some
others making some other sports, to procure laughter; and thus gamesomely do
they pass their time, as if they were created but for the matter of pleasure:
So that to me it seemed no little wonder, that that Nation, which heretofore
made all the world admire their wisdom and learning, who (in regard of
themselves) held all the world besides, but Barbarians or harbarous, should
now become such cup shot companions, tripping their nimble wits with quick
and subtle wine, thereby turning all their deep policy, into deep
carowsing, and shallow iocunditie. But, Tempora mutantur, and nos mutamur in
illis. Having spent those twelve days, as aforesaid, in Candia, among those
merry Greeks, we eftsoons embarked our selves for Ciprus, to which we were
some nine days passing: where (as the saying is) the Italians (with whom we
passed to Zant) did our errand (like knights errand) against our coming. They
made report to the Turks inhabiting the same I Will, that we were all pirates,
and that they should do well to lay hands on us, and to carry us to the great
Turk their emperor, because, besides that, we were pirates, and came into Turkey,
but as spies. Whereupon the Turks laid hands upon us, even upon our first
arrival, threatening to have brought us to Constantinople: howbeit they staird
us in Ciprus two days; in which time, they were indifferently well qualified,
in hope of money we promised them, and which they had, to their full
contentment, ere we parted from them.

This was the worst welcome which we received on shore since our departure
from the English shore, and made us most to doubt our safety. But within two
days passage of Candia, as we came toward Ciprus (which I had almost
omitted) there is also a Greekish Isle (whose name (I am ashamed therefore) I
have quite forgotten) whereupon we touched and watered, which is some half mile
over, having one religious house therein and alone, with about some twenty
Greek friggets inhabiting the same, which is (as we thought) an other Eden;
and the most pleasant place that ever our eyes beheld, for the exercise of a
solitary and contemplative life: for it is furnished with the foizen of all
Gods good blessings. All kind of fruits (as apples, pears, plumbes, orenges,
lemmonds, pomegranates, and the like) in great abundance grows there: with
most pleasant gardens, replenished with all manner of odoriferous flowers, and
wholesome herbs for sallets, or medicines: wherein breaks forth many fresh
and cristall clear Springs of water: having therewithal, cattle* (as beeues
and muttons there naturally bred) more than sufficient to serve that house. In
our trauelles many times, falling into dangers, and unpleasant places, this
only Island would be the place where we would wish our selves to end our
lives. They have also this help, that if they did want aught, shipping
continually passing by that way, would soon supply it.

From Ciprus (as from a place we had small reason to take pleasure in, our
entertainment was so unpleasant) we hired a very small boat of some ten
tun (there being none other to hire) to transporte us unto the Holy Land, the
which was but four and twenty hours sailing. But the Turks (our Taxers)
told us, that there lay Galleys fraught with Thieves that robbed all that
passed that way: notwithstanding, we hoised up sail, and put our selves to Sea
thitherward, abandoning our selves to all the rouing adventures of Fortune,
being accompanied with an other boat which held her direct course whither we
were bound, which was taken (as afterward appeered) and her men drowned. But,
as God would have it, (to whom, as well for that, as all our other many many
preseruations, beyond all probability and expectation, we were infinitely
bound) our boat, by the way, being taken by an indirect wind, to that our
direct course, we thereby fell down upon Tripoly. Who being guided by an
omnipotent and neuer-failing Pilote, we passed out of the sea into that famous
river Orontes; along the which we held our course up into the country, the
Ianizaries or soldiers thereof flocking about us, threatening, that if they
might not have what they demanded, they would cul out such of our company as
best pleased them to serve their zodomiticall appetites, and most vile and
villainous purposes.

This while we sent to Antioch, not three days journey off, for certain
Ianizaries, to safeconduct us thither, which Ianizaries were of our
Interpreters acquaintance, who being come, the other left us immediately, and
so we passed to Antioch, conducted by the Ianizaries which we sent for thither,
where we remained six or seven days, for the company of certain Merchants
that were bound to Aleppo, being six days journey from Antioch, between which
Cities, in the way, were from time to time, diverse robberies committed by some
two hundred Arabs, until that instant that we were at Antioch, where we
heard, that the Ianizaries of Aleppo issued out against these robbers, part of
whom they killed, and the rest put to flight, by means whereof, our passage
was cleared to Aleppo, whither we were bound, and where we were right well
entertained, by the English Consulles, and the rest of the English merchants.
There we remained about some six weeks at the English houses, and feasted
(for the most part) while we there continued. And being examined by the
Bashaw of that place, touching our intendement, sir Anthony answered, that we
were Merchants, desirous to trade to the utmost confines of his countries;
which was granted by the Bashaw, with his Pass, together with the English
Consulls and vice-consulls.

Leaving here awhile to prosecute our journey, I will speak somewhat of the
fashion and disposition of the people and country; whose behauiours in point of
civility (besides that they are damned Infidells, and Zodomiticall Mahomets)
do answer the hate we christians do justly hold them in. For they are beyond
all measure a most insolent superbous and insulting people, ever more pressed to
offer outrage to any christian, if he be not well guarded with a Ianizarie, or
Ianizaries. They sit at their meat (which is served to them upon the ground) as
Tailers sit upon their stalls, crosse-legd: for the most part, passing the day
in banqueting and carowsing, until they surfeit, drinking a certain liquor
which they do call Coffe, which is made of a sede much like mustard seed,
which will soon intoxicate the brain, like our Metheglin. They will not
permit any christian to come within their churches, for they hold their
profane and irreligious Sanctuaries defiled thereby. They have no use of
Belles, but some priest three times in the day, mounts the top of their
church, and there, with an exalted voice cries out, and inuocates Mahomet to
come in post, for they have long expected his second coming. And if within
this six years (as they say) he come not (being the utmost time of his
appointment and promise made in that behalf) they have no hope of his coming.
But they fear (according to a prophecy they have) the Christians at the end
thereof shall subdue them all, and convert them to christianity. They have wives
in number according to their wealth, two, three, four, or upwards, according
as they are in ability turnished to maintain them. Their women are (for the
most part) very fair, barbed every where; and death it is for any christian
carnally to know them; which, were they willing to do, hardly could they
attain it, because they are closely chambred up, unless it be at such time as
they go to their Bastoues, or to the Graves, to bewail their dead (as their
manner is) which once a week usually they do, and then shall no part of them
be discovered neither, but only their eyes, except it be by a great chance.
The country abounds with great store of all kinds of fruit, whereupon (for
the most part) they live, their cheifest meat being Rice. Their flesh is
Mutton and Hens; which Muttons have huge broad fat tails. This meat most
commonly they have but once in the day, all the rest, they eat fruit as
aforesaid. They eat very little beef, unless it be the poorest sort. Camels
for their carriage they have in great abundance; but when both them and their
horses are past the best, and unfit for carriage, the poorest of their people
eat them.

They have one thing most usual among them, which though it be right well known
to all of our Nation that know Turkey, yet it exceeds the credit of our
homebred countriemen, for relating whereof (perhaps) I may be held a liar,
having authority so to do (as they say and think) because I am a traveler.
But the truth thereof (being known to al our Englishmen that trade or travel
into those parts) is a warrant omnisufficient for the report, how repugnant
soever it be to the belief of our English multitude.

And this it is, when they desire to hear news, or intelligence out of any
remote parts of their country with all celeritie (as we say, upon the wings of
the wind) they have pigeons that are so taught and brought to the hand, that
they will fly with Letters (fastened with a string about their bodies under
their wings) containing all the intelligence of occurrents, or what else is to
be expected from those parts: from whence, if they should send by camells
(for so otherwise they must) they should not hear in a quarter of a year, for
so long would they be in continual travel. As for example; when any
merchandise are to come out of the east Indies, to Mecha, or elsewhere of like
distaunce, pigeons are carried from Mecha or Aleppo before hand, which is a
quarter of a years passage, then they tie (as before is mentioned) the said
letters about the pigeons, acquainting thereby their factors what commodities
they have, and what are like to prove most vendible: by means whereof (whiles
their camels are three noneths in coming) they know what merchandise is fit to
be kept, and what to do away.

Now to return where I left, and so to go forward with our journey: we
passed from Aleppo through the heart of the Turks country, the strength
whereof is very small, whereof the christian Princes are ignorant, (as it
seems) for if they knew it, as we do, that with all circumspection observed it;
doubtless, they would with no great difficulty utterly suppress him, or so
extremely distress him, that they would constrain him to embrace the
christian faith, and rest at their devotion, or at least remove his seat from
the holy land, and parts adjacent. And to give the Reader a taste how probable
this is, (lest I should be held, as one that knows not whereof he does
affirm) there is (as it is there commonly reported, and as commonly known) in
all Palestine and Syria, but one thousand and five hundred Ianizaries that
guardes those cities of Aleppo, Damascus, Antioch, and Jerusalem. As for
Grand-cagro, they are not able to stir for diverse Arabs that lie in the hills
betwixt Jerusalem and it: between whom and those Turks of Grandcagro there
is deadly feud, as the Scot speaks. As for Babylon and Balsera, they have
likewise continual wars with those Arabs of Arabia Felix. Besides, there are a
great number of christians borne and bred in those parts, which would most
willingly be assisting for their liberty.

From Aleppo we set forwards in the midst of August, accompanied with our
English merchants three day^^ ^^^uit wit, until we came to a Town called
Beerah, or Birrah by which runs the most famous river of Euphrates, parting
Mesopotamia and Syria; where we rested six or seven days, whilst boats
were preparing for us, and other Turkish merchants: that being done, we parted
from our merchants, and betook our selves to the said river of Euphrates, on
the which we were somo three and twenty days passing down the same. In which
time we came by a castle called Racca, where we were to take in fresh meat,
and men to row. But lo, there it happened, that a Turk being in one of the
boats in our company, discharged his piece toward the shore at randon, where
he most unhappily slew a Turk of the town, (the bullet entering his brain:) by
reason whereof, our boat, as well as the rest, was stayed, and we constrained
to make satisfaction for the man's death: which cost sir Anthony for his company
some hundred crowns. Which being paid, and we discharged, we held on our
course from thence some two or three days passage, where we were eftsoons
stayed by the King of the Arrabs there living upon the rivers side in Tents:
before whom we were brought, whose hands we kiss: and demanding what we
were, and what business we had in those parts, we replied, we were
Englishmen, and Merchants by our trades, coming for traffike into those parts
of the world. Whereupon this good king told us that he must needs see our
merchandise, which we (God wot) durst not contradict: and so he borrowed
(without a privy Seal, or bill of his hand) some thirty yardes of cloth of
silver, until our return. That being done, we had license to depart to our
boat. In whose camp we saw nothing but a multitude of cammelles, mules,
asses, horses, sheep, and goats: from whence we passed to another town
called Anna.

From thence, to a town called Dire, by which there is a lake or poole of very
pitch, which in their language they call, the mouth of Hell. It swelles in the
midst thereof to the bigness of an hogshead, and so breaks with a great
puff, falling flat, and thus continually it works: whereof there is no
bottom to be found, albeit it often has been tried by all means. There was
nothing else worth the noting, until we came where we were to pass by land
again. So we sent for cammels and horses to Babylon (being two days iorny
from us) to carry us thither. Where being no sooner come, for our welcome, we
had all our merchandise arrested, for the use of the Bashaw of that place, to
be paid therefore, at his price and pleasure: howbeit we had license to
provide our selves an house, and he dealt better with us then we expected;
for he gave us, by estimation, half the worth of our goods, which was good
pay, from so ill a debtor. Yet he extorted from sir Anthony a great deal of
plate made of pure emerald, which he purposed to bestow on the Persian king,
by us called, the Sophy. Howbeit we prevented him, for the one half of our
goods, which was carried into the town in another Turks name that came with
us, for which favor, we gave him (by agreement) forty crowns. At Babylon
(being thus entertained) we remained a month, or more, in which time a
Dutchman, being one of our company, had like to have preferred us all to the
heads-mans handling. For, being one day drunk (according to his wont) and
withal, bearing a grudge to some of our company) went in that mood to some of
the chief Officers of the Turks in Babylon, made signs to them that he had
some matter of importance to deliver to the Bashaw, touching sir Anthony.
Which Officers sent for an Armenian a christian, that was then in town, who
had used sir Anthony exceeding well, and was beloved no less of these Officers,
to whom they showed the signs this Dutchman had made. He forthwith
answered, that he was a drunken companion, and that sir Anthony had often
beaten him for his immoderate bowzing, and continual drunkenness, which was
(as he said in our excuse) the only cause he thus played his part. And
withal, desired them to suffer their Ianizaries to beat him well, and to send
him so beaten to his master. Which was done (by their command) accordingly.
Whereupon sir Anthony was constraind to chamber him up close, until we were
past danger: leaving money with him to carry him back to Aleppo.

During the time we stayed in Babylon, we had all kind of foul, flesh, and
fish, with great store of venison very cheap.

The old tower of Babel is three days journey from this place, which by
common and just report of the inhabitants of this City, is about the height
of Paul's, at this time, as they by towers of the like height, in our
estimation described it. It is not hollow, but sollide thorowout; the base, or
foot whereof, is about a quarter of a mile in compass. It consistes of
Brickes baked in the Sun, of great breadth and thickenesse, interlined with
canes pleated like mattes, which remain much less perished then the Brickes.

The tower which is called Nabuchadnezers Tower, stands hard by new Babylon,
which is fashioned much like the other (as it is said) but not so high as that
we saw, by which does run the famous river Tigris, taking his course through
the City, and so along by this tower.

Thus, having spent a month, and somewhat more, in new Babylon, in great fear
and perplexity, by reason of the drunken Dutchmans signs and tokens (as
before is mentioned) staying the most of that time for a Carauan of the
Persians, and a great company of Merchants, we received Letters from Aleppo,
by which we were wished to make all possible speed from Babylon, for that we
were discovered there; signifying thus much further unto us, that there were
letters from thence in all post addressed to stay us. A Carauan is a great many
of Camels laden and men in a company, not much unlike our Car^iers (many in a
company) here in England.
By chance this Carauan of Persians were gone but one day before we received
these Letters, and had they bin gone four days before, we would soon have
overtaken them, in regard of their heavy lading. But after the receipt of these
Letters, it was but like the spurring of the most free horse to hasten us after
them, for without taking leave, we stole slily away, and were soon with them:
who would not go the direct way whither we were bound, but passed through the
Medes country, which was five or six days journey out of the way on
pilgrimage, unto a certain Sanctorie, a prophet of theirs; whom we were
moved to accompany, more for fear, than for any devotion. In which country,
as we passed, we saw (that which was ruth to see) the confused ruins of
marvelous great towns, which had (as it should seem) flourished when the
Medes triumphed, and their commonwealth prospered. This pilgrimage ended, we
went on from thence directly the course we had determined: demanding of the
Persians, whether we had any more of the Turkish Governors to pass, who
answered, they had one (and that very mighty) called Cobat-bag, by whom we
must of necessity pass. At which answer it had bin an easy matter to have
found a company of poor hearts near their masters mouths; for to us
remained no hope, but that we should have bin inter^^^ted there. Yet, as God,
and good for tune would, some of them (better bethinking themselves) remembered
another way, through one Heyder-bags country; who was neighbor to the other,
howbeit at continual wars with him, in regard whereof we had good hope he would
aid us. So entering the first night into this Heyder-bags country or
jurisdiction, the other hearing thereof; sent unto our company, that if we
would not return and come by him, he would in the morning with his troops
cut us into gobbets. Then were we in worse plight than at any time before:
notwithstanding we resolving to sell our bloods as dear as we could (since
avoid that extreamitie we could not) we there upon sooke heart of grace,
and about midnight we arose with bag and baggage, and so held on our course
through Heyder-bags country. When in the break of the day we might descry a
troop of horses coming toward us, which we verily imagined to be the
ennemy: but we were luckily deceived, for it was he that governed that
Country, who came to our succors, and safely to conuoy us through the same,
having had some intelligence before of our progress that way.

Which having passed in safety, through his gentle assistance and conduction,
we were indifferent well at hearts ease; albeit we had six days journey to
pass (ere we should enter the confines of Persia) through the Courdes country,
which is by interpretation the sheeus country. The people whereof are
altogether addicted to theeuing, not much unlike the wild Irish, so that as we
passed through them, every night we did encampe, they slily stale more or
less from us, watched we never so warily: else would they do but little
hurt. This people do live altogether in Tents, keeping of Cattle.

Having passed this pilfering people, we then happily entered the king of
Persiaes country, where upon our first entrance we thought we had bin
imparadized, finding our entertainment to be so good, and the manner of the
people to be so kind and courteous (far differing from the Turks) especially
when they heard we came of purpose to their king. We passed from the bordures
nine days journey, ere we came to Casbin, where we expected the residence of
the king: during all which time we passed by no great Towns worth the noting,
until we came thither, having sent a Currier before, to signify what we were,
to the Governor of the City, lest, by our sudden approach, our welcome should
have bin the less, and his marvel the more. Who thereupon prepared for us, a
house of the kings, furnished with such ornaments as befitted a great State. We
came into the city by night, for that we would not be first seen in our
traveling apparel. Howbeit the Governor the next morning, together with the
chief of the kings house, came with a great train, to salute sir Anthony,
assuring him that his coming would be right pleasing and acceptable to the
king: but signified unto him, that he then was, in person, against the
Tartares, his bordurers, with whom he had wars) to whom, at that time, he
had, in a pitched field, given a mighty overthrow. And thereupon dismissed a
post to the king, signifying unto him, that there was come, a christian (right
well attended) to see him, by reason of the great fame he had heard of him.
Which when by the post he understood, he made as much expedition as possibly
he could (with respect had to his great affairs) to come to sir Anthony.
There we remained some three weeks before he came.

In which time we were banquetted, and right royally entreated, by the
Governor and the kings Steward, who brought us to the kings gate, to offer
that homage that all strangers do, that is, to kiss the entrance of his
Palace three times. Against the kings coming, we apparrelled our selves in
the best manner we could, with such stuff as we brought with us, that is to
say, sir Anthony himself in cloth of gold, the upper coat and under. His
brother, in cloth of silver, the upper and under. Six Gentlemen, their lower
coats silk, the upper, cloth of silver. Four of his chiefest servants, in
silk vnder-coates, the upper, crimsin velvet. The rest of his servants, in a
pretty kind of bombaste stuff, all the upper coats, watchet damask; our
whole number being six and twenty, which made a very seemly show, the fashion
of our apparel somewhat differing from the Persian.

Now by this time that we were thoroughly thus furnished and fitted, the king
approached within five miles where he encamped: from whence he sent to his
Governor, commanding him to furnish our company the next day with horses, to
the end we might come forth to meet him on the way, which was performed an
either part accordingly. He coming in great triumph, having borne before him,
advanced upon pikes, one thousand and two hundred heads of the conquered
Tartares; whose king, and his son, he led along in triumph, having taken
them prisoners: which triumph was continually more and more graced and
augmented, by the country as he passed, each one indeuouring (according to his
power) to give him welcome from the wars. Himself being accompanied with all
his nobles and great men in diverse troops, that we could not see any thing
all the way, but men and horses, with such thundering of trumpets, kettle
drums (carried upon camells) and such like instruments of war, that a man
would have thought, heaven and earth were tilting together. Their trumpets
being all straight, some two yards and an half in length, having such a deep,
harsh, and horrible voice, that it would amaze a man to hear them, if he never
heard them before. At length we were brought into the presence of the King, as
he thus passed in triumph: we all dismounting our horses to kiss his foot
(as the manner is) sir Anthony first, who offering to perform that complement,
the king, out of special and unusual favor, put his hand between his mouth
and his foot, and would not permit him to do it, so all the rest in order
kissed his foot: which being done, the king called sir Anthony unto him,
told him that he was right heartily welcome to him, and to his country, which
ere his departure he said he should find indeed. Who suffering not sir
Anthony to reply, caused his horse to be brought, and so we rode on next to the
king. Where, in a while after, we might see a great troop of curtezans of the
city come riding richly apparelled, to salute the king, and to welcome him
from his wars. Their apparel little differing in fashion from the men's, but
only in their head attire and upper coats. They wear breeches, and ride
astride as men do, and came with such a cry as the wild Irish make. The
multitude of people were so great (consisting of Actors and Spectators) that we
has much ado in six hours to pass three miles, which was from the place
where we met the king, to the market place of the City. Unto which at length
being come, the king brought us to the door of the house where we should
alight, situate in the same, commanding one of his great men to place us
therein, whilst himself rid about some hour or two to see the shows and
matters of triumph performed. Which being done, he returned to sir Anthony,
where being set upon the ground, with carpets under him, according to the
custom of the country, commanding stools to be brought for sir Anthony and
his brother: there sir Anthony made his Oration: which being ends, the king
discoursed with him of his trauelles, of his native country, the manner of
government there, and of diverse other things that accidentally became then
subject to their discourse: the particularities whereof sir Anthony answered,
to the kings high contentment: and further, possessed the king with such a
burning desire to invade the Turks dominions (by reason his strength was so
small, as before is mentioned, and then at large sir Anthony unfolded) that he
would on the very neck of that his late victory, before his blood was cold
(as it were) have entered into action against the Turk, to the which sir
Anthony ceased not to animate him, for a double grudge he bare him, to wit,
for being such a mortal ennemy to Christ, and for using them so like mortal
ennemies, being christians: howbeit, that expedition was, for a time, deferred,
yet nevertheless fully resolved on. These, and the like, made the King
instantly to conceive so exceeding well, and grew more and more into such
liking of sir Anthony, that once a day at the least, he would send for him to
confer, and complement with him: yea sometimes he must be sent for to come
to his bedchamber at midnight (accompanied with his brother) for that purpose.

The king continued in that town about some thirty days, where many nights
the people entertained him with spectacles and shows in their Basars, which we
do call shoppes, all covered over head, as the Royal Exchange. At which
always we must meet the king. Their manner is to make the greatest show of
those wares they have, in four long streets, in the midst whereof is a
round kind of stage, covered with costly carpets, whereon is laid all kind
of fruits, confections, and wine for the king to banquet withal.

After that he has seen all the shows, toward night, they set up as many
lights as possible can stand one by another, consisting all of lamps; so that,
by estimation, there burns at once in those four streets a hundred thousand
lamps, so close upon, and round about their stalls upon the ground, that a man
can hardly put his hand between each lamp. After which sights, he goes to
that place appointed for the banquet, where banqueting till midnight, being
solaced all the while with all kinds of music, of Instruments, and voice,
with boys and Curtezans, dancing strange kinds of Iigges and Lauoltaes:
without which Curtezans, no banquet, be it never so costly has any relish
with them. Howbeit no man's wife comes thereat; neither is it possible (or if it
be, very rarely) for a man once to see a woman if she be once married, and her
husband living, no, though it be her own natural brother. So iclous are
husbands of their wives loves and chastities, and such cause of suspicion is
there amongst them in that respect. There is a custom in that country, that if
the King purpose to make any man great, by enoblizing him, he has a very rich
chair set with stones carried after him, wherein he places that man at his
banquet in public assembly. This chair was brought for sir Anthony to sit in,
and he by the King placed therein accordingly. Which made the people much to
admire that accident, in that he vouchsafed that high favor to a stranger,
without desert, or experience of his worth: whereas accustomably he would have
great proof of a man's worthiness, before he would so vouchsafe to dignifie
him. Instantly as he caused sir Anthony to sit, he gave him his own girdle
from about him for a further favor: which was all of some golden stuff, very
curious and costly, three yards long, and an ell broad.

Three days after he sent a Present to sir Anthony being a certain
demonstration of the great estimation he had him in. Which was, forty horses
furnished with saddles etc. four of which were very rich and fair, fit for
the proper use of any Prince, twelve camels for carriage, together with fix
mules, four and twenty carpets, most of them rich and fair, three Tents or
Pauilions, with all other necessaries of house; last of al, six men laden with
silver. The steward that brought it, told sir Anthony that the King had sent
him that, to defray his charges till the next remove, which was ten days off.
I need not speak more of the Kings bounty, let the world, by this, imagine
the rest, and how he entreated Sir Anthony.

And albeit the fashion and mauer of the Persians is not unknown to many of
our English nation, as having, by their own trauells, attained that knowledge:
or by reading, or credible report bin informed thereof: Yet somewhat to speak
touching the same, I hold it not altogether amiss, for the better information
of those (my countrymen) that do not so well know it. For their sitting at
meat on the ground, with their manner of food and feeding, it is much after
the Turkish guise. Their devotion as the Turks, but somewhat different in
religion. As the Persian prays only to Mahomet, and Mortus Ally, the Turk to
those two, and to three other that were Mahomets servants. Against which three,
the Persian still inueighs, and has in all towns, men that carry axes on their
shoulders, challenging them to rise again, and they are there pressed to
encounter them by force of arms.

They use much exercise, as hawking and hunting, with very much shooting. Their
hawks are excellent good, which they bear on their right hand, without hood
or bell.

The merchandise and commodities which Persia yields, are silks, both raw,
and otherwise, of all suits and colors. Spices, drugges, pearls, and other
precious Iems: together with carpets of diverse kinds. These, with many other
commodities of this nature, Persia plentifully affoordeth.

They write from the right side of the paper to the left like the Turks,
contrary to our manner. Their Letters or Characters being so irregular, and (as
we would think) deformed, that to us it seems the writing of some utterly
unskillful in letters or learning, or as a wild kind of scribbling, that has
therein neither form nor matter: howbeit they affirm their writing is most
compendious, and every letter (well near) with his circumfler imports a
whole word, though consisting of many sillables.

They have not many Books, much less great Libraries amongst their best
Clerks. They are no learned nation, but ignorant in all kind of liberal or
learned Sciences, and almost of all other Arts and Faculties, except it be in
certain things pertaining to horses furniture, and some kinds of carpettings
and silk works, wherein they excel.

They have neither gold nor silver from any mines of their own, for they have
none: howbeit they have money made of both kinds, in great plenty, together
with some small coin made of copper, like our Bristow tokens.

Their conceit of Christ is, that he was a very great Prophet, and a most holy
and religious man, but no way comparable to Mahomet: for Mahomet (say they) was
that final prophet, by whom all things were, and are to be perfected and
consummated. They further say, that because God had never wife, therefore
Christ cannot possibly be his son.

If any man conspire treason against the king, or otherwise capitally offend
him, he is punished, not only in his own person, but in his whole Tribe.

If they affirm any matter with an oath, they swear by God and Mahomet, or
Mortus Ally: and when they would be believed, they swear by all three at once.

They circumcise their children at seven years old, according to the custom
of their neighbor the Turks.

In making water, the men kowre down like the women, and when they do it,
they have a spowte or springer, to spirt some part of their water upon their
privy parts, as well men as women, which they hold as a kind of religious
duty, and which in no sort must be neglected.

They buy and sell men and women in the market, which is a principal
merchandise of theirs among them selves. If they buy any young women there,
they feel them every where. If a man buy a bondwoman for his own carnalitie,
and she prove false to him, he may (by their law) kill her, as he may a dog
in England.

In praying, they turn their faces toward the South, as we do toward the
East, because Mecha where Mahomet is encoffined in iron (which by force of a
Temples roof, consisting of Adamant, hangs, as it were, by way of miracle in
the air) lies in Arabia, which is South from them. To which, whosoever shall
go on pilgrimage (as many of them do) they are ever held for most holy and
sacred Saints, which they call Setes, and not only themselves are so reputed,
but the posterity of that man are so accounted, and of themselves are so
persuaded. For if one shall in any thing contradict them, either in saying or
in doing, they will overrule him, and exact credit and belief with all
obedience, by saying he is a Saint at least, and therefore, on pain of
damnation, must be believed, and highly esteemed although he lie never so
loudely, and do never so lewdly.

Their buildings are (for the most part) made of brick, hardened in the sand,
not made with fire, as durs are: wherein they have very little furniture other
then carpets upon their floores; and such the poorest man has, but the goodness
thereof is according to the ability of the owners: their houses are all made
with flat roofes without, covered with a kind of plaster, or earth spread
plaisterwise.

Near unto a town called Backo in Persia, there issues out of the earth in
the manner of a water-spring, a certain kind of oil, in great abundance,
which they (from all parts of the Persian dominions) do fetch upon Camels,
Kine, and Asses, to burn in lamps, which are the lights they use in their
houses.

The people are now very courteous, using all strangers with great kindness and
civility, especially since this King has governed. Howbeit (by report) they
have been heretofore little better (in that respect) then the Turks.

The names of the parts of Persia, that in times past were distinct kingdoms,
are Casuin, Hasphane, Seraze, Knghgollo, Suster, Curdistan, Hammadan, Kirman,
upon Corrozan. These this King had when he came first to the crown; these
following he took and wan since. Tuntabas, Coffe, Corrazon, Buchora, Vrgans,
Taskane, Strabat, the kingdoms of Mascendran, Marcu, Rustendar, Nure-cugge. The
kingdoms of Ieglands; the first Iegland, Reast, Saughtoser, Caskeger, Tawlis,
Aderbegsan, being a great kingdom.

These towns following were lost by his Predecessors to the Turk. viz.
Tawris, Seruan, Samachy, Iange, Berthe, with many others; which the Persian
does now hope to recover; being far better able then in times past, for that
he has drawn all the forementioned towns and parts into his possession:
which, when his Predecessors would invade the Turk before, these would impeach
and mollest them behind: so that now he stands secure from all invasion of the
borderers, whereby he is able to carry all his force clear, without
interruption against the Turk, which at the least will be four hundred
thousand strong. Upon which undertaking he is (as before was mentioned) fully
resolved: but first by sir Anthonies advice, he is determined to join in
league, amity, and confederacy with the Christian princes, by means whereof,
he may the sooner prevail in his purpose, and thereby utterly suppress the
Turk. Howbeit his councellers were all obstinately bent against these
determinations and proceedings at the first, yet the king with his general,
who is a Georgian Christian (still animated and provoked thereunto by sir
Anthonies forcible persuasions) were resolute and confident in the cause, and
being so irremouable, at last prevailed, and all the rest absolutely assented.
And by that mutual consent of the king and his counsel, no man was thought so
sit to be employed in Embassy to the christian princes (to the purpose above
recited) as sir Anthony being a Christian, and the first mouer of the king to
these undertakings, appointing a great man of the Persians to accompany him in
those businesses, but the whole burden thereof to lie only upon sir Anthony,
who undertook the same accordinglyly.

Which being concluded, and thus undertaken, we were ready to depart from
the Kings court, lying then at Hasphane, when suddenly there came news of a
Portingall friar, that was coming thither, accompanied with two other friars,
and four servants: this friar stayed some three miles off the town, and sent
the other two with letters to sir Anthony; whereby he signified unto him that
he was the last King of Portingales brother, and that he was sent by the King
of Spain as Procurator general of all the East Indies. Sir Anthony believing
it, went himself, accompanied with as many christians as he could get, to the
Frigot. And after mutual greetings, he told sir Anthony, that hearing of his
great and weighty businesses, and so godly a work (he being a great bishop
of the king of Spaines) came posting night and day to assist him therein. Which
sir Anthony was right glad of, and to manifest the same the better, he brought
him along to his own house, and there dislodged his brother to lodge him.

This being done, he told sir Anthony, that he greatly desired to see the
King, for that he had a present to bestow on him, which sir Anthony soon
procured. But now, by the way, this present was delivered him in trust, to be
delivered to the king, howbeit he presented it in his own name, in requital
whereof the King gave him a Crucifixe worth (by estimation) a hundred pounds
and better: which villainy, and many others, sir Anthony afterward discovered,
though the mean while he held him for a holy man.

Ere we departed from the King, he would feign (by the Kings Commission) have
bin an Agent in the present action, wherein sir Anthony was principally
employed, and likely he was to have bin one, with universal consent, but that
the writings and all other things thereunto incident were before perfected and
finished. And seeing he could be no actor (as he defired) by reason thereof,
he entreated sir Anthony to procure the Kings favorable letters, in his
behalf, to the Pope, and the King of Spain; which sir Anthony did
accordingly. In requital whereof, he began (underhand) to deal with those
of the Kings council, which had bin backewards in the beginning of these
businesses, who assured them, that sir Anthony was not able to perform so
great a negotiation. Which sir Anthony perceiving, he made all the haste he
possibly could to be gone, the rather, because he had waded somewhat too far
with this execrable friar, who the first night he lodged in sir Anthonies
house, found the means to have a Persian curtezan to lie with him, and so had
night by night during his continuannce there; which if he wanted, he would
hyre a boy zodomitically to use. And that he was a zodomiticall wretch, it
does appear hereby: sir Anthony at his first coming, bought two christian
boys in the market, which afterward he bestowed on this Friar, whose name
was Nicolao deMelo. He no sooner had them, but he was in hand with them
concerning his zodomiticall villainy. The boys finding whereto he was inclined
(being incessauntly importuned by him, to yield to his beastly desire,
complained to him that sold them, he likewise to the Officer, the Officer to
the King, by means whereof the King espied his villainy. Whereupon the king
sent for the boys from him, and sent him word, that were it not for sir
Anthonies sake, he should loose his head.

Soon after we departed, taking the Friar and one of his fellows with us,
having eighteen days journey from the Persian Court to Iegland, where we
were embarked to cross the Caspian sea. In which time, the friar confessed he
was but an ordinary Augustine friar, and in a gamesome vain he further
confessed how he would bring men's wives, after he had shriuen them, to his
bent, as taking advantage of their confessed faults: and to close up this,
and such like good talk in the day, we should be sure to take him with a
whore at night. And I will tell you a jest concerning him, which I had
almost forgotten.

One day, at Casbin he sent his man to a whore, feeing her with two Chickins,
(which is two rialles) to come unto him at night, taking upon him the name of
the Ambassador. The kind wench being true of promise, came unto sir Anthony,
who demanding the cause of her coming, she told him all, etc. So the wench
went away gratis with the money, the friar not daring to demand it.

Thus having merrily passed the time with this sorry Friar, and being come to
the place where we should be embarked, we stayed there one month for the
Persian Peer, that was to go along with us, as before is mentioned.

Upon whose coming, we presently embarked our selves for Haster-caune, which
is the first landing place of the Emperor of Rusciaes country to Persia ward.

Upon the Caspian sea (which we were to cross) we were two months before
we landed: which time we endured with much pain, and no less fear, having
(besides the natural roughness of the sea) very much foul and stormy
weather: by reason whereof we had been like to have suffered shippewracke,
which twice struck on ground, so that we were constrained to disburden the
same of a great part of our substance. Howbeit in the end God so blessed us,
that in two months we came to our wished harborow. Where being arrived, the
Governor having intelligence of our landing, sent a Captain with a guarde to
receive us, and to conduct us to the castle of Haster-caune, where was landed
but the day before, an Ambassador that the King of Persia had sent a month
before, only to make our passage through the Emperor of Ruscia his country.

From which castle to Musco town we were, by river, and by land, ten weeks
passing. All which time sir Anthony and his company, with the other
Ambassadors, and their attendants, were all at the charge of the Ruscian
Emperor (for so is the custom of that Country, to all Travelers of that
nature, as long as they are passing through his dominions) who eats such meat
as is brought before them gratis, having withal, a guarde set over them, so
that they are little better then prisoners, as long as they are within the
limits of his territories.

From Haster-caune we pasit by bote along the mighty River of Volgo, until we
canie to a town named Negson, which was seven weeks passage. In which time,
we saw nothing worthy the noting, but three or four wooden Eastles or
Blocke-houses to guarde that River, which River does bring marvelous great
commodities to the Emperor, and to the whole country.

Diverse Tartars passing from place to place about that River, living in little
houses made upon wheels, and are carried too and fro, having abundance of
cattle, live so in subjection to the Emperor, paying him tribute, etc.

One only fair City we saw all that while called Gassane, wherein we were:
from whence we passed to Negson a or said, where, by the way, fell out a tar
between sir Anthony and the other Ambassador, because sir Anthony presumed to
reprehend him for diverse misdemeanors which he committed, to the dishonor of
his king and country: Insomuch, that had we not had guarde in our company,
one of us had killed another. Leaving here a while, I will turn again to the
Friar, who was by this time grown into mortal hatred with his fellow Friar,
of whom before I spoke, whose name was Alfonso, a Friar of the order of Saint
Francis. Which Friar had acquainted sir Anthony, that Friar Nicolao had spent
his life most lewdly in the Indiaes, the particularities whereof he at large
related.

Morcouer, he told him, that by reason of his licentious life, the king of
Spain had sent for him, because he did much more hurt than good in those
parts, but never would come until now that he was going thitherward.

He also told sir Anthony, that that present which he delivered the king of
Persia in his own name, was sent by a friend of the kings from Ormous, by
another, who had withal, a letter to the king. Which bearer, (being of his
acquaintance) he inueigled and enticed, by the gift of fifty Crowns, and
sayre words, to deliver him the present, together with the Letter to carry to
the king, who finally prevailed with him. And when he came to Persia, he
suppressed the letter, but delivered the present in his own name, as before
is declared.

Upon discovery of which villainies, sir Anthony took him prisoner, and
earried him along with him, as one deprived of former liberty.

And being come to Negson, we stayed there near hand a month. Toward the
end whereof the Emperor sent a great man of his Court thither, for to
accompany and conduct us to Musco, who gave the pre-eminence to the Persian
Ambassador, in that he was Ambassador to the Emperor from the Persian, and
sir Anthony but a passenger through his country, as he esteemed him, and so
did use at his pleasure, to fir Anthonies small contentment, until we came to
Musco, where we were entertained in the best forte they could, with a crew of
aqua vitae-bellyed fellows, clad in coats of cloth of gold: which show being
ended, for the first encounter those coats were put up again into the
Treasury or Wardrobe, and we shut up in prison for ten days, yea all
access of others to us, or we to them was thereby utterly harred. In which
time we sent to entreat, that either our English merchants might be permitted
to come toovs, or that we might go or send to them for necessaries, because
we were not fitted with clothes, (as we thought) convenient for the Emperors
presence.

Where upon the Lord Chauncellor sent for the merchants, enquyring of them what
sir Anthony was, and whether they durst give him any credit. To whom they
replied, that he was nobly descended, and alied even to the best men of
England: yea, and that they would give him credit for as much as they were
worth.

Here upon they had liberty to send us such necessaries as we sent for, but
no liberty to come to us, much less we to them.

The tenth day we were sent for to come before the Emperor after their order,
which was, to lay down in a note, how every man should be marshalled in
coming (being all on horseback) wherein the Persian Ambassador was
appointed by the Emperor to have the first and chief place, the next, that
Persian that was sent but to accompany sir Anthony, and the last of the three
should be sir Anthony hymsefie.

Which when sir Anthony perceived, he utterly refused to go in that order,
because that he, to whose trust and charge the whole business had been
cemmitted, and by whom the same was solely procured: by which Persia likewise
should be infinitely benefited (specially he being a christian, and they
Pagans) should be put hindermost in the march, that was the foremost in the
matter.

By the means of which refusal, he purchased the Emperors displeasure: and
to manifest the same, first he took the Friar from sir Anthony, and gave him
his liberty to go whither he thought good. Next, he daily sent his great
Dukes to examine sir Anthony upon diverse frivolous particularities, to prove,
if they thereby might groape out some matter of advantage against him.

Thus daily he was extremely vexed and molested by the Emperor, the Persian
Ambassador, withal, setting on the Friar underhand, to devise all the
villainy he could against him, as to say, he knew sir Anthony to be but a man
of mean parentage, and also, that he was come but as a Spic through the
Country for purposes tending to his own good, and not of Persia and
Christendom, as he pretended. Whereupon they took all the kings Letters from
him, and opened them, to know the purport thereof.

Soon after sir Anthony and the Friar were brought before the Commissioners to
be further examined: where sir Anthony (being inflamed with choler, by reason
of his exceeding ill usage, notwithstanding the goodness of the cause of his
coming) demanded whether the Emperor did ever purpose to send any
Ambassadors to any other Countries? Protesting, that if ever he met with
them in any parts of the world, besides their own, he would endeavor to let
them know he was not half so well entreated in Ruscia, as the cause of his
coming of right deserved, and the Emperor, by the laws divine and civil
ought to have performed, and the rather, because he was a Christian, such as
he pretends himself to be, and came (as became a christian) for the general
good of al Christendom, the Persian being stirred up thereunto by his only
means. Whereupon the Friar in terms thwarted sir Anthony, whose blood already
boiled, with the excess of his chollers heat, which as then abounded. And
being by that graceless and ungrateful Friar further provoked, he (not able,
though instantly he should have died for it) to suppress his heat, gave the
fat Friar such a sound box on the face (his double cause of choler
redoubling his might, desire of revenge withal augmenting the same) that down
falls the Friar, as if he had been struck with a thunderbolt. Which being
done, (with that courage and high resolution which well appeered in his
looks, words, and deeds) they forthwith gave over examination, because they
had too far examined sir Anthonies patience, which well they with fear (as I
think) saw, and the Friar (almost past fear) did far better feel.
Whereupon they went instantly to the Emperor, and informed him of all that had
happened, and how sir Anthony was resolved. For which (as by the event it
appeered) he was used the better. For from thence forward we had liberty to go
to the Englishmen, of whom we were very honorably entertained, and royally
feasted. Howbeit we were constrained to remain there six months, expecting
every day (for all this) some mischief to be done unto us, or to be sent into
some part of his country to be kept, where we should not have heard from our
friends in haste, which we feared worse then death. Yet, in the end, we were
eftsoons sent for before the privy council, where sir Anthony had his charge
to be gone, which was no small joy to us all.

But the day before we left Muscouia, it was my fortune to see the King, and
his Queen, in cerimonious and triumphant manner passing out of the City, with
a great Image, and a huge Bell, to offer to a certain Friery some thirty miles
off, which was performed in this sort. First, all the morning diverse troops
of horse passed out of the City, to stand ready to receive him at his coming
out of the gate. About midday the King setting forwards, his guard foremost, all
on horseback, to the number of five hundred, all clad in stammel coats, riding
in rank, three and three, with bows, and arrows, and swords girt to them, as
also hatchets under the one thigh. After the guarde were led, by twenty men,
twenty goodly horses, with very rich and curious saddles, and ten more for his
son and heir apparent, being a child of twelve years of age. After which
was led, in like sort, twenty beutifull white horses, for the Queens
chariots, having only upon them a fine sheet, and on their heads a crimesin
velvet bridle. After them came a great number of Friars in their rich coapes,
singing, carrying many pictures and lights. After them followed the greatest
part of the merchants of the City. Next them was led the Kings horse, for
that day, together with his sons: the kings saddle and furniture most richly
besette with stones of great price and beauty. Then followed the Patriarch,
with all the Archbishoppes, Bishops, and great Prelates singing in their
coapes, very rich and glorious, having huge Images borne before them, being
very richly inlayed, with precious Iems of diverse colors, and lights about
them. Then followed the king himself, who had in his left hand his son above
mentioned, and in his right hand his cappe. Next him came the Queen, supported
on either side by two old Ladies, her face even thickely plaistered with
painting, as were the other Ladies (according to the custom of the Country)
her body very gross, her eyes hollow and far into her head, attended with
some three score very fair women (if painting (which they hold a matter
religious) deceived not the judgment of mine eye.) All whose apparel was very
rich, beset with pearl curiously wrought, having white hattes on their heads,
with great round bands laden with pearl. We never saw hattes worn by any
women in the Country, but by them only. Next unto them was drawn three huge
chariots, the first with ten fair white horses, two and two, the second with
eight, and the third with six in like order: which chariots were al very rich
and gorgeous within and without. After which, all the noble men passed in
coaches. Then was carried, in a great chest, the forenamed Image, guarded by a
great man and State of the Country, with some five hundred under his command,
for the guarde and conuoy of that Image. And last of all came that huge bell,
being of twenty tun weight, drawn by three thousand and five hundred men
(not being possible to be drawn by oxen or horses) in manner following. They
fastened six exceeding long hawsers, or mighty great gable ropes in six lengths
to the frame whereon the bell was placed. In this rank of ropes were placed
those three thousand and six hundred men, with little cords over their
shoulders, fastened to the great hawsers, drawing after the manner of our
Western barge-men here in England.

The poyse of the Bell was so g^^at, that passing along the streets of Musco
(being paued with great square pieces of timber set close one by another) the
woodde of the frame or carriage whereon the bell was drawn, set the timber of
the streets on fire, through both the woods chasing together, so that some were
feign to follow hard after, to throw on water, as the timbers began to
smoke. And thus was this bell and the Image eonueyed to the Friery, as has
before been said.

The next day following we took our journey (that is to say, in mid May)
toward Saint Nicolas to take shipping, which was some six weeks passage by
land and river. During all which time, we saw nothing, in a manner, but woods
and water. But being come to the sea side, being the place where we were to
take ship, we stayed there one month for provision for our journey.

In which time we were diverse times invited aboorde English ships, where we
were roially banquetted at the Agents charges and the merchants. To the
solemnization of which banquets we had three hundred hundred great shot. And as
we stayed there, one Master Megricke a merchant came from Musco, and brought
the Friars two letters with him, reporting that the Lord Chauncallor, in
satisfaction of the wrong and ill usage he extended to sir Anthony, sent after
the Friar to the borders, who took both his letters and all his substance that
he had deceitfully and lewdly gotten in many years before in the Indiaes from
him, leaving him not so much as his Friars weed: and whether he caused his
throat to be cut, it was uncertain, but not unlike.

Thus, as this lewd wretch had (as peradventure he thought) passed the pikes of
Gods judgments bent against him, and threatening his ruin, for his several
villainies, and that (as to him perhaps it seemed) he was now even entering
the confines of his own country, furnished with Letters in his commendation,
from the Persian mighty Potentate, to his liege lord the king of Spain,
whereby he thought to have attained (notwithstanding his former lewd life in
the Indies) great reputation and preferment, even then was he overtaken with a
vengeance, and paid home with a mischief, to the utter loss of his Letters,
wherein so much he ioyed, his substance that was all his liueloode, and (as it
is most likely) of his life, the lewdness whereof brought upon him these
unexpected (yet well deserved) miseries.

A good caveat for all those, that under God almighties coat, will play all
devilish prankes, whereof there are but too many (in these last days, and
therefore the worst days) crept into his holy church, in all quarters of
Christendom, making the same sacred house of pr^^er (which ought with all
prayer and holy endeavor to be preserved from all pollution and polluted
persons) a very den of thieves, as it is in the Gospel, that walk
continually in sheep clothing, but inwardely they are ravening Woolues: They
are known by their works.

From hence we took ship for Stoade, being six weeks upon the Sea, ere
we could recover it. In which time we were continually tossed and tumbled
with contrary Winds: and once had been like to have been utterly cast away,
so that we all were overwhelmed in despair, as we were at point to be in the
Sea, but that (by Gods protection and direction) we (past all expectation) fell
upon the Fly. Where, (having diverse Letters of sir Anthonies to his friends
in England) I parted from hin (he holding his course toward the Emperor of
Germany:) from thence I came to the Tassel then to the Firm: so to the Hage:
from the Hage to Vlushing: And finally, from thence to Dover, where I landed in
the midst of the month of September, in the three and fortieth year of the
Queens Majesty's reign, and in the year of our Lord God, one thousand six
hundred and one.

FINIS.
I. D. of Hereford in praise of William Parry Gentleman.
TO creep like Ants about this earthie Round,
And not to gather with the Ant, is vain:
Some find out Countries which were never found,
Yet scarcely get their labor for their pain:
Whereby I gather, there they gather not,
But rather scatter. Better lost than found
Were all such Countries. Will, such is thy lot,
Thou have lost ground, to find out other ground,
Yet thou have found much more than thou could lose,
Though thou could lose more than the Seas confine,
For thou have found that, none could find, but those
That seek, as thou have done, for Wisdoms eine,
And that is Experience, no where to be seen,
But every where, where thou ( good Will) have been.
Tam Art Quam Marie.

