CONTEMPLATIVE PICTVRES: With WHOLESOME PRECEPTS. The first part:

Of God. Of the Devil. Of Goodness. Of Badnesse. Of Heaven: and Of Hell.
By RICHARD BERNARD.

LONDON, Printed by William Hall for William Welbie, and are to be sold at his
shop in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Swan. 1610.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable EDMUND Lord SHEFFEILD, Knight of the most Noble Order
of the Garter. Lord PRESIDENT of his Majesty's Honorable Counsel in the
NORTH, and his Highness Lieutenant there. And to the right Honorable that his
lovingly obedient Lady VRSVLA the Lady SHEFFEILD.
To the Right Worshipful Ladies, their Honorable issue, the Lady SWIFT, and
the Lady FAIRFAXE: Heavenly ioies in Spiritual Meditations, good conscience in
obedience and endless glory by faith in Christ: that grace and peace evermore.
RIGHT HONORABLE, RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL:
SIx divided equally to two, is three, or three to either. Three is all, so
many to every one, no less to any. A man is either of God by regeneration,
living in goodness, going to heaven; or of the devil by corruption,
practicing wickedness, and running headlong to hell. Two generations, the
heavenly race or the Serpents seed: two Regiments, some slaves by sin to
Satan's controulement; some in voluntary subjection by grace to Gods
government: two places to go unto, the infernal bottomless pit, or the
celestial endless paradise. There is but one Conductour, God in the
spiritual brightness; but one seducer principal, the devil in spiritual
darkness. One only true Religion, the rest Idolatry and Superstition.
There are no men Miscellane, one between two of either, and yet neither. There
is no mean or third place betwixt Hell below and Heaven one high. The Pope
with his Priests may teach a Purgatory, to pick the purses of foolish
Papists: but believe them those that list, the word yields no such warrant, to
cause a judicious and sound Protestant to fear or force of it. Yet is there
one, an ill mean among men, that loathed creature, that Lukewarm Gospeller: a
time seruer professing after his pleasure, as may stand with his profit: this
is the Miscellane man. But is he good? then of God; then go such to heaven:
but God says he will spue them (a term of loathing) out of his mouth: if
bad, then of the Devil, and so belong to Hell. Three and three then, God,
Goodness, Heaven: the Devil, Badnesse, Hell; my subject matter empinfolds
all: none not within the compass of these. God either guides men by his holy
spirit, settles them in grace, and rewards them in heaven with infinite glory:
or the devil bears swaie in their hearts and holds them in wickedness, for
which in hell they receive wages due, even unspeakable misery.

Here therefore ( RIGHT HONORABLE, RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL,) of all these are
certain pictures, not Popish and sensible for superstition; but mental for
Divine contemplation; whereto are added wholesome Precepts for direction after
godly meditation. Gods Picture, to behold him, that is so good; to admire his
excellency, to fear his Majesty, to praise his bounty. The Devils
portraiture, that he may be seen, that is so evil, to wonder at his
wickedness, to loath his vileness, to detest his wretchedness, and to beware
of his deceitfulness. Good is set forth, to behold the comely beauty of
celestial grace, to embrace it with love. Badnesse is discovered, that the
ugly morphew of sin may be seen, to abhor it. Heaven is described to
work joy in well-doing by considering so great a reward of happiness and that
eternally. Hell is deciphered to restrain from sin, by fearing the
recompense of vengeance in internal torments everlastingly. He that does good,
may turn and read of God, his blessed guide; and of heaven, how in the end he
shall be in felicity. He that does evil, may read of the devil, his
accursed leader; and of hell, and behold his future and dreadful misery. This
is the practical use of these pictures.

Right Noble Lord; Still let the honoring of the gospel, and hatred of
Popery praise your zeal: this is of God. Let still your speedy execution of
justice make renowned your seat of equity: this is goodness. Your Honors
love to the truth and regard of the ministry is not unknown: your godly hate
of Antichristianisme is no less manifest; and is not a care in just proceeding
between these two words, mine and thine, commended? These give sure hope by
Christ of heaven. My prayer is for your Honors constant footing in this happy
path. Indeed the way of weldoing is strait, and as narrow as strait: hard to
enter, and as difficult to endure therein: whereunto is required the wisdom of
a Serpent, and a Doves innocence. Godly sincerity now adays with Achitophels
is held an affection from folly: just and resolute dealing, but a desperate
attempt. The dislike of Lukewarmenesse, and hate of a false religion with
Machiauellian Time-seruers is judged but a passionate rashness, the heat of a
spirit apt to Sedition.

What if this be the wicked man's censure? What if the world, the School of
Satan's policy, do thus condemn true Christianity? Must noble spirits set up
to advance piety, yield to such hellish Hags, and become slavish to the froth
of vanity? A true child of the Church instructed in the School of Christ,
can not endure it: his high spirit, elevated beyond the low pitch of corrupt
reason in confederacy with flesh and blood, possibly cannot so debase it
self. This were to separate wisdom and innocence: to leave religious
sincerity, and to take up other godless men's impiety. He that can put in
practice our Saviors lesson, to be as wise as a Serpent, and as harmless as a
Dove, he may do well. Together are they good; it is not seasonable to be in
act, while they be asunder. The first alone is but devilish deceitfulness:
the latter, by it self, is but a good meaning silliness: He that conioines
them rightly, seeks his own safety. Conscience will plead for innocence,
God will defend it: and prudent practice keeps an estate good, maugre the
enemies malice. Where these two like to lodge and harbor in one heart, that,
as rare, as excellent a person, may live within himself comfortably, among men
peaceably, and in the end die joyfully: my unfeigned wish to your Honor and to
all that walk with God vprightlie.

Right honorable Lady, Right Worshipful and Honorable offspring: My attempt
may seem a wonder; but the conceit of the wonderment cease where judgment
searches out the cause, and prudence does guide wisdom to weigh the
circumstance. A Lady is Honored in her Lord, children are dignified in the due
fame, and high promotio^ of their parents. The first are united by Gods
ordinance, the latter by natures influence. Whom God then and nature has
cemented, I, in my due honoring of al, presume to conioine. Right Honorable
Madame, and to you Ladies, I wish all welfare under God, on earth true goodness,
in heaven enduring gladness; a time to read good things, but all times to
practice, commending to your hearty assent this memorandum: Women are but
weak, their strength is to be under government, excellent praise is gotten by
their wise silence, but their principal glory stands in their awe, and
cheerful obedience. This perhaps may not seem a plausible sentence to your
Sex; but (good Ladies) he cannot flatter, that indeed does give you true
Honor.

I present your Honors, your Worships, with these special meditations, the
first part of my Pictures and Precepts. Tho I be troubled with controversies
and called into such matters of contention; yet intermix I my study sometime
with these better motions. I find that Questions curiously contrived do more
exercise wit, to inform judgment, then to make the heart devout in our
pilgrimage and this earthly exilement. By troublesome disputations men get
knowledge to approve of good, but by quiet meditations men grow to more
conscience in their ways, and do increase in grace. Hence is my interchange,
and a cause of some stay of my answer both to Master Ainsworth the Separatist,
and to Master Smith that Anabaptisticall Se-Baptist: but now the time will not
be long, ere I publish my reply. This present labor, in the view of words,
may seem but little, but the weight of the matter rightly valued makes it more.
The heads here handled are but few, yet comprehend much: the words not many; I
have studied breuity: It is irksome to be tedious, it is delightsom to be
short and perspicuous.

It is (Right Honorable, Right Worshipful) what it is, even my good meaning,
my first and best endeavor in this kind; whatsoever it be, be it not, as it
should be, my will yet wishes it to be well, and my thankful heart offers it
up with all due respect unto ^ou, and craves your honorable and worshipful
acceptances ^f the same. If I have offended by tendering so small a work, ^o
so great and worthy Personages, I beg pardon for my ^oldnesse: and so praying
for ^our euer-prosperous estate and true happiness, I humbly take my leave.

From Worsop in Notinghams. Nouem. 6. Your Honors, and Worships to be
commanded in the Lord, RICHARD BERNARD

THE PICTVRE of GOD.
GOD is by contraction good, the prime cause of all his creatuers: Only one,
one alone. Incomprehensible, infinite, invisible. A substance without
composition, action without motion. A being spiritual, of himself eternal:
before time, in time, and beyond altime: without beginning, without ending, the
Alpha of every thing, the Omega of althings: the first, and the last: without
term of time. He is that kingly regencie, that lordly Souerainity. He does
give to all life, motion, actio^; he bestows the quality and increases the
quantity: yet is he good without quality, and great without quantity. He is
the being and beauty of his creature. He made every thing good, and still from
him flows goodness; bodies bliss, souls safety, goods, preservation, and
grace. He is Supereminent above all, Superexcellent beyond all, abundant in
love to all, and absolutely in perfect happiness without all. He is the
highest in majesty, the greatest in glory, the largest in magnificencie, the
powerfullest in omnipotency, and the ever only best in unspeakable bounty.
Without him nothing available, with him all things possible, without, besides,
and against means. He is present every where, without circumscription of place,
neither included here, nor excluded there* he fills what is empty, sustaineth
what is weak, directs what is not right, gouerns what is instable, and
perfects whatsoever is i^ defect. Heaven is hiS throne the firmament hiS
pauilion, Paradise his palace, the earth his theate^ Angels are his attendants
the Princes of his army; al creatures his host. The azioured sky his comely
curtain, his privy chamber, the place of unspeakable pleasure. His face is a
flame of fire, his voice thunder, his wrath, dread, and terrible horror. If he
meet his enemies, he rides upon the wings of the wind, his chariots are
without number: he raineth upon them snares to entrap them, fire ^o devour
them, hailestones to kill them; he sends a smoke to smother them, a stormy
tempest to terrify them, the stincke of brimstone to annoy them, and hot
thunderbolts to shoot them through. He is the Landlord to all the inhabitants
of the earth; they are his Tenants, the best but his Stewards, the mightiest of
his making. He preserves by his power, rules by his providence; he has in
his hand a Scepter of iro^, and does reign as he list, over him that seems
to outrage the most. Satan is but his slave, though he rule over faithless
Princes and Peers. The loftiest creature, the highest man in Souereigntie, is
but his footstool, and hardly a shadow of his glistering glory, and glorious
emine^cy. He foreseeth every thing before it be, wisely orders al things
that are, and preordeineth all certainly what shall be. There is no preue^ting
of his will, no gain saying of his good pleasure: his power manageth his will
irresistably; his will is the rule of righteousness vncha^geably: he makes
every thing to bow at his beck: he alters the order of nature, and changes
the course of times. He can span heaven with his hand, sound the depth of the
Ocean feas, make the earth tremble at his prescence. Something he can make of
nothing, and the least something is he able to multiply into in. numerable
many things. He is admirable in his preservation, and wonderful in the
creation: By subduction of his infiniteness, he left an inanity of substance,
form, and force; so prepared he unspeakably an emptines to frame and place
his creatures: by reduction of himself again innarrably he made a kind of
fullness, and caused that sensibly to be seen, what never had being of any
thing before. All his works lively demonstrate him; his word truly reueales
him: yet no mortal eye can see him, nor any wit conceive him. He is mercy,
he is justice, a fire burning, and yet not hastily co^suming. He is al
presence, his nameis, I am, nothing past with him, nor to come which is not in
sight. Infiniteness it self is his compass, for time and place. His justice
is without partiality, he judges ever righteously, and punishes only
offenders, and that deservedly. His pleasure is absolute in himself; what he
delights in, without himself, is for that, which is only from himself. To
conclude an endless matter without conclusion; He is mercisull without
measure, pitiful in great compassion, but without any passion. He is
repentant without sorrow, he makes a change in his action, but is never
alterable in his person. He is himself holiness, the very fountain of all
goodness,: nothing evil from him, nothing evil by him. He before wills all
things, which he causes to be, and makes also that good which he wills to
be. He is majesty, he is mercy, he is excellency, he is glory, he is power,
he is principality, he is grace and goodness, life and happiness. All these,
in, and from himself, in all perfection, beyond imagination, without
limitation, endless. To him be praise perpetually. So be it.

Precepts.
Fear this God, believe him to be, know him rightly, behold him inuisibly,
conceive him without Idolatry. Remember ever his presence, consider his
powerful providence. Thou art of him, thou art in him, thou wast made for him.
Seek his friendship, force of nothing in respect of his favor. Love him above
all, hold on his side against all, and be subject to him before all: reverence
thou his majesty, obey his commands awefully, in all actions seek his glory,
and praise his name continually, that thou may of him be blessed eternally.

Amen.
The Picture of the holy Trinity.
GOD, the true God, is but one in unity, yet three in Trinity: One in substance
without division, three in person by distinction, the Father, the Son, and
the holy Ghost. In order, one before and after an other: but essentially, all
coequall, coeternall together. Al God, not three Gods, yet ever three persons,
never the same in propriety and manner of working Here is admiration, but no
demonstration. This Catholic and Christian verity is an innarrable mystery.

Precepts.
Believe this, the word teaches it; but corrupt reason is against it. Beware
of curious searching, it is a matter unsearchable. Stand not upon this to know
how it may be* subject thy reason to faith in sobriety. It is a godly
ignorance, in that to be unskillful, which the Scripture concealeth. He that
suffers herein his reason to wade farther than faith, may lose his reason and
belief, his Christianity for infidelity. Presume not (man) in this matter
above that which is written. This is a deep mystery, this doctrine of the
Deity, the inscrutable point in Divinity. The Lord give thee true wisdom,
resolved faith, with reverend fear.

Amen.
The Picture of the Father.
IN the unity, the Father is the first in the Trinity. He is not begotten, but
from everlasting begets the Son, of his whole substance. He made all things
by the Son, through the holy Ghost. What he willed he made good, and all of
nothing by his word. This gracious father of his mere mercy, has chosen many,
without their merit. He calls his ere they come; and when they come, he
confirms their faith. He knows them before they be, and makes the^ friends by
grace of deadly foes by nature; of Satan's slaves, his faithful Servants; of
Servants, dear Sons, children adopted, yea kings, priests and Coheires with
Christ. He cares for his children, when he mostcasts the^ down: He can allow
them their godly will, but he permits them not to be wanto^: when they do
offend, he will fatherly forewarn; if they repent, he will not punish. He is
full of commiseration, he does speedily pardon the Penitent, and withal
shows great gladness to do them good. He does send them his spirit, to
assure the^ of peace, and freely promises to bestow on them grace, either to
prevent their fall, or to pardon their fault. Though we be neither worthy of
being, nor breath, and deserve nothing, yet he affoords us his blessing, and
gives needfully anything. Earthly Fathers are such, as they be, for a season,
but this Heavenly Father is so for everlasting. He forbeareth with patience,
and keeps his in eternal remembrance. He hates never, where he loves ever.
Bountiful he is in his blessings, largious in his liberality, full graciously
favorable, and without end in goodness. He is strict, but not extreme in
justice: He calls man to make satisfaction upon pain of destruction: yet if
man can make no payment, his mercy has ordained means to discharge the debt.
Ere sinful man do die, his sinlesse Son must suffer death. Wrath must not
reward us, his great goodness will needs have us guiltless. Is not his love
enlarged toward us unspeakably? does he not purchase us peace with the price
of blood? He gives an obedient Son, for a rebellious Sinner: Wrathful
displeasure must sease upon Gods natural Son and an innocent, that pity may
be showed to adopted children, to escape torment. The ever worthily beloved
must undergo pains of Hell, to make for the unworthy of love, free passage to
Heaven. See (Sinner) see the incrediblenesse of so great grace: Stand (thou
Sinner) amazed, at this wo^derme^t of good. O matchless mercy! Did ever a
Father satisfy his wrath upon his dearest son, to appease his anger toward
his deadly foe? did ever a loving Father put his darling to death, to prevent
from his enemy the force of his wrath? We see it not, stories record it not,
nature suffers it not. Yet this father kills his best Son, to kiss his
worst creature; forsakes the Gracious, for a time, to receive the Graceless
to mercy, for ever.

Precepts.
OH therefore let us ever love and praise the Lord this heavenly Father for
his goodness: Oh let us not cease to declare the wonders which he does for us
the children of men!

Amen.
The Picture of the Son.
THe Son is the second person in the Trinity, the Fathers natural Son begotten
from eternity, the Image and substance of his Father without inequality. From
the father, by the Holy Ghost, he works together with the Father in all
things: he is God, he is man, perfect in both natures. He has a Father, he
has a mother, eue^ both truly; and also no father, nor mother but
respectively. He is ma^-God, and God-ma^; yet not two persons, but only one
Christ: One not by conversion, but by assumption; not by co^fusio^ of
substance, but by unity of person. This is the seed promised; the prophet
foretold the prince of peace. This is Melchisedech, the priest of the high God,
the king of Salem, the Jews Messiah, the Christians Savior. This is he that
will summo^ all to appear, and give true judgment upon al, both quik and dead
in the last day* Satan here he vanquished subdued the flesh and conquered the
world. He has mitigated Gods wrath, performed our work: justice is satisfied,
the law fulfilled. He has made an atonement, obtained mercy, and freed us
from punishment. The father of his mercy gave him for us, and he in love
bestowed himself of us. The father did will our peace, and he spared no pains.
He came into the world poor, to make us rich. He was to the wicked a
derision, that we with Angels might be had in admiration. He was blasphemed,
to make us blessed; buffeted and scorned, to make us secure in true comfort. He
wrought righteousness, that we might be free of wickedness: He was
innocent, to procure us pard on being penitent. His holiness is our
happiness, his suffering our safety, his grace our good. He was here in
trouble for us, his life paineful and miserable, so his end for us doleful,
and his torments intolerable. In all his life, that we read of, he did never
laugh; but often lament: He mourned to see men's madness, and wept for their
woe. Here he sighed sore to make us sing, he sobd and sorrowed much to make us
merry. He bare upon him unutterable torment patiently, that we might avoid
the plagues of God eternally. His prayers were loud cries and strong, to make
our prayers to pierce the Heavens. He sweat drops of blood to purge and sweeten
us unto our God: he cried with bitter torment upon the cross, to save his
servants from the dreadful curse. He did die as a malefactor, to become to
every believer a benesactour. Evil did he none, we are the offenders; Heaven
is his desert, Hell ours deserved: we have merited damnation, and he purchased
for us salvation. We were bound to the Law, we were under the curse, in danger
of death, and subject to wrath: but he has sent us his Gospel, preched peace,
promised pardon, and obtained grace. If the law would condemn us, he has
fulfilled it for us; his works prevent wrath, his cross, the curse. Conscience
by the law would accuse, the Gospel by grace will quiet it and acquit us. If
justice demand her due, his pains were our full payment. He is the way for
us to walk in. He is the truth, we may believe him. He is the life, happy
is he that lives in him. By him and through him all our wants are suplied, and
all grace and goodness obtained. Are we in corruption? His purity purges us.
Are we disobedient? He was most obedient. Are we subject to wrath? he couers
us. Wander we? he recouers us. Seek we safety? He affoords us solace. Want we
a surety? He is our pledge. None in so great debt, but he can discharge: None
so in disgrace, but he can procute him peace. He is ascended for life, that we
might not descend to the place of death. We need not fear the Law, Satan,
sin: he has gotten us heaven, life and salvation, without danger of Hell,
death or damnation.

Precepts.
HEre is peace (O happy man) and by Christ procured. Seek in him thy souls
safety: Behold here joy and spiritual security. Call boldly God father, it
pleases this Jesus to be thy brother. Believe in him, and constantly rely on
him. Love him, and long for him; say, when Lord? how long Lord? come Lord
Jesus, come quickly. In the mean space, live in love, work righteousness,
seek peace in holiness, keep in the limits of sobriety, continue in chastity,
and be never without charity, and expect assured felicity: which the father
of mercy evermore grant thee,

Amen.
The Picture of the Holy Ghost.
HE is the third person, his property is proceeding from the Father, and from
the Son. He works ever from both, together with both. He is Christ's Vicegerent
in his kingdom, The Pope may be packing as the devils darling.
his only Vicar General in his Church. He raised up the Prophets, he
instructed the Apostles, and now qualifieth all Christ's true messengers. The
bad he makes good, in the good he increases grace. He reforms our ways,
informs our judgment, and confirms our faith. He changes discord into
duties of love, and turns all misdeeds, into Alms deeds; prattling into
devout prayer, foolish prating into powerful and perswasiue preaching: the
Preachers tongue he makes the pen of a ready writer. Evil lusts, where he
comes, he kills, the dead works of darkness he expels. He is the spirit
sanctifying the elect; he is not partial, but deals measurably to all,
without sinister respect. He is to the Saints the blessed Comforter; he
persuades them all, to call God Father. He works repentance, and gives
thereupon true peace of conscience. Christ's Church is his Temple, and he the
saueguard of his sheep. He signifies our innarrable sighs, and maks us
express our desires in prayer unto God. He helps us to indite, to frame our
wills, to make our meditations, to moderate our affections, and orderly to
dispose al our actions. Our eics by him do see into the Scriptures, he is the
true commentary to understand the word. He learneth men to handle
controversies, without conte^tion; and to make a separation, but without
Schism. By him crosses are not without comfort, and the day of prosperity,
not without meditation of a change. He makes every thing to the godly
profitable, and the greatest afflictions, never insupportable. It is only he
that works in his faith by the word, distastful wearisomnes of the world, a
hopeful persuasion of heaven, without any dreadful fear of hell. He knits
piety to right policy, and seuereth true devotion, from foolish superstition.
Here in this life he begins grace, sets on to goodness, perswads to
holiness, urges to charitablenesse, presses on to godly practice, settling
the soul in religious pureness, and so leads it forward with a resolved
constancy to endless happiness, and perfects all in the life to come.

Precepts.
OH (unstable man) get the strength by this Spirit, pray him earnestly to
settle thy soul in safety. Make him thy master; his motions, thy first mouer.
Advise by his Counsel, walk ever by his course. Silence thy self, when he
gives sentence; be not secure, if he do censure. Bestow thy self by his
direction, and willingly be led, by his instruction. If he premonish, be
forewarned; if he call back, run not on. Stay, Where he bids thee shop, and
stand not when he moves thee to set forward. If thou have him not, entreat the
Lord to send him: If thou have him, carefully hold him. If thou would try
the true Spirit, discern his motions by the word; his habitation in thee by
sanctified work. The Scripture is his Scantling, he works not ordinarily,
but as the word does warrant, and he abids in none that are wicked and
disobedient. Be no Schismaticke; he will forsake thee; be no Heretic, be
will not harbor with thee. Displease not him, despite him not by thy
prophanenes: If thou quench his grace thou loosest thine own good. Let him
guide thee after the word, and thou shall be ever well-pleasing to God,
accompanied of Angels, approved of godly men, and be rewarded in heaven: which
benefit the blessed trinity vouchsaf thee (Reader)

Amen.
The Picture of the Devil.
He is that damned Ghost, the first siner, the first Seducer: One knowing
much, yet never obedient, but by constraint. He is but a Slave, as base, as he
is beggarly: as malicious, as cursedly mischievous. Blasphemously careless of
God, tyrannously cruel to men. A continual Tempter, Gods jailer, a dreadful
tormentor. Ever is he out with God, and a hater of the good. What God commands,
he condemns; he will allow, what God dislikes. A bright Angel, he was in
heaven; but now the black Fiend in hell. To no man a friend, to the Church a
most malicious foe. He is driven out of the penitent, he harbors in the
disobedient* The leaud are his lodging the profane his habitation. He is the
unclean spirit, the place most full of abomination, is his common harbor. All
his motions, are to satisfy lust, he would have us live after our liking, to
work wickedness, to rage in rebellion against God. He knows himself to be
damned; all he cares for, is to make other like himself. This cursed spirit,
is that Lion roaring, strong, fearful: that old Serpent, subtle, guilfull:
that red Dragon, bloody, terrible. He reigns where he gets any rule, and
whom he gains, those willingly he will not let go. Antichrist is his
eldest son, the damned crew his cursed children. He is the invent our of all
villainy, the author of heresy, the setter up of idolatry, the plotter of
conspiracy. He raises rebellion, and works treason. He turns religion into
superstition, love into lechery, friends into foes, consent into contention,
peace into bloody persecution. He comes where the godly be and good
excercises, not for love to them, but maliciously as an instrument to hinder
them. He will send Caine to sacrifice with Abel, but afterward to murder him:
He will thrust Judas among the Apostles, but to betray Christ. He is equally
envious, as malicious: If Christ plant a Church, he will erect a Chapel; if
he have Apostles, this will raise up false teachers; If Christ sow wheat, he
will scatter tares. He deceived Eve, which brought a curse to the earth: He
provoked David, to fall to numbering, that the people might be plagued. He is
that grand Lier, that shamlesse Slanderer: He is as impudent, as irrepentant.
He tempted Christ himself impotunately, he vexes his members, and that
daily. He is full of fair words, he makes many promises, but does never
perform what is good. He is a Machiauellian, when he pretends most to do
well, then he intends most mischief, and to do ill* He keeps men in
ignorance, and persuades them of faith; he puts them in hope of salvation, and
yet disswades from the grace of sanctification. He would have the wickedly
disposed to presume of mercy, and the godly penitent to despair in
apprehension of justice. He induces his to believe, that good meaning without
the word, is warrant enough in Gods worship, and blind devotion, to be a great
growth in religion. He commends wickedness with titles of goodness: He puts a
fair vizour over the ugly face of sin. Excessive pride must be cleanely
decency; no pomp. Filthy lust, but a trick of youth; no carnality. Bad
company, with pot-mates, good fellowship; no vanity. Covetousness in the
Nigard, thrifty husbandry; no sordid quality. Prodigal expenses
frankheartednes; no unthriftiness. Inte^peratenes in meetings, neighbourly
meriments; no gluttony, nor drunkenness: Riot, recreation; idle musing,
contemplation. Thus he blinds him that cares not to see sin, that so a man
may be secure, in hastening to hell. He that is most in transgression, is his
bestsonne; yet is the greatest sinner, his basest Slave. Who so does most for
him, shall in the end, be most tormented by him. God commands his children for
their own salvation; but Satan his servants, to bring them to confusion. All
his are either carnal Atheistes, gross Idolaters, Hypocritical Time-seruers;
foolishly superstitious, damnably mischievous, proud Heretics, or idle headed
Schismatiks. He will allow some of his to be of the visible Church, yet only
a Came, an Achitophel, a Saul, a Judas, without invisible grace. He will give
them leave to profess, but not to practice. He lets them know verity, but not
acknowledge it with sincerity; their service is only fashion. Hypocrites are his
Saints, custom his Canon, Sophistry his reason. His kingdom is darkness;
Schismatikes, his zealous servants; Heretics, his chief Champions. His
company the accursed, the profane his principal attendants, next to the
Fiends, the hellish inhabitants. The reward to his, wrath from God; seclusion
from the good. The place for their abode, is the infernal pit, there to be
tortured in torment, and plagued with erernall pains without end.

Precepts.
OH wretched sinner, seek peace to thy poor soul: seal not up thy
damnation, by doing service to this Devil. Stop thy ears, hear him not: if
thou do, believe him not. Wherein he most seems a Saint, therein hold him
a most accursed creature. Tho his promises pretend peace and salvation, yet
ever in his reasoning, deny his conclusion. Make no peradventure of the word;
if thou do, he will forthwith co^tradict the truth. If thou be a doubting
Eve, to say, lest I die, he will be a Serpent, and dare confidentlie say,
thou shall not die. Be not: a slave to him, that made suite to lodge in Swine.
Be not ruled by him, if thou be truly penitent, who reigns only over
the disobedient. Be no subject to so base an abject: nor a friend to so great
a foe. Leave his lusts, else look for no life. Forsake the world, else thou
gainest nothing by the word. If thou will needs be led by him, look for no
Heaven: if thou securely sin, prepare for Hell. Remember the end, the due
reward of wickedness, both in the devil, and the damned. From which misery,
the God of compassion deliver thee (Reader) of his tender mercy.

Amen.
The Picture of Goodness.
Goodness is grace, a picture of God: the worst in general approve it, but the
Saints specially rejoice in it. It is heavens pathway, the righteous man's
aim: no earthly thing can purchase it, it is only God that gives it. In it
self it is beyond any price, and makes other things precious. It is the
difference between creature and creature, between men and me^ in their words
and works. Goodness makes man good, the person, his speech and practice. It
banisheth brutishness, forces fraud to be flying, allayeth contentious heat
of spirit, and meekneth the untameable nature of man. It suffers no
reuengement, it is not rigorous in punishment. Love springs from it, patience
waits of it, and charity vshers it. It is that which makes a man friendly, to
procure relief for the needy; and without delay to help the distressed soul.
It is defective of no duty, it is pliable to all the works of mercy. Will is
never wanting by goodness, tho ability be away. It inhabiteth ever in true
piety, and lodges with godly pity. It banisheth malice and michiefe far
from it, and is a deadly bane to rancour and rage. It forbeareth a fiecre
adversary very quietly; where it may fully revenge, it forgiueth readily. It
will pass by wrong through mercy, yet not show partial pity, to overthrow
justice; it keeps moderation and measure in all things. It is borne up of
humility, strengthened by patience; the word of life does nourish it, the Lord
of life does cherish it; the spirit gives it quickening, and Gods glory sets it
on working. It is from heaven above, in earth entertained of few: he is full
that has it, and he ever in want that is without it. It moves us to mind God
more then goods, the Lords precepts, more then our profits. It thinks of death
before death, to be fit for death. It prepares the body for the earthly grave,
and the soul for the heavenly glory It brings to a man peace within, and
praise abroad; here commendation, and after salvation. This is goodness, the
form is true godliness, the cause is grace. It maks a man study to be quiet,
it keeps patience within us, contentment about us, wickedness far from us.
Good is he, that has this goodness, he shall attain to everlasting
happiness.

Precepts.
Labor to come to this goodness, dwell with it: harbor under it. Let it
grace thy person, and commend thy condition. Let thy words declare it, and thy
works paint it out to the world. Thou shall by goodness get with God favor,
and among good men friendship: which the God of goodness give unto thee now
and always:

Amen.
The Picture of Badnesse.
THis is sin, the cretures deformity, the turning of the will from God, and
the mind from good. It is the seed of Satan, the fruit of tentation, and man's
destruction. The Devil is the Father, concupiscence the Mother. The Serpent
subtly suggested it, our first parents foolishly did entertain it. Satan yet
is ever in begetting it, worldly objects provoke it, the senses let it in unto
the soul. Consent is conception, the heart is the womb of conceiving. It
quickneth by fleshly reasons, it trauelleth in desire to be doing. It brings
forth by opportunity, the Midwife; expelling first Gods fear, laying aside
his precepts, contemning his presence. Holy piety has here no place,
conscience is not called to this business, remembrance of Gods mercies is
quite out of mind, thoughts of his wrath hidden in the earth: Gods word must
be no warrant, goodness is forgotten. These bring not sin to birth, these
hinder sin for coming forth. Doubting of Gods word makes preparation, lust
lays it in bed, infidelity brings it to perfection. It is wrapped in vanity, it
is laid in the cradle of security. The Devil closes the eyes with ignorance,
and fills the ears with Sophistry: the head is covered with presumption of
mercy, over the heart is laid hardness, the judgment is ouerspread with
blindness. It is nursed by the world, suckled upon the breasts of pleasure and
profit. It grows great by custom, and spreads by community. Bad examples do
countenance it, plausible terms confirm it. It is clothed with the hope of
pardon, tied with the girdle of common favors, imagined to be of Gods special
grace Shamlesnesse attends it, persuasion of time enough to repent, gives it
rest, and conceit of finding favor in the end, rocks it asleep. Sins sleep
is conscience deadness, the judgments blindness, the wills perverseness,
affections disorderlinesse, and a resolved carelessness. Tho sin have such a
sleep, yet sometime upon a fearful terror, it will suddenly awake: and
waking, the pleasant ditty of Satan's song gets it soon asleep again. It has
four parts: the Tenor, carke and care thou for the world: the Mean, thou
may repent when thou will: the Treble, rejoice thy self in thy youth: the
Base, think death is not yet at hand. Hereby it snorts in a carnal safety,
spreads in breadth, waxes big, and hie by hardness of heart. It is very foul
at the first, worse by continuance, but loathsome at the last. It bastard-like,
brings shame to the begetters, disgrace to the abettours, confusion to the
followers. Where it gets strength, there hardly it is cast out: where it is
not timely mastred, there it will have the upper hand. It is lordly, and couets
to rule: it is raging, and tyrannous, if it reign. He that subdues it, easily
kills it; and he that strives not to stifle sin, works his own woe, and
neglects his own safety. Sin where it is not killed, will kill; if it die, we
live; i^ it live, we die most certainly. It was at the first, personal; it is
now original, and natural: From Gods mercy in the elect only venial; in it
self and in all other, deadly and mortal. Good is propounded in the
suggestion, pleasure is conceived in the consent, and so wickedness is
approved, by the heart deceived, till the time come of torment. Seduced souls
bewitched with the works of the flesh, know not the evil of sin: but behold
and see, how it defaceth Gods image, makes man a monster; of Gods child, the
devils creature. It dislodgeth goodness, it keeps out godliness; inwardly it
delights the heart with filthiness, and outwardly sets the hand to act
unrighteousness. God and man by it are at ods, who werebefore at one: the Earth
in creation blessed, by transgressio^ is accursed. It takes from us what good
we have, and brings the evils upon us, which naturally we hate. It cast the
Angels out of Heaven, Adam out of Paradise; by it Reuben lost his birthright,
Judas his Apostleship, by it comes death to men terribile, and their persons
to God execrable. It makes the Law condemn us, and conscience to accuse us.
By it godly exercises grow loathsome, godly company becomes irksome. No
blessing should be wanting, if sin put not in a bar: ever contentment,
without discomfort: ever internal peace, without external disgrace. It is
wickedness, that works our wretchedness. Shame is sins raiment, dishonor
the cognizance, reproach the praise, an ill name the recompense. In itself it
is vanity, the gain but misery. It is a strife with the truth, an heresy
against verity, Idolatry against sincerity. It is a conflict with God, and a
resisting of goodness: nothing worse then herein to have the victory. Man's
opposing of the word, is a taking part with Satan, against the Lord: and man's
joy in sinning, is to be glad of the devils triumphing. All men have sin, but
he that commits sin, is a slave to sin. It rules in some, in other it
is ruled: He that makes the least of it, shall, as with wisards, have least to
do with it. It is as an impudent guest; tho it come seldom, yet is ever
troublesome; small kindness does work great boldness; much courtesy,
intolerable sauciness. It is ever to the godly vexation of spirit; if but
once in act, yet greatly grievous; if it be liked, and often welcome, and never
forbidden, there grace and goodness will grow into a consumption, and the
party run headlong into perdition. It is of diverse colors, and keeps not
one shape; it is of diverse natures, and not of one sort In one it is pride and
lordly, in an other humility in show, but indeed hypocrisy. In the cholerike
it is irefull, in some other nature lustful. It is sometime adultery, and maks
a man filthy; it is sometime dru^kennesse, and makes a man beastly. It has the
commandments, ten witnesses to name it; it has also the same law to declare
against it. One precept terms it Idolatry, an other says it is adultery:
this makes it superstition, that treachery and rebellion; as the Law looks
upon sin, so the commandments do name it, and thereupon withal disclaim
it. It turns a man into it self, and makes a man to show it, against
himself. One sin is linked in with another, and every one forces out the
proper fruit, of it own nature. By covetousness man grows niggardly, an
oppressor, unmerciful: by pride, arrogant, hauty and hateful: by
gormandizing, gluttonous; by faithlesnesse, treacherous: by ignorance,
superstitious; by carnal service, Idolatrous: by contempt of other, and abuse
of wit, against the word, heretical; and by immoderat passion, and strong
affection, Schismatic. It is in every one more or less; the child has it,
but knows it not: the young man is carried with it, but cares not; the grown man
forced with it, but resists not: and old age with it Crammocklike crooked, but
feels it not. Yet is nothing more in use to be known; more hindering man's
good, to be avoided; more subtle, to be looked unto; more inward, to be felt;
more perilous, to be prevented; more forcibly assaulting us, to be strongly of
all resisted. By it Satan gets of the heart possession; by it is hindered the
spirits illumination. Our understanding by sin is darkened, our thoughts from
God estranged; the heart in goodness is fainted, the faculty of the will
weakened, and the quietness of conscience interrupted. Faith falls to doubting,
hope lets go her hold, and love turns her liking into loathing. Yea, if
repentance, upon every sin, cut not the cord of vanity, and grace grow up in
the room with sincerity, this death in sin, will bring death for sin,
which will turn salvation offered, but carelessly rejected, into confusion
deserved, but now not greatly feared.

Precepts.
Love not (Reader) the works of darkness, lest thy eyes cannot behold the
light. To save thee from sin, learn the commandments, know thy natural
inclination, and strive for amendment. Hear how God threats, and stand in awe;
observe his judgments to discern of his wrath. Other men's punishments for thy
personal faults, make the^ admonishments that thou no more do fall. Oppose
Gods precepts, to temptations of pleasure, the reward of that heavenly life, to
this temporvrie, and earthly loss. For sake not God, for any worldly good.
Sin not here, as a servant to Satan: neglect not true holiness, which is
with God commendable, and shall be recompensed with endless happiness. Remember
thou must die, and therefore live to die: Consider the day of account to make a
good reckoning. As thou art here, so look to stand there: if here sinful,
there shameful; if here regardlesse of the commandment, there certainly
expect severe punishment; from which the Lord deliver thee.

Amen.
The Picture of Heaven.
Heaven is the haven of rest: desired of all, hoped for of many; but only
enjoyed of the best. It is the highest place, the seat and throne of God, the
habitation of Angels, the harbor for the just. It is the court of the great
King, the mighty Creator. It is the Lords Tabernacle, the faithful man's
receptacle: the Region resplendent, the comfortable continent, the City of
safety, security: the sacred sanctuary of peace, prosperity. All in it are
without misery, never after subject to calamity. It is a Paradise for
pleasure, a City for beauty, and a Kingdom for state. Here is life
temporal, there life eternal: here the beginnings of grace, there the
perfection of goodness. There is God in his fullness of glory, yet to none
dreadful, there he reigns in justice, and yet with none wrathful. The
company are all triumphant, as here they have been members Militant. All is
in tune, concord, never discord; sweet melody, never any bitter malady. Such
fullness there is of all things, such love mutually in all, such respect from
all to each others state and place, as no excess is seen, nor any defect is
felt; who that have least can desire no more, and those that have most,
discern no want in other. All is beautifulness there without blemish,
immeasurable beyond all motion, excellent beyond all imagination. The walls
thereof are of stones most precious, the streets paued with pure gold, all the
work is framed curiously, set out with all sorts of pearl very sumptuously,
and adorned with all skill mostgloriously. It is decked with all delights,
replenished with all pleasure, garnished with algraces, beutified with the best
company, flourishing with the flower of all nations. There is the royal
Priesthood, the peculiar people, the children of light, the new creatures, the
elect by Gods preordination, the separated Society by Gods effectual vocation,
and the holy Saints by the spirits sanctification. There are metioifully
together the Head and his body, Christ and his Church, the Prince of peace,
with his Patriarks and Prophets, Priests and Professors, Apostles and
Apostolical men, Saints, true servants to God, Ministers of the Gospel, and
Martyrs for the truth. They are all there noble, none ignominious, all Kings
reigning, all victoriously triumphing: None contemptible, all honorable. All
invested in glory, crowned in Majesty, clothed in sincerity. Their faces
shine with comely beauty, their hearts are filled with piety, their tongues
extol the Lord with spiritual alacrity, and in their hands they hold Palms
in token of victory. This heavenly happiness cannot be imagined; the
blessings are so many, they cannot be numbered; so innumerable, as they cannot
be comprehended, so incomparable, as cannot be equaled; of such value as cannot
be prized; so great, as not to be measured; and of such eternity, as they
never can be ended. They be ioifull in an euer-reioicing joy, they cry aloud
Hosannah, and sing cheerfully Halleluiah. They stand before the face of God in
inestimable favor, in the view of Angels with brightness ouershining the
Sun. Mercy embraces them, without doubt of misery: in comfort without
coffeehouse, in peace endless, in glory matchless. There is mirth without
sadness, health without sickness, soberness of countenance without sorrow,
tranquillity without undermining treachery, liuelihood without labor, goods
and riches without greeuance in getting, without care in keeping: and a full
felicity of all things without adding, without diminishing. There is flowrishing
youth never decaying, strength never abating, comely countenance never
withering: liveliness is without fading, couragiousnesse of heart and spirit
without danting. There is ever love without lothing or dislike, victory
without fear of after vanquishment, gladness without diminution of goodness.
Mortality has put on immortality, corruption glorification. No sin is there
to be seen, the Law is fulfilled, the curse is removed, death subdued, the
promises of the Gospel fully accomplished. Faith has her perfect work in
charity, hope her desired happiness, love a large scope in everlasting
unity. There is no Foe to fight, no Cousener to collogue, no Parasite to
dissemble, no Superior among them to command, no Inferior to yield obedience:
no maligning envy, no proud Soueraignetie. All are now equal members, no
divided orders; no sorrainers, but brethren; no strangers, but all of the
household of faith: Children of one holy Father, coheirs with Christ, their
elder brother. There are no tears, the cause is taken away: No torment, Christ
freed them by his punishment; no dread, Christ set them at liberty from
death; no crying, there is no pain; no pangs or sorrowful passion, they
possess peace in Paradise. No disease can infect the body, it is not subject
to sickness, it is freed from infirmities, and cannot be distressed by
calamities. There is no sighing nor sobbing through sorrow of heart, such
accidents cannot happen; no lamentable complaints for injuries offered, no
wrongs can there be wrought. No ill success nor woeful wants, no grief of
mind nor anguish of spirit, no cruel oppression, nor ominous action find there
a subject to harbor in, neither practiser nor patron. Care combers no man's
mind, nothing weakneth the understanding, nothing blunts the apprehension.
Judgment cannot be infected with error, zeal with corrupt affection,
patience with anger. Will is there without wilful frowardness, the heart
without deceit and hardness. Thoughts are not troubled, they be not corrupted:
affections not distempered, they be not disordered. The holy spirit rules all,
the holy Lamb leads all, God by his power preserues them, by his grace does
ever assist them. All mercies are received thankefully, al commands are obeyed
rightly: in heart without hypocrisy, willingly without grudging, readily
without lingering, faithfully without altering, ioifully without murmuring, and
constantly without ceasing. Their drink is the sweet water of life, Angels
food their delicate nourishment, Christ's righteousness their holy raiment,
and their perfect fulness ioifull contentment. In a word, there is happiness
with goodness, felicity with unity, safety with solace, peace with
perfection, pleasure with profit, agreement with grace, lowliness without
contempt, exaltation without pride, security without carnality, stability
without wavering, abundance without euer-wanting. All persons generally have
the participation of joy, and every one in particular the fruition of glory.
Nothing there is here to the eye discernable, nothing there but innarrable, all
things to humane reason incredible. A man may imagine much, a tongue may speak
much, the ear may hear much, yet heavenly happiness is beyond all relation,
all imagination. The name of heaven to all is lovely, many do wish it heartily.
All Religions aim at it: the Jew expects it, the Turk wishes it, the
wickedest desire it, the Papist would merit it, the Schismaticke seeks for it;
the sound Protestant, the devout Christian by faith begges it, and he through
Jesus Christ shall enjoy it; to whom be praise and glory for evermore. Amen.

Precepts.
O Mortal man, do thou often meditate of this happiness. Let it eat up thy
heart with desire to enjoy it. Let carking for this world be expelled with thy
care of heaven: neglect not this felicity, the things here are transitory
vanity. Delight not in the pleasures of death, to lose, for them, the paradise
of life. To win the world by works of darkness, what is thy gain, if thou
lose true goodness? To pawn thy soul for sin, is it not madness? Exchange
not God for the Devil, goodness for badnesse, heaven for hell. Heaven is a
holy place, the unclean enter not thereinto. Suppose no such easy passage, as
fabulous Poets paint out: Strait is the way unto it, narrow is the gate to go
into it: many seek it, few do find it. Let thy way be verity; thy path
piety, the spirit thy conductor, the word a directour, thy eye faith, thy
stay hope. The straitness of it, is affliction; the narrowness, true
contrition; the suburbs, the Church; the door, Christ: by whom thou shall enter
into the palace, even the Paradise of God. Strive then to avoid here
wickedness, to escape all future wretchedness, that thou may possess this
true blessedness for evermore. This God grant thee, Christ merit for thee, the
holy Spirit thereof certainly assure thee, and thy godly life witness the
same to thee, that thou may end thy days comfortably.

Amen.
The Picture of Hell.
HEll is the place for the impenitent, every such person is the hellish
inhabitant. It is the prison for those that be separate from Gods presence, the
dreadful dungeo^ of utter darkness, the fearful Topheth, and deep pit
bottomless. It is the lake burning with brimstone, the hollow cave and Chaos
of confusion. It is terror with lamentation, it is dread with desolation, and
horror with utter destruction. There is death, there is ever dying, and yet
nener without being. It is a gulf devouring, a swallowing whirle pole, a
flaming furnace: Gods justice makes it, his power vpholds it, and it is blown
with the bellows of his wrath. There is scorching fire unquenchable, and
freezing cold intolerable. Stinking smoke is for the smell, loathsome filth
for the stomach: the ear shall hear a hideous noise, the eye shall see
gastlie sights, and horrible visions: what not there to breed amazedment? what
not there to cause fearful astonishment? It is the valley of Gods utmost
vengeance, the fullness of his wrath, and perfection of his plagus. The Lords
jail, the exilement of souls, the sinck of sinners, the foul harbor for
infernal Hags. Oh what woe is there with wailing from hearts comfortless;
what rivers of tears, because of torturing torments, and yet remediless?
Forlorn creatures, cursed caitifs; full of travel, painful wearines: full of
frightings, fearful terrors endless. They be in themselves helpelesse, of
Gods mercy hopeless. Oh the clamorous outcrying, the yelps and yelling, the
sighs and sobbing, the mad rage that there is and roaring! No heart so hard, as
can suffer a mortal eye to behold it, no ear to hear it, nor mind to muse of
it. The devil there has his full damnation, the fiends are outrageous and
filled with fury, the rest fret and sum, and are as in a wood frenzy. Their
desire is revenge, their devotion, cursing; their blessing, blaspheming. The
wicked there be so fagoted up with the bands of Gods justice; as bundles of
sticks so cast into the fire, by the power of his might, so held in vndurable
torment by his perpetual displeasure, as they blaspheme Gods benignity, for
feeling his justice in severity. They be in a huge Sea of misery, in an
Ocean of calamity. Fire, flames, and flashing about them, the worm of
conscience gnawing within the^; rage, madness, irefull indignation among the^:
ugly visages of black devil saffrighting them, monstrous apparitions, an
uncomfortable company about the^: Sulphur and hot burning cinders under them:
the revenging hand of God over them, and pouring forth the viols of his wrath,
full of variety of plagues without ceasing upon them. Egyptian plagues are
there increased, the tempests of lightening and thunder multiplied. They may
remove from place to place, so exchange in plagues, but never either be eased
of pangs, or freed from pain. They are chained up perpetually, to endure real
punishment upon body and soul eternally. They have heavy hearts loadned with
passion, they be woefully distressed with all Calamities, without any
commiseration. There is care, but no comfort; vexation, without consolation;
lamentation but none show compassion. They weep, they cry, they wail, and
mourn, they houle, and pitiously bemone their euer-during misery. Ah, alas,
says one, in cold freezing, and yet extremely burning: Woe to me, says an
other, in hot water-scalding, and yet so cold, as his teeth may be hard
chattering, his body may behold so to quak, and in every joint to quiver, as if
bone from bone would fall a sunder. Hence such roaring, such yelling, such
bitterness in banning, such scritching and outcries, at the sudden renewing of
torments, at the continual removing into exchange of tortures, and yet
remaining always in contrary plagues, as the ear never heard, the eye never
saw nor mind of man able to apprehend: Woeful doleful, horribly fearful,
insufferably painful. This stinking Sidde and dungpit crawles full of the
venomous generation, bloody Cainits, with sorcerous Balaamites, persecuting
Saules, with crafty Achitophels, the Serpents seed, the reprobated race, and
the accursed workers of iniquity. There the rageous may rend and tear one an
other, and none part them; the envious gnash for anger, and gnaw one an other
to the bone, and none regard them. He that here sinned for his pleasures,
will there sin more because of his plagues. Every sin shall there be
punished, accordingly as they were here committed. There is penury for
gluttony; extreme dryness and thirsting, for exessiue drinking; burning, for
lecherous lusting; outrageous madness, for blaspheming; want, for ill gotten
wealth; a fearful agony, for bloody cruelty; for oppression utter
desolation. Then is seen with sorrow enough their time spent in vanity, their
childhood in foolishinesse, their youth in lustfulnesse, their manhood in
wickedness, and their old age in covetousness, their first years run on in
ignorance, the middle age consumed in negligence, and the term of life ended
without repentance. They out of measure are vexed to consider what they were,
and might have been, what they are, and must be, what they would be, and
cannot attain to. They think of time past, but without thought of recovery,
they taste of the time present in unspeakable misery, and do look to the
time to come, without hope of delivery. One curses his birth, and bewailes
his ignorance; an other curses his education, and parents negligence; a third,
direfully bannes himself for his irrepentance. Their own senses do enlarge
much their sorrows; they behold Heaven, and themselves in Hell; the godly in
gladness, themselves in grief; Christ's faithful people in order, and honor,
themselves in confusion and fearful horror; the Saints of God in glorious
prosperity, themselves in shameful infamy, and miserable adversity. They
hear in heaven blessing, melodious singing; in hell cursing and lamentable
mourning; before the eyes are flashing flames, and a thick smoke ascending;
for the nose is prepared a noisome smell everlastingly stinking. In steed of
sweetness, there is gallie bitterness; for delicate fare, farnishment; for
liberty, inthralement; fire brands, for beds; for soft lodging, pich and
brimstone with juniper coals burning; in steed of music and pleasant
harmony, a hellish noise of discordancy. They feel torments unspeakable,
pains intolerable, and the same always durable. By impatience their plagues
are increased, by their obstinacy continued, and by Gods power and justice
maintained. Thus are their hearts in continual heaviness, their pale
countenance in doleful sadness. To heaven they look up, bewailing their
mishap, in hell they look down with shame of face. If they would repent now
they cannot: if they could, it is then to late; they were retchlesse in the
days of amendment, and their case is remediless, in the time of punishment.
There is not any grant of the least comfort to the greatest torment, nor to the
extreemest pange any kind of easement. They may cry, and cry again, Lord,
Lord; they may entreat for mercy, but never be heard: no grace, no peace, all
pain, all plagues; none blessed, every one accursed. He that is afflicted,
shall be more tormented; he that is condemned, shall ever be damned. Heaven
have they lost, and not to be purchased, Hell have they duly deserved, and
the place must needs be endured. None among themselves can help one another,
and among the celestial company they shall not find one comforter. If
children should call to parents, they will not pity them they have lost that
natural affection, they can have no such compassion. Though parents should
make petition and pray their children, they will not be cared for. Tho they
cry and call, saying oh our bowels, and our blood. Oh once bone of our bone,
and flesh of our flesh, speak for your poor tormented parents: Is there no
natural love now left? What no compassion? Shall we perish? can you see us
thus plagued, and show no pity? Have mercy, dear children, on us so in
misery, sweet Babs, once loving and beloved, speak, oh speak one word for us;
are we not plunged in unspeakable pain? look upon your now forlorn Father,
who once fed you with food: ah, alas, have some remorse of your mournful
mother: Oh for Gods sake seek this time our good: let some sparkles of your
love appear. Can you be in pleasure, and suffer us to lie in perpetual pain?
We spared no labor for your education, and can your eyes behold us
languishing in this place of destruction? If you did call, we came speedily to
succor: when we heard you cry, we were in care for you; your misery was to
us calamity; your adversity, the abatement of our prosperity; and can you
hear our pitious groaning, and see the Devils grinning as dogs upon us, your
ears hear our bitter crying and they again barbarously tormenting us and be
silent? Oh, woe is unto us, fire, consume us; vengeance, do you utterly make
an end of us. All this will not work, words are but spent in vain; natures
force has lost the effect; there is no knowledge of kindred, or kinsfolk; the
godly regard Gods glory, and therein only rejoice. To conclude, they now
know, and to late believe, that the good do dwell with God, have Christ's
company and Angels glory; but themselves to be hated of God, neglected of the
good: to be with black devils damned, with savage furies accompanied, with
barking helhounds horribly affrighted, and with barbarous tormentors cruelly
handled; so as they always in this liuelesse living, weep, mourn, and lament
for such hellish pains: and in this deathlesse dying cry, yelp, howl, yell,
for such ever during plagues: from which (O Lord) deliver thine, and show them
mercy (O God) that they decay not in goodness, that so they never feel these
punishments for their wickedness. Amen.

Precepts.
O Miserable Sinner, now do thou seriously consider: here in this life, see
to thy self. Who would endure, but awhile these pains, for all worldly
pleasure? Who would go to this doleful place of Devils, for wicked gain?
What is there in this pleasure here, profit, and honor, that for it thou
should adventure infernal pains for ever? Oh break the caul of thine heart
with sorrow, rather then to fall into such plagues, for delight in sin. Brust
into tears, to escape these torments. Live not securely; stoop hautie heart,
that thou may not for pride be sent packing to this place of pains. Grow
lean cheekt thou Glutton, and pale faced thou Drunkard, ere thou be
everlastingly famished with penury, or be scorched in a burning flame, and
ever be kept dry and thirsty. Thou mincing creature Peacock-like, neglect thy
pride i^ apparel, that thou may betime in time avoid this peril. Profane
Miscreant, seek an atonement, labor for peace, fall down before the throne
of grace. Let (O wicked liver) thy head be a fountain of water, and cause thy
eyes to trickle down tears, yea to run as rivers for thy transgressions,
that thou may escape these hellish vexations. Look on the ground whereon
thou go, and think upon thy grave: behold the heavens, and consider whence
is grace. Awfullie regard the accusation of conscience, and set ever thy self
before Gods presence. Read letters of discomfort sometime from the Law, lest
thou presume by promises of the Gospel. Draw near to God, whilst he does
say, Come; stretching out his hands to embrace the penitent: before he say,
Go, sitting as Judge to condemn the disobedient. There is a time for thee
before thou die to obtain salvation; but in time after death there is no
redemption. Therefore crave pardon of God earnestly, associate thy self to the
godly speedily. Fall groueling upon the ground, and ask forgiveness: grieve
heartily, speak passionately. Smite thy breast, strike on thy thigh, shake thy
head, wring thy hands, shead tears, power, power out thy soul unto God, and
cry aloud, aloud, I say, cry, oh spare spare me good Lord, whom thou (O God)
have redeemed with Christ's precious blood. Oh forgive me, I confess I have
offended thee: let thy patience forbear me, let thy great mercy acquit me.
He that does repent betime, the Lord will hear him in time: Gods gracious
compassion, is never without pitiful commiseration: neither the provoking of
his justice to wrath, without dreadful and certain destruction. Presume not,
yet despair not; live to die, yet die to live; think of heaven, yet forget
not, that there is a hell: be so comforted in thy justification, as thou ever
get a certainty of glory by thy sanctification. Live in the fleshes
mortification, in hatred of the world, in the spirits vivification; use the
means of thy effectual vocation: claim naught of merit, crave all of mercy,
live in true humility, and practice always the works of charity, and thou
shall assuredly escape Hels


