A SCHOLASTICALL DISCOVRSE AGAINST SYMBOLIZING WITH ANTICHRIST IN CEREMONIES:
ESPECIALLY IN THE SIGN OF THE CROSS.

Anno Domini, 1607.

To the Reader.
GEntle Reader, thou may perceive by the following Protestation, how the
Author was forced to compile this Treatise, to prevent the discredit he might
reap by some scattered notes. The like necessity does compel, the present
publishing hereof, to avoyde the scandal which may arise, by a large answer,
penned to the first papers, which were scribled out by the Author in few days,
and are not the true copy to which he does slande: In which respect I hope the
Author will not be offended hereat, when it shall come to his knowledge, though
he were altogether unwilling it should pass into the hands of his frindes for
so public a purpose. And to thee good Reader I doubt not but it shall be very
acceptable, for the great learning, acutenes, modesty, fidelity and
sufficiency thou shall find therein: It containing a full answer to
whatsoever has been materially objected by the Prelates, or any of their
Champions in d^fence of the Ceremonies, and in special, to the Sophistications
of such, as have written for the Cross in Baptism. Thus forbearing to
commend the work which will much better commend it self, I commend both
thee and it, to the rich blessing of God in Christ Jesus. Farewell.

A protestation of the Author.
AS Augustine once thought it fit, upon occasion to make known, both whereof
he stood in doubt, and also wherefore: so judged I it my part of late
(touching the Controversies about the Ceremonies) to show in writing, both
what the points be I stood upon, Augustinde Genefi. ad liter. lib. 10. c. 26
and what are my grounds and reasons. To this purpose I addressed a certain
Treatise (such as it was) against the Cross: which I imparted to some of my
friends: either to have their censure of it, or to approve my self unto them
in my forbearance to conform. This being copied out by some (who I know not)
was made more common then I would: and that vnliked, and more unfashioned, then
might be for my credit. By this means I was enforced to take pen in hand
again, and to frame this sorry Treatise: as to set right what before was out
of square, so to polish (as I was able) what was vnfyled, and to take in (by
some additions) some things that wanted. Now because I do not know, into whose
hands this poor labor of mine may come: therefore I beg of the indifferent
Reader, to take knowledge before hand from me of these few things. First, let
none think me to be one that stands upon terms of learning: I am too much
privy to overmuch ignorance: I know well (although not so well as I should)
quam mihi sit curta supellex: besides I want books and conference, and my
School studies have been long discontinued. In regard hereof I am to crave
common humanity at the least, which is to read my abortiue ouersightes with
due compassion: some of which I have my self already found: as Malta mistaken
out of Surius for Nilenus: Nazianzen forgotten in Germans allusion, and the
time of the German triple Crown, not so distinctly set down as it should.
Secondly, as I do not stand upon any challenge to learning at all, so neither
do I stand peremptorily, upon the assertions of this Treatise (not as if I
doubted of what I have written, whether it be true or not) but because my
determination is no more, then to suppone and propound the reasons which I have
against the Ceremonies, and that Dicis causae only, by way of disputation. To
have set down every thing with a Quaere, had been for a Discourse unfit, to
have annexed to every period and proposition As it seems to us, or As we
think, absurd and tedious: I expect it shall suffice, that I protest here once
for all, that these Clauses be understood throughout this whole Discourse. What
then? I write here, in Psalm. 85:
as Augustine elsewhere, non tanquam affirmator, sed tanquam scrutator, which
can any mislike? For a very Papist him self will have leave to dispute against
a Synod, so he do it inquirendo non astruendo: Nicol. Clau. disputat. de
Council. Melchior Canus. Amos 7.10
yea more, an Inquisitor him self gives leave to detect the corruptions of a
church Leiturgie, so it be dolenter done, not calumniose. Thirdly, because our
Adversaries rack our speeches, and oftentimes without all color make them
speak against the state (after the example of Amaziah against Amos, The land
is not able to bear his words, and of Eusebius, the Court is against
Laserius, Facis Imperatorem nostrum Nabuchodonosorem? Theodorit. histor.
eccles. lib. 2. ca. 16.
when he had pleaded in simplicity, Non diminuitur solitudine mea verbum
fidei, sic enim est olim tres tantum inuenti sunt qui edicto Regis non
resisterent): Therefore I protest, that whatsoever shall be found within this
Treatise Reprehensorie, is intended of the Prelates and those Opposites of
ours, that be Scholars and Divines: it is not written of any Civil
Magistrate, much less is it meant of his sacred Majesty, (whom the Lord
bless, long to reign over us): so that I claim here that common Equity of
all ages, The King, and a man's own Mother must be always excepted when they
be not expreslie named. Fourthlie, let no man say, I have an ambition and
vaynglorie, stuffed the margent with quotations. Being charged with Novelty
and Singularity, I was in all wisdom to dye my self in a tincture concolor
mortuis, as near as I could. Being a dwarf in stature likewise, I was to
creep upon the shoulders of some tall men, and with Zacheus to clime some
trees to see the better. Further, who knows not how much it avails with
what arm a Dart is thrown, in which respect who can mislike, if wanting sides
of mine own, I have used the strength of theirs who first or last have fought
the battayles of the Lord? Last of all, shall it be lawful for our Opposites
to rake out of the grave against us, the rotten reasons of Papists, Lutherans,
Adiaphorithes: but unlawful for me to summon ancient and reverend
Protestants, to bear witness to the Truth? This I speak, because (pull the
vizard away) and the soldiers with their muster against us, will be found no
other, Polycen^s de stratage.
then such as the soldiers of Gastro were, to wit, Egyptians in Grecian
harness: whereas on the other side none can justly censure me, who before
condemns not Ennius and Naeius, I mean our ancient standerd bearers and
forerunners in the faith. Fifthly, let no man put me to business about the length
of this Discourse, to which my earnest desire carried me, which was to search
every corner of the controversy which I handle with the lantorne of the Word,
Pro. 20.27.
and by the light thereof, to scatter (as much as lay in me) the gross
corruptions that infecte the bowelles of our Churches. What that I may plead
example? For Clodis Tarcinensis wrote a very great volume of the very same
argument, Jonas Anielianens. de cultu Imag. lib. 1. Bonauentu. Vulcanius in
epist. ad Ordin. Belgic.
I mean against the very having of Crosses and Images in the Church: and
Nilus Suziceus, no less then 120. chapters in an argument of the same kind,
to wit, about the leaven. Having thus advertised touching the purpose of my
writing: I come to satisfy some of them who think I should not have written
at all: And of these Censors I observe four sorts. The first sort do judge
all contending about Ceremonies, to be no better then vain disputing, such as
the Apostle does forbid. I ask: Are not Ceremonies matters of faith? Yea
certainly. They are indeed matters of faith, and therefore not vain, but
necessary to be known and discerned by us. 1 Timothy 6.5*
That we may not guess, but clearly understand how they are all established,
or condemned by Gods word. Howbeit were they but things indifferent, as indeed
they are not in Gods worshipp; yet must they not (specially in this use) be
done in faith? or can there any faith be of them that is not grounded on the
word, which is the only word of faith? It is sufficient if the scripture be not
against them. True: but (as Tertullian of old) If the scripture does not
permit them, it does forbid them, and sine lege and contralegem ( as in
Policy, lib. de Cor^. milit. Thom. Mor ton. Apolog pa. 2. lib. 1. cap. 4^.
Idem p. 420 ^eza Annot. in 1. Cor. 11 10. 1 Cor. 11.7.14.16.34
so in Divinity) are both one. In deed if not viua ratio out of the word, yet
manifesta aequitas always is ever needful to the very circumstances of Gods
service: as for lawfulnes so for expedience: expedience I say, and the same,
not only general according to the perpetual circumstances which cleave to
their kind: but also special, according to the occasional circumstances that
occur in their particular practice. So much is manifest by Paul who proves
the Expedience of the veil (a civil custom in the Church of Corinth) by
reasons drawn from the law of God and Nature, before he forbids co^tending
against it: and puts over the ordering of other circumstances of celebrating
Gods public worship in that Church, till by oculata experientia he had seen
their estate, and weighed what was most convenient. What when this course is
not observed? Why men are set to eat their meat without salt (says Hierome)
when they are commanded any thing that has no relishe from the word: and to
build without hay and stubble, like Israel in Egypt, when they be not
allowed some warrant out of the Scripture, which only can combine the matter of
the work, and make the frame of the building sure. But Augustine will have us
follow a Synod of a Church etiam latente veritate. What and will he have us
follow it too, without using the means that may bring the truth to light?
No, but here he requires even certa documenta, lib. de peccat. merit and
remiss ca 36 Fasc^cul. rer. expetend. artic. 18. folio 129. in 1 Cor. Homil.
13. Romans 14.5.
out of the word to the commandments of the Church: even as John Wiclephe
taught since his time. We must take nothing from the Prelates which is not
clare, even clare demonstrated by the scriptures. Chrysostom gives a reason
hereof: Our cogitation halteth, when the word wants, which halting is sin,
because we are bound to the (...) of a full persuasion even in indifferent
things and all. And in this Controversy of the Ceremonies the truth is not
latens. I trust this very Discourse will show there is not only no reason to
conform, but also reason strong and evident against Conformity: at the least
I doubt not, but it will clear us from that stomach and stubburnes wherewith
we are unjustly burdened, as bearing us witness we are the men that keep the
old rule, Non est a consuetudine recedendum facile, nisirationi aduersetur.
Augusti. de Mufic. lib. 2. cap. 8. Tertull. de veland virg. Digest. lib. 1
Ticul. 3. cap. 39. Tho. Aqui. sum. p. 2. q. 92. art. 3.
for which we protest according to the ancient tenor, Nullam respicimmus
consuetudinem quam damnare non possumus: and thereupon call at the Tribunal
for that old sentence, Quod non ratione introductum est, sed ex errore primum,
deinde consuetudine obtectum est, in alijs similibus non obtincat: in the
Schools, for that Decision Theological, For as much as the law Diume
proceeds from the will of God, the Humane only from the will of man, vsus
authoritati cedat, prauum vsum lex and ratio vincat. The second sort of our
Censors, though they mislike not all sticking at Ceremonies, yet all standing
they condemn against an Order once established in a Church. What, and have we
then lived to the time to hear Sion speak in Sorbons language: No further
reason must be sought, then a Synodes own authority, that which the wiser
sort of Papists them selves condemn? nicol Clau. collat. de Council. Cyril
Hierosol ca. 4. Mat. 23.8.
Sure to believe any, or each simpliciter dicent, upon his bare word: is to
set up a Master on earth, to no small prejudice of our Master in heaven,
whom we are only in this manner to believe. It is also to inthrall the Church
to a servitude Babylomeall, if not worser, for so much as some children of
Babell her self, refuse to bow down their necks to this yoke, as we see by
Alphonsui, Alphons. de Cast. cont. haeres. lib. 1. cap. 7. Martin Luther li.
cont. papat. Nicol. Clau. disputat. de Council.
Miserrima seruitus est (says he) iurare in alicuius verba Magistri. I omit
to object here, yea so much to inquire, whether the Synod that made this
order, sat as Judges in their own case, which is against the law of Nature:
whether they assumed an Immunitie to them selves, to have al accusing of them
reputed schism, which is our exception against the Concill of Trident. whether
they came resolute against Reformation, and fully bent to make such Decrees as
best might strengthen their own estates, whereby the Concill of Pisa once
barred and shut out the Holy Ghost from their assembly: whether the name of
the house it self knew not of many Canons made, as at the second Council of
Ephesus many subscribed to what they knew not. Last of all, whether some Canons
were only read, as at the Diet. of Augusta the Jnterim was proposed only by the
Chau^celour of Charles the fifth, and so thought sufficiently ratified,
although the States and Peers there present, never gave their voice to it. The
Inquisition of these things and other the like, I say, I omit. This is the
answer I rely on: the Reformation we seek, Zepper de polit, ecclesiast. in
epist. dedicator.
is in substance the same, which not one, but many: Why speak I of many? which
even all the godly Synodes have agreed on, that have been gathered from time to
time, since the restoring of the Gospel, in all the Churches best reformed
beyond the Seas. The third sort of our Censors will give us leave, to gainsaye
a Peter, Nilus Thessalonicens. de precat. Papae.
when in Ceremonies he walks awry: howbeit in conference to his face only
and not in writing. Nilus supposed it was in vain to debate with the Pope,
alwhile he looked to be judge him self, and do the Prelates look for less?
The Bishop Argensius found by experience in the Council of Basile, that there
is no dealing with Superiors who expect the inferior must succumbere: Aeneas
Sylu^ in gest. Council. Basiliens. lib. 1. Polydor. Virgil. de Inuentor. rer.
li. 8. ca. 4 Augustine. epist 174. Carol. Sigo^. de regn. Ital. lib. 9.
and do not the Prelates expect as much? Luther stepped away from Caietan, even
after the listes were entered, because he saw he would magis imperio rem
definire, quam disreptatione: and have we not cause to suspect them and fear
the same of the Prelates? Augustine when he conferred with a great man, he was
overcome, though not veritate, yet clamore: and it was given forth against
him, that he was foiled when he was not: and have former conferences with the
Prelates sorted to any better event? For my own part I had a private defense
for my self. Albericus was better at writing, then at disputing: so is it with
me, by reason of the dulnes of my wit, I must plodd on what I do, and when I
have advised my self all that I can, yet all comes short of that which should
be. The fourth and last sort of our Censors, mislike not writing, save at this
time, when we should busy out selves (they think) about more needful
matters. Certain it is that we their mistake. For it is an Hercules that is
fit to throw out the dounge it self of Popery: such as I am, serve best, to
sweep down (as they are taken) the Cobwebbes of it which yet remain in the
house of the Lord. When the Cobwebbes fell down all on a suddayne at the
Council in Trullo, the Fathers there present took it as ominous: Council. Tom.
2 p. 895. Caro. Sigon. vbi. supra. p. 49
so may we now our selves learn from it how clean the house of the Lord must
be kept from al coinquination with hereticques. Suppose the Ceremonies were no
more then that they are taken, the cobwebbes of popery? Do not even cobwebbes
foster poysonful spiders? sure these cobwebbes of ours do. And see ye not how
they have gotten even to the very top of the Palace, as Solomon speaks?
Shall we suffer them there with silence? Pro. 30.2^.
must we not write to sweep them down at the least from thence? And let
others look to those matters, which some repute only able to shake the
mountains of our religion, whom the Lord (as a Father speaks) has taken up
into the mount: my standing is at the foot of the hill, therefore it shall be
enough for me to acquit the place I stand in, from those corruptions, Which
howsoever counted molehilles, yet much molest the holy vineyard of the Lord.
Even this also must needs be done by some or other. For though the people were
foolish, whom Gerebrard mentions, who thought the mountains were endangered
as often as the Moales did wagg: yet I remember I have read that even Moles in
Thessalie once ouerthrewe a whole Town: Plin. histor. lib. 8. c. 29.
sure I am (I see it with my eyes and am sorry) that these Moles against which
I write, have even already annoyed, if not vctie near decayed diverse goodly
Co^greganous. And as for the time, 1. Cor. 16.9
where is assistance to the truth most necessary, but where it has most
adversaries? It is time for the ass him self (says one) to open his mouth,
Gildas de excid Britan. in proaem. Inc. 19.40.
when things run to ruin. And our Savior, where other witnesses do fail,
let the stone him self cry. These premises considered, I am not deterred from
proceeding to the Search following, into which I now enter in the name of the
Lord: premising that common and beaten rule, non est obstinatus qui paratus est
corrigi: for which I finally protest with Job: Teach m^^ and I will hold my
tongue, Job. 6.24.2.26.
and cause me to understand wherein I have erred? How steadfast are the words
of righteousness, and what can any of you justly reproone? Do ye imagine to
reproous words that the talk of the afflicted should be as wind? Now therefore
be content to look upon me, for I will not lie before your faces.

A Scholastical discourse against Symbolizing with Antichrist in ceremonies:
especially in the sign of the Cross.
The Cross in baptism, Idolatry against God
The Idolatry of the Cross. CHAP. I.
WHat 2. Cor. 1.26.
agreement has the temple of God with Idols? Hose. 14.9.
What have I to do with Idols? 1. Ioh. 5.21.
Babes keep your selves from Idols. These Scriptures and the like, not only
control, but also cashire the sign of the Cross; it being an Idol that is
many ways polluted. The first way respects God, whose heavenly Majesty
while it transformeth by carnal thoughts, there is that August. in Io. tract.
19
Idol of the heart begotten, which must as Idem de verb. Dom, see. Mat. sermon. 6
carefully be expelled out of the mind, as any Idol that is external out of
the Temple. Is not every lie of God a Tertul. de praescript?
kind of Idolatry? But the Cross turns his glorious essence into a vile and
shameful lie, when it puts on him a certain esse Suarez. Tom. 1. in Thom.
disput. 54. sect. 4.
vestitum imagine, an essence clothed with an Image. And every Hierom. in
Ierem. cap. 32.
heresy transforming God is an idolatry in like manner, whereas there is none
that does more change him then the haeresie of this sign; teaching that he
may be united with a Cross (with a Cross I say, a detestable Idol) and so
united, that the Cross may be Caiet. in Tho. part. 3. Q. 25. art. 3. vt
citatur A.
said to be Christ, Christ and the Cross to be one and the same in Suarez. vt.
supra.
apprehension: which is more then to set a Dagon by him, it is to marry a
Dagon to him; yea to turn him into a Dagon, partly flesh, and partly fish:
which is it not monstrous? To this belongs that fantastical Christ of
Papists which is conclusus, Vazquez. de adorat. li. 2. dispur. 5. cap. 6. and
14.4.
in imagine, Christ enclosed in a Cross, a worse transmutation of him then
Act. 17.24.
God enclosed in a Temple. For what enclosing prison is there more loathsome to
him, then an Idol which is as Deuteronomy. 29.17 The doct. of the Cross (...)
teaches G^od to be de^^ighted wi^th will worship
dongue; and more abominable in his presence then may be spoken? Another
metamorphosis there is behind, little better then these. The Cross sets
God before us, as delighting in Will Worship, which is ever carnal worship; by
name in such a carnal Will Worship as does worship him in a Cross, yea in a
Cross Th^o. Aqui. p. 3. Q. 25.
coworshipped with him in the very same worship, at the sight and sense
whereof if our hearts rise not, if our spirits burn not (like Paule^ Athens)
it is because we want his zeal. But be his zeal sound with in us, it ^^ll not
suffer the sound so much as of such an Idol to be amongst us. For, know we
not that all will worship is flat Idolatry, by Aug de. confens. euang. lib. ^
cap. 18.
fathers, Varq, de adotat. lib. 2. dispur. 1. cap. 3.
adversaries, own Doct. Bills. ag. Apolog. p. 4. pa. 344.
writers, and all? The Papists themselves confess, it is Idolatry to worship
God as present there, where he is not Catharin, cont. Dog^^at. Ca^^^.
present, that which this sign does cause at this hour, the papists praying
to a cross, as to Christ Jesus Thou Aqu. p. 3. Q 15. art 4. Suaz. in coment.
ibid.
present in it, and teaching wittingly in their writings Andrad. Orthodox
explicat. 9.
Deus est vbicunque (crux) eius signum est, that God is there, where this sign
of his is. Last of all, It is an Idolatrous conceit of God to think he will
suffer any Doct. fulk. reioynd. to Mart. art. 1. page 145. Guil. perk. li. de
Idolo. lat.
grace to drop toward any, without himself distille it down, by his own
means; amongst the which, although it never came into his heart to ordain
this sign, yet is it believed Tripart. histor. lib. 2. cap. 1^. Ion.
Aurelianens. de cult. imag. lib. 2.
Martial. de cruc. art. 4. fol. 48.
that there has been no grace bestowed by the ministry of man or Angel
without the same, since his coming in the flesh: which also is held to be an
necessary Rhem. annotat. in 2. These. 2. sect. 17.
mean and instrument of man's salvation. Yea, so necessary for his part
herein* as that it is matched with Martial de cruc. fol. 21.
faith, with Ibid. fol. 20.
charity, with the Ibid. fo. 16
Sacraments: Yea the incarnation of our Doct. Fulk. reioynd. art. 1. page 143.
Lord Christ Jesus. And these many ways is the Cross an Idol in regard of
God, since these many ways it does conceive him qualis non est, such as he is
not, a gross idolatry by all the August. quaest. sup. Ioh. lib. 6. cap. 29.
fathers, yea, by some Suar. tom. 1. in. Tho. disput. 34. sect. 7.
Papists own confession.

#Sect. 2. The doctrine of the Cross teaches merit, satisfaction and pardon
for sin.
THe second Idol found in the Cross is the man that does use it, who is said
to merit by it, to satisfy by it, sometime also to pardon by it, which none
but God himself can do. The sign of the Cross is an act of devotion, a part
of Gods worship, a profession of Christian faith, therefore in signing our
selves with it, how can we not merit, says the Bellar. de effect sacra. cap
31. proposit. ^.
Papists? And whereas a venial sin is not the death but the wound of grace,
that may satisfy for it, says Tho. Aquin. q. disput. 7. de peccar. venial.
art. 12
he that can recover to our souls our former feruor of devotion by the
considering of some what else that is able to inflame it. Now among these, the
sign of the Cross excels for that it raises a remembrance of the passion
it self of Christ, so that here has place that of the Apostle, God forbid I
should rejoice save in the cross of Jesus Christ. No need (say they) to
interpret this of the death of Christ alone: we may Martial. de cruc. cum
reliquis.
interpret it of Christ's death as remembered by a Cross, since this sign by
remembering of it Rhem. annotat. in 1. Tim 4. sect. 14.
purges the impurities of the soul, being (to omit all other means) enabled
thereto by the ordinance of the Church, which does Bellar. de effect. Sacra.
cap. 31. proposit. 3.
impetrat for the ceremonies which it does bless a power to cleanse from
venial sins. And this is ordinary. Another trick there is on foot whereby
the treasurers of the Church join Rhem. ibi.
their blessing to the Cross by way of indulgence. For as John Durant. de
ritib. lib. 3. cap. 11. sect. 3.
the 22. annexed an indulgence of 40. days pardon to the office of the Cross,
so are there standing pardons adjoined to the crosses Chemnit. in exam. p. 4.
de indul. station. vrb. Romans page 84.
Church at Rome for every day 48. years: for every Sunday 300. years: and for
the Dedication day remission plenarie. Now what grossnesse of idolatry call
you this? For none can pardon but God alone, none merit of God or make
satisfaction but only Christ: and he by virtue of his Godhead, without the
which his Manhood could not have done any thing Heb. 9.14. Act. 20.28.
either meritorious or satisfactorie for our redemption.

#Sect. 3. The effects of the Cross Spiritual great and marvelous. Two
objections to the same answered.
THe third Idol is the sign of the Cross itself endued with Bellar. de
effect sacra. cap. ^.
virtue for effects spiritual, great and merueilous, for whi^^ he is also
worshipped. The Cross Martial. art. 5. pe^. totum. Rhem. annotat. luk, 24
sect. 5.
blesses, which only the blessed seed can do. The Cross Martial. fo.
114.115. conc. Nicen. a. act. 4.
conuerteth sinners, which is a new creation. The Cross Bellar. de imag. c.
29.30. Rhem. 1, Tim. 4. sect. 11.
sanctifyeth, which is the office of the holy ghost. The Cross Belar. ib. cum
reliquis*
drives away the devil, which is the honor of the woman's seed. The Cross
works miracles, whereas it is the Lord alone which works wonders ( Psalm.
136.4.) what will ye more? The Cross Matrial. art. 2. fo. 16
saves like the Goncil. Nicen. 2. Act. 2.
serpent, like Noah's Arc, like Ezechtels mark, (which were figures of Christ
Jesus) yea saves Coste^ In Enchi. c. 11
all that are marked with it, which is to be a Jesus. Two things I look to
have objected: First they make the Cross a mean under God of these effects,
which freeth them from Idolatry. Not so, as long as they hold it a mean that
is worthy to be adored even as our Doct. Fulk. reioynd. 2. Apoc. 9. v. 20.
Lord had been an Idolater if he had adored the devil out of an
acknowledgement that he was a distributer of things earthly under God. Let not
this instance be despised: for the sign of the Cross (as all other Popish
Idols) is a flatly a devil, yea, a devil adored by them, as a distributer
under God; not of temporal blessings only but also of heavenly graces. And
what though some teach in their subtlety, that the Cross makes holy by
stirring up devotion only, not by Vasq. de adorat. li. 3 disput. 2. cap. 5.
imprinting any holiness, and moreover deny it to be holy per se but in Bella.
controuers 7. lib. 2. ca. ^9
relation of Christ alone they decree it worthy to be Vasq. lib. 2. disput. 6.
cap. 2.
worshipped for this relative holiness, yea some to be adored Bellar. ibi.
cap. Suar in Thom. 21. tom. 1. disput.
per se. The former of these euicteth Idolatry; the latter of them a Danae.
cont. Bellar Controuers. 7. li. 2. ca. 19.
contradiction to maintain it. The second objection will be this. The Papists
Council. Trident. sesl. 25. decret. de ima.
deny there is any holiness, power, or virtue in the Cross. True, inherently
and per se. Which, what is it to the purpose, while adherently and in relation
they say it has Bellar. controuers. 7. lib. 3. cap. 7 Caesar, Baron Annal. in
anno 253. Rhem. in 1. Tim. 4 sect. 9.10.12.13.
holiness and virtue through Christ's institution and the Churches benediction;
yea power to make actually And. willet. controuers. 9. Q. 7 part. 5.
holy even by bare Bellar. de imag. ca. 30
touching, and to drive away the devil even ex opere operato: To wit, they
compare the power of the Cross to the power of David's Harp, Tobithes Liber,
Elishaes Salt, Christ's Hemme, Paul's Napkins: in all of which our writers find
an Idolatrous fancy in the^, although being asked, I know they will answer,
that none of these (to speak properly) had any power inherent in them, but an
assisting virtue only. No more did the Pagan Sozom. lib. 7. cap. 15.
Olympias think any power celestial to be inherent in his Images perpetually.
Neither did the Jews imagine any power habitually to be immanent in the
serpent. Hereby these became to be Idols, that a certain power divine was
thought to be (with Ric. Hook. lib. 5. ca. 65 page 164.
them) and present to them, which is now ascribed to the Cross in a manner
Danae controuers. 7. lib. 2. ca. 18
little better then that of the Pagans; sure in a manner out Ric Hook. Ibid.
right as idolatrous as that of the Jews when they idolized the serpent. And
this is verified, even in the learned of the Papists John Reynold. de Idololat.
lib. 2. cap. 3. sect. 81.
tanquam si presens vis inesset, they seek to Crosses and to Images, as once
the heathen did to their Idols; they think there is Rhem. in Act. 19. sect.
8.9.
a power given to relics, to cross; and unto the name of Jesus they
attribute a Luc. Marinaeus de reb. hispanie. lib. 5.
Numen to a crucifixe, howsoever in the schools they gull us with Vazq. de
adorat. lib. 2. disput. 8. cap. 3.
Nihil est Numinis, in an Image, or in a Cross. And John the 22. Pope ascribed
a virtue to the Veronica: Salve vultus Domini, imago beat, lumen funde
cordibus ex vi tibi data. In regard hereof our writers flatly call the cross
an And. willet controuers. 9. art. 4. page 411.
Idolatrous sign, an insinuat, Doct Fulk. answer. to Rhem 1. Tim. 4. sect. 11.
that he cutteth to near upon the office of the Holy Ghost, and Danae. contro.
7. li. 3. cap. 7.
openly cry out upon the sacrilege of Rome for ascribing even the
extraordinary effects of power divine unto these consecrate things of theirs.
Therefore to conclude, as the tree Genesis 3.5, 6.22.
of knowledge was an Idol when there was ascribed to it a power to make
happy, the 2. King. 18.4.
brazen serpent an Idol, when a power of healing was conceived to be with it,
the Johan Satisbur. Polycratic. lib. 2. cap. 19.
star an Idol when he was deemed to have a power of effecting or foreshewing
things below: as Gen, 30.6.
Jacob and Reg. 5.7.
Iehoram were made Idols when there was given to the one a power to give
children, to the other a power to give life: finally as the earth of Israel was
made an Idol by Ibid. v. 17.
Naaman, and 1. Sam. 5.5.
Dagon by his priests and servants, when the first was made able to sanctify a
sacrifice, the latter made able by his touching to make holy a threshold, so is
the Cross an Idol: now seeing he is imagined able to do that which the Lord
can only do, and thereupon is adored and worshipped with the honor which
belongs to him alone.

#Sect. 4. In grace given and received by men, as also in forms of Oaths, the
Cross is not only joined and matched with Christ, but sometime ouermatcheth
him as being more effectual then be.
THe Cross is become an Idol in that it is joined with Christ, there being
nothing more commonly heard then these copulatiues among the Papists, the
Martial. art. 1. fol. 21.
name of Christ and the sign of the passion, the, Martial. in reply. art. ^.
faith of Christ and the banner of the Cross, the Miss. de. invent, cruc.
passion of Christ, and the Cross. When mention is made of grace to be given
or to be received by men. And if the Agnus which the Cross does consecrate,
purges Lib. ceremo. 1. tit. 7.
sin, sicat Christ sanguis as the blood of Christ it self which should it
seem incredible to us, that the Cross the efficient of such power in the
Agnus should be able himself to do as much in their opinion? Sure when
Tecelius the pardoner taught that the Cross was able to cleanse our sin
as well as the Cross of Christ, Amand. Polan. in orat de, scient cruc.
our writers interpret him to mean as well as the passion of Christ it self:
why should they not? Pray not Papists at the consecrating of a Cross
Pontifical. Roman. p. 2. tit. de benedict. nouae crucis.
sicut per crucem Christi, etc. As by the Cross of Christ the world is
expiated from all guilt, so by the merit of this Cross let them that offer it
be clear from all committed offenses. He that will clear the Cross aereall
from this attainder, he must consider the speeches are genenerall there is a
Marti. de cruc. art. 6.
water flowed into the Cross which is known to be the salvation of faithful
souls and again, Iopas Aurelian de cult. imag. lib 2. Torrens. in. confess.
Augustine. lib. 4. cap. 9 tit. 4. Durant. de rit. lib. 2. cap. 45. sect. 3.
Martial de cruc. art. 6. fol. 92.93.
The Cross does as much as the presence of Christ on earth, and proceeds
with like efficacy, as he himself the samplar. Howbeit, there is wherein the
sign of the Cross ouergoeth Christ's flesh, as it was present here on earth,
for as much as it had no effectiue virtue in it by the sight of it self and by
bare touching to drive away Satan, or to make holy or to work miracles: but it
was the mighty power of the Godhead, whereby these things were wrought. And
before we leave this point, see we how he was matched with Christ in the
worship of an oath when the old Christians were willed to swear by God,
Christ, the Holy Ghost, per Veget. de. re milit. lib. 2.
Maiestatem Imperatoris, by the Majesty of the Emperor Tertullian seems to
mislike the form, Tertul. de coron milit. cap. 11.
Credimus humanum sacramentum divine super induci licere and in alium dominum
respondere post Christum? Think we it lawful to add an humane oath to the
divine, and to swear after Christ by an other Lord? Sure it is in Pamel in
Tertul. apolog cap. 31. nota. 5.
France forbidden after this manner to swear by God and by the King or by the
Kings children. Now this form of swearing is performed to the honor of the
Cross, as appears by the oath which Otho took unto the Pope, Carol. Sigon.
de reg. Ital. lib. 6. anno 960.
Iuro per Patrem, and filium, and spiritum sanctum, and per signum hoc vivifica
crucis. I swear by the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, and by the sign
of this life-bringing Cross. When Lib. Pontifical. in Pelag. 1.
Pope Pelagius cleared himself, he went up to to deske having the book of the
Gospels and a cross upon his head. Council. tom. 3. page 917.
Martine the fifth when he adiureth the followers of Wiclife, and of John
Husse, he commands them to touch the book of the Gospel and the Image of
the crucifixe. The Cross then was honored in an oath as well as the Gospels
book, which thar it was matched with Christ, it does appear by the abiuration
of Council. tom. 3. page 600.
Beringarius who swore by the Holy Trinite, and per haec sacro sancta Christi
Euangelia, by the holy Gospel also. Now least any should reply, that Christ
had the honor which the Cross signified as once in Carol. Sigon. ibid. lib. 3
anno 742.
Anastatius oath, who holding a Cross in his hand said, per eum qui huic ligno
affixus est inro: I swear by him who was fastened to this Cross, it must be
considered that the very Cross itself had a part in this honor as appears
by that Decret. p. 2. ca. 22. q. 5. cap. 2.
Canon which enioyneth three years penance to him that has forsworn himself
upon a Cross consecrate, The sign of the cross pertaketh both of the inward
and outward worship of God.
but in case the cross were not consecrate (by which he forswore himself)
then the penance of one year only.

Thirdly, the sign of the Cross is an Idol in that it partaketh of Gods
worship both inward and outward. Of the inward he partaketh when men are
Breuiar. Roman. in hebdomad. 4. in quadragesimo. Tho. Aqui. par. 3. q. 25. art
4. Andrad. Orthodox. explicat. ^.
taught to put their trust in him. a moral Idolatry (says one of their
Rodolph. Ardens. homil. 9. post. Trinitat.
own.) Sure an Idolatry by many of their own Council. Trident. sess. 25.
Bellar. de imag.
confessions, that which also is great, both because it is an Epiphan. haeresi.
79.
adultry of the spirit which God, a spirit, much respects, and also because
it sets up a August. cont. Ma^imin. lib. 1. cap. 11.
spiritual temple to an Idol, which is far worse then when some material
temple is erected. And the Cross is to be worshipped outwardly with latria it
self which is Gods worship, for so the Church of Rome does Tho. Aqu. pa. 3. q.
25. art. 3.4. Anton. Posseuin. bibliothec. lib. 1. cap. 10. Bellar. de imag.
cap. 23.
teach not only for a Cross material, but even for an aereall also. For who
is ignorant of this distinction, the true nails and spear and sepulcher we
adore, but not their Images. The true Cross we adore for his sake and his
Alexand. Ales. p. 3. q. 30. memb 3. art 3. Durant. de rit, lib. 1. cap. 6.
images also, him for touching and representing, these for representing only?
And it is indeed Nic. Saund. de imag cap. 13. Bellar. de imag. cap. 24.26.
directly taught that the sign of the Cross is to be worshipped among the
rest of these representations, and their practice is answerable. For they
invoke this sign, Catechis. Regin. Maria. Anglic.
per crucis signum fugiat hinc omne malignum; per idem signum saluetur quodque
benignum. Yea in invocation they join it with Christ. Per misericor dia^ Jesus
Christi? Offic. Miss. in praeparat.
Per auxilium and signum sanctae crucis, Per intercessionen beatae Mariae, etc.
And they adore it in their solemnities. Portifor. Sarisbur. in fest. exaltat.
crew.
Adoramus crucis signaculum per quod sumpsimus salutis sacramentum: but more of
this in place convenient.

#Sect. 5. The sign of the Cross, a part of the devils worship: A Character
to effect things supernatural and deuilish miracles. An instrument of
witchcraft: an inchaunting rod, a magical sign.
THe fourth Idol of the sign of the Cross is the devil himself the
adversary of God, who here obeyed and not God, is worshipped here in stead of
God as he was once in the hill Leuit. 17.4.7.
altar, though set up for the worship of God as well as this sign is now.
Think we the spirit without cause calls him a devil, as it is Apoc. 9.20.
evident that he does it being one of the popish Idols against which the Turk
is loosed? sure being a character used to effect things supernatural without
promise from the Lord, it cannot be less then a Magdeburgens. apud Bellar. de
imag. cap. 30. Doct Fulk. con. Saund. de imag. c. 12. p. 652.
rite of the devil, an instrument of Goulart. in Cyprian epist. 56. not. 31.
witchcraft, yea a very inchaunting Calfhil. cont. Mat. art. 8. and passim.
rod as our writers use to term it, why not? Seeing the pieces of the Cross
were Hierom. in Mart. c. 23.
charms and inchauntments, by a certain woman borne in the boosome in Hieroms
days, it no way helping which Rhem. in 1. Tim. 4. sect. 15.
some allege there is no covenant made with the devil, for even an Zanch. de
oper. redemp. c. 17 these. 5.
implicit covenant makes up witchcraft, such as was between Eve and him in
Paradise though not expressed. And whereas the heathen hanged Macrob. saturnal.
li. 1. cap. 7.
Imagines Maniae before their doors to keep out hurtful spirits, the Sebast.
Munster. lib. de Imperat and prohibit. Iudaeor.
Jews at this hour set up a circle about their houses to keep out the
devil, the Cross among Christians takes up the reuersion of this office even
as we see him over many a country door for the very same purpose. Hierom. in
Isa. li. 16. ca. 57.
Hierom could not brook the Deus Tutelaris which stood in the entry with a
candell before it, to preserve the house from evil: for that it did hurt even
to Christians and all converted, because as they went into such houses and went
out of them, they were ever put in mind inoliti erroris of their old and wonted
error. The Cross in baptism is more powerful to remember a wonted error,
then a Cross in an entry or over a door, which also will never go from the
possession of private houses until the public house of God do spue it out.
Neither is it nothing that the Papists give it the name even of an Tholossan.
Syntax. Tom. 2. li. 28. ca. 24.
Amulete against the devil, and fear not to say they conjure ( even Lindan.
panopl. li. ca.
conjure) the devil by it. Somewhat also it is, that the devil has wrought
many Zanch. in operib. redemp. ca. 15. these. 3. Whitak. controner. 1. qu. 6.
ca. 12. Fulk reioind. Art. 1. pa. 145.
miracles by it, and at this hour colludeth in it as in a cricle faining he is
chained or chased away, when (indeed) he Hospin. de orig. imag. Calih. cont.
Mart. passi.
gives back to get the more ground, and flies from the sight to surprise the
soul with greater advantage. As for the crosses of the Mass Microlog. de
ecclesia. obsetuat. cap. 14. I ^an. Reynold. conferenc. ca. 8. diui. 4.
Gregory the seventh took them immediately from the circle, which is the cause
they run in odd numbers to keep the old rule, Numero deus impari gaudet.
The crosses of Danae. contro. 7. li. 3. ca. 7. And. Willet con.
consecration, and of the Herman. Hamelman. de tradit. p. 1. lib. 4. col.
373.369. Fulk. answer, to Rhem, 1. Tim. 4. sect. 15.
exorcisme, are coniuring maces in like manner. What that the figure of the
Cross is even by to 9. q. 7. p. 5.
nature magical, and a ceremony used in magique throughout all ages. So that
the Papists may seem to provide two strings for their bow when they chose him
against the devil, no less then when for the matter of their Beads they
choose a stone that has a Durand. de rit. lib.
natural force against him not only a spiritual. Cael. Rhogiin. Antiquit.
lib. 10. cap. 8. Plin. lib. 28. cap. 4.


#Sect. 6. The Surplice as a Priestly and holy vestiment, is to be adored.
NOw while we thus wholly bend our force against the Cross, the Surplice
happily may hope to escape, which must not be suffered. The things that be
dead (says the Papist) are not capable of adoration (per se). Howbeit as they
have ( Vazq. de adorat. lib. 2. disputat. 6. ca. 2.
ordinem) and relation unto God, so they are capable and they have an order to
him which are Suar. tom. prim. in Thom. disputat. 54. sect. 5.
consecrate to his service by the authority of the Church, which if it be
public it is authentic and in this business does suffice. For though there
be not in these, says he, such a relation unto God as can Ibid.
formally and Vazq li. 2. disput. 8. cap. 14.
expressly represent him like an Image and a Cross, yet being once consecrate
to his service, they begin to be things of God: yea Ibid ca. 7.
parts of God whose worship is a worship of God, so that with him they are to
be worshipped as the purple is wont to be worshipped with the king. Some
difference I grant there is among them about the manner of adoring, some
think they are to be adored Suar. vb. supra disput. 54. sect. 4. and disput.
56. sect. 2.
(per se) quatenus holy with an inferior adoration: Vasq. li. 2. disput. 8.
cap. 10.
others think it is superstitious to worship any thing (per se) without
relation unto God: and that the adoration due to holy things in this relation
is not an inferior worship, but the worship of Ibid. cap. 14. p. 12.
latria, wherewith God himself is worshipped. Howbeit, about the matter they
all accord that holy things must be adored as well as Images, as well as Crosses,
or any thing else that appertains to the Lord. Synod. 8. can. 3. Vasq. li. 2.
disput. 8. cap. 14. Doct. Bills. against Apolog part 4 pa. 319.
They say, Images and Crosses themselves must be adored like holy vessels, holy
books, holy vestiments, with the like. Vasq. ibi. cap. 7. and 10. and 14.
They say the cause of worshipping Images, and of worshipping other things holy
is one and the same: Suar. disputat. 54. sect 3. Vasq. li. 2. disput. 6. cap. 2.
They prove by these reasons Images must be adored and worshipped, because they
are (res sacrae) holy things: at a word holy things are even n proprie, that
is, properly to be worshipped in their opinion, as the ground (say they) was to
be adored and worshipped where Moses stood, because it was holy: and the Arc,
the Tabernacle with the rest of the Temple were all worthy to be adored because
all holy to the Lord. This our own Doct. Bills. cont. Apolog. par. 4. pa. 319.
divines see well, who charge the Papists with Idolatry to be abhorred in
their worshipping of holy books, vessels, instruments, with the like. Indeed
their worships speak so much though they and we and all men else were silent,
Vasq. li. 2. disput. 8. cap. 14.
oblations, censings, lights, kissings, bowings, vaylings: which, are they not
Doct. Bills. ibid. p. 321 322, 323.
Idolatrous worshippings when communicated to a creature religiously? But the
Surplice (you will say) is none of these. That were great pity, considering
how eminent above the rest he is in Durand. ra^iona. li. ^ cap. 1. Jacob. a
Vitriac. histo. Occident. lib. 2. ca 34.
holiness, both for use and signification, wherewith because I am loath to
incumber my self, let this suffice, the vestes sacrae and the Suar. disput.
154. sect. 3. Saund. de visibl. Monarch. tract. de imag. (...) 2. cap. 1. Vasq.
lib. 2. disput. 6. cap. 2. and lib. 3. disput. 1. cap. 1.
vestes sacerdotales, the holy and the priestly garments are not forgotten in
the writings of the Papists, but named expressly for holy things that must be
adored and worshipped. And must not the Surplice (then) pack with the Cross,
and go with him for company, it being a filthy Idol like him? For if it were
but a stone in a field, that had bin worshipped as Papists adore and worshipped
it, it ought to have bin long since abolished as a C^ncil. Nanne^ens. cap. 20.
council does decree. In consideration that such Idolatry renounceth
Christianity: which Idolatry cannot be remedied but by an utter desolation of
the Idol. And this we have to say against the Cross and Surplice in that they
are Idols. Now to proceed, if they were but Idolothites they were to be
abhorred by us, the which we can easily prove against them.

#Sect. 7. The Cross, Surplice, etc. incurable and inerecouerable Idolothites.
The Cross no creature of God, therefore utterly to be abolished.
THe Idolothite is wont to be described unto us, either actiuely, or
passiuelie. Actiuely, that is Idolothious (says Anselmi. in gloss.
interlinear. in 1. cor. 10.
the ancient description) quod est sub veneratione Idoli, which reflecteth any
glaunce of the least honor, credit, or countenance to an Idol. So the Canon
Law does reackon a Pagan poem to be an Idolothite not to be used, Decret.
par. 1 distinct. 37. cap. 15.
quia non solum thura offerendam daemonibus immolatur, sed etiam little dicta
libentius capiendo: and we know willingness to use an Idol as a sign of Gods
covenant graceth him more then when we read a poem of his in some Grammar
schole or other for a lesson of Poetry. The Tertul. de spectat. August. de
ciuit. dei cum reliquis.
Fathers do also inroule a stage play among other Idolothites which
represented heathen Gods, although the Theater honors not so much as an holy
Sacrament of the Lords. Decret. p. 2. cause. 1. qu. 4. ca. 12
Gatian accounts meat sacrificed in a temple to be Idolothious even out of
the Temple, and at a private table it self to the man that knows so much;
for that honor in truth or in show at least which it sends to the Idol, to
which it appertains. Passiuely, when a thing Idolothious is described in
sense most large it is defined to be an unclean thing of Idolaters which we
must not touch, because they defile whatsoever belongs unto them, if their
use which is religious has but touched it. For as in the Law of Moses, that
was unclean which had bin touched by any other thing or person that was
unclean, so now what heretics and Idolaters touch take any way into use
religious, that is unholy and Idolothious, as 2. Cor. 6.17.
Scriptures, Iud. 23. vid. Bara ibid.
Fathers, and the practice of the primative Church do show. For, was not the
zeal of Christians such, that a babble was therefore held to be unclean,
Hieron. in Aggeum. cap. 2.
because by chance one of the Theodoret. histor. li 4. ca. 15.
Arrians beasts had touched it, and that in the street. As for the Church,
Constantine forbad his picture to be hanged in an Idols Temple, Eusebius. de vit.
Constantin. lib. 4. cap. 16.
ne ipsa tabella vel minima lineamentorum part prop^er vetitorum Idolorum
errorem labem aliquam contraheret. But if an heretics touching in use civil,
the touching of an heretics Temple defiles that which is not incorporated
into their worship: then much more is that defiled which has even state
religious in their service, as the Cross and Surplice have, and that by way of
consecration? Properly therefore that is Idolothious which has been
consecrate to an Idol with state religious in his worship. So the Jewels of
the Iamnites were unlawful, because before they had been consecrate unto
Idols. So Tertul. li. de idololat.
Tertullian profanationis suae maculam haec habent ab initio Idolatria dicata.
These things are spotted by their consecration unto Idolatry. 2. Mac. 12.40.
So Augustine, when he defines the Idolothite which is unlawful, he has
these words, Omni^ creatura dei ^ona est, sed si illud quod in agris na scitur
consecratur Idolo, vel sacrificatur i^te^ Idoloth y^a, de putandum est. So
Ambrose (last of all) Aliquid p^ll^rum est p^^a^^identiam (id est) oblationem
Idoli. By virtue hereof, Ambros. in 1. cor. 10
whatsoever guilt there was in the Idols meat at Corinth, and at Pergamus, that
lights upon the Cross and Simplice, because although they have been never
sacrificed, yet have they been not only offered privately, but also publicly
been consecrate to idolatrous service. Which does it not make them Idolothites
eue^ in the Vazq. de adorat. lib. 3. disput. 1. cap. 1. and 2 Rhemist. annotat.
in Apoc. 2. sect.
highest degree? For, as God Tho Aqu. p. 3. qu. 83. art. respons. ad quart.
ever blesses to good, so the Devil to evil. As things well consecrate
become Chrysostom. 2. cor. homil. 20. Gregor. Nissen. de sanct. bapt.
holy, so things ill consecrate must of necessity become unholy. As things
well dedicate receive an Thom. Aquin. quo supra respons. ad tertium.
aptness for the service of God, so the contrary receive an aptness for the
service of the Devil. Last of all, as right consecrations are blessings, so
the profane blessings of heretics and Idolaters are Decret. p. 2. cause. 1.
qu. 1. cap. 66. and pass.
maledictions and mere Rhemist. in Apoc. 2. sect. 8.
cursings that make most execrable. But if Gods creatures by such consecration
become the creatures of the Devil, become unholy, become parts of the Devils
service and so accursed, then into what sincke deserves the sign of the
Cross to be cast which never was good nor a creature of Gods, and is now
become so evil, as that he passes the pollution of all other Idolothites
whatsoever? What is the Agnus, what the holy Water, what the holy Bread to the
Cross? What all the rest of Popish trumpery for which we are wont to raise
such outcries against the Popish Fulk. answer to Rhem. 1. Tim. 4. com reliq.
consecration? Has the Cross any need of the Churches consecration, as these
have need? No, the Cross is holy of it self; the sign Euthym. panopl. tit.
20. cap. 14
^ereall of the Cross especially without any further consecration. But if he
had need, there is not any whose patent is so large as his, as whereby he is
not only himself Decret. p. 3. de consecrat. distinct. 5. cap. 10.
consecrate to Idols service, but also installed a Grande consecrator of all
things else in Idolatrous worship. The common creatures that are, are not
Rhemist. in 1. Tim. 4
blessed without the Cross to common use. What other things to use religious,
Vazq. de adorat. li. 3 disput. 1. cap. 1.
Omnia nobis ipso signo crucis benedicuntur and sanctificantur. Are not the
Sacraments excepted? No not the Sacraments, But, Omnia Sacramenta crucis
signaculo perficiuntur, Decret. vt supra.
says the Canon. At a word, Dutand. de rit. li. 2. cap. 45. sect. 7. Torrens.
in confess. August. li. 4. c. 9. tit 4
sine hoc signo nihil sanctum, neque aliqua consecratio qua meretur effectum.
Come hither you that plead for this adultresse, see ye not how deeply she
has drunk of the bitter water of cursing to the rotting of her thigh, and the
swelling of her belly? And this curse is as incurable, as it is bitter. When
Gods creatures are polluted they may be reddita suis benedictionibus, restored
again unto their blessings as an ancient Tertul. de cib. ludaic. 2 Isa. 2.20.
Father speaks. For example, the Idols meat by the word and prayer may be
restored to the common blessing of feeding the body which God did give it in
the day that he created it, and the bread of the Sacrament Idolized to the
special blessing of feeding the soul which Christ did give it in the night he
ordained the supper, whereas this wretched and unworthy sign can recover no
benediction by either of these two ways he being neither a creature of God,
nor yet a rite of his sons ordayning. Such an Idolothite as this so deeply
and irrecouerably polluted, shall it not be defaced through some injurious use
or other? Yea be cast out of the Temple of God? Yea thrown unto the moules and
backs the common receptacle of all defiled relics? For defacing with some
injury, we have the ancient Vazq. de adorat li. 2 disput. 2. cap. 2. ^. Mac.
4.45
Albingenses for our torch-bearers, who in disgrace of Images and Crosses,
painted the holy and blessed Virgin with one eye, and set forth the Crucifixe
with one nail only through both the feet. For remoouall out of Gods Temple,
we have the famous Maccab^us for our leader, who when the Pagans had defiled
the Altar, he would suffer it to stay no longer in the Temple. For throwing to
the Moules and backs, we have the renowned and zealous Council. Nicen. 2. act.
7. page 188.
Graecians for our example; who not only threw out Crosses and hurled Images
out of the Church, but also qua ex c^ra fusa^rant in singularim ornatum, in
turpes vsus converterunt. Keep we then the Cross and Surplice within the
church and break we wilfully those two cautions which have bin evermore
prescribed and accordingly practiced against the Idolothite? First to show our
detestation of the Idol, we must either destroy him, or in keeping him for
private use, so alter and change him that August. ad Publicol. epist. 154.
Omnis honor Idoli cum apertissima destructione sub^ertatur. that all the
honor which the Idol gains by him or gives to him, may be turned vpside
down. Secondly, for so much as in every ceremony we are to provide not only
for the glory of God, but also for the good of our neighbor, therefore not only
for his Ibid.
honor must all this honor be despoyled, but also all show thereof, as these
words show, Apparet illud esse prohibitum nein honorem alienorum Deorum
aliquare vtamur; aut vti existimemur, sic eam accipiendo vt quamvis animo
contemnamus eos tamen qui nostrum animum ignorant ad haec honoranda
aedificemus. We talk of an use of Cross and Surplice with a diverse mind
from papists. but talk only. Do not Ih. How^let in refusal. rat. 2.
papists themselves gather out of this rule of Augustine, that it suffices
not in mind to hate our service and our ceremonies, unless all show be made
also of their hatred by forbearing both the one and the other? Aeneas Sylui.
hist. Bohemic. cap. 6^.
Sygismund in heart honoreth the Sacrament: yet when Rochezana carries it in
procession, he will not uncover to it, and all to avoyde offensive show, Ne
Rochezanam approbasse videretur. It is not enough for good Eleazar that he
eat no swines flesh, Mac. 2.6.
but certain meat of his own bringing, which although of it self it was
lawful, yet must he rather loose his life then eat it, for that show of
conformity to Idolaters in the eating of swines flesh which it bore and
carried with it. Caesar. Baroni Annal, anno 303.
Secundus is commanded to deliver his Bibles, he makes answer, Christianus
sum and non Traditor. Hereupon he is commanded to deliver aliqua ecvola (that
is) certain stuff which was cast aside for that it had no use. Will he not
deliver this to save his life? no not this. It was lawful, but it had a show
of their sin whom the Church called Traditores for their delivering the holy
books to be burnt by the officers of the tyrant Dioclesian. Last of all, Phil.
Melancthon. in epist. ad eccles. marchiac.
Was it lawful for the poor man at Berne to use the ceremony of fasting from
flesh with a diverse mind from the papists? then was he to blame to burn as
he did, to avoyde all show of communicating with them. But if Decret. par. 2.
cause. 32. qu. 4. cap. 8.
Augustine may be his judge, he was not to blame; who holds it better to dye
for famine, then to eat an Idolothite. This as it may excite our governors to
hate the sign of the Cross and the Surplice (they being polluted in the
highest degree of Idolothisme, so to second the ancient zeal of their
forerunners in the faith, who hated all customs of the alienes even in common
use it self, and all things else if but only touched by them: so may it
justify our loss of livings rather then to honor them apertissime by
aduauncing them into the service of the most high, so to follow aloof of those
worthy witnesses who leave example to loose life, not living only, rather then
incur so much as a show, so much as in the least ceremony of the least
approbation of foreign Idolatry.

#Sect. 8. Two several sins committed in retaining the Cross: The first
reserving it as a special and scandalous Monument of Idolatry past: with six
reasons against the retaining of it.
WE have vewed the sign of the Cross in his Idolothisme considered in
general; now to the end we may proceed, descend we down to the several
sins thereof, which are two. The first, in that he is a monument of
Idolatry past. The second, in that he is an inticement to Idolatry for time to
come. Concerning the former, what is Monumentum? but that which mouet mentem
(says August. d^ cura pro mort.
Augustine?) but now the Cross cannot but admonish the mind of popery, and
that to think the better of it, as long as they see it, being Iac. Ledesima
Catechis. in initio.
the principal badge of popery; enthroned and sitting in a Sacrament amongst
us, where ought to be seen no sign but such as men should tremble at. Deuteronomy.
21.23.
Moses cross must be pulled down because no Francisc. Iun. in Analy^ ibid.
(monument) of any heinous crime committed must be seen amiddst the holy
people of God. Is the Cross a Monument of what he has revenged and punished
but none of that which he has served and honored? It is too good a Decret.
par. 2. cause. 13. qu. 3.
Monument for a wicked man to have his body buried in the Church-yarde, or his
name mentioned in the Church Service among the names of holy men. And is it not
then too good a Monument for the Cross to be revived at the Font, and there
be mentioned honorably, together with the sign of the water, the sign of the
covenant? What that these ceremonies of Cross and Surplice are expressly termed
relics of popery (as they are left behind in our church) by the best of our
Ioh. Calvin. epist. to Francford. Pet. Martyr in^pist. Amic cuid. in Angl.
writers. In regard hereof, say we to them as we are prompted, Isa. 30.22
get ye hence, for ye are menstruous. Yea as our own Homil. ag. peril of
Idolat. Iniunct. art. 343.
Laws enjoin, and leaders direct. root we out thoroughly all the monuments of
popish Idolatry, even to the Johan Wolph. in 2. Reg 18.
least relic; even to the Pe^. Martyr amic. cuidam in Angl.
least leavem; even to the least Gualt. in Luke 5. ver. vlt.
quisquilliae. even to the least Pet Martyr in epist. alia amico cuidam in Angl.
foot step; which if it be done, all the friends in the world are not able
to save the cross, it being so grande a monument of popery, as that the
papist is Humble mo^. for tollerat.
tickled at the very heart to see it entertained amongst us. What then lets
that we should not renew the ancient request Council. Cartha 3.5 can. 15.
Placuit ab Imperatoribus gloriosissimis peti vt reliquiae Idololatriae in
quibuscunque locis omnimodo deleantur. Seeing all the reasons are liable
against these Relics controversed, which moved Aurelius with his Colleagues to
sue for the razeing of those remainders of Idolatry which in their times were
left. First, the Cross is a Jewel of the harlot; while we keep it we repent
not of former adultery as we ought. Secondly, it is a Trophee of Antichrists
conquest; while it stands Christ is dishonored and put to shame. Thirdly, it
is a sign of commoderation with Gods enemies; while we bear it we forbear to
confess against them as we are commanded Thou shall destroy all signs and
monumentes of their religion, because thou art an Deuteronomy. 7.5.6
holy people to the Lord. Fourtly, It is a stumbling block to the popishly
minded, while it continues, some regard seems to be had of their service and
of their ceremonies. Fifthly, It is a Judge. 2.3.
snare like to one of Canaans monuments. while it surviueth, occasion is given
to abuse, yea to worship it. Sixthly, It is a Isa. 44 10
vanity, even as every Idol is, which can no way be profitable. More then
these six reasons, the best of our Gui. Perk. de Idololat. p. 109.
writers cannot allege against any monument of Idolatry, which being all of
them found in these relics controuersed, it is apparent that the jealousy of
the Lord is provoked to see them: and that it stands not with the holiness of
our Church to keep them, whose duty is to Isa. 30.22
pollute the ornament; to hate the employment of Ind. 23.
every Idol, and to account his gold Deu. 7.26
execrable, his meat Apoc. 2.20.
abominable, his name it self Psalm. 16.4.
detestable: yea a name to be Exodus 23.13.
rooted out from under heaven. This duty we see practiced from time to time.
Genesis 35.2
Jacob not only burning the bodies of his Idols, but abolishing their earings
too. Elias abhorring an 1. Reg. 18 32.
Altar of Baals, as well as Baal himself. Iehu not only defacing Baals Image,
but his 2. Reg. 10 22.
Temple and Vestrie also. Daniel detesting the meat Dan. 1.8.
of Bell as well as Bell himself. And Iosuah (lastly) razing forth whatsoever
monument he could find of Iosu 23.7
Canaans Idolatry. The faithful in Jacob when they reform and purge the Church
to take away the sin thereof, make all the stones of the Altars as Chalk
stones broken in pieces, that the Isa. 27.9.
groves and Images may not stand up. That which is left of first love in the
decayed church of Ephesus hates all Apoc 2.6.
Nicolaitan participation in the appurtenances of Idolatry. Thus Augustine,
the Christian soul that is truly thankful for her conversion from Idolatry,
August. in Mat. sermon. 6
non vult in terra sua aliquid esse in contumeliam Dei, speaking of the
monuments of former Idolatry which is repented of. To this agrees that of
Chryso. in 1. cor. 10
Chrisostom, with what face can thou give thanks for thy conversion from
Idolatry with that mouth which thou defilest with the leauings of the Idol?

#Sect. 9. The second sin committed in retaining the Cross, is the danger of
Idolatry in it for time to come.
THe second hurt of the Crosses Idolothisine is the danger that is in it for
the time that is to come. For the relics of Idolatry, says Augustine, August.
etiam sopitae solunt recale scere. What then will these relics do of Cross
and Surplice? which as sparcles fly about and are not only not quenched, but
also not covered so much as with embers? And the common sort of men are
entangled with superstition oftentimes even in the midst of Religion August
demoribus eccles. lib. ^ cap. 34.
thoroughly purged, What hope then they can be pure, when unpurged relics lie
in their way, as stumbling blocks and snares unto them? Seeing then Council.
Chalced. act 3.
principalis prudentiae est, omne malum initio opprimere, and serpentem morbum
legum medicinaresecare, Yea a duty, Pelag. 2. epist. ad universe. episcop.
Italiae.
ante prouidere remedia quam morbus increscat, in consideration that Council.
tom. 1. pa. 760.
sera sunt remedia quae adactis iam vulneribus opponuntur. The Cross and
Surplice should be so far from the open honor they have in the worship of
God amongst us, as that indeed they should be forbidden to be in sight at all.
What do thou in the way toward Egypt, to drink the dirtie waters of Geon
(says Hierom. comment. in Abbac. lib. 1. ca. 2.
Hierome?) meaning that the very way must be stopped which leads back to the
Egypt spiritual; and every pleasant fountain, barred and kept from the
people that may enlure to return. The same Hierome Idem in Isa. lib. 17. cap.
63.
proves by Gods stopping of the Israelites way with thorns, least they should
return to their former lovers; that there is need of a strong fence from all
occasions, that may reduce unto Idolatry. The very Papists themselves accord
hereto when they affirm, that to keep the people of Israel from Idolatry,
God forbad there should be any Vazq de adorat. li. 2 disputat. 4. cap. 2.
Image at all amongst them; and Sixth. Senens. Bibliothe. annot. 247
justify the Council of Eliberis, in forbidding every Image for a remedy to
prevent Idolatry. To come to our own Church we must have a care Homil. agperil
of idolat. par. 3
(says it) not only for our selves, and for our own times, but also for
other Churches abroad; and for our posterity, for whose sake, we must away
with all Images, that may be abused, after the ensample of Ibid. pa. 2.
Epiphanius: much more with them which have been Ibid. pa. 1.
abused already, in consideration that Idolatry will come of them, which is an
Ibib. pa. 3.
inseparable accident to them. All these premises being considered, can any
doubt, but the sign of the Cross sins through Idolatry against Gods first
commandment? What our own Law? pronouncing that in the Church an Ibid pa. 1.
page 4, 5.
Idol which has been, is, or is likely to be worshipped? Have we not here an
Act of Parliament, backing all that has been written hitherto? If any say,
the Homilies meaning, is of Images that are material, a double reioynder is
ready at hand. First, The Cross cannot be kept in, but by this general
position, that Images and all may be had in the Church, ad vsum historicum, a
point which our opposites stoutly maintain, but the Holy refuteth strongly.
Secondly, The Homily is grounded upon these general tenants Ibid. pa. ^. page
27.28
every similitude of every thing, every Ibid. pa. 1^ pa. 32.
likeness of any thing at all, even all kinds Ibid. p. 3^
of similitudes are unlawful in the Church which have been, are, or be
likely to be worshipped, which take more hold of the sign of the Cross,
then of many other Images that be material. To conclude therefore, the sign
of the Cross and Surplice are Idols, Idolothites, Monuments of Idolatry, and
Incentiues to the same, therefore they must pack (cum pannis) out of Gods holy
worship.

#Sect. 10. How some contrary to the Papists meaning and writings deny
adoration to be given to the aereall Cross.
THe friends of the Cross deny (some of them) our antecedent. Some of them
our consequent: which disagreement is such amongst them, as that on both the
former heads, there grow more heads then one. For even of them that deny our
proposition, some stand on this, the sign of the Cross is not purposely
adored by the Papists; some on this, we confess the Papists have a purpose to
adore it, but they cannot: the vanishing nature of this sign being not capable
of their worship. As for the former of these twain, they coin a distinction
between a material Cross and aereall, as if the Papists did only worship
the Cross material with Latria which is abolished, and not this aereall
sign, the use whereof is urged. And this distinction is held forth by them,
as if it were an Ajax buckler, under which they are secure, whereas (indeed) it
will not serve so much as for an Ostrich-bush, to cover the least part of their
nakedness from our agumentes which they can never awarde nor answer. First,
whatsoever Papists write, of the Cross in general, that must be meant of
every Cross, else both of the laws are broken, of which the Canonical
speaks thus: Regul. Iur. in sext. 80.
In toto partem non est dubium contineri. The Civil thus, Digest. li. 50. tit.
17.
semper specialia, generalibus in sunt. And the Jesuits words are clear,
Vazq. de adorat. lib. 3. disputat. 2. cap. 4.
bactenus probatum manet, in vniversum, signum crucis, in honor and reuerentia
habendum, ex quibus idem dicendum de signo in aere, etc. Another speaking of
the aereall Cross by name has these words in special of it: Suar. tom. 1. in
Tho. disput. 56. sect. 3.
Modus hujus adorationis iuxta ea, quae de imaginibus and de nominibus sacris
diximus, est explicandus. Do they not press the miracles of the aereall sign
when they prove the Crosses worship? Give they not instance in the Cross Vid.
Attil. serran. de 7 eccles. vrb. Romans page ^5.
aereall, when they prove the Crosses virtue? not to be tedious; the
testimonies which they cite belong they not indifferently now to the aereall,
now to the material, as they first come to hand or serve fittest for the
purpose. Secondly, we must not distinguish of their worship, when they
themselves distinguish not. Now they hold that every Cross is to be
worshipped, Vazq. de adorat. li. 3. dispu. 2. c. 4
Quocunque modo expressa, as they speak of themselves: Sub quacunque figura a
se facta, and fabricata (say we) and our Whitak. cont. Durae. lib. 10. page
868. Amand. Polan. in Orat. de scient. cruc.
writers of them. Photius a Phot. de 7 Council. ca. 7.
Patriarch of Coustantinople does thus interpret the Council of Nice, erucis
signum adoramus, etc. We adore the sign of the Cross, by which the troops of
Diuils are chased, and diseases cured, grace and power being once exhibited in
the samplar which now diffuseth like virtue down into the examples:
worshipping therefore all these (to wit) the Image of Christ and his Cross,
and the note of his Cross with honor, and with adoration etc. Council. 8.
Constantinopl. can. 3.
But let a Council it self speak. Dignum est, etc. It is a worthy thing and
according to congruitie of reason, and ancient tradition, that for the honor
of the principal, all other deriuatiue Images should be honored, and adored
as typus praetiosa crucis, the type of the precious Cross. When Papists cite
out of Sedulius,

Sedulius. Carruin. paschal. lib. 5.
Neue quis ignoret, speciem crucis esse colendam.
Quae Dominum portauit ouans ratione potenti,
Quatuor in de plagas quadrati colligit orbis:
And out of Saund. de imag. ca. 13
Chrysostom, Crucis effigies and figura colenda est, adorandaque. Who can shut
out the aereall sign which is a figure of the Cross, as well as the
material? There is nothing more often in their writings, then the adoration of
the sign. Pottifor. satisbur. in fest. exaltat. cruc.
Adoramus crucis signaculum. Durand. de rit. lib. 1. pac. 6. sect. ^4.
Crucis signum adorandum est omnibus populis. Damasce. de sid. lib. 4. ca. 12.
Adorandum est signum Christi. Phot. vt supra.
Signum crucis adoramus, with the like. Mow I ask which is the sign of the
Cross properly? Bellarmine, answers me. It is the aereall Cross. ^ Bellar.
de imag. ca. 29
And will any man then exclude from these speeches the Cross aereall, it being
signum crucis properly and only include the material Cross, which so properly
is not such? Thirdly, the same reasons that move Papists to worship the
material Cross, are all found in the Cross aereall, what one of them is
wanting? The material bulk? But we worship not any thing, say they, for the
Suar. vt supra. Alphons. de cast. in verb. adorat. Rhemist. in Phil. 2. sect. 2.
matter, but for Christ's representation in it. I ask (then) wherefore worship
they the Cross? because it Tho. Aqu. pa. 3. qu. 25. art. 4.
represents Christ's death: that does the Remis. quo supra.
aereall Cross as well as the material. Wherefore worship they the Cross?
because it is consecrate in Christ his blood; and receives virtue from it:
this is common Rhem. in Luke 24. sect vlt.
to the aereall, as well as to the material. Wherefore worship they the Cross?
because God is present in it, to work spiritually and miraculously by it. This
is done by the Bellar. de imag. c. 29. Mart. repl. art. 1.
aereall as well as by the material. Last of all, wherefore worship they they
cross; because it is, Quid Alphons. de cast. in verb. adora.
ad Christum pertinens; Bellar. de imag. ca. 28
Vexillum eius; signum eius. Because it pertains to Christ, and is his sign
and banner? The aereall Ion. Aurelianens. de cult. imag. lib. 1.
sign has as great a part in these titles, as any material Cross. Fourthly,
we have flat and evident testimonies for the adoration of this sign: go we
to the fountain of the Crosses Idolatry, the second Council of Nice. Which
after it had said that the Cross is holy in it self, and to be worshipped,
subioyneth this of the aererall Cross by name, Council. Nicen. 2. Act. 6.
satisfacit nobis figura, etc. The figure is sufficient for us, which then
receives sanctification, when it is adored by us. For whether we imprint him
as a seal in the forehead, or whether we draw in the empty air the sign
thereof, we hope and believe it is able to put the Diuill to flight. Euthym.
Panopl. tit. 20. cap. 14.
Euthymius having to deal against the Armenians, that consecrated the
material Cross, after their manner before they adored it, disproueth them by
the holiness of the sign aereall, which by the common consent between them,
was deemed more holy then the material, and so more worthy of adoration,
although it were not consecrate. Damas. de fide. lib. 4. cap. 12.
Damascen after he had taught that the sign of the Cross is to be
worshipped, infers instances, and cites figures which belong to the Cross
aereall. The University of Colen, after much spoken of the Cross, has this
conclusion, Censura. Coloniens. in Catechis. Mohem. dialog. 3.
Sitanta est, etc. If the efficacy of our Lords Cross be so great, when he is
only with the hand imprinted in the fluyd air, then why should it not be the
same when he is pictured in a table? So speaking, as if the aereall Cross and
the material were of the same condition. What should I here set down at large
the words Bellar. de imag. cap. 29. and 20.
of Bellarmine? Who calls it, Signu^sacru^, and venerabile, An holy sign and
venerable. Of Coster. Enchirid. cap. 11.
Costerus, who says, that the sign of the Cross whereby men do fence
themselves, is, Summa veneratione colendum, Is to be worshipped with most high
veneratio^ or trouble my self with the large discourse of Gretzerus or any
other? The two last Jesuits that have written shall suffice. Thus Suar. in. Tho.
tom. 1. disputat. 56. sect. 3.
Suarez, ex his intelligitur, etc. By this it is given to understand, that the
sign of the Cross is venerable, and worthy to be adored. For he has an holy
use and signification. Neither is it material that he consists in a matter
and action transeunt, because the only diversity of matter, when the figure and
signification is the same, does not hinder adoration. Our other witness is
Vazquez. Whose maine theme runs in these words, Vazq. de adorat. lib. 3.
disputat. 2. cap. 2. page 487.
Non solum cruxilla, etc. Not only is that Cross to be adored, on which
Christ died, but also every figure of the Cross, whether it be carved or
painted, in some matter permanent, or whether it be fashioned with the hand or
with the fingers in the air, then which, what can be playner spoken on our
side? Fifthly, Our own writers are our witnesses in this truth. Yea, our
enemies their own judges. Simon Goulart. i^ Cypri. epist. 56. fol. 158.
Goulartius is cited against us by Master Hooker. Now he finds even manifold
Idolatries in the aereall sign of the Cross. So that although it were
indifferent when the Fathers first used it, yet now he holds it no longer
Indifferent, but an Idol to be abolished. Lamb. Dan. com. 7. li. ^. c. ^9
Danaeus gives his judgment thus, Etiam crucis signo in aere facto, etc. Even
to the aereall Cross which has no subsistence. Bellarmine contendeth,
religious worship ought to be given. Guil. whitak. cont. Dur. lib. 10. page 859.
Doctor Whitakers answering Duraeus, about the aereall Cross, has these
words, Idololatriam vestram, etc. Your Idolatry and superstition whereby you
worship the Cross with Latria, and sign your selves daily with Crosses
innumerable, as the Devils do like well, so all good men with all their hearts
detest with execration. Nay our most bitter opposites themselves, that most
desire to clear the Cross, have felt the light of this truth so brightly
shining in their own consciences, as that one of them acknowledges that the
very S. Harsnet in declarat. of Westons impostures cap. 20.
expression and signification of the Cross, is the same to the Papists, that
the horn of Jupiters Goat, was to the heathens, and that they give to it the
supreme honor of our Savior Christ himself. An Gab. Powell. de Antich. lib.
2. cap. 10. these. 11.
other cites out of Vazquez, that they worship the Cross and the sign
thereof (to wit) the aereall sign, for that is Vazques Doctrine. A Tho.
Hutton. ag. Deuonshiere minist.
third makes this difference between the aereall Cross of the Papists, and
ours at home, that they worship theirs, but we do not ours. Neither has the
shift which some have broached any covert to hide them. They only give a
reverence to it (say they) whereas the material Cross they worship even with
Latria which is the worship of God himself. For to omit all former profes
which manifestly show, they worship the aereall sign in the very same manner
with the Material? What distinction call you this which is without difference?
For do not the Papists directly tell us, that Vanq de adorat. li. 1. ca. 1.
Idem sunt reuerentia and adoratio, Reverence and adoration are one and the
same, that which Doctor Fulke long since observed. He confounds reverence and
adoration. Consider the titles themselves of their Treatises* Go they not
thus, Doct, Fulk ag* Saund. of imag. cap. 13.
De veneratione, when they write of the worship due to the Durand. de rit. lib.
1 cap. 6. Vazq. de adorat. li. 3
material Cross it self, or to Suar. in Tho. tom. 1. disputat. 55.
relics, or to Ioh. Eckius. Enchirid.
Saints? All which worships are Idolatrous? Consider the reasons used in their
Treatises, prove they not the Ioh. Gropper. de Eucharist.
Euchariste, the Image, the Rhem. in Mat. 4. sect. 3. apud Fulk. ibid.
relic, must be adored, because they are venerabiles? Consider (lastly) the
conclusions of their Treatises. We have ( Coster. Enchirid. cap. 11.
summa veneratio) ascribed by them, to the aereall sign of the Cross. When
the highest adoration which they give to the greatest Image is but a Laurent.
Surius. in monitiuncul. ante Council. Nicen. ^.
reverence; a godly Greg. Mart. in discover of English translat. cap. 3. sect.
16.
reverence; a due Rhem. in Act. 17. sect. 4.
reverence; a small W. Bishop. ag. reformed Catholic. cap. de imag.
reverence; to wit, such a small Council. Nicen. 2. act. 2. page 69.
reverence only, as is that reverent salutation which we sinful men do give
in love one to an other.

#Sect. 11. How the ayrye sign of the Cross is Idolized and worshipped tho
transcant.
THe second sort of our opposites grant their wants no will in the Papist to
Idolize the aereall Cross, howbeit he cannot worship it, neither make an Idol
of it, because it is transeunt, while one part is, the other is not, wholly it
does never subsiste; to be adored by him. And what lets (then) to cry out,
(...) I have found. Howbeit, not what Archimedes once, but quod pueri in faba
now. Indeed had not this triuiall shift appeared personally, when time was
against a certain preacher, and deprived him; and were it not that since I see
it taken up in the mouths of many others, and that it is a common gigge to
shift of all things brought against this filthy Idol, by (Tushe, the aereall
Cross is nothing.) I would have scorned to have looked on it, much more to
have answered it. But now, what matter is it, whether the object of Idolatry
be capable of pollution or no? Honor non est in honorato sed in honorante, and
as August. cont. Faust. Manichae. lib. 21. cap. 22.
S^per^i and imp^ spiritus, non nidore ac funio sacrificiorum sicut nonnulls
v^^i opinantur, sed hominum pascuutu^ erroribus, So it is not for any pollution
in the Idol it self, that we are commanded to root it out, but to cure the
disease of their error that commit Idolatry to him. Secondly, on how lain a
leg does this reioynder stand? Nothing can be made an Idol, whose parts are
transeunt and aereall, and presently vanishing. Which if it be true, then the
Idol of Hieron. comment. in Isa. lib. 13. ca 46. Clem. recognit. ad Jacob.
frat. dom. li. 5.
Pelusium, which the Fathers condemn for the greatest that ever was, was none
at all. I know it cannot be unknown to the ordinary of this case, that the
heathen adored the August. ad publicol. epist. 154.
wind and the air it self. For even to the fluyd air under the name of Dius
and Dia were there Temples without Rome, that were uncovered at the top. To
omit the flood Nilus which the old Egyptians worshipped, and the Agathias.
Scholast. histor. Justinian. li. 1
fluminum lapsus which the Galli did adore. Now by this reason none of these
were Idols. For what more aereal the^ the wind and the air it self? and what
more transeunt in the parts then rivers, falling down and running? And what
will be answered to the name Jesus (the name of him that is God blessed for
ever?) more aereall then the Cross, because a found? which thus describes it
self in the Poet,

Ioh. Lauterb. oenigmat. 86.
Corpore colliso vel rupto nascor in auras
Vanesco, atque animam vix generatus ago.
Say we (then) the material Cross is an Idol with the Papists, not the
aereall? we may say as well the material name of Jesus (as it is painted or
engraued) is an Idol with them, but not the aereall. Whereas vox Jesus,
velaudita vel visa, is indifferently worshipped by them. Anton. de Corduba.
lib. 1. qu. 5. dub. 4. art. 2. Dominie Soto de instit. li. 2. q. 4. art. 2.
By some of them improperly, by others Suar. tom. 1. in thom. disput. 54. sect.
5. Vazq. de adorat. lib. 2. disput. 8. cap. 10.
properly: so that our writerers do not err who censure their bowings to the
Fulk. anns^ ^ Rhem. in Phil. 2. sect. 2.
aereall name of Jesus, for Idolatrous, to which also there is an The relat. of
the relig. of the Western etc. page
indulgence annexed for pardon of sin. Thirdly, the reason why the aereall
sign of the Cross is thought (though worshipped by the Papists) to be made no
Idol by them, is the slender subsistence it has, for which men say, it is a
thing of nothing. First here, how cannot the stomach be moved to see God and
the Church so mocked? The Church is mocked, because commanded to make a thing
called a Cross, which is no Cross; because Crosse-wise never existing. God is
more mocked by this opinion. For what have we here brought into his service? to
wit a Cross, not a Cross; a thing that is nothing, like Sphinxes riddle; a
man, not a man: standing, not standing; upon a tree, not a tree? Secondly; the
Cross had as little subsistence in the primative Church, as it has in these
late days. In these has it so little being, that popish Idolatry cannot
discredit it? then was it such a thing of nothing in those times also, that the
use of the Fathers could not credit it, and now it is so thin a sharke, that
our own Church cannot countenance it neither, though command it most unworthy.
Thirdly, know we not that it was never denied to Bellarmine that (...) in near
sense and signification, is a Ioh. Reynold. de Idololat. lib. 2. cap. 7. sect.
1.
vanishing aereall shadow, like the vmbra of one dead in Eustathius, which
being true, the vanishing ayrenes of the Cross furthereth (indeed) but stays
not the idolizing of it. So does it further the guilt of it (likewise) Quasi
vero. etc. as if it were not better (says August cont. Faust. Manich. lib. 20.
cap. 15.
Augustine) to worship a stone which has a being, then in the doting of our
fancy, to adore that which has no being? As if it were not better (say I) to
adore a Cross of stone, then a Cross aereall, which our Opposites give forth,
is a thing of nothing. When the Septuagint ad to the Hebrew (Gods that are
not.) Hieron. comment. in Isa. li. 1^ cap. 65.
Hierome likes the amplification well enough in regard of [ not being in
subsistence] as heresies are Idols so much the worse (says he) (and so by
consequent aereall Crosses) because in similitudinem vmbrarum, transeunt and
intereum; They vanish and pass away like shadows. Fourthly, be the
subsistence of the Cross outwardly never so transeunt, subsistence it has in
the minds of men constant enough, yea too constant as is seen by our
opposites. What a thing is it, that they who talk so much of the [nothingnes]
of the [vanishing] of the [not subsisting] of this sign, should make
(notwithstanding) so great a thing of it in their hearts, and give it so
permament subsistence there, that neither the tears of the poor, nor the
suites of the rich, neither the scandal of religion, nor the damage of the
Church; neither the triumph of the Papist, nor the worsting of the Protestant,
nor any thing else, by any means possible, can cause it to vanish away from
thence? What though the Rayn-bow be but a shadow of the sun, transeunt and
vanishing, as sings the Poet. Mill rapit varios aduer sa luce colores? the
mind for all that does apprehend it, as a constant Hieron. in Comment. in
Ezechi. lib. 1. ca. 2.
sign of Gods covenant, which has no show nor shadow of changing. Mulium
differt, etc. there is great difference (says August. de ciuit. dei li. 11. c.
29.
Augustine) between knowing a thing as it is made, and as it is in it self.
as the straitnes of a line, is known one way as it is conceived in the
understanding, an other way as it is written in the dust. What then, though the
Cross be transeunt, as he is made, yet he is permanent as he is considered in
se ipso, as a line is permanent in the mind, though not in the dust, wherein
he is drawn. For the Ludouic. viues ibid.
Geometer draws his lines in the dust, that he may mende and mar as he
list; dash out and draw new, when (yet) in his understanding they are
permanent, and in his mind, as we may see by Archimedes, whose lines if they
had not been deeper printed in his mind, then in his dust, he would not have
been found poring on them, while Syracusa was in surprising. To be short, that
which August. confess. li. 11. c. 27.
Augustine says of a sound, though the parts of it be transeunt: Quod eius
vtique peractum est sonuit: Quod autem restat sonabit. Yet it is totally and
actually existing in the mind, that which is past in the memory; that which is
to come in the intention, all of it together in the affection; that may be
applied to the cross aereall. So that the vanishing ayrines of it, excuses it
not from being an Idol with the papists; condemns it with us to our greater
guilt, who though an aerie vanishing idol do yet nourish more the^ a vanishing
likening toward it in our hearts

#Sect. 12. Reasons with objections answered, why the Cross may not be
entertained by us, etc.
WE have strengthened our Antecedent, and proved the Cross to be an Idol
among the Papists. Isa. 52.11. 2. Cor. 6.17 Apoc. 18 4.
Now must we show the strength of our consequent against the second sort of
Opposites, who confessing that the Papists Idolize it, make this their iussue,
It may be used by us notwithstanding, because with us (say they) it is no
Idol. First, we are not only forbidden to continue in our own uncleanness, but
also to touch any uncleanness of [theirs] as if that which is vnclane with
Idolaters, could no way be made clean to us. They who think otherwise speak
the language of Ashdod. What though the papists use the cross, what is that
to us? Just so Baronius, Caesa. Baron. Annal. Anno 132.
siquis dicat Gentiles habuisse in vsu aquam lustralem, quid tum? And we use
the Cross which they use, not imitating it, but correcting it rather. Just so
Suar. in Tho. tom. 1. disput. 54. sect. 7.
Suarez, We worship Images, which Gentiles worship, non imitando sed
corrigendo. Secondly, It is with us in the service of God an image which
without warrant we have made to ourselves, Doct. Bills. ag. Apolog. p. 4. page
340. Doct. Fulk annsw. to Rhem. Act. 17. sect. 4.5. Perk. in reform. Cathol.
ca. de imag.
therefore an Idol. It is an Image consecrated (that is) addicted to holy use,
Doct Bills. Ibid p. 34^.
therefore an Idol. It is a mean to many, whereby they worship, and many hold
it a part of Gods worship, therefore Doct. Bills. ibid p. 345 348.
an Idol, to them especially, who serve herein August, de consens. euang. lib.
1. cap. ^8. Hieron. in Hos. ca. 4.
quod ipsi fingunt even their own fancies. Thirdly, There is a Ioh. Reynold de
Idololat. lib. 2. ca. 1. sect. 1.
Metaphorical Idol that transgresses, and an Idolatry Thom. Aquin. comment.
in epist. ad coloss. 3. lection. 2.
secundum similitudinem, although not secundum speciem [per accidens] though
not [per se.] Whereof, let them that be able excuse this sign, for we can not.
Be there a few in the Realm (think ye) that do put as much confidence in the
cross, as the couerous in his wealth? Now if any shall say, that for this the
cross must be no more removed, then wealth and riches, we have to answer, that
all the Hospin. de re templar.
Fathers remove gold, and all pompous ornaments out of the Church, and all
carnal lasciuiousnes in painting or singing, and every thing else, which by
the covetous or unclean, or any other, might in likelihood be made an Idol
there. Fourthly, There is an Idol [reatu] through guilt remaining, and an
Idol [actu] by actual committing Idolatrous sin, and the sign of the
Cross is an Idol with us of the first sort, if not of the second. Idolatrous
worship is the soul of an Idol (say some of our Opposites) therefore seeing
we worship him not, his soul is departed from him. First, August. epist. 19.
col. 76.77.
Augustine accounts, that the ceremonies of the Jews are dead, and thereupon
argues that they were to be abolished. Now, the Cross ought to be as dead
unto us totally (for it is not better the the ceremonies of the Jews) and we
have as great need to bury his carcass, which if it be left above the
ground, will not the stincke thereof be intolerable? And seeing our reviving
of him, with a new style which we say is not idolatrous (for as yet he lives
in popery) bears show (at least) of favor to him, remember we the ancient
canon, Leo epist. 90. ad rustic. Narbonens. cap. 7.
Nos quibus viventibus non communicauimus, mortuis communicare non possumus, we
may not communicate with him dead, with whom we might not communicate when he
was alive. Secondly, we must not compare any creature of God with an Idol
which is the creature of the Deity: if we keep our selves within the bounds
of the scripture, we must compare the Cross with an harlot. Say we (then) the
Cross is no Idol now, because it has no adoration, which is the soul of an
Idol? this is as if we should reason, this woman cease to be an adultresse
any longer, because now at this present she is not actually in that copulation,
which is the life, and the very soul of adulterous crime. No, an harlot
remains an harlot though her sin be past: and so the sign of the cross an
Idol, though his Idolatry be ceased amongst us. And look what laws are made
against the bodily harlot (although repenting) they are all in equity liable
against the Cross, although purged thoroughly from former Idolatry, which I
would to God it were. He (then) that will not permit his Priest that stands
before him, and ministers unto him, Lenit. 21.7.
to marry an harlot (though repenting) will he endure the sign of the Cross
(the harlot her self) to minister before him in his Sacrament? Yea, to be
married to his Sacrament, and matched with it? Deuteronomy. 23.1^
He that will not suffer the price of an harlot to be brought into his house,
to the benefit of it: will he endure the sign of the Cross (the harlot her
self) to the defiling of his house, to be brought not only into his temple,
but also into the service thereof? and there to be rated at such a [price] as
that the holy priests themselves, that before did minister before him, must now
become a price for her, to bring a greater sin upon our Church, then that
which Ioell taxed once, they gave the child for the harlot: Joel. 3.3.
seeing they are the Fathers themselves, even the Fathers of many in Christ,
that are sold by us for the Cross? Deuteronomy. 23.1^ 2.3, etc.


Last of all, he that will not permit the issue of the harlot, to bear any
office in his congregation, till both her memory and her blood be quite worn
out, will he endure the sign of the Cross (the harlot her self) and that
even flagranti crimine, while her fornication reaketh, and Idolo viuo, (as
speaks Tertullian) while the Idol (the Cross abroad) is yet living? I
refer it to indifferent judgment, whether this be not like that rebellion
of a wife, when she puts her lover into office, in the house of her husband,
if not in dispite of his teeth (as usually we speak) yet sure underneath his
nose. Fifthly, there is an Idol more strictly taken, and an Idol of larger
sense, which will include the Cross. For the better understanding hereof, we
must borrow a distinction from the Thom. Aquin. comment. in epist. ad Coloss.
ca. 1. lection. 4
scholemen, by which a thing may be guilty of Idolatry, essentialiter,
participatiue, or causaliter: which our doctrine at home does back, that is
confirmed by Act of Parliament; Affirming that to be an Idol in Gods service,
which is, Homil. ag. peril of Idolat. p. 1. pap. 4.5.
has been, or is like to be worshipped. What [is] worshipped by our selves,
that is an Idol essentially. What [hath] been worshipped, or [is now]
worshipped abroad by others, that is an Idol by [participation]. What is
[likely] to be worshipped, that is an Idol [causing] idolatry in time to
come. In which sense Gedeons Ephod may be termed an Idol August. quaest. vet.
testament. lib. 7. q. 41 Vazq. de adorat. disput. 1. ca. 3.
quoda^modo; and that it may be even before it was adored. And hereby are many
objection answered. Our Writers deny an Image in the Church (say some) to be
an Idol, in case it be not worshipped. True, an Idol essentially, as many of
them as desire to have Images thrust out of the Church (of which sort Ioh.
Reynold de* Idololat. lib. 2. ca. 2. sect. 2.
there be a great number) they hold them guilty of Idolatry by participation
and by occasioning, or else why will they thrust them out? A second objection is
wont to be made. If the sign of the Cross be an Idol with us, then must men
seperat from our Church, and from our Baptism; which follows not. From
Idols (essential) men ought to separate by the example of the Levites and the
two Tribes that made separation from the calves of Jeroboam. 2. Cron. 11.13, 16.
From Idols by participation and occasion men are to keep their own selves
pure, but not to seperat, by the ensample of the Godly, who separated not from
the Temple of God, for Damascus Altar there, or from the church because of her
high places. 2. King. 16.11.1. King. 22.43.
It is objected once more against us, If our sign of the Cross be an Idol,
then our Ministers that do make it are Idolaters, and our Churches idolatrous
also. This follows not neither. For denomination being from the form, and
the Cross not being formally an Idol amongst us, but materially (I speak in
comparison to the Cross popish, in regard whereof, we may be said to use
that, which is an Idol, but we do not use it idolatrously) therefore as
Doctor Doct Fulk ag. Greg. Mart. cap. 3. sect. 20.
Fulke concludes of the Lutherans for having Images in their Churches, the
same must be said of all those Protestants that will retain Crosses, they
sin against the first two commandments (through Idolothisme) not directly
thorough Idolatry, and therefore they may not be termed Idolaters. Howbeit by
way of reduction, Idolothisme is in some sort guilty of Idolatry, as shows
the Apostle, who in steed of saying Fly from Idolothisme, says, fly from
Idolatry. This Idolatry by reduction what is it else, 1. Cor. 10.24.
but idolatry by participation, as does appear by the 18.20. and 21. verses
following. But this participation is not in our Cross (will our Opposites say)
who first, least happily they should mistake us, we defire to recount the
ancient distinction Chrysostom. Pet. Martyr in 1. cor. 10.16.
plus est communio, quam participatio, nam ad hanc satis est partem habere, sed
ad illam requiritur, vt prorsus vniamur: atque totum percipiamus, quod nobis
proponitur. This being premised (to wit) that we charge the Cross, not with a
total communion, but with a participation in part only, we thus bring in our
evidence against him.

#Sect. 13. We commit Idolatry in receiving the Cross, because we do not
Zealously banish it.
FIrst, we are guilty of participatio^ in defect through omission, because we
come short of that zeal against this Idolothite of Rome, which is enjoined in
this word [flie from it.] For, 1. Cor. 10. ver. 14.
this does not coidly bid us to avoid it, but (as it were pulling us out of the
flame) it cries fervently, use all Gloss. interlinear.
diligence to separate it from thee. Be zealous in heart Pet. Martyr Ibid.
to detest it with honor, and shake thine hands from the least communication
with it, Gualt. in Archetyp.
etiam minima ex part. This partaking forbidden again, Ephe. 5.11. Have no
fellowship, but reprove them rather, is committed Tho. Aquin. commentar. in cum
loc.
three special ways: Imitando, coadiuuando, consentiendo. By imitating,
helping, and consenting. Of all which three the Cross is guilty. Forinpart we
imitate the Papists in making like them a Cross like theirs, in the very same
Sacrament to many of the very same ends; which being more then [minima ex
parte] it makes us participants, like unto the Corinthian eating. We make no
account of the Cross (we say) so they judged the Idol nothing. We use not the
Cross for any liking to the popish crossing, but for peace and for the winning
of them: 1. Cor. 8.1.2, 3, etc.
so the Corinthians did not eat for any honor to the Idol, but to continue
Gualt, in Archityp. in ver. 14.
love and likening with old friends, and to draw them to the faith. In regard
hereof they bring nothing, who to clear our cross from imitation, say, we use
it diversely, and to a good end, and lawul. First, this stops our mouths
before Papists: whom how shall we answer, alleging the very same defense for
their Images (as well they may) it being as lawful for the^ to erect Turrian.
pro. canon. Apostol. li. 1. cap. 25. Feuardent. in Iren. lic 1 cap. 24. Caes.
Baro. Annal. an.
Christian Images against Pagan Images, in holier manner, as is to erect in
holier sort, a Protestants Cross, against their popish one. Secondly, the very
using of that rite which heretics use, has always been held a following of
them, and an unlawful imitation. The first Council of Nice will not celebrate
Easter on the same day, whereon the Jews did keep the Passover. Wherefore?
they hold it to be an imitation of the Jews, and the same unlawful to them,
as these words show: Tom. council. 1. page 352
Indigna res est sanctissimu^ eum diem, imitatione atque consuetudine Iudaorum
celebrare. Again, the fourth Council of Toledo will not use the rite of
threefold dipping which the heretics used, because they held it to be an
imitation evil in the show at least, to them especially who take no knowledge
August ad publicol. epist. 154.
animi nostri of our diverse manner of using. Thus go their words, Council.
Tolet. 4. cap. 5.
Propter vitandum (autem) schismatis scandalum, vel haeretici dogmatis vsum
simplam teneamus Baptismi mersionem, ne videantur apud nos, qui tertio mergunt,
haereticoruns approbare assertionen, dum sequuntur and morem. Thirdly, the
pretense of winning Papists, clears us not from an unlawful imitation, but
yoketh us with them unlawfully. Here I think worthy to be remembered the words
of Gelasius, Gelas. 1. in epist^ad Euphemiam.
We may condescend for peace, but not descend down into any [praecipitium]
hoc descensu number saluare est aegrotantem, an cum languenti consumi? He is
preposterous that wills the Physician to be sick, and not rather the sick
to receive health from him. Is this the best way to repair peace, or rather
that, which rejecting all contagion, and preventing all infection, keeps the
unity and the communion pure, unmixed, and undefiled? The way to help one that
is sick (says August. epist. 9.
Augustine) is not febres mentiri, but in the strength of his health cum
patientis affectu, to minister the means that may rid his sickness. Hierome
writing of Peter's imitating the Jews in their ceremonies: Noua clementia
Apostoli (says Hieron* ad Augustio. ibid. epist, 11.
he) etc. a new gentleness of the Apostle, while he goes about to make the
Jews to be Christians, he himself (a Christian) is made a Jew. For he could
not reduce the luxurious to frugalitie unless he proved luxurious himself;
nor mercifully succor miserable men, unless he felt himself in misery. The
effect is, we must not make our selves sick, for the healing of others:
neither must Protestants participate with Papists, to reduce them from popery,
but in compassion heal them rather with medicine contrary to their disease;
that is with all purity from their error, and from all show of communicating
with the same.

#Sect. 14. The second kind of participation with Idolatry is when we may
hinder it, and do not.
THe second participation is [Coadiuvando] by helping and furthering, from
which, who so flies as this Scripture does command, he chaseth the Idolothite
before him, and makes it to fly as from a whirlewind. For this text requires
all Nicol. Lyra. in hune locum.
possible diligence to resist Idolatry by preventing those occasions which the
Idolothite procures, so that from hence August. sermon. d^ a temper, 241
Augustine of old, our Gualt. Archityp. in ver. 20.
own writers of late, collect, that they participate with Idolaters, who do
not root all the Monuments and the Relics of Idolatry out of their
territories and possessions. Qui non prohibet cum potest, iubet, (says the
Senec. in Orest.
Poet.) He only is guiltless, says the Digest. lib. 50. tit. 17. cap. 51.
civil Law) qui cu scit, prohibere non potest: And the Canon Law thus,
Docret. p. 2. cause. 23. qu. 8. ca. 12
Qui non emendat and corrigit, is committit. Ibid. qu. 5. cap. 38.
Qui parcit vitijs, is fauet nutriendis. Decret. p. 1 distict. 85. cap. 3.
Error cui non resistitur, approbatur: negligere, cum possis deturbare, nihil
aliud est quam fouere. Non caret scrupulo socitatis occullae, qui manifesto
crimini, desinit obuiare. What then? we should have grubbed up all Heb. 12.15.
Deuteronomy. 29.^8.
root of bitterness. We have left a Surpplice and a Cross behind for a
stompe in the ground which will reflourish. We should have taken all evil away
from the Deuteronomy. ^3.5.
midst of Israel. Our eyes have spared the abetters of it; nay our hands have
advanced them. We should, have purged out the old 1. Cor. 5.7.
leaven, that we might be a new lump that is unleavened, we suffer it still to
abide in the house* yea more, we set it upon the table. We should have slain
every Amalekite beast, we keep the Cross, the Surplice, and other popish
rites alive, because we think they are the best amongst those which we have
abolished, upon pretense they are fat (that is) 1. Sam. 15 15.
sit to be used in the sacrifice of the Lord. Last of all, we should have shut
our lips from Psalm. 16.5
saluting the Cross, we reach forth that Ahabs have to embrace, yea to lift up
into the 1. King. 20.33.
charet, wherewith indeed we should have slain him. What excuse is left for
us? Popery is furthered, if so notorious brokers of it be not resisted Whereas
we (as if our conniuency were too little) even command them and commend them,
and plead for them. Now, Quo modo Leo. 1. apist. 91. cap. 15.
decipi simplices possunt, nisi venenata pocula, quodam melle perlinirentur, ne
vsque quaque sentirentur insuauia quae essent futura. The Cross and Surplice
being Idols, must needs be poysonfull; my glory therefore join thou not with
their sweet tongues that sprinkle them over with fair excuses, as it were with
honny. Ennodius in lib. defensor. pap. sym^anch*
Non grandis est differentia vtrum laethum inferas, an admittas* mortem
languentibus, qui cum possit non excludit, inflixit: and these do more then
barely admit, or not resist. The third participation here forbidden is consent
and approbation, not only manifest but also secret, not only by our selves
intended, but so interpreted by the Lord. When this text here wills to [fly]
from the Idolothite, think we an open consent unto Idolaters, is only
forbidden? No, the Corinthians did not think they consented to Idolatry, even
as we now think of our selves: they consented (notwithstanding) in their
eating the Idolothite, so do we now approve of popery. If any ask how? the
Vid. Lynd. Wood.
Laiwer will tell him, what a secret consent is in general. And as for the
secret consent in hand a Ioh. Howl^t. in Refusal. rat. 5
Jesuit himself will answer, that though a man does not intend to consent to
heretics, yet, that then he is guilty, when in appearance he makes that
show of communication, which makes the Lord to [interpret] that he consents.
The question then is, how the Lord will interpret our retayle of popish rites,
which may be assoylde, by that interpretation which he gave once of Jacobs
catriage. Jacob loves Leah well enough if he may be suffered to be his own
judge* but why (then) does he not take her into him as well as Rahell? This
argued he loved her not in so high a degree as he should, 7 Gent. 29.31.
therefore does the Lord [interpret] that he does hate her. In like manner we
hate the Papists well enough in our own judgment but why (then) put we not
away from us, these Thamars of theirs, which they have defiled, as well as
other reformed Churches? this argues we hate it, then not in so high a degree
as we ought. How can (then) the Lord but [interpret] that we love them and
approve them. We are in the Angels case of Pergamus and of Thiatyra. We have
some ^eale against Nichol^itan Idolothisme, as our remouall of many of Romes
trumperies shows* to which notwithstanding like these Apo^. 2.^4.20.
Angels we consent, in that we proceed not to an utter riddance of them. We are
in the prophet of Bethel^ case, we have some zeal against the bread and water
of Rome, with which notwithstanding we participate, as he did with that of
Bethell; in that by the persuasion of our elder prophets, we do not forbear
them in their 1. Reg. 13 19.
society. Last of all, we bear some proportion, though not total, with Elies
case; we abhor that any fornication should be committed within the
Tabernacle, but because the harlots there have proceeded out of the loins of
our own brains (for so we may say of the Cross and Surplice) therefore we
are loath to thrust them out: and do we not then 1. Sam. 2.29.
consent like him? Decret. p. ^. distinct. 88. cap. 5.
Consentire videtur (says Gregory) qui ad resecandum non occurrit. Council
Aquisgran. sub Ludo. vic. 1. c. 25.
Si corrigere potest and dissimulat, verum est quod consensum erroris alieni
habet. We see popery is spread by these pedlerie wares of hers; and yet we
forbid not the opening of them. Council. Pistens. ad Sequanam. cap. 4.
Non est liber a consensu, qui quod emendare potest, emendare negligit. Qua
propter sine dubio, peccati se participem facit. Our negligence in amending the
corruptions that are left is manifest to men and Angels. Suar tom. 1. in Tho.
disput. 55. sect. 1.
Consentiunt, qui licet express hoc non intendunt, facto tamen ips^, ita se
gerunt, ac si intenderent. Our fact is the same whatsoever our mind is, they
can but use the tites of Rome that do intend to consent to them, and so do
we. In this case how can the mind be pure? In show at least. Ennod. v^ supra.
For, as Nemo creditur odisse, quorum relatione non laeditur. So none will
believe we hate from the heart, the rites of Rome, as long as they see we are
not grieved (I say even grieved) at the use of them.

#Sect. 15. Three objections fully answered, whereby the opposite endeuoreth to
prove that to communicate with our Cross, is no Idolatry.
IT being thus proved we participate because we [flye] not from Idolothisme so
far as the Corinthian should, what matter though we come not so [neare] it as
once the Corinthian did? Howbeit how much are we short of him. The Corinthian
protested not against the Idol, we profess and publicly teach against the
popish Cross (say some.) First, the Corinthian did profess, 1. Cor. 8.1.
he held the Idol to be nothing, and did make known he did not eat for any
honor to the Idol, but for love, and for the Gualt. in Archity p. in 1. cor.
10.14. and in cap. 8.
company of his neighbors. Secondly, the thing being known to be Idolothious,
a protestation that we honor not the Idol, serves not the turn: we must also
forbear, as by the plain text of the 28. verse, so by plain reason, (to wit)
because without forbearance, our protestation will seem Pet. Martyr in ver.
29.30.
ridiculous, neither will it be believed; if it might, yet is it no little
sin toward God, Ioh. Calvin. in ver. 20.
Obire eas actiones, quae Idolorum cultum prae se ferunt. The second difference
which our Opposites do allege is, that the Corinthian went in to the Temple
of the Idol to eat, while the Idolater was eating there. But we go not into
any popish Church to use the Cross together with them. First, the (...) here
is not the Temple by any likelihood, but the Erasm in 1. cor. 8. Pet. Martyr
ibid. ver. 20.
feasting chamber rather, as does appear by this, that the Apostle, 1. Cor.
10.21. does not charge them for presenting themselves before the Altar of the
Idol, but for being present rather in a room where is a [table] for eating
only, and not an Altar for sacrificing. Secondly, August. in ^ Psalm. 99.
Hoc est presentem vel absentem esse, sensu abesse vel presentem esse. Was not
Paul present at Corinth, when he was in spirit there? So long (then) as by the
use of Cross and Surplice, we seem present in good [liking] we give as great
honor (well near) to popery, as the Corinthian bodily presence gave to the
Idol. Thirdly, the Corinthian participated when he did eat the Idolothite 1.
Cor. 10.28.
even out of the (...) it being once made known to be such, even as it was out
of the Temple in private and civil use, that 1. Reg. 13.22.
Bethels water, and Dau. 1. ver. 8.
Bells meat were unlawful. The Papists (indeed) say that the feasts the which
Paul writes against were only at the Altar, but our writers affirm the
contrary, proving out of the Scriptures, that the manner was to feast at 1.
Sam. ^.8.9. pro. 7 14.
home, after the sacrifice was once ended: and out of the heathen writers
likewise; for the manner of the Gentiles was the same, as appears by Virgil
^^e ad. ^.
Evander, who when he had sacrificed to Hercules, invited Aeneas to a feast at
home. They prove out of the Fathers (also) that the known eating of the
Idolothite out of the Temple Clement. exam. p. 2. de missa. col. 175. Math.
Sutcliff. de missa. li. 3. cap. 13.
wheresoever, does in Paul's doctrine make a man guilty of participating with
the Idol. Whereby it appears that our using of Cross and Surplice (so it be
reverent) makes us participant wheresoever we use them, and not only when we
are present in the act of their Idolatry. Fouthly, our transporting of Cross
and Surplice from their Temples into our Churches, is as great a participation
as if we had gone to some Church of theirs in the eyes of our Ludouic. Lauat.
in Hest. homil. 46. page 89. Pet. Martyr loc. comm^. clas. 2. ca. 5. sect. 24.
writers, who hold it a Corinthian sin in an high degree, to bring into holy
use, any rite of the heretics. The ancients agree to this. Council. Aphrican.
tempore Bonifac. Pap. 1. can. 27.
Feasts which were used by imitation of the Gentiles are abominable; if they
be used [in ipsis locis sacris] in the very Churches themselves of the
Christians. So in like manner, as it was held detestable to enter into an
heretical Temple, so was it counted an execrable matter, Council. Epaunens.
can. 33.
basilicas haereticorum, sanctis vsibus applicare, to apply the Churches of
the heretics to Gods service, unless they were such, as they had taken from
the Catholics themselves before. But whether it be as great a participation
or no, as if we went into an Idols Temple after the supposed Corinthian manner.
Sure I am, it is greater then that of the Corinthian was, when he did eat the
Idolothite at home at a private table. For wherefore must he not be eaten, but
because it returns a certain Pet. Martyr 1. cor. 10.
honor to the Idol, to which it belongs? And Tertul. li. de Idololat.
Omnis honor Idoli, Idololatria. And it skilleth not whether it be verus honor,
or, Thom. A. quin. in ^. cor. 10. lect. 4.
putatiuus, it being Idolothisme when the Idol is honored by us in the
estimation of other men. Now this is done when by our use of Idolatrous rites,
we make their Idolatry to be Pet. Martyr 1. cor. 8.10.
thought the better of; and when Ambros. 1. cor. 10. ver. 28.
alius qui Idolis seruit, gloriatur. Which cannot be avoided in our religious
use of the Cross; because he that sees thee eat the Idols meat, (says
Chrysostom. 1. cor. 10.
Chrysostom) Existimabit te non nihil Idolorum cultui defer. And Ambr. ibid.
in ver. 29.
Ambrose, Iudicatur non distare ab eo, qui colit Idol^^, quando non horret quod
oblatum est simulachro. What that the Cross is worse then Corinthes
Idolothite, even in private use and all like unto the Jewish meat? Because the
very common crossing of the Papist, being known to be evil, we partake with
their Idolatry if we use their Cross in private, even as they Decret. p. 2.
cause. 28. qu. ^. cap. 14.
partaked with the Jewish superstition, that sat with the Jew at a private
table, for that even here his meat was known to be superstitious; whereas
Corinthes meat, against which Paul writes, was often unknown to be
Idolothious. The third difference which our opposites make, is this: The Cross
and Surplice are sanctified by the comment of our Church, which the Corinthian
Idolothite lacked and wanted. First, the Idolothite at Corinth must be forborne
when he is known to be such, 2. Cor. 10.30.
although sanctified by giving of thanks. This deceived the young Prophet at
Bethell, he thought he might eat the bread and the water there, so it were
not in the fellowship of Idolaters; in the society of an old Prophet, who
commands him in the name of the Lord, and sanctified them before they were
eaten; he thought it to be lawful enough, 1 King. ^3.18.19.
which is up and down our error. August. de temp. sermon. 241.
Augustine handles the very case, we are to fly (says he) from the
Idolothite, as if we saw the Devil himself, and that in our own houses, not
only in Idolatrous places, where some say, ego signo and sic manduc^, I cross
my self and sanctify the meat before I eat: take heed of this. This were
for a man to cross his mouth, and to stabbe his heart. What God has
sanctified, polute thou not: so what God has polluted, sanctify thou not. No
Church, no holy society, can make holy a Cross or Surplice, or any other
Idolothite, because the word of God defiles them and pronounces them
unclean. Secondly, the Temple cannot sanctify what is unclean, but what is
unclean can pollute the Temple. Agge. 2. vlt. 2. Cor. 6.16
What agreement has the Temple of God with Idols, says Paul? either here he
reasons a Glossa. or. dinat. ibid.
genere, No Idol must dwell in any Temple, therefore not in any spiritual one
or a Guak. Arehitip. in hunc. loc.
Comparatis. The material Temple must have no Idol in it, ergo not the
spiritual neither. The Cross (then) being proved a notorious Idol, what
makes he in any Christian Church, or holy society, to the pollution of the
same? I conclude with August. epist. 11.
Hierome: The Jewish ceremonies used in our Churches (says he) cannot make the
Jews to be Christians, but they will make us Christians to be Jews: even so,
our holy use of popish rites, will not make Papists to be Protestants; but they
will make us Protestants to be Papists (to wit) through participation with them.

#Sect. 16. An objection of the Opposites answered, saying, they may use the
Cross, because they have changed the Cross. Though there be four sorts of
things that may be changed, yet the Cross is none of them.
HOwbeit; there is an hope in our Opposites, cleanely enough to shift
themselves even of all this. How can we in Cross and Surplice participate with
the Papists (say they) seeing we have changed the Popish Cross, and have
altered it from what it was, and it is not the same. First, the consequent
hereof sounds not well in their mouths, who were M. Fenner. ag. Doct.
Bridges in his treat. of the Cross.
wont to reason we may use the Cross although an Idol, because the sun
though Idolized, because this excuse supposes the Cross were unlawful if he
were the same unchanged, where as that reason matcheth the Cross with the
sun which remains, we know, unchanged and is even Numero, still the same.
Secondly, the consequence is unsound, because of things that may be changed
from their abuse, the sign of the Cross is none. The first sort of these are
the things of the Idolater not Idolatrous. Which by the change of fire and
water, became lawful in Moses Number. 31.^3.
law, like the garment of the Leaper not Leuit. 14.8.
leaprous, which being washed might be put on* whereas the Cross because it
self is become leaprous (as has bin proved) ought to be burnt, as also
because it was at the first (when it was at the best) but hay M. Calf^^. ag.
Mart. art. 5. fol. 125.
and stubble which the 2. Cor. 3.11.
fire of the word has in other reformed Churches long since consumed. The
second sort, are things Idolatrous, but without state in Idolatrous service. As
the August. ad Publicol. epist. 154.
fountain of any Idols water, and the sun in the firmament which beholds
without all Tertul. de spectac.
contagion, the Idolatry that is committed to him: whereas the Image of the
sun (to which the sign of the Cross now answers) for that state which he
has had in worship Idolatrous, is not tolerable in a Christian congregation,
for who can endure there the Ioh. Reynold. de Idololat. li. 2. c. 3. sect. 25.
fire of the Persians? the Ibid. sect. 25.
Colossus of the Rhodians, and the Sect. 55.
Romans? or his Image of a man termed Sect. 51.
Bell in Assyria? Lib. 1. ca. 5. sect. 17.
Baal in Palestina? The third sort are things which have been in state
Idolatrous: howheit, because they have been inspired by God with a purpose they
should continue, therefore they may, and sometines must be changed to the use
of their first inspiration. But how shall we know whether they be inspired by
God? to wit, by this mark, A deo inspiraia sunt (says Tertul de coron.
millit. Genesis 4.22. Genesis 3.21.
Tertullian) qua procurant meras vtilitates, certa sub sidia, honesta solatia,
necessitatibus humanae vita. As the Mechanical arts devised by Cains
Idolatrous posterity were from God, as well as the skill of clothing was, which
he taught Adam immediately. To this the scholemen do agree. Tho. Aquin. p. 3.
qu. 25. art. 3. respons. ad 2.
Aquinas teaching in rebus fructuo sis gentilium, we may communicate. Where as
in rebus infructuosis (such as are the Cross and Surplice) we may not come
near them. The fourth sort, are the ordinances of the Lord, such as are the
holy Sacraments which must even after abuse Idolatrous, which [chaunge] from
former superstition, be to Gods service restored again. For that haec Bucer.
in Censur. Leiturg. Anglic. ca. 9. pa. 472.
nobis nulla potest, impiorum vitiare peruersitas, they August. de Bapt. cont.
Donatist. li 6. ca. 25.
passing through their abuse without contagion, as the Decret. p. 2. cause. 15
qu. ^. ca, 5.
ray of the sun strikes into the dounghill, and is not defiled. What mean
(then) our Opposites to allege August. ad deograt. epist. 49. qu. ^.
Augustine likening well of Pagan rites, when they be altered to the true God?
For he means of Sacrifices and of Temples which were commanded in Moses
law. Are Cross and Surplice commanded also? No more, are Temples commanded
now (will they reply) concerning these, they have had no state in Idolatrous
service, such as Cross and Surplice have, they are not mere inventions of
man, as the Cross and Surplice are. When circumstances do not hinder, they
bear the [Marke] formerly mentioned, of a purpose in God to continue them
still (to wit, commodity and needful use) which stamp, and superscription of
Gods, the Cross and Surplice cannot show to prove themselves his lawful
coin. They therefore who reason, A Temple may be still continued, therefore a
Cross, trace the footesteppes of Tertullians adversaries. We use physic
though it be consecrat to Aesculapius, therefore a garland too: and of the
Papists our own adversaries, We may retain a Pagans temple, therefore his
Durant. de rit. lib. 1 cap. 9. sect. 10.
frankencense also. t Tertullian denied the former consequence, because
Physic is profitable, whereas a Garland was unnecessary. Tertul. quo supra.
Our writers the latter, because a Temple has necessary use, whereas
frankencense is good for nothing, which yet is better (or not so bad) as the
Cross and Surplice are. Let me, to the contrary, use a weapon of our own men.
All rites abused popishly must be abolished, Bucer. in censur. quo supra.
Nisi existant ex ijs rebus, verbis, and signis, quae dominus nobis
commendauit. The sign of the Cross has bin abused popishly, and is no
ordinance of the Lord; therefore he must down, when Temples sometimes may
Council. Aphrican. com. 25.
stand: as in the days of Constantinus, though at other times they must be
raised (necessary circumstances so requiring) as in the reign of Theodosius,
some of them were, and in the time of the Council Epaunense of which before.

#Sect. 17. An enlargement and continuance of the matter contained in the
former Section.
THirdly, what if the Cross might be changed, as the things forenamed may? It
appears in sight it has with us no change sufficient. The natural
Sympathy, Iulias Scaliger.
Nulla intercapedine impeditur, No more can the spiritual be let or stopped,
which is between our and the Popish Cross, as long as the Cross has a being
in Baptism, it will offer toward the Popish no less then the needle toward
the Pole; in so small a distance (also) as now is between them, they will
close like the Adamant and the Iron together, neither can any wisdom of man
keep them asunder; Even in our Opposites grant, the change is not total,
but in part only, to wit, in the manner of using, which if it be so, Mat. 9.16.
there is a new patch put to the old which will (say I) nay which already
has made, the breach the worse. And to say it is not the same Cross, because
a patch or a piece is diverse, it is as if the old disputers about Plutarch. in
symposiac.
Argo, should have said, it was not the same ship, because it is new peeced, or
as if Elias might have repaired one of Baals Altars upon mount Carmell, Reg.
18.30.
and have Pet. Martyr in hunc loc. Ios^^. 6.26.
sacrificed on it, upon a pretense that now it was not the same, because he had
patched it, or as if Hiel should have pleaded, Jericho (indeed) is justly
accursed, howbeit I (the repayrer of it) deserve no blame, for why it is not
now the same, I have made a new one of it. Howbeit, that this enterchaunge of
patching and peecing may the better appear to be insufficient, it shall be
showed. First, that the old piece is too great; then that the new piece is
too little. First our Cross has too great a piece of the old, in regard of
his honorable use. For being a vessel of Moab he should have been made a
washpot, Psalm. 108.9.
whereas now being set in Baptism, as on the cubbard where the rest of the
plate stands, he has the place of a vessel of honor. The Idolothite is
never lawful (says August. epist. 154.
Augustine) till the honor of the Idol be most openly subverted, that is never
done till his benediction be clean wiped off, this cannot be done, but by some
Syluest. Prier. in sum verb. benedict.
injurious use: this use injurious who dares offer to the Cross? When a
Baeat. Rhenan. i^ Tertul de coron. milit.
Christian soldier came with a garland in his hand which he should have worn
upon his head, he was put to death under the reign of Seuerus the Emperor, in
the days of Tertullian, who defends this fact of his. Baron. Annal. in anno
201.
Baronius condemns it, but upon this ground, that it was a civil and a
necessary ornament for his head, and elsewhere he is contented to parallel this
Act of his, with the caution of holy Christians, which in other Pagan rites,
avoided and shunned all show of Symbolizing with them. The Cross (then) being
a Symboll and badge of popery, it ought by the pattern of this example to have
bin turned in use from the head to the hand at least; whereas now we see it is
set still, even on the head of baptism, for a garland to adorn it, and we
will not turn it so much as from religious use to civil handling, whether the
Christians wished the washing of the feet, when it seemed in August. epist.
119. cap. 18.
Augustines days, pertinere ad baptissimum, but to pertain to baptism.
Secondly; our Cross is not sufficiently changed from the popish, because too
great a piece of his old bonorable names remain. For the very Exodus 23.13.
Iosu. 23.7. Zach. 13.2
name it self of an Idol ought to be left, and every regardfull remembrance
of him, and that in civil use and all, where even a custom to say mehercule
is Tertul. de Idololat.
Idolatrous to Hercules, and every other mention else of any Idol is unlawful,
Ibid.
nisi adijciatur aliquid, quo appareat, that he is not named with honor. As
for a contract, though it be civil, I must be so far from naming in it an
Tertul. lib. cod.
heathenish Idol as that I sin if I keep silence when an other does name
him. What watch keep I over the door of my lips (then) in case I name in
the heavenly contract between God and man (for such is Baptism) this
abominable Idol of the Cross? Yea, name him there, that he may consecrate
my seed to God, as a sign of the Son of man, as an holy sign of Christ,
for so we are taught to speak by the Ric. Hook li. 5. ca, 65.
doctrine of our Church, in whose practice vulgar abroad, these honorable
titles do sound oftener in men's mouths, a blast to the Crosses houour, then a
due and lawful praise to baptism it self. Marc. Bibulus once complained of
Caesar his colleague, that he drowned his name as Castor the name of his brother
Pollux. For though the Church was erected to them both, yet was it not called
Pollux Temple, but the Temle of Castor only. A greater suit may the water of
Baptism commence against the sign of the Cross, which never being ordained a
sign of Christ at all, yet ruffleth under the honorable name, whereof it
robs Baptism. this is a thing unworthy of us, who use to Ioh. Crispin. in
cronolog*
control the Papists because in their common speech, they call Corpus Christi
day by the name of [Gods Feast] more often, then the holy Sabbath day which was
the holy Feast indeed, which God himself ordained.

#Sect. 18. Our Cross not changed from the Papisticall Cross, whilst ours as
also theirs resemble Christ's death: and whilst the old piece of his figure and
form remains.
THirdly, the Cross is not changed sufficiently, all while the piece of his
old offices still remain. For I ask, wherefore do Papists adore their
Crosses, because they Tho. Aquin. p. 3. q. 2^. art. 4
resemble Christ. If so, then all while we use the Cross to be a sign of him
and of his death, we cannot deny that he retayneth, and that entirely his old
Idols office with us. Fourthly, the change of the Cross is insussicient, all
while the old piece of his figure, and form remains. We observe the Cant.
miss.
cantell of the Mass book it self, drawing his lines atwhart not a sloape,
which ought not to be so, because in an Idol it is the August. epist. 49. qu.
3.
form which does maxim afficere infirmos animos. and as for the Cross it is
the Alphons. de Castr. in verb. adorat. Damasc de fid. lib. 4. cap. 11.
form, for which the Papists do adore it. The sensers of Corah Number. 17.^.
and Abiram themselves, though never consecrat to an Idol; though far from
being Idols such as the sign of the cross is, were not admitted into the
Tabernacle, till dispoyld of former form. The woman Deuteronomy. 21.12.
Idolatrous taken captive, may not be married till by the change of her
outward hab it (even to hair and nails themselves) she give assurance she
has as bewayld, so also renounced her former country. Now by what outward
formal change does our Cross give security, that he has either bewayld
duly her former Idolatry, or renounced truly her Idolatrous country Rome, which
has not so much as a fair new garment dight her, which this woman was to
have: unless it be in some pieces and patches only as has been said. Sure to
dissolve the two Cross lines was Athanas. fict. Antioch. qu. 16
thought of old to be the only change sufficient to prevent the suspicion of
that abuse, wherewith Papists in the highest degree, have since defiled it. This
change corrumpent of the form, being not in our Church performd; our Cross
remains the same in specie, that it was among the Papists for figura Thom.
Aquin. in epist. ad colos. cap. 2. lect. 4.
is signum always spetici. Fifthly, (therefore) our Cross is not sufficiently
changed because the piece of his old [kind] is still the same. Are not the
excuses of them that were bidden to the marriage said to be [ Luke 14.18.
one] for that [Communitie] of denial which was between them, though
otherwise diverse in themselves? The duties of masters and of servants are
they not said to be the [ Ephe. 6.9
same] although different in themselves, because of that [Common] proportion
that was incident to them both? Do we not hold against the Papists their oil,
their lights and their Frankencense are Ioh. Reynold. confer. with Heart. cap.
8. diuis. 4. page 49^.
Jewish, because in [kinde] they be shadows of Christ like them? What (then)
though there be some petty differences, to be given between the Popish
Cross and ours, as long as our Cross partaketh of [Common] properties, of
[Common] proportion; and does [like] him shadow forth the death of Christ, he
may well be termed popish, yea in some sort the same. For when we accuse them
of Jewish rites, we do not require they be the same Idem. pa. 494.
absolutely if they Ibid. page 495.
resemble the Jewish rites, and in their [kinde] be shadows of Christ, we
think it sufficient. Patere legem quam ipse tuleris, and our English Cross is
popish, though absolutely he be not the same with Rooms, but in some common
and general properties does resemble him. And surueye we the Scripture herein,
which flatly condemns even all [likenes] and all proportion, and all
similitude with aliene rites: as an Altar like in fashion to the Altar of 2.
Kin. 16 11.
Damascus, is unlawful, and a carte provided for the Arc like that which the
1. Sam. 6.8.
Philistines provided for it, is no 1. Cor. 15.13.
due seeking of the Lord. Survey we the practice of the Primative Church. A
laurel bough and a light set at the doors [like] that of Idolaters, was
Iodolatrous, even in Caesar. Baron. Annal. an. 201.
Papists own confession. Survey we late writers, they Bulling de orig. error.
lib. 1. cap. 33.
affirm the same Idolatry is amongst Papists which was amongst Pagans. They
mean a samenesse for some proportion that is between them. They Whitak. de
not. eccles. not. 6.
affirm the same heresies are taught by them, as the ancient heretics
broached, but mean a samenesse for some likeness that is between them. They
Math. Sutclif. in Turco-papism.
brand diverse of their superstitions, with the infamous mark of Turcisme,
because they come too near to Turkish superstion. And there be some Papists
that in some things see no difference between Ludonic. Viues in August. de
ciuit. dei li. 8. ca. 27.
their own Idolatry, and the Polydor. Virgil. de inuentor. rerum. li. 5. cap.
1.
superstion of the heathens, who yet in diverse petty differences, could not
but find diversity.

#Sect. 19. The Opposites first difference, why our Cross not the same with
the Papists sz. because not the same Numero.
WE have performed our first task and have proved the old pieces of the Cross
to be too great, to admit a change sufficient. Take we now the second in hand,
where we shall find his three new patches to be to little to endure it. The
first difference (forsooth) in our new Cross is [Numerall.] It cannot be said
to be the same with theirs (say some) because it is not the same in number. In
which sort, if Papists may reason, they will easily prove against us that none
of their rites are Jewish or Paganish. And if we may be suffered to use like
reasoning, we are able to make clear, that the antiquity that is alleged
for the Cross, is quite impertinent, our Cross not being the Fathers Cross,
because Numero not the same. Our high Court of Parliament has established no
less then [three] Homilies against the use of all Images in the Church. What?
speak they only against those Images which were [Numero] the same, that
Papists had abused? speak they not against all Images like to theirs, although
in number not the same?

Decrer. p. 3. de onsecrat. distinct. 5. cap. 10.
Steven the fifth, Pope of that name, consecrated to Idolatrous service no
numerall Cross, but the sign of the Cross in general. If (then) the sheafe
of the first fruits consecrated all the rest of the harvest, the consecration
of the sign of the Cross in general has much more hallowed to use
Idolatrous (and so defiled) all numerall Crosses. All the meats that were
brought to the table of Nebuchad-nezzar, were not offered to Bell, only Amand.
Polan. Francis. Iun. in Dan. 1.8.
one dish was set on his Altar for the rest, and this hallowed all the rest.
Would Danieli eat upon our excuse, this meat [Numero] is not the same, which
Bell has defiled? But when the weak of the Primative Church did eat August.
de morib. Manicheorum. li. 2. ca. 14.
herbs for fear they should among other pieces of flesh light upon some which
had [Numero] been sacrificed, they show that scrupulositie it self stuck
only at that, which was abused indiuitually, and when the Christians (on the
other side) that were at Antioch, ate of the meat that Julian had dedicated to
his Idols in the shambles they show that a general consecration does not
defile particulars. As for the the first, the weak of the Christians that
stuck at meat Idolothious, would have stuck much more at the holy use of the
Idol, and at his habit in Gods worship, which now is the blot that staineth
Cross and Surplice. The latter instance puts this distinction quite out of
fashion For did they not at Antioch eat even of that meat which even Numero
had been consecrat at the shambles? Its kills not (then) whether it be
[Numero] the same or no, that has been consecrat, but the manner of
consecrating and of eating is here the point which is all in all. Has the
Idolater consecrated specially with state in Idolatrous service, and does the
Christian use the thing so consecrat in Gods holy service? Then caeteris
paribus, the thing is unclean. Has the Idolater consecrated generally only
at the August. epist. 154.
fountain or at the shambles without bestowing any Lambert. Danae. in August.
de haeres.
special state religious in the worship of the Idols temple, and does the
Christian use the same in civil use? then may it be used as it was at
Antioch, howbeit with some Theodoret. histor. li. 3. ca. 15.
sighing; that which I thus apply to our purpose. Though Antioch meat was
without state, our Cross and Surplice in state of Idolatrous service, though
that was fetched from the shambes, our Cross sent us out of the Temple of the
Idol though that was necessary our Cross needless; though that was a
creature of Gods in one civil use, our Cross a mere invention of man, out of
one element in use religious: yet Christians partaked of that lugentes and
gementes, being thereto by need constraind. Whereas our Opposites even
ridentes and deridentes enforce a necessity of a Cross needless, to the
general [gemitus] and to the luctus of Christian Churches.

#Sect. 20. Our second Opposite different why our Cross not the same with the
Papists, sz. because ours is made at the fount only: theirs at the Church door
also.
THe second difference between the popish Cross and ours may be termed
circumstantiall. It pleads our Cross is not the same, because made at the
font only whereas Papists make it at the Church-doore also: and ours is not
daubde, with oil on the childs forehead, as their Cross was daubde, and is.
First, accept of this difference and justify the popish ceremonies from being
Jewish, since the same (if not greater) may be even alleged for them: as that
the Durand. rational. lib. 4. ca. 8.
Jewish frankencense was a perfume, their simple frankencense without any
ingredient else, and the Idem lib. ^. cap. 7. Marcell. Corcy^ens. lib. ce tem.
1. rit. 2.
Jews lights were of oil, whereas theirs be of wax. We Ioh. Reynold. confer.
with Heart. cap. 8. diuis. 4. page 490.
use to deride such differences of theirs; and are bold to affirm that a
sacrifice were now Jewish, although the matter totally differed; to wit, though
a dog were offerred in stead of the Jewish sheep. Secondly, there be as
great differences as this in many Crosses, which never yet were held sufficient
to vary any common case, that is incident unto the Cross. The Cross which
Christians Eusebius. histor. li. 8. cap. 7.
made with their arms, placed a twhart, when the Panthers were now ready to
devour them: the Cross which the ancient communicants made with their hands,
when being to receive the bread of the supper, they did Cyril. Hirosol.
Catechis. 5. Darand. de rit. lib. 2. cap. 55. sect. 17.
subijcere sinistram, veluti sedem dextra, The Cross; which the Durand. de
rit. li. 1. c.6 sect. 11
Gentiles made with the thoumbe, put a twhart over the forefinger, which they
kissed in adoring the Sun, are cast into the heap with other Crosses; and
brought by authors to prove the virtue, the use, and the holiness even of the
Cross aereall which differs from them, with greater [circumstance materiall]
then our Cross from the Popish. What Vid. Pet. Viret. in Cantel. miss.
exception was ever taken either by the Burgonions against the French Cross;
or by the French against the Burgonions, the one of which was asloope, the
other atwhart? Durant. de rit. li. 2 cap 45. sect. 10.
What difference was ever imagined between a Cross with five fingers, and a
Cross with two? between a Cross from the right side to the left, and a
Cross from the left side to the right? Wherein was it ever judged that the
Stola cancellata in pectore, ad modum crucis, Durant. lib. 2. ca. 9. sect. 15.
ad signan dum passionem Christi, that the Ibid. sect. 26. Raban. de institut.
cleric. lib. 7 cap. 20.
Dalmatica which does praferre crucis formam, to be an indicium passionis
dominica, that the stretching forth of the Priests arms at mass to make a
Cross to signify Durant. lib. 2. cap. 42. sect. 2. Microlog. de obserua. Miss
c. 16.
extentione^ Christi in cruce; that the Durant. li. 2. cap. 9. sect. 44. Raba^.
Maur. li. 1. cap. 25.
four red Crosses which are in the Bishops pall, to be a memoriace passionis
redemptoris, did differ from the aereall Cross, or any Cross else material?
Thirdly, make good these differences of former circumstances, between the
popish Cross and ours, and then our Cross will not be the Fathers Cross, as
it is boasted and given forth. For our Cross is after Baptism (men say)
whereas the Cross of the ancient Fathers, was both before and after, the
water even Wolfgan. Lazins in Carol. magn. epist ad alcuin.
many times repeated. Before Baptism, the Cathechumeni were examined with
interrogations and Brissonius de spectacu. p. 150. 151
Cross, which also was done when they were Ibid. p. 153
exorcized. The oil (also) went before the consecrating of the font, which was
done with a Ibid. p. 154 and 201.
Cross, the Ibid. p 167
consecrating of the font followed, and that was also done with a Cross. After
these (some say) the Baptized was crossed in the Durant. de rit. li. 1. c. 19
sect. 28. Wolfgang. Lazius. vt supra.
forehead, though others seem to contradict it; who are of opinion the
Presbyter Brisso. de spect. page 190. 191. 204. 206.
signed in vertice only. Howsoever this be, after Baptism there was another
annoyting used with diverse oil, by (a Bishop forsooth) who lastly Durant.
lib. 1. cap. 20. sect. 12. Brisson. vt supra. page 188. 190. 198.
crossed him on the forehead by the general consent of all. Fourthly, such
differences of circumstance make no difference else where, and why then should
they here? The Passover in Canaan had neither shoes on the feet, nor girdle
about the loins, nor staff in the hand, as the Passover in Egypt had, and
yet it was the very same Sacrament. Our Lords supper is in the forenoone and
with the leauened bread whereas Christ was after supper, with bread unleavened,
yet the Sacraments be not diverse. Our Baptism (also) is one with the Fathers
Baptism, though ours be in the day, their was at Brisson. page 179.
night, which had a special signification; as also their Ibid. page 181.
staying of the Baptized in the Church, or in the Baptistery until midnight.

#Sect. 21. The Opposites third difference of our Cross and theirs, is in the
meaning, end and use.
THe third and last difference alleged for our Cross, to make it diverse
from the popish, may in this sense be termed [formall] in that it is drawn
from a diverse manner, in our meaning, end, and use. First, this justifies
both the Lutheran in his Images, and the Adiaphorist in all his mixtures, and
meashings with popery; Augustan. consulta. Mait. 15. 1548. c. de ceremon.
both of them protesting the rites they retain, are not popishly used by them,
but [ad ornatum] only, and ad decorem, and ad adificationem. Yea, this
justifies the Papist (also) in all his Jewish, and heathenish ceremonies. Who,
why should he not plead as well as we, I use them not as Pagans use them?
Charles the great condemns the Baptizing of Bells (to wit) the Durant. de rit.
li. 1. cap 22. sect. 6.
superstitious manner of Baptizing (says Vitus Amerbachius) not the Baptizing
it self. The Council of Eliberis condemned lights at funerals (that is say
the Papists) the manner of them Idem. cap. 23. sect. 14
ex superstitione gentilium, not the lights themselves. Our tapers (also) which
burn on our Altars, are diverse from those of the heathens (say they)
Wherefore? because Christiani, Idem. li. 1. c. 8. sect. 5.
non eadem mente, coque fine, lumina offerunt. The Christians offer lights not
with the same mind, not with the same end that Pagans do. Again, the Priests
of the heathen used the stole, yet their stole is not heathenish, because the
heathen did not use it, Durant. lib. 2. ca. 9. sect. 12.
eadem ratione, qua nunc Christiani. Secondly, the general plea of this excuse
must needs be this, the Papists Cross to an ill end, we to a good. Which, is
it good in an evil adultresse, such as the Cross is proved to be? then excuse
August. de sermon. domin. in monte. li. 1. p. 1123.
Augustine too, excusing adultery, when it is committed to a good end, as to
save an husbands life. Thirdly, we have Scriptures against this excuse, and we
have the Fathers against it. Peter, used he not the Jewish rites Ioh. Reynold.
confer. cap. 8. diuis. 4.
diuersa mente, and yet is not excused? If we use the Cross for edification,
and not as the Papists use it, so he used the Jewish meats for edification,
and put no merit or necessity in them, as they of the Concision did. Augustine
speaking of him, It is unlawful (says he) to retain any of the Jews
ceremonies (and Popish ceremonies, are worse then theirs) August. epist. 19.
page 77.
Quolibet affectu, and quouis animo id fiat; how diverse so ever our mind and
meaning be. Fourthly, I appeal to our own writers, whereas Extrauagant. de
sacra vnerion. cap. vnjco.
Innocentius pleads, their oil is not Jewish, because it signifies
diversely, they refute him, because a diverse Ioh. Reynold. confer. with Heart.
cap. 8. diuis. 4.
manner makes no lawful diversity, and because it is not lawful to borrow
form Jews, (therefore not from Papists) and Pet. Martyr in 1. Reg. 19.
addere nouam significationem. Martial makes a difference between the
heathens incense and theirs, because they use it better. D. Fulke. reioynd.
art. 7. page 187.
Doctor Fulke disdaineth the difference, and scorneth to answer it, it is so
foolish. Bonner holds their Images diverse from the Pagan Images, because
used by them to better end; Act. and monu. in histor eius. Hos. 6.11.
Master Hawks cares not for the diverse use, as long as both laid together,
have eyes and see not, ears and hear not, and so agree in common properties
the one with the other, he counts them all one. Finally, this change of a
popish rite, upon pretense of a diverse use, is but a transplantation only,
which out of the Scriptures Philip. Morn. de Eucharist. lib. 2. ca. 1. Guil.
Perk. in problem. praeparat. 3
all our writers do condemn; affirming that it is our duty, to grubbe them
clean out of the Church. Fifthly (and last of all) I appeal to our own
practice, whereas some Churches retain the Alexand. Alesi. in proaem. liturg.
angli.
elevation still, not for adoration like the Papists, but for ostension to the
people, as if this difference of diverse manner, bore no meat in mouth, we
have abolished it. Where as some Bullinger. de orig. error. l. 2. c. 6
allow of a stone Altar so it be erected for a Sacrament, not for a Sacrifice,
as if this diversity of use and end were insufficient, we have removed them
like to Zepper de polit. eccles. lib. cap.
other reformed Churches. Whereas Lutherans retain Images in the Church for
use historical as if this diverse end were nothing, we have turned them Homil.
ag. peril of Idolat. p. 1 and 3.
headlong out of our Churches. We might use in diverse manner the popish
Crosses of the supper, as well as their Cross in Baptism; them we cashire
under this general and peremptory doom, Bucet. in censur. ca. 5
papisticorum gestuum licentia, prorsus tollenda. And is not the Cross in
Baptism a popish gesture, as well as that of the Lords Supper?

#Sect. 22. Our use of the Cross, the same with the Papist in senen respects.
The Opposites distinction of effectiue and significatiue in defense of it
answered.
WE have proved a diverse manner in using of the Cross, is no sufficient
change. Now what if our manner be not diverse, but in a manner the very same?
For do we use the sign of the Cross, not as a substantial part of Baptism,
but as a ceremony for order, decency, and edification? even Pet. Lumbard.
lib. 4. distinct. 3.
so do they. Do we use it as an ancient rite, that brings reuerentiam
Sacramento? even so Canisius de Sacram. in genesis ca. 8
do they. Do we set it in the forehead, the seat of shame to profess Christ
crucified? Bellar. de imag. c. 29.
even so do they. Do we use it for a sign to stir to patience, to fight
under Christ his banner? even Canis. de fid. and symbol. ca. 12.
so do they. Do we use it to dedicate our selves and our children unto God?
even Francisc. Coster. Enchirid. c. 11
so do they. Do we use it for a thankful memorial, to call to mind our
redemption by Christ Jesus? Canis. vt supta.
even so do they. Do we use it to confirm our faith in the same redemption,
or to put our selves in mind of the forgiveness of our sins? Coster. vt supra.
even so do they. But whereas they use it effectiue, we use it only
significatiue. Hui? And is all come to this? Is it possible so great a cry,
should yield so little wool? For first the Adiaphorist (whom we were wont to
call a Elmer in Harbor. of faithful subjects.
Sattanist) uses the very same distinction, he will have his Conrad,
Schlusselburg. tom. 13. cap. ^. p. 76.
candles and Images, to be signifying memorials only, without all such
effectiue power, as papists give to the^. Yea, Georg. Cassand. consultac. art.
21.
Cassander himself (the very Godfather of Adiaphorisme) will have Images
retained only upon this condition, vt rerum gestarum, etc. That they be
accounted monuments of things done, not instruments, and that no power or
virtue be ascribed unto them. We all Hospinia. de re templ. ca. de imag.
cry out upon Paulinus, for first bringing Crosses, and other pictures into the
Churches; which, were they other then significatiue? Guess by his Cross
begirt with a crown, two doves standing on the top, which, what was it else but
a meare Emblem? which the Prudent.
Poet thus expounds.

Cerne coronatam domini super atria Christi
stare crucem, Celso spondentem Celsa labori
pramia, toll erucem, qui vis auferre coronam,
Quaeque super signum resident caeleste columbae
Simplicibus produnt regna patere dei.
There be Papists that tolerate Images only for their signification and as
they are Ioh. Picus Mirandula Gabri. Biel. supra canon miss. lect. 49
recordatiue. In the Canon of the Mass, the Crosses were made, Ad Durant. de
rit. li. 2. cap 45. sect. 9.
comemorandam veritatem crucis, and passionis Christi. Quid enim est (vt ait
Iuo Carnotencis) inter mysteria rebus sacratis vel sacrandis signum crucis
super ponere, quam mortem domini commemorare? Read Tho. Aqu p. 3. q. 83. art.
5.6. Alexand. de Ales. pa. 4. q. 33. Innocent. lib. 5. ca. 11. Mi^^olog. c. 15
others, and you shall find the Crosses of the Lords Supper to be
significatiue alone, which have we not for all this abolished? therein
destroying this significatiue excuse, which now we go about to build?
Secondly, we have condemned all interpretations in all rites popish, by one of
our writers thus: Nullus fingat sibi commodas in spetiem interpretationes, etc.
Muscu. loc. commu. de tradit. ca. 6.
Let no man forge interpretations to himself, though never so glorious in
show, by them to persuade himself, he may lawfully observe any papal
traditions, without the hurt of his own conscience. Now this excuse of ours
for the Cross, is not an interpretation only, but to speak with Saint August
in Psalm. 113. part. 2.
Augustine, even interpraetatio simulachrorum. The Pagan of his time, thought
he was purgatioris religionis, in that he held his Image to be a sign of his
God only, even so think we our Cross purgatior, because we make him not a God
as Papists do, but only a sign and a monument of him? When Innocentius
makes this difference between the Jewish oil and his own, that the former
was significatiue only, his effectiue; does this excuse it from being Jewish
in the eyes of our Ioh. Reynold. confer cap. 8. diuis. 4.
writers? The school Sophisters makes the Cross of Baptism and other
complements to differ in [efficacie] from the water in Baptism, and therefore
they coin a distinction between them, that the one is Sacramentum, the other
Sacramentalia only. This distinction sauoureth ill before our writers* one
Pet. Martyr. in 1. Reg. 8. fol. 73. 1. Cor. 8.1.2.
calls it sophistical, because it is not sumpta ex re, these ceremonies,
being outward signs as well as the water, and that of the same things a diverse
conceit of a power effectiue, is but vain to make sound difference, it being
in cogitation only. Thirdly, this interpretatiue excuse, is inward we know
being able to plead no further then the Nicholaitan once, though I use the
Idols meat yet is mine heart free from all Idolatry and superstition. What
though we should grant, that the effectiue power of the Cross, being
abolished, his body, flesh, and bones were gone? are we commanded to avoid the
Idol himself, or his service only? are we not bound to refrain even Tertul.
de corona. milit.
ab effigy also, from his shape, and from the Rolloc in 1. these. 5. verse. 22.
superficies of him? that is his skin: Yea from his very upper Iud. ve. 22
garment? at a word, from all Pet. Martyr. amie. cuid. in Angli. Zanch de Imag.
these. 2. Bucer in censur. cap. 3. p. 459.
show and from all spice of popery? Two Tripart. histor. li. 6. cap 30.
Christians throw incense into the fire before Julian, not with the same
meaning that others did. A soldier wears a garland in the days of Tertul.
de coron. milit.
Tertullian with a mind free from the Idolatry of his fellows. Joseph uses
the same oath that Idolaters do, when they ascribe a certain kind of
immortality unto Pharo, how be it his mind is diverse from theirs. This
difference is nothing worth, as long as the incense, the garland, Franc. Inn.
in Genesis 42.15. Ioh. Piscator. in mat ca. 5.
the oath is the same (as we now use the same sign with the Papists) there is
a partaking with Idolaters by show and in appearance. But we remedy this show,
in that we make our meaning known to use it only as a sign. As if Ezechias
had not wit to think on this? whereas the inward Idolatry to the brazen
serpent ascribes to it an effectiue power of healing, I will let him alone,
and make known to the people, he is kept only (as Moses appointed) for a
signifier and memorial of so much. This protesting against the outward show we
give, is (indeed) no other but that which once deceived great Origin. For thus
he, Epiphan. li. 2. haeres. 64.
venite accipite frondes Christi, non iam frondes simulachri: For so we call
men to the Protestants cross as if it were now the popish cross no longer.
Remember the fondnes of Marcellinus, Caesar. Baron. Annal^. anno. 303,
Non dijs sacrificaui, sed tantu^ graua thuris, leuatis manibus, superprunas
combus^i. I did not sacrifice, I only took a little frankensence and did
burn the same upon the wales. What more ridiculous? and yet it as good (well
near) as this excuse which we do make, we make no popish Cross at all, we
only wagge our fingers a little, and draw two lines a cross. Fourthly, this
[interpretatiue] difference which is [inward] consists only in a lower
estimation of the heart, we ascribe not the same power to the Cross that
Papists do, this is all; which is the very ground they stand on, that worship
the Cross both by East and by West, we perform the same outward reverence to
our Images, that the Pagans do to theirs, but here is the difference (say
they) we do it Ierem. Patriark. in epist. ad Crusium.
(...) ^o^ only without ascribing any Gregor de valent. de Idololat. lib. 2.
cap. 7.
power divine unto them. Fifthly, our communion book must be gently handled, or
else our sign of the Cross is effectiue. For we sign the child in token,
that he shall continue Christ's faithful soldier to his lives end: these
words [shall continue] to his lives end, compared with the like in the Epistle
of the 22. Sunday after Trinity [God shall continue the work in you to the
end] show unto us, that we use the cross for a pleadg to give assurance to the
child to continue in grace unto the end, which if it be so, then he serves to
work faith, and is used effectiuely. And who can conceive that the book
gives less power to the sign of the Cross, then to the sign of imposing
hands? which that it is effectiuely used, it is out of question, for it is
ministered to the baptized, [ Rubric. before the Gatechis.
that he may receive strength agains sin, and against temptation.] So hitherto,
it has bin proved, that neither the Cross may be changed to use religious;
neither is changed sufficiently by us. Now, what if it might and were? for we
plead.

#Sect. 23. Evils occasioned by the Cross in regard of the Cross it self,
people, Minister and Governors that urge it.
THirdly, we are not to consider so much whether the Cross it self be
changed, as whether the events of the Cross be changed or no, which we find
are not, much evil still flowing from it by the fault of the Cross it self,
by the fault of the people; by the fault of the minister that does make it, and
last of all by the fault of our governors, that do enforce it. It is the
Cross fault that it is too like a Popish Idol. For Ludouic. Viues.
similitudo is even to the wisest men, the mother of error. What (then) shall
become of a vulgar company who have even a Rolloc. in epistol. ad ephesians. 4.
verse. 14.
(...) in them of inconstancy they do so lean to superstition? And it is the
Crosses fault that he draws too near to the popish Idolatry. For let all the
former excuses speak what they can, they can say no more then this, We march
on with the Papists a good way, but we go not so far as they; and we agree
in many uses with them, but one of their uses (to wit) their [effectiuenes] we
forbear. Which what is it for us, who are forbidden not only to plunge our
selves so deep as Idolaters do, but also to touch any of their unclean
things, or (indeed) to come near the least imitation of them? 2. Cor. 6.17
Deuteronomy. 12.30
Might not the virgins of Cypri. li. 1 epist. 11.
Cyprians time plead the fame. Indeed we go far (we grant) in the way of
fornication we walk with young men; we talk with them; yea, we go to bed to
them. But when it comes to the act, then we forbear, and therefore are
guiltless. For that we talk with the harlot the Cross, it is apparent by the
conference which we have with her about Christ Jesus, which she represents,
more apparent is it that we walk with her who has chosen her for our teacher
and our guide, most of all apparent is it, that we go to bed to her, for we use
her in the Church, which is known to be the bed both of chaste and unchaste
worship. What (then) though we use her not effectiuely? Isa. 57.8. Hos. 7.14.
Cant. ^.15.
This is but to forbear when it comes to the adulterous act, like Cyprians
virgin, so that there is liable against us now, what then she heard. Non est
locus dandus Diabolo, nemo diu tutus periculo proximus, graves multorum ruina
inde sequantur. Come we to the people in the second place. Ludouic. Viues in
August de ciuitat. dei li. 8. ca. 27.
It was the desire of Ludouicus Viues and Ioh. Gerson. de negligent. praelat.
Gerson before him, that the Images might be removed, because the people
finding them in outward appearance like the Idols of the Pagans, they would
eftsoons worship them in the same manner. If we seek the like remouall of the
Cross, we have like cause; the people being as prone (now) to does o^ the fame
in popish manner, as long as they see it before their eyes, after their old
popish fashion. I say after their old fashion, because populus non nouit
distinguers (as one says our of Arist^^le) especially in so quaint a
difference, Mat. Flace. Illyrric. in lib. de Adiaphor.
as this of [effectiuenes] or in such a ceremony as the Cross, which they
have so long abused as one of our Bucer. in censar. ca. 9 and alibi pas^im.
writers well, populus, etc. the people either understands not, or considered
not the right use of those ceremonies, which they have so long abused, as also
their for fathers before them. To come nearer home: Idem in cens^^. c. 12
M. Bucer will not have the cross in Baptism, unless he be both purely
understood, and religiously received by the people. Which condition finding no
place in the people to this hour, what reason to put him to any longer trial.
In regard hereof lay we to heart, even what a B^llar de Sacram. in gene. ca. 21
Jesuit speaks. The chaunges of a Sacrament (says he) must be regarded, not
as they are Mathematical, but as they are moral; not according to the
problemes of the learned, but according to the opinion and the practice of the
people. So that the Mathematical change, which our law is said to have made
in the Cross, is not material, alwhile the moral estimation and use of him
in the people, is the same. The change of Haedera in stead of Cucurbita in the
translation of Jonas, was mathematically little, yet morally it was very great,
because the August. in epist. ad Hieron. 10
people took head against it, and made great a do about it. On the other
side, the change of the ancient Churches Leiturgie in the days of Nicholas,
was mathematically great, Rodolph. de Riuo. Tungrens.
because it brought in perfection of the mass: but morally it was nothing at
all, because few or none observed it, neither were the people grieved at it. I
come in the third place to the Minister that makes the Cross, he says, I
make it not [effectiue,] the Image maker said the like. I make the Image, not
for any favor to the worshipping of it, but to follow my trade and calling.
But if he did Colere, because he fashioned it, Tertul. li. de Idololar.
vt coli possit, then he that fashioneth a Cross in use religious, vt ad
superstitionem conuerti possit, incurreth himself the blame of superstition.
Ex hoc quod vetor facere curandum est ne fiat per me. Again, the
schole-master, who in the days of Tertullian, read the stories of heathenish
Gods unto his scholars, did not in intent approve them, yet because he
refrained not from occasion of approbation in other men, Tertul. ibid.
dum docet commendat, dum tradit affirmat. And does not (then) a Minister much
more commend the honor of the Idol, when he makes it? and affirms it when
he fashioneth it in honorable manner, and in the reverent service and
Sacrament of the Lord? he cannot say, I make no such Cross as Papists do.
What if he could? Tertul. li. de spectat.
Nobis satis non est si ipsi nihil tale faciamus, nisi and talia facientibus
non conferamur? I come in the fourth place to our governors, who lay (in
vain) the fault upon the peoples abuse, that our Cross is not morally
changed from the popish, but hatcheth the same effects amongst us. For God
will ask them, why do you keep it in your Churches to be abused? Tertul. de
coron. milit
Nulla distantia est abutendi cum cessat veritas vtendi. The people could not
abuse the Cross, if it were not used at all, Nulli abuti apud Apostolum licet
facilius non vti docentem. We hold Caelius Rhodigin. antiquar. Lection. li. 9.
ca. 14.
Tullus Hostilius unwise for aduenturing on Jupiter Elicius, since the least
swaruing A formula, would burn him, and his house to powder; which also fell
out. So (me thinks) it is unwise to adventure on the Cross, our distinction
of [effectiuenes] is a nice point, and such as brings to the brinke of
danger; and let the people swerve never so little from the [formula] of it,
and they are in the pit. As for teaching them to the contrary (alas) what is
it? For if the August in Psalm. 113. p. 2.
sight of an Idols ears and eyes, persuades them more, that he sees and
hears, then their hearing to the contrary that he hears not, that he sees
not: then much more will their eyes prevail to persuade them that there is an
effectiue Cross amongst us, (the very same that was of old in time of popery)
then their ears when they hear from us it is not such, which they do not
consider. I would (therefore) we could follow the warynes of Rome herself in
a matter of like danger. Why may not a written piece of Scripture with a
Cross be bore in the boosome with this caveat, modo ne ex superstitione, modo
ne spes habeatur, in modo scribendi, that is, so it be not used effectiuely?
She considers it is dangerous to bring her children so near the brinke of
effectiue hope; therefore she concludes, though a man may lawfully bear
these in his boosome, yet it is, Thom. Aquin. 2.2. q. 96. art. 4
tutius and laudabilius, ab his abstinere. So though it were lawful to use a
Cross, with a prouiso against the effectiue use thereof, yet were it tutius to
abandon it quite, to aquit all danger.

#Sect. 24. Five defenses of the Cross objected by the Opposites: The first
whereof is answered in this Section, and that which follows.
WE have strooken through the loins of them, who deny the sign of the
Cross to be so much as an Idol amongst us through participation, upon
pretense, that it is not the same with the popish, but that it is changed
sufficiently with us. Now make we a stand against them, who plead five things,
against the sentence of abolition, for this gross Idol pretenciuely changed.
First, the commandment which Moses gave touching the abolishing of all
monuments of Canaans Idolaty, binds not (say they.) It was a temporal
exercise for the Jews only, and other Pagans were not devoted to destruction
as they were, and popery is not so bad as Paganism; and therefore there is
not required of us the like severity in the abolishing of her relics. First,
let them remember themselves do hold, that Moses Law concerning Tithes is
perpetual, even according to the letter, by which tithes are [de iure diuino]
in their opinion. A strange thing they should strain the very letter it self
of Tithes, but clean pass by the maine equity of this law, that abolisheth
aliene rites; seeing Bellar. de cleric. cap. 25.
Bellarmine himself does see (that which the Apostle plainly shows) that a
sufficient maintenance only of the minister is to be enforced hence, Cor 9.14
and more then this we go not about to wring out of this Exodus 23.24. Deuteronomy.
12.1.2.3. Exodus 34.1^. Deuteronomy. 7.5. Number. 23.52.
Law; we crave only an equity of it, to wit, such an abolishing of Idolotrous
relics, as may be sufficient for Gods glory, for the edifying of his people,
and for the preserving of religion in holy pureness. But Master Calvin himself
confesses the letter of it was an exercise that was temporal to the Jews;
which we willingly grant, so that our Opposites will allow us that everlasting
equity of it, which he auerreth: Fateor (says Ioh. Calvin. Apendic. praecept.
2. page 286.
he) quaecunque ad superstitionem fouendam spectant, e medio tollenda esse.
Again, Summa huc tendit, quo melius pateat, quantopere detestatur Deus
Idololatriam, velle eorum omnium memoriam aboleri, quae semel dicata sunt
Idololis. I ask how the Idols themselves may remain in honorable use, (such
as Cross and Surplice are) when the very memory it self, must be razed of
every thing, that heretofore has been consecrate to their service? Lo the
equity of this Law? behold the equivalent, to which this equity binds for
ever? even as the causes are perpetual, whereon it is grounded (to wit) Deuteronomy.
7.4.
the jealousy of the Lord, against each remnant of Idolatry, the Churches
duty to abhor it for ever; the 1. Cor. 10 24.
ensnaring Deuteronomy. 8.6.
of the Idol and of his monument, the danger of abuse in his people with the
rest that have been heretofore Supra. sect. 8.
rehearst. Secondly, though the Cananites were more devoted to destruction, for
their persons then other Pagans, yet the Idolotries of other Pagans, were as
much as theirs devoted to abolition, both before them, from the beginning, and
in time after them euersince* Before them, Jacob does aware, not only the
Images, but also the earings of his wives Idols, and that by the law of nature,
that was written in his heart. Genesis 35.4.
After this law of Moses, (made against the Canaanites) we see it continued
against the Idolatries of other Pagans, whose Isay. 2.20.
Images, whose Isa. 30.20
ornaments, whose very Psalm. 16.4
name, whose Apoc. 2.13.20.
Idolothites; whose 2. Cor. 6.16.
unclean things, whose very Iud. 23.
garment, and each appurtenance, must be cleansed and cast away. They were the
Jews not the Cananites, that committed Idolatry to the brazen serpent, which
Hezechias did abolish, though by Moses himself preserved, to be a figure of
Christ crucified* of which honor the Cross comes short; yea his very figure
it self, (to wit) the 2. Reg. 18.4.
post whereon the brazen serpent hanged. But Hezechias was not bound to break
the serpent (say our Opposites) he might have chosen (as every Christian Prince
may now) in the Idols of the Papists. But the text is clean to the contrary:
Verse. 6.
Hezechias did this according to the Law of Moses, and the interpreters of the
text are to the contrary. Zanch. de imag. these. 3 fol. 3^4.
Quidquid fecit Hezech. fecit ex lege, and some Vazq. de adorat. li 2 disput 4.
cap 5.
Papist (also) are to the contrary, what needs more? Our Opposites themselves
are to the contrary; who rehearse this fact of Hezechia not only among things
Doct. Bills. ag. ^he Apolog. p. 4. page 339.
well done, but also amongst things which God required to be done. And when
Gratian meateth the same measure to them, The Pope might have chosen whether he
would have submitted himself to the Emperor or no (which they meat to us.)
Hezechias might have chosen whether he would have broken the serpent or no,
they can tell how to detect the shift with that reply which we must now return
home to them. Idem ibid. p. 2. page 204.
It is a very short and an easy method, Idem p. 2. page 179.
to be rid of all examples and histories, to say they did so, but it was more
then needed to be done. Let them satisfy me in two things, would God have
commended it, if he had not commanded it? or can any thing be well done, that
is not commanded to be done? August. Tom 10. sermon. 6. decret. 1. distinct. 63.
cap. 18. Pet. Martyr in lib. Iudic. cap 2. Zanch. de operib. redempt cap 15.
these 3. Ioh. Wolph. in 2. Reg. cap. 18. Jewel. arr. 14. deuis. 2. D. Fulk.
cont. Saund. de imag. cap. 4. p. 584. Zepper. de polit. eccles. etc.
Say the former, and bring in traditions, grant the latter, and grant works
of supererogation. To make short work, the example of Joshua destroying the
monuments of the Cananites, and of Hezechias breaking down the brazen serpent,
bind for ever, to the razing of all Idols, their rites and monuments, to the
end of the world, in the eyes of all good writers.

Sect. 25. THirdly, there is no Idolatry Cananitish, Paganish, Jewish, or what
else soever, against which the equity of this law, is more liable, then against
the Idolatry popish, so far is it, that her relics may be better spared
then theirs. For what is there written literally against Paganish Idolatry in
the old Testament, which is not Anagogically applied by the Hieron. in Abac.
2. and Amos 5.6. and 8. Hos. 11. and 12. Zanch. 13. Lyran. in deu. 7. vid.
Conrad. Lutzenburg. and Greg. Mardiscour. c. 3. fol. 29.
Fathers against the heresies of the new, of which (we know) the popish is the
greatest? Nay it is the common divinity of all ages, that heresy in pretended
Christians, is far Hieron. in Hos. ca 4. August. de bapt. cont. Donatis^ lib.
6. c. vir. Tho. Aquin. 2.^. q. 10. art. 6
worse then any Idolatry of open Pagans. As for the heresy of modern popery
in particular, we find it described through the Scripture, as the quintessense
of all paganism, so that the second beast of Rome ouertopt by the Papacy,
that rides on it, is araigned and found guilty of Apoc. 17. 1.2, 3, etc.
more whoredom and blasphemy, more spiritual drunkenness and tyranny finally
of more abomination, then the first of Apoc. 13. 1.2.3. etc.
Rome. Paganish when the papacy did not rule it. And because we are in a
comparison of the old Idolatry of the Cananites and other Pagans that were
before the coming of Christ: as Rome for her Empire Apoc. 13.2
quartereth her Schutchion with the Lion of Assyria, the Bear of Persia, the
Leopard of Macedonia, and with the uncouth ten horned beast of Syria and
Egypt, as if all the wickedness of all the enemies of the Church were to the
full transfused into her; so for her papacy she is styled Apoc. 11.8
Sodom, Egypt, Babylon, with the like, as if she were (as indeed she is) the
very Sea that receives into her channel all the filthiness of all Pagans that
were before. Neither is there Cananite, Moabite, Philistine, or any other, to
whom the Papists are not equal. For it is to these Gentiles and heathenish
nations, to which the spirit does allude when he calls Papists by the name
of Apo. 11.2
Gentiles and heathen men; that tread down with their feet the out court of
the Temple, that Apo. 20.9
compass about the tents of the Saints. Finally that Apoc. 19.15.
fight against Christ's Church, for which he smites them with the sword of his
mouth, and breaks them with his iron scepter. And as the Papists are in
equipage with former Pagans so likewise with all modern aliens, the Turk
himself being not excepted who is loosed Apoc. 9.13.14.15
from the East to punish them, and is not half so much aimed at in the book
of Gods Counsels (which the Lamb has unsealed to John) as they are aimed at.
No merucile, Cypri. de simplicit. praelator.
Plus metueudus and cauendus est inimicus (says Cyprian) cum latenter obrepit,
ea est Diaboli astucia, vt sub ipso Christiani nominis, titulo, fallat in
cautos. It is the Pope that is the Antichrist, even by our own Doct. Bills.
cont. Apolog. p. tot.
confession. It is the Pope that is the 2. These. 2.4.
adversary of God. He is also the Apoc. 9.11
Apolluon the destroyer. Yea the Apoc. 13.11.
dragon tongued beast, The man of sin, the child of perdition; the whore of
Babell, the Apoc. 17.5.
mother of fornication and of all abomination through the earth. This
considered, what means our torpor? what our frozen coldness in zeal? we
may not (forsooth) be so forward against the Papist, as the godly have been
before us against the Pagans. Oh speech unworthy, because making our selves
unworthy to be in the number of those faithful and blessed instruments, who
shall be called by the Lord, to be the men that shall burn the very flesh it
self of the Apoc. 27.16.
harlot with fire; that so no footstep, no remnant, no relic of her may
remain. Go ye Apoc. 18.21.
Angels and blessed spirits, and (without us) throw ye Babell like of stone
into the bottom of the sea. Go ye Apoc. 19.17.
fowls of the air, and ye beasts of the field, and (without us) devour and
swallow the flesh of her soldiers, and leave not so much as a Iezabels skull
behind. Go ye Apoc. 18.20.
Heavens Apostles, Prophets, and ye the Saints of the living God, and (without
us) rejoice in her ruin. Yea, Go ye Apoc. 17.14. and 19.14.11.
warryers faithful and chosen, and (without us) fight under your glorious
Captain against her, and make your swords drunken with the blood of her
slain. While you are laboring, that never Apoc. 18.23.
candell shine in her again, we must nourish her sparcles least her light be
quite extinguished. While you cleanse and rince your garments from her
pollution, and put on linen Apoc. 19.14.
pure and white, to war against her, we must buy of her Merchandise, and of the
Apoc. 18.12.
linen which she sells to the nations, while you like Sampsons stir your
selves, and shoute against the beast of Rome, (as against the greatest enemy,
that ever our good Jesus had upon the earth) we must let our weapons down,
and hang down our hands, and cool our zeal. Yea sound for Parle, and think
upon conditions of peace. More then this, we must even turn our weapons
against our own brethren (who are our own bowels) as if they were worse then
Papists, and in favor of Christ's enemies, become enemies unto the faithful
soldiers of Christ; we must take the crowns of our Martyrs and surrender them
to Parson. in conuers. of Engl. p. 2. cap. 2.
Parsons, as if they were not as blessed Apoc. 14.13.
now, who die in these days against Rome Popish, as they who died in older
time against Rome Paganish. We must repeal our Act of Parliament, which
finds Homil. ag. peril. of Idolat. p. 3.
Paganisime it self in popery; we must yield, and give up the very ancients
of our army, and break their Ioh. Reynold. de Idolat. li. 2. ca. 3. sect.
3.4.6.13.16 17.67. etc. Mat. Sutcliu. in Turc. papism. cum reliquis.
golden pens in pieces, who have taught that the Images of God in popery are
as vile Idols, as the Images of the Pagans were; and that their worshipping in
the papacy is as abominable, as the Pagan adoration. But what is the worst
that can be said of Turks and Pagans? I trow this, that they served devils.
And is not Apo. 18.2
Rome an habitation, and cage of devils? The factors of Rome, the Apoc. 16.14.
spirits of devils? The Apo. 9.20
Idols of Rome, even devils themselves? This brings us home to the Cross and
Surplice which being Idols of theirs, August. de tempor. sermon. 241.
are no otherwise to be thought of, the^ we think of the devil himself. When
the Corinthian thought it a thing indifferent to eat of the Idolothite, what
(says 1. Cor. 10 21.
Paul) call you that indifferent, which makes you partake with devils? The
same may be said of the Cross and Surplice, not only by virtue of the former
text, which calls them devils (as they are used in popery:) but also by our
Gault. Architip. in 1. cor. 10. Ioh. Reyn. de Idolola. li. 2. ca. 3. sect 44.
writers verdict, who give good reason the diuill is worshipped in popish Idols
as well as in Paganish. As for the Cross, does not Ambros. de obit. Theodos
Ambrose directly say, the adoring of it is a paganish error? I conclude with
one of our writers. Bulling. de orig. error. li. 1. cap. 36.
Cum paromnino cultus ratio vtriusque gentis sit, consequens est omnia quae
contra deos and Idola gentium, pronuntiata sunt, a sanctis etiam contra nostros
diuos, corumque imagines esse pronuntiata, and Idololatriam hanc, nobis non
minus persequendam esse, quam sui saeculi Idololatriam, maiores nostri
persecuti sunt.

#Sect. 26. Objections of the Opposits for the Cross confuted in this Sect.
and 27. following. Ceremonies honorable in their ancient beginning must be
corrected, not removed.
THe first defense which maintains the Cross and Surplice in possession,
pleads as we see, the abusers of it must be spared. The second follows; and
it says, the first users of it are to be honored, and for their sakes they
must not be abandoned by us, but restored to their first use. The Alexand.
Alesini. Proaem. leiturg. Angl.
member curable must be healed, not cut off. It is sufficient to Ric. Hook lib.
5. ca. 65
sheere the ceremonies of the Papists, though we do not flea them. The
Admonit. de cerem. abolit. and relent. in leiturg. Anglic
ceremonies which may be used well, may not be cancelled, if it be but for
their antiquity, which purchases to them sufficient authority; yea in things
that are abused, the abuse only must be removed, the things themselves must
still remain. First be it considered, that the Vazq. de adorat. li. 2 disput.
5. cap. 2. Suar. Tom 1. in Tho. disput. 54. sect. 2.
Papists plead the same for their Baall, the Lutherans for their Images, the
Adiaphorists for their mixtures; as Cassander by name, pleads the same, for
his hodgepodge in Germany. Baldwin the same, for his gallimawfry among the
French. Orichouius the same for his medly in Polonia. Nay more, we may here
repeat that of Tertul. de Idololat.
Tertullian: Quid aliter dixisset Ethnicus? I mean, what can the Papist say
more, for all the pack of his ceremonies, then what he speaks in this our
language? Canis. in summa. tit. de Sacram. in genesis c. 8.
Praeterquam quod decorem sacramentis afferunt. and reuerentiam quandam
conciliant, singulari quoque antiquitatis commendatione nobis sunt venerande.
Secondly, the sign of the Cross, had never any ancient use that was
laudable, to speak the best it was but D. Fulk. in reioynd. art. 5. page 175.
tolerable; to speak the least it was Calfh. ag. Martial. passin.
superfluous, to speak the worst it was Guilihel. Whitak. controuers 1, q. 6.
c. 12 page 443. Guil. Perk. problem. tit. Chrisu^. D. Fulk. ag. Saund. of imag.
c. 13. p. 657 Ioh. Breut. in prolegomen.
superstitious and near Montanicall. Such a meare tare it was sowed by the
enemy in the Lords field; yea nothing better then Calsh. ag. Mart. art. 5. fol.
125.
hay and stubble, built unadvisedly upon Christ. I omit that in ceremonies,
Pet. Martyr in lib. Iudie. ca. 1.
non tam origo, spectanda est, quam vt consentiant cum verbo dei, but if our
Opposites must needs drink of his cesterne of antiquity, then let the Bear.
Rhenan. in Tertul. de coron. mulit. Magdeburgens. cantur. 3. cap 6. tit. tit.
Baptis.
oil it self of Baptisine, be revived: yea, Magdeburg. ex Tertul. de Bapt.
Baptizing by lay men, for these be as ancient as the Cross, and sprange
about the same time with it. Sure with far better reason may they be raked
out of their graves, the ceremony Cypri: lib. 3. epist. 8.
of [kissing] the infant Baptized: the ceremony of the Ter^^^de pudsair.
ringe; given in Baptism, for an obsignation of faith and profession: the
ceremony of putting Tert^l. lib. de coron inilit.
milk and honey into his mouth: and lastly the ceremony of the Id^n (...)
Baptis. (...) Beat. Rhenan. in lib de coron mil it.
white garment wherewith the Baptized was wont to be clothed. These being
equal to the Cross, both for antiquity, and for profitiblenesse of
signification, and surmounting it in other respects, as that they were never so
much abused as the Cross has been, not now import so much peril, as the
Cross brings with it, may give wise men cause to wonder why these should be
buried in a Toumbe sealed up, while the Cross not only lives, Pet. Martyr
loc. comu. de imag. sect. 17.
but also dominiereth. But if the Cross must needs be renewed above his
fellows (though far better then himself) then renew we the use effectiue,
and operative of it: renew we also the necessity of his use, for such was his
use at first, as shall be showed hereafter. Yea (then) take we up the Tertul.
de coron. milit.
crossing of our selves too, in all our business; Yea the crossing of our
bedds, and other things which are without life* It may be (also (...) we must
take up the very material Crosses and all. For so some guess out of Baat.
Rhenan. ibid. Tertul. lib. ad vror.
Tertullian, who gives instance in wooden statutes of the heathens, which
were like to those Crosses among Christians which they so much misliked.
Migdeburg. cent. 3. cap. 6. tit. de cerem.


THirdly, what if the Cross had in old time an indifferent use (for good I
Folk. reioynd. art. 5 p. 175.
am forbidden to term it) is not the Cypri. de singularit. cleric.
contradictio calumniosa, quae de bonis praescribit vt asserat mala? For the
abuse of it has since been such, as that now it is the Fathers Cross no
longer. What one Place. Illyric. lib. de Ad^aphor.
porro quod quidam dicunt, etc. They say nothing for excuse, who say they
restore those ceremonies, which because they have been used by the Fathers,
therefore penitus do not appertain to Antichrist? For after that things have
served Idolatry, they are Idolatrous, and they please not God; but God would
have them to be castaway. The brazen serpent was ordained by God; and that by
Moses (so great a Prophet) yet after it had served Idolatry, it was no longer
the serpent of God but the serpent of Idolaters, and the serpent of the devil.
And praised is Hezechias who brake him in pieces, therefore although these
popish ceremonies were extant in the Church, even from the days of the first
Fathers, yet notwithstanding seeing they are (and have bin for so long a time)
defiled penitus with Idolatry and abuse papisticall, they are no longer the
Fathers ceremonies, but the ceremonies of Antichrist, and they are piously
abolished, but impiously and against Gods will restored again. Ioh. Wolf. 2.
Reg. 18. Ioh. Reynold. confer cap. 8. diuis. 4. page 5 10.
How many of other writers subscribe to this? Gideon did set up an Ephod to the
same end, that Eusebius de vit. Constantin. lib. 3. cap. 48. Judge 8.33.
Constantine did erect the Cross, to wit, for a thankful monument that his
victory came from God but when it once became an Idol, was it any longer his?
or his intent and zeal this way, did it any way excuse the Ludouic. Lauat. in
Iudic. ca. 8.
suffering of it when once the people stumbled at it? The Ephesians set up an
August. de mirabl. sacra. script. li. 1. ca. 15.
Ox by Iosephes toumbe, for a thankful monument of their preservation by
him, and by his husbandry. This intent at first was good, after it grew to be
adored in Egypt. After this abuse, was it Iosephes ox any longer? or was it
for his sake to be spared, and so restored to his first use? ask the Council
of Rome herself and be ashamed. Baleus in Adrian. 4.
Adrian the fourth, when the papacy is degenerat, he says it is the papacy of
Peter no longer, but the papacy of Romulus rather. Polydor Virgil. de inuentor.
rerum. lib. 3 cap. 12.
Polydor Virgil counts sanctuaries abused, not the sanctuaries of Moses, but
of Romulus. Pius secundus calls the Mendicants, the Thom. Moresin. de
deprauat. relig. origi. in verb. Monastic.
Monks of the devil, when they are degenerated from the ancients. Paulus
Thaebeus, Antonius Hilarion with the rest. Poly dor. Virgil. li. 7. cap. 1.
Polydor Virgil counts not the Monks of his time degenerated, the Monks of
Benedict, Augustine, Hierome, quine cale quid vnquam cogitarunt futurum, not to
be tedious. Ioh. Molan. de canonic. li. 1. cap. 26.
Johannes Molanus reckons the fastes of his time degenerated, to be none of
the ancient fastes any longer. Si ad veterem disciplinam atque rigorem
respiciamus, vix vllus hoe tempore ieiunare censebitur. We our selves count not
the tapers of the Papists (abused) although abused only to signification and
no operation, to be any of the ancient lights which were used in the Hieron.
cont. vigilant.
East, and their holy bread now abused to operation, to be Guil. Perk. problem
in werb benedict.
none of the hallowed bread used of old for a sign of friendship only. As for
the Cross, which has received all the abuses which can be named of operation,
adoration, etc. there may be better said of it, then of any other relic; of
any Idolatry whatsoever, what one of our writers has, Place Illyric in lib.
de Adiaphor.
sicue faris aut scorti, ipsimaetiam vestem, etc. as we detest the very garment
it self of a these, and of an whore, though it be innocent; and there is no
honest man that willingly does so much as touch it so they that be truly pious
from the heart, do abhor these Popish tristes, because in the papacy they
have been put to extreme abuse, and to impiety, and have been therewith
defiled. Necest tantum delicati (...) s^l^m palati istud f^sti dium. But indeed
it is the Holy Ghost himself that does seriously detest these ceremonies that
are polluted with abominations. But whether the Cross may be called the
ancient Fathers Cross or no, sure it is the pretense of restoring it to the
ancient Fathers use, will not be received, neither will it serve to save it
from the executioners hands. Might not Hezechias have restored the serpent to
the ancient use which it had in David's time, by setting it besides the Rod
and the Manna, and other monuments? or by hiding it behind the Arc where
David laid Go^iahes sword? but he knew a thing so abused, was to be broken and
not restored. Neither has the Church since him thought any course fit to be
taken with the relics of Idolatry, the^ the same which he did take which is
Council. Aphrican. circa tempora Benifac. 1. can. 25.
penitus amputare, even wholly and altogether, without that sparing which
advises to sheere only, and not to flea the popish ceremonies, and to spare
them from abscision, in hope they may be cured. And not only against the
relics of Idolatry has the Church showed this severity, but we shall
find things more profitable, have been abolished and removed from time to
time, and that for less abuse. Feasts of charity at communions were more
Tertul. apolog. ca. 39. Cypri. li. 3. ad Quirin ca. 3. August, cont Faust. li.
20. ca. 4. and 20.
ancient then the Cross, and more profitable to nourish love, yet when they
grew once to abuse, we see them cashiered, as by the Apostle so by diverse
Laodicen. can. 28. Trullan. can. 74. Antisiodore^s. cap. ^.
Councels following. The confession before the communion how little was it
abused, yet when abuse grew out of it, although but once, Nectarius with other
Socrat: histor. eccles. lib. 5. cap. 9.
Bishops, thought it meet to be abolished. The night Vigills of men and women,
when abused had more color of defense then our Cross can have now. Hierom.
cont. vigilant. ca. 4.
Hierome might plead for their abuse, paucorum culpa non praeiudicat religioni,
qui and absque vigilijs possunt errare, vel in suis, vel in alienis domibus. We
come short of Hierome even in this excuse of his; it being by the Cross that
very many be ensnared and he containing no holy exercise of religion, which may
be prejudiced by his abolition: and yet we find these forenamed Council.
Elibertin. can. 35. August. ad fratres in ceremo. sermon. 25. Council.
Antisiodorens. can. 5.
Vigills, not only misliked, but also surceased. Last of all, the sanctuaries
are ancient, which nevertheless because abused, are now long since Polydot.
Virgil. de inuentor. rerum. lib. 3. cap. 12.
misliked, Vid. Pet. Martyr in loc. communi. cap. de Asylis and Hospin. d^^e
templ. tit. de Asylis.
condemned, and in France and other places totally Durant. de rit. lib. 1. cap.
vlt. sect. 9.10.11.
abrogated. Let the Cross be judged by the Canon law and his privilege of
antiquity, for late abuse will be taken away. For the doom is just, Decret.
part. 2. distinct. 74. cap. 7.
Priuilegium meretur amittere, qui permissa abutitur potestate.

#Sect. 28. The abuse of the Cross cannot be removed the Cross it self
remaining.
FOurthly, this defense implies, that the abuse of the Cross may be removed,
the Cross itself remaining: which is both against that general rule, Ioh.
Calvin. de necessitat. reformand. eccles. Carol. 5.
Certum est Idolomaniam, qualiter nunc illa fascinatae sunt hominum mentes, non
aliter quam subducta insaniendi materia curari posse. And also that particular
tenent of our writers which one has, Calsh. ag. Martial. in praefat. so. 5
It is as impossible to cure the abuses of the Cross (the Cross it self
remaining) as it is to quench the flame all while the wood and fuel lasts.
Indeed a poysonfull rust has so deeply eaten into it, as that it can no more
be cured then those other abused ceremonies, of which our own communion book,
Admonst. touching ce^em. before commun, hook. a pud Bucer. Censur. 454.
their superstition cannot be taken away; the ceremonies themselves remaining.
The experience of forty years has proved this true, even as the experience
of two hundred has proved that true in the popish Church, which was Theodor.
A. Niem. in lib. de Council. Nicol^de Clemangi^ in lib. de corrupt. eccles
stat^^.
foretold to the Council of Constance, to wit, that the abuse of Images could
not be remedied but by an abolition of them: hereof there be many reasons: The
Idol is a Zanch de imag. these. 3. fol. 369.
tempting harlot, the Cross in particular a very ring-worme that spreads
mightily. Men by nature (the men of England by custom also) are most prone to
superstition, the devil is present with the Idol to insinuat bad Calsh. vt
supra.
suggestions, which are much furthered by the Joseph Antiquit. Iudaic. lib. 17.
cap, 8.
(...) of the same and by the honorable August. de ciuit. dei lib. 8, cap. 24.
Hierom. in psalm. 113. p. 2.
sublimitie of it which the Cross obtains in Baptism, it being a place of
chief advancement in Gods service. What that the common multitude does
reverence it there, which is an especial August, ad deo great, epist. 49. qu. 3.
motive, and the authority of the magistrate, does there countenance, yea
command it, nay more revenge the quarrel of it, D. Fulke ag. Saund. of imag.
cap. 13. p. 659.
upon the grave and reverend preachers of the Gospel, which, strikes it a
little stroke with the simple and vulgar man? Last of all (which is most of
all) God does in justice curse their course, who upon any pretense retain any
Idol or any monument of Idolatry, making it a Deu. 7.25
snare, to all that will needs try their strength upon it, against his word.
This has he done in the use of this sign, even from the beginning, it being
scarce out of the cradle, when it became a fertile mother of much superstition.
Which curse will now be doubled on us) according to our just deserving) if we
presume to harden our selves against this tried experience past, and against
the former punishment, or if we shall be Calsh ag. Mart. art. 4
bold to adventure upon like danger in an age more corrupt, amiddst a people
more infected, and on a ceremony more abused in latter times, then heretofore
it has been. Against these vollies of deadly shot, what one Bulwark, what one
Blockehouse will suffice? It will be replied that the people may be taught
against these abuses, which if it be done (as their is liberty given to do
it) there is no peril to be feared. First, this voice comes even out of the
Dragons mouth; Vazq. de adorat. lib. 2. disput. 3. cap. 4. Snar. tom. 1. in
Tho. disput. 54. pa^^^m.
Si quid periculi ex imaginibus dei potest accidere, assidua doctrina pastorum,
and traditione parentan^ auferri debet. Yea, this police if I term it the very
seed of all Idolatry, I do it no wrong; as they easily will assent that do but
weigh and well consider the rising and the grouth thereof. For when it began to
blossom first Philipp. Mor^^^^. de Eucharist. lib. 2. cap. 3. fol. ^24.
among Christians lately converted from their paganism, at what time they were
desirous to have Crosses and other Images in room of their heathenish Idols,
in which honor the unwary pillars of the Church then living, did to much
favor them: if then the rule had been observed, Let no root of any
bitterness be found among you, They had happily at the first crushed and
bruised this serpents head. Whereas following the tract of this carnal policy
of keeping Images and Crosses to please the people, upon an hope a preaching
against their adoration would clear all danger, they gave them scope (before
they perceived it,) not only to moare but also to spread, and finally to gain
that height in which at this day we find them. And who was the Father of this
policy, but that Gregory. from whom (as from a Trojan horse) many other
superstions issued forth. For when Serenus Bishop of Marsellis in the spirit of
Hezechias brake down the Images and the Cross of his Diocese, because he
saw they were Idolatrously abused. This Gregory wrote an Epistle to him tart
and sharp. Wherein, after he had reproved him of much rashness and
indiscretion, he gives him direction to call the people of his Diocese before
him, and so Gregor. li. 9. indict. 4. epist. 9. homil ag. peril. of Idolat. p.
2. and 3.
reach them out of the Scripture that their worship was unlawful, but as for
the Images and Crosses themselves, to let them stand untouched. And this was
the D. Fulke ag. Saund. of Imag. cap. 3. p. ^80.
prima labes about the year 600. After in the 700. age, Crosses and Images go
down in the East; especially after the seventh Counsel at Constantinople had
decreed the abolishing of them. Which being crossed by the second of Nice, the
Emperor Charles called a Council at Frankford (which walking in the midway
between them both) decreed that Crosses and Images should stand against the
Council of Constantinople, but that they should not be worshipped against the
second of Nice. And this policy and course continued in the West (in France
especially) for a long season, as these words of Strabo show; Walafrid.
Strab. de reb eccles. cap. 8.
Non ideo, quia nouimus non adorandas, ideo conculonadae and delenda pictura.
Now I need not be long to show to how little effect this policy sorted: the
fact of Claudius Taurinensis bewrays sufficiently the Idolatry which it
brought forth; who upon the same occasion that moved Serenus of Marseillis
before, brake the Law to break down Catalog. testium ve^etat. in Claudio.
etc.
Crosses, and other Images, because he saw the abuse of them so increased as
could no longer by any preaching be redressed. And for this fact he was never
Philipp. Mo^nar. vt supra.
troubled. Yea, whereas he wrote an Apology for himself, Ludouicus the king
received it graciously; and gave it to Jonas Bishop of Orleance to survey it.
To suffer the sign of the Cross (then) and to have the abuse of it preached
against, is to imitate among the Bishops of Rome Sz^ged. in specul pontifit
malorum Primum; among the Emperors that are revived from not [being] through
the Lombards desolation, and the Goths the bestiam Apoc. 17.8.
primam which the spirit has foreshewed: whereas our writers call us to an
imitation of Claudius (rather) in consideration that Phillip. Mornae de
Eucharist. lib. 2. cap. 3
for the raising of superstition, no means are left, as long as the Bishops
think they do service sufficient, if they preach against the worshipping of
images. Secondly, the presidents which we have to keep the Cross, and preach
against the abuses of it, are not so unworthy of imitation but the presidents
which we have to the contrary, are as necessary to be followed. Iosuah did not
bid the Priests to preach against the Idols of Canaan, but with his hands he
threw them down. And Hezechias willed not the Levites to preach against the
serpents abuse, but he brake it all to pieces, and showed it all the disgrace
he could. Our Lord, not only preached against the Oxen and Doves sold in the
Temple, but also (as the king of the Church) he cast them forth. Epiphanius
took no course with the Pastor of Anablatha, or with John Patriarch of
Jerusalem, to have the image of Christ (hanging in the Church) to be preached
against, but he reproved them for suffering it there, and Epiphan. in epist. ad
Ioh. Hierosol.
pulled it down himself. The Council of Coucil. Elibertin. Can. 36.
Eliberis, and the fifth of Council. Carthag. 5 cap. 15.
Carthage (where Augustine himself was president) and the Council of Council.
Mogunt. cap 42.
Mentz, leave not a relic nor a remnant of Idolatry in the Church, upon a
color of preaching against the abuses of them, but they remove and abolish
them all, or sue to the magistrate for their abolition. Constantine the great
would not suffer the least ragge of Pagan Idolatry to remain to be preached
against, but razed out all memorials of it; as which he acknowledged to be
Eusebius. de vita Constantin. lib. 3. cap. 47. and 52. So^zom. lib. 1. cap. 8.
lapidem offensacula ante pedes proiecta. Theodosius was more earnest: Theodor.
histor. li. 5. cap. 20 Tripartit. histor li 9. cap. 33.
who not only overthrew funditus, but also obliuioni dedit, those few
ceremonies which had escaped the hands of Constantine; or which Julian had
repaired. The same together with Valentinian, took out of the way, Pet.
Crinitus de honest. discipline. li. 9. cap. 9.
Quodcunque signum saluatoris: and suffered them not upon an hope to have their
abuses preached against. Idem ibid.
Leo the third did the like; and Constantine the sift his son, which was the
Emperor that called the seventh general Synod at Constantinople, to ratify
and confirm this course of abolition.

#Sect. 29. Preaching as it is now in England is not sufficient to remove the
abuses of the Cross, the Cross it self remaining.
THirdly, Sect. 29.
it is no M. Calsh. ag. Mart. art. 9. fol. 170.
wisdom to prescribe a medicine that does not reach so far as the disease
does reach, as preaching does Bucer. in Censur. ca. 2. p. 458
not. For preaching Homil. ag. peril. of Idol^t. p. 3
wants in many places where the Cross is used, and where it is, many preachers
neglect as notorious faults as this, and some are corrupted in their judgment,
some desirous to please; some are infected with the spirit of emulation to add
affliction to the misery of their brethren, who are of a diverse judgment.
Polidore Virgil desires more preaching, against abuses of Crosses and Images
of his time. Howbeit, as a man out of hope to have them ever by these means
amended. When Gabriel. Biell. in canon. miss. lect. 49.
Gabriell Biell sets down, teaching (as we do now) for a remedy against the
abuse of Images. Georg. Cassand. in consultat art. 11.
Cassander himself replyeth, istud quidem recte dicitur, etc. This is well
said, but I would these teachers were not themselves the causes of this
superstition, or at the least the nourishers of it, in the hearts of the
simple: neither is it enough, if the people by sermons and admonitions be
revoked from error, unless by the common care of Princes and Bishops it be
effected, that with as little a do as may be, omnis huiusmodi errorum occasio
praescindatur. What that our book of Homil. ag. peril. of Idolat. p. 3.
Homilies it self, rejects this pretense of preaching as insufficie^t? not
only because it often wants, but also because when it informs, yet it does
not so much prevail as when the momuments of Idolatry themselves are removed.
Lastly, thus Bucer, Bucer. in censur. cap. 10. fol. 478
Si dicamus vsum istorum, signorum salutarem posse restitui per doctrinam,
videmus doctrinam alijs deesse, alijs covsque non prodesse: sublata itaque haec
signa malim, quam retenta. Fourthly, whether is it better to Baeza. in epistol.
fill up the pit (as God Exodus 21.33.
commands) or set one to warn the passengers they fall not into it? Must not
our governors make good to the Lord, every soul that shall miscarry, either
by his own blindness or deafness; or by the watchmans sleep or doumbnesse,
for that his course is disobeyed; a course that would have cleared all danger?
and a contrary course taken, which neither is so wise nor safe? And let the
commandment of the Deu. 22.^
rail, and of the battlement be adjoined. For as the former forbiddes all
occasions of throwing down, so this commands to bring in place all occasions
and all means of staying up. Woe worth (therefore) the careless exposing of
the precious souls of men to the danger of any Idol, from which the Lord in
love has fenced them (as it were) with a double hedge. I speak not here, how
this course does tempt the Lord; or how near it approaches to that Nichol.
Saund. de imag. c. 17.
hardiness (yea hardness of heart) that will have Crosses and other Images for
the trial of men's strength, least it should be idle. For the credit of the
Church, least it should be esteemed weak, and for a private credit also (to
wit) to avoid the blot and stain of pusilanimitie. Such men, if they disdain
to learn of Quint. Curtius.
Scithians, Nemo contemnendo vicit, etiam ferrum rubigo consumit. I send them
to a Christian writer, who thus can counsel him in the like case of adultery
bodily, the victory Author. lib dsi ugularit. cleric. apud Cyprian.
is uncertain, quando pugnatur inter arma hostilia; and it is a foolish thing,
Arctari cupere ad laborem quando offertur abque vllo periculo delicatus
triumphus, the sight of the harlot (such as spiritually this sign is) serves
for nothing, save ad augendas impugnationes, it is far better, vt homo
cognoscat se infirmum, vt fortis existat, quam vt fortis videri velit, and
infirmus emergat, Last of all, quanto quisque magis ab aduersis est, tanto
minus aduersa sentit. Fifthly, what shall the people be taught? the right use of
the Cross? what need they be troubled about learning his use at all? who
hardly are brought to hear willingly the necessary points of their salvation.
What that the doctrine of the right use of it is so hard, that a man may say of
the Cross in particular, what Erasm. in Cateches.
Erasmus of all other Images. They may more easily themselves be thrown out of
the Church, then their right use defined. And know we not the beaten proverb,
which experience tries too true, Flace. Illyrie. in lib. de Adiaphor.
populus non intelligit acuta? Lastly, is it safe to propose to the people,
these controversies not so material of things unnecessary? For both A Paul
forbids to assume the Romans 14.1
weak to the controversies of disputation about things that are indifferent,
(such as the Cross is held to be) and A Eusebius. de rit. Constan. lib. 2. cap.
67.
Constantine will not have the people burdened with the preaching of any
matter controuersed, which is not of weight and moment to be known.

#Sect. 30.
Sixthly, what though the people might be taught, and it were fit they should,
it is ouerruled by an Adiaphorist himself, that till occasio superstitionis
praescindatur, Georg. Cassand. in consultae. ad Ferdinand. and Maximil. art. 21.
nullus superstitionis finis sperandus est. And home authority has permitted
this to be published touching the Cross, M. Calt h. ag. Martial. art. 4. fol.
88.
Doctrine will not prevail with the people, if the Cross it self, (which is
the thing they trust to, and delight in) be not taken from them. The
Adiaphorisme of Saxony, and Interim of Lipsia, inioyne the keeping of the
holyday of Corpus Christi with this Conrad. Schlusslburg. lib. 13. for. 509
elusion, that there might be a Sermon on that day to teach the people (as I
take it) against the abuse thereof. Hereby see, how large the mockage of this
excuse is, The people may be taught against the abuse? Indeed the suffering of
a thing that has but a show of conformity with popery, does ten times more
hurt then peaching is able to do good. Does Homil. ag. peril. of idolat. p. 3.
meat nourish so fast as poison extinguish? Or Physic heal so fast as the
pestilence does infect? or in a Gal. 5.6.
leaven is there not a quicker power to make sower, then is in any drugge to
sweeten? Add that the people are moved more with the sight of the Cross which
they see made, then with any words of the preacher which they understand
hardly, attend unwillingly; and they mark more what the preacher does, then
what he says; and while the law commands the Cross, it will seem but
Puritanisme what is spoken against it. And last of all, if a preacher shall
make the Cross, and the same preach against it being abused, the people with
whom the abuse of it, is (for the most part) the right use of it, will think
he speaks one thing, and does another. So that here the Counsel has place
which one in a like case gives. Pet. Mart. epistol. amic cuid. in Angl.
Quis videns te, etc. who seeing thee (the messenger of Christ) praying at the
Altar, before the Image of a crucifixe attired with the Priestly Vestiments
will not think, that thou also do not only bear with these rites, but also
approve them? whence it will follow, that when thou shall afterward teach
otherwise, none will believe thee. For he that teaches otherwise then he
does, destroys what he builds: and on the other side builds that which he
overthrows. There has here place also what a whole Church wrote about the
like rites of popery retained. Quod vero quidam ineptiunt, etc. Hamburgens.
epist. de Adiaphor. ad Philipp. Melanch.
Whereas some fondly say that the doctrine of bad ceremonies should be free,
and that they should freely be reproved, it is ridiculous. For how can a Pious
Pastor administer that, in which his conscience reprehendeth him, and
perpetually observe that, which himself reprooueth daily before the whole
Church? Who will give any credit at all to their doctrine, who build up again
things by themselves reprehended, condemned, rejected, and are compelled daily
to preach against themselves as against impenitent men? How can peace and
quietness be settled there, where the Pastors of the Church reprove and tax
publicly those things, which the court commands shall be observed without
all violation? Come we a little nearer home. It is known that Peter preached
against the abuse of the Jewish ceremonies, to which the Concision turned them;
so that by the license of this excuse, he might now lawfully conform to them,
Act. 15.10.
as to ceremonies of edification for the Jews. But Paul thinks this his
conformity is but hypocrisy; destroying that which before he had built, which
our writers lay open thus: Magd^burg. centur. 1. li. 2. cap. 10. in vita Pet.
Antiochiae non recte etc. Peter at Antioch walked not with a right foot to
the truth. For, eating with the Gentiles he used aright the Christian liberty,
but when certain Jews came from James, he withdrew himself fearing the
Jews: and by this means, what before he had built of the Christian liberty,
that now he destroyed again, and approves ipso facto, the necessity of the
Jewish rites, to give contentment to the Jews. Our case (as I take it) does
symbolize with this of Peter; who by our disvse of popish ceremonies, have
disclaimed (until now) the necessity and virtue of them. So that, if now (for
fear to displease) or to differ from some great men (such as James was then to
Peter) and should conform our selves to them, that would be destroyed what
has been built by us; and we in [fact] should approve with Peter what our
[preaching] must disprove. A miserable case and full of scandal, the people
having in their mouths ever, Quid verba audiam, cum facta videam.

Seventhly, to preach against the abuse somewhat, but not all. The duty of
zeal toward God, of confession toward the truth, of love toward a neighbors
soul, requires also an abolition. For must Christ's spouse be chaste in word
and not in deed also? abandoning from her all loue-tokens of former adultry;
and must not the truth be professed in practice as well as in preaching? and is
not example as necessary as doctrine for the edifying of an neighbor? Well
fare our old divines, Hieron. Zanch. de imag. these. 3. fol. 368.
At inquiunt docemus, etc. They tell us they teach against the worshipping of
these Images, as if God of old did not this far more diligently by Moses and
the Prophets, then we can do it now. Why would he (then) beyond this teaching
have Images also taken away? because it suffices not by word of mouth, to
teach that evil is not to be done, but the scandals and the prouocations, the
causes and the occasions of that which is evil, must also be removed. Bucer.
in Mat. 18.
So another, we are not only to teach the people [sapere fortius] but we are
even. [exemplo] also to [prouehere] and set forward their edification. And this
needful for the present, is much more necessary for time to come. Which, who
knows whether God will bless with preaching or no? Charles the great,
leaves Crosses and Images standing; willing their worship to be preached
against, this (in part) is done for his time, and gross Idolatry is stopped a
little, during his life. But what after his death? Did not Idolatry then
reenter like a flood upon the West, so that Philip. Moruae. de Eucharist. lib.
2. ca. 3. page 128.
Charles his son was constrained to write a book sharper then his Fathers
was.

#Sect. 31. Opposits objection answered, which is, the abuses of the Cross
are sufficiently reformed, because the Altars Shrynes, Images, etc. be utterly
removed, etc.
WE have waighed in the balance of the sanctuary, the two first places of the
sign of the Cross: the one extenuating the late abuse, the other extolling
the first use of it, and have found them both too light, so will the third be
found likewise, which justifies our present use as if from the late abuse to
the use prime, it were sufficiently restored already. To wit, not only
possible is it unto us, being so good surgeons as we are, to cure the Cross
from all abuse, the Cross it self remaining, but also it is done already Gods
commandment being satisfied by the pulling down of Altars, Shrines, Images,
Crucifixes and material Crosses, with which we would content our selves (say
our Opposites) if there were any reason in us, since the Idolatry of the Papists
is by these means sufficiently disgraced. First, know we whom we justify in
this excuse, and from whose ward-rope we have stolen it? If this argument do
hold, then did Leontius reason well. I cannot be a favorer of Idols, seeing it
is known I have destroyed, Council. Nicen. 2. Act. 4. page 104.
multa Idolorum phana. Again, we need not break down all Images (says the
Papists) when the people do abuse them, Durant. de rit. lib. 1. ca. 4. sect.
11.
their abuse must be corrected; if it cannot, then shall it suffice to break
down that Alphons. de cast. in verb. imag. adorat.
one Image that is abused, or some Nichol. Saund. de imag. c. 17
one of them for example to the rest, after the example of King Hezechias in
breaking down the brazen serpent, which how does D. Fulk ag. Saund. ibid.
Ezec. 13.10.
Doctor Fulke confound by proof apparent, that Hezechias brake not down the
serpent only, but all other Idols that were in his time abused. Secondly,
distinctions framed between Idols and Idolothites to excuse any one sort of
them, where the Law distinguishes not, and where the difference which they
import is only secundum magis and minus, is but for one to build up a wall
without the leauell of the word; and for others to daube it over with
untempered mortar. What that this mortar is tempered to our hands at Rome. The
Bishop of A discourse of the confer at. Fountainbleau. Maii. 4. an. 1600.
Eurex and his Perefius de tradit. Saunders de imag. Durant. de rit. lib. 1.
cap. 5. Vazq. de adorat. Mart reply art. 3.
fellows make a difference between pictures in tables, and pictures in
walls: who does not laugh at them? Gregor. de Valent. Apolog. de Idololat. 2.
cap. 7.
Gregorius de Valentia out of Peter misinterpreted, 1. Pet. 4.3. makes a
difference between Idols that be abominable, and Idols that be not
abominable. Who does not abhor him? Ioh Reynnold. lib. de Idololat. 2. cap.
7.
Bellarmine makes a difference between Images of true things, and Images of
false things, as if the one were Idols, the other were not. Adrian. in epist.
ad Constant. and Iren in Council. Nicen. 2. and Durant. de rit. li. 1. c. 5.
sect. 11.
Adrian makes a difference between an Image and (...), that is, statua
abiecti cuiusuis animalis, as if the latter were only forbidden, the former
not. The Greek David. Chytre. in praelect. chronic.
Church makes a difference between Images painted, and Images graven: who
holds with them? Now of the same linnadge is the difference of our Opposits
between the material and mystical Cross; that of the Rood-loft, and this of
the Font, the Cross, of the Supper, and this of Baptism; If he were not ill,
why was he removed? If this be good, how is he ill? Seeing like the former
Images by Papists distinguished preposterously, they be of one kind, and differ
only in little and great, to grant the most that can be supposed. Now this
difference excuses not in any one commandment, because he that forbids
robbery, forbids stealing: and he that forbids adultery, forbids
fornication: and he that forbids slaying, forbids mayming: Iam. 2.10.
nor yet in diverse commandments neither, because he that breaks the least
is guilty of the greatest, for that he disobeyeth him that gave them all. Very
fit for this purpose are the words of Hierome, Hierom. comment. in epist. ad
tit. cap. 2.
Fur non solum, etc. A man is judged a thief, not only in great matters, but
also in small: for that which is stolen comes not into account: that which
is considered, is the mind of the stealer. As in fornication and adultery, the
fornication and adultery is not therefore made diverse, because the whore is
fair or rich, deformed or poor, but whatsoever she be, the fornication and
adultery is still one and the same. See we not from hence how little service
this our coined distinction does us? For as in the bodily adultery it is the
mind that is respected: whether the harlot be fair or foul, rich or poor, it
skilleth not: So in the spiritual it is the honor that makes guilty, and not
the Idol, whether he be material or aereall, permanent or transeunt, painted
or graven, cunningly drawn or botcherly made, poor or bedecked with Jewels.
So in the Scripture, the popish Idols, whether they be of wood or of gold, they
are all one: and the Images of the heathen are thrown all of them into one
heap, Apot. 9.12.
whether they be of the common sort, or of exquisit grauing by the art of man.
And in the Fathers, Act. 17.19.
Tertul. de Idololat.
Omnis forma and formula, Idolum se dici exposcit, be it little or great, and
when Jesuits quarrel about Pesilim and Massecoth, which they interpret
sculptile, conflatile, they are answered by us, D. Fulke ag. Gregor. Martin.
ca. 3. sect. 23.
that howsoever properly they are graven and cast Images, yet by a Synecdoche
they are taken for Images of what making soever: the question being not, by
what art Images are made, but to what use, and how they be used, that they may
be condemned for unlawful. But if there be any odds between the material
and mystical Cross, it is the mysticell that has the start. Therefore

#Sect. 32. Reasons why the aereall Cross ought rather to be abolisht then
the material.
THirdly, we reply that of the two, the Cross aereall has more need to be
abolisht then the material. For, Romans 1.20^
first in the seeming of our Opposites it is a thing of less account, and we
know the baser the Idol is, the worse is the Idolatry. As Egypt that adored a
worm, is worse then the Greek that chose a man: or Persia which chose the
sun and the stars to worship them. No matter (said Hierome before) whither
the harlot be rich or poor, fair or foul. True unless to this effect. The
fowler the harlot and the baser, and the more loathsome is the lust of the
bodily adulterer: even so the baser the Cross aereall, the more execrable is
popish Idolatry committed to it. Ovid. in Phoedra. Ezech. 16.44.
Peius adulterio turpis adulter obest. Secondly, It may be said here, as is the
mother, so is the daughter. Provided that the Cross aereall be acknowledged
the mother of the material. For, was it not the sign of the forehead that
begat all the other Crosses that were material in the eyes of all the Theodor.
Beza. in epist.
writers? Guilihel. Perk. probl. tit. sig. crew. Heb. 7.7.
Arose not the material Cross some years after the aereall sign, which at
the first was a Cross simply. Afterward it grew to be a crucifixe, and all out
of that reverence which the Cross of the forehead had amongst the Fathers?
Thirdly, there is no doubt but the less is blessed of the greater. Greater
therefore is the aereall sign of the Cross which blesses and sanctifies a
Council. Trident. sess. 21. c. 7 Durant. de rit. li. 2. ca. 45. sect. 7. Caesar.
Baron. Annal. an. 1 12.
temple it self, and all things in it, and so (as I take it) the very Vid.
Pontifical Roman. and Hospinian. de re templot. lib. 4. cap. 4.
material Cross and all. And seeing consecration and holiness is the
fountain and the womb of all superstition, this Cross must needs be the
more fertile thereof, the more in estimate of holiness it ever has borne away
the bell, wherewith the people bless themselves, whence expect they to be
sanctified before God? to be helped against the devil? What is their Orcigalea?
What their Delphicus gladius to speak in the common Lindan. panopl. lib. cap.
phrase they use? which is Brisson. de spectacul. p. 151.
their (...), their (...), their (...) Whereby is wrought their obsignation,
their consignation, which gives the Ibid p. 201. 202. 203, ibid.
holy Ghost himself? which is their Ibid. p. 201
signum vivificum, their signum salutare, their vexillum, their vexillum
triumphale, is it not the Cross mystical? Shall we tread the sign of that
under our feet (says Paul. Diacon. ^er. Roman. lib. 18. Gregor. Turonens.
histor. Franc. lib. 5 cap. 19.
Tiberius the Emperor) wherewith we use to bless our foreheads? Here the
material Cross is but a token of the aereall which is the (...) of the same.
If the sign of the Cross in aere fluido be of such power (sath the Censur.
Colon. in Catechis. Monhem. dialog 3.
University of Collen) then why not the Cross material too? Here the
material waits on the aereall for credit and for countenance from it. There
is a Carol. Sigon. de Regno. Ital lib. 15
table in Germinians Church at Mutina of Lucius the Pope, blessing the city
with the sign of the Cross, at his departure in these words: Benedicta sit
terra quam incolitis; and benedicti vos and posteri vestri in perpetuum. Here
the material is a monument of the mystical. There is a Missale in offic.
peregrin.
rule that no man make a material Cross in any part of his body: and they
that in Baptism Conrad. Lutzenburg. in verb. Iosim.
burn Crosses material in the foreheads of their children, are enrouled among
the heretics. Here the material Cross is condemned, when the aereall
sanctifies, consecrateth, and makes holy unto God. But the material is more
gross, more sensible, and it inticeth more with some perhaps. But there is
reason with some to the contrary, what the aereall Cross in popish estimation?
The more incapable a thing is of worship in it self, Vazq. de adorat. lib. ^.
disput. ^. cap. 1.
(says the Papist) the more capable of [latria] and the more fit to be
coadored with Christ. What the aereall Cross in popish apprehension? We adore
not any Cross for the matter (says the Damascen. de sid. lib. 4. cap. 12.
Alphons. de castro. in verb. adorat. Martial. in reply. art. 10.
Papist) but for the form: so that the less material, and the more formal:
so much the quicker is the passage Thom. Aquin. p. 3. qu. 25. art. Pro. 30.20.
ab imagine ad rem significatam: in which motion of the mind all the
worshipping does consist. Last of all, what the aereall Cross in popish use?
Is it not more common to use? is it not more ready to be used at all assayes?
and does it not serve all times and turns, better then the Cross material?
Has it not (also) more excuses attending on it, to color hypocrisy, whereby
this spiritual adultresse, may (like the bodily) wipe her mouth, and say, I
have not sinned.

#Sect. 33. It auailes nothing to remove the material Cross, retayning the
mystical.
FOurthly, what though the material Crosses done away by our Church, were
every way worse? To remove the material Cross, and to leave the mystical
behind in Gods service, is to break the 1. Sam. 5.4.
hand of Dagon, not the head, if the head, yet to leave the stompe behind; to
remove the adultery of the breasts (if of the breasts wholly) but to leave
the adultery of the Hos. 2.2 apud Tremel.
forehead behind, and the whorish painting (as it were) of the Ezech. 23 40.41
face: at a word it is, to remove the flesh of the adultery (if the flesh
thoroughly) but to leave the Iud. 23
garment behind, which it has touched and spotted. This, how can it stand
before that God, that uses to censure a reformation (though never so upright
in doctrine) if there be but an 1. Reg. 15.4. and 12 23. 2. reg. 12.3.14 4.
high place standing? which perchance was never abused to Idolatry (as the
sign of the Cross has been) and who never contenteth himself with a
reformation of his Church in part, but requires a Bucer. in Math. 18 Pet.
Martyr in 1. Sam. 14 Marc. 11.15.
total clensing of his house, and that from the 6 abused instruments of his
own service: how much more (then) from Cross and Surplice, which have been
instrument of the service, how much more then from Cross and Surplice, which
have been instruments of the service of Devils? Indeed the reformation public
should be such, as may further the private purity of every man, whose throat
and belly if they must be pure from the meat of the Idol: then much more his
Tertul. in lib. de spectacul.
membra which are augustiora, must be kept pure from the Idol it self, as his
hands, his eyes, his ears, from the Surplice and from the mystical sign of
the Cross? Fifthly, whereas the abolishing of the Cross material is thought
to throw disgrace sufficient upon the mystical Cross of popery, we are most
humbly to entreat our godly governors to take knowledge of a contrary event,
there being nothing (indeed) that does credit it more then this, that the
Cross of the forehead stands when all other Crosses fall, and that by
authority of law and magistrate: which, if they be not the only Lords of the
common peoples faith, yet are known to Josias Simlerus in praecep. 2. Gualt. in
Luke cap. 5.
sway it more, and that awry in such a case then were convenient. And as the
remouall of the Cross material graceth (after this fashion) the aereall left
behind: so the aereal left behind another way graceth the material that is
cast out; against the doctrine of our Church that is confirmed by Act of
Parliament, which therefore Homil. ag. peril. of Idolat. p. 3
excludes an Image out of the Church, because if it be suffered there, he will
give credit to other Images, that other where are worshipped. When did not the
Cross material and aererall mutually scratch and claw one another? when the
Cross material was to be taken for the recovery of the holy land: what course
has Bernard but to ply the Catal. Sigon de reg. Italiae li. 11 in Conrad. 2.
Cross aereall? that which he does in healing the sicike, and so prevails
that Conrade the Emperor himself assumeth the material Cross, and resolves on
the journey. Robert Genebrard Chronolog. lib. 4. an. 1 148.
Bishop of Nazareth stays the flame of the fire, with the Cross material,
Idem ann. 824.
Paschalis with the Cross aereall. Was the material only graced by the
former, the aereall only by the latter? do not both give credit to all Crosses,
yea to the whole religion of popery in the eyes of all Papists? And now that
we are lighted upon the mention of these Papists, if it be true that Tertul.
li. de coron. milit.
Tertullian has, Nihil tam dignu^ deo, quam quod indignum Idolo, then can we
not do God better service, then to offer the greatest indignity that we are
able to the aereall sign of the Cross. We may perceive by this, that they
draw it to the gracing of their religion, because they take nothing more
Laurent. Surius in comment. pa. 690. Ioh. Grop. de Eucharist. lib. Jacob
Billius in Gregor. Nazianzen.
indignly, then to see the least indignity offered against it. Can the sign of
the Cross grow cold and he not burn? Is the sign of the Cross touched, and
he not tormented? or can any take it down, and he not take on? Tush (say our
Opposits) of the sign of the Cross, non in eo po sitae sunt fortunae graciae,
but I shall never hear so much out of the mouth of the Papist. Who, as if
Haniball were before the gates, and all the forts of Rome were shaking, uses
to cry out all religion goes down, if the Cross go down, a way is open to
all Rhemist. Annotat. in Philip. 2. ver. 10.
Atheism, if he be away. Yea Christ himself is abandoned, if he be abolished.
And is there not (then) a way opened in his opinion to all popery, when the
honor of the Cross goes up (as it does by our making of it in honorable use)
I say by our making of it, for Tertul. lib. de Idololat.
Co limus qui facimus vt coli possit, diligentia nostra illius memor est.

#Sect. 34. Another Opposites objection answered: which is, we use it as a
civil ceremony, not religious.
ALthough we have covered the mouth of the Cross in all former excuses of
abuse extenuated, first use extolled, and late use purged, yet being an harlot
that is talkatiue she still proceeds to multiply words, Pro. 7.11. and 9.23.
as if her present purged use were thoroughly clean both for the manner of her
placing in Gods service, and for her place where. Touching the former, why is
the Cross cried out against (say some of our Opposits) as if it had an use
religious? There is no such matter. For we do use it in our Baptism as a
ceremony merely civil; in which manner used by us, it is as lawful in that
sacrament, as in the coin which we bear in our purses; where we our selves
(they say) do wish it, not only hold it lawful. Howbeit, how easy is it to
justify our use of the Cross to be too religious, to be lawful? for the
understanding whereof, we must run over the two sorts of religious things. The
first of them are religious in a sense common, rising from Syluest. summa in
verb. relig.
Religio as it is a virtue, in which sense all is religious that is done to an
holy end: the end being it, that determines every use, as Tho. Aquin. 1.2. q.
16. art. 3.
scholemen teach. In this sense the Cross is [Religious] even out of Gods
service and ever has bin, since at the first it served to profess the faith
against Guilihel. Perk. problem. tit. sign. cruc.
Pagans, to sanctify Tertul. de coron. milit.
omnem progressam to civil business, and Hieron. ad Eustoch. epist. 22. cap.
16.
omnem actum thereof. Did Constantine set it in his banners, or on the
shoulders of his soldiers? he did it Sozomen. li. 1. cap 8.
assuefacere exercitum suum ad colendum deum, and to make known Cassiodor
tripartit. histor. li. 3. cap. 4.
hunc Deum colo, cuius signum meus portat exercitus. Have Christian kings since
his time adorned their crowns Hieron. ad Laetam. epist. 7. c. 2.
patibuli salutaris pictura? they do it to show they profess Christ Jesus.
Last of all, when a malefactor saved his life by flying to sanctuary, by the
ancient laws of our land, he was to be banished, carrying a Cross in his
hands to the sea side. This was signum seruatae vitae, religionis ergo. This
considered, the sign of the Cross is never mearely a civil thing, even in
civil obiectes themselves. Mixtly, and for the end of his use he remains
still religious. Howbeit, our Opposites turn this against us, we use it in
Baptism for a civil end (say they) therefore it is civil, and in respect of
this end lawful. First, this iumpeth with the Chytr^us in Iosu. 22.
Lutheran, who excuses his religious Images in the Church, by like civil end
and historical use: and with the Papist, who excuses his Jewish ceremonies,
in that he does use them, Tho. Aquin. p. 3. q. 83. art. 5.
Non quasi ceremoniali praecepto legis, sed sicut ecclesiae statuto. And
because the thing which he uses, is quiddam secundum se conueniens, ex
instituto Ecclesia, which is our language up and down. Lastly, this iumpeth
with the politic of David. Chytreus in an. 15 84
Augusta, who inforceth the Popes new Callender on this color, the Ministers
shall use it in their feasts, not as received from the Pope, but as enjoined
by the Senate. Secondly, though Cross and Surplice may for their end in some
sense be termed [Ciuill] as all rites that serve for Harmon. confess. sect. 17.
confess. Augustan. art. 7.
order, Bulling. in epist. ad N. and M.
yet this end makes it not lawful, because though an ill end makes an ill
action (for that even one defect does suffice to hatch a sin) yet a good end
(such as order and decency is) and the obedience to the Magistrate cannot make
an Tho. Aquin. 1.2. qu. 10. art. 2.
action good, because the integrity of the object, and all other circumstances
must here concur, which in these rites are wanting. The Cross is an
Idolothite; which a Gualt. Archityp. 1. Cor. 10. Hest. 3.
Corinthian may not eat for any civil use or end of peace and friendship, or
any civil commodity else. The Cross is an Agagite, devoted to death and to
destruction, a Mordecay may not bow down unto it, though he pretend, that it
is only to perform obedience to the Magistrate, that he performs this
honor to him. The Cross sorteth us with the Papists, as much as the Garland
sorted the Christians with the Pagans in the days of Tertullian. But a Beat.
Rhenan. in Tertul. de coron. milit.
Christian may not wear a Garland, no not on the birth day of the Emperor,
though he pretend a civil end, and civil honor to his Prince. Our sign of
the Cross, the Papist interprets to be a liking of his rites like as the
Pagan (in Iulians days) interpreted frankencense thrown into the fire before
the Throne and seat of Julian, to be a profession of Pagan religion. This two
Theodor. histor. li. 3. cap. 16.
Christians may not do, no though they do it to a civil end alone, to wit,
to honor and obey their Prince.

#Sect. 35. Pretense of a civil end of the Cross excuses not the Cross, used
in the worship of God.
THirdly, though a civil end might make such a thing lawful, yet were this
sign never the near, because this end is not Caietan. in Thom. 2.2. qu. 154.
art. 4.
finis operis, which gives value to every action, but finis operantis only to
which it pleases the vser to turn him: which in this question turns the
scale neither one way nor the other. The natural end of the Cross is religious
as has been showed, and the same operative; and therefore evil. It pleases
our Church to use it to a civil end which is good, this end, is it any thing
to the purpose, it being accidental? Timoleon his soldiers are much amazed
for meeting an ass laden with Polyae^. stratagem. lib. 5. sect. stratag. 376
oppium, which was used at home in funerals. his bidding them to wear garlands
of it, in sign of victory, had it been any encouragement to them, if this use
had been devised by himself diversely from the use of Istmus games, where men
ware it that wan the prize? so until the common use of the Cross abroad be
good, our good use (diverse from the common use) cannot encourage us to use it.
How does it excuse Aelian. var. histor li. 1. cap. 21.
Ismenias from adoring the king of Persia, that it is to take up a ring (let
fall) that he stoupeth down before him? For as long as this stouping (in
common use) is the adoring of the king, he is interpreted to have adored him.
So our diverse end of crossing, makes not our case diverse: It is the common
use of the Cross which has been ever, and (yet) is general, by which our
crossing must be judged. I speak on supposall. The Vazq. de adorat li. ^
disput. 5. cap. 3.
Jesuits judgment is good and sound, common and usual kneeling (being in the
common estimate a Caietan. in 2.2. qu. 84. art. 1.
worship divine) it would not have excused Mordecaie if he dad bowed down to
Haman, though he had kneeled with a civil kneeling only, and that to perform
a civil obedience to the King. It will be objected here that Naamans bowing
in the house of Rimmon was lawful enough, because Pet. Martyr in 1. Cor. 10.
Nichol. Heming. in ephesians. 5.1 ^
civil. And Tertul. in lib. de Idololat.
Tertullian allows a Christian to be present at the sacrifices of Pagan
marriages; servants (also) to wait on their masters while they are
worshipping of their Idols, because this was a civil presence, and not for
religious end. We answer, the case is diverse from this of the Cross. The
finis operis, the end of the work, in the Cross is commonly religious and
evil. The finis operis, in these instances is in common estimate civil and
good; performed to the marriage of the bridegroom; not to the sacrifice in the
first, not to the Idol, but to the master in the second. And the sign of the
Cross is an aliene rite, having an estate most inward in Idolatrous worship,
whereas no gesture was allowed, no rite, no ceremony, that had coincidence
with Idolaters, in the instances premised, as these words show: Tertul. de
coron. mili.
Nullum (puto) circa haec officia periculum obseruari, de flatu Idololatriae
quae interuenit. Causae enim considerandae sunt quibus praestatur officium.
Haec nos homini, non Idolo, officiosos habet. Sum tantum spectator sacrificij:
These offices make us dutiful to men, not to the Idol. For I am but only a
beholder of the sacrifice, etc. When the Ioh. Sleidan.
Duke of Saxony was to bear the sword before Charles the fifth, he was
present at the Mass; but with protestation that he was there, for a civil
duty only: and besides he abstained from all Mass gestures, and was only
alooker on. The like do John Howlet. i^ refusal. reas. 9.
Papists themselves prescribe, not Pet. Martyr in 1. cor. 10.
Protestants only, to wit, that no civil presence suffices for joining with
heretics, unless both naturally the action be civil, and also commonly
known and rated to be such. Now the Cross being not such, nor so thought of,
it can no more be used in Baptism, to the end of civil obedience; then
Christians might set up boughs, and light tapers at their doors to the honor
of their magistrate like as other heathen did. For I may answer out of Tertul.
li. de Idololat
Tertullian, as concerning Cross and Surplice: seeing these, ad Daemonias
pertinent, belong to the devils, among the Papists as much as the former
boughs, and tapers among the Pagans, our use will give credit to the popish
Idols, as the use of those did to the paganish: and omnis honor Idoli est
Idololatria, All honor done to the Idol is Idolatry. Caesar. Baron. Annal.
in. an. 200.
And the honor and obedience of the magistrate was pretended as much in them,
as now in these. Yet Tertullian would not justify them, but made this
answer. Si hominis causa est, cogitemus omnem Idololatriam in hominis causam
esse, If it be the cause of man, let us think all Idolatry to be for the cause
of man. Further yet, we find some things casheered by our selves out of Gods
service which might far better pretend a civil use then these. Consider a
little the permixtion of the water with the wine in the Lords supper. The very
finis operis in it from the beginning was merely civil: to wit, to abate the
heat of the wine, for which cause the auncientes called it a mingled Iren. lib.
5. cap. 1.
cup, a Justin. Martyr Apolog. 2.
dilution, and a Cyprian. lib. 2. epist. 3. ad Caecilium.
tempering of the wine. A strange thing we should hold this addition of the
water unlawful, even to the suffering of an Council. Trident. sess. 22. can. 9.
Anathema, out of Durant. de rit. li. 2. ca. 27. sect. 4.
an opinion that such addition is against Christ's institution, the ceremony
being such as is thought Christ did use, such as the Papists never did so much
abuse; such as had a civil end and the same good, when still to a Cross is
cried without ceasing [great is Diana] a ceremony not so ancient, an abused
ceremony to the depth of all iniquity, only upon a fond pretense of an end
civil which is not finis operis, the end of the work, to it, but finis
operantis, but the end of the worker only which never excuses.

#Sect. 36. The use of the Cross is religious not civil as the opposites
proved in this Section, and that which follows.
WE have examined the first sort of things religious in nature and end, and
find no shelter for the Cross. Come we now unto the second, which are
religious in sense special, to wit, in [State]. Here, that is religious which
is Ecclesiastical: that civil, which political: that religious which
belongs to Gods service: that civil which has the use solemn in the
service of common wealth. To this agrees the Etimologie of religio and
religiosum which comes a August. de religion.
religando ad Deum, from binding to God, or else a Aul. Gellius lib. 4. cap. 9.
relinquendo, the common [state] of civil things. The Scripture does agree
likewise, which calls the bread holy and religious, when it is set on the
table in the holy place; but when it is taken away from thence, then it
begins to be 1. Sam. 21.6.
Communis, as Tremellius does interpret. When a vestiment is holy, it must not
be carried out of the Temple, no not to the high Priests Ezech. 42.14.
house. That which the Priest puts on when he goes out of the Temple is
Origin. in Leuit. 20. homil. 11.
vestis communis. This is imitated by the Canon law, Decret. p. 2. cause. 11.
q. 2. ca. 70.
Opus est vt de ecclesia, mystici poculi forma non exeat, It is necessary that
the form of the mystical cup go not out of the Church. The Hieron. in ezech.
li. 13 cap. 44. Amalar. de offi^. eccles. li. 2. ca. 16.
Fathers (also) will have the garments to be religious, that are used in the
Church: the garments to be common that are without it. When Sigebert. in ann.
795.
Charles the great forbad the doorekeepers to use common garments, pitcheth he
not (as it were) the bounds of things common and religious at the porch of the
Church. For the first, to begin there; for the latter there to end? We our
selves say against Lutherans, that the Images are religious which are in the
Church; and against Papists, that the bread of the supper is bread common
[extra vsum] out of the use of the holy Sacrament. Howbeit it does not suffice
to make a thing to be religious, that it is in the Temple, unless also it be
of it, and have [state] in it, as was before mentioned. The old oak under which
Jacob buried his Images, stands within the bounds of the Tabernacle in
Iosuahs time, Genesis 35.4. Iosu. 24.26. Mat. 21.12.
and the doves and the oxen, are within the court of the Temple, which yet
notwithstanding are not religious for want of inuesture, and of incorporation.
A stranger leaves meat in an Idols temple, is it (therefore) religious,
because in a religious place? August. ad public. epist. 154.
No, because it was not consecrate to the Idol. The cup of the supper in the
days of Tertul de pudic. cap. 10. Caesar. Baron. Annal. an. 216.
Tertullian had a shepherd pictured in it, bearing a sheep upon his shoulder,
which yet was no more religious then the statue of a good shepherd, which
Eusebius. de rit. Constantin. li. 3 cap. 48.
Constantine set up in foro, in the market, because it was in the service of
God without a state. Now, 3. Tho. Aquin. 2.2. q. 183. art. 1.
things are required to a state, Order, Obligation, and a kind of Immobilitie,
and the Cross and Surplice have all three of them in our Leiturgie. The Cross
has an order dependant on Baptism, to which it is added. An obligation it
has, because it is ordained by our Church. It has also [quietem] left in holy
use, and a kind of immobilitie, a kind I say which does suffice. As for the
Cross, Leo the Emperor made a law, Cod. li. 1. ti. 3. ca. 26
Ne signum crucis inferretur in loca publica, into common places, and
Theodosius, that places should be made religious, Cod. Theodos. de pagen. cap.
vlt.
collocato in ijs Christianae religionis signo. As for the Surplice the old use
thereof had immobilitie altogether in Gods service; it being utterly unlawful
to wear it Durant. de rit lib. 2 ca. 9. sec. 1 Caesar Baron. Annal. in art. ^60
elsewhere. I know the friends of these ceremonies would be loath to take them
down, so much as one hairs breadth. Neither will they wholly swerue from
Surius, misliking a Cross should be used by Archers for a mark to shoot at in
their pastimes.

IT will be objected that the Cross has a state civil amongst us too, in
coins, banners, and the like. Where, seeing we like him well enough, why
should he be misliked in Baptism? First, we deny him to be absolutely
lawful, even in such civil use, when once he comes to be Walafrid. Strab.
in 1. cor. 10. in glossa.
sub veneratione Idoli, under the worship of the Idol, and to give the least
occasion to think the better of popery, or to cast some show or some shadow
of it, then he Iosu. 23.13. Mat. 5.19. 1. These. 5.22.
grows to be unlawful. For consider the origin and beginning of this [state]
civil, in coins and banners. Even in war Eusebius li. 9 cap. 9. Sozomen. lib.
1. cap. 3.
Constantine holds the adored [labarum] of the old Romans to be unlawful:
and in coins, the old Images of Mercury and Hercules: and therefore sets
up in both the Cross which then the Idolaters most of all hated, and which
made most profession against them. The Cross (then) being become an old
adored I doll of Rome, must he not be done away (caeteris paribus) even out of
coins and banners themselves upon like reason, and some other ensign be
brought in use, which may profess against the Papists? So shall we follow the
zeal of Constantine, as also of others whose coins and banners knew no
mark, but such as made distinction manifest between them and Idolaters. We
see this in the Machebees, who bore in their flagge, Francise. Iunius. in 1.
macca. ^
M. C. B. I. expressing the sentence which is in Exodus 15.11. Quis est par
tibi deus Iohouah, who among the gods is like unto thee Jehovah? Whence they
were termed Macbaei, and after Macabaei. We see it in Carrion. Chron. in.
Theodos.
Theodosius, who bore in his ensign against Eugenius, this name of XRS Christ.
we see it in the religious of France, whose standart spoke thus, Comenta. de
stat. religion. in Gallia.
pro Christo and Patria, for Christ and the Country. That of Alphonsus was
better then a mark confounding with the aliens whose symbol was a Pelican,
shedding her heart blood for her young, with this imprese, pro lege and grege,
for the law and the flock. Let noue think this to be precisenes more then
needs. An Idols name must not be mentioned in common Tertul. in lib de
Idololat.
talk, ne illius maiestatem confirmemus. No book must be read in a common
schole, wherein Idols be mentioned, that are instantly Idem li. de spectacul.
worshipped, ne affirmentur dum traduntur, least they be avouched whilst they
be taught. No spectacle of theirs must a Christian behold in a common Theater;
no habit of Idem. li. de coron. milit..
Aesculapius Priests must be used, no not when a cock is dressed for private
use. No picture of the Sun must be seen in a Christian man's shield Hospin.
de re templar. tractat. de imag.
, quando deputatur ad Persas, the adorers of the sun. No Idolothite must be
suffered in common or in private use, in which the August. epist. 154.
honor of the Idol is not defaced. To go no further then scripture it self.
Is not the Deuteronomy. 7.26.
gould of the Image abominable, even in private use, when the Idol is
countenanced by it? The Deuteronomy. 27.15.
Image accurssed in a private place, when kept with honor? The Idols Iewll 2.
Mac. 12.40.
hated of God, when secretly put underneath the garment? The Idols meat a
partaking with Devils, even at a common 1. Cor. 10.28.
table when it is known? Pray let me appeal even to our own practice: Did
we not deal with many Crosses material at first, even out of the Church, as
Diagoras dealt with Hercules when he put him to his thirtenth labor which was
to boil his lentils? And the common use of crossing, especially our bedds and
other dead things, we use to condemn in the Tertul. li. ad vxor. Beat. Rhenan.
in lib. de coron. milit.
Fathers themselves: which, why condemn we? it being ancient, it being
civil, all while we press the baptism, cross, which being no auncienter and
not so civil must needs be more unlawful? who can spitt at the Temple
frankensence (says Tertul. li. de Idololat
one) when he sees it on the altar, all while he has frankensence in his
seller at home? Or with what face can a man exorcise Satan in the Church, that
in his own house has wares for his service? But with more reason may I
infer from allowance religious to that which is civil, not of wares that may
be Idolatrous, and superstitious, after they are sold, but of Crosses that
are already, how can we condemn Crosses at home, that exact crossing in the
church? or with what face can we condemn papists for Crossing, who justify
them with our own example? for we may reason as Augustine does, speaking
against the riot and excessive usage in his time, upon the holy days of
Martirs, August. epist. 64.
quis audet vetare priuatim, quod cum frequentatur in sanctis locis, honor
martyru^ nominatur? who dares forbid home crossinge as execrable, which being
used in the church, is held to be honorable before the Lord?

But what if the Cross were lawful, absolutely in civil use? for in the
second place we answer, the argument holds not from civil use to use
religious, as our opposites think it does. The Cross is lawful in coins, in
banners, and princes balls, therefore in the Sacrament of our new birth? First,
this reasoning is popish. For so they for their Images. an Image is lawful in
Ioh. Albinus in praefac. Vazq. de adorat.
coin, therefore in the Church: and Feuardent. in Iren li. 1. cap. 24.
Beza himself sets forth Images, virorum illustrinm, therefore saints,
Images are lawful in the church, and if the Vazq. de adorat. li. 2 disput. 6.
cap. 3. Council. Nicen. 2. Act. 1. p. 54 Step. Gardner. in epist. ad Ridleyum,
etc.
Images of an earthly prince may be worshipped, then why not the Images of
saints as well? The Lutherans thus reason also up and down. The Aegidi.
Hunius in Mat. 22.
Iconomachi can endure well enough in their pursses a Portugal Cruzado, in
which there is the sign of the Cross with this word, in hoc signo vince, and
are they not blind (then) in that they are not able to see the Crosses
lawfulnes in the church as well? Secondly, the ground whereupon this reason
stands, yeldeth no other foundation then this, what is lawful in civil use,
is lawful also in use religious. The contrary whereof (indeed) is true in
honorable and helpful things themselves. For non Walafrid. Strab. de reb.
eccles. cap. 10. Durant. de rit. li 2. c. 9
tantum illicita prohibentur in Ecclesijs, verum etiam profana quaecunque,
licet alibi legitime exerceantur. What more honorable then a Council Mogunt.
sub. Carol. mag ca. 40
session for judgment? What more helpful to the service of God, then Mat.
21.12.
Oxen for sacrifice, and money to buy them? What more allied to the love and
charity required in the service of God, then Decret. p. 1. distinct. 42. cap.
4.
a feast of charity? All which commendable in civil use, must yet forbear
the tent it self, where religious use does dwell. It is a golden saying of
Augustine, and enrolled in the canon it self, August. epistol. 109. de regul.
Monach.
in oratorio praeter orandi, psallendique cultum, penitus nihil agatur, vt
nomini huit, and opera iugiter impensa concordet. Hence thus we reason, is the
Cross a thing mearely civil, then is it a sin to bring it into the Church,
where ought to be nothing, in [state] religious but the parts of Gods worship.
when the Jews told Caius Caligula, Philo. de legate. ad Ca^um.
sacrificamus provobis, he answered in choler, at non sacrisicatur nobis. Our
Governors (then) being Godly, will be contented, that in the Church we
sacrifice for them, though we sacrifice not unto them: which we should do if
to please them, we should defile the worship of God with these their ordinances
under a color of a civil obedience to them. Add to the former, that of
Hierome, Hieron. in Ezech. conument. li* 12. ca. 43
who thinks there is a post of man, set by Gods post, when Civil things
are mixte with sacred, vt nihil intersit inter sacrum and profanum. But the
Cross is so nearly conjoined to Baptism, that who among the vulgar people
discerns between them that the one is holy (as the ordinance of God) the
other a thing mearly civil, as the ordinance of man? Chrysostom (lastly)
thought it did derogate from the honor of God, to suffer an Image of the
Empress Eudoxia, set up near unto the Church with stage plays celebrated to
her honor after the heathnish and paganish manner: but we have more cause to
stand then he, who are required by our Godly governors for their honor, not
only to suffer near the Church, but also to bring into the Church, and into
the service of the same, not an Image of their own (which we love) but an
Image and an Idol of Antichrist him self, which, from our hearts we hate
with execration. Thirdly therefore, if the Church bar her door against
civil things, because not consecrate unto God, then much more against such
things, as have been consecrate unto Idols, of which the sign of the Cross
is one. See we not how the Jews follow in war the Roman standarde though
an Dion. li* 40 Herodian. lib. 4.
Idol to the pagans, when yet they will rather choose to Joseph. Antiquit. li.
18. ca 5.
dye then see it brought into the Temple? and suffer the Roman Eagle stand
upon Antonia, when they will not Ibid li. 27 cap. 8.
let it stand, no not on the temples porche? and use the image of Mat. 22.20.
Caius in coin, when Petronius is resisted from Joseph Antiquit. li. 18 cap.
15. Homil. ag. peril. of Idololat. p 2.
setting it in the holy place?* From the Idol come we to the Idolothite; which
is it as lawful within the Church as it is without it? No. Paul allows it in
the shambles (we know) and then only, not in any use religious. And the
Christians at Theodor. histor. 3. cap. 15.
Antioche, when Julian had consecrate their victuals to Idols, used them only
upon this ground, We neither fetch them from a Temple, nor bear them to any,
but use them civillie to that use, for which God created them? Next what an
Image? Do not we our selves exile Hermon. coufess. sect. 2.17. Pet. Martyr in
1. Reg. 7. Zanch* in operib* redemption* cap. 1^. these. 2.3.
Images from the Church, which we now at last approve in civil use? And plead
we not the ancient* Innocent. Gentillet. exam. Council. tridentin. lib. 4.
sess. 25. sect. 5. Hospin. dear templar. tit. de imag cap. 9. fol. 46. Calfh.
ag. Mart. in praefat. fo. 6.8. art. 3. fol. 82.
Christians brought no Images into the Church, when out of the Church they used
them, and great Hospin. ibid. fo. 47. Calfh. art. 2. and. 5. fol. 128.
Constantine set no Crosses up in the Church, who set up many in other places?
And what a sign added by man unto the signs of Gods appointing? We allow an
altar on Iordan-bankes in D. Babing. upon the 2. co^mandem.
use civil, which in use that is religious we do not approve, Mat. Sutclin.
de sum. pontisic. lib. 4* cap. 6.
some of us at least; who cannot allow Salomons altar which he added in the
temple by any warrant that is ordinarily out of the word. Last of all, what a
ceremony, received from without? The new Callender of Pope Gregory the 13.
when at Augusta it was commanded, the David. Chytreus in an. 15 84.
ministers of the Gospel there thought fit to use it in mere civil matters,
not in their feasts, not in their Churches, not in the exercises of Religion.
To conclude, It is sinful to bear even a Mark. 11.16.
common vessel thorough the temple, what is it then, not to bear through but
to bring in (I say) not into the Temple, but into Baptism, which is the holy
of holies thereof, not a common vessel only by God vnconsecrate, but even a
vessel that is also unclean, I mean a Cross which is an Idol, an
Idolothite, an Image forbidden, a sign humane, a ceremony popish? And hide we
our selves under the pretense of an use civil, when we scorn D. Bills. ag. the
Apolog. p. 4. p. 348.355.358.
papists that pretend a civil worship in templarie bowing, and when Vazq.
de adorat. lib. 2. disputat. 4. cap. 6.
papists them selves will have no forbidden Images in modo and statu
accommodato ad adorandum, though else where they may be used?

#Sect. 39. The fifth objection of the Opposites answered: which is, he is not
worshipped in the sacrament, but is only an attendant upon the sacrament.
THe fifth and last defense of the Cross to keep it in possession, stands on
denial of this last point. His state in Baptism is not a state accommodatus
ad adorandum, applied to worship, (say our Opposites) seeing there he was never
made an Idol by the Papists. And seeing there (now) he is used by us, as an
attendant upon the Sacrament, and not as any part thereof. First, this is the
Jesuits language up and down. When Images were unlawful in Israel (says
Vazq. ibid.
he) yet there were Cherubins and figures of Lions in the Temple lawfully,
because being ornaments to other things they were not in statu accommodato ad
adorandum. Where as the lip of truth speaks otherwise, to wit, that if
these figures and these Images had not been by God commanded Tertul. de
Idololat. see D. Bills. ag. Apolog. p. 4. p. 340.
specially, they had been within the Church unlawful, which is now the Crosses
guilt. Secondly, so God hates the instruments of sin, as that although they
be his own creatures (which the sign of the Cross is not) and incapable of
sin themselves, yet he disgraceth them from all use for ever after; from use
honorable at the least, as we may see by that course which he took against
the beast abused to murder; or to an other unnamed sin. As for the
instrument of Idolatry may it be used where it has not been abused? Genesis 9.5.
Leuit. 20.15.16. Deuteronomy. 7.26.
no, if it has been abused any where like the gold of the Idol in Moses law,
it becomes an Anathema every where: in regard of civil use it self that is
John Wolph. and Ioh. Calvin in Deuteronomy. 7.
honorable, much more (then) in every use that is religious, which cannot but
Decret. p. 1 distinct. 4^* cap* 5.6.7.
be honorable. Thirdly, it is idlye said, that the sign of the Cross has
not been made an Idol in Baptism, seeing no where else he has been more
abused. Where has he a more lively signification of Christ Jesus (for which
the Papists do Suar. in Tho. tom. 1. disput. 56. sect. 3.
adore him.) Where has he more power against the Devil, Thom A. quin. p. 3. q
66. art. to
ne impediat effectum Baptismi, in which consists a chief part of his
Idolatry? Last of all, where does he more sanctify? where is he more operative
and effectiue? for thus one, Hugo de s^nct. Victor de sacrament. lib. 2. p. 6.
Signatur prime Baptizandus signaculo crucis in front, in pectore, in occulis,
in auribus, in ore, vt totius corporis sensus, hoc signaculo muniantur, cuius
virtute omnia nostra sacrame^ta complentur; and omnia diaboli figmenta
frustrantur. Let him that is to be baptized, be signed first with the sign of
the Cross in the forehead, breast, eyes, ears, mouth, that the sense of the
whole body may be fenced with this sign, by virtue whereof all our Sacraments
are fully perfected, and all the illusions of the Devil are frustrated. Here
at home in King Edwards Communion book, the Cross was ministered with these
words: N. puer, recipe signum sanctaecrucis, tam in front quam in pectore:
which Master Bucer in censur. c. 12
Bucer (not without cause) censureth as Magical: which words yet differ not
altogether from ours which yet are used. Howbeit, Ibid. cap. 16.
he censureth much more the consecrations of the Cross in Baptism; which are
(indeed) meare Idolatrous profanations of this Sacrament, as may appear in one
of them (for all the rest,) Missal. in benedict. fon^^^.
which runs thus: Sumat haec aqua Maiestatis tuae Imperio, etc. By the
commandment of thy Majesty, let this water take the grace of thine only
beloved Son by the holy Ghost; who regenerating this water (fac crucem)
prepared, let him make fertile by the secret admixtion of his light: that
sanctification being conceived from the immaculat womb of the divine
fountain, an heavenly progeny may arise out of it, borne again unto a new
creature. Let this holy (fac crucem) and innocent creature, etc. Let it be a
living fountain (fac crucem) Let it be a water regenerating (fac crucem) a
wave purifying (fac crucem) etc. Wherefore I bless thee thou creature of water
by the living God (fac crucem) by the true God (fac crucem) by the holy God
(fac crucem) and here let the wax tapers be put into the water: then the
Priest must say, Let there come down into the fullness of this Font the power
of the holy Ghost, and let the Priest blow thrice into the font, saying, Let
him impregnate the whole substance of this water with the effect of
regenerating. All these things let the Priest do thrice, both with the
candels, and with the words, etc. then let him go forward, and dippe his right
thumb into new Chrisme, and let him sign the font with the wonted form of
the Cross, saying, In the name of the Father, of the Son, and of the holy
Ghost. Let this Font be sanctified, etc. Shake we not, do not we tremble at
these abuses of prayer, these prophanations of Gods name, these Herman.
Hamelman de tradit. p. 1. lib. 4. Col. 372. Gualter. in Act 19. Homil. 126.
incantations of the element of this Sacrament, the Cross having a deep hand
in them all? Fourthly, what if the Crosses Idolizing made it not every where
unlawful in use religious, and it were never in the Sacrament by the Papists
made an Idol to this hour, so let our Governors deal with us as they shall
find, that the very appearing of it in Baptism thorough the show that it
bears of equal honor with the same before the simple, is such a modus
accommodatus ad adora^dum, as that is nurseth much Idolatry even from Dan unto
Bersheba. Leave the people of diverse places to themselves, and they put no such
devotion in any thing else, as if they had made choice of the cross in worse
sense, then Antonin. histor. p. 3. ri^. ^3. cap. 7.
Thomas Aquinas once chose the crucifixe, when he said to it, Nothing but thee.
Leave them not to themselves, but reprove them (as if their Crossing did them
no good) and then take up that of Iustus Just. Lips. annot. lib. 3 de crew.
cap. 5. Judge. 18.24
Lipsius, if we err in the sign of the Cross, Quid tum de nobis fiet, what
shall then become of us? Lastly, leave the Cross out of Baptism, and Michaes
Hubbub is presently raised, If the Preachers take the Cross away from us, what
will or can they leave us? In regard hereof who can with pity leave it
amongst them? If any thing excuse Iehosophat or Hezechias for suffering the
Idolatrous Temples which Solomon built, it was because they were lorne,
forlorn: which Josias raised, notwithstanding to prevent all inconvenience.
This he did, because these sinckes were of themselves scandalous (says Ric.
Hook li. 5. ca. 65.
one) and could not choose but breed offente. But is the Temple of the Idol
such, nay is a Temple forlorn so dangerous, and not an Idol himself that
flourishes in service of God? But our people are strong, and not likely to be
infected. So are the people of the Papists no ways easily to be infected; no
not by the worshipping of the Cross, if we believe them? Durant. de rit lib.
1. cap. 5. sect. 11.
Non est indicandum (say they) quod populus hodie vlla annili religione imbui
possit. In like manner is it, that our Opposites hodie stand on the credit of
this their [hodie] forsooth they have caused the Gospel so to abound in the
land by their Nonresidencies, and pluralities by their idle and their dumb
ministry, as that hodie, let the Devil himself be let loose amongst the
people, he is not to be feared to do any hurt. But as there be monsters in the
sea, which the seafaring man does meet, though the Ilander will not believe
it: so the poor and vigilant Pastor meets in the country with many a
monstrous abuse of the ceremonies, though the University (little experienced)
or the palace (little troubled with such matters) do not apprehend them. As
for the court, their reigns Tho. Aquin. p. 3. q. 25. art. ^ in respons. ad 3.
Aquinas his error. The Cross is so base, as that there is no fear of
Idolatry in it, which one well answers: Ric. Hook. vt supra. p. 165.
The meaner or baser a thing worshipped is in it self, the more the people
incline to think, that every man who does adore it, knows there is with it
or in it a presence of divine power, Let it not be said (then) the Cross is a
trifle, it can do no hurt, whole popish service is little else then a Mass of
trifling ceremonies, which yet are highly esteemed of the people, through the
mean above rehearsed, which if any thinks is not to be found in the people
of this land, he little considers that the Papist is incomparable for his
learning in the eyes of simple men, especially in the case of the Cross,
wherein they imagine the state concurreth, and the policy of the whole Realm.
But if the sign of the Cross be nothing, then why is it pressed as if it were
all in all? Is it fit the messengers of God, and the ambassadors of Jesus
Christ should well near be deprived of the air, because they cannot break
the air with one of their singers, 1. Cor. 9.27.
for fear of stripping and beating the air which they are careful to
decline? but this may suffice for the first sin of the ceremonies
controuersed, which is their Idolatry.

The Superstition of the Cross. CHAP. II.
The Cross is an Image flatly forbidden by the second Commandment.
THe second is through Superstition, which is Isidor. aetymolog.
supra statutum. For whereas the second precept admits no ceremony into
Gods worship, which has any Chemnit. examine. part. 1. fol. 39.
mixture of Superstition, or any Ioh. Brent. in tractat. de Adiaphor.
condition superstitious, or so much as the least Zanch. in praecept. 1.
occasion that leads that way, the sign of the Cross will be found guilty
of all these, to the breaking of the letter it self of this commandment. For
what? is not the sign of the Cross an Image? First it has been counted of
old, greater then any other Image, Charles the Carol. magn. lib. de imag. 2.
cap. 28.
great himself being withes, who throws down Images below the Cross. To
him may be annexed that Monk, who in the second Council of Nice was the
deputy of the East; who when he says, Council. Nicen. 2. Act. 4.
Imagines meo iudicio cum vener anda cruce aquiualent, Images in my judgment,
are equal with the venerable Cross, plainly bewrays the Cross was of
undoubted credit when Images were not, and then the Michael Glyeas. Annal. p. 4
fol. 351.
reporter of this Synod, who gives the pre-eminence of the first place to the
Cross, desinierunt venera^dam erucem vna enm religiosis imaginibus adorari
debere. They have determined, the venerable cross ought to be worshipped with
religious Images. Council. Nicen. 2. Act 6.
Neither may we deprive the Cross aereall of this pre-eminence, which the
Council of Nice makes equal with the material, and which never yet came short
of any priulledge worth our worship, it being dedicated in Rhem. Annotat. in
Luke 24 sect. 5.
Christ his death; as well as any other Cross; and being as decent a memorial
of it, as any other whatsoever. Secondly, hereby it appears, the cross is
greater then any other Images are, because it always representing Christ Jesus
dying, it does always set him as adorable before us: Whereas other figures
and Images do not Syluest. summam in verb. imag.
represent him dying. Yea, such a gallant is the Cross, that if a Vazq. de
adorat. li. 3 disput. 2. cap. 6.
spear be but set hear him, though he were not before regarded, yet now
presently he becomes a representator of Christ's death worthy to be adored
and worshipped. Thirdly, it is the Cross that does bless all other Hospin. de
re templar. lib. 4.
Images: and it is without controversy that the less is bsessed by the
greater. It is the Cross also that brought in the Image. First there was the
Guil. Perk problem. fig. crew.
Cross simple, then the Council. Constan^inopl. 6.
Council added the Image of a man unto it, which now is the crucifixe: and
there is no question, but the mother is always greater then the daughter.

#Sect. 2. The Cross is directly an Image.
But what if the Cross were not greater then other Images? An Image it is, in
use religious, of man's devising, therefore a sinner against this holy law of
God. In deed no difference in popish Suar. tom. 1. in Thodisput. 56. sect. 1.
schools, between Cross and Crucifixe, the one must be adored as well as the
other and the very Cross it self simply, is as the similitude Ibid sect. 2
of a man stretched forth and crucified, and so by consequent a figure of
Christ, though no image be upon it? Be it, an Image strictly taken must bear
the shape and similitude of the same Tho. Aquin. in. epist. ad Colosens. ca. 1.
lect. 4
species. I trow there is none that will deny but in larger sense the calfe of
the Israelits was an D. Bills. ag. Apolog. p. 4. p. 325.
Image of God? The Ibis, Hyaena, Caelius Rhodigin. Antiquar. lection. li 9. ca.
5.
and the Dog of Egypt were true Images of their false Gods, though they bore
not the like figure and shape of kind. These beasts were the arms and the
cognisences of the men when they were alive whom they represent. Therefore now
they bear a kind of similitude of them, though no similitude of their kind,
which kind of likeness and similitude in an Image largly taken, does suffice.
Else could not a Vazq. d^ adorat. li. 3 disput. 2. cap. 6.
maunger, a crown a thorn, a spear be Images of the Lord Christ, as now they
are defined to be. Indeed, it is representation that is the essence of that
Image which this commandment does include, to which concordeth the very
popish definition, Idem. li. 2 disputat. 8. cap. 7.
Imago nihil aliud est qua^ figura quadam cum relatione ad exemplar. An Image
is nothing else then a certain figure, having relation to the example. Idem.
li. 2 disputat. 9. cap. 3. Suar. disputar. 54. sect. 7. Apoc. 9.20. Romans 1.21.
Imagines nihil aliud quam picturae quaedam cum relatione representationis,
Images are nothing else then certain pictures with relation of representation:
so that the Cross as long as he resembles Christ, he must be needs an Image
of him and of his death. And seeing his death is represented, mediatly by the
Cross, on which he died, it must be an Image of it likewise. Which, is it not
the Whitak. cont. Dureum. lib. 10. p. 269.
greatest Devil amongst all the Idols of Rome, against which the Turk is
loosed by God him self? For this Cross though more base then the worm him
self of Egypt, which the Apostle makes the basest, has nevertheless
attained to the honor of the most high, to wit, to Tho. Aquin. p. 3. q. 25.
art. 3. Gregor. de valent to^^ 3. de Idololat. punct. 6. Bellar. de imag. c.
23. Dent. 21.23 Gal. 3.13.
latria, wherewith God him self is honored, and that by means that are more
mean then ever any Idol had. It pleased the Lord to dye on a cross, an
accursed tree, to show that he did bear our curse. This says the Cross has
made me blessed, and worthy ever to be honored. A senseless sophistry: yet
so plausible, as that it has prevailed with many in most places of the earth.
The August. ^ont. Fanst. Maniche. li. 20. c. 1^.
Manichees for the trees sake on which Christ died, honored all trees:
testifying their reverence toward them by forbearinge to touch their fruit.
As for Crosses artificial, there were who adored them in Euthym. Panopl.
Armenia, for which they were termed (...) These Rome follow to this day, whose
children do adore the Cross, because an instrument of Christ's death, as
certain Epiphan. ha^es. 38.
heretics honored Judas for the very same cause. Now it being the duty of
the Governor, Leo. epist. 55.
scandala etiam in longinquum nata vt resecet multo magis ea quae sub oculis
surgunt, non sinat acorescere. How can he bring the living Image of so great a
Belzabub etiam ipso Idolo viuo into Gods service and be innocent, especially
considering that his Image cannot be there, but he himself must be there
likewise? Turrian^ pro canon. Apostol. li. 1. ca. 25.
siquidem inseparabilis est a prototypo effigies eius. Again, Tho. Waldens. de
facrament. cap. 156. numero. 6.
Qui videt imagine^ alicuius, videt eum cuius est imago. Turrian. d^ character.
dogmatie. lib. 3.
Imago pars est Archetypi. Euthym. penopl. par. 2. tit. 19.
Imago nullum habet personam per se, sed subsistit in prototypo. Vazq. de
adorat. li. 2. disput. ^.^^.14.
Prototypon est vita Imaginis, ficut anima est corporis, to which there
answers diverse like speeches which the S^^r. tom. 1. in Thom. disput. 54.
sect. 7^
Jesuits cite out of the Fathers. And there is another matter besides this
matter which the sign of the Cross resembles, to wit, the bad and disordered
manner of resembling. This first of all is indecent and absurd.

For although there be more natural aptness in the figure of the Cross to
resemble the death of Christ, then in many other things, yet in regard of
moral aptnes, it is true that Brent. in consed Wittenber. cap. vlt.
Brentius says. A circle represents Christ's death as well as a Cross; and
what Peter Viret said: A Cow is as good a sign of it, as is this sign. Do
not the Papists Feuardent dialog. 5.
scorn at Brentius and at Viret, when they charge them with this absurdity?
but there be in the world who pretend communion with these men, who fight
notwithstanding for this Cowish and cirole-like sign which they condemned.
Secondly, the manner of the Crosses resembling is doubtful, if not double, and
untrue. Is it not an unworthy thing, our church should reach forth the hand to
save a tradition flouting in the maine of Chemnit. examine. p. 1. tit. de tra
dit ^ol. 84.
ambiguitie? But now it is doubtful, whither our fashion of the Cross be the
true one or no? with five Irenae li. 2. cap 42. August. tom. 10. homil. 3.
extremities (the board being reckoned for one, which was in the middle for the
crucified to rest his feet) yet because there were many forms of Crosses then,
as there be of Gibbets now, the true Cross lies in the dungeon of
uncertainty, by the providence of the Lord, who would have brought it unto
light, if he had meant to bring it to the honor to which we have advanced it.
See what Iustus Lypsius in Cornel. Tacit. li. 16 and. de cruc. li. 1. ca. 8.9
Bellar. de Imag ca. 27 Durant. de rit. lib. 1. cap. 6. sect. 11.
doubts and what varieties of conjectures the Papists themselves use to
propose about this matter. Let the Iustus Lypsius quo supra.
authorities of Hierome, Damascen, and of Isidore be considered, who make the
Roman X the Cross which is crux decussata. An Andrews Cross which also
appearing on a time to Constantine, begot an opinion that the Cross appeared
unto him. This form of the Cross receives great credit from Justinius Martyr:
who applies certain words of Plato to be spoken of Christ's his death upon a
Cross of this decussate form, for so the latest and Sixth. Senens. bibliothec.
li. 3. page 145. Jacob Pammel. in Tertul. Apolog.
greatest Jesuits understand him. What shall be said to them; Just. Lypfius in
annotat. ad lib. 3. de cruc. ca. 5.
who make the Cross and iugum one? which by likelihood differed not much from
the form of the gallouse which we now use. Minut. Faelix. in Octan.
Minutius Falix compares the Cross to a common ingum of an husbandman. Cum
erigitur iugum crucis signum est. Which Just Lypsius de cruc. lib. 3. cap. 5.
Plutarch describes in his Furca to be an ox yoke with a transuerse bar at
top. Last of all, the Roman Y. which has this transuerse bar removed,
does bear some beam, because it is the right Idem lib. 3. cap. 3.
Furca, which many think to be one with the cross, to which Minut. Faelix.
vt supra.
Minutius and August. de ciuit dei li. 10. ca. 8.
Augustine seem to come near: the first resembling the form of the Cross
manibus precantis porrectis, the other manibus Moysis inter precandum extensis,
which make a forke and the top of a Roman Y. Is it not M. Calsh. ag. Mart.
art. 2.
said that Cardinal Poole in his new Lambeth Gallerie did set up the letter Y.
which is the arms of the Archbishopricke for a token of the Cross? There
being so great diversity, and from hence so great doubtfulnesse, were it not
to be wished all were of our D. Fulke ag. Saund. of images cap. 13. pa. 664.
Andr. Willet de cruc. art. 2. argument. 2.
writers minds, who by reason of these uncertainties think the Cross a sign
unworthy? The doctrine of our Church is, Homil. ag. peril. of Idolat. D. Bilf.
part. 4. page 329. and 335. contra Apolog.
There is a lie made when there is made any Image of Christ, because his visage
is unknown: so then the fashion of the Cross being as much unknown unto us
we commit a lie in crossing. The Gnostickes would have no Images of Christ, but
such as they were persuaded were drawn in Pilates time, hence Caish. ag. Mart.
art. 10. fol. 182.
one of our writers twiteth the Papists, that whereas Irenaus called it heresy
to carry about the true Image of Christ, yet they will worship a false Cross.

#Sect. 3. The Opposites saying, the second Commandment forbids only
material Images, are confuted. The Cross now used is not simply aereall.
NO great color can our opposites find, to clear the cross from these
imputations: but that which they are able to get, that they varnish with all
the industry and skill that may be. The first sort of them singe the old
ludden: It is the material Image that this commandment does forbid, of such
an aeriall figure as this, it takes no knowledge, alas, what is it but the
wagging of a finger? First, we insiste upon the letter of this Commandment
temunah, signifies any similitude whatsoever. As for Pesell though it be
properly an Image material that is hewn, yet by a D Fulke ag Gregor. Martin
ca. 3. sect. 20.
synechdoche it does stand for all other forms and figures. Secondly, we stand
upon the intent of this Commandment, which is to forbid all man's invention in
the worship of God, Whereupon it becomes unlawful, not only to adore, but
also to D. Fulke reioind. are. 3. fol. 162. D. Bills. ag. Apolog. p 4. p.
340.3^2.
make any similitude in the service of God; any similitude (I say) of any sort
or kind whatsoever, for so our Homil. ag. peril. of Idolat p. 1
Homily bids me speak. Thirdly, we build upon the nature of an Image,
whose essence is to represent that which an aereall sign can do as well as
any, as the aereall smoke of air the pillar of fire that was aereall, the
aereall image of Endor show, and the aereall Trelcat.
transcunt actions of breaking, pouring, giving, taking, which are Symbolicall
in the Supper. When Council. Nicen. 2. Act. 1.
Chrysostom is alleged, Tho. Aquin p. 3. q 25. art. 4.
Ego ex Cera fusilem picturam pietate plenam amaui: and when the little shrines
of Diana, which Baeza in Act 19.
Demetrius made are condemned, and the Images of Basilides although but little
as which were borne about in the bosom, the matter permanent is not respected,
or the form how little or how great it is, so it be a form at all? and as
little and aereall as the sign of the Cross is, Master Hooker matcheth it
with the brazen serpents picture, Ric. Hook li 5. ca. 65. Caesar. Baron Annal.
in an. 120.
which he thinks might have been lawful in the Temple. Whereas it is
certain that not only every picture of an Idol is unlawful (by this
Commandment) in Gods service, but also quicquid Papistae rapiunt ad sacrum
impietatum picturam and commendationem: whatsoever the Papists snatch to the
painting and commendation of their impieties. Howbeit we lean not upon Master
Hooker, mortivicina Paula, crucis signum Hieron. epist. 27. cap. 13.
pingebat in labijs. Ad omnem incessum manus Idem epist 22. ad Eustoch. cap 16.
pingat crucem, Paula near to death, painted the sign of the Cross in her
lips. At every putting to of the hand let her make a Cross. Diverse like
testimonies might be brought out of the Fathers, that this sign is not so
aereall, but that it may be termed a picture which is an Image in all plain
sight. For Epipha. epist ad Ioh Hierosolimit.
Epiphanius calls the picture of Anablatha, an an Image. Eusebius the Eusebius
histor lib. 7. cap. 14.
pictures of Paul and of Christ, the Images of them. And what the Council of
Council. Elibertin. can. 36.
Eliberis decrees against pictures in the Church, what August. de morib.
eccles. cont. Manich. cap. 34.
Augustine speaks against the adoring of pictures in walls, that do we
apply against Images as well we may, none making any difference between them,
but the Greek, and perchance the Lutheran Churches, which are condemned on
all sides. Neither does the aerinesse of the Cross hinder but that it is
amongst the pictures of largest sense, which this Commandment does condemn.
Especially seeing in ancient times the picture aereall and material were
yoked together as if they were one. Pingamus in lanuijs, atque in frontibus
viuisicum signum (says Ephreem. de. paenitent. cap. 3.
one) Sanctus Hilarion (says Seuerus sulpit. Carol Sigon. de occidental.
imper. li. 7. an. 365.
another) pinxit in Sabulo tria signa crucis. Saint Hilarion painted in the
sand three signs of the Cross, and thereby stayed the inundation of the sea.
Now I would feign know what difference between a Cross pictured in the sand,
and a Cross pictured in the childs forehead? has not the one as lively
colors as the other? what if it had not? Nos non in coloribus and tabulis
honorem constituimus, We put not honor in colors and in tables (says
Council. Nicen. 2. Act. 2.
the Idolater). Again, Non colorum naturam adoro; ab sit sad inanimata^
Characterem Christi, I worship not the natures of colors. God Ibid. act. 4
forbid, but the liueles Character of Christ. Fourthly, we plead proportion,
for as every figurative Idol is forbidden in the first Commandment (as has
been showed) so every figurative Image here in the service of God. Decret. p.
^. de consecret. distinct. 3. cap. 13.
The Canon law holds a Sunday, an Image of the day wherein Christ rose, allow
such a largnesse of sense, and is not the Cross an Image? Decret. p. 3 de
poenirent. distinct. 2. cap. 35.
The mind that is sanctified is an a Image of God, and is not a mind defiled
then with fancies, an Image of that which does defile it? This I speak because
the cross works Images in the soul, which are unlawful by the
Commandment: and we know, Quicquid efficit tale illud ipsum est magis tale,
whatsoever makes such, is it self, much more such. The Cross helps the
inward imagination (says Master Hooker.) This imagination apprehends an
Image of the thing conceived (says the Suar. tom. 1. in Tho. disput. 54. sect.
1. Rodolph. Goclenius metaphy. sic. disput. 4
Philosopher.) This Image conceived is a true Image (says the Decret. p. 1
distinct. 6. cap. 1.
Lawyer.) When this Image is received from the apprehension of an outward Image
(which the Lord has not commanded) it is an Image Idolatrous, says the
August de vera. religion. c^. 38
Divine, to which our D. Bills. ag. Apolog. p. 1. p. 30.
Opposites themselves consent. If the inward Image which is no way sensible
which the Cross begets be an Image which is unlawful by this Commandment,
then the outward sensible similitude which begets it, must be an Image much
more unlawful, be it never so little a one; be it but a fingers wagging. For
even Pro. 6.10. ver. 13.
sloth though never so [little] is without excuse, as also the inordinate
wagging of the Isa. 58.9.
finger, though never so transeunt, it being our fingers duty to be a weapon
Romans 6.13.
unto righteousness; which how can it be, alwhile it is in pay with an Idol,
does such an hand Isa. 33.15.
shake it self from that which is evil, as it is enjoined to do.

#Sect. 4. The Opposites saying our Cross is no Image, because they intend no
expression, are confuted.
NO want (then) of matter in the aereall sign of the Cross, but it may be an
Image well. Now to the want of form objected. Our Cross (say our Opposites)
is no Image, because our Church does not intend any [expression] which must be
warily understood. If this be the meaning: our Church means not in making the
Cross, to draw it from the Cross of Christ, though by the Sam. Harsnet. in
declarat. of Weston. impostur. cap. 20.
doctrine of our Opposites, the Cross is naturally such an expression, yet we
stand rather upon this, that such expression is not needful. The Image which
the Archbishop of Mentz set up in his Church, was an Image of the blessed Thom.
Morescin. in verb. representa.
Virgin, though the figure was drawn and expressed from the face of a certain
harlot which he kept, and not from her own countenance. If this be the
meaning, [our Church intends not in making the Cross to make an Image] then
we reply two ways. First, our Church intends in crossing, that which is
proper to that Image, which this Commandment does forbid. For we use it to
teach by resemblance outward; and to admonish by striking the senses, which is
proper to an Image largely taken, by the letter of the word. Thou heardest a
voice, thou saw no Image, As who should say, cleave to his voice. What is
added in the Church without his warrant, that esteem to be an Image which he
detesteth, and abhors. And this have some of our Opposites taught us out of
Abbacuck, who reprooueth the Idol (as they conceive) not only for teaching
ill, but also for teaching at all, because God allows no teacher but
himself, D. Babing. in praecept. 2. page 95. D. Bills.
nor mean of teaching, but his holy word and Sacrament. As for these
Sacraments, they are Pet. Lombard. lih. 4. distinct. 1. Tho. Aquin. p. 3. q.
83. art. 1 Ioh. Iewd^ Apolog. Angl. p. 37 Harmon. confess. ti^. de Sacram. in
confess. Anglie. D. Bills. ag. Apolop. p. 4. p. 594
Images in the eyes of all the learned, and were unlawful by this
Commandment, like this teacher of ours (the Cross) had not God himself
ordained them. Secondly, we use the Cross to signify and represent, which is
an office proper to an Image even by our own confession, who hold an Image
and a sign to be equivalent, even as (in deed) in largnes of sense they are
but one. Whereas Theodosius and D Fulk against Sand. de imagine. c. 7. p. 695
Valentinian removed quodcunque signum Salvatoris, we use to allege it
against the Cross, and all other unlawful Images. The Heathen said of their
Images, August. in psalm. 113. Concion. 2
eius signum intueor quem adoro. And yet we condemn them amongst the Images
here forbidden. The brazen serpent was like the cross, a sign and a figure
of Christ, yet we Ioh. Jewel Apol. 14. Diui. 3. D. Fulke vt supra. Ioh Reyn. de
Idolola. li. 1. ca. 2. sect. 2.
allege the breaking of him for the abolishing of popish Images out of the
Church. But it may be that our Opposites will deny, that they intend any
such teaching, any such signifying, of Christ's death by any relation to the
Cross on which he died. This if they do, then what should I say, but that it
is a thing impossible (as it is in the ancient Apologue) to make a coat for
the Moon. Mr Hooker and the rest hitherto; the modern Canon that is in force,
many of our present Governors, do not only allow that our Cross should be
a signifier and a teacher, but also commend him for his teaching and for his
signifying. If there be any that since and so sudainly change like the Moon,
it is time they take home to them selves that accusation of newfanglednes
wherewith they have so long defamed us. Was it ever heard before that the
Cross was ever used without relation to Christ's cross, without signification
of his death? Our Cross is the Fathers Cross (we say) but little sign. For
which of the Fathers ever used it not to this end? to wit, they call it Basil
de spir. sanct.
salutiferae Crucis signaculum. Hieron. Epist. ad Laetam. 7 c 2.
Patibuli salutaris picturam. August. sermo. de sanct. 19.
Victoriosae Crucis insignitam memoriam. And that which is most common amongst
them, Theodor. hist. lib. 4. cap. 22.
Diuinae Crucis signum. And Eusebius, de vita Constant. lib. 2 ca. 4. and li. 3.
cap. 2.
salutaris Christi passionis nota ad insignem. They think the Devils run
away from it, because they see in it Theodor-histor. lib. 3 cap. 3. Tripar.
histor. lib. 6. cap. 1.
Trophaei dominici figuram, and so remember the overthrow given them on the
Cross. Zozomen. lib. 1. ca. 8.
Constantine, or the rest of the Fathers, would they have thought it an honor
to the cross of Christ, to take the death of the Cross away that no
malefactor might be honored with the death which Christ once died; had they
not used it as a sign and representation of his death, and of the Cross
whereon he dyed? unless it be for this relation, how can these Augu. ser.
deverb. Domin. 18. Homil. in Johan. 36. and in psalm. 36. conci. 2
speeches stand? Alocis suppliciorum fecit transitum ad frontes imperatorum,
qui tantum honorem dedit poenis suis. Quid servat fidelibus suis. Quid servat
fideli suo, qui talem honorem dedit supplicio suo? But this testimony puts
all out of doubt, Iustus Origelitan. in Cantie.
signum Crucis praenotamus in front. Ex sua enim Cruce Christus crucis signum
in frontibus omnes in se credentes, edocuit. Secondly, what though our Church
did not intend in the sign of the Cross that is proper to an Image, were
this any thing, all while naturally it is an Image? all while the Papists
repute it so? and it is such in common use? For we have this confession from
the mouth even of an adversary Rye. Hook li. 5. ca. 65.
him self, that things must be judged as they run in common use, and not as
they are done in the special construction of some men's wits and
understandings. Now in proper use that the sign of the Cross is a sign of
Christ's Cross and of his death, this does witness* before he died it was
ever Guilihel. Alan. de sacram. li. 1. art. 2.
execrable, since his death from the time that it has been used, it has been
ever honorable. As for the Papist, his schole doctrine runs thus? The
material Cross is potissima imago Crucis: the aereall veluti successiua Suar.
tom. 1. in Tho.
Imago Crucis. And in his contention against us, he obiecteth that the Crosses
of our Banners them selves, are Bellar. de imag. c. 12. Nichol. Saund. de imag
ca. 7.
Images, although they are only in Civil use and not in use religious. As for
the common use of the people, must they be enthrald now at last to a private
intention of the Minister, which all our writers have so long ago disclaimed
in other things for Jewel art. aga. Hard. 1. diuis. 12
A dungeon of vntertaintie? No, the very use of the Cross in Baptism, gives
warrant sufficient to think an intendement to signify Christ Jesus crucified,
and the profession of him. For example.

The very Vazq. de adorat. li. 3 disput. 2. cap. 6.
painting, yea setting of a spear and a thorn in the Church near a Cross,
is sufficient to make them representators; which other spears and thorns are
not, which stand or grow without the Church. So, though there be nothing to
enforce an intendment in civil Crosses, yet the very making of a Cross in a
Sacrament, (the sign of the covenant) is sufficient to make it a signifier. To
dippe one into a river abroad, argues no intention to baptize, but in the
Church, Bellar. de sactam. in gener. cap. 21.
cognoscitur ex ipsa action, there is an intendment, So when a Carpenter
lays a cross beam in an house, or a Weauer a cross thread in a cloth, he
argues no intention in him to signify the death of Christ; whereas a minister
in baptism [ex ipsa action signandi] bewrays sufficiently in the common
estimate of all the the world, that he intends so much.

#Sect. 5. The opinion confuted, which not able to deny the Cross to be an
Image, affirm Images to be lawful in case the Magistrate command them, etc.
And the aereall Cross is worst of all Images.
THe most learned of our Opposites, perceiving how vain a cavil it is to deny
the sign of the Cross to be an Image, strike up the forehead and grow bold to
affirm that Images are lawfully nough in the Church in case the magistrate
should command them. This, should it not add comfort to our souls, as it
adds credit to our cause? Stand we against trifles, who stand against
Papisme and Lutheranisme too? Or stand we alone who have all on our side that
from the beginning ever stood out, for the purity of Gods; worship and the
holiness of his house? We have with us the religious Joseph. Antiquit. lib.
17. cap. 8. and lib. 18. ca. 4. and 15. and contra Appion. lib. 1.
Jews, that to dye would never so much as receive an Image into the Temple,
though they were not bound to worship it. We have the religious Christians of
the primitive Church; for whom when Adrian goes about to build churches, he is
told he must build them Aelius. Lamprid. in vita 30. Tyrannorum.
without all Images. We have the religious Council. Elibertin. Can. 36.
Concills of Eliberis and Constantinople the 7. which condemnde not only the
worshipping but also Sygebert. in Anno. 755.
suffering of any Images in the Church. We have the famous Emperors of Greece,
who stood not only against the worshipping of Images, but also against the
Genebrard in Anno 796. Doct. Bills. ag. Apollog p. 4. p. 316.
having of them in the Church. We have the Fathers; among whom Tertul. lib. de
coron. milit.
Tertullian writes, against the Images them selves, not only against the
adoring of them. And Epiphan. in epist. ad Ioh. serosol
Epiphanius teareth with his own hands, a picture found in the Church of
Anablata, although it were not worshipped. We have the ancient Conrad. Lutzen.
burg. in Catalog. Heretic. in verb. Waldens.
Waldenses, who not only condemned the worshipping of Images, but also razed
the Images them selves, and removed the Oil and the Priestly garments out of
all religious houses. We have the ancient Ibid. in verb. Orphani. and Ioh
Zisca^.
Thaborites in Boheme, who under Zisca pulled down Images, and utterly defaced
them: and when they lighted upon any of the popish consecrated Oil, they
greaced their shoes with it. We have the Harmon. Confess. sect. 2. ex Heluetic.
posterior. and Suevica.
Confessions of the Protestant churches, against all having of Images in
churches. We have the confessions even of many Vazq. de adorat. lib. 2. disput.
4. cap. 2.
papists them selves, that the very having of Images in the church is flatly
forbidden in the second commandment to the Jews, and not their adoring only.
We have the confession, even of many of our D. Babing. on the 2. Commandem. D.
Bills. ag. Apolog. p. 4. p. 316 318.319.354.
Opposites, who as, they write against papists, that the adoring of Images, so
against Lutherans, that the very having of them (in use religious) is unlawful
by this law. We have the Protestants that have written of this argument; of
whom, who is there Ioh Calvin. Institut. lib. 1. cap. 11. Pet. Marty^ class. 2.
cap. 5. Zanch. de. Imag. these. 3. Josias Simler. in praecept. 2. D. Fulke ag.
Gregor. Mattyn cap. 3. sect. 20. cum reliquis.
almost that has written, whom we have not? Last of all (which may close up
all) we have on ourside our own Homil. ag. peril. of Idolat. p. 1. p.
29.27.28.32.
law made by act of Parliament: which affirms that every similitude in the
Church and in use religious, is a mere Idol, although it be not worshipped.
And what can be here replied? that this is meant of those Images only that be
dangerous? but the Homily and the rest of our witnesses do therefore
condemneall Images in the Church, because in the Church they cannot but be
dangerous. They condemn them also because they are Pet. Martyr vt supra sect.
24.
Idolothites, which they hold to be unlawful in the Church. They condemn
them moreover, because this commandment forbids not only the worshipping
of Images, but also the very making of them for use religious. Where our Homil
vt supra p 3. p. 94 and 46
Homily presses out of John [Babes, keep your selves from Idolls] which is
interprets out of Tertullian, he says not keep your selves from Idolatry,
as it were from the service and worshipping of them, but from the Images and
Idols them selves, that is, from the very shape and likeness of them. Lastly,
they condemn them because their place in the Church is Homil. ibid. and Josias
Simler. in praecept. 2.
honorable whereby they give countenance to popish Images, that are elsewhere
adored. Now the burden of all these reasons light upon the aereall Cross,
which in some respects is worse the^ the material permanent Image of the
Lutherans. First, we Pet. Martyr loc. commun. Class. 2. c. 5. sect. 26
hold the Image of Christ more dangerous then any other, because of the
excellency of his person, therefore the aereall Cross is worse then another
Image, because of the opinion which is had of the excellency of Christ's
Cross which it does represent.

Secondly, the Lutherane Image is only a looker on, having no such state among
religious actions as the Cross aereall has, which if it were nothing, then
would not D. D Fulke ag. Gregor Mart. ca 3. sect. 20.
Fulk heerby excuse the cross that stood once in the Chapel of Q. Eliza. in
that it had no use religious there. Thirdly, The Lutheran Image is [ Vazq. de
adorat. li. 2 disput. 5. cap. 1.
ad solum ornatum] and he stands not solie many times, but in history,
whereas the cross is used solemnly in baptism, as a sign ministered apart by
it self, with a word annexed to the element, which is that placing it Ioh.
Calvin. Institut. lib. 1. cap. 11.
in sublimi, which in this matter is most vicious. But the Lutheran Image
moves more. This is that which Alphons. Tostat. abulens. in Deuteronomy. ca. 4. qu. 5.
Tostatus wrote long since, A Picture is more tolerable in the church then a
grauon or carved statue, because corpulentiam nullam gerent minus est motiua,
nec ita simplices decipi possunt: which though (caeteris paribus) it may be
true, yet here it fails, because the intelligible and comtemplatiue credit
(which the sign of the cross has gotten) strikes deeper, then the sensible
corpulencie of a common image, and more deceyueth more sorts of men. I
remember Bellarmine elsewhere proves, that Images have been taken for the
persons represented, because birds flew to Zeuxes grapes which he had painted
taking them for grapes in deed. If there be any men that follow their sense
like birds and beasts (as he insinuates) they no doubt would be more moved
with the corpule^cie of an Image. as for others who are wise, they are ledd by
contemplation of the power and of the virtue which is conceived to be in the
aereall Cross, witness these words: Council. Nicen. 2. Act. 2. page 68.
Qui imaginem adspicit non ex pictura and colorum tinctura similitudinem
accipit, sed ad co^templationem primi exemplaris animum reducit. and he
regards not the quantity, or the corpulencie of that he sees, as in the
Lords supper he is moved as much with a little, as with a great loaf: even as
Hilar. decret. tom. 3 concilior. p. 285.
Non est quantitas visibilis in hoc astimanda my sterio, sed virtus sacramenti
spiritualis. Howsoever it is better for us to walk in the royal way of this
Law, and so avoyde all Images, then to ramble in the wandering paths which have
distracted the commoderators of all times, some of whom will have pictures but
no images. Petrus Altiac. de reformat, Eccl. ca. 3.
some images, but not so many, some have no Gregor. Cassand. consultat. art. 21.
images but the Cross, which is now our Churches sin. So is the Cross
proved an image; and because an Image not to be tolerated in the service of
God.

#Sect. 6. The aereall Cross is a new sign directly against the entendment
and rule of Gods worship. The danger of retayning old popish Ceremonies.
FRom the letter of the law, come we to the intendement of it, which is the
authorizing of the word to be the rule of all Gods worship, which is wronged by
all new devised signs, and by rites popish more ways then one. First, They
hinder teaching, learning, and keeping of it. For whereas the word does now
teach clearly the Cross (with the rest) ouercast (as it were) with a veil the
brightness of it, witness the whole Harmon. confess. sec. 17. in Wittenburg.
confess. fol. 229.
Church which says: that a light in the day time to signify the Gospels light
and a Cross to show Christ's victory by his crucifying, makes the doctrine
far more dark then if the word did shine by it self without them. And it is
confessed the popish ceremonies were as Ric. Honk lib. 5. ca. 65
leaves that did shadow the fruits of Baptism, whereas it is known that the
Cross amongst the rest is a vine leaf of Plin. natural. histor. lib. 16. cap.
21.
Memphis more hurtful then any, for that besides it casts more shadow, it
self is never cast nor fades no not when others not only are faded but also
fallen, and that deservedly. For vmbra legis evanuit even in the judgment of a
Innocen. 3 decret. Gregor. lib. 3. tit. 47. ca. 1
Pope; in the judgment of Protestants so vanished also, as that no Homil. for
Whitsunday. p. 2. Andrew Willet controuer. 2. q. 4. p. 2.
shadow of any shaddowing rites and ceremonies ought now to remain. For
whereas it is unfit as Eusebius. hist li. 4. ca. 22.
Pynitus wrote of old, that the Church should still immorari lacteis
sermonibus et in puerili institutione consenescere, the Cross and other popish
ceremonies teach still with a fescue as the Jews were anciently taught, and
Laurence Saunder in Act. and monument. p. 1494.
keep the Church in her infancy and weakness still. Upon this and the like
reasons, when in the Latheran council new rites were thought on, rather cut
off from the old (said Catalog. testium veritatis. fo. 7
Johannes Sarisburiensis) that Gods word may be kept the better. A fit
counsel for this time, when scarce any thingh else is thought on, then the
pillering up of ceremonies: which if they were cut of and gone, the word of God
would flourish more and be far better kept. Secondly, the substance it self
of doctrine stands in danger of the Cross and popish ceremonies not well
purged forth: what first impeacht the Gospels purity in the whole Church but
a delight which the Fathers had in heaping up Pet. Ca^tor. in verb. Ab breuiat.
catalog. testium. fo. 387 Theodor. Beza in respons. ad Franc. Balduin. Phil.
Mornaeus de Eucharist. lib. 2. cap. 1.
ceremonies? what first deformed the faith of this land, but the rabblement of
Roman rites, which Balaeus in histor. Augustine.
Augustine the Monk brought in; amongst which the Cross was chief? What has
lamed the Luteran profession (lastly) with inclination unto popery, and with a
vehement smatch thereof, but popish ceremonies retained in their Church? When
Charles the 5. would have obtruded upon the Churches that were reformed, the
ceremonies which they had left: these counterblastes were heard against him.
The old popish ceremonies annexed to the doctrine of the Gospel, are an old
Confess. Theolog. Saxon. aedit an. 1560
ragged clout patcht to a new garment. They are (as it were) an Conrad.
Schluselbu. tom. 13. in praefat.
Incrustation both unlawful and unseemly. The retayning of them is the Apud
eundem. ibid. fol. 412. libel. supplicator. Theolog. German. an. 1561. p. 587.
sweeping of the house for the ill spirit to reenter. yea, the opening of a
window to a confusion Samariticall of the religion it self in the end. Indeed
many ways do the ceremonies that have been popish, hurt the faith. First
they are of themselves Bellar. de offert. Sacrament. cap. 31. Gal. 5.9.
Cortices religionis. so that, as good ceremonies spread the sap of true
doctrine, in like manner ceremonies popish diffuse the verdure and the juice of
superstition. Great advantage gets Satan in this business by our security,
which holds them for trifles: little considering that a little leaven is
quickly able to infecte an whole lump. that Andr. Fris.
paruus error in initio, fit maguns in fine, as one spoke once of popish
errors. And that which our Saxon Confess. Theolog. Saxon. vt supra.
brethren alleged against the trifles of the Adiaphorisme, ex paruis sape
magnarum momenta rerum pendent. and negligenda non sunt parua initia, ex quibus
paulatim postea maiores fiunt accessiones.

Secondly, The establishing of popish ceremonies is oftentimes [Commenium
politicum] to draw in the whole body it self: that which the Preachers of
Hamburgens. in epistol ad. Philipp. Melaut^^on
Hamberough saw when against the popish mixtures of the Interim, they thus
protested: sunt ista Adiaphora nihil aliud quam semina Corruptela, and nervi
papisticae superstitionis, and Cuniculi per quos aduersarij in nostras
Ecclesias irrepere conantur, vt eas a fundamento evertant. The same saw
(likewise) the Preachers of Confess. Tholog. Saxon. aedit An. 1560.
Saxony, Satan non contentus vno vulnere, longam texit telam, and ab his
paruis initijs Ceremoniarum progressus, facit ad Corruptelas doctrinae.
Thirdly, The establishing of popish ceremonies after the Gospel a long time
preached, carries a show of inclination to popery, and of commoderation with
it. By the first of which an hope is raised of restoring again the doctrine it
self. By the latter an opinion engendered, the doctrine it self is not so ill.
So that the censure here has place, which once was leavied against the
ceremonies retained in Germany, Conrad. Schluselburg. tom. 13 in epist.
dedicatoris
rerum illarum externarum conformatio, hoc est laruae Antichristianae assumptio
nequaquam sine doctrinae violatione fieri potest, iaque ipsa experientia
comprobauit. Fourthly, The retayning of popish ceremonies put men to their
wits, to devise colors and excuses to paint and varnish them, whereby there
is woeuen Ibid.
amplissimum adiaphoricum pallium, Covering all kinds of inclinations,
concessions, yeeldinges, abiurgations, calumniations, lyinges, raylinges, and
reprochinges. For ensample, the Adiaphorisine of Germany brought forth these
Axioms to the corruption of manners. That Erasmus Sarcerius. in Confess.
Mansfield. An. 1560.
to stand with the Magistrate in small matters (though pertaining to the
truth) is contamacie. The commandment of the Magistrate does excuse the
subject. Not to conform our selves to some popish ceremonies, is to offend
the Papists. A Surplice is a trifle, and not to be stood on. No In colloquio
Torgae habito. apud Conrad Schluselburg. tom. 13.
duty of confession is required in Adiaphoris. It brought forth also diverse
Axioms to the corrupting of the judgment. Flac. Illyric lib de Adianhor.
That superstitious abuse does not bind to a remoouall. Popish ceremonies may
serve for order, decency, comlines. When any are offended by popish ceremonies
retained in the Church, it is scandalum acceptum not datum. And these which
seem more dangerous, Libell. supplicator Thelog. German. 1561.
Quacunque per se impia non sunt, ea ratione circumstantiaram impia fieri non
possunt. Semper perinde licet Ceremonijs vti. Licet veram Ecclesiam cum impia
in omnibus Adiaphoris co^formarem. Adiaphororum and Ceremoniarum Ecclesiae
finis and scopus est pax politica: most of which (if not all) the Cross
speaking in his language at this day. What should we do, but stand up in the
gappe against him? and with those arguments refute these errors wherewith our
Godly Brethren in Germany, fought against their Adiaphorisme, which did
disturb their Church? Fifthly, The retayning of popish ceremonies keeps still
on foot many popish principles. For show me the man that can uphold the Cross
and Surplice, and the rest of the Ceremonies controversed, and not run him
self a ground upon popish sands to justify them? who now give forth, The
Bishops when they talk with us Papists, play the Puritans; when they talk
with the Puritanes, then are they Papists; and those objections that are more
ancient. There be many William Reynold.
catholic things in the book written against Cartwright the Puritan. The
News out of Holland.
common Protestant must fly to Catholic grounds and answers, when he
deals against the Puritans. The The humble mot. for tollerat. Act 16.4.
Protestants can not defend them selves against the Puritans, but by our
grounds and answers. We have the ceremonies called (...) in the scripture:
and no mervayle, because the ceremonies bear up some doctrine, or begette some
doctrine or other. When the Greek Church began to Genebrard. An. 1273.
dissent from the Latin, left it not the Ceremonies of the Latin Church
withal* When Room first established a Church in Brittanie, did she not the
same time require an observation of her Bed. in histor. Anglor. lib. 2. cap. 12.
Ceremonies too? When Hierome of Prage Council. Constantiens. session 19.
was sworn to the Church of Rome, was he not bound to observe the
Ceremonies, as well as to believe their faith? In the Genebraid in an, 1549.
Interim, was there not exacted a conformity unto ceremonies, and unto the
doctrine both together? The reformed Churches, when they began to banish the
whole dosse of popish doctrine, did they not at the same time exile and banish
every D. Bills. ag. Apolo. p. 1. p. 31.
dram of their ceremonies also? It cannot be (says Cyprian de simplicitat.
praelat.
Cyprian) that Nouatus should keep the doctrine of the Church, if he break
the discipline. He that is guilty in the ceremonies, is guilty also in the
faith (says the Council. Toleran. 4 Can. 40.
Council of Toledo.) How do the Papists bewail an Carol. Bouius in praefat.
in Clement. Constitut.
Antiquation of their ceremonies, as for causing a downfall of their religion
it self? How do Protestants on the other side foresee a danger of our
religion where popish ceremonies do remain? Pet. Martyr in epist. amic.
cuida^ in Angl.
Vtinam vidissent (says one) qua haec conseruanda censuerunt, euangelium ijs
manentibus non satis esse firmum. Therefore we are by our Con^ad. Vorstins in
praefat. Euchirid. controuers.
leaders directed to hate, (as the doctrine) so also the rites of Rome. Yea (by
name) we are willed to abolish the sign of the Simon Goulatt. in Cypria. epi
56. not. 31.
Cross, if we mean that the doctrine of Christ crucified, shall be thoroughly
fixed and settled in our Church. These premises considered, we may well assure
our selves, that popish ceremonies retained amongst us, will rob in the end
and riffle our faith. Away with them then, Nunquam securus cum the sauro, latro
tenetur inclusus. Author. lib. de singularitat clericor. apud Cypr.


#Sect. 7. The Cross sins against this maine principle of the word, he that
adds or takes from it, etc. Popish Ceremonies worse then Jewish.
AS the sign of the Cross sins against the letter of this Commandment,
Sect. 7.
and the rule of Gods worship which it intends (which is the word,) so is
transgresses against a maine authorament of it which is this, Deuteronomy. 4 2. and
12.32.
Thou shall not add to it, nor take away from it. Exodus 20.25.
He that of old lifted an axe over an Altar to hew and frame it to his own
liking, did pollute it: and can it be then without the polluting of the
Sacrament, that the Cross is lift up over it, not only an axe that serves to
polish according to policy, but also such as has been whet at the Philistines
forge, nay bought or borrowed from them? It this to obey the commandment,
Deuteronomy. 12.31.
Thou shall not do so to the Lord thy God, as they do to theirs? Is this to
fear the reproof, Ezech. 43.8.
They set their thresholdes by my thresholdes, and their posts by my posts,
and defile mine holy name? Lastly, Is this to reverence the inhibition, Hosi.
2.16.
Thou shall not call me Baali (that is) serve me in like manner as Baal is
served withal? Here the patrones of the ceremonies controuersed divide the
house, some taking no shame to borrow from Papists; others (for shame) standing
on a denial that these ceremonies are borrowed from them. The former of these,
how do they weaken their brethrens hands, and blunt their weapons against the
Papists? For against the antiquity of their lights and incense with the like,
the best Magdeburgens. centur. 4. cap. 6.
plea that we have is this, that they are borrowed by a (...), From the Pagans
and the Jews. The whole body of popish ceremonies, which Durand has
anatomized, we use to thrust through with this spit, Hospinian de re te^plar.
lib. 4. ca. 1.
He professes that they are taken from the Jews. Whole Treatises and
Bulling. de orig. error. ca 33.34. Tho. Motescin. de orig. and depraunt. relig.
per tot.
books have we written against their apish imitation of Jews, and Pagans in
their feasts, in their Images, and other complements of their service. By name
we renew the ancient censure against their holy water condemned of old,
because it is [ ritus Sozom. lib. 6. cap. 6.
gentilium] against their Images, because they are Eusebius. lib. 7. ca. 17.
gentilis confuetudo, against their shauing, because the Priests Hieron. in
Ezech. lib. 23. cap. 42.
of Isis used it against their lights, Senec. lib. 14 epi. 15
because at first they were set up to heathen Gods, and not to wander from
home, we censure the Christians that borrowed a Cross from the D. Fulk again.
Sand. of Images cap. 11. page 663. Ca^th. ag. Mart. art. 5
T. of Serapis. And this we do being thereto bound not only by the word of
God, but also by the general practice of the Church throughout all ages.
Indeed, I know not whether the Church has not exceeded in her zeal, since it
has made it no less then heresy from time to time to use any rite of aliens
as we may see in the August. haetes. 2^.50.
Quartadecimani, for this only esteemed heretics, because they kept their
feast of Easter upon the same day on which the Jews observed their Passover.
And thus Hierome, Hieron. Augustine. epist. 11.
Cerinthus and Ebion, propter hoc solum a Patribus ana. thematizati sunt, quod
legis Ceremonias and Christi Evangelium miscuerunt, and sic noua confessi sunt
vt vetera non amitterent. But it will be said, this was because of the merit
and of the necessity which they put in the rites which they retained, and the
ceremonies now controuersed, are not so urged. Of this shift we may be ashamed.
A Conrad. Lutzenb. Catalog. haeretic. lib. 4. parti. 13. fol. 85.
papist him self averring etiam lege Iudaica non cogente, it is heresy to use
their rites in case of love or in case of charity, because vmbra legis is
totally vanished; and the rites of the Jews are now [mortiferae] to him that
uses them, let him use them which way he will. And the Eastern Churches
observed not the fourtenth day, as the Quartadecimiani: they observed it as an
ancient custom, but we do now observe the Cross: whom yet the Council of
Nice condemned, because it became Christians to have nothing common with the
Jews in their rites and observations. Now, where is a reason to make it more
lawful to borrow from papists, then from the Jews? Is there not apparent
reason we may less? For the Jews ceremonies were ordained of God, the Papists
by the man of sin the Antichrist, and Jewish ceremonies renewed are but
Christi sepulchra, When they be at worst, the Ceremonies of Papists even
foetida stercora in the opinion of our Ioh Calvin. in Act. 16.3.
best Divines. Secondly, as this tenent weakneth our own hands, so does it
strengthen the hands of papists, who so reverence the grace and truth of the
Gospel, as that withal they will retain Adrian. in Epist. in Conc. Nicen. 2.
act. 2 p. 72.
veteres typos, figuras, and vmbras, for notes and for signs of the same. So
Innocentius will have the Laws of Deutronomie still observed, adding a reason
(...) is secunda lex. While our Matt. Sutclif. de miss. lib. 3. cap. 6.
writers protest against this vayling and shadowing of the Gospells brightness,
we in retaining of the Surplice do make good, Durand. rational. lib. 3. cap. ^.
confessed on all sides to be borrowed from the Jews. Dej consecrat. distin.
1. cap. 2.
Gratian professes we are to take pattern from the Jews. The gloss thereupon
infers, possumus argumentari ab exemplis infidelium. This while Hospin. vt
supra.
our Writers do with all their power destroy, our imitation of the Papists
worse then the Jews builds up again. The Rhem. annotat. in 1. Tim. 4. sect.
18.
Rhemistes directly hold, we may take ceremonies from the Jews. Our D. Fulk in
answer ibid. D. Willet. co^trovers. 2. q. 4. p. 2.
Writers set foot against them; these we by retaining popish ceremonies, fear
not to supplant. Casar Baronius reads us this lesson, Caes. Baron. Annal. an.
200.
Consulto introductam videtur vt quae essent Gentilitiae superstitionis
officia, eade^ verbi Dei cultu^ sanctificata, in verae religionis cultu^
impenderentur. Again, Idem in Martyrolo. Roman. F^bru 2.
In multis gentiliu^ institutis contigit vt super stitionis little vsus sacris
ritibus expiatus, ac sacro sanctus reditus in Dei Ecclesia^ laudabiliter
introductus sit. Which while our Ioh. Reynold. de Idolat li 2. c 3. sect. 13
best writers refute with reasoning, our doing the same in Cross and
Surplice, approve with practice. Polydor. Virgil de inven. rer.
Polydore Virgil deriueth the most of popish ceremonies from Jews and Pagans.
Blondus takes pride to blende the rites of new Rome popish, and old Rome
Paganish. Which while our Tho. Moresein. de orig. depra. religion.
Writers with their pens make odious, our retaining of popish ceremonies make
to be lawful. Thirdly, this conformity of ours with Papists in their rites,
destroys that difference and separation which ought to be between the Church
of God and aliens. Well, Melciad. in epist. Decret. ad Hispan. Epise.
Melciades. No man must fast the Thursday or Sunday, vt inter iciunia
Christianorum and Gentilium, and bareticorum vera and no^ falsa discretio
habeatur. For we may if we will learn from him, that to retain an alien rite
in diverse use, is falsa discretio, that the separation is never true, till
heretical ceremonies be cashiered. Here it is pleaded that Gedeon sacrificed
Baals Ox to God. That Joshua sanctified the goods of Jericho to the Lord, and
Moses turned the Censors of Corah to plates for the Altar. To omit that the
last were no goods of Idolaters at all, the former no goods of Idolaters in
state Idolatrous, which makes a maine difference between them and the
ceremonies controuersed, with many more pleas which we might allege; we rest
on that which one of our Pet. Martyrin Iudie.
writers brings, There was a special warrant for these, and A special
commandment, but none for Cross and Surplice. It is also The examiner of the
declarat. of the Ministers of London.
objected, that God borrowed linen vestures from Egyptian Priests: that he
ordained Tithes notwithstanding Hercules had his Tithes before, and appointed
bread for his Sacrament, though Mythra had bread offered to him. That the
Christians had their Agapae at communions, notwithstanding the (...) of the
heathen in the Temples of their Idols. That the primitive church had many
things from the Jews. that we our selves retain at this day the Ring in
marriage from the heathen, and Tithes from the Jews, and keep set fastes,
though Montanus were the first that did set down set days for fasting. We
answer: The ordayner of the most of these was God; of whom if any say he
borrowed, he blasphemeth. as also he presumes in his pride, that thinks he
has the same power that God has, to ordain the ceremonies of his service.
Howbeit to particulars. The Priests of Egypt borrowed their linen from the
Jews, as it is likely even as they did their circumcision. Ioh. Bohem. Auhan.
de morib. gentiu^. li. 1. ca. 45.
Mythra Tertul. de praescript.
borrowed his bread from God. To say the Agapae of the Christians were not an
imitatio^ of the Jews feasts after their sacrifices rather then of the
Gentiles, and that they were not abolished when time of abolition came; or that
Hercules (which is Joshua) was before Moses, to have his Tithes imitated by him,
is ignorance or falsehood. To justify popish rites in use religious by customs
of the primitive Church, by tithes and fasting days of our own at home,
either tolerated for a time only, or continued by a (...) and perverse
imitation, or used only in civil matters and not religious, is inconsequent
and absurd. August. de vnico. bapt. contra. Petilian. ca. 9.
Augustine (also) is wont to be cited, but he only allows to take from
heretics, the things that be good. in such as Cross and Surplice are, he is
with us, as shall be showed. Now, mention we only, that grand position which
ever the Church of God allowed, Tertul. de coron. milit.
Nihil dandum Idolo, nec sumendum ab Idolo. a rule so strictly and seriously
kept in the primitive Church, as that they abhorred the very words and names
them seiues, which did symbolize with aliens. This the Papists them selves
confess: the word Priest and Sacrifice was not wont to be used (say Durant.
de rit. li. 1. ca. 1. sect. 7
they) till the days of Irenaeus, For fear of Co-incidence with the Jews.
And wherefore feared they this Co-incidence? least they should seem (says
Bellar. de miss ca. 17.
Bellarmine) to renew their rites, or to confirm them. For the very same cause
another pronounces, Garol. Bonius schol. in Clement li. 7. ca. 39.
Haereticorum etiam vocabula timenda sunt. And our Rhemist. Annotat. in 1. Tim.
6. sect. 4.
Rhemistes, We shall keep the faith of our Fathers, if we keep their very
words themselves. But avoid we the words of heretics although they seem to
have no harm in them. Is there a sinful seeming in the use of the names of
heretical rites, and does the very use of their names renew and confirm
them; And will Papists forbear the very words themselves of heretics,
though they do not so much as seem to have hurt: and is there no sin for us
to renew and confirm the rites of papists, when we not only use their names
honorably, but also use their rites themselves, yea command them; yea revenge
them, and that not only when they have a seeming of hurt, but also do effect
much harm? Oh take we heed, it is an heavy thing to expect even papists
themselves, to rise up in judgment against us. Howbeit, what say we to the
names of Idols, Act. 18.24.
Apollo, Act. 17.34.
Dionysius, Romans 16.14.
Mercurius, Romans 16.
Phebe, with the like, which the Christians retained even in their baptism (as
some of our Opposites would persuade us) against the letter of the old law?
Thou shall not take up their names within thy lips. In deed some think they
have found out herein a great piece of matter against us, if yet it be against
us, and not rather against the Lord, and against his servant Moses. The
christians were called by their old names which were taken from Idols. True, as
the street in Athens is called Mors street out of a necessity, for who had
power to change and alter them? And mark not our Opposites this instance is
wholly civil? No say they, for even in baptism these names of Idols were
imposed on them. A Papist himself will not say so, who thinks there were
Godfathers in the Primative Church; and that men's names were given unto them in
the administration of Baptism. For he thinks their old Idolatrous names
were Caesar Baron. Anal. anno 258. and an* 259.
changed when they were made Christians. As for us, who know there were no
Godfathers at the first, as now there be, nor no new John Reynold. de Idololat.
li. 1. cap. 5. sect. 28.
names given in Baptism, this objection might very well have been omitted. The
truth is, when an Infant was baptized, the order was very strictly Durant. de
rit. li. 1. ca. 19. sect. 20.
kept, which is fathered upon the Council of Nice, Council Nicen. can. 30
Nefidelis nomina gentilium filijs suis imponant. And we may even hence
perceive, that the parents set the name at home: as also by an other ensample.
Caesar. Baron. Anal. in an. 290.
Parents mei vocarunt me Tharacum. And also by the common order Dionis.
Ecclesiast. Hitrarch.
registered thus, The Minister was wont at the Church door (not in Baptism) to
ask the name of him that was to be Baptized (mark, ask and enquire) and not
to give the name himself. As for the aged, there was ordinarily no meddling of
their names at Baptism: but the order was to come before hand, at what time
they were called [competentes] and give their names, to wit, their old ones
which were written down in a Register; which order continued long after
Christ, as many undoubted Cyril Hierosol. Catechis. 1. Council. Carthag. 4. cap.
85. August. epist. 155. Baron. an^ in an. 284.
witnesses show. And that these names were totally civil, it appears by
this, that men did change their names when they would. As one called Tharacus
at the first, when he enters into war, he gives himself the new name
Caesar Baron. ana. an. 290. Cod. lib. 9. Tit. 25. ca. 1.
of Victor. And the civil z Law it self permitted this change. In which
often the Christians of Africa changed their old Idolatrous names into such
as present occasion did require: Caesar Baron annal. an. 303.
As these names show [habet Deum] he has God, [spes in Deo] hope in God,
[bene seruatus] graciously saved: which, are they not the very same which our
Opposites think fantastical, when now they are imitated?

#Sect. 8. The Opposites that affirm their Ceremonies to come from the
primitive Church immediately, and not from popery, are confused.
THe second side of our Opposites, will not deny but that it is a thing
unseemly for the Church (the spouse of Christ) to attire her self with the
cast apparel of the harlot of Rome, therefore they turn to an other angle,
and stoutly deny that these ceremonies come from thence Dic colorem? why the
parties from whom we receive them (immediately) are the Fathers of the modern
Church; the parties from whom we receive them mediatly, are the fathers of the
primative Church. Concerning the former, Our reverend Fathers impose these
rites, and from their hands we take them. But they, from whom? why (think ye)
they intend any imitation of the papists? no, they impose them out of policy
(as rites of order) for the Churches good. First, this answer of a good intend
is merely cauillous. any sinner may use it and never be cast, unless he
confess against himself. And the papist himself does use it, who pleads
the very same intention that we do, to wit, that he does use his franckencense,
not as it is Jewish, but as Thom. Aquin. p. 3. q. 83. ar. 5.
commanded by the Church; and his holy water, not as it is a rite of the
heathen, but as an Durant. de rit. lib. 1. ca. 2^. sect. 6.7.
ordinance of the Churches. Secondly, There have been (and are) many unlawful
imitations which want intention to follow and imitate unlawfully thorough the
same carnal wisdom; which when it sees an example of it self in aliens, it
begets in men's hearts an Image thereof. For example, The Iubile of the Jews
and the sight thereof, has begotten a lively Image of it self in the popish
Iubile. Howbeit without intention, since they Clement. 8 Bulla. Iubile.
deny this Iubile is drawn or borrowed of the Jews, as peremptorily as we
deny that these ceremonies controuersed are borrowed from the Papists. And the
consecrating of Mars his sword among the heathens, with the rest of their Gods
relics, has Tho. Morescin. in verb. ensis martis.
begotten in Rome (howbeit perchance without any intent to imitate a
reuerencing of Iosephes breeches; Thomas his shoes; Martins boots; Georges
sword: and all other relics of their Saints. The Pagan gods painted the
beasts which they did love, and the sight thereof: as Alexand. ab Alexandro.
lib. 3. cap. 12.
Isis standing in her Temple with her Goose, Venus with her Dove, Apollo Idem.
li. 4. cap. 12.
Smynthius with his Mouse, Minerua with her Dragon; and the Garlands and
bunches of grapes wherewith Bacchus was painted, has Hospin. de imag. ca. 9.
fol. 43.
begotten (though perchance without intent of imitation) the like reverence in
Rome to the beasts of their saints, so that in their Churches Wendoline is set
forth with sheep. Antonie with a Pigge, Martine with his Geese, Eustachius
with his Dogs and Dear, Gertrude with her Mice, George with his Horse and
Dragon, and Urban is painted (successor of Bacchus) with his wine-pots and with
his grapes. Thirdly, our Church may easily be euicted of an intention to
imitate the Papists, if not explicit, yet implicit by the open marks thereof
which drop down in our ways. The first of these is emulation. For can we
deny we use the Cross to the end: we may not seem to lack any good and
ancient ceremonies which are in Rome? now this suffices to euict an intended
borrowing of them, as does appear by these examples. Sozomen. lib. 5. ca. 15
Julian is said to borrow from the Christians when he did like unto them: to
wit, adorn his Idols Temples, Secundum Christianorum traditionem, and
appointed all rites of credit, ex aequo respondentes, least his Religion should
seem to lack any good order, which the Christian religion had. And the
heretics are said to borrow from the Christians when in like manner, ad
imitationem Ecclesiae, Psalmos Durant de rit. lib. 3. cap. 13. sect. 9.
componebant and canebant, not to seem less devout then they. The Pope is
said to borrow from the Emperor in like sort a ceremony of state, When he
dight himself a triple crown, not to seem inferior to him. For he did it to
Tho. Morescin. in verb. coron
vi^ that triple crown which the Emperor had. The first of silver at
Aquisgrane. The second of Iron, at Millane. The third of gold which he received
at Rome, as may partly appear by this. We never read of the Popes Platina. in
Paschal. 2.
Tiara, till after the broils of Gregory the seventh, which was one of the
first that openly did set up himself above his Master. To come near home:
Chrysostom is said to borrow from the Arrians, their singing Psalms in the
streets as they went to Church, singulari pietatis specie, when least the
people should be carried away with this hypocritical show of pieti, he did
similia Socrat. li. 6. cap. 8. Sozomen. lib. 8. ca. 8.
instituere. Additis ardentibus facibus and argenteis quibusdam crucibus. The
second mark of intent to borrow, is conformity with Papists to win them,
even as Paul indented an imitation of Jewish rites when he shaued his head at
Cenchrea, and in ceremonies that were indifferent, He became all things to all
men, to the intent he might save some. So the Christians intended, (and that
Calsh. art. 6. fol. 128 and art. 1. fol 25.
faultely as we censure it) to imitate one of the heathenish rites, when
instead of Serapis Ruffin. li. 2 cap. 29. Sozomen. li. 7. ca. 15.
T. they set up a Cross to win them. How can we deny we borrow from Rome,
when we profess and bear before us, we take their Surplice and their Cross
into our Churches to win them the sooner, and to give contentment to them?
For this is not only the common plea for the ceremonies now Examine. of the
declarat of the Ministers of Land.
adays, but even at first, when as Master Hooker See. Parsons conuers. of
Engl. pa. 2. ca p 12. sect. 21.
and Master Rogers misliked the likeness of our service with the Masse-booke.
It was (I say) even then pleaded that this conformity was needful to fit and
please the Papists. The third mark of intent, is commutation. For as goods
found in a man's house industriously changed into his own mark, is evident
sufficient he purposely stole them, so our careful changing of the Cross into
our own livery euicteth plainly that we have taken it from the Papists. For
we are heerby in the case of the papists, whose processions are Polydor.
Virgil de inuentor. rerum li. 6. cap. 10.
confessed to be borrowed from the heathens, in that they have changed them
into Christian Letanies, the heathenish banner which was the Labarum or the
Apulei. Maetamor. phos li. 11.
Caducius Mercurij being chopped into a Cross. Did not the popish Bishops
borrowe their Tho. Morescin. in verb poderis.
Poderis from heathen priests, when they changed it from woollen to silk? Did
not Pope Eutichianus take a ceremony from the heathens, when condescending to
the infirmity of men converted from their Gentilisme he abolished Szegedin, in
specul. pontifi. Polydor. li. 6. cap. vlt.
not their feasts in the church, but altered and changed them into refreshings
for the poor. Did not the Archbishop of Turone intend an imitation when he
was instant to have the sacrifices and the feasts of the 11 last days of Tho.
Morescin in verb. pt^^es.
February changed in festum aepularum beati Petri ad tollendum abusum et popull
super stitionem male instituti in Christianismo, vt qui adhuc faperet suum
ethnicismum? Seeing in all these changes our writers do accuse the papists for
an unlawful imitation, how can we be excused our selves who have changed our
Cross and Surplice from their Idolatrous Cross and Surplice in manner like
unto the same end? The fourth mark is substitution. For as the brother in
Moses law intended a continuance of the name of the dead when he substituted
in his place an other to bear it, so it will be interpreted we intend to
continue the name of the popish Cross and Surplice in case they were dead
(which were to be wished) in that we raise other Crosses and other Surplices to
be (as it were) their heirs. By which means it will come to pass, that
their names will never out in the gates of the people. Surcease we then this
substitution, or cease we to charg the papists for the like: as their
substituting of Ioh. Reynold. de Idololat. lib. 1. ca. 2. sect. 5.
Mary in the place of Venus, and their substituting of other saints to fill
up the room of heathen Gods and Goddesses. for example: their Theodulus is the
Christian Aeolus. Their Agata the Christian Vesta. their Nicholas and
Christopher the Castor et Pollux of the Christians, their Urban the new
Bacchus. their Katherine, a late Minerua: say Bulling. de origin. error. li. 1.
cap. 34.
our writers, because they are sought to, as having power over winds, over
fire, over fea-tempestes, over wine and drinking meetings, and over learning:
even as the heathen sought to the former out of an opinion they had the
government of the same things. But do we seek to Cross and Surplice? In
profession we do not, in practice there be too many that do, who are incoraged
by our substitutio^ of cross and Surplice in holy use, for whose sakes we
should avoid even all show, although but in part, of their abominable
substitution. And our substitution is it not in a manner the very same which we
mislike in others? as when in the room of the pagan feasts, which they made
for their dead, the Christians August. confess. lib. 6. cap. 2.
substituted feasts that were like at the Martyrs memorials, as when Gregory,
Gregor. Nyssen. in vlt. eins.
Thaumatourgus permisit memorias Martyrum ne vulgus imperitum propter
voluptates in errore simulacrorum permanerent, as when feasts were substituted
to Peter, Theodor. de euang. veritat. cognit. li. 8
Paul, Thomas, Sergius in Room of the ancient heatenish solemnities? as when
Ioh. Crispin. Chronolog in valent.
Sixtus substituted the feast of Saint Peter ad vincula in place of Augustus
feast, the first of Auguste: for his victory against Antonius and Cleopatra?
as when Boniface the fourth turned the pagan Pantheon at Rome which was
dedicated to all their Gods, to the Church of all Saints, whose feast was in
May at first, the same time that the heathenish feast was kept, we worthily,
condemn all these substitutions, Ioh. Funccius. Carol. Sigon.
because they [ Ioh. Crispin. in Phoca.
Change] not [chase] away the old superstition, even as our Cross and
Surplice do not. Far better Decret. p. 2. cans. 26. q. 7. cap. 14.
Zachary when he saw some celebrate the Kalends of January and to feast and
dance Paganorum more; illico omnia haec amputauimus (says he) because that
paganisine (and so papisme) will repullulare, unless all the customs of it be
hewne down at the root. The fifth mark and last of all; of an intended
receiving from papists is retention of some likeness in name, in use, Ioh Bohem
Auban. de gent. morib^ lib. 1. cap. 5.
in office. Even the papist himself will confess an imitatio^ where there is a
likeness, as because there are like rites in Rome to them in Aegipt, therefore
one says, pleraque, etc. many things translated from the Egyptians which have
crept into our religion: as the linen garments, the turnings and windings at
the Altar: the pomp of sacrificing, the soundes of Music: with many like.
Ioh. Reynold. de Idololat. li. 1. cap. 6. sect. 5.
Our writers take part with Vigilantius against Hierome: therein they take part
with us. For what was his quarrel but this, that in the relics of Martyrs,
Christians came prope ritum gentilium: as all the quarrel which we have now
against the rites that are controuersed, is this, because they come prope ritum
Antichristi, to near the rites of Antichrist. The Image of Ambrose and
Sebastian at Millaine we say are heathenish imitations. Wherefore? because the
latter is not Bulling. de origin. error. li. 1. cap. 34.
multum absimilis, to Homers Apollo casting his deadly arrows into the camp
of the Gretians, the former set forth with Miter, Staff, and Whippe is Ibid.
cap. 33.
haud absimilis to Jupiter stator. Papists reuelling at Christmasse, is
acknowledged to be heathenish. Blond. de Romans triumphant. lib. 2.
Wherefore? Quia similia a nostris comittuntur, to those sportes which Pagans
made about the fourteenth of the Calende of January. The Parentalia which the
Papists perform to the dead, are Idem. in cod. lib.
confessed to come from Pagans. Wherefore? because Non dissimiliter a nostris
fit. The Oscilla which Papists offer with other Imagunculae of their members
cured and healed, yea of their sheep and horses recovered, are professed to
be an imitation, non Religionis modo, verum superstitionis etiam, of the
Pagans. Wherefore? because they are Polydor. Virgil. de inuentor. rerum. li. 5.
cap. 1.
Consimilia like to those expiations which the Pagans were wont to offer for
their lives and for their healthes in the Chapel of Dis their God. The herses
covered with a black cloth, and with a white Cross are said to be borrowed
from the Pagans. Wherefore? because Simile Tho. Morescin. in verb. lectistern.
Quid is here committed to the Lectisterina of the Pagans. Last of all, the
Amulets and fascinations of the Pagans are said to be imitated by the Idem. in
verb. Amulate.
Papists, when by the Cross and a piece of Scripture written, they go about
to effect strange things. In all these ensamples it is a borrowing, when the
rites come near, when they are not unlike; when they are done according to
some like manner; and are used but in like fashion. And no marvel, since he
that retains but a rite that is like, sins against the inhibition of this
Commandment, which to cut of from all borrowing of heretics, condemns all
likeness with them. What (then) shall we say to a same-nes, in name, in office,
in time and place, and other mo circumstances? we take D. Fulke in answ. to
Rhem. in apoc. 1. ver. 10.
advantage against the Papist, because their feriae retain the name of
heathenish feasts: and it is thought there is a strong symbolizing between
Rome Paganish, and Rome Christian in the sportes of their Blond. de Romans
triumphant. lib. 2.
Carnispriuium because some foosteppe do remain of old name, time, place: and
that a principio mutationis facta, a gentilium superstitione adritus
Christianos. Let then the Cross and the rest of the ceremonies wipe their
mouths and say they are not borrowed, since all the printes of retention are
marked in them not only for [likenes] but also for [same-nes.] The same name,
the same time, the same place religious: yea and in some sort the same office
also. When we are forbidden to put an Ass and an Ox under one yoke, we are
forbidden to put men of diverse professions into one office (says the Decret.
p. 2. cause. 16. qu. 7. cap. 22.
Canon of the Law.) Are not our professions not only diverse but also
contrary? Alas (then) what does any popish rite in our service, especially
meddling with the office of the Sacrament it self?

#Sect. 10. The second defense of the Cross confuted: that is, we receive it
not as superstitiouslie abused by the papists, but as first used by the
Fathers.
WE have done with the first pretense, that we receive the Cross from the
Fathers of our own Church, and not from the Papists, and have undone it. The
second follows: We receive them not from the Papists but from the Fathers of
the primitive Church; which does tota pellucere even of it self. First, The
Fathers can be no vizard for a rite whereof the Pagans, Jews, or heretics
were the fathers and first begetters. It was the fault of one Tertul. de
resurrect. carn.
Alexander, that he sange the Psalms of Valentinus: It is ours now that we
use his Cross. I call it his, because he was the q first that used this
figure. D Fulke ag. Szund. of imag. cap. 134.
the very Idem in Luke 24. sect vlt.
first that made account of it, as appears by Irenae li. 1. cap. 1.
Irenaeus, who after the scriptures which this heretic wrested to the Crosses
commendation, adds this: these scriptures he applied a se male inventis. But
this is spoken of one of aeones which he terms Crux, I know it well. but
pleases it our Opposites to know as well wherefore he termed him Crux? to wit as
he termed this aeon oros to show a separating power in him because it is the
nature of a bound to separate. so in like manner he termed him Crux, to show a
purging power in him, because he held the Cross a purger of man's sin, like
the fan in Matthew, which purges the Wheat in the Lords flower from chafe
spiritual. And that he was drawn into this opinion by the same means that
papists are drawn, by a supposed dedicating of it in the blood of Christ, it
may in part appear by that which he says elsewhere, to wit, that his aeon
was without a [figure] until Christ by his death upon the Cross, did give him
one. Let this be marked, for it is known that Valentinus did use [ Sixth.
Senens. Bibliochec. lib. 3. page 146.
Figures] by them to express all the doctrine of his aeones: and it appears
by the text of Irenaeus that he did use the [Figure] of the Cross to express
this one of them: and till now we never read of any that used the figure of
the Cross before him, or made any account thereof. therefore he it is (even
Valentinus) for ought we know, that first brought it into request and
reckoning. And who (then) will suffer us to say we borrowe it from the Fathers
and not from him? The Greek Church say, they imitate the Apostles in their
abstinence from their blood and strangled. No, (say the Stanislau^. Socolon. in
Censur. Oriental. Eccles. cap. 21.
very papists them selves) they are the Jews ye imitate. The Durant. lib. 2.
cap. 10. sect. 2.
Papists say, they imitate the Fathers in their processions. No (say Ioh.
Reynold. in confer. pa. 495.
we) they are the Gretians whom ye imitate, in their carrying about their
Idols. The same would father their life Monastical upon the Fathers, Paulus
Thaebeus, Antonius, Basil, Augustine, and Hierome. Guil. Perk. problem. tit.
de monach.
but we hold they borrowe it from the heretics Essaei, because they were the
first Eusebius. de praeparat. Euangelic. lib. 8. and histor. li. 2. cap. 27.
that used it. So when they Durant. de rit. lib. 1. cap. 8.
would derive their lights from the Fathers, we will not Ioh. Reynold. de
Idololat. lib. 2. cap. 3 sect. 13.67.
suffer them, but stand out that they borrowed them from the Pagans, who first
devised them for their Gods. See we not (then) that to say we follow the
Fathers in the Cross, ( Valentinus the heretic, being the first deviser of
it) we are forced to fly like Eutropius, to the very same sanctuary, which
we have denied, and shut up to others? Secondly, The Fathers can be no vizard
for a ceremony which have been abused since. What then? Popery having abused
the Cross, and the Cross being none of Gods ordinances, (which abuse can not
defile) it is now the Popish Cross and not the Fathers: so is it from
papists that we borrowe it and not from them. Does not adultery make the
member of Christ, the member of an harlot? Therefore though the Cross were a
member of the Fathers before, yet now it is a member of the harlot of Rome:
seeing since their days he has been found coupled with her in spiritual
fornication. And when a righteous man falls, all his righteousness is
forgotten, and in the sin that he has committed, in that he dies. What
(then) though the Cross in the days of the Fathers did some good deeds, they
are now to be forgotten, and in the Idolatry which he has committed, he
is to dye. Does not every ceremony unite a man to the religion to which it
belongs much more (then) is the Cross united to Antichrist, whom he serves,
1. Cor. 10^ 17.18.
whereby he forfeiteth all the communion which erst he had, or since might
have with Christians? As for the Lord he will suffer naught come near him,
but that which stands in first purity: as it must be a Virgin which his
Priests must marry; and a beast that never bore yoke, which his priest must
offer. So that I marvel men can imagine he can endure a Cross or Surplice in
his house which have bebe defloured by the man of sin; and which have drawn
in the yoke of Antichrist? Howbeit, I marvel more, men are not afraid to
back such defiled ceremonies even with meare mockage. For what is it less to
say, We use the Cross, not as abused by the Papists, but as first used by the
Fathers. This were as if the Greek Church should elude the abrogation of the
Jewish ceremonies with this cavil: Genesis 9.
we abstain from blood, and strangled not as it is a Leuitical ordinance, but
as Noah and the Fathers abstayned from it before that Law was given. This were
as if one should have eluded the inhibition of a grove with this cavil: Deuteronomy.
16.21.
I set up a grove not to imitate late Idolaters, Ezech. 48.
but such a grove do I set up as Abraham and Isaac used, and the rest of the
ancient Fathers. This were (also) as if one should elude the abdication of a
priest falling into Idolatry (the equity whereof Cypr. lib. 1 epist. 7. li. 2.
epist. 1
Cyprian continues still, who barreth such as have sacrificed unto Idols for
ever, from the priestly function,) with this cavil: I admit him to be a
Minister, not as now of late he has been defiled, but as at the first he was
holy to the Lord thorough the oil of consecration that was upon him. This were
as if one should have eluded the Law that abolisheth all the monuments of
Idolatry with this Ioh. Reynold. conferenc. ca. 8 diuis. 4. p. 5 10. Genesis 37.3.
2. Sam. 13.18.
cavil: I use not the brazen serpent as lately it has been abused, but I
restore him to the use, for which Moses first reserved him. This were, as if a
wise man now should wear a party colored coat (not as it is a fools coat,
but as it was the Fathers coat be Christ's coming) as if a servant should be
coucred before his Master, not as covering is a late sign of pre-eminence,
but as Plutarch. in problem Roman. Chem. exam. p. 1. de tradict. Genesis 7.
of old it was a sign of subjection, and take the right hand of him, because
Anton. Nebrissensin annot. in 52* lib. script* loc.
of old that was the inferious place. Suppose one should preach at Paul's
Cross, that the Bishops are [Tyranni] to their brethren, Fures to the Church,
Sophistae to the Truth: would they accept this excuse of their own. I use
these words, as of old they signified a ruler, a servant, a student of
wisdom? No, no more then Steven Act. and Monu. pa. 1227.
Gardener would admit it, because all men know that words and actions must be
interpreted, used, received, according to their modern use, and not as they
have been of old.

#Sect. 11. Its no good defense of the Cross to say we have it from our
Fathers not from the papists, because the Fathers also abused both, the simple
use of it and as its mixed with oil.
THirdly, what though from the Fathers we take this sign? this helps not
till the Fathers use be justified, which will never be. Whether we regard
their simple use of it, or mixed with oil. For that the oil was imprinted in,
or with the form of the Cross, is it out of controversy? Dionis.
Ecclesiasti. Hierarch* lib. 2. ca. 2.
Episcopus trino crucis signaculo vnctionem inchoat. Ibid.
Adcrucis effigiem sanctissimum fundit Oleum. Just. Origelitan. in cantic.
Signum crucis cum odore Chrismatis praenotamus in front. Burchard. de sacram.
Eccles. li. 6.
Pectus codem perungitur Oleo, vt signo sancta crucis diabolo claudatur
ingressus. Bernard. in dedicat. Eccles. sermon. 1.
Vere crux nostra vncta est. De consecrat. distinct. 5. cap. 10.
Omnia chrismata sacerdotalis Ministerij figura crucis perficiuntur. Neither
can it be said this grew up of late, for the Oil is as ancient as the
Cross, and whence is the Unction called signation, consignation, obsignation,
(with the like) but from the Cross? But there is a Ibid. distinct. 4. cap. 120.
Canon that forbids the Priest to anoint the forehead of the Baptized, who
yet did Durand. de rit. li. 1. c. 19. se. 28
sign it with the Cross. Be it the Cross was made in Baptism on the
forehead without the Oil, never was the Oil applied either in Baptism, or
otherwhere without the Cross. Therefore has he no wrong, though we sue him
as partner with all the horrible superstitions of the Oil; which if he be he
that reads the Pathers writings, shall meet indeed with such a Chaos as will
make him afraid (I say not to fall into it) but even to behold it. Who can
brook the efficacy that Tertul. de resurrect. carnis.
Tertullian gives it? Caro vngitur vt anima consecretur. Caro signatur vt
anima muniatur. The necessity which Cyprian gave it. For as he says, Cyprian.
epistol. 2.
Vngi necesse est baptizatum. So has he elsewhere. Idem. epist. 73.
Baptizati signo dominico consummantur. Or (lastly) the effectual necessity,
and necessary effectiuenesse which Cornelius ascribes to it, when he says:
Nouatus was not well Baptized because Eusebius. histor. lib. 6. cap. 33.
Reliqua consecutus non est, quorum oportebat participem fieri secundum
Ecclesiae Canonem, neque signatus est ab Episcopo. And what say we to
Dionisius, who says of this, Unctuous consignation Dionis. Ecclesiasti.
Hierarch. ca. 2. part. 2.
maxim dininos efficit? To Simeon Thessalonicenscis: who says that it is
necessary that every one be signed therewith, Simeon. Thessalo. de Myster.
lib. 2.
Vt Baptismum diuinissimum habeat and consummatum? Thus Nazianzen. Nazian.
oration. 4. in sanct. baptism.
In Baptismo firmissimo auxilio tibi caueris animam and corpus unction and
spiritu consignans. Which last words show in what sense the Cross is called by
the Fathers, spirituale signaculum, (to wit) because he brings the spirit.
For which one place may serve our turn. Sequitur spirituale signaculum, quia
post fontem superest vt perfectio fiat quando ad inuocationem sacerdotis
spiritus sanctus infunditur. And in the Torrent. confess. Augustine. lib. 3. ca
4. fect. 3.
opinion of the Fathers, the water of Baptism is nothing worth without the
Cross. In the opinion of the Fathers the Cross is insigne Regni, and clauis
Paradisi. In the opinion of the Fathers the Cross is the Origin. in Exodus cap.
15. homil. 6.
terror of the devil, and an Lactan. lib. 4 cap. 26.27.
impregnable wall against him: So that they used the Cross Sozom. lib. 5. ^ap.
2.
themselves when they were in any danger. Last of all, in the opinion of the
Fathers the Cross is so necessary, as that he is to be made Tertul. de coron.
milit.
coming and going, sitting Cyrill. Hierosol. Catechis. 4.13.
and standing; even ( ad Hieron. epistol. ad Demetriad and ad Eustach.
omnem incessum) at every stop, and ad omnem actum, in every action that we
do. One Xystus Betulei in Lactant. de sapien. li. 4. ca. 27.
Papiste is found, who says, the Fathers meant not of the outward sign, but
of the thing signified, which is Christ's death. It is well, that we have this
confession from him that the Fathers cannot be justified in case they mean
the outward sign, which they mean undoubtedly, or^els our Opposites do us
great wrong, who object the Fathers against us in the outward ceremony of the
Cross: as also our writers be deceived, who spare not to censure the Fathers
of Magdeburg. centur. 4. tit. de rit. Doct. Fulke reioynd. art. 3. page 158.
and cont. Saund. de imagine. cap. 13. S^^ltes, mudiull. Lactant. cap. 12.
Superstition in their use of it. I reckon not here Master Hooker in the
number, who draws M. Goulart (as it were) by the hair to clear the Fathers
from the Superstition of the Cross which he does not; save in comparison of
the popish Goulart. in Cypr. ad Demetrian. Not. 51.
merit, and Idem. in epist. 56. ad Tibaritan. Not. 31.
enchantment, which afterward crept in. As for the operative power which they
placed in the Oily Cross he flatly Idem. in lib. de vnct. Chrysmat.
condemns them. Whereupon there follows in him that Apology of ours now
which is taken up of Augustine, non putandum est aliquid verum esse quia Patres
it a senserint, sed si per authors Canonicos quod a veritate non abhorreat
persuadere possint. What that in rites (though aunciently used by the Fathers)
his Idem annotat. in epistol. 47.
doctrine is that they ought to be abolished when they gather any leese of
Superstition; and that amonst these he names this very Idem. annotat. in
epistol. 56. not. 31.
sign of the Cross, which must now be left (says he) not only because our
times must be distinguished from theirs, (which Pamelius indiscreetly does
confound) but also because of the gross Idolatries and Superstitions to which
since it has been abused. And thus far of the sin of our borrowing.

#Sect. 12. The Cross is condemned as a superstitious ceremony: as
superstitious will worship, and for a superstitious Ceremony, and will worship
Sacramental.
Having examined our borrowing, come we to the sign which we have borrowed,
where that every man may see what a great catch we have gotten in him, we
araigne him first for a Superstitious ceremony. Secondly, for a Superstitious
will worship. Lastly, for a Superstitious ceremony and will worship
Sacramental. Concerning the first. The duties of a right ceremony (respecting
the Church) require an aptnes to edify the same through decency and order. 1.
Cor. 14.33.40. ve. 11.5.13. v.
Neither has the Church any authority to pass this bound, as within which
God has intrencht all humane power, to which our Pet. Martyr in 1. cor. 14.
Danaeus Aethic. li. 2. cap. 1.
writers do consent. Now how can our ceremonies in question be such, the rule
holding whereon the Divines of Germany stood against the ceremonies then
enforced. The Ioachim. Westphal. in explicat. sentent. e duob. ma. lis minimu^
Illyric. in. lib. de. Adiaphor.
ceremonies which have been abused to Superstition, can never serve for order
or comeliness: Because they will breed a confusion between us and the
Papists, and bring in Superstition, and in themselves are as indecent for the
holy spouse of Christ, as an harlots weed is for a grave Matrone? What that
these ceremonies that have been abused this way are vain and light, and hated
of good men? What that the introducing of them disturb the Churches that have
discontinued them? and set the churches that do nourish them in their boosomes
in a combustion of endless contentions? What that they stain many worthy
Ministers either with the slander of disobedience (if they refuse them) or
with the blot of inconstancy, if they use them? This very last (though it
seem little) is great unseemliness. For the laws which are made for
decency, prevent revealing of all nakedness in those that ascend to the Altar
of the Lord; and forbid the shauing away of any ornament of their head, Deuteronomy.
22.12 Exodus 20.26. 1. Cor. 11.5.
who are to stand in the presence of God, whereas these ceremonies yielded
unto, against former sincerity, both discover the weakness of present
inconstancy, and shave away (as it were) the glory of former faithfulness; and
that in and from them that should be nearest to the Lord. Secondly, a right
ceremony respects even the aliens themselves, and not the church of God
only; where his duty is to separate and make distinction. For we must make
the Lord our pattern, whose very civil ceremonies themselves serve to this
use, not only religious. Do the heathens eat almost none but swines flesh after
they have sacrificed of the kind? Leuit. 21.5.
the people of God must of all other abhor this meat. Do the heathens make
their pates balde, shave the locks of their beards, and make cuttings in their
flesh? The people of God must of all other abhor this guise. Do the heathens
usually reserve portions of the Sacrifices? the people of God must burn with
fire that is left, Exodus 12.10.
rather then leave any one piece of the Paschall Lamb unto the next morning.
And whereas he forbids them to marry with the Cananite; whereas he bandeth
them in eternal hatred against the Amalechite; whereas he barreth them to
admit the Moabite and the Ammonite to any preferment in his congregation: Deuteronomy.
23.3.
whereas he inhibith them to go back to Egypt the same way they came thence:
Deuteronomy. 34.6.
what does he else, but even in civil laws and all, draw (nay dragge as it
were) his Church from all co-partnership with aliens in their customs? Other
laws there are of his, whose use does serve to signify so much, as when he
forbids the wearing of diverse stuff together in one garment, Deuteronomy. 22.10.
Leuit. 19.19. Deuteronomy. 22.5.
the ploughing with an Ox and an Ass together in one yoke, the mingling of
diverse seeds together in one field, of diverse beasts together in one foale.
The abstinence which he prescribed from unclean meats, what noted it else but
holy pureness from all communion with unclean Gentiles? he is abominable that
wears apparel like the woman's, For that herein he confounds Sexes,
especially when he does it Decret. p. 1 distinct, 30 cap. 6.
religiously (for who will not think this worse, then when a woman of Nie.
Cragius. de reb. Lacredaeruon. tabula. 4. Institut. 6.
Lacedaemon does it in private.) How then is it likely we shall be excused, that
wear the apparel of the harlot of Rome, and use the sign of her Cross,
which is her chief cognifance, when arises a confusion even of Sects.
Lastly, consider the religious ceremonies themselves which were showed in the
pattern upon the Mount. Were they not set as an [ Iansen. Concord. Euangelic.
cap. 114.
headge] to make a pertition between the Church and the aliens? Were they not
ordained for a diverse Zanch. de cult. extero. fol. 392.396.
badge to sequester Gods people from all other nations? Nay, were they not
squared to be even a [ partition Rolloc. in epistol. ad ephesians. ca. 2. ver. 14.
wall] between the Church and the forreners that were without? Last of all,
were they not displayed for a flagge of defiance to make his people an Nichol.
Gallas. in Exodus 8.26. ver.
abomination to all other nations, and all other nations an abhominatio^ unto
them. For instance take the Temple it self (the warehouse and wardrop of all
the rest) which stands Westward contrary to the Eastward Temples of the
heathen; and that (which papists themselves can observe) ad Tho. Aquin. 1.2.
qu. 3 art. 3 respons. ad 5. Durant. de rit lib 1. cap. 3. sect. vlt.
arcendam Idololatriam. Whom shall we follow if we follow not this course?
Not the Fathers. For Epiphanius in the end of his book (says Bellar. de
effect. Sacrament. cap. 31.
Bellarmine) which he wrote against heresies, rehearses the ceremonies of the
Church for certain notes whereby the church is discerned from sects of all
sorts. Not the late Writers. For they condemn every Bucer. in Censur. cap. 25.
peregrina Ceremonia: every Pet Martyr in lib. Iudic. ca. 1.
ritus peregrinus: especially such as came in pilgrimage from Ibid. fol. 34.
popery to us, as coming out of the very stews. What that the light of this
truth shines in the hearts of papists themselves? The use of Bellar. de
effectu Sacram. c. 31.
ceremonies rightly constituted and ordained (say they) is to distinguish the
members of the Catholic Church, from the heretics that be without. Neither
Caesar. Baron. Annal. in anno. 303. p. 769
would the Christians have used the sign of the Cross (say they) had it not
been proper unto Christians and such as did discern them; yea make Pagans
angry with them. When the heretics called Monophysitae made the sign of the
Cross with one Niceph. Ca^ist. histor. li. 18. cap. 53.
finger, Innocent. lib. 2. de Sacram. altar. cap. 44.
Innoce^tius (to be unlike unto them) decreed this sign should be made with
two fingers. I conclude with the Lutherans: who notwithstanding their manifold
mixtures, when they contemplate the general duty of a ceremony, are forced
to give witness to us, Conrad. Schluselburg. tom. 13. in epist. dedicat.
We must not bear so much as a vizard of Rome (say they) in external
conformation of ceremonies. No not so much as a show of Rome in Ioh. Wigand. in
Synops. Antichrist, Roman.
ceremonijs sieve omnibus sieve aliquibus, sieve maximis sieve minimis. But we must
avoid (say they) every Math. Iudex. in lib. de graniss, mandat. ex eund. e
Babylon.
minutissimus Character of popery: insomuch that they much abhorred that
positio^ of the Adiaphorists touching the ceremonies which in their time were
controuersed. Quo propius Papae, eo melius. Let Master Bucer shut up all.
Bucer. in Censur. cap. 3. p. 460.
Omnia quae sunt Antichristi Romani habentur abhominationi, saltem quo ad
externam speciem, vtinam and reipsa poenitus. And thus sins the sign of the
Cross as it is a wrong ceremony.

#Sect. 13. The Cross is a Wil-woship, proved by three reasons.
IF we proceed in the examining of him, we shall find further that he is a
will worship, as he is used among the Papists, in which regard it is not
lawful for Gods Church to use him in his worship at all. The first reason is,
because it makes the Church participant with the popish superstition through
defect of Godly zeal against their superstitious worships. For ensample, The
Greek Chruch abstaineth from blood and strangled, not placing in it any
worship of Gods, but to obey the Apostles rule for order and for edification.
Does this excuse that Church? Censur. Oriental. Eccles. cap. 21. p. 393.
no, as long as the Jews use it for a worship they are Stanislaus Socoloui.
ibid. p. 460
held to Iudaize. From the Church of Greece, pass we over to Afric, there the
Bernard. Bridem. bact. peregrinat. Hierosol. p. 2. cap. de Abyssin. Francisc.
Aluares in descript. Aethiop. ca. 96.
Abyssini use circumcision; not as a worship of God like the Jews, but as a
ceremony which is decent for that imitation which is of Christ in it. For
which also they are baptized every Epiphanie the day on which Christ was
baptized as they suppose. Many such rites they have which they use as
ceremonies only, not as worships like the Jews, as these words show.
Zagazabo. alias Christopher Lichanati in confess. Aethiop.
Non quod ad salutem spectare credimus; again, non ob circumcisionem
gloriamur, nec caeteris Christianis nos putamus ob id meliores aut Deo
acceptiores, etc. From Aethiopia pass we to Germany, where shall we excuse
the Adiaphoristes, because they impose not their Pseudo Adiophora, as worships
of God, but only for ceremonies of edification? I hope we will rather join
with those constant brethren of ours, who thus replied: Confess. Theolog.
Saxoniae. aedit. ann. 1560.
Ordinem in Ecclesia decentem constituendum esse clamant, quasi vero antea sine
ordine in summa confusione ecclesiae nostrae vixissent. Indeed, have the
Churches no order or comelines that want the Cross and Surplice? Nay, have
they not more a great deal then ours, who are out of hope ever to come near
the reverend gravity of their rites, or the chaste modesty of their
assemblies? We use not the Cross as a worship (say we) as the Papists do
use it. By this our excuse we justify Papists in burning incense before
Bellar. de beat. sanctor. lib. 1. cap. 13.
Images, and before Missal. Roman. tit. rit. Celebran. Misl.
Crosses to the defeating of that argument which our writers make hence against
them. You commit Idolatry to Crosses and Images, because you burn incense to
them as the Jews did to the brazen serpent. Have they any color to answer
this, save this of ours, we use not the incense as a worship Divine, or as a
Sacrifice as the Jews did? which we Andrew. Willet. controuers. 9. q. 5. p. 1.
art. 4.
hold unworthy the answering, all while the ceremony is the same? If it be no
sufficient difference to use the Jews incense not as a divine worship like
them, how can it suffice for us to say, we use the same Cross that Papists
use, but not as a worship as they use it? How the Papists use their incense
before the Cross, I leave in the midst: their making of the Cross with
incense is thus described: Durant. rational. lib. 1. ca. 7. Number. 36.
Crucem cum incenso facere est Christi passionem patriostendere, and ipsum pro
nobis interpellare. What difference here between them and us? For we use to
sign with the Cross to signify the merit of Christ's death, they the Cross
(and incense withal) to signify his intercession by the merit of the same?
Secondly, though we use not the sign of the Cross as a worship, yet our using
it in Gods worship, gives occasion of will worship in other men. We may not
think but this commandment forbids all occasions as well as other
commandments do, and that in the Cross it self, which because it is an
occasion of superstition, it is to be done away in the judgment of our Calfh.
ag. Mart art. 1. D. Fulke reioynd. art. 1. p. 140 Exodus 12.15.
writers. Is it sufficient the leaven be not put in the bread of the Paschall
supper, or that it be not eaten with it as a part of that worship? No, it is
further required that it be not suffered so much as in the basest room of the
house. The equity hereof has feared our Divines from suffering ceremonies
less hurtful, least in the end they give occasion of a worship superstitious.
As they remove the receiving of the communion with the Bucer. in Censur. cap.
3.
mouth, least in the end it should breed an opinion of holiness in the
consecrate hands of the Priests. And the Ibid. ca. 4. p. 464.
reserving of the communion Bread and Wine to avoid the occasion which it
gives of thinking them holy, extra vsum, or changed in substance. The same
Divines of ours condemn even omnem speciem of the popish superstition. (even
August. epist. 19.
as Augustine long since affirmed: The man is thrown down into the dungeon of
the Devil, that observes a Jewish ceremony in deed or in show) so much the
more, because in this land, Bucer. in Censur. cap. 3.
Omnia sunt superstitione referta. This last clause wills us to be more wary
of show, when the people are ready to take hurt by it. I say [take hurt] even
as our Communion Book forbids the wafer cake to take away all superstition
which any might [ Rubrie. after the L. supper.
take] mark (take in it) in which wafer cake when was there put the one half
of that superstition which is now in the Cross? Nay the censure is yet more
strict, If we love Christ Jesus, Bucer in Censur. cap. 9. p. 472.
Nihil prorsus loci apud nos inuenient eaeres omnes, verba and gestus in quibus
vel appareat esse aliquid tantis impietatibus affine aut ad vllam rapiatur
(quanquam improbe and absque data causa) harum suarum impietatum
commendationem. Howbeit, in Cross and Surplice there is even occasion given:
first by that show of a will worship which is greater in them then of a Mass
in the Priests going up to the Communion table to say the prayers before the
Offertorie, which notwithstanding we have Bucer. in Censur. cap. 3. p. 458.459.
censured for [occasioning]. and through that representing of a popish worship,
which is as great in Cross and Surplice, as in the elevation of the bread for
ostension to the people which is condemned for Alexand. Alesius in proaemio.
leitourg.
a prouoker: And last of all, by the appointing of them to be used in holy use,
which is adjudged offensive even as the August. epist. 86. ad casulan.
appointing of a fast on a Sunday, it being the same day as the Manichees do
appoint, sauoureth too much of approbation. But there be instances fit for this
purpose even in the very Cross it self. Our Divines could not abide those
nigrae cruculae which were in Bucer. in Censur. cap. 9. p. 472.
King Edwards communion book to direct the Minister how to make Crosses on the
bread and on the wine. It is forbidden by the popish Missal. secund. vsum
sacrum in offic. peregrinor.
Canons, that any pilgrims should burn a Cross in their flesh. Wherefore? It
seems because they were to meet at Jerusalem with the Bernard. Bridenbac.
peregrinat. Hierosol. p. 2. de Abyssen. Pet. Bellan obseruas. li. 2. ca. 85.
Aethyophians and the Danaeus de haeresib. cap. 97.
Iacobites with others, who in their baptism burn some one, some two, some tree
crosses with an hot iron in the forheades, in the cheeks, and above the noses
of their children. By proportion from hence we may not figure the Cross in
baptism because they figure it as they burn it not, because the superstitous
burn it. Let the Germane Divines shut up all: who alleged against the
Surplice and other ceremonies the^ enforced, that al Lib. Concord. apud.
Conrad. Schluselburg. tom. 13. P. 751.
shadow of show was to be shunned with popely.

#Sect. 14. The holiness and necessity of the Cross, cause it to smell very
ranckely of superstition.
NOw this participation and this occasioning is much advanced by the rank
savor which the Cross has amongst us, both of that holiness and of that
necessity which are propet to a worship. What faults find we in a popish
ceremony, but only these Bellar. de effect. Sacrament. cap. 31.
two when it is made a worship by them. But now a rank savor of these two
cleaves as closely to the Cross unto this hour, as did the leap rosy of
Gehazi unto his seed. Begin we with the former, first how near are we to the
yoke of fellowship with them in the efficient of the Crosses holiness. For when
they recite what does make an Image holy, and a Cross, they Suar. tom. 1. in.
Tho. disput. 54. sect 4.7.
name antiquity, and the authority of holy persons that have used it, and the
presence of God that has wrought miracles by it, and the benediction of the
church. In which who hears not the very sound of our home pulpits? which
declaime before the people how ancient the sign of the Cross is: How much
reckoning the Fathers made of it? What miracles God has wroght by it? and how
devoutly our Church has sanctified it to be a mean whereby to dedicate our
seed to him that dyed upon the tree thereof? But they say that the Cross has
power against Satan Ibid. disput. 56. sect. 3.
ex diuina institutione. and that it is holy by way of Bellarm: quo supra.
impetration, for that God hears his Church when she does bless it. But what
if in the former by divine institution they mean naught else but Apostolical
use? then so many of our Opposites concur with them, as hold the Cross to be
Apostolical. As for impetration, are we not told of Gods assistance to our
Church, as if the Cross must needs be good because the Church ordains it?
But our Church does not ordain the Cross in so vile manner as the popish. As
if there were not too great an agreement between the Armenians and the Romans,
because the Armenians do consecrat the Cross in so vile manner as that the
papists Vazq. de adorat. li. 3 disput. 2. cap. 1.
themselves detest it? Secondly, how near are we to the right hand of
fellowship with them in the condition of the Crosses holiness, seeing they well
near agree with us in what we speak against it, we with them in what they
speak for it. We put no holiness in the Cross (say our Opposites) f so
Harding: we put no holiness in the Surplice: so the Council of Trent. Council.
Trident. seff. 25.
you must put no virtue nor holiness in Images. So the Jesuit, Vazq. de adorat.
li. 2 disput. 6. cap. 2. and lib. 3. disput. 1. ca. 2
There is no holiness in any dead thing, but only in relation to some what, Cui
sanctitas primario conuenit. As when Jacob says, This place is holy, he
means no sunctitie in the earth, but a relative holiness in respect of Gods
presence who appeared there. On the other side, in relation to Christ and his
death, and to Gods and the Churches ordinance the Cross is holy says the
papiste. So do our Opposites call the Cross [ Ric. Hook. li. 5. ca. 65.
an holy Crosse] and the holy sign of Christ. Now I would feign know, what
relation there is in it which by the Principles of our Religion can advaunce it
to this style? Is relation to our Churches ordinance? but our religion
teaches, It is D. Fulke in 1. Tim. 4.
superstition to consecrat any thing to be holy in Gods service. Yea no less
superstition then that which God plagued in D. Willet. contro. 9. qu. 7. p. 5.
Abihu, when he brought into the Tabernacle holy fire of his own choosing. Is
relation to Christ's death? but our religion Idem. cont. 9. q. 5. art. 2.
argum. 1.
teaches that to call a Cross holy in this respect is plainly to cross the
holy Apostle who calls it cursed. Indeed a Vazq de adorat. li. 3. disput. 2.
cap. 6.
Jesuit himself will yield that as the Cross is considered to be but an
instrument of the pain of Christ his death, that so he ought to be as
detestable unto us, as the gibbet is to a child which was the instrument of his
Fathers infamous hanging. And what other consideration will our religion allow
in the Cross save this alone? For whereas the Papists count him holy, as an
instrument of our redemption which was merited by the pain to which the Cross
did put him, we totally deny that he may be considered so. Affirming that the
Cross was only used for pain and curse that of the redemption which came by
this curse and pain he was no instrument at all, upon no other ground save
this continue we still the ancient argument of the Vid Bellarm. de Imag. cap.
16.
Petrobrusiani the cross ought to be as odious unto us as is the Gallouse to a
child on which his Father hanged. Thirdly, we come too near the society of
the Papists in the act of the Crosses holiness: which is so vile, that it is
a fault even a louse off to follow them. For a man to Cross himself, it is
with them, Guilhel. Wideford. a dvers. Wickleph. a rt. 10.
actus Christianisimus: and the tradition of the Cross is with them perfecta
the very Queen of all other traditions. So that Wicklife is thought to be out
of his wits in that he thinks there may be sin committed in so holly an
Idem. a rt. 16.
act as Crossing. And when great Alphonsus chose the greatest duty in the
burying of a stranger, he set his servant to dig the grave to dress the
corpe and shroude it reserving the holiest part to himself which was to make
an holy Cross to set at his head, and is Panormitan. de dict. and fact.
Alphons.
commended for his holiness in so doing. Howbeit I doubt whither late
Inquisitors will commend him, who have taken an Siluest. Prier. in verb. imag.
new course to keep the Cross in request for holiness; to wit, the dead must
rather want the protection of his holiness, then his holiness be so debased, as
to be set by a graves sides upon the ground. For the same cause must women
kick the sanctification of the Cross at Rome. For as women were of old
debarred from access into the Temple of Simon Enagrius histor. li. 1. cap. 14.
Stellites, and by an old Canon from all ingresse in Capitul. Grecor. Synodor.
Collector. sanct. Martino. Bracarens. can. 42.
Secretarium: so least the Cross should be esteemed no more then ordinary for
his holiness, no Attillius Serranus de sept. eccles. vib. Romans page ^6.
woman must come into his Church but once a year, only the twentieth of May
which is the dedication day. No small preferment I tell you to be admitted into
the presence of the Cross, and to taste of his bounty; and to have the top
of his holy scepter reached forth unto you. The more is it to be lamented that
even in the midst of our own Church some should arise, to renew a great
part of this his credit. For as if Wideforde, Alphonsus, Prieras and the
Crosses Priests at Rome had a neast of birds amongst us lately floush and
now flowne, we make more ado about a Cross then about any duty else: as
if it were Actus Christianissimus, and preaching must be turned out rather
then it be dispossessed so much as of a babies face; yea deeds of mercy
themselves must pack, I say not to the dead but to the living; and not to
women alone, but to men also, yea to Jesus Christ himself; not only in his
members, but even in his Ministers. And although we hold the Cross can
preserve from sin in the very [instant] of the tentation, yet are we
contented to deprive our brethren of it, for we may not use Ric Hook li. 5.
ca. 65.
common crossing, least unhappily the sign should grow into contempt And what
other course can be taken for the holy things of God themselves? For no way
sooner can there be procured a reverence to the holy name of God then Exodus
20.7.
by forbearing it in common talk: to his Exodus 30.31.
Oil then by forbearing it in common use, to the fat or Leuit. 17.11.12.
blood of his sacrifice, then by forbearing them in common meat. And I pray
you what great difference between seperating of meats from common hands to
make them holy which the Mark. 7.1.2.
Pharisees did, and this seperating of a Cross from common fingers to make it
seem holier in the eyes of the people.

#Sect. 15. The Opposites first reply answered: which is, that the law
commands not the Cross as an holy worship like the Papists.
Four things are here replied. First, that the law commands it not as an
holy worship like the Papists; which helps not, unless one of our pillars
fail us, who has these words, D Fulke reioynd. art. 1. page ^140.
Also he denies that they attribute the virtue to the sign without relation
to the merit of Christ's passion. Whereas M. Calsh. speaks not of such shifts
as crafty Lawyers can make for their excuse, but of the opinion of the ignorant
people, who have thought without any further relations that the sign of the
cross was an holy, blessed and whole some thing. The pretense then of the law
(not commanding it as holy) is but a [shist] neither is it to be regarded what
use the Law allows, alwhile the use which does follow of the Law is awry in
the people. The second excuse denies the peoples abuse herein, which makes
our time like to the fourth age of the Church. Then the relics of Martyrs
were covered velamine pracioso, and thereupon too highly reverenced.
Vigilantius was grieved as at the reverence it self, so at this Velamen which
was Ioh Reynold. de Idololat. lib. 1. ca. 6. sect. 5. Ezech. 16.16.
illecebra ad Idololatriam, as well he might, the scripture condemning the
latae maculae wherewith the high places were interstinclae, and the versi
colores vestes wherewith the Idols were operta for that they provoked to
spiritual fornication, even as in the adultery bodily all inticements are
forbidden, as Quid est (says one) in capite feminae Corona quam formae laena,
quam conflatio illecebrae? It pleases Hierome then to gainstand Vigilantius
defending this illecebra, Terrul. de coron. milit.
and denying such abuse to follow as was objected. How truly an Gaudent.
Brixian. tract. 4. in Exodus
indifferent man shows, who living in the same time confesses that diverse
by occasion hereof, parentalia mortibus sues sacrificabunt. Like stands the
case of the controversy about popish relics now. The Law and the holy use
they have amongst us (as a precious covering breeds in the many to high an
opinion of holiness in them, and of whole popery to which they belong. Hereupon
we are grieved at them, desiring the remouall of this illecebra from them, we
feel herein the resistance of diverse Hieromes in our Church, whose chief
argument is a denial of the abuses which we object. Our plea is just, these
Hieroms having no experience of these abuses, as living either in contemplation
(it may be at some University) or being otherwise busied (as they who live in
Palaces) are not to be heard against those who like Vigilantius and Gaudentius
see them daily with our eyes, hear them with our ears, yea (in a manner)
feel them palpable with our hands. Is it not common to sewe read Crosses
under the shrewdes of the dead over right the heart? to lay white Crosses upon
the bear, let the Minister forbid the same with never so great vehemency? to
make courtesy down to the ground, while the Minister is making of it on the
forehead of the child? or to kiss the hand or bend the body toward it?
Lastly to set it over the door to hallowe the whole house? It begins also
to appear openly in the boosomes and breasts of many, whence Hieron. in Math.
23.
Hierome himself once threw it out. I omit to stir this sink any further.
In the time of Gregory the thirteenth, Richard Atkins Supplem. ad Cronolog.
Ioh. Crispin. in Gregor. 13
Englishman catched at the host, as it was carried in the street at Rome, to
tear it down: but missing, he was judged by the people to have catched at
the holiness of it, whereby he escaped. The like devotion remaining in them at
this day when they see he Law command us to scrape a Cross in the childs
forehead that is Baptized, will they not imagine we even scratch (not catch
only) after the holiness of this sign? The third excuse is, that if the
Cross be so abused the way is to remedy the abuse, the Crosses honor being
preserved notwithstanding. This galopeth apace toward that of Bellar. de
eccles: triumph li. 2. cap. 4.
Bellarmine, Non quia pauci nimium cultum praestant, ideo omnis cultus
abolendus, and toward that which Sadolet. lib. epist. 4. epist. 1. and 2
Sadolet once replied to Erasmus, wishing the remouall of certain pictures,
because of the abuse which followed of them, seeing it was only nimium quid
quod in ijs subaccusari posse videatur opinionibus studijsque populi non est
obsistendum. Our Ioh. Reynold. de Idolol it. lib 1. ca. 2. sect. 7.
writers stand for a remouall to remedy this [nimium quid] and so by
consequent turn Cross and Surplice out of door for the opinion of too great
holiness that is had of them. Suppose this opinion be denied in the people, no
color at all to deny it also in the Papist, for whose sake we are to leave
them; by the example of our Lord: who therefore refused to conform to the
ceremony of washing hands because he saw the Pharisees put an holiness in it.
Marc. 7.2.4.
This is that which an Harmon. confess. sect. 17. ex confess. August. p. 222.
whole Church says, semper illi ritus abijciendi sunt, quibus assuunt
aduersarij opiniones falsas, ne confirmentur vitiosi cultus. The fourth excuse
is, That ancient Laws have provided for the holy esteem of the Cross, and
punished the contrary contempt thereof. Constantine to honor the Cross,
forbad malefactors should be crucified. Not to honor the Cross, say I, but to
honor Christ. The words of the Sozom. lib. 1. ca. 8. Tripartir. histor. li. 1.
cap. 9.
story going thus: Least any in their deserved punishments should be equalled
unto Christ. The like Law made by Cod. li. 1. tit 12. leg. 10.
Honorius shows the like; who forbad the Jews to burn any Cross, or any
other sign of Christ in contempt of him. p Julian is abhorred for tearing the
Cross from the Imperial standard. The Conrad. Lutzenb. in verb. Templar.
Templars detested for spitting on the Cross. John Genebrad. in an. 826.
the twelfth, condemned in a Synod at Rome, because he used not to Cross
himself, and all deservedly, because it was out of a most wicked despite of
Christ and in prophanes that they did it. But God have rewarded them that have
reverenced the Crosses holiness? As Gregor. Turonens. li. 5. ca 19. Paul.
diacon. li. 18.
Tiberius by name, who found a mass of great treasure under a Cross, when in
devotion he took him up that he might not be trod upon. But the history
tells us it was his former alms to the poor that was rewarded in this
treasure. I give instance of the like in them that use the sign of the Cross
as little as we our selves do wish; I mean the Protestants of Co^menta. de
stat. religion. Reg. Gal.
Beziers in France, who as they were digging the foundation of a Church, found
a table of silver in time of extremity when they wanted pay for their
soldiers: But it was the Cross that kept Tiberius his treasure. And it was an
Image with a brazen head in Apulia, having this written about it: Platina. in
vit. Leonis 9.
Calendis Maij sole orient aureum caput habebo, that kept an huge mass of
treasure for a long season. Robertus Guiscardi ransacking the country, was he
that discovered it in the midst of a thicket; but it was a Saracen by the
help of the Devil that found out the meaning of the inscription to be this:
that in the Calends of May, at Sun rising the shadow of the Images head where
it lighted on the ground, should have great treasure of gold underneath it. But
to return to our purpose, when will our D. Rabing upon a. commandem.
Reverend Fathers return to their old inuectiues against the holiness of
crossing? Our children to the doctrine of their Fathers which is that the
Cross D. Fulke ag. Saund. of imag. cap. 13. D. Willet. contro. 9.^.5. art. 1.
must be removed as the serpent was broken before the opinion of his holiness
will out of the flesh, both Fathers and children to the ancient zeal which
has been showed from time to time against the holy things of aliens? When the
Sheep and the Oxen were holy in Nichol. Galalius in Exodus 8.26.
Egypt, the people of God must put them to such use in sacrifice as will
debase them. No use (then) of the holy Cross and Surplice is now pleasing to
the Lord, but that which most will deseyze them of this honorable estimation;
And such is the first smatch of popish leaven in Cross and Surplice, to wit,
such a twange of holiness as is proper to a worship.

#Sect. 16. The second pretense for defense of the Cross, is necessity.
THe second is an other property which also does pertain to a worship, and
that is [Necessitie] Here the Rhemist. Annotat. 2 Thessalonians. 2. sect* 17.
Papist reckons the Cross not only among such traditions as are necessary to
salvation, but also among such as are principal parts of faith. It being so,
we are much in fault to dwell so near them as we do, there being almost no
pretense which their necessity admits not as well as ours; no blame which
our necessity incurreth not as well as theirs. Touching the first, what are we
able to say for our selves more then this, that we command it in Baptism not
[tanquam necessarium] but oblige the conscience in respect of the Magistrates
commandment only, not in respect of the rite it self. As though the Papists
command it otherwise? Seeing in baptism they confess it is not necessary
perse, it must be confessed they command it there in the very same manner that
we command it; as also all the rest of their rites. Thus Aquinas, Tho. Aquin.
2.2. qu. 147. art. 4. respons ad. 1.
statuta Ecclesiae sunt de his quae non per se sunt de necessitate salutis, sed
solum ex institutione Ecclesia. Neither fish nor flesh of it self does
defile (say the Rhemist. in Math 15 sect 5.
Rhemistes) but a breach of the Churches precept defiles. They who hold the
single life of Ministers to be indifferent, describe the necessity of it in
such terms of not Tho. A. quin. 2.2. qu. 88. art. 11.
essentialiter sed ex statuto Ecclesia. accidentaliter, of not absolute ratione
ordinis, sed ex statuto Ecclesiae. of not Durand in 4. distinct. 37.qu.1.
Caietan. opulcul. tom 2. tractat. 31.
absolutely loquendo and seclusis legibus Ecclesiasticis: as that a Protestant
him self cannot devise better to show that the Cross is not necessary of it
self, but as authority does command it. Is not the Cross a Satramentale?
And how command they their Sacramentalia, but as we now the Cross? Carol.
Bouius. in schol. in Clement. li. 7 ca. 44. Bellar. de effect. Sacrament. cap.
21. proposit. 2
not ex necessitate Sacramenti, sed ex necessitate praecepti: not Durant de
rit. lib. 2. cap 27.
ex necessitate Sacramenti, but ex necessitate ministantis Sacrame^tum. Last of
all, Alexand. ab Alis apud Thesang. Theolog. p. 4. qu. 12.
not ex necessitate faciendi, but ex necessitate facientis only. And what the
very Cross it self, Bellarm. de verb. non. script. lib. 4. ca 7.
Quaedam etsi ex se, etc. some things there are which although they be not
necessary of them selves, yet after they be commanded, they be so necessary
as that if purposely they be omitted, men grievously sin. of which sort is
the sign of the Cross in consecrating the water, etc. We have the Cross then
made necessary in popery no otherwse then we our selves do make it
necessary, and yet our Francisc. Iun. cont. Bellar. ibid. not. 29. Math. 15.2
writers bend them selves against the necessity of it, even after this manner
introduced. So did our Savior stand out against the necessity of washing
hands, though pressed upon him by virtue of the Elders commandment, and of
the order of the Church: When Peter conformed to the Jews ceremonies, he did
it Hieron. apud. Augustine. epist. 11.
consuetudine solemnitatis, non necessitate salutis, and yet he did ill. And
wherefore ill? because though he did not [predicare] that they were necessary,
yet his using of them did [ August. ad consent. cont. mendac.
simulare] a necessity in them. which also was so much the more faulty
because there were many who in error did [putare] that is, hold them to be
necessary. All while (then) papists and simple men hold the Cross to be
necessary as other worships of God are, it is no sufficient excuse, we do not
predicare and teach a necessity in him, our using of him does (simulare) so
much, and breed such error in other men. One example more: They that kept the
Passover like the Jews Socrat histor. lib 5. cap. 21.
pari ratione cum Iudaeis condemnantur, though they pretend a sublimior sensus
in their observation, because they did pedibus proterere their diverse manner
of observing by that bellum grauissimum, which they raised against their
brethren about the same. Hence any may collect, that our diverse manner of
crossing, saves us not from being condemned with the Papists, all while we
make them so necessary, as to make war upon our brethren about them.

#Sect. 17. We can hardly accuse the Papists of any abuse of the Cross,
because we abuse it almost as much as they.
WE have proved the Papists may plead as good a manner in their necessity
of the Cross as we well near in ours. Now proceed we to show, we can
scarcely accuse them of any evil in their manner, but we have it in our own.
What was said of old, non sunt Massilienses insipientes, eadem tamen faciunt
quae insipientes, has fit place here. Our Opposites are not Papists, yet do
they many things touching the necessity of Cross and Surplice that Papists
do, which we could wish were otherwise. First they wrest the Law against us,
which if it be such as they pretend, we could wish it were only a Canon to
direct, yea such a Canon as our forefathers were contented withal in the days
of King Edward, when they left crossing to men's own discretions. Rubric. vlt.
Liturg. Fdw. 6. apud Bucer p. 455.
Quantum adgenu flectionem, and consignationem signo crucis, eleuationem
manuum, tunsionem pectoris, and semiles gestus, liberum erit cuique sequi suam
sententiam. What binding laws were there made about ceremonies in the
primitive Church, whose ancient liberty we may wish for by the authority of
August. ad Ianu. 119.
Augustine, who waild the burthensomnesse of humane ceremonies in his time.
Even Agrip. de vanitat. scient. ca 62.
Agrippa, a Papist can cry out against the fetters and chains of ceremonies
which were not at first when the Church was free. As for our own D. Fulke ag.
Rhem. in 1. Tim. 4. sect. 8. Thom. Morton. Apolog. p. 2. lib. 2. cap. 9.
writers they are bold against the Papists to appeal to the liberty of the
ancient Church, when no binding laws were made about eating or fasting. That
which is in different, Hieron. in epist. ad Roman. cap. 14.
vnicuique in sua voluntate dimissum est, says Hierome. Let then our Reverend
Fathers suffer us to make that request to them, which a Papist thought fit to
make even to a Pope himself. Andr. Frisius de eccles. lib. 2. tractat. 13 in
epist. ad Paul. 4. fol. 542.
Quod si Adiaphorum sit, cur not liceat vtroque vti ijs qui velint? Nam
Adiaphororum ea natura est, vt eorum vsus and intermissio nemini prodesse,
nemini etiam obesse debeat: sed hanc illi Adiaphoriam aliter interpretantur,
nam and dicunt quod volunt and interpretationes afferunt quales volunt. Dicunt
Adiaphora esse quod de ijs litigandum non sit, sed quemcunque moribus suae
Ecclesiae vti debere. He that well considers these words, will see, though the
cross were indifferent, yet that the same course which is taken with us, and
the same interpretations used which the Papists take and use; yea that some
things also are said and done, which the more moderate sort of Papists think
to be more then needs. Finally, we desire our Opposites to remember that the
sign of the Cross has been [ Chemnit. apud Bellarm. de verb. non script. ca.
7. lib. 4.
ritus liber] even from the beginning [like to the praying toward the East]
which our Fathers were so far to exact with necessity, as that they have by
Law D. Fulke ag. Rastall. sect. 4. page 720.
abolished it for that conformity which it does bear with Papists. A second
thing which is done in the urging of the Cross, like to that which Papists
do, is the exaction of a [fidcs interna] unto it, by subscribing that it is
well ordained. This, has it not too great a smatch of that which Bellarmine
affirms of rites. Bellar. ibid
Necessarium est ad salutem credere, eos been esse institutos, and eos non
contemnere? Out writers blot our the former [credere eos been esse institutos]
which cannot be received but on Bellarmines ground, which is, that the Church
in ordaining ceremonies cannot err; and Ioh. Calvin. institut li. 4. ca. 10.
Harmon. consess. sect. 17.
leave contempt to be in the inner man, the only thing that is unlawful. And
as this is done by them, because there is no infallible truth in the Church,
for faith to rest on, so also because there is no absolute power in man, in
things rituall to [ Francisc: Iun. cont. 1 lib. 4. ca. 7. not. 25.26
Oblige] by itself and necessarily, for these things because they are humane,
they only oblige humanitus so long as no injury is done to the truth of God, to
piety, to charity, to simplicity, and to christian liberty. What is here
spoken of our liberty not to be injured, has this meaning. Whereas Philip
Melancton in the hurrey of Germanies Adiaphorisme, was wont to say, Melanthon.
epist. ad Hamburgens.
seruitus aliqua in cermonijs ferenda est. That the Hamburgens. epist. ad
Philip. loachim^ West phal. apud Conrad. Schiselburg. tom. 13. p. 254.
rest of the religion will have understood of the outward man only in body and
goods, not of the conscience which is not to be enthralled to any rite by man
commanded further then with grife to Pet. Martyr Amico. cuid. in Angl.
tolerate what is amiss. If it be further in England exacted, not only vt
tolleremus, sed etiam vt Chirographo tanquam recta comprobemus (says Baeza in
epistol. ad frat. in Angl.
one) there remains nothing else but that de innocencia nostra testati, et
omnia remedia intimore Domini experti, manifestae violentiae cedamus.

#Sect. 18. The third abuse of the confuted: which is, that the Cross is urged
of necessity without omission, even as with the Papists.
THe third thing which the urging of the Cross does, like that of the Papists
is the exacting of a necessary use without the least omission. This is it not
the very same with the Council of Trent, To Council. Trident.
omit any rite in baptism which is ancient, and which the Church commands
upon any cause or pretense what soever, is a damnable sin. This considered we
have little cause to make many words of a diverse manner in the necessity of
the Cross. Peter Martyr, was not ignorant of this manner, who yet affirms of
the English ceremonies, that Pet. Martyr epist. ad Hoop. episcop. Glocest.
quoad aliter facere non liceat, they were grievous and burthensom. Pilkingto^
in epist. ad commit. Le^cestrens.
D. Pilkington was after B. of Duresme, the manner of the English necessity
was not unknown to him, yet he writes that it destroyed Christian liberty:
for that; liberty turned into necessity, is liberty no longer. But the
Apostle (say our Opposites) the 15. act. 28 called the things [necessary] which
they commanded being of themselves but things in different. Necessary (indeed)
but how? not necessary as now the Cross is necessary whether he edify or be
scandalous, do good or destroy: but necessary secundum quid, so far forth as
then they served for edification and no further, witness Paul's practice in
the very next chapter. For though the Council had forbidden circumcision, yet
does he break their decree, and boldly circumciseth Timothy because he saw it
was the fittest course to edify. Wot ye then, what is rightly concluded hence?
That the Apostles themselves cannot absolutely command in things indifferent.
That things of themselves free become [ Chemnit. examine. p. 1. tit. de bon.
operib. p. 203.
necessary] to be used when they edify, to be disused when they edify not, so
that if the Magistrate be displeased for our forbearance of the ceremonies, it
is but scandalum acceptum. in him we forbear, to edify, and this is a
necessary duty to which we are bound. Indeed unless we do this, how can we
walk circumspectly without offense, Ephesians. 5* 15.
especially in the creekes of Idolatry, of which Tertullian Tertul. lib. de
Idololat.
inter hos scopulos and sinus inter haec vada and freta Idololatriae velificata
spiritu Dei fides nauigat tuta si cauta, secura si at^onita. The fourth thing
which the urging of the Cross does like that of the papist is compulsion
through threat of heavy punishment, and punishing out right not only the
obstinate and malicious and the contemner who only are punishable by the
Statut. of Eliz. before communi. book. 1. Cor. 8.9. and 9.19. and 6.12.
law, but every one who shall omit it howsoever. Ought not our godly
Governors to forgo their commodity, and spare their authority in so
general a perturbation of infinite consciences, as the Apostle gives
commandment, and example, Baeza epist. 12.
Number vero ista tami sunt vt propterea oporteat tam multorum consciencias
perturbari? Peter compelled to the Jewish ceremonies August.
exemplo only, and we see how Paul withstandeth him. When Eusebius. histor. li.
5. cap. 24.
Victor compelled to a conformity in Easter, how does Irenaeus take him up,
upon this ground: C^talog. fest. veritat. fol. 10.
That the observation of such things ought to be free? Charles the great
compelled to a conformity to the service book of Rome, but how dishonorable
was it to him? for he did it, Cumminis and supplicijs, says Naucler. generat.
22 Jacob. de Vorngin. in legend. Gregor. and Eugen.
the story. Philip. Mornaeus de Bucharist. lib. 1. cap. 8.
Alphonsus the sixth K. of Spain compelled to the same book of Roman rites,
and how grievous grew he, and how burdensome to the people? who cried out, Quo
volunt Reges, vadunt leges: The laws must sing, as will the King. Bishop
Ridley enforced the Surplice upon M. Hooper, to the great regret of his
conscience, and of this rigor Act. and monu. in. epistol. annex. ad vit. Hoop.
repented himself a little before the day of his death. Certain Princes of
Germany to please Charles the Emperor, imposed the Surplice with other rites
upon the Ministers of their several territories, and are all condemned for
this, Libell. supplicator. Theolog. German. Anno 1561.
That they caused to sigh the spirit of God in the hearts of good men.

#Sect. 19. The pressing of the Cross confirms popish principles. The urging
of the Cross, establish a popish necessity, ex consequenti.
Fifthly, though our governors be not popish, yet by their pressing of the
Cross, they confirm the popish principle, Bellar. de effect. Sacram. ca. 29
ritus Sacramentorum debent esse perpetui: against which our writers use to
build up a contrary doctrine in Ritibus, Zach. vrsin. de Adiaphor. Gal.
2.12.13.14.
ne accedat perpetua obseruatio. Sixthly, though the urging of the Cross and
the rest of the ceremonies do not establish a popish necessity [ex professo]
yet ex consequenti it confirms it, both with the Papist abroad, and the
simple at home. Paul does reprove Peter, wherefore? because by his conforming
to the Jews ceremonies he confirmed by his ensample that necessity which was
held of them. The trin-immersion is a rite more ancient then the Cross, yet
when it grew necessary in the opinion of heretics, even Gregor. epist. ad I.
^andrum. indict. 9. cap. 41.
Gregory himself does abolish it, a man devoted otherwise to much to
ceremonies: whom, how many Pet. Martyr. de Imag. sect. 25. Hieron. Zanch. de
imag. these. 3. fol. 369.
of our writers cite to prove it a duty to abolish all rites which are held
necessary by the Papists? And a whole Harmon. confess. sect 17. August. confess.
p. 223
Church has said, when there is a necessity placed in a ceremony, we are by
ensample to show the contrary. Yea our Zepper. de polit. Eccles. lib. 1. cap.
11.
Divines consent, that when ceremonies are so strictly and precisely urged,
that trouble does arise about them, that then a man is bound to forbear, to
give notice by his ensample against the necessity which might be conceived in
the^. Say not here, no necessity can be conceived in the ceremonies
controuersed, because the authority that does urge them, does openly profess
the contrary. One of the Crosses proctors tells us: Ric. Hook lib. 5. ca. 65
p. 165.
in actions of this kind we are more to respect what the greatest part of men
is commonly prove to conceive, then what some few men's wits may devise in
construction of their particular meaning. Now what the people are prone to
conceive is evident, Chemnit. exam. p. 1. tit. de rit. Sacrament. p. 38.
Vulgi persuasio. etc. The persuasion of the vulgar people makes the rites
devised by men, to be as necessary to the integrity and efficacy of the
Sacraments, as those which God himself has ordained. What two is put to this
persuasion by the practice of authority, is (indeed) more evident then can be
expressed. For when they shall see them so necessarily pressed, as that the
most respected preachers shall be utterly cast away before their eyes
(themselves and theirs) for not relishing this necessity: how can it be but
they must conceive that the men who bring this wrack do hold them necessary
in their judgments? Look not for large discourses about this point, never
were men able in the abuse of Images to allege more then known experience,
which has been always held sufficient, Bellar. de imag. c 1^.
adducit Caluinus experientiam qua docet in cultu Imaginum superstitionem and
errorem irrepsisse. Agrip. de vanit. scient. ca. 57.
Dici non potest quanta Idololatria apud rudem populum alatur per Imagines.
Gregor. Cassand. consultat. art. 21.
Manifestius hoc est quam vt verbis explicari possit. Who ever denied the o
sufficiency of this evidence? In the abuses (therefore) of these ceremonies,
our experience does suffice; neither will any reasonable man expect more of us
in that which dici non potest, which cannot verbis explicari: Neither can
teaching to the contrary help. If in part it could yet is not that sufficient,
as has been showed elsewhere already, to which these testimonies for a
surcharge may be added. Thus one of an whole Church, Chemnit. vt supra. p. 39.
Vtile est in huiusmodi Adiaphoris etiam exemplo libertatem oslendere. Th^^ an
whole Church of a private man, Harmon. confess. sect. 17. ex confess. August.
p. 223.
Cum hanc de cultibus opinionem, etc. When the adversaries take up an opinion
of worship then all men must know it is a good deed to cry out against the
same; and by the breaking of such ceremonies to show example whereby the godly
may learn what they are to think of them. So Eusebius writes of Attalus
commanded from heaven to command Alcibiades using only bread and salt, that
he should feed on common meats, Ne alijs errorem offunderet. Last of all,
thus one of the Illyrie. in lib. de Adiaphor.
Ministers who is to teach the contrary. Nec est, etc. It is nothing that the
Adiaphoristes say, that they have taken order that the people should be taught
the right use of the ceremonies; for such ceremonies ought to be appointed
which by their goodness may help the preaching of the word; and not such as the
word must daily have need to correct and chasten. The Apostle commands that
all things be done to edification, and not the Sermons only. But if in other
Churches example be needful, then in ours much more where the people can tell
what our Churches tenent is, but by the Preachers. Of which, some beat
continually upon a necessity to keep and observe them: and some roundly and
boldly affirm, that they are worships. For proof hereof, what need I go
further then to an University Act, where before a confluence and concourse of
people out of all parts of the kingdom, D. Foen. in comitiis Oxoniens. ann.
1605.
A Doctor incipient in Divinity publishes these verses.

In Domini cultu si quid medium esse videtur,
quod populi dubio, stat, cadit, arbitrio:
Hoc sacrosancta parens Ecclesia si modo sanxit,
Inque sacris cultum hunc si velit esse ratum:
Non erit hic cultus medius, cogitur ad illum
quisque: necessarius hic quoque cultus erit.
#Sect. 20. The Cross as the Opposites, use it, is proved to be Sacramental.
AS upon former examination we have found the sign of the Cross to be a
ceremony and a worship superstitious, so if now we proceed in examining, we
shall find him faulty herein also that he is Sacramental. What should an Hagar
do in the house, that has so long not only crowed against her Mistress, but
also crowded into her place? For first the August. cont. Fault. li. 19. ca. 14.
and in Psalm. 141. and 65. Bernard. de bono defenden.
Fathers called the sign of the Cross a Sacrament, yea such a Sacrament as
the Guil. Perk problem. in verb. Sacra.
holy water and Chemnit. exam. p. 2. ca. 1. p. 7.
holy bread are, which also were signed with the Durant. de rit. lib. 2. c 58.
sect. 2
cross and sanctified by it. Now the holy water has such an efficacy (says
one) Quae certe nisi in Sacramentis esse videri non possit, so that maxim
omnium videtur habere propria^ rationem Sacramenti hoc illustris ceremonia. As
for the holy bread wont to be given to the catechized when others did receive
the Communion, it was no less then standing instead of the Sacrament unto
the^, therefore it was termed e^logia and Durand. Rational. lib. 4. ca. 53.
vicarius co^munionis. What that the August de peccator. merit. and remis^i.
lib. 2. cap. 26.
cross with this Ibid. and in Regul. 75.
bread ministered was thought to sanctify like a sacrament, as these words of
August, show, Catechuminos secundu^ quenda^ modum per signu^ Christi puto
sanctificari? Howbeit the sign of the cross stayed not her ambition here:
Alan. de Sacra. ca. 5.
she meant to catch the sadle in self before she had done, that which in
Baptism she quickly attained, and with little ado, Perk. problem verb.
Chrism. sect. 2.
Our writers telling us that the Fathers who set her on cock horse, made more
of her then of the water it self of Baptism. The same gave power unto the
Cross to Cyprian. epist. 73.
perfect Baptism, and to Idem. de vnct. chrismat.
confer the spirit of God unto the Baptized. As for the former, chewe a
little upon these speeches, it may be they will tell thy taste how unsavory
the Fathers are in the matter of the Cross. August. de tempor. 18^.
With the sign of the Cross it is that the body of our Lord is consecrated,
and the Font of Baptism sanctified. With Idem cont. Pelagium lib 6. ca. 1.
the sign of the Cross is the wave of Baptism consecrated. By Chrysostom. in
Mat. 16. homil. 55.
the sign of the Cross is the Lords body consecrated: the Font of Baptism
sanctified, and all things whatsoever are made holy, they are made holy with
the sign of the Lords Cross. Cypri. lib. de bapt. Christ.
We glory in the Cross of the Lord, whose virtue works throughout all
Sacraments: without which sign nothing else is holy, nor any other
consecration that comes to effect. August. de sanct. sermon. 19.
With the sign of the Cross is the Font of regeneration made holy: and to
speak fully all Sacraments are perfected by his virtue. August. in Johan.
tractat. 18.
Unless the sign of the Cross be applied to the foreheades of the
believers, or to the water whereby they are regenerated, or to the Sacrifice
whereby they are fed, none of these are rightly performed. August. de
vulitat. poenitent.
The water of salvation is not the water of salvation, unless being consecrate
in Christ's name, it be signed with his Cross. Again, Ambros. de its qui
initiantur. Myster. cap. 3.
The water is good for no use of future health without the preaching of the
Lords Cross. But when it is consecrated with the mystery of the saving
Cross, then it is tempered to the use of a spiritual washing and of a saving
cappe. As therefore Moses threw the wood into the waters of Marah and made them
sweet, so the Priest sendes the preaching of the Lords Cross into this font,
and the water thereof is made sweet unto grace. Secondly, come we from the
Fathers to the Papists, who plainly Mart. reioynd. art. 1. Fulk. ibid. p.
141. 142
teach, that though it be not a Sacrament, yet is it like a Sacrament, for
which cause they call it a Sacramentale. Now there are two things (says
Bellarmine) wanting of a Sacrament. Bellar. de imag. ca. 30
First, he conferreth no justifying grace [ex opere operato.] Secondly, he
works not infallibiliter. But some say (and Cardinal Bellar. de effect.
sacram. c. 31.
Bellarmine seaneth that way) that the ceremonies which the Church does bless
(of which I trust the Cross is one) apply Christ's merits as Sacraments do;
confer their graces ex opere operato, as Sacraments do. Finally produce their
effects, infallibiliter si id vttle sit hominibus; and what need is there that
any Sacrament should do more? It is the Cross (says Durant. de rit. li. 2.
ca. 45. sect 7.
one) whose virtue shines in every Sacrament, the efficacy of blessing in the
imposition of hands, (and that is a Sacrament with them) depends upon the
sign of the Cross Ian Senius Concord. euangelic. cap. 150.
says another: an Tho. Hutton. ag. Devon. Minist.
other sort of them teach, that the sign of the Cross may supply Baptism,
and stand in the room thereof. Thirdly, from Fathers and Papists come we
down to home writers, who Lamd. Danaeus. cont. Bellar de cultu. sanct. ca. 7.
D. Willet. de bapt. q. 8 error. 15.
teach that every new devised sign, is a new devised Sacrament, and that a
Sacrament Pet. Martyr in comment. 1. Reg. 8.
and a Sacramentale be all one, as long as there is an outward sign with
symbolicall signification, and that the Papists are D Fulke repl. to Mart.
art. p. 141. 142.
sacrilegious in bringing the Cross so near a Sacrament as they do. In
regard hereof they cannot be clear that do use the Cross in a Sacrament as
we do. The Theodor. haere^. ^abular. lib. 1
Manichees did eat the meat, the dressers whereof they held in execration,
and are held ridiculous. As then we detest the Papists for dressing of the
Cross with the relish of Baptism, so let us forbear to eat of the meat it
self which they have dressed there, who should abstain even from the very
broth it self, of every unclean thing. When the Nazarites were forbidden to
drink wine, it was unlawful for them to taste of the liquar of the grape.
August. de haeres. cap. 46.
Augustine reprooueth the Manichees for that professing earnest hatred against
the wine, Isa. 65.4.
they would fill their bellies with grapes notwithstanding. Number. 6.3
Seeing then we profess hatred against the popish Cross, retain we no
longer this liquorishe taste of him in our Sacrament. They Council.
Aquisgranens. ca 63
that will not eat meat, must yet touch it, to show that they did not judge
it unclean like the heretics. Our use of the Cross in Baptism, if it be
not an eating of this Idolothite, yet is it at least a touching of it, whereby
the people judge it clean. August. contra. Penlian. lib. 2.
Augustine himself was carried away with the use of his time to think that
the Oily Cross in genere signacularum visibilium was sacro-sanctum sicut ipse
Baptismus. Will not simple men be drawn much more to think that the sign of
the Cross is holy as Baptism is, all while they see it used in Baptism?
Consider the water wont to be mingled with the wine of the supper, because it
was suffeted there, it grew at last to be thought as necessary as the wine. So
that the Conrad. Lutzenburg. in Georgian. Durant. de rit. lib. 2. cap. 27.
sect. 3.4.
Armenians and our Church are condemned as heretics for omitting the water as
are the Aquarij for the leaving out of the wine. What then? as the washing of
the feet was cashiered from Baptism, when it seemed August: epist. 119. cap.
18.
pertinere ad Baptismum, so now deal we with the Cross; whose first
Sacramental guilt we have seen, that it is well near a Sacrament added.

#Sect. 21. The Opposites saying the Cross is Sacramentale, is four ways
faulty.
THe second is that it is a Sacramentale, whose addition is found faulty of
four sins against the second Precept. The first consists in a
[Sacramentall power] from the ruste, whereof, is our Cross scoured? What
means this bleating then in our ears? Ric. Hook li. 5. ca. 65. fol. 160.
The Cross is an holy sign. A most effectual teacher, yea, there cannot be a
more forcible mean to avoid that which may deservedly procure shame. Howbeit
draw we near, and we shall hear more. Master Hooker being ashamed to apply
the text of Ezech. 9.4. Apoc. 7.3. to the sign of the Cross in that gross
manner as Jesuits do, fetches a windlasse which cunningly brings them at
the last to the very same standing. They mean (forsooth) no visible mark, but
security from that shame which uses to show her self in the face: whereof
shall I say, (says he) the sign of the Cross is in some sort a mean? since
he thinks it, he may very well say it, to make known to the world an
Amalekites beast is kept alive which should have died. For shall I say, the
sign of the Cross is in some sort effectiue of grace, if in some sort it be
a mean to secure from confusion everlasting? And how do not these places
imply a mark visible, if they employ the Cross for a mean of the safety that
they promise? Howbeit draw we near, and we shall hear yet more. He is not
ashamed to cite a sentence of Cyprian, who says, the Cross does purisie the
forehead. Yea keep it pure from the Garland of Satan, in the same sort that
the Sacrament of the Supper keeps pure the mouth from the scraps of Idols.
Now how comes it to pass, that M. Hookers forcible mean to keep foreheads
from shame, has so foully deceived his Master? leaving his own forehead so
void of shame, as to justify this purifying of foreheades by the Cross, and
this keeping pure? But he has made some recompense (you will say) in the
second allegation out of Tertullian, which for very shame of the forehead is
shuffled (as it were) out of the rank, to stand in the margin. No this was
policy, because he shows his horns too openly, and bleateth the Amalekitish
Idiom too broad. If it had been shame he would not have brought him into the
field: he being burnt in the ear as a Rogue of Montanus by the bench of all
our Whitak. contro. 1. q. 6. cap. 12 fol. 443. Chemnit. exam. p. 30 de tradit.
fol. 94.
writers. One of whom thus: Tertullianus de resurrectione carnis, etc.
Tertullian in his book of the resurrection recites Unction, signing with the
Cross, and the imposing of hands, for the ceremonies of Baptism. Neither does
he only ascribe unto them decency and signification, but efficacy also. For
he says, the flesh is anointed, that the soul may be sanctified. The flesh
is signed that the soul may be fenced; the flesh is shadowed with imposition
of hands, that the soul may be enlightened with the spirit: and that these are
Montanicall, it may be gathered by this that he adds in the same place,
serophagias sordes corporis monogamiam quae montanita esse certum est. But
Master Hooker does not mean he saves from shame, purifieth the forehead, and
fenceth the soul ex opere operato, as does the Papist: but ex opere operamis
only, as he sturreth up meditation, and consideration, or (to speak in his
own language) imagination, which happily are a sleep without it. He
differreth (in deed) that the papist gives unto the Cross, a power ex opere
operato against the Devil which he gives not, as for the grace which
sanctifies, some papists give no more power to the Cross then does Master
Hooker for ought I see, for he makes it powerful (as a mean) which God
blesses to the inward stutring up of the mind: and what does S^^ph. Garden.
in epist. ad Ridley.
Steven Gardener him self give more to the Cross or to holy water, or to any
thing in their imagined power of sanctifying? Does not a Vazq de adorat. li. 3.
disput. 2. cap. 5.
Jesuit directly deny, that a Cross imprinteth any holiness saving by prayer?
Others (it may be) give a power ex opere operato in this behalf, but I leave
them in the midst, the point I drive at being apparent a power Sacramental,
to stir up the soul by striking the senses, is ascribed to the Cross, and
that very near in a popish manner against the doctrine of our Chemnit. exam p.
2. cap. de ritib. page 36 37. 38.
Writers who disclaim it.

#Sect. 22. The Fathers urge a necessity of the Cross very superstitiously.
The Papists more indifferent then they, therefore their authority of no value
for the Cross.
AS the Cross is a Sacramentale guilty, for the power Sacramental which it
usurps, so for the necessity which it chalengeth to it self, and that in
the Fathers monuments which we have chosen for our guides. For Mart. of the
cross. art. 4. Calsh. ibid page 92. D. Fulke in reply. art. 4. page 164.
Cyprian is cited to prove that Baptism has no effect, but in the figure of
the Cross. In the answering whereof we put ourselves to much trouble, unless
we yield that Cyprian meant the very sign it self of the Cross together
with Christ's death. Durant. de rit. lib. 1. cap. 19. sect. 12.
Ambrose is cited, the saving water of this Sacrament, is no more saving
without the Cross, then the water of Marah was sweet without the wood that was
thrown into it. August. is cited to prove no Sacrament is perfected rite
without the Cross, which whether it be as much as recte in his judgment or
no, it is not much material. As for the Papists their necessity is better
espied by their practice and by their preaching, then by their schools and by
their writings which are more crafty. Here of late they have scattered abroad
many pamphlets in rithme after the example of the old Sozom. hist. lib. 8. cap.
Socrat. hist li. 6. cap. 8.
Arrians. Now one of their Ballades runs thus.

The Lament. of the Cross to the tune of the L. Courtn^is dumpe.
Without the Cross S. Augustine says,
Read him, and you may see.
No man is steadfast in the faith,
No Christened well may be.
No Sacrifice, no holy Oil,
No washing in the Font,
Nor any thing can thee assoyle,
if thou the Cross do want.
Christ crucified he does affirm,
When that he rose from death,
Has left his Cross here after him,
For to increase our faith.
Children by it have Christendom,
The water blessed also:
The holy Ghost appears to some,
And gifts of grace bestow.
When that this Cross is made aright,
Of them that hallowed be:
Where it is not, there wants might,
For ought that I can see.
Saint Chryso stome in likewise,
Per swades himself herein:
And says by this a man does rise,
From death and deadly sin.
The Cross is at our birth, says he,
And where that we be fed:
The Cross it is most meet perdie,
When that we shall be dead.
For this necessities sake the rule is to be held, which is delivered by one of
our writers, which he inclusiuely means of the very Cross it self, which
he did not rehearse among the tolerable rites of the Fathers of which he had
spoken before: Quodilla postea, etc. Whereas those ancient ceremonies of
baptism, Hieron. Zanch. in Ephesians 6. lect. de bapt. ca. 7.
which arose after together with others superstitious and frivolous which are
used in the papacy, have been taken away by our men, this was even necessary:
because of the superstitions which were introduced, and for the opinion of
necessity. Hezechias is commended for breaking the brazen serpent: which
(notwithstanding) was ordained by God; because the Israelites had begun to
abuse it. How much more then are our mento be commended, who have done this in
rites ordained by men: quanquam per se non malis quoniam iam plenae essent:
superstitionum. What (then) though the Cross were not evil [perse] by reason
of the popish necessity, it is to be removed after the example of other
Churches who have abolisht it: out of an opinion that it is a necessary duty
to remove all rites which have mounted to an estimate of necessity. In regard
hereof it is a fig leaf, covering no nakedness, which is tossed up and
down, The Law does not make the Cross a necessary part of Baptism, but a
rite only needful for decency and for order. First the harlot her self can say
as much for her excuse, for whose necessity notwithstanding our writers think a
remouall necessary in every of her rites. For the Master of the Sentences
tells us, that the Pet. Lombard. lib. 4. distinct. 3.
sacramentalia (of which the sign of the Cross is one) do not pertain, ad
substantiam sacramenti, but ad solemnitatem only. Tho. Aquin p. 3. qu 66. art.
10.
Thomas Aquinas says, that the Sacramentalia are not necessary, ad esse
sacramenti, but only ad been esse. Bellar. de sacrem. in genesis ca. 21.
Bellarmine says, the Sacramentalia are not necessary, ad integritatem
sacramenti essentialem, but ad integritatem accidentalem, and no more. The
Canon Law having rehearst the Sacramentalia, adds this, haec cum patrimis
non mutant esse sed ornant. Besides these general distinctions Tho. Aquin. p.
3. qu. 84. art. 4 ad. ^.
Aquinas says particularly of the sign of the Cross, that it is not
necessary to any Sacrament. Holcot in sentent. p. 4. distin. 3. qu. ^3.
Holcot, that it is not necessary to Baptism that which also is affirmed both
by Mart. in reply. art. 4.
Martial and by Alphons. de Castro. in verb. Baptism. haeres. 6.
Alphonsus, the last of whom reckons it an heresy to hold the Cross to be
necessary in Baptism, although he seem to miss in the heretic, which by
probability cannot be Ion Aurelianens. de cult. imag lib. 1.
Claudius Taurinensis, because he opposed himself against the worship of the
Cross; not only material, but aereall also.

#Sect. 23. The Opposites give that to the sign of the Cross, which is only
proper to an essential part of the Sacrament.
SEcondly, though we intend not to make the Cross a part of Baptism, yet we
give that to him which only is proper to an essential part thereof, and it is
sacrilege (says one of our Chemnit: exam. p. 2. tit. de tit.
writers) to give that, which is proper to a Sacrament in whole or in part to
any thing else. Our writers Calsh. ag. Mart. art. 4. D. Fulke reply art. 4 p.
166.
tell us, the oil is abolished, because it incroched upon the material sign
of Baptism. Now wherein does the oil more then the cross? Though to be a
sign be not proper to a sacrament, yet to be a sign [ Tho. Aquin. p. 3. qu.
60, art. 5. ad ^.
determined] in Gods covenant, is in part (at least) proper to it. Now this the
sign of the Cross has with us. Seeing the Jews (says August. com. Faust.
lib. 19. cap. 14.
Augustine) died for their ceremonies, how much more ought we to strive, pro
Sacramento, pro Christi Baptismo, prosigno Dei? We follow him and strive for
the Cross as for a Sacrament, and do we not (then) give it the honor, which
is proper to an essential part of Baptism? Is there so much care for the
purity of Baptism, as there is for the honor of this sign? If Baptism it
self were in question, could it be more egerly maintained then now the Cross
is? What that we give it even the office of an essential part or Baptism, of
which hereafter? Thirdly, though we intend not to make the Cross a necessi^ry
part of Baptism, yet we seem to make it: which is faulty by that council
which abolished the Trine immersion upon this reason, Council. Tolet. 4. can. 5.
ne approbare videantur hareticoru^ assertionem dum sequuntur and morem. And I
would we had no cause to complain of the effects of this our seeming. For it
is known that some refusete be Godfathers where the Cross is not used. Others
living in places where it is disused, carry their children where they may have
it. It has been known also that children have been rebaptized for the lack
of it. The people are in fault for this. True, for the sin, but our Governors
for the stumbling block, who though the Cross be mos haereticorum yet use it,
and continue it in Baptism, together with the sign of the covenant, as if it
were equal with it. For what course have we taken here to make it seem
inferior to it? It is thought the Priest is prejudiced in his order when the
Tho. Aquin. p. 3. qu. 8 a. art. 3.
Deacon is suffered to sit with him, or to consecrate in his presence. But the
Cross sits with Baptism and dedicateth our seed to God. The Damas. Pap. in
epist. decretal.
Cor Episcopus is barred from faluting the people, with the sign of the Cross
in the presence of the Bishop, but the sign of the Cross, not only saluteth,
but also receives and admits our children into the Church, in the presence
of Baptism. Cicero pro Cecinna.
Every King puts of his Crown in an others kingdom; every Act. and monu.
Archbishop lays down his Cross in an others Province; Leui. decad. 1. li.
2.
every Subordinate state submits his Mace, in the presence of a greater.
Whereas no man diuesteth a Cross, what should I say, lay him down or aside?
in the Kingdom, Province, or presence of Baptism; when the most part strike
to hoyste him yet higher. The Durant. de rit. lib. 2. cap 9. sect. 35.
Abbot is bound to wear a Miter of less ornament then the Bishop, that when
both be in place together, the Abbot may be known to be inferior to the
Bishop, whereas there is no order taken to make it outwardly appear, that the
Cross is inferior to the water. When there is something mingled with the bread
in the Lords Supper, all is marred, if the permixture be [ Tho. Aquin. p. 3.
qu. 74. art. 3. ad 3.
Magna] puta ex aequo vel quasi. When the wine is mingled with the water, there
must be [ Durant. de rit. lib. 2. cap. 27. sect. 3.
paululum aquae] and plus de vino quam de aqua. Whereas therefore in all cases
of emulation, the wise dome of man has provided sensible signs and visible
marks of inferioritie, we are to blame that in our use of the Cross in
Baptism, we ordain such a visible and such an outward administering of him, as
Baptism has it self.

#Sect. 24. The Opposites objection saying the Cross in Baptism is inferior
to the water, because it comes after, confuted.
NOt so (say some) we cause the Cross to come after the water, which is
acknowledgment sufficient of inferioritie, and a sensible badge of subjection
to it. First, this ill beseems our mouths, who cannot endure the Papist when
he makes the same excuse. The Cross (says Durant. de rit. lib. 2. cap. 33.
sect. 6.
he) which comes after the consecration in the Lords Supper belongs not to
it. We oppose against him, the consecration does reach to the whole
administration of the Sacrament, within which administration, whatsoever sign
is administered, it cannot but (at least) in show pertain unto it. Decret. p.
3. do consecrat. distinct. 4. cap. 76.
Ipsa responsio ad celebrationem pertinet Sacramenti, theresore it is part of
the Sacrament, says the Canon. So all while the Cross is within the
[celebration] of Baptism, it is [morally] a part thereof. For ensample, The
feast came after the worshipping of the calfe, and after the substance of
Idolatry. Yet because it appertained to the solemnity, the Gnate. Archetyp. in
1. Cor. 10.
Apostle not only counts it a part of the Idols service, but also such a
principal part as includes all the rest that went before. The Agapae came
Andre. Hipper in 1. Cor. 11
after the substance of the Lords supper, yet because they appertained to the
solemniye, the Apostle alleges the institution against them, which holds
only against such rites of a Sacrament as be added parts thereof. The wearing
of the white garment it self, vsque Beat Rhenan in Tertul de coron. milit.
ad dominicam de albis: and abstinence from washing all the week long, were
ever reputed to belong to Baptism, as well as any other rite, because it
hanged in the extremes of Baptismes solemnity. We accuse the Papists for
making Oil a part of Baptism, yet does it follow after the water, as far of
as the Cross: yea after the first crossing. Finally the worst additions in the
world may be excused by this shift. The worst addition in Bellar. de pontifi.
li 4. ca. 17.
Bellarmines judgment, is additio ad opus praeceptum, as if one household
should have eaten two lambs in the sacrament of the Passover in stead of one.
Whereas by this divinity of ours, there is a trick to eat two Lambs within
the solemnity of this Sacrament, and yet be guiltless: to wit, by eating one
after another. The worst addition which we meet withal in the Fathers, is the
bread and cheese of the Epiphan. haeres. 49.
Artotyritae in the Lords Supper, which by this Theology is lawful enough:
provided that the bread and cheese be eaten after the supper bread, and
receiving of the wine. Secondly, this excuse holds by that separation, which
it makes between the water and the Cross: Whereas (indeed) there is nothing
that marreth this whole ointment like this one fly (I would say plea) of
separation. What makes the fitches, tylles, tares with the like, which are
mingled with the wheat, that they make no addition to the bread of the Supper?
because there is no separation but id Tho. Aquin. p. 3. q. 74. art. 3 ad 3.
quod est modicum assumitur a plurimo. And what is the cause that the ancient
mingling of the water with the wine was tolerable? because the water became
one with the wine without separation, and was no sign of a diverse Ibid. and
Durant. de rit. lib. 2. cap. 27.
species from it? as one describes, Julius Pap. in epist. decretal. ad
Episcop. Egypt.
Qua copulatio aquae and vini sic miscetur in calice domini, vt mixtio illa non
poss it seperari. Let me hear (then) what says this excuse? I have separated
the Cross from the water? If thou have made a separation, thou have made a
fair hand: this very separation makes the Cross to be a sign of a diverse
species, and so by consequent to be an addition that is unlawful. And the
manner of this separation (boasted of) makes the after place of the Cross yet
worse. For, there being a word seueralled to it, such (for show) as the water
has, occasion is given to the simple to imagine, that the water and Cross in
Baptism are of the same sequence and consequence too, that the bread and wine
are in the Lords Supper. Indeed what hinders? For what though the Cross and
the water be diverse in matter? So are the bread and the wine in the Supper.
They make one refection in Christ, and so grow to be Aquin. p. 3 qu 73. art. 2.
ad 2.
formally one, these may grow to be one likewise, because they make formerly
one, inuesting into the Church. And does not the Cross touch the water as
near as the wine does touch the bread? The postation of the wine does not
prejudice it, therefore the postponing of the Cross does not prejudice it
neither. A separation of so small distance waggeth no corn, it casts the
Cross behind the water, but not below it. Never thought the ancient
Christians there was a sufficient separation between them and the Jews, till
the solemnities themselves did differ on Council. Laodicen. cap. 29. Irenaeus
li. 1 ca. 26. Epiphan. haeres. 30.
diverse days. So that, as long as the Cross and the water, our Cross and
the popish, are seen in the same solemnity of Baptism, the separation is
insufficient. Thirdly, so far is it that the Cross comes after Baptism,
thereby to be made morally at the least no part thereof, that it has in fight
the chiefest room and seat of credit, which the administration of this
Sacrament can afford. It makes much for the Crosses credit that he receives
into the Church, although it be out of the Sacrament, as the Torrens.
coufessi^^ August. lib. 4. ca. 9^ tit. 4.
citing of these words bear witness, August. in exposit. Symbol. ad Catechum
Nondum quidem adhuc per sacrum baptismum renati estis, sed per crucis signum
in viero sanctae matris Ecclesiae iam concepti estis. What credit (then) is
there done him, being set in Baptism, where we receive into the Church, and
dedicate to Christ which is the whole office of Baptism it self, and the
whole benefit that we reap by it. And can the oil and the lights be of little
credit though they follow after the water, when they are used to help to
receive into the Church? Gregor. Turonens. histor. li. 5. cap. 11.
Pontifex (says the story) prae gaudio lachrimans cunctos aqua abluens,
chrismate liniens in sinum matris Ecclesiae congregauit flagrabant Carei,
lampades refulgebant. Again, The Ring cannot have a more honorable place in
Marriage, then where the wisdom of man has seated it, in regard of marriage
solemnity, it is used when the conjunction is in making, in regard of the
party married, it is set on the fourth finger of the left hand, the Durant. de
rit. li. 2. ca. 9. sect. 37.
nerve whereof runs strait to the heart. But the very same place has the
Cross in Baptism, while we and Christ are conjoined together by our receluing
into the Church, we use it, and we imprint it on the forehead, Tho. Aquin. p.
3. qu. 72. art. 9.
ad que^spirit us direcle a cord ascendunt. Moreover, why should a subsequence
after the water make a rite seem the less, and a precedencie before the water
not make it seem greater, which yet it did never? August. de verb. Apostol.
sermon. 8
Non ijs sufficit quod inuncti sunt, festinent ad Lauacrum si lumen inquirunt
(says Augustine.) Whereof two ceremonies alluded to the one going before the
water (to wit the Oil) and the other coming after (to wit the light) this (we
see) which comes after, is preferred. So that from the ceremonies before the
water men always pass to them that came after, as in a progression from the
imperfect to those that be perfecter. There was an Tho. Aquin. ad. 4. sentent.
distinct. 6.
Oil before the water in old time, and one after the water: and which of them
was held the better? Sure not the oil that went before the water which was
Durant. de rit. lib. 2 cap. 20. sect. 3.
Oleum simplex, serving for the shoulders, breast and forehead, but that which
came after, which was Oleum principale confectum (scilicet) ex Oleo and
Balsamo, and which anointed in Vertice, which is the highest part of all. Once
more, When men would have the water in the Supper to be no sign by it self,
nor an addition to that Sacrament, they mingled it with the wine Durant. de
rit. li. 2. ca. 38. sect. 3.
before it was consecrate and not after: so that the place which may give
seeming the Cross is no part of Baptism, is to use it before the water rather
then after, which is the place of greatest ambition serving to perfect, seeming
to consummate all the rest that went before, as experience it self has tried,
and that in the greatest men. Thus Cyprian Cyprian. epist. 73. ad Iubaian
baptizati signo dominico consummantur, Thus Ambrose, Ambros. de Sacra. lib. 3.
ca. 2.
superest signaculum vt perfectio fiat. Thus Eusebius. hist. lib. 6. cap. 35. Cas.
Baron Annal. in an. 254.
Cornelius, because Nouatus was not signed, therefore he had not all his
christendom. Thus the custom of the whole Church, the Durant. de rit. li. 1.
ca. 20. sect. 8.
obsignation is the (...) the (...) even the vpshot of all the rest. The
Censur. oriental. cap. 3.
Greek Church says of the after complements of Baptism: to wit, the Oil of
confirming, and of the bread of the Supper which they put into the mouth of the
Infant that is Baptized, hic est finis omnis mysterij. It has a long time been
held by the Latin Church that the rites of Baptism which came after the
water, did make a Christian, and give Christendom, which none could have (it
was thought) without them. Illa Dionis. eccles. Hierarch.
perficiens vnctio facit perfectum, quippe diuinae regenerationis perfectio.
Tho. Aquin. p. 3 q. 66. art. 10. Durant ^^. supra.
Qui confirmatus non est, non est perfectus Christianus, nec sidem habei inter
perfectos. A place cited out of Clemens, to which there acordeth another
brought out of Rabbanus: Omnes fideles per manus impositionem Episcoporum,
accipere debent spiritum sanctum, vt pleni Christiani inueniantur. Evermore
then has the last place of the folemnitie of this Sacrament been a stage where
those ceremonies have showed themselves that would be esteemed the perfecters
and finishers of our Christendom. The water we see is powered on, and here is
not finis Mysterij. Neither is a man made hereby a Christian, no he shall not
be called a Christian by any nor suffered to sit among Christians until he
partake of the after rites of Baptism, and by name the Oylie-Crosse. It may be
some will think I will apply the former testimonies to the after rites of
Baptism which seem to belong to the Sacrament of confirmation. But let them
not deceue themselves. There was at the first no confirmation out of Baptism,
but it was within the solemnity of Baptism, that the child received the
water, the bread of the Supper and the oil of confirmation; Simon. Goulart. in
Cypri. de vncti. Chrismat. Carol Bonius schol. in Clemen. Stanisla. Socolouins
in Censur. Oriental. eccles. ca. 3. Perk. problem. chris. art. 7.
as all evidences and writings show. Have we not done (then) a great deed, and
with admirable wisdom prevented occasion of a necessary estimation in the
Cross? To wit we have set him at the latter hand of the water, as Peter is set
at the left hand of Paul Act. and Monu. fol. 241.
in the Popes Bull, I end with the title of the Canon, which does it say: of
the sign of the Cross after Baptism? No, but it goes thus: of the sign of
the Cross in Baptism.

#Sect. 25. A third fault wherein th'Opposite usurps upon Sacramental
offices.
THus have we seen how guilty this Sacramentale is in a Sacramental power,
and in a necessity Sacramental. Come we now to a third fault wherein he
usurps upon Sacramental offices which he bears in this Sacrament or unto
it. Touching the former; we rejoice (I know) to follow the Fathers, and so to
use the Cross in Baptism as they did use it; but there and in the other
Sacrament of the Supper which was August. in Johan tractat. 118.
signare Christi bona; which how can it be justified? For first as none can
sign a lease but he that has power to let and demise it: so none devise a
sign of the covenant, or of any grace thereof, but God alone that promises.
This the school men saw and taught, Tho. Aquin. p. 3. qu. 60. art. 5. ad. 1.
determinare quo signo, etc. It pertains only to the signifier to determine
what sign must be used to signify. But it is God who is the signifier unto us
of things spiritual by things sensible in the Sacrament, and by words
similitudinarie in the scriptures; therefore as it is determined by the
Judgment of the holy spirit, by what similitudes things spiritual should be
signified in certain places of the Scripture, so it ought to be determined
also by divine institution what things should be chosen to signify in this,
or in that Sacrament. I add to this the co^mentary added by a Cardinal.
Caietan. Ibid.
Aduerte quam, etc. Consider from hence how presumptuous, and injurious their
wittines is, which write or preach, or interpret the similitudes of poets or
some of their own, thereby to represent things spiritual. For they usurp the
office of the Holy Ghost, by whose judgment some things are ordained to be
figures of other things; and they vilify the sacred Sripture, while by such
fiction they give occasion to believe that the things which are in the
Scripture, are figurs by humane spirit, even as these which they have framed by
the dexterity of humane wit, so much authority is detracted from the figures
of the holy Scripture. I press here that God only is significans: that it
comes from carnal wisdom to devise any significations; that he usurps the
office of the holy Ghost that added new signs: and lastly that new signs
devised are so far from adorning the water of Baptism, as that they vilify
it and detract much authority from it. One maine ground of this doctrine is
mainly refused (I know) by the Bellar. de sacram. in genesis ca. 21. proposit. 2
papists, which is that no man may devise any worship of God: and another
ground is brought in place (to wit) the Sacraments of the new Testament do give
grace and none can give grace but God only: And therefore none ordain a sign
but God alone. How near our Opposites come to this Jesuit, all men may know
who hear them distinguishe, though a man may not devise an exhibitiue sign,
yet he may devise a significatiue, one such as is the sign of the Cross.
Alas to what poor shifts are these men driven! For we have heard out of the
school men already that God is the only signifier both in things and in words:
therefore a sign even quatenus it signifies must be from him. Nay, this cannot
stand before Bellarmine himself, even he therefore shall be their judge. For
though the signs of the old Testament be not in his judgment, exhibitiue of
any grace, but significatiue only, yet he says, they were all ordained of God
and so ought to be. Upon this reason (which now takes hold on the sign of the
cross, seeing we use him to receive into the Church) Bellar. ibid
etiamsi Sacramenta vetera non efficiebant gratia^ iustificante^, camen
introducebant in populu^ dei, at nemo potest determinare aliquid ad
introducendu^ incerta^ rempublica^ nisi qui author est illius legis and
reipublicae. Secondly even in the time of the old law when signs reigned, none
were lawful which were not showed in the pattern of the mount: the letter of
which commandment then the equity now keeps out all signs devised by man
which are not found in the pattern of the word. The signs which now man
devises, it keeps out the more strongly because they obscure the Gospel: for
nothing ought to be adu^brated now in the clear light thereof, say Ioh. Brent.
in confess. Witenberg cap. vlt. Ioh. Calvin instit. li. 4. ca. 10. sect. 14.
our writers. So that we thus plead against the oil (and the oil and the
cross are twins of one birth) Athanas. oration. 2. cont. Arrian.
Christus transsadit in nos vnctionem spiritus absque tali Ceremonia. Again.
Eusebius hist li. 1. ca. 4.
Christianinon vnguntur amplius per typos and imagines, fed per ipsas nudas
virtutes. August. aduers. Iudeos. ca. 4.
Christus mutanit vnctione^ carnale^ in spirituale^. No ceremony in Baptism
like to the oil, it goes beyond all the rest, in this that the smell of it
affecting the sense, Brisson. de spectacul. page 189. 192.
it strikes adeeper force and impressio^ into the mind. If therefore it must
vanish away, and the oil spiritual be only left, much more the sign of the
cross must be taken away, and the cross spiritual be left only behind, which is
faith in Chapter Jesus crucified, and patience to bear his cross. Whereas it was
an ancient custom ( Ducant de rit. li. 2. ca. 55. sect. 14
says a papist) to wash the feet before Bapt. the Church is now contented with
the thing signified only, which is internal preparation: why should not we be
then contented with the thing signified of the Cross, in consideration that
God has not abolished his own signs in this time of the Gospel, to give D.
Fulke ag. Saund. of imag. Ioh. Dearing. in Heb. lect. 2
man leave to set up others in their rooms. Thus August. August. de doctrine.
Christian. lib. 3 ca. 8.
Christiana libertas cos quos invenit sub signis vtilibus, interpretatis signis
quibus subditi erant ad cas res quaru^illa signa sunt eleuauit. Is it not a
singular benefit to be taught clearly without signs: which to understand some
Oros Apollo had need still be present with us to expound the^: what shall the
people of Egypt do with the Hierogliphicall letters of their priests which are
significatiue? plain letters Ioh. Bohem Auban. lib. 1. cap. 5.
are best for the^ whereby to write. So was it a benefit for the people of the
East, that the Emperor Anton. Gubert. Costan. Polyhistor. cap. 9.
abolisht the significatiue writing of the law by Notae, which served for
Compendiu^, bringing ina plain manner of writing, with out any such signs. So
was it a Genebrard li. 2. ann. mundi. 1791.
benefit for Philosophers that Aristot. abolisht the figures and numbers of the
Platonickes and Pythagorians reducing lodgike into such an Art, as proved an
instrument of plains in teaching. So was it a benefit (last of all) that
Socrat. hist lib. 6 ca. 3. Sozom. li. 8. ca. 2.
Diodorus Tarsensis ( Chrysostom. schoolm.) brought in a simple and literal
meaning of the Scripturs, abolishing mystical significatio^s. What then? very
bad service do our Opposites to the Church, to make way to a new servitude of
signs to be by man devised against our own Homil. for Whitso^tyd page 2.
law, which proves at large against all signs which the papists have brought
into Bapt. that no signs now should burden the church, save those which the
L. has left which are not burthensom. I end with one of our writers. Ioh
Keynold. confer. cap. 8. diuis. 4. p. 521.
To devise new signs, is to set the Church to school again after the Jewish
manner. This Jewish fashion how intolerable now it is, an other tells Chemit.
exam. p. 2. rit. de rit.
Quod vero praetendunt, etc. whereas they pretend that many things may be godly
and profitably signified, admonished and taught by those rites which are added
be me^, to that it may be answered, that figurs are proper to the old Testa.
Look what things Christ will have taught and admonished in the new, those
things he will have proposed and deliuerd not in shadows, but in the light of
his word, and we have a promise from him for the efficacy of the word but none
for the efficacy of figurs devised by men. But such rites as he would have
added to his word, those he has ordained himself.

#Sect. 26. Though the devising of new signs corrupt the simplicity of
Sacraments ordained by Christ: yet it hinders not but something is left to the
Church concerning circumstances, as time, place, order, etc.
THirdly, the devising of new signs corrupts the simplicity of the
Sacraments which are perfectly ordained by Christ: What (then) is there nothing
left to the Church? Yes, the disposing of the Zepper de politia. eccles. c. 12
circumstances of Gods service, as time, place, order of doing with the like:
and of the particulers of those things which the word commands in general:
as the profession and preaching of faith and repentance at Baptism, and the
applying of the element with prayers fit, beyond which there must nothing be
added as one of our Writers says, who after he had rehearst all these Zanch.
in. ephesians. 6. lect de bapt. ca. 7.
hoc est primum rituum genus (says he) quod and necessarium est, and solum
sufficit. Indeed when Christ said, hoc Theodor. Baeza. epi. 8
facite, he tied his church to his own signs, and to them only, as one thus
shows, Chemnit. examp. p. 2. de rit. p. 37 Mat. 19.8. 1 Cor. 11.23
Cumfilius Dei sacramenta ita instituerit, vt ea certis a se institutis ritibus
praeceperit administrari, valde ardua est quaestioan hominibus permissum sit
alios praeterea quocunque praetextu superaddere. Fourthly, ask the Fathers of
the primative Church, whether any signs were used in their days besides them
which the Lord ordained. For it suffices against every vpstart sign that ab
initio non fuit sic: because nothing must be received in a Sacrament, but that
which the Lord ordained as Paul wrote once to Corinth and it was xxvj. years
after the assention that he thus wrote. Whereby it appears, Bulling. de orig.
error. lib. 2. ca. 5.
Neijs quidem vnquam venisse in memtem auctiorem ritum Ecclesijs profuturum.
Now we are recalled to the simplicity of these first times well near by all
our Phillip. Moruae. de Eucharist. lib. 1. ca. 1. D. Willet. cont. 2, q. 4 p. 2.
writers. Some D. Pilkin. epist ad commit. Leicest. Ann. 1578.
of them wish that the glory of Christ may shine nakedly of it self as in the
beginning when it was purest: when all these devises of men were unknown;
Chemnit. vt supra. Bucer. in Censur.
Others will, that it be now as it was then, when in Baptism there was no
ceremony, but that which had express commandment or ensample in the
Scripture. As a man runs to the fountain (says Cyprian) when the channels
are defiled, so Cypr. cont epist. Stephan.
must we repair to the practice of the first Church which is the Anton.
Sadeel. cont. Mon. Burdegalens. art. 1.3
fountain of all piety. All customs which are grown up since, we are to
reject, be they never so ancient, not sparing the signs which the Fathers
themselves did use; whose ceremonies arose from an Ibid. p. 98.
evil root, which was indeed a fond desire to please the Pagans and the
Jews, proceeded with a mind not humble nor obedient, and ended in an evil
event. For God accursed this their presumption, and suffered Satan to Theodor.
Baeza cont. Balouin.
work out of it even Antich. defection it self from the faith. Fifthly, to bring
in ceremonies and to give them a signification, is to Hamburg. epistol. ad
Phillip. melanthon
conficere nouu^ rationale diuinoru^ officioru^, to the justifying of Durand,
yea of the whole church of Rome in all her symbolicall signs devised, if not
in all (the worst of which is not worse then the Cross) yet in the white
garment, the taper in Baptism, and the head veil since these were not abused
by them to operation, but were used for signification only, as we pretend we
use the cross. Our D Willet. de bapt. q. 8. error. 5.1. cor. 11.2 3. Mat.
28.19. Act. 10.47.
writers use to allege that of the Apost. What I have received, that do I
deliver: that of our Lord: Go and baptize, teaching to observe all that I have
commanded. That of Peter: Can any forbid water that these may not be
baptized, against the oil, the salt, and the spittle, and the rest of that
ragged rewe. I ask, are these scriptures forcible against these? then they
exclude the cross [as well] which is worse then these. And when Bellar. de
bapt. ca. 24
Bellarmine bids us cease to teach, we must have no other signs in Baptism
then such as the scripture warra^teth, or else leave out our cross, what shall
we answer him? Sixthly, we have on our side, all the Protestants down from
Wickliefe, not one of them but has fled to this bulwark: No sign must be
received in Baptism, which has been devised by man. It was Tho. Waldens tom.
3. de sacra. tit. 5. ca. 45.
Wicklief himself that set it on foot; Ioh. Crisp. Cronolog. an. 1400.
John Husse continued it: Ioh. Calu. instit. li. 4. c. 15 sec. 19.
Mr Calvin resumed it: Harm. co^f. sect. 17
whole Churches confess it: Magdeb. cent. 1. li 2. ca. 6. and cent. 2 c. 6. D.
Willet. de bapt. q. 8. error. 5.
All Writers make it good against the Papists. When Bellarmine excuses the
signs of his Church, and says, they are not advmbrations, because the
things that are signified by them, are res spirituales presents, and not
things that be to come: he receives answer from us. Lambert. Danae. cont
Bellar. de cult. sanct. lib. 3. ca. 7.
It is blasphemy to think, that any outward thing may be made a sign in the
Church of any thing that is spiritual, unless it be expressly ordained in the
word, and commanded by God himself to be used to that end. When the Monks of
Bordeaux affirm the signs which are added to Baptism, are an ornament to it,
we thus reply: Sadeel. cont. Monach. Burdegalens. art. 12.
Number igitur sunt, etc. Are they wiser then Christ Jesus, who has ordained his
Sacrament in so great purity and simplicity, and who knows better then all
the men in the world, what ornament was fittest for it? If it be but the
covenant of a man when it is confirmed, no man abrogateth it, or adds any
thing to it: what arrogance is it then to add to the institution of Christ?
Bucer. in Censur. cap. 25.
Master Bucer condemns them that devise, vllum signum invsum religionis.
Act. and monu, in hist. cius
Master Hawks (holy Martyr) I deny (says he) in Baptism all things devised
by man, as your oil, salt, spittell, etc. John Ibid. in hist. cius
Denlie (a Martyr likewise) the Punuch (says he) said to Phillip: Lo here is
water; we do not read that he asked for Oil, cream, spittell, or any thing
else. Hereby it appears, that the ancient Religion of the Protestants is with
us, that liberty to devise new signs is but a young wanton nouice, which the
licentious Adiaphorisme has begotten.

#Sect. 27. Though it were lawful for the Church to denise new signs, yet not
for religious use, especially where God has ordained signs for the same
purpose already.
SEcondly, though it were lawful to devise new signs, yet not where and for
what God has ordained signs already in use religious, as the Cross (we
know) signifies that which Baptism has already signed by the ordinance of
the Lord. Exodus 30.38. Leuit. 17.3. Leuit 10.1. Eccles. 3.14. Psalm.
For first it beseems us to acknowledge God so wise, in the sign that he
has chosen, as to hold it presumption for any to imitate him in devising of
the like. For ensample, None must devise an Oil like his, none an Altar
besides his, none a fire like the fire which he has chosen. Yea in his works
themselves he is not magnified as he deserves till we confess none is able to
come after him: and till we say, who is able to do the like? Secondly, when
man deuiseth new signs, the signs of God are Caiet. in Thom. p. 3 qu. 6.
art. 5.
vilified, as if they also were but from an humane spirit. Yea, as if they were
Chemnit. exam. p. 2. tit. de rit. p. 37.
minus idoneae and sufficientes: in particular, as if the water were not enough
even as our own Homil. for Witson. p. 2.
Law speaks. Thirdly, whereas man is carnal, blind and impotent, and yet a
lover of his own devises (no less then Pigmalion of his own picture) if he
should be suffered to invent new signs, they would be carnal and not
spiritual; dead having no power, they would be dark also, vayling the
brightness of the Sacrament, and yet more loved and delighted in, then the
Sacraments themselves. For ensample, Gedcon sets up an Ephod and other
ceremonies like them in the Tabernacle. For the Ephod as a principal one
includes all the rest (says August. in Iudic. li. 8.
Augustine) which made it not Ophra in very short time more famous then the
Tabernacle? So a Temple built on Joseph. Antiquit. It. 15. ca. 8.
Garezim (like the Temple at Jerusalem) ouertoppeth the Temple, and to what
fame arises a Temple which Onias built Aegesip. li. 2. ca. 13.
in Heliopolis, like to that of the Lords in Jury, abusing to his purpose Esaias
10. I will set up an Altar in the midst of Egypt. What need we go further
then to the very sign in hand? For no sooner was it added to Baptism and made
a sign like to the Lords, (there being abused to his commendation. Ezech. 9.4.
Apoc. 7.3.) but he presently became Perk. problem. in verb. Chris.
greater then the water which was Christ's sign, and that in the eyes of those
who so advanced him. Fourthly, we have here the judgment of the learned with
us. Ioh. Brent. in confess. Witemberg. art. 35
What say we to him that condemns all the ceremonies of the Mass that
signify Christ's passion, the same that the Supper signifies? Bucer in Census.
cap. 9.
What to him that condemns the staying of the child at the Church door, to
signify original sin, because Baptism signifies this well enough without
it? Last of all, what to all D. Wills de confirmat. p. 4.
our writers, who condemn confirmation for that signifying the same that
Baptism signified before, it robs the Sacrament of his honor? Let there be
considered what our John Wolph. in 2. Reg. 17.10.11.
writers have against the Altars of the high places, because they were set up
for the same use which the Altar had in the Temple. As for the cross, he is an
Altar fetch from Damascus and set in the Temple cheek by ioule with the Altar
of the Lord, which what is it else, quam Ethnicam suscipere religionem (says
Idem in ca 16. ver. 15.
one?) but to partake, say I, with the religion of that Damascus from which we
borrowe him?

#Sect. 28. And though it were lawful there to ordain new signs where God
has already ordained, yet is it not lawful to annex them to the holy signs
of God, as with us the Cross is.
THirdly, though it were lawful to devise new symbolicall signs, where the
Lord has ordained some already, yet is it not lawful to annex them to the
holy signs of God, as we see the Cross adioined to the water in Baptism in
the very same solemnity. Ioh. Calvin. institut lib. 4. ca. 10. sect. 20.
Master Calvin calls the holy water a mere profanation and repetition of
Baptism, and yet it is used out of Baptism. What (then) is the Cross used in
Baptism to signify the same that Baptism does? Is not Baptism the seal of
the heavenly king? and can any new print be added to the seal of a King,
without high treason? Rolloc. ibid. ex etymo. grec.
What that this heavenly King of ours delivers his people to be marked with
no other form or print save that which is framed in his word and in his own
Sacraments, Romans 2.21. and 6.17. It will be replied, there may be many fit
signs of one and of the same thing. To which the schole men answer, Idem Tho.
Aquin p. 3. qu 60 art. 5. ad. 1.
potest per diuersa signa significari, determinare tamen quo signo sit vtendum
ad significandum pertinet ad solum significantem. There is Typus factus, and
there is typus destinatus. A man may use the former to his private use, but
none the latter in use public and religious, God having here sole authority
to ordain the signs of his covenant. For example I give instance in that
sign which some of our Opposites object unto us was lawfully used by some of
the Fathers. The word (...) which signifies a fish, is at large (...) as it
is used in the Acrostich of Sibilla. What if Tertul.
Tertullian or Ambrose, or Brisson. de spectat. page 115.
Rupertus use the emblem of a fish to put them selves in mind of Christ and
of their duty toward him, whose fishes they are made by the water of
Baptism. For Ambros. de Sacram. lib. 3. ca. 1.
Ambrose may well infer, As the water of the creation begat fishes to life,
so the water of regeneration begat thee to grace. Fsto igitur tu piscis quem
saculi vnda non mergat: when yet he may not make a Typus determinatus of it in
use religious, and thereupon painte a fish upon the forehead of a child at
the time of his baptizing. Do we not cry out upon the Dove Durant. de rit lib
1. ca. 19. sect. 7.
let down of old upon the baptized (one of which I saw at Wickham not
abolisht some 25. years past) for a sign of regeneration by the spirit? Nay,
whereas Damas in vit. Siluest.
some say, Constantine set a lamb in the Baptisterie of Lateran, to signisie
our sins are washed away in the Sacrament of Baptism by the blood of Jesus
Christ, we cannot Hospin. de re templar. lib. 2. ca. 4.
savor it. and yet this lamb never had any such state religious in the
Sacrament as the sign of the Cross has now. Sure a sign in such manner
determined with state in Baptism, we can easily prove to have been abhorred
throughout all ages, howsoever in the particular of the Cross, the Oil, and
some other signs, God permitted the ancient Fathers to fail in heart, to
bring in (through their oversight against their own general doctrine) that
Apostacy from the faith which he foretold. For prose hereof, I begin with the
Agapae of the ancient Christians annexed to the supper; and so much the more
willingly I begin with them, because our Opposites prove by them the lawfulnes
of our adding of the Cross. First the Agapae were far more tolerable then
the Cross, they followed after the whole administration and the prayers
thereof, they had no state among the actions of the Supper; they were in
corporable into the bread and wine to make one banquet with them. Secondly, If
we may add the sign of the Cross to Baptism by the pattern of these
feasts, then may we add roastmeat or sodd meat to the Supper of the Lord,
after the manner of the Council. Constantinopl. 6. in Trullo. Can. 99.
Armenians, who added sodmeate to the bread and wine of the Lords Supper. The
Council abhors this addition, condemns it, counts it execrable. And
where as some feasts with the vessels of the Supper, the Council of Bracara
thus exclaimeth: Council. Bracarens. 3. can. 2.
Hoc malum and obstupenies deflemus, and deflentes obstupescimus vt illic
humana temeritas sibi epulum praeparet vbi sanctum spiritum cognoscitur
aduocasse et ibi esum Carnium crapulatus assumat vbi diuina visus est
celebrasse mysteria. By this we perceive how odious an addition of meat would
be to the Sacrament of the Supper, and (me thinks) our addition is worse. For
the Agapae are more ancient then the Cross, and they follow after the bread
and wine with greater distance then the Cross does after the water; and are
more homogene to the bread and to the wine then he is to the water. Thirdly, If
our Opposites will match the Cross and these feasts together, then must he
pack out of the Church. For the Carol Bouius in Schol. ad Clement. li. 2. ca.
32.
papist himself will confess that the Apostle misliked these feasts, and
quite Durant. de rit. li. 1. ca. 26. sect. 8.
abolished them. Known it is that diverse Council. Laodi. en. can. 28 Trullan.
can. 74.
Councils did forbid them in the Church, and the Canon Decret. p. 1 distinct.
42 cap. 3.4.
Law still keeps them out, when Paulinus could not banishe them out of saint
Faelix Church at Nola, he mourns thus: Paulin. Nolan. Natal. 9.


Verum vtinam suis agerent haec gaudia votis
Nec sua liminibus miscerent pocula sanctis.
Which is a president to our Governors to grieve at the Cross in Baptism, as
long as they see it there.

#Sect. 29. No outward sign ought to be added by the Church to Christ's
institution.
MY second instance is in the addition of the water to the wine of the Supper.
For as much as against this addition, and in it the former rule has ever ben
kept (to wit) that no outward sign must be added by the Church to Christ's
institution. Against it Tho. Mort apolog. part 1. cap. 78.
Master Morton alleges a Canon out of a Synod at Orleans that runs
thus: Nullus in oblationibus sacri calicis nisi quod ex fructu sacrae viniae
speratur and hoc sine aqua mixium offerre praesamat; quia sacrilegium iudicatur
aliud offerre quam quod in mandatis sacratissimis saluator instituit. What
edition Mr. Morton follows I know not, but the doctrine is acknowledged by
our Church, which holds the adding of the water to be against the
institution, as the Council of Trent interprets. And what reason then to add
the Cross to Baptism* Council. Trident. sess. 22. can. 9.
The water of the Supper is more ancient, the Cross in Baptism younger.
Christ used the water in the Supper by all probability, the Cross he used
never in all certainty. The water was mixed before the solemnity of the Supper
began, the Cross is adjoined in the cheese place of it. The water was added
for civil use to alay the wine at first; the Cross was added for use
religious, yea Sacramental. The water was never abused but to signification
only, the Cross even to Idolatrous operation. The water of the Supper became
one with the wine, the Cross remains still a sign by it self, and that of
a diverse kind. If then our Church has yet abolished the water from the wine
of the Supper, least it should hear from the former council. Thou that
abhorrest Idols committest thou sacriledg? much more should the Cross be
removed from the water of Baptism, Romans 2.22.
seeing in the addition thereof, there is both sacrilege committed (as the
former Council censureth) and an Idol blessed besides. And the duty of not
adding has been severely kept by those who have added this water, for that they
Hieron. in Marc. c. 14 Damas. li. 4 de fid. c. 14.
hold it instituted by Christ, prophesied of by Solomon, Cypr. cpist 48. and de
consecrat. distinct. 2. cap. 2.
bibite ex vino quod miscui vobis, and commended for ever to be used in the
Sacraments of Christ's death, because it flowed forth from Ibid Martin.
Bracarens. in Synod. can. 55.
his side what time he died, whence Sacraments flow. Upon these grounds the
Aurelianens. Council. 4. ca. 4.
4. Council of Orleans in the common edition commands this mixture upon the
very same reason that is in the Council, which Mr Morton alleged before, to
wit, because it is sacriledg to use any outward sign in the Supper which is
not ordained by Christ. So the Cou^cil of Hipponen. Council. can. 25.
Hippo and Council. Carthag. 3 can. 24.
Carthage commands this mixture and no more, vt in sacramentis nihil aliud
offeratur quam quod Dominus tradidit. So the decree of Iulii. 1. decret. 7.
Julius and the Bracanens 3. cap. 1.
council of Bracara command this mixture and no more upon this reason that
nothing be done in the Sacrament, but that the Lord did. So the Council of
Constantinople commands this mixture to the Armenians, because nothing must
be diminished nor added to that Synod. 6. in Trull. can. 32.
Quod Dominus tradidit. Last of all, So the Council of Wormatiens. Council.
can. 4.
Worms held in the year 868. commands this mixture and no more, because
aliud offerri non debet quam quod Christus sub hoc Sacramento praebuisse
cognoscimus. My third instance is in the honnie added to the wine of the
Supper: like to which addition was the honny added to the water of Baptism,
and put into the mouth of the infant baptized. These are as Tertul. de coron.
milit Baron, ann. 294.
ancient as the Cross, and they were never so much abused, neither are they
now likely to do like hurt. Yet a Antisiodorens. Council. can. 8. Exodus
Cou^cil thought the honny added to the wine unlawful, because our L. ordained
it not, and our own Church has cast out the other. Moses forbad honey in every
sacrifice. Wherefore? to shut out all humane additions, which are honny-sweet to
his carnal wisdom, in which relishe the cross exceeds all his fellows. My
fourth instance is in the addition of the milk to the L. supper; like to which
was the milk added to the water in Baptism, and put into the mouth of the
party baptized. This was as Tertul. de coron. milis
ancient as the cross, and it was never so much abused, and it has his
analogy of signification out of the scripture. it was given to the baptized
Hieron. epist. cont. Luciferianos.
ad infantiae significatione^: out of Peter's words, As newborn babes desire
the sincere milk of the word, etc. which is still the epistle read now as of
old (says Bellar. de bapt. ca. 27.
Bellarmine) to the baptized in Dominica in albis the next Sunday after Easter.
Howbeit for all this, we have turned it headlong out of Baptism, as the
Councills Bracarens. 3. cap. 1. Iulii. 1. decret. 7.
cashiered it out of the supper, because the L. ordained it not. This is in the
Decret. p. 3. de consecrat. distin. 2. cap. 7.
Canon Law expressed at large quam hoc sit, etc. how contrary this is to the
Apostolical doctrine, it will not be difficult to prove by the fact of the
truth it self, by whom the Sacraments are ordained. For when the Mr of the
truth commended the true sacrifice of our salvation to his Disciples, we know
he gave the^ in this Sacrament no milk but bread only and the cup. let
therefore milk cease to be offered, because a manifest and evident example of
evangelical truth has shined forth, that besides bread and wine it is not
lawful to offer any thing else. We have here that the institution must be kept
pure from al addition of any signs, and that a sign added is contrary to the
institution. The very memory is abhorred of the Lambert. Dane. in August. de
haeres. c. 64
Barsaniani and Semidalitae, for that instead of bread they used meal, even as
others are utterly condemned for bringing Council. Bracarens. 3 de consecr.
v^supra.
grapes in steed of wine. Others for giving the bread dipped in wine pro
co^plemento co^munionis. The Greek church now at Co^stantino. crumbleth the
bread into the wine, and so take both in a spone together. If these sin through
defect against the complement of the Sacrament, judge (then) whether the cross
sins not in excess, added for a further complement to the same? My last
instance is in the bread and cheese, which the Epiphan. in haeres. 49. August.
de haeres. cap. 28.
Artotyritae brought into the Supper upon an imitation of ancient times when
the fruits of the earth and the fruits of the cattle were wont to be offered
to the Lord; for they brought the chief for the fruit of the cattle, and the
bread for the fruit of the earth. We plead antiquity for the cross in
Baptism, bread and cheese pretend as much for a place in the supper.
Notwithstanding this pretense, the bread and cheese are sent packing, because
not commanded Conrad. Lutzenburg. Catolog. haeres. in verb. A^totyrit.
in the institution, at the terror whereof the Cross would begin to trusse up
his pack, trusted he not in our parcialitie, who pull him back even when we
see the backs of his betters.

#Sect. 30. Though it were lawful to devise new symbolicall signs in the
Sacrament where God has ordained already, yet not to take a Cross from the
brothelhouse of superstition.
FOurthly, though it were lawful to devise new symbolicall signs in the
Sacrament where God has ordained some already, and to append them to these
Sacraments, and by name to Baptism: yet is it not lawful to take a Cross
from the brothelhouse of Gods great enemy, all whose signs must out to the
dunghill: as our Whitak. cont. Dureum li. 8. p. 657. Anton. Sadeel. cont.
Monath. Burdegalens. art. 13.
best Divines do teach. Thus Augustine, August. de doct. Christian. Il. 3.
cap. ^. 1. Cor. 10.22.
Quod ad cos quos Dearinuenit sub signis invtilibus non solum seruilem
operationem sub talibus signis sed ipsa etiam signa frustrauit, remouitque
omnia. What plainer evidence can we have as to remove the superstitious use
of this sign, so likewise this sign it self: we in stead of remoouing, bring
him into the holy place. What mean we thus even to despite the Lord (says
Paul unto us?) For as Adrian could not spite the Jews worse, then to set up
the Image of a swine over the gate Genebrard lib. 3. in an. D. 129. Isay. 66.2.
of Jerusalem which they most hated, so for ought that I can see we cannot more
provoke the Lord, then to set up, his Sacrament this sign (most odious) of his
enemy, which is as swines flesh to him. And must we needs amongst those his
enemies signs make choice of the Cross, the very worst of all the rest? For
as the sottishnes of Hieron. in Dan. ca. 11
Ptolemeus Philopater, was the more ignominious, the more base his harlot
Agathoclea was, so is our provocation the greater (wherewith we provoke the
Lord) in that our inordinate love has lighted on the Cross, then which there
is not amongst all other signs of Rome a more gross or dirtie harlot. What
that we love her even in her filthiness: to wit, in her signification which is
the shame of her adultery and fornication. The Cross must be worshipped (says
Suar. tom. ^. in Tho. disput. 56. sect. 3.
one) Quia habet significationem sacram, he must be adored (says Bellar. de
imag. c. 20.
another) Non solum quatenus goret vicem prototypi sed etiam quatenus
similitudinem geritrei sacrae, and quatenus signum. It may be here will arise
some scruple; as if our writers thought not the Cross to be the worst of
Baptismes pollutions: because they are silent and name not the Cross, when
they name others: to wit, the oil, salt, and spittel, and write against them.
But it may be their purpose was to rehearse the rites that were proper to
Baptism. Tertullian himself names not the Cross in his book which he
writes of Baptism, who yet holds it one of the chiefest rites thereof. The
Papists think most highly of the Cross; yet do they often omit it: as in
these verses.

Sal, oleum, chrisma, cereum Chrismale, saliua
Flatus virtutem Baptismatis ista figurant,
Haec came patrimis non mutant esse sedornant.
As for our writers when they name not the Cross, they include it. And there
be Bulling. decad. 5. sermon. 8.
who among the pollutions of Baptism, name the sign of the Cross for the
very first. Who Gualt. in Mat. ca. 3.
among the fordes of Baptism name the sign of the Cross for one. Lastly, who
among the Stephan. Szegedin. de bapt. tabul. 2.
profanations of Baptism reckon the Cross, and therefore Zepper. de polit.
ecclesiastic. li. 1. ca 10. page 50.
throw him out of the Sacrament, as out of a sling. Indeed why not he as well as
his fellows? because the Cross is aereall, and not so gross as the rest that
be material. As if we have not abolisht the Flatus of the exorcisme, which is
as aereall as is the cross, and Whitak. quo supra. cont. Dureum lib. 8. page
658.
condemned it for superstitious even as it was used aunciently amongst the
Fathers? Great exception sure to be taken against the aerealnes of a popish
sign, seeing to them there is even a Character that is invisible and yet a
sign; words also are signs with them in their Sacraments of penance and
marriage, which are more aereall then the Cross. Another objection is wont to
be made we may well choose the sign of the Cross above his fellows, because
God in nature has commended him, a thing not lightly thought of by the
Fathers: who use to cite for the Crosses commendation, that no man can sail in
the sea without it; or till the land; and that the foul flying, yea man
himself praying does make the Cross. These were but rhetorications in the
Fathers; and they had use against the pagans who depended on nature, as for us
who depend upon Christ's institution, we Just. Lip. de cruc.
leave them to papists to play withal. For if we go to the best signs in
nature, what form comparable to a circle? of which the very Fathers
themselves: p Circulirotundi figura est figura caeteris pulchrior. August. de
quantitat anim. cap. 15. Hieron in Job. cap. 38.
If to the best by art, why is not the Council. Constan.
triangel of Hierome of Prage, as good as the best, that which he termed scutum
fidei? But we must take heed, in a Sacrament how we rely upon natures
commendation. Some Christians once used Caesar Baron. Anal. ann. 257.
water in the Lords supper not wine, least the smell of it should have detected
them to their persecutours. These did ill, but the Aquarij worse, who even out
of the time of persecution and of danger used water and not wine, which sprang
from the Lambert. Dane. in August. de. here is. ca. 64
Taciani, and the Encratita who advaunced water above wine, for natural
qualities and commendations. Nay, we must turn a quite contrary leaf
admiring the goodness, and the wisdom of God, who has chosen common Pet. Lom.
lib. 4 did. 4.
creatures for the signs of his Sacraments and such as be in u nature bace,
that so no virtue may be put in them, and our obedience be tried by submitting
our selves unto them. A third objection is wont to be made. Catechis. Roman.
page 177.
Many of the reformed Churches beyond the seas retain still the Cross in
Baptime, for I have heard the sound of such a blast, which makes me much to
mervaile. For the harmony of confessions makes no such things to appear unto
us: we find not by it the sign of the Cross received, or approved in any
protestant Church on the earth, we find an observation rather which inclusiue
speaks some what against it. Quadam istorum, etc. (speaking of the popish
rites of Baptism) Harmon confess. sect^ 13. obsera. 2. ad Helu. posterior.
certain of these as merely superstitious; others as manifestly translated
from the Baptism of old men to the Baptism of infants, by the negligence of
the Bishops others of them (last of all) as being altogether unprofitable. We
have dashed out, as is plainly confessed in the confession of Wittenberge. Does
not Jacob. Pamel. in Tertul. de coron. mili.
Pamelius make this difference between the Lutherans and the Caluinistes, that
the one does use the sign of the Cross, the other does not use it? And
Bellar. de Bapt. ca. 24.
Bellarmine cites no protestaut Church, when he would prove that we use the
Cross in Baptisine without the warrant of the word, he only cites a
catechism of Lutherans which has these words: signum Crucis signetur in
front and in pectore Baptizandi. Now as for this Luther he crossed himself
every morning and every evening, and is never seen Calsh. ag. mart. art. 7.
fol. 143.
painted but praying before some crucifixe. Shall we approve him in this also
as we approve him in the former? No, but in both let us consider how contrary
he is even to his own doctrine delivered else where, in Baptism Luther,
homil. 1. de bapt. anno. 1535
eadem signa quae Christus instituit and non alia sant adhibenda. And such is
the sinful office of the Cross in Baptism, seeing man has planted him there
for a sign, the heavenly Fathers will is, that he should be rooted out.

#Sect. 31. Objections of the Opposites: The Cross is sooner to be used in
that it teaches good things, and has a profitable signification: therefore
every ceremony is significant, or else vain: that the Lord delighted much in
signs which the woman showed, and blamed Simon for not showing the like, etc.
HOwbeit our Opposites lack not a painting to make it seem even fair and
beautiful. They tell us the Cross is the sooner to be used in that it
teaches good things, and has a profitable signification. Hereupon it is
objected (first of all) that every ceremony is significant, Hook. li. 5. cap.
65. fol. 15^. Luke 7.44.
or else vain; that our Lord delighted much in signs which the woman showed;
and blamed Simon* for not shewinge the like: and that the kneeling, knockinge
of the breast, and the lifting up of the eyes, are all of them signs which
signify somewhat. At a word, that no ceremony can add a decency to Gods
worship unless it signify. And is there any answer expected to so gross a
paralogisme, and so wilful an ignorance of the Elench? For we dislike not
all signs, but only such as are Theodor. ^aza epi. ^ ad Grindal Episc.
London^^.
Symbolicall, of which the sign of the Cross is one, but these forenamed are
none. For seeing God has reserved to himself all authority to ordain the
seals and signs of his own Covenant, we are worthily ielous against all
other signs, in cause they be Sacramental.

Now what is a Sacrame^tall sign? For the understanding hereof we must
consider that some signs are Nata only, some only data, some nata and data
both, and these are Sacramental, as Bellarmin. de sacram. in genesis c. 9.
Bellarmine truly deduceth out of Augustine and others. It being so, our
Opposites wander from the question, when they talk of kneeling knocking of the
breast, and lifting up the hands in prayer, because these are not signs
Sacramental, of which the question is, but signs natural: witness this they
are common to all men of what Religion soever they be. And this our neighbor
Confess. Scor^^. aedit. Iun. ^0 25^0.
churches see who use the former signs of knocking, kneelinge, lifting, who
yet renounce all Crosses and crossings, and all Simbolicall signs of popery.
Upon the same string do our Opposites jar when they prove man may ordain
the sign of the Cross in the service of God, because Paul approves the
sign of avayle to show the subjection of the wife unto the Husband. For what
have we to do with this sign which is not Sacramental, but Artificial,
which Paul (we see) proves to agree with the Law of nature, and so does the
Canon Chem^i^. examine. p. 2. titul. de rit. ^ Cor. 10.
Law it self. Again, our Opposites wander from the question when they tell
us, that man may ordain signs for order and decency, as a fair cloth on the
communion table, is a sign of reverence, and the ringing a Bell is the sign
of a Sermon. What have we to do with these signs again, which are not
Sacramental, but merely Artificial? not Simbolica, but mare indicantia? not
signifying but showing only. What aptnes have these signs of their own nature
to intimate these things? sure none at all, neither could they be signs of
them more then an Ivie-bushe is of it self a sign of wine, had not
institution of man ordained them to this purpose. Neither of these signs then
are within the Question as the sign of the Cross is, which way be thus
demonstrated. Two things are required to a Sacramental sign, the first is,
that it have by nature some analogy, and relation to the thing it signifies.
Secondly, that this Analogy and reverence be but confuse ^ellar^^^ ^^sup^a.
apta quidem us significet, sed acta non significans nisi humana institutione
determinetur. For ensample, the particular Image of Titius is no Sacramental
sign but natural, because the similitude is so vehement, that of it self it
represents him. The Image that has but the general shape of a man, is no
sign of Titius more then of Caius. Yet when it is determined by the painter to
be the Image of Titius, whose name he writes underneath it to restrain it
unto him, now it a sign of Titius, not merely natural, nor merely
artificial, but in the middle between both (or mixed of both rather) that is,
Symbolicall: So fares it with the sign of the Cross. The Cross is a
similitude of a man crucified, as the Suarez tom. 1. in Thom. disput. 56. sect
2.
Jesuit teaches truly. Hereby he is of nature apt to represent any one man
crucified, Peter, Andrew, or whosoever. The Churches determination comes and
restrains him to the son of man Christ Jesus crucified, and is he not now
a Sacramental signifier of him? Yes, as well as the member of generation was a
sign of original sin in the Sacrament of circumcision. This member has
Analogy to the propagation of it, because it is an instrument of propagation.
The very same habitude and relation has the Cross to the death of Christ. For
was it not an instrument of it? Gedeons Ephod had no natural fitness to
represent the God that gave him victory; but the sign of the Cross has as
good to represent Christ's death: because it is an instrument of his death as
well as the August. quest. sup. Iudic. cap. 41.
Ephod was an instrument of Gods worship. Ioh. Bohe. Auba. de moribu^ gent.
lib. 1. cap. 5.
The Emperor of Ae^hiopia when he goes forth, has a Cross carried before
him, and an earthen pitcher full of earth: the one signifying his profession,
the other his mortality. Has this pitcher of earth a Symbolicall
signification? Then has the sign of the Cross as well. For it is only by the
adiunct or effect of mortatalitie that he Symbolizeth with the same, and a
Metonimicall Symbolizer, the Cross is as well as he. The August. de mirabi.
sacr. senp. lib. 1. ca. 16
Egyptians for a monument of Iosephes feeding them with corn, set up an Ox
by his Toumbe: which was the cause (as Augustine thinks) that the Jews chose
the figure of an Ox in the wilderness. Now look what Analogy this Ox had
to represent the husbandry of Joseph, and the same has the Cross to
represent the death of Christ: it being an instrument thereof as well as the
Ox was an instrument of Iosephes husbandry. This Ioh. Rainold. de Idolat.
lib. 2 cap. 3. sect. 1^.
Joseph is called Bos Dei, by God himself, and his feeding of Egypt with
corn, is represented in Pharaohes dream by seven fatt Kine, because in Egypt
they were the instruments of husbandry, as Josephus tells us. The Romans
also honored Minucius, aureo boue, when he retained them in time of dearth.
all which make clear that a figure drawn from the instrument is Symbolicall,
and so by consequent prove the Cross to be Symbolicall, it being an
instrument of Christ's death which it represents to us. The beasts that were
worshipped in Egypt had Symbolicall relation sufficient to represent their Gods,
because they were the badges of Ludoni. Viues in August. Godes^alk Steweceius
in veget. de re militar.
them which they bore in their banners, while they were alive. How much more
has the Cross a relation sufficient to Christ's death seeing he more nearly
pertaines unto it: then these beasts did to the men whom they resemble? How is
the serpent apt to figure Christ crucified, but by the poale on which he is
hanged, which figured the Cross the nearest instrument of his crucifying? What
need more a do? such aptnes has the Cross to signify the crucifying of
Christ, as that the Fathers, yea Scriptures themselves use by the name of the
Cross to describe his death, even as the Canon of the Cross it self
confesses. No marvel, the one being the Suppositum; the other the Appositum
(as Bellarmine speaks) which are so nearly linckt together as that the one
may very well stand for the other. Siluest. insumma. ver. imag.
Figura Christi est, quae ducit ad Christum argurtiue. Now what argument has
quicker passage then that which comes from such a subject to such an adiunct?
But Sacramental signs are similitudinary. True, but there is a similitude
Metonimicall, as well as Metaphorical, which Metaphorical similitude is not
wanting in the Cross, neither as those words of Tho. Aq. page 3. qu. 75. art.
9.
Aquinas show insignitur signo Crucis, sicut miles signo ducis. They shall
have their Fathers name written in their forheades. This has allusion to the
sign of the Cross (say some) which is not so, but to the writing of the
Emperors Just. Lyps. de Roman. militia. li. 1 dialog. 9.
mark and name in the flesh, yea foreheads of those who were pressed to war,
until the writing of it in the forehead was by the Cod* lib. 9 ti. 7. ca. 17.
Law forbidden. Howbeit, as soldiers are separated to their Emperor by his
mark, so are men set apart unto Christ, to fight under his banner by the sign
of the Cross. The very word token [we sign him with the sign of the Cross
in token, etc.] shows that the Cross is used as a (...) a figura a typus;
all which the Scriptures, 1. Pet. 3.2^.
Gregor. Nazianz, oration. de pasch. 2. August. epist. 23.
Fathers, our Anglican. confess. art. 10.
selves appropriate to a Sacramental signifying. To conclude (then) as there
are words merely indicant which show, and words figurative which signify: so
are there signs mere indicantia which show, and signs symbolicall which
signify, and a man may determine the first, but not the latter: even as we
were told by Thomas and Caietan in part before. Now this power to determine
signs indicant, whether it be a devising or no I will not dispute, it may
seem man may only in the service of God dispose. It is apparent he cannot
devise any of the natural indicant signs mentioned before, but dispose them
only. As for the signs which are artificial and depend on man's institution, in
this sense he is only a disposer of them, and not a deviser in that he is tied
to such as are decent in use already. So that he may not devise any new
ceremony against common decency: witness Paul, who takes not upon him to
approve the veil before he has proved it decent, 1. Cor. 11.
and who beats down every contrary rite to this. It is not decent in common
practice, we have no such custom, nor the Churches of God, which now fights
strongly against the Cross and Surplice: because where are they used out of
our Church? And this may suffice for this first objection.

#Sect. 32. The second objection of the Opposites, There be many similitudes in
scripture drawn from Gods creatures, which employ so many signs, etc.
THe second tells us, Sect. 32.
there be many similitudes drawn in the Scriptures from Gods creatures which
employ so many signs. which does warrant us to use Gods creatures not only to
uses natural, but Bucer. in lib. de re vestiar. Romans 1.20.
ad significationes etiam, and ad pias admonitiones. First the Cross and
Surplice quatenus talia are no creatures of God, but of Antichrist rather:
which, will he endure as signs determined in his covenant? Secondly, Gods
creatures show him, but signify him not: that of Antonie is famously known:
Tripartit. hist. lib. 8. cap. 1.
The Theater of the world is my book: and a book teaches indicantly, not
Sacramentally. So that our Gualt. in Luke 8. homil. 75.
writers will hence conclude, that having natural images, we need neither
artificial nor Sacramental to be devised. Thirdly, though in civil use, yet
not in the Church, may the Sea D. Bills ag. apolog. p. 4. p. 388
Alegories and similitudes of the Scriptures be painted, seeing [dicere] and
[pingere] are so [imparia] as that the words themselves of Scripture (in some
Josias Simler. in Exodus 20. fol. 83.86.
men's judgment) must not be painted on the Church walls, because that place
serves for the preaching not for the painting of them. Swerue we from this,
and suffer the Papist to ouerrunne us, who has chosen the best Similitudes
that are in the Scripture, to paint and act them in Gods service. He puts
salt into the mouth of the Baptized to act the similitude of salt used in the
Scripture, and this rite is very ancient, for August. mentions it: August.
li. 1. confess. cap. 11.
signabor signo eius and condiebar eius sale. and Origin alludeth unto it when
he wills men to prepare themselves [ vt Origin. in Ezech. homil. 6.
fiant sal domini.] and not be Baptized like Simon Magus. He has incense to
act these words: Durant. de rit. li. 2. ca. ^9. sect. 1.
Let my prayer ascend as the incense, and we Idem. li. 1. ca. 9 sect. 8
spread abroad the savor of life. He has lamps which he puts into the
hands of the Durant. de rit. li. 1. ca. 19. sect. 41
Baptized, to act the parable of the virgins lamps, and other similitudes of
light in the Scripture. and the light is (also) ancient, as being used in the
Gregor. Nazianz. in oration. de sanct. bapt.
days of Nazianzen. He has a white garment which he puts upon the body of
the Baptized, to act the wedding garment and the armor of light, and the
keeping of garments pure, and other similitudes of the same stamp. the
antiquity of which ceremony needs no prove. And to what end? for through
this liberty of acting similitudes out of the scripture in Gods service, it is
come to pass, that there is nothing now without signification. no part of the
Church, but it is a sign of somewhat. the shutting of the door; the coming
in; the goeing to the deske, etc. have Maximin. in mystagogia.
all of them their significations. yea without the church and all, scarce any
thing is free for us to behold, not as a sign; witness the Durant. de ^rit. li.
1. ca. 22. sect. 8.
Cock that stands on the steeple to act the crowing of Peter's cock, to put
men in mind of awaking to repentance. Now what is that which our Cross
blundreth? the scripture it self uses the name of the Cross to express
Christ's death, therefore we may use the figure of it to act what Christ
speaks? Then are the Papists just and righteous, and we must no more cry out
against them for any of their forenamed actings. There are no better
similitudes to be chosen out of the scripture then those which they do act
already. If those be not lawful, none are lawful. if none, then not the
acting of the Crosses similitude neither. Augustine tells us that Christ in
the scripture is compared to a Bull, August. cont. Faust. Manich li. 18. cap. 6.
propter virtutem Crucis cuius cornibus impios ventilauit. Ribera in Habac. cap
3. number. 26
Hierome is very often to prove, that where the word horn in the old
testament is spoken of Christ, there he figureth the Cross. This being
granted, let this position hold, it is lawful to act what the scripture
speaks by way of figure and similitude, and it will be found as warantable,
as the sign of Christ's death, to put a pair of Bulls horns upon the
forehead of the baptized. A red thread by this reason will be found as
warrantable as the sign of the Cross for life, not only because the Fathers
make Rahabes red thread a sign and figure of Christ's death, but also because
former Jacob. Vitriac. histo. Occident. lib. 2. ca. 36 pa. 396.
times have in Baptism used it accordingly to this end, together with the
Cross.

#Sect. 33. The third objection of the Opposites: There be diverse signs added
in the scripture by man lawfully as the knife of stone, etc.
THirdly, it is objected, That there be diverse signs found in the scripture
added by man lawfully. First (say our Opposites) what say ye to the knife of
stone added by Joshua or the Jews to the Sacrament of Circumcision with a
symbolicall signification, for Justinius Martyr in Tryphon. August. de temp.
sermon. 141. Nicho. Lyran. in Iosuah 5.
he signified Christ our rock and corner stone. First, there is no comparison
between this knife and the cross, because the cross is a sign of state by
it self, whereas the knife was an instrument of the sign of Circumcision, and
so by consequent no more an addition then the silver pipe which lay men used in
the sacrament of the Supper, as the statute of the Carthusians shows, which
was, they should possess nothing but a silver cup and a pipe of silver Beat.
Rhenan. in Tertul. de coron. milit.
qua laici dominicum absorbeant sanguinem. Secondly, There was never added a
knife of stone to the sacrament of Circumcision but it was always a knife of
iron as Justinius Martyr Justinius Martyr. vt supra.
witnesses. But the text calls them knives of stone. The Caldee paraphrast
interprets giadiolos acutos, as well he might. For what is here a knife
(...) the Septuagint, or ex petra acutus as the ordinary gloss. At a word,
what is the knife of stone, but a knife of the Arrias Monta. in hunc locsi.
whet-stone: that whet-stone which may not be sold by the Digest. lib. 39. tit.
4. ca. 11.
civil law to an enemy under pain of death, it is so fit to sharpen. But
what shall we say to the Fathers (then) who make this knife of stone a figure
of Christ? who say more over that Circumcizion was on the 8. day to figure out
Christ's resurrection. Why, as it is Andre. Masius in hunc loc. pa. 83.
pertinacie in them who defend this stony knife though they do it because
they are loath to loose that figure of Christ which the Fathers have placed in
it, so now it will be partinacie for thee to defend the sign of the Cross in
Baptism for that significations sake wherewith the Fathers dignifie it. Alas,
thou must consider how playfull they were in their significations. and thou
may easily see from hence what little hurt it is to loose the fond figures
they have devised.

The second sign added by man (which our Opposites do allege) is the Altar
of Jordan bancke. The altar of the two Tribes and an half was lawfully added
to the Altar of the Temple (say they) therefore the Church may lawfully add
the sign of the Cross to the water of Baptism. First let me reason a little
better: The Altar like to that of Damascus, was added unlawfully in the Temple:
and the Altar of the high places was an unlawful addition likewise: therefore
the addition of the sign of the Cross to the sign of the water, is unlawful
altogether. Secondly, who lamenteth not to see how gross our Opposites are
grown? For what coherence in this argument, what coincidence in these two
signs? For neither was the Altar of the two Tribes in state religious as the
Cross is, nor in use. it was civil in the judgment of the most D. Babing. in
the 2. comment.
learned of our Opposites. Or if it were to an holy use, yet not to the same
for which the Altar of the temple served. The Tribes had sinned (say our
Ludouic. Lauater. in Iosu. 22: homil. 61.
writers) if out of the Temple they had determined an Altar to the same use,
for which the Lord had set up one in the Temple already. And since it was out of
the temple, it was not in state religious like the Cross. What if it were? It
had been but like the Altar which Solomon reared, when Moses Altar could not
bear all the sacrifices that were brought. From this Altar it is, that
Bellarmine argues a great deal more strongly, then our Opposites from the
other of Jordan bank. The addition of an new Altar added by Solomon, was
lawful (says he) therefore additions of men are lawful to the worshipps of
God. How do we answer him? First, this was done upon special warrant, as
Solomon was a Prophet who had extraordinary inspiration (say some Matt.
Sutcliue cont. Bellar. de summo Po^tific. lib. 4. cap. 6.
of our writers) and from these it will follow against Bellarmine and our
Opposites, that there is no warrant ordinary in the word to add in any
religious use, either Altar, Cross, or any sign else. Secondly, this Altar
was added out of the equity, even of Moses law it self (say Franc. Iunius
co^trouers. 3. lib. 4. cap. 17. nota 4.
others) neither was it any addition at all, seeing no new sign of a diverse
kind. These put this answer into our mouths: The Altar of Jordan was no such
addition, in respect of the kind, as is the addition of the Cross which is a
new sign, of a diverse species from the water, to which he is added. Another
Altar is set by the old, to this answers not a Cross, set by the water but
two Fontes of water, set one by the other, when one of them does not suffice,
that which in deed is no addition. Thirdly, (and last of all) either our
Opposites have very bad hap, or else they cannot speak one syllable save out
of the popish, or Lutheran Grammar. They think it much when they are able to
say, that our Cross serves only for a memorial (even as this Altar did) but
a papist from this place, speaks as honestly, as they for their lives. The
sign of the Cross (says And. Maefius in Ios. 22.28.
he) is like this Altar, which the Church proposes to us, not that we should
adore it, but that we should remember the Altar, whereon our Priest (according
to Melchizodeches order) offered him self, as a sacrifice for us. And they
think they have excuses their Cross sufficiently from being popish, when
they have said, we use him not to the same end, but in a diuer se manner. But
there is a David Chytre in hunc locsi.
Lutheran, that speaks as strongly, and as honestly for the Images of his
Church: As here the Tribes (says he) being challenged about this Altar, make
answer, they set him not up for sacrifice, but to another end: so when the
Iconomachi challenge us about our Images, we may well excuse out selves in the
like manner: We do not set them up to adore them, as papists do, but we
use them for monuments only.

The third sign added by man, which our Opposites do allege, is the sign
of the Cross added to the Sacrament of the Passover, for as much as it
appears by Justinius Martyr in Tryphon.
Justinius Martyr, the Paschall Lamb was roasted in the form of a Cross. One
of my brethren hearing of this, said, that he had often heard of a tale of a
roasted horse, but never of a roasted Cross before. This reply will serve the
turn. For either the Paschall Lamb was not dressed in form of a Cross, or
if it were, it was no typus destinatus: or if it were, it was instituted from
the beginning.

#Sect. 34. The 4. sign alleged for the defense of the Cross, is the
imposition of hands: and why should not the sign of the Cross be as lawful
as it.
THe fourth sign added by man which our Opposites do allege, is the
Imposition of hands. why should not the sign of the Cross be as lawful as
it (say they). First, as our writers answer the Papists imposition of hands,
in the Apostles times was a sign, but not a sacrament, so we answer our
adverse brethren. It was a sign merely indicant by institution from God in the
old Testament; by the custom of Christ and his Apostles in the new: whereas
the Cross is a sign Symbolicall and Sacramental with a word annexed unto it
just like the water. Secondly, our writers defend this imposition of hands was
ever [ritus liber] whereas we are bound now to the Cross although it want that
ensample in the word which this sign has. Thirdly, whereas the Catechized had
the hands laid on them before they were baptized, and thereby were received
into the Church, though some differences may be alleged between the sign of
the cross and it, yet we hold it superstitious like the Cross which was made
in it, and with whom it arose, for the highest mentioner of it is Council:
Carthag. senten. 37.
Vincentius Tibaritanus, co-equall with Cyprian, for that counterfeit Dionisius
Dionis. Areopag. in Ecclesiast. Hierarch.
Areopagita who cannot be more ancient. Fourthlie, imposition of hands
following Baptism, is cancelled by the reformed Churches for the popish abuse
thereof: no where is it used but in England and in Boheme, where some think it
to be Harmon. confess. in obseruat. in sect 13. ad Bohemic.
tolerable because it has some profit there, and breeds no offense. neither
of which can be said here of this sign of the Cross. The fifth sign added by
man is the [Osculum pacis] which was used in the primitive Church. Which seeing
it was lawfully added to the Sacrament of the Supper, why may not the Cross (a
like sign unto it) be adiected unto Baptism? First, this went Iusti. Martyr
apolog. 2. ad finem Tertul. in lib. de oration.
before the very solemnity of the supper, Chrysostom. Homil. de prodit. Iudae.
to prepare men to a worthy receiving in love and charity. It had no state in
the sacrament it self, as the Cross has now in Baptism. Secondly, this was
a mere natural sign of peace, and not symbolicall or sacramental. all the
people of the earth use to embrace, and to strike hands, and to kiss, when
they will show forth indicant signs of peace and reconciliation. Two men that
were enemies join hands together in the Church before they go to the
communion table in token of reco^ciliation. will you make a sacramental sign
of this? or will you say it is an addition to the sacrament or affirm the
sign of the Cross is no worse, nor no more an addition then it? but now the
kiss of the primitive Church was such: men joined hands in it: men embraced
one another in it; as Chrysostom. ad popul. Antioche^. homil. 51.
Chrysostom tells us: and these verses of Paulinus: Tunc ambo nexi ad
invicem dextras damus. In osculo pacis sacrae, etc. Quisquisne tibi ( Hieron.
ad Theophil. Alexand.
says Hierome) invitus communicate? quisquamne extensa manu vertit faciem and
inter sacras apulas Iudae osculum porrigit? So is this kiss a sign of Love,
as the turning away of the face is a sign of hatred, that is, a natural
indicant sign, and not symbolicall or sacramental like the Cross. Thirdly,
what is now become of this kiss? It is cast forth of the Church. Wherefore?
because it was abused. for it begat in popery the kissing of a table, which
had the Image of Christ, or of some saint in it (called the Paxe.) and
wherefore was it turnde at first into the kissing of this Paxe? why, for the
same reason, that kissing Clemens in constie. li. 8. ca 11.
of men and women together was forbidden before, Gabr. Biel. in can. missae.
lect. 8 1 Durant. de rit. lib. 2. ca. 54. sect. 7.
ne recti specie aliquid libidinis diabolico afflatu irrepat. Alas then for us,
who cannot even by this learn to abolish the sign of the Cross, less
ancient, less profitable, more abused: it self having begotten a worse
Idolatry? no, though it be needful to abolish it, not only to prevent ne
quid irrepat, but also to remedy that which is crept in already. Now,
besides this kiss before the Communion, there was one given to the party
baptized before his baptism, about which we need be no more careful then
about the exsufflation which went immediately before it: or the salt that
followed after it: and as it quickly Durant de rit. li. 1. ca. 19. sect. 24
vanished away, so I would it had taken the Cross away with it; it could not
have had better company. Thus far of the sin of the Crosses office which
it does bear in Baptism, where we use it for a symbolicall and a
sacramental sign. There follow now the offices which he performs to
Baptism, which are in number 4.

#Sect. 35. Four offices which the Cross performs in Baptism.
THe first is to consecrate the water thereof, Sect. 35.
to make it effectual* whereof if we be ashamed, why loath we not the rest
as well? seeing this office is as ancient as they are. What though it be
fathered upon Augustine by Amolar. de Ecclesiast. offic. lib. 3. cap. 24.
some? Is Augustine no body? but we may fetch it a great deal higher, as these
words of Cyprian show: Cypri. lib. 1. epist. 12.
Oportet mundari and sanctificari aquam prius a sacerdote vt possit Baptismo
suo peccata hominis qui baptizatur abluere. The second is to procure reverence
to Baptism Thom. Aquin. p. 3. qu. 66. art. 10.
ne putetur esse communis ablutio. Which is the office of the salt, the taper,
and the rest of popish signs, which how cut we of, but with this axe that
beheadeth the Cross as well D. Whita. contra Dureum. li. 8. pa. 65 8.
Non existimandum, etc. We must not think but that the baptism of Christ and
of the Apostles was performed with reverence enough when these signs were
wanting: neither must we take upon us to be wiser then they. To procure right
reverence to the Sacrament is to lay open the institution by the preaching of
the word, and then to deliver it in that simplicity in which we have received
it. To add signs over and above, is not to honor it but to defile it. In
deed had not the Arc been more honorably entreated, if it had been sent home
again as it came into the land and hand of the Philistians. They thought they
could not honor it sufficiently, ^ Sam. 6.
unless they set a budget by it of certain new devised signs to wait upon
it which did defile it. David emptied this budget, and did well. Howbeit, their
cart he thinks cannot well be spared, for which the Lord made a breach in
Israel, ^ Chron. 13
until he drove him to confess that he was not sought in due order, as long
as one ceremony of the Philistines did remain. The Lord show mercy to our
Church, otherwise he will show that our emptying of the popish budget in
banishing the salt, the oil, the spittell with the rest, will not be judged
sufficient, unless we cease also with a Cross of theirs to cart Baptism,
which should be borne up to reverence, no other way the^ by the shoulders of
the Levites, I mean the labors of those preachers which now (alas) lie in the
duste, because they will not defile their hands by touching of this
Philistine-carte, for to uphold it. The third office of the Cross which he
performed to Baptism, is to drive away the Deull, Thom. Aquin. vt supra.
Ne inpediat effectum Sacramenti, for which, why is he not himself driven
away, as well as we have scattered into the wind the flatus of the exorcisme,
seeing he is Goulart. in Cypri. epist. 56. not. 31.
simbolum magica in^antationis as well as it in the eyes of all good writers:
The fourth and the last office of the Cross which it performs to Baptism,
is to put us in Ric. Hook li. 5. ca. 65.
mind of our vow therein, and that in the instant of every tentation that so
we may keep our selves from finne. what, and serves the sign of the water
(then) for the time only of the perfusion? or must we needs have a sign of a
sign? If so, Then how many, and to how many degrees I ask? For if a new sign
of a Cross be needful to put us in mind of the water, then holy water (a new
sign) is needful too, both of it and of the Cross, why do papists keep
holy Iansenius. Concor. euangelic. cap. 106.
the dedication day of every Church? Why to the same end, that we use the
Cross, (to wit) to put themselves in mind of their Bapt. when they were
washed and when they were crossed to be dedicated an holy Temple to the Lord.
But to the holy water again which was no rather mentioned. There was once a
fellow that carried about holy water to put me^ in mind of their Baptism, and
therefore when he sprinkled it, he was wont to say, memineris te esse
baptizatum. This man al wise men Pet. Martyr. in 2. Reg. ca. 2.
laughed at. howbeit, whereas Bellarmine allowed this course for good, Bellarm.
de cult. sanct. c. 7.
non negarem per aquam benedictam refricari memoriam Baptismi and admoneri
Christianos vt cogitent se aliquando per aquam purgatos fuisse and pactum cum
Deo contra Diabolum inijsse. how shall we answer him, alwhile our selves do use
the Cross, a sign that is more unfit to the very same purpose? More unfit
(say our Ric. Hook lib. 5. vt supr.
Opposites) how can that be, seeing the cross is ever ready at hand to stay us
from sliding even in the instant of the temptation, which other signs are not?
Excellent. For now at last I perceive it was for somewhat that Anselm. apud
August. de te^por. sermon. 181.
Anselme tells us, Christ chose rather to dye by a Cross, then by a sword or
a stone, or by any other instrument, that we might have always a weapon ready
against Satan: to wit, the sign of the same Cross: whereas al me^ cannot have
always ready a stone or a sword against him. But what (now) shall we do with
those writers of ours, that besides the two Sacraments condemn all signs
though never so fit in the eyes of carnal wisdom? when Martial cites out of
August. Crucem nobis dominus reliquit in memoriam passionis Calf hill. ag. Mart.
fol. 82.
Master Calfhill replyeth, the word and the Sacraments are memorials
sufficient. We must not devise signs to our selves (says D. Fulke ag Rhem. in
Philip. 2. sect. 2.
another) but use such as God has appointed. There were some that to move the
people the more, brought pictures with them into the pulpit, whom we have on
this ground censured. The Calfh. ag. cont. Mart. arric. 9.
word being the ordinance of God sufficient, all these additions of signs
sensible are vain and superfluous: upon the same ground it is that we condemn
the sign of ashes Tho. Morofin. in verb. cinis.
upon Ashwendsday, which Gregory the great brought in not without pretense of
great antiquity, seeing it was used by men (we know) aunciently in their
mourning. Last of all, in the year. 1420. one Antonin. tit. 22. ca. 7. sect. 5.
Bernardinus a Minorite, carried about the name Jesus painted in a table, which
he used to show to the people to put them in mind of Christ. This Martine
the fist condemned in his consistory, not only as superstitious, but also as
scandalous, giving occasion to worship the Characters rather then Christ, which
is just the Crosses cause. I would know how we can use the Cross to put us
in mind of our vow in Baptism, seeing the common Crossing of the people is
forbidden by And. Willet. de crew. art. 3. D. Fulke reioind. art. 5. sol. 177.
writers. They only forbid the superstitious crossing (you will say,) so said
Heart Hierome only forbids the superstitious bearing of the Cross in the
boosom. But Ioh. Reynold confer. cap. 8. dinis. 4.
as it was replieth to him [all bearing it, there is superstitious] so is all
using of it here. This will not our Opposites hear of; Ric. Hook vt supr.
who object to the contrary that the ancient Fathers draw an argument for the
ceremony of the Cross, when they exhorted to constancy. First, the Fathers
make the sign of the Cross operative in this their arguing: Thus Leo: Leo.
epist. 81. ad Monach. Palestin.
Hi non erant digni confessione filij and patris, quibus nunc caro Christi
verecundiam facit, probabuntque se nullam de signo Crucis sumpsisse virtutem
qui quod preferendum frontibus acceperunt, promere labijs erube scunt. Thus
Cypria^. Cypr. epistol. 65.
Arm your selves (says he) with all boldness, that this sign of God may be
kept safe. where the former part of the exhortation being thus, never let the
hand that has received the body of Christ, offer sacrifice to Idols: he
matcheth the Cross with the bread of the Supper prefers it before the water
of Baptism, in whose rome the Cross is mentioned. Secondly, when the Fathers
draw an argument of exhortation from the Cross, they call us not to a new
crossing at the instant of the temptation like Master Hooker; they only will
us to call to mind the Cross received once in Baptism. And in this manner
they drew exhortations from other rites, which yet notwithstanding we have
abandoned. Does not Dionisia exhort her soon Maioricus to Victor. de
persecut. Vandalic.
constancy, willing him to remember the pure white garments which in baptism
he had received? It was usual in like manner to exhort by calling to mind the
oil of baptism, Theodor. in cantic. cap. 1.
recordare sancti baptismatis myster ium in quo qui initiantur spiritualis
vnguenti Chrismate invncti etc. What then? Must we wear white garments still,
and bear oil in our boosoms to put us in mind of baptism? But enough of the
third sin of this sign in regard of his offices whether in the Sacrament or
unto it.

#Sect. 36. The fourth sin that makes this Cross Sacramentale in these
words, we receive this child into the congregation of Christ's flock.
THe fourth point which makes the Cross a sacramentale unlawfully added is
the complement of a word wherewith it is graced (to wit) this: Sect. 36.
We receive this child into the Congregation of Christ's flock, and sign is
with the sign of the Cross, in token that hereafter he shall not be ashamed
to confess the faith of Christ crucified, and manfully to fight under his
banner against the flesh, the world, and the Devil, and to continue his
faithful soldier unto his lives end. Herein we cannot deny but that we
are past the ancient bounds. We stand on the Fathers, but which of them
(tell me) used the Cross with any word annexed unto it, and not rather as a
Perk. problem. in figno crew* sect. 5.
gesture of prayer either explicit or implicit at the least, and that not by it
self existent, but subsistent in prayer? Least this should seem strange unto
us, we must consider that the sign of imposition of hands was at the first no
other (as these words of August de bapt. cont. Donatist.
August. show) Quid est impositio manaum nifi invocatio supra hominem. And of
Tertul. lib. de bapt.
Tertullian, Dehine manus imponitur per benedictione^ aduocans and inuitans
spiritum sanctum. And lastly of Hierome, Hieron, aduers. Luciferian.
Episcopus ad invocationem spiritus manum impositurus excurrit. The Oil
likewise at the first had no word ceremonial annexed unto it: neither was it
used without prayer, as now we use the cross. Ambros. de iis qui initiant.
myster. cap. 7.
Ambrose witnesses it had this prayer, Deus omnipotens qui te regenera^^t ex
aqua and spiritu sancto, remisitque peccata tua, ipse te vngat in vitam
aternam. August. sermon. 19. de sanct.
Augustine says of the cross it self (if the words be his own) hoc facit
cum fideli invocatione nominis Christi victoriosae Crucis insignita memoria. To
conclude, Mr Bucer Bucer. Cansur. cap. 12 479.
wished the words of the Cross were turned to a prayer. Howbeit there be who
think the cross the more tolerable even for this words sake, because it
declares to what end we use it, and so distinguishes it from the cross
popish. First, Cassander used this apology, for the consecrating of the water
by the cross and for other gross ceremonies: Istae ceremoniae (says he)
mouent hominu animos si accedas interpretatio and intelligentia. Which, while
our Herman. Hamelma^. detradit. p. 1. lib. 4. colum. 374.
writers refure as frivolous, we by this sacrame^tal word which we give unto
the cross in practice justify. But by this means the cross becomes signum
commonefaciens, and is not mute Not so. For this signum Chemnit. exam. part. 2.
fol. 38.
commonefaciens which our writers do approve, is that which speaks out of the
word which the sign of the Cross does not. When the Gentiles objected that
there were many mysteries signified in the histories of their Gods, Arnobius
replied, Arnob. cont. Gent. lib. 5.
Christiano satis est quod scriptu^ est, and quod auditur, accipe^e. So let the
cross speak what mysteries he can, in this his sacrame^tal word, if he speak
not out of the scripturs, we Christians care not for it. Mr Ioh. Calvin. lib 4.
institut. cap. 10.
Calvin knew the popish ceremonies do admonish by the word of man (and the
cross does no more) who (yet) terms them dumb and separat from doctrine. To
Martial obiecting That the church had ordained the cross for a remembrance of
Christ's passion. D. Fulke reioynd. art. 3. page 157.
D. Fulk thus replieth: Christ committed to the prelates the government of his
church to feed it with his word, and not with dumb signs and dead jmages,
such as he has forbidden. Have we not here the Cross termed [A dumb signe]
and no teacher, because he speaks out of the mouth of the Prelates of the
church only? Secondly, what though the addition of this word did open the
mouth of the Cross and make him a teacher? this helps not as long as he is
a superfluous reacher, and a teacher that is unlawful. Superfluous he is,
because the common plea against Images lies flat against him. Josias Simler.
in Exodus 20. fol. 86.
Quod sierudiunt vel absque interpret id faciunt vel opus habent iuterprete.
absque interpret mutae sunt. Quod si autem verbis docendum est, poteru id
absque ijs commodi^is fieri. He is also a teacher unlawful. God will not have
his Church taught by the Devil. and the sign of the Cross is a Devil. Who
will have his child taught by a papist? but the sign of the Cross is popish.
Mark 1.25. Apoc. 9.20.
In the third place, he is a teacher insufficient. When Mariall affirms that
Images teach like the word, and the word becomes a scandal to diverse
as well as Images: D. Fulke reioind. artic. 9. page 201.
D. Fulke replyeth that the scriptures do plainly condemn the errors and
vice to which they are wrested: whereas Crosses and Images do not for.
Although then it be true, what this Sacramental word of the Cross does teach
yet it cannot be approved as long as it teaches insufficientlie: and do not
like the scripture condemn the vices and the errors to which his word is
arested In that monument of the Cross which Costantine the great sat up, this
word was annexed Nicephor. Calist. histor. lib.
[ ne^s vinae which, though it were good, yet did it hurt, men hereby grew
into a conceit that the Cross was a chosen instrument of Christ, to overcome
by. which eftsoons falls out in the word of our Cross. Because (like the
scripture) it does not pretend all occasions of such error* neither teaches
any one lesson against the same. So far of the word of the Cross in
general. Now to the form in which it speaks, and to the matter what.

The form cannot be denied to be Sacramental, like unto these, Durant. de
rit. lib. 1. c. 19. sect. 33
vngo te oleo, I anoint thee with oil. Bellarm. de confirmat. cap. 10.
Consignote signo sanctae Crucis, and Chrismo te oleo salutis. I sign thee
with the sign of the Cross, and anoint thee with the oil of salvation.
Compare with these, the form how our Cross does speak, We receive: We
sign, etc. speaks it not as the popish Oil speaks in Baptism, and in the
sacrament of Confirmation: to partake with the iniquity of them? It may be
added, it speaks like the water in Baptism (I Baptize) to steal away the
honor of it. As for the Quidditi which some have light on, the Minister says
not [I signe] etc. as he says in the water [I Baptize] but [We receive, and we
signe] it makes no material difference, as a gross papist him self will
yield: Ioh. Molan. de Sacrament. c. 3. coclus. 4.
in hac forma [Ego] non est plane necessarium: Et si commutetur in (Nos) non
vitiatur forma. But when the Book says (We receive) it speaks in the person
of the Congregation. And speaks it in the person of the Minister only, when
it says, [I Baptize]? If it do, the Minister may say [We Baptize] if he list
you see, and so take in the Congregation. But this is the very same miserable
shifte which is used when men excuse the infantes Credo and volo Baptizari,
when yet he has neither any faith, nor desire to be baptized. Forsooth he
speaks not this (say Jacob. a Vitriac. histor. Occidental. lib. 2. cap. 36.
some) in his own person, but in the person of the Congregation. Which, how
like you? is it not acute like the other? Be they spoken in whose person they
may be, the words are still sacramental, uniting the Cross to the other
parts, and to the other actions of the sacrament, as both the precedencies and
the sequencies show. Before the Book makes request for the Infantes that are
to be dedicated to God by our office and ministry. Compare these words with
the Canon that tells us, the child baptized is dedicated to God by the sign
of the Cross which follows them. After, the Book directs us to give
thanks that the child is received into the Congregation. Compare these with
the words of the Cross to which they have relation, yea which they repeat,
and whereby the infant was received: and tell me whether the Book does not
incorporate the sign of the Cross into the Sacramental actions: seeinge
this, it combyneth and knittes it to them both, a priori and a posteriori, as
it were with a couple of strong cords, never to be unloosed by them who say,
the Cross comes after Baptism, and if not morallie, at the least a part
thereof: unless they take up the sword of Alexander (that which already they
begin to do): to cut off with violence, what they cannot by art untie.

#Sect. 37. It follows not because we use the Lords prayer and Creed in
Baptism, that therefore we may use the Cross. For the word Cross implies 3.
senses contrary to the word.
FRom the form, come we to examine the matter, when Bellarmine would prone we
add in Baprisme the Lords prayer, and the Creed, and the renuntiation as
culpably as they the Cross and Oil, he has these words: Bellarmin de bapt.
ca. 24.
neque his repugnat quod or atio domiuica sit in scripturis and simbo lum qu^ad
sensum. Nam inscriptur^ non habetur or recitetur in Baptism. But we have for
addition of the creed and the Lords prayer the general warrant out of the
word, which wills decency in administering of the Sacrament: whereas the
Cross is in double transgression. First; Non habetur in Scripturis that he and
his word should be used in Baptism, either by special or general warrant.
Then his word is so far from being in scripture [Quoad sensum] as that it
implies three senses which are contrary to the word. First, when i^ says:
We receive this child into the congregation of Christ's flock, and sign him
with the sign of the Cross* the copulation of this word [and] takes in the
Cross, to have an hand in the childs incorporation, which the Canon bears
before it, when it affirms that the sign of the Cross does serve in
Baptism to dedicate the child to Christ. This what is it less, then that
which the Torrens. confess. August. lib. 4. cap. 9. sect. 4.
grosnes of popery it self would countenance by Augustine, Augustine. de
lymbol. ad catech. cap. ^.
per signum Crucis in vtero Ecclesia concepti estis: d Per signum Cru^^s
suscipit vos matter Ecclesia. Our Church to the contrary, investeth the water
unto this honor: Harmon. confess. sect. 13. confess. Belgica.
Baptismo in Ecclesiam Dei, re^ipimur and a peregrinis omnibus religionibus
segregamur, vt pote illi soli co^secrati cuius symbola and insignia gestamus.
Secondly, when the words of the Cross say in token he may not be ashamed to
fight under his banner against the Devil, and they make the Cross to be the
banner of Christ's soldiers: if not to confirm them to the fight, yet out of
question to make them known. Which, have we it any where taught in the
scriptures? First, says Bellar. de imag. ca. 2^
Bellarmine calls for adoration to the Cross, even for this, because it is
Christ's Banner (for we may not come short of the heathen says he) we must
as well adore the banner of our Christ, as they Sozom. histor lib. ^. cap. 4.
adore the military banners of their Emperors* me thinks it is an hard thing
for us, to confirm them in this Idolatry with such an acknowledgment as that
it is indeed his banner. Secondly, it has ever ben a quarrel between our
writers and the papists that the Cross is no banner of Christ's soldiers, no
not so much as by it to make them known. Martial affirms that the Cross is
Christ's banner Master Calfhill Calfh against Mart art. 7.
denies it, and he is thus seconded by Doctor Fulke. D^ Fulk reioynd. art. 7.
p. 190.
Further you say the note, that the material Cross is no Ensign of Christ,
has simple proof, but (indeed) your assertion that it should be the ensign
of Christ has no prove at all. And again: Idem. ibi. art. 1. page 144.
That Cassiodorus and Lactantius spoke of the sign of the Cross it is
granted, but because they speak of it besides the book of God* Master
Calfhill does well to disprooue their reasons, as where Cassiodore compares
the sign of the Cross, upon the faithful to the Princes stamp on the coin*
the comparison is naught, for the sign of the Cross which is upon hipocrites
shows them not to be Christ's servants. Neither did Christ give any such
outward sign, by which they should be known who would profess themselves to
be his servants but only Baptism. To the last foot of his sentence there is
another that fetteth Gualt. in Luc. homi. 9^.
Quin potius m^mi^eyimus, etc. we must remember that we were by baptism made
the soldiers of Jesus Christ, to fight under his banner against the Devil.
Thirdly, not only to make Christ's soldiers known, but also to strengthen
them in the warfare do the words of the Cross make him their ensign and
their banner. When one of our writers bends himself to shake the power of
confirmation, he speaks thus: They And Willet* de confirmat. p. 4.
deprive Baptism of the proper use thereof, which is a sign to us of the
assistance of Gods spirit, to sight manfully against the Devil: Now Baptism
be a sign of our victory against the Devil, yet they rob Baptism of his
honor, and give it to Confirmation. I care not for the quint-essentiall
interpretations which some have distilled of late, these words (in token, he
shall not be ashamed to fight, but continue his faithful soldier) do in the
intent of the authors of our communion book, and in common construction make
the Cross a sign of the assistance of God spirit to fight manfully against
the Devil, so that the Cross does prejudice Baptism even as confirmation
does. Indeed confirmation speaks no otherwise their the Cross, the cross no
otherwise the^ it: Thom Aquin. pa. 3. qu. 75 ar. 9
signantur confirmandi Chrismate sig^^ Crucis in fro^^d, vt in manifesto
ostendant se Christianos esse. Et ne nomen Christi ob timorem vei ^r
ubessentiam praetermittant. Bartholo. Caranz. in Council. Florentin.
Again, Ideo in front vbi verecondiae seeds est confirmand^^ in vngitur ne
Christi nomen confiteri erubescat, et praecipue crucem eius propr^r quod c^ucis
signo signatur. Compare with these words: in token he be not ashamed to
confess the faith of Christ Jesus crucified, savor they not of the same
spirit? speak they not the same languadge? may not the same Dialect of Rome be
most easily discerned in both?

#Sect. 38. The Opposites saying that the Cross is the sign of Christ
crucified, confuted.
THe third doctrine which the word of the cross brings in, is that it is the
sign of Christ crucified. Which, where have we in the scripture, unless in
the places which papists cite, which our Calfh. ag. Mart. ar. ^ fol. 38. D
Fulk reioynd. art. 1. p. 135.136. D. Willer de crew artic. 3.
writers long since have proved to mean the word and the Sacraments joined
with the inward seal of the spirit, but not the Cross. These places are
(Isay. 49.22.) whence they prove the Cross to be Christ's standart. (Iere.
4.6.) whence they prove it to be Christ's banner. Ezech. 9.4. whence they
prove it to be Christ's mark. Apoc. 7.3. whence they prove it to be Christ's
sign Ephesians. 1.13. whence they prove it to be Christ's seal. Math. 24.30.
whence they prove it to be the sign of the son of man. Now so distressed is
the cause of the Cross, as that our Opposites are not ashamed to cite some of
these places of the papists for it: that which (indeed) Master Hooker
himself was ashamed once to do, who no doubt considered that if it be a shame
for papists to cite for the Cross, those places of scripture which Valentinus
the heretic cited (as our D. Fulse*
writers object unto them): that the^ it is an utter shame for any Protestant
to defend a cross as different from the popish, and yet to be able to bring
no diverse scripture for it. Again, we cry out against the papists for citing
scriptures for the Cross, because it is held by their own Church to be a
tradition that bath no ground at all in scripture: as Decret. p. 1. distin.
(...) cap. 5.
Quae scriptura salutiferae Crucis signaculo fideles docuit insign^r^ (says
their canon law it felfe.) But our Opposites may not in this case cry out
against them, the beam is in their own eye, who join with the basest of the
papists, to prove the sign of the Cross by scripture, against the
principal Magdeb^. centur. 1. li. 2. cap. 6. colum. 406 407. D. Full reioyn
art. 1. pa. ^54. Calf. art. ^ fol 20.
lights of our Church, who though they grant the Cross it self is
prefigured in the old Testament, and named in the new, to describe the curse
of our Lords death, and the merit thereof, yet stand out strongly against his
sign of it, that it is neither prefigured not mentioned from the beginning to
the end, much less mentioned with so honorable a style, and tittle as to be
counted the sign of Christ. Nay our Calfh. art. 2. page 44.
writers go further, they tell us the scriptures will not fuffer us to use the
cross for a sign of Christ. O happy age of ours (then) that has found out
what never could be found before, to wit, that there be scriptures that do
warrant it, what might they be? The first that is stood on (by our Opposites)
is Ezech. 9.4. where when the Angel preserves from destruction by setting T.
in the forehead of the faithful, the sign of the Cross in the forehead is
made (say they) or alluded unto; for thus (now) they reason, iumpe with
Bellarm. de imagine. cap. 29. Mart. de Cruc. art. ^
Bellarmine and with Martial, and with the rest of the papists. First it is
not the letter T but Tau the word that is here used, which signifies a sign,
so that the Angel is said only here to set a mark or a sign in their
foreheads: Chryso. ad popul. Antioc. homil. 18. apud Sixth. senens. Bibliothec.
li. 2. fo. 121 Cypri. co^t* Demetrian. ap. D. Fulk reioind. ar. 2. p. 147. and
cont. Saund. de imag. cap. 13. p. 663.
as in Apoc. 7.3. and 9.4. So does the Septuagint render it (...) do Aquila
and Symmadus; so do the Fathers take it for signum indeterminatum, and for
quodcunque signum. There be learned papists themselves, that either cite this
place in their Arrius Montain.
Lexicons to prove that the Hebrewe Tau does signify a sign; or leave it
Sanctes Pagnin.
indifferent between the letter T. and the word. But Theodosion understands
the letter. No, but leaves only the word Tau Hieron. in hunc loc. 1 Samuel 21.14.
untranslated, as he does the word Baddim, a little before, and as his manner
is to do in every word which he takes to be mystical. Now what is this to
the Cross? sure no more then the Tau, which some say, was set on Cain, neither
does the Angel make Crosses here more then David made crosses on Achis his
gates for the word Tau is used there as well as in this place. The Tau that was
set on Cain and preserved him (say some of our Opposites) was but a praeludium
to those other which should figure the salvation of Christ's Cross: but (me
thinks) the text shows plainly enough what Cains mark was, to wit, these
words engraven in his flesh, he that kills Cain shall be revenged 7. sold:
for (to omit all other reasons) how else could this promise be so famous as by
Lamech the profane we see it was? And the Crosses which David, may be concluded
by this reason, to have scraped on Achis door, are they for the Crosses credit
too? who is censured by the Church, as a poor and miserable man, Psalm. 34.7*
for the making of them? for these Taues preserved him too, even as the Cross
preserues now a days many a Minister fatt, and shining in his benefice,
howsoever before the Lord they are poor and miserable that do make him,
especially they that do make him for fear of their living, as David made his
Taues and marks for fear of life. But to conclude, it is here the word Tau
that signifies signum in general, which cannot be restrained to the sign of
the Cross of all other signs, because during the time of the old Testament,
it was held and esteemed execrable: as a papist Alanus. de sacrament. lib. 1.
ar. 2.
himself confesses.

#Sect. 39. Though Tau were in the text, yet cannot a Cross be colleleth from
it, unless we ground doctrine upon the mysteries of Letters, which the
Gnostickes, Valentinians, and the Cabalistes use.
SEcondly, what if the letter T. be in the text, yet cannot a Cross be
collected hence without wringing and churning, yea without part of that
vanity also of grounding doctrines upon the mysteries of letters which the
Gnostick heretics, and the Vale^tinians, and the Cabalistes use, and the
Sixth. senens: Bibliothec. li. 3. page 146. Genebrad. in ann. ante Christum*
not. 87.
papists themselves condemn. All the letters of the Hebrewe Alphabet are
mystical (says Hieron. de nominibus Hebra.
Hierome) who holds not this position vain? yet is it the ground whereupon
the Cross is foundded in this place, and that by this mystical Hierome, who
yet resolves not on the matter but rather rehearses what the opinions of
others ar, as these words show, Hieron. in hunc loc.
et us ad mostra veniamus: and his whole drift, not in this place only, but in
all his commentaries: in which as he tells his reader elsewhere, he writes
rather out of the opinions of other men, then out of his own judgment. And
when he explicateth the sign here meant by the words of Solomon, pone me
sicut signum, Cant. 8. of David: signatum est super nos Iumen vultus tui. Psalm.
4. and of Paul: Nolite contristari spiritum a quo signati estis, it is plain
that some of the authors, whom he followed, understood this sign to be
spiritual and not an outward mark, which is the ^enent of all our Calfhil.
again. Mart. art. 1.2. D. Fulk relo^^d. ibid.
writers. If our Opposites have found out since the sign of an outward Cross
in this place, I would they would tell us which way they came by it. The
Machabees in their banner used the first-letter of the words in Exodus 15.11.
M. C. B. I. to express the whole sentence. Is this cours^ here used? Then by
the letter T. what more likely to be meant then the word Torah which
signifies the Law; to show the men here preserved, were such as kept the Law;
and bewailed the transgressions which were committed against it which was the
opinion of the Jews as Hieron, in hunc loc. glos. ordi.
Hierome mentions, and which conlecture f^^^t-s^^en* bibli^^ he^. li. 2. fo.
121
some p^pistes with Lyran. in hunc loc.
others cannot reject. In the Apoc. the situation of a and o in the Alphabet is
used to describe the Lord Christ Jesus to be the beginning and the end. Is this
course here taken? then what more likely by the letter T. the last consonant to
be meant then either Christ the end of all (as Hector Pintus in hunc loc.
some) or the perfection of knowledge taught by Christ (as Petrus Serranus in
hunc loc.
others) or perfection of science in the men here signed (as Hieron. Strab. in
glos. ordi.
others) or a Sixth. S^nens. vt supr.
perfection of obedience in them as humane frailty did permit. Last of all,
the figures of letters were respected by Pythagoras when he described the life
of man by the letter Y. and by the Idem Bibliot. li. 3^ pa. 145.
officers of war, when T. noted the living. the dead and slain, because this
letter has the form of a men thrust thorough, as it were with a dart. It were
hard to say the holy Ghost takes this course here. But what if he do? For a
papist him self confesses, long Hector Bint. in hunc. loc.
falluntur opinione qui asserunt hanc literam apud Hebraeos crucem esse, nullam
enim habet crucis figuram. Ita. n. scribitur. which makes a fair pair of
Calfhil. art. 2. fo. 44
gallows in deed, but comes nothing near a Cross Hence it is, that the
chief defenders of this opinion waver much; as is to be seen in one of them
for all the rest. Sixth. senens. Bibliothec. li. 2. page 120.
Fuit signum T. nifallor, (mark ni fallor) figura Crucis. But it is objected
out of Hieron. ad Paulln.
Hierome, that the old Hebrew T. had the form of a (...)
Cross like to the Greek, that this which now has not the form of a Cross,
was changed by Ezrah, witness this, that the Tau of the Samaritanes, who kept
the old Hebrew letters, was of the Crosses form. First, it is unlikely that
Ezrah would leave to the Samaritanes, the enemies of God the ancient characters
of Gods own finger wherein the Oracles of God were written, and put the Church
to new. Secondly, though he changed in other places, yet not here, because the
fashion of this T. being marred, the mystery was marred which depended upon
it. which he (no question) understood, if there were any such. Thirdly, It is
untrue that the old Samaritane T. was a cross. Guilibelm Postell. de liter.
Faenitum.
Postellus tells us it was of an other fashion. a man in this matter to be
rather believed then they, who cannot tell how to refer it, whether to this
figure. as Sixth. Senens. vt supra.
some, or to this T. out of Tertul. cont. Marcion. ca. 30
Tertullian, as others which by Isidor. Hispalens.
some is called the Greek T. by Mart. in reply. art. ^
others the Roman T. Others say Ezechiell had reference to the Hebrew, Greek,
and Roman, and all. as Act. and mo nument. pa. 1940.
Friar Billing, Parson of Wilton at the burning of Spicer and Maundrell at
Sarum. Fourthly, there is no agreement about Ezrahes exchange of the Hebrew
letters. One Genebrar. Chronic. li. 2. in anmun. 36^^
affirms, there was a change a while, but after, a return to the old
letters again. Rabbi Simon denies that ever there was any change at all.
Rabbi Moses Gerundensis says, The change of them was at the first Ibid. in
anmun. 3203
Division of the Kingdom in the days of Rhehoboam, to differ from the ten
Tribes that were grown Idolatrous. The Ibid, in an. 3710.
most common opinion is, that Ezra changed them immediately upon the return
from Babylon, to differ from the Samaritans. But all this is strooken dead in
the neast by Caesar Baron. anal. in an. Christ. 180.
Caesar Baronius, who lahoureth to prove that Ezra never changed the letters:
that the old ancient Copies of the Hebrew Bibles were many of them remaining
in Ezralies time. that they all are in one character (to wit the old and
ancient character of the Hebewes. Howbeit Baronius him self sayleth in part,
the whole matter is here of late brought cleerlie to light by Joseph Scaliger,
who writes thus: The old Hebrewe and the Samaritane letters be all one, and
the letter Tau in neither of them is like a Cross or the Greek or Roman T.
Hierome what he recites of Ezraes change and of the old Samaritane Tau, he
takes word by word out of Origene in Romans Origin was deceived by a Jew,
on whose bare relation he grounded him self: which relation was also false.
Whereas Hierome says elsewhere, he saw a Samaritane copy, that was after he
had written this: if before he had seen it, he would have seen Origens
error, and have prevented it in him self. But if there be any thing worth the
learning in this error, it is this, Hierome and others think it a worthy thing
for Ezra to change the letters of the scripture, to the end that the Church
may differ from Samaritanes and from aliens, even in their writing. An ensample
of like zeal we see in Paul. D^^t. (...). ^^.
Vlid the Arabian, who when he meant to enlarge the religion of Mahomet, not
only rased the churches of the Christians that were in Damascus, but also
abolished their very letters. making a law that nothing should be written in
Greek but in Arabique only. And when the Christians were after afflicted
because they would not menscrizare (that is) conform, who can say but that
they stood out against these characters amongst the rest which they refused.
What then? We may not conform to the Cross especially in religious use, it
being a Character of the beast, but our Church must change it, and make a law
against it, if it mean to be zealous after the pattern and proportion of
these examples. Thirdly, let it be the word Tau, or the letter T. let the
letter be changed or not changed: all is one, and this one thing is nothing for
the Cross. Then are the Fathers nothing, neither (say our Opposites) for they
are all of them for the Cross even in this text. But may we not a little
chaung the words of Christ, and say to the Fathers in this matter, Men what
have we to do with you? even as we are prompted by Doctor Fulke. Master
Calfhill (says D. Fulke reioyn. art 1. pa. 137.
he) does justly reprove the Fathers for so high extolling the sign of the
cross which has no ground in the word of God, but was brought in either by
contention against the heathens who despised it, or in emulation of heretics
who first used it. We must give the Fathers leave to play, and according to
their own pleasure not only to fetch the figure of the Croffe out of this Tau,
but also out of the Aug^. cont. Faust. lib. 12. cap. 34.
two sticks which the Widow of Sarepta gathered, yea to fetch a Cross and a
T. too out of the 300. Augusti. questi. suplib. Iudle, lib. 7. ca. 17
soldiers of Gedion, who (me thinks) resemble the 300. ministers, who now
stand out against the Cross: for that, disdayning to ley down under the
burden of an evil conscience to drink at ease the pleasant waters of
conformity, they are contented to lapp like dogs the waters of marah, or
rather to be used like dogs: surely, no more to be called Naomi (although
their gifts and their labors in the Church had made them beautiful) but
Marah rather, because the Lord beginning judgment at his own house, has
showed them bitterness. Secondly, what though the Cross be here insinuated,
that is nothing to the sign of the Cross in the foreheade, but to Pet.
serran. in hunc loc. Calfhill. ag. Mart. art. 2 D. Fulke. reioyn. ibid page 146.
Christ's Cross only, on which he died, which is not here insinuated neither
for any honor to it self, but for the forshewing of Christ's death, whereof it
was the cursed instrument. As for the sign of the forehead mentioned in the
Revelation, Hector Pintus in hunc loc.
it is as fondly (after Aquinas, Martial, the Rhemistes, and the rest of that
^^^ble) drawn to the aereall figne of the Cross, as this sign of Ezechiell
is. For, this Mr. Calfh ag. Mart. art. 1. D. Fulke. reio. ar. 1. p. 137
sign in the revelation gives the Spirit of life and faith, so does not the
Cross. this sign makes a difference between good and bad, so does not the
Cross; this sign in the forehead notes those who with open Ioh^n. de ^a^^o.
in Apo^. ca. 7
forheads should profess the Gospel, even as they, who are not signed in the
forehead. verse. 9. note those who should lie hid, and not so openly profess as
the former; who yet made the sign of the Cross in the forehead, as well as
the former, called to martyrdom and confession, if antiquity be true. Thirdly,
what if the sign of the Cross in the forehead, be alluded to in Ezechiell and
in the Apocalips? yet this makes nothing for the sign of the Cross in
Baptism, because it was tolerable in old time, Lambet Dane. cont. Bellarm. de
Imag. c. 29
quatenus erat testimonium confessionis in trepida contra ethnicos, not
Lambert. Dane. don't, Bellarm. de Imag. c. 29
quatenus it was a sign in baptism. Fourthly, Our Opposites that entitle the
sign of the Cross to the place of Ezech. and that of the Apoca. the same must
needs entitle it to an effectiue and operative power, for such a power does
the text give to the signs of these scriptures. witness the very Fathers
themselves, who thinking these textes to speak of the Cross, conclude out of
them that the sign of the Cross does arm, defend, preserve us. of which
error we are ashamed to our shame until we disclaim their interpretation of
this scripture, and the obligation of their authority in this question of the
Cross.

#Sect. 40. That the sign of the Cross, is not the sign of the Son of man.
THE second scripture which of late we have heard alleged against us, is the
24. chap. of Math. 30. verse. where some of our Opposites will have the sign of
the son of man to be the sign of the Cross, even as the Fathers teach.
Alas, whether will the Fathers carry them? Because of the Fathers they will
believe that a sign of the Cross shall appear in heaven, for a forerunner of
Christ his coming unto judgment. Will they not awake to see that this is no
other dream then that which Lactantius dreameth, There shall be a great sword
let fall from the heaven into the earth, before Christ's coming unto
judgment, for a token and sign thereof? which (me thinks) they are bound to
believe, as well as the other. for he has scripture as good, [ Lactant. lib^*
^e vita Beat. cap. 19.
When I come I will send a sword into the earth]. And how is it probable
that Christ should call that his sign which him self ordained not? which can
be no D. Fulk. ag. Rhem. Luke 24. sect. 5.
convenient sign of his, because a meare invention of man's: and which he
foresawe in time should become an Idol of abomination, and a mark of his
ennemie the man of sin and perdition? There is (then) no probability for the
Cross. is there probability for any thing else? First it is Calvin: Baeza,
Buc^*
thought that by this sign of the son of man, there are meant (by way of
Synecd^che) the great signs of glory and majesty, which then shall compass
him round about: and shall omnium oculos convertere ad se, quasi signo dato.
which seems to have strength from the explication which does follow, He
shall be seen come in the clouds with power and great glory.

Secondie, it is Johan: Piscator. in schol. D^ Fulk. in reioynd. are. ^ page
136.
thought, that as the sign of Circumcision is nothing else but Circumcision it
self, so here the sign of the son of man is nothing else, but the son
of man him self, as a certain sign that the time is come of the last
judgment* which receives strength by the conference of the other
Evangelistes, who in steed of these words [Then shall appear the sign of
the Son of man, Romans 4. Luke 21. Marc. 13.
] have only these, Then shall the Son of man appear. Near to this one,
Chrisost. In Math. homil. 49*
Quidam putant Crucem Christi ostendendam esse in coelo: verius autem est ipsum
Christum in corpore suo habentem testimonia passionis, (id est) vulnera lanciae
and clavorum.

Thirdly, it is Muscul.
thought, that a sign here stands for a signification of Christ's coming to
this sense: These foresaid eventes shall be a certain signification, and (as
it were) a sign of my coming. And because the Rollocus. in 1 Thessalonians. cap. 4.
and Park. on the Creed.
fyring of the heaven and of the earth, is one of the chief of all the rest,
therefore chiefly it is accoun^^d to be this sign. I can not omit the words
of one: Lambert. Dane. cont.
The sign of the Son of man, is the very same things which Christ
foreshewed in the 29. verse, before should fall out in the Sun, Moon, and
Stars, and not any other thing. Therefore after Christ had foreshewed the
signs that were nearest to his coming, he adds for conclusion and
explication sake, that these signs are the very signs of his coming. And
what can be alleged against these things? The Fathers? But they agree not.
Bellarm. de Imag. ^a. 28
Bellarmines mouth runs over exceedingly, when he says that the ancient
Fathers omnes ad vnum interpret this sign to be the Cross. For Chriso stome
thinks it to be the body of Christ it self. Hierome writes thus: Signum hic
aut Crucis intelligamus. ant vexillum victoriae trium phantis. Beda follows
him in the same words. Theophilacte holds the true Cross shall appear
whereon Christ dyed. So does Sybilla, O lignum faelix in quo Deus ipse
pependit. Nec te terra capit, sed coeli tecta videbis. And Tho. waldens. Tom.
3. tit. 20. cap. 158.
Thomas Waldensis follows the^. Abulensis and Iansenius are of another
opinion. They think it shall be a Cross compacted of glorious and of lightsome
air. Now is it likely that the wood of the Cross which has been so long ago
rotten, shall be raised up again in glory? Seeing the promise hereof belongs
to the members of Christ only; who receive it from the power of his own
rising? Thirdly, If ihe sign of the son of man be here admitted to be the
Cross, the true cross and the crosses image which is material, is here
authorized, (which our church has broken and overthrown) but the aereall
sign of the forehead is never the nearer, if our Opposits keep their old
tennes still.

#Sect. 41. An answer to the argument of the Opposites which is taken from
Visions and Apparitions.
FRom scriptures we must come to Visions and Apparitions whereby God himself
from heaven has showed (say our Opposites) that the Cross is a sign of his
sons, Sect. 41.
and a mark of his own. For when Constantine was in suspense on what God he
were best to rely for victory, did not the Cross appear in the air unto
him with this subscription, In hoc signo vinces, In this sighe thou shall
overcome. First, this word [signe] is foysted in by a sixth singer. Eusebius. de
vit. ^^^st. lib. 1. cap. 22.
Eusebius naming only (...) huic vince. Socrat. Histor. lib. ^. cap. Niceph.
lib 2. cap. 29. Zonar. in Constanti.
Socrates and others (...) in hoc vince (to wit) in this Christ. Secondly, It
was not the sign of the cross that appeared, but a sight somewhat like it
(...) says the story, made after the fashion of a Cross, to wit, (...), a
mark of Christ's name. This mark contains the two first letters of his name
X Eusebius. quo supra. c. 25.
P. so that the P. was made an X. by crossing as it were a spear a sloope,
Ioh. Reyn. confer. diuis 4. ca. 8. page 508.
either after this manner ^ or as Lypsius upon the vewe of ancient coins does
draw it thus, ^. The former of these comes nearest to the description of
Eusebius, therefore the latter may be some imitation of it, even as in coins
there was a diversity in imitation. Prosper. page 3. de promis cap 34.
Arcadius stamped his coin with a common cross upon a victory which he
obtained against the Persians. before which, as the battle was joining,
certain crosses appeared on the garments of his soldiers. This stamp (says
the story) grew Genebras. in anno Chri. 404.
common to all the world, especially it was used in Asia; and the use of it
does endure unto this day. As the stamp of Arcadius differed from that of
Constantines, so did the stamp of Theodosius which was X. P. S. which the
latter age has vitiously imitated. taking the midlemost for a Roman P. which
in Greek is an Godescal. Steweckiu. in Veget. dear milit. lib. ^. ca. 18
R. There have been coin of Magnentius seen with Lypsius his form, which why
it might not be an imitation of Constantines figure rather the^ the figure of
Constantine him self, I see no manifest reason. But what form soever the two
first letters of Christ's name had in Co^stantines days, the Onuphri. de fast.
lib. 2. Vazq. de adorat. lib. 3. disput. 2 cap. 4.
letters of his name they were not (say Papists themselves D. Fulk. reioynd*
art 1. page 138
to which we add not) the cross, which he wore in his helmet, and set in his
Labarum, whether it were on the topp, framed of some solid matter or in his
flagge drawn and embrodered or both these ways in both these places (which I
take to be the Prudent. stan. lib. 1. in symach.
truest) with this ba^ner he overcame (without thanks to the cross) Eusebius. de
vit. Constan. lib. 2. cap. 54.
(...) to wit, D. Fulk. reioynd. art 2. page 148
holding forth the forenamed characters of Christ's name. See you not (then)
the cross discorded from this apparition? For whatsoever honor has accrewed
to him by the same, it came either from the alchymie of the Bishops in those
days, who drew a Cross out of the sight which Constantine saw, or from the
sophistry of Papists since.

The Bishops of those days thought it good polity to make Eusebius. de vit.
Constant lib. ^ cap. 22.
Constantine and the world believe, that not only the name of Christ had
appeared, but also the cross; as the sight (you see) was somewhat like. Hence
is it that Constantine is set up in the for^m at Rome with a Cross in his
hand, with this inscription, Eusebius. histor. lib. 9. cap. 9.
Hoc salutari signo verac^ fortitudinis inditio Civitatem nostram a iugo
tyranni ereptam liberavi, and S. P. Q R. liberatum pristino splendori and
claritati restitui. Hereupon also they adored Zozom. histor. lib. 1. cap. 4.
labar^m of the Romans is changed to a Cross, to draw the Army to the
adoring of Christ the sooner. Yet so, Bellarm. de imag. cap. 27.
vt vexilli formam non amitteret. It is said by some, the labarum was a Cross
before this change, so that the Cross bar whereupon the Eusebius. de vit.
Constant. lib. 1. cap: 25. Jewel art. 14. diuis. 3^ Lambert. Dane. con.
Bellarmin. de Imag. ca. 28.
^lagge did hang seems to be the Cross of this Labarum. which though it
were there before, yet was it not eminent by the name of a Christian Cross as
now it is. Latter ages added the rest of this Labarum, as now Papists do
Dura^* de rit. li. ^c. 6. sect. 11. Bellar. de Imag. c. 27. Iaco. Pamel. in
Tert. Vazq. de adorat.
describe it: who also have turned it into a Vaz li 3. dis. ^. c. 4
. which now is set over the flag in the room of it in all processions.

#Sect. 42. Answers to the arguments, which the Opposites take from miracles.
FRom Apparitions we must come to Miracles, whereby God has manifested in the
judgment of our Opposites, that the cross is a sign undoubted of his holy
fonnes passion. When he would foreshew to Zozom. Histor. lib. 5. cap. 2.
Julian that his Gospel should prevayle, he did it by a Cross environed with a
crown, which he caused to appear unto him in the entrulles of a beast in the
midst of his divining. When he would make known to the Jews, his gospel
should prevail against them repairing the Temple of Jerusalem to deface it, he
did it by certain Ibid. ca. 2^
signs of crosses appearing in the builders garments. Last of all, when he
would foreshewe the renewing of his Gospel by Martin Luther, he did it in Anno
1450. by Ioh Picus. Mirandula de myste. cruc. ad Maxim.
bloody Crosses, Nails, Spunges and Spears; which appeared in the garments of
men and women, yea in their rocks as they were a spinning. First I answer with
one D. Fulk. reioyn. art ^. page 14^
of our writers: If the Lord would in those times use the Cross for an outward
sign, what is that to defend any present abuse of it? Did not God work a
great miracle by the brazen ^o. Reynol. Confer. ca. 8. diuis. 4. page 508.
serpent, which must be broken for all that when it is abused? Secondly, It was
not for the Crosses sake that God ever used it (as if it were any sign of his
sons) but per accidens, for that occasion which then it affoorded, as Paul
once used Socr. histo. lib. 5. ca. 17
the Altar of Athens for his turn, a thing much esteemed of amongst the
Idolaters. And the Christians the T. of Sirapis, much accounted of among his
Priests, as signifying in their theology vitam venturam? What then? to retain
a cross for an ordinary sign, because God or man have sometimes made use
extraordinary of it, is as if we should still set up Altars because of that D.
Fulk. ag. Saint. of Imag. cap. 13.
extraordinary use which Paul had once of an Altar at Athens. and retain
Theodo. lib. 5. ca. 2^ Beda histo. Anglor. lib 1. cap. 17.
holy water and Euagri. lib. 4. cap. 35.
holy bread for the sakes of those miracles which are storried of them, or
finally the D. Fulk. reioyn. art. 3. page 15^.
Oil and Imposition of hands, for the diseases which they cured, and the
gifts of the holy Ghost which were miraculously bestowed by the^. Thirdly,
These miracles were done to grace the Willihel. Perk. pro^. page 84.
faith which the cross then commonly signified, and the prayer which the
cross gestured wrought all in all, it was not to grace the Cross it self,
neither was it the cross it self that did effect these things. The Image which
Julian broake was revenged Zozom. histor. lib. 5. cap. 10.
miraculously. What? to grace Images? No, but to punish Julian, who in the
Image dishonored Christ. A baptizing Theodor. histo. lib. 2. cap. 27.
garment by Constantius the Emperor is given to Macarius of Jerusalem. this
garment is sold to a stageplayer, who falls down dead whiles he had it on his
back. what to grace holy vestures, as the Duran. lib 2. c. 9. sect 4
papists will have it? No say we, but to reve^ge the despite, contempt, and
profanenes of the player. Leo 1 Naucler
the 4. Emperor of Constantinople takes the Crown that was full of precious
stones out of the treasury of Sophia* a while after he had set is on his
head, he falls into a fever and dies. what to grace sumptuous adorning of
Churches? No, but to punish sacrilege. Fourthly, seeing the papist adoreth the
Cross with the greater honor, the greater miracles that he has wrought, a
badd office do we perform who use the Cross the more honorably for his
Miracles sake. It was ill done of the Jews to make Elias his Altar upon Mount
Carmell, Cornel. Taci. histo. lib. 2.
an high place to serve God in for the John Reynold de Idolo^at. lib. 2. cap. 3
sect 46.
miracles sake which God showed in it. How (then) can it be well done of us to
bring the Cross into Gods service for the miracles which God has wrought by
him against all Protestant writers, who not only refute papists error for
their superstitious and unlawful worship to the Cross, but also for this
their Joseph. Scaliger. de Idolol. Halens.
unsound reasoning for the same. Fifthly, our common Ibid. p. 45
objection against the Papists is, that their Saints, Images and Crosses had
store of miracles when they had no need, and when there was none, that did
impugn them but want miracles now a days at, greatest need, when so many
rise up against them. Against this there arise in the midst of us, who set a
broach even modern miracles for the Cross. As a Father (says one) wishing
his child had been cross in the seat of natures impuritie, had a next child
borne without vent there. First let the time be considered when this miracle is
ronge, which was grateful to the papists of those parts, to back a former
miracle of theirs about the Crucifixe. Iustus Just. Lyps. de Maria Halans.
Lypsius Deifieth the Lady of Halles, because her image remains untouched
when fire confirms round about her: even so the Papists of those parts,
were in a cry, Great is the Crucifixe, because in fresh memory, a Crucifixe
of Dunneid remains without hurt, when round about it, the Church and windows
were thorn with thunder, that which diverse went forth to see. Secondly, let
the person of the Father be considered, upon whom it is fathered. For how could
the proclaymer hereof either better revenge himself, then to set him upon the
stage, who stopped at home his popish leavene, and detected abroad many of his
badde proceedings; or gratify better his frindes of the other side, then to
make him a spectacle of Gods Judgment in the Crosses reveng, who had before
made himself odious to them, all by service effectually performed in the
apprehension of diverse of them? At one time being unable to enter a certain
popish house he beats down a Cross in ieste, that stands over the door.
A great matter is made hereof, as if there were renewed the miracle of the
Cross, which hindered Paul. Diacon lib. 1.
Homar in his attempt, until it was taken away. Thirdly, let the subject of
this miracle be considered, how homely it is, and how much sauouring of that
spirit, which coined a miracle of our home Kentismen, borne with tails,
because they hanged tails upon Beda. hist. Anglor. Genebrar. in Anno Do. 595.
Augustine the Monk, and of the Vincent. Beluacens. lib. 23. cap 159. Pa^cic.
Tempor. in an. 754.
wife of Gingolphus, letting escape with her tail as often as she spoke, because
deriding her husbands miracles she had said before, that her tail made
music, as much as he made miracles. Fourtly, let the malice be considered of
this miracle: For suppose the child was so borne, are there not instances of
children so borne, even in the same country, whose parents never offended the
Cross? Is it not folly in Caesar. Barph. Anal. In ann. 271
Julius Firmicus (a favorer of fate) to impute all the plagues of Plotinus his
death, to fates revenge, because he had written against it? If Joseph.
Scaliger de Idolo. Halens. pa. 48
Zwickius have his nose cut of with a shot, must it needs be the Lady of
Hales that has done it, to revenge her self upon him? or if Risselman, loose
his chinne, in like manner, must this needs befall him for his contempt of
that Idol. Fifthly, consider the falsehood of this miracle. If he could have
reported of this child, that he was borne sollid and flat posteriore Julius
Obsequens lib de prodig. cap. 85.
natura part, (as once one at Rome) their had the birth been (indeed)
prodigious. But this child was not so borne, only he had a stoppage within.
Which being removed by the Physicians advise, he dyed afterward of a scouring.
He reports (also) that the Father had wished before, the Minister had Crossed
his brother there howbeit being wary, he puts in [I hear saye] this
hearsaye since, upon inquiry, is found a liar. By reason hereof the Father
slaundered, may well take up the words of Hierome, Hieron. in Episto. 62.
Ne probare cogatur audisse se dicit. O si and mihi liberet dicere quae multi
clamitant and aliorum maledictis acquiescerem. iam and nos intelligeret scire
quae omnes sciunt and me quoque audire quae nullus ignorant. (...) conclude,
which is the worst miracle of all? that which does not only Chrisost. in 2 Thessalonians. cap. 2.
indu^er^ ad falsa, but is also falsum, even such a one is this.

#Sect. 43. The refuge which the Opposites seek to have by the Fathers,
removed, both because they passed measure herein, as also, that the case and
time is now far changed.
THE last refuge of our Opposites is the hold which they have by the Fathers,
who generally term and call the Cross Signum fidei, Caesar Baron. Anal. in ann
286
Trophaum fidei, Signum Dei, Signum Christi, Signum Dominicum, with the like.
First the custom of the Fathers herein, none ever yet was able to justify. as
who are known to crown the Cross with this honorable name more often then
the water it self of Baptism. Quid August. cont. Faust. lib. 19. c. 14.
est (says Augustine) quod omnes noverunt esse signum Christi, nisi Crucem
Christi? speaking as if all men had forgotten that it is the water in Baptism
that is Christ's sign. Nay, the Cross not only jetteth in the name of
Christ's sign whereof it has robbed the water in Baptism, but also
throughout the Fathers writings bestows this name away from the water on
whom please him, even on as many of his attendants as he thinks good. The
Fathers call the Creed Ambros. de veland. virgin.
Signaculum cordis nostri. Wherefore? For the Crosses sake it seems that did
go with it, as these words show: August. de symbo. ad catecu. lib. 2 cap. 1
Quando voluerit adversarius insidiari noverit redemptus cum symboli Sacramento
and Crucis vexillo debere occurrere. So is the imposition of hands called, a
Dionis. de Ecleesiast. Hierach.
Consignation for the Crosses sake wherewith it was administered. On the Oil
many are the tyties which he bestows in the writings of the Fathers. who
call it for the Crosses sake, Cypri. in Episto ad Iubaian.
Signaculum dominicum. Ambros. de Sacram. lib. 3. ca. 2
signaculum spirituale. Synod. Trullan. cap. 95.
signaculum Dei and Spiritus sancti: yea (...) also, that is Eusebius. hist. lib.
6. c. 35.
sigillum. Seeing the Fathers overlashe thus far, we need not be moved
much with their authority brought against us, who are not the first that hold
this sign was D. Fulk. reioynd. art. 3. page 158.
grown superstitious, even in their chiefest age; yea long before the time of
Augustine. Is it not a maxim in the Canon Law, Paul. Launcelo. Perusin.
institut. lib. 1. tit. 2.
prava consaetudo non ligat? Has not a Council determined, Council. Sardicens.
cap. 1.
prava consaetudo non minus extir panda est quam perniciosa corruptela?
Secondly, what though the custom of the Fathers who used the Cross for a
sign of Christ, were on all sides good, the times do differ. They lived in an
age when it was despised: we in a time when it is adored. They in a time when
it professed the faith: we in a time when it countenaunceth heresy. They in a
time when it was proper to Christians: we in a time when it is common to
Papists. They in a time when it was used over all the Church for the sign of
Christianity: we in an age, when out of our own Church it is no where used
but for a sign of Antichristianitie. In regard, whereof we may well appeal to
the old Canons, Regula Patrum traditae sunt (says Decret. pa. 1. distinct.
29. cap. 2.
Gregory) provt res postulare videbatur, temporis, loci, personarum, reique
ipsius habita ratione. And Ibid. disti. 14. cap. 2.
Leo, Sicut quaedam sunt quae nulla possunt ratione convelli, ita multa sunt
quae pro necessitate temporum at consideratione aetatum oporteat temperari. And
thus far of the Crosses sin against this second commandment.

The hypocrisy of the Cross. Cap. 3.
Vanity is all one with privation: Romans 8.20.21.
as the vanity of the creatures with Paul is the privation of their liberty
from corruption. Now in privation, sin so consists as that the habits of
sin which are Nullam habent ratione^ mali nisi ratione priuationis iustitia
debitae, as the Caiet. in Primam. 2. quest. 18. art. 9.
schole deuines determine. Hence 1. King 17 15.
the Idols sin is vanity against the first commandment, and a wrong
worship a worshipping Isay. 29.13
in vain, against the second, and all hypocrisy and miscarriage in every name
and worship of Gods, a taking of his name in vain, as this Exo. 20.7
third precept speaks. For this cause it will not be in vain, to show that
the sign of the Cross is vain a thing most easy to be done. First, there
is a vanity of superfluity in it, in that it is a D. Fulk. reioyn. art. 4.
page 164 and 166.
needless ceremony; in that we are as well Calfh co^t. matt. art. 1. fol. 30.
with out it, as with it: and it is a ceremony that is D. Fulk. reioyn art. 1.
page 143
superfluous altogether. Christ's person being considered (says Andrew.
willet. de Bapt. cap. 8
one) It was fit, the Cross, Salt, Spittell etc should have been used in his
Baptism, if God had seen they were needful for his Church. Now when Christ
sends for any thing, his argument is: Marc. 11.3
for the Lord has need of it. And when he receaueth any thing he will not
suffer this blott to rest on it. What Math. 26.8.10.11.
need? But he will wipe this suspicion of a needlessnes away, and so will prove
it needful. This example our superiors cannot follow, unless before they
urge the Cross, they prove unto us that the Sacrament has need of it; and
that it is not vain and needless which this precept does condemn. Does not
the Law discarg from a vow, that which has a superfluous, Leuit. 22.^2.
member, and from a sacrifice that which has a superfluous wenne? Why vow we
then a Cross in Baptism? why by the Cross vow we our children unto God? a
member superfluous, as used in popery, and by the people, a wenne superfluous
sticking in the upper skin, though used according to the skill of our one
Church. Nay (to search this point to the quick) the superfluity of this sign
makes (indeed) our sin to be admirable, in that we have the water already
(a better sign ordained to our hands) even as it is a thing much to be
merviled, and not to be believed by Bellarm. de Imag. c. 13
Bellarmine, that the Jews should desire a calfe for a sign of Gods presence,
having the cloud and the pillar which did resemble it better before. What
increases the sin of the Jews when they desire superfluous flesh, the
sin of the adulterer, and covetous person how is it augmented, but by this
there is no need, the Jews having Number. 11.5
Manna a better meat already to their hands provided? The Pro. 6.30.31. 2.
Sam. 12.8.
adulterer being blessed with a wife of his own already, and the covetous man
with food and 1. Tim. 6.
raiment as much as is needful for him. This also made the sin of Euae
Decret. pa. 2. cause. 33. quest. 3. c. 1
heinous, that having so many blessed fruits, she lusted after that needless
fruit which was forbidden notwithstanding, which now is our A french. discourse
of the honor of the Cross. part. 1.
sin, who tempt God and fall a lusting after a superfluous Cross, a meat
Idolothious, an harlot spiritual, a Jewel of Anthichrist, a fruit forbidden
not being contented with the water an heavenly Manna, a chaste ceremony, a
Jewel left for a pledge by Christ, and a fruit of his, whereby he feeds us
till he himself do come in place, the true tree of eternal life, which
stands in the midst of the paradise of God. Last of all, we condemn the
papists in their Agnus Deies and other consecrate signs of theirs even Ioh.
Reyn. de Idolola.lib. 2. cap. 3 ^ct. 6.
for this, that Baptism and the Lords Supper, not only suffice, but also
excel: which, with what face can we do any longer, as long as we keep the
sign of the Cross, to signify Christ Jesus to us, a superfluity as badde as
they, if not far worse.

#Sect. 2. That the using of the Cross is but an idle apishe roye, and lighter
then the Surplice, which is also too light.
SEcondly, There is a vanity of lightness in it which makes it worthy to be
cut of (as Balthazar was) when in the balance he was found to light. For
every idle ceremony must away from the service of God ( Muscul. loc. de trad.
cap. 5.
say some) even Io. Husse. in Con^l. Consta. soss. 12. page 834.
omnis ritus leuis and infundabilis ex scriptura. and every ceremony which
has either Chemnit. in exam. p. 2. page 39.
otiosum spectaculum, or ludum otiosum. And the sign of the Cross is an idle
ceremony (say Calfn. con Mart. art 4 fol. 92. D. Fulk. reio. art. 3. page 159.
others) which all reason will make plain. Does any know a reason waightier to
balance the Cross then that which a Durant. de rit. lib. 1 cap. 6. sect. 11.
Papist brings, who proves out of Caelius Rodigin lib. 10. cap. 8. that the
Cross is a sacred sign, grave and religious, even by the law of Nature,
because the Heathens in their adorations, moving their right hand to their
mouths, did kiss their thumb laid a twart over their forefinger in the manner
of a cross? If he do, let him speak. For, as for this reason it wayeth
nothing with me, since every Italian fashioneth so. Crispi. Frederic. 2.
such a cross as this, as often as he gestureth Eccola fico. Howbeit, what ask
I? When the friends of the cross them selves acknowledge it to be a toye. and
our writers chalk it up amongst other Andr. willet de Baptis. cap. 8.
toys popish whereof I am sorry. For how can we keep our mouths open against
papists for using D. Fulk. retent. aga. Bristow. in mot. 34. page 99.
toys in the service of God while we our selves use these ceremonies which in
common estimation are but tryfles? The Surplice has more gravity in it then
has the gesture of the cross. For the wear of white was of old time
honorable, and now it is Bucer. de re vestiar. Pet. Marti. Epistol. ad Hooper.
pleaded with some color, it serves to set forth the Ministers dignity. and
yet we see how our Fathers have hissed at it. One terming it. Gualt. in Hos. 2.
Calui. institut. lib. 4 c. 10. sect 29
player-like apparel, and a vain vizard. an other a Baleus. in declarat. of
Boner. arti. page 100.
pretty toy an other an D. Tailor act. and mon. page 1659.
Apish toye. an other Baecon. p^. 1. Cathec. page 480.
histrionicall, scenicall, and hic scorner like. It is lighter then the
Surplice which yet is esteemed too light, and is it waightier then the
ceremonies which are singled out of Gods service because they are Pet. Mart. in
1. Sam. cap. 14.
minutiae. because Idem in Iudic. ca. 2. fol. 33. Calvin. institut. lib. 4 c.
10 sect. 29
Nugatoriae; because they yield nothing Ibid.
praeter inane oblectamentum. because they seem Pet. Mart. in 1. cor. 14
decorae only sensui Carnis, and mundi iudicio, and non constant
mortificatione, sanctitate, modestia? Mr Buter misliketh the stay of the child
at the Church-dore, and the white garment that is done on him in the church,
because the former is actio scenica, and in so holy a mystery as this we may
not do any thing Bucer. in Censur. cap 9.
magis leuiter. the latter a sign that serves for little, save only Ibid. c.
10
ad augendum ludum, cuius etiam occasio omnis, est amputanda. and he concludes
at the last, even of the words of the Cross it self, as they stood in King
Edw. communion book, Ibid c. 12.
Nihil tale decet scriptura, and ludicra omnia debent ab his mysterijs long
abesse. It is no sin with Pet. Viret. annotat. in Miss.
Peter Viret to term the crosses in the Lords supper, juggling feats, and an
Egyptians fast and loose. And as for the Priest that stretches his arms to
express a Cross to the people, he laugheth at him, and says, he is too
Ibid. c 42.
merry a Christ. Is not a Cross in a childs forehead, as very a play-game as
a white Chrisom upon his face? or a Cross in baptism a fast and loose
gesture as well as it is in the Lords supper? And what difference to express a
Cross with arms, and to make a cross with the finger? Alas this finger
cross is but leuis agitatio manus (as Auselme tells us in sober sadness)
August de temp. sermon. 181.
elegit crucem, quae leui motu manus exprimitur; qua and contra inimici
versutias, armamur. Therefore is it too merry a gesture to represent the
sorrowful torments of the Lord Christ Jesus, especially those unspeakable
torments which in his soul he suffered. Can the bloody sweat of his whole
body, be represented to us by the wagging of a finger? the groans, the tears,
and strong schritches wherewith he filled the whole firmament of heaven, be
well resembled by a little breaking of the air? Can the hell of his heavines,
be proportioned with a playful gesture of ease, or can any gesture though never
so uneasy (unless Gods ordinance underprop it) bear up with gravitie, the
fearful mystery of this Sacrament? which to reverence as we ought, Exodus 3.6.
we stand rather in need of a cloak to cover our faces then of a cross to
write on the face, after the manner that Christ with his finger wrote on the
ground, John ^.6.
when he would show the matter was trifling which was in hand. Nay, our
Forefathers devised a far more reverent sign (as some conceive) to express
the dying of the Christ to come. not in Gods service which was unlawful, but
in the firmament of the heaven. When amongst their Astronomicall figures they
proportioned a man dolefully praying on his knees termed (...) at the first and
no more, though aftertimes have named him Hercules. and in his praying
stretching his arms in form of a cross, and composing the rest of his body
as if he were hanging (for so Arat. in Phainom.
Aratus does describe him) and treading with his right foot upon the serpents
head. This was a sign of some sablenes, of some saddnes. as for the crossing
of the finger, what fether more light? sure not the feathers of the fan of
which Hierom, in that they drive away the flies they have an eligant
signification Hieron. Epist. 20. ad Marcel.
debere luxuriam cito restinguere quia muscae moriturae oleum suauitatis
exterminant. No nor the feathers of the Mass-flapp neither. For when he drives
away the flies from the cupp of the Duran. de rit. lib 1 c. 10
Lord Supper, he serves for better use and purpose then the sign of the
Cross has any, and when he signifies the driving away of evil thoughts
ventilabro fidei after Abraham's example, who drove away the fowls with a
staff that came to hinder his sacrifice he keeps the decorum a great deal
better, then the sign of the Cross, which our Idem. li. 2 cap. 45. sect 5.
Jacob. Billius. in Gregor. Nazianz.
brethren use to call flabellum muscarum for the vanity of lightness in it; and
as a vain and Vazq. de adorat. lib. 3. disput. 2. cap. 5.
empty ceremony do much detest.

#Sect. 3. That the Cross is unprofitable, fleshly, smelling of Idolatry,
and of too light a color.
THe Crosses 3. vanity is of unprofitableness for the which he must be banished
by this commandment; For what? The unsavory salt cast forth, because good for
nothing? Math. 5.13. Ier. Heb. 13.9.
The frutlesse Vine thrown into the fire, because good for no use* The old
ceremonies of the Jews forbidden because they did not profit them that were
exercised in them: do all declare how ill God is pleased with that which is
vain, through inanitie of commodity and of proffit which ought to be in it.
Does not this suffice to cashier a thing: It is not profitable, it edifieth
not, even as Thom. Aquin. Commen. 2, cor. 5.
Aquinas himself observes? Nay, does not our own Law Admonit. de ceremo.
apud. Buce, in Censur. page 45 3.
condemn the ceremonies quae (...). And what though they have been profitable
here to fore, must they be kept for their old service? No, Chemnit examine.
page 2. tit. de rit. page 39.
omnes ritus remouendi sunt qui ad adificationem vtiles esse desinunt. and
again Pet. Mart. in 1. Sam. cap. 14.
Ceremonia vbi nullus est amplius earum vsus absque omni dubitatione tollenda.
The light hereof has forced our adversaries to make this their issue The,
examinat. of the declar. of the Minist. of London.
we doubt not but great good will be done by the ceremonies controuersed, what
great good of a tryfle? for so you judge your self of the Cross. Then behold
either a great miracle (to wit) a thistle bringing forth, not only a figg, but
also a pomgranate; or else a great Monster (to wit) a fountain sending forth
both sower water and sweet. And what means in the Cross by which these
proffites may arise. First, be the reverend antiquity of it, which gives
contentement to the people, with whom experience it self shows Rich. Hook.
lib. 5. cap. 65.
how much through custom a ceremony works. This reason when time was would
have served Pilate well. [ Mar. 15.8
When to content the people of Iewry] crying for their old custom, he let
Barrabas loose amongst them, not much worse then the Cross, unless we count
soul-murther nothing, and the stirring of sedition in our Church. And it would
have well serves Symmacus also, backing his paganism with the custom of
former times, whom when one answers he replyeth for us in the cause of the
Cross.

Prudent. cont. Simach.
Quid mihi tu ritus solitos Roman Senator
Obiectas? cum scita Patrum, populique frequenter
In tabulis placiti sententia flexa novarit
Nunc etiam quoties solitis decedere prodest
Praeteritosque habitus cultu damnare recenti.
And the abuse of this sign considered, the more ancient the worse, and the
more contentment it gives the more superstition it breeds. there having
place, hear what one said of the Surplice once: Bucer. in censur. c 2. page 45
8.
St singulis parochijs idonei mittantur doctores, pijs hominibus grata erit,
ista vestium sublatio, impiorum vero gratia si Christi serui esse volumus,
nulla modo captanda est benevolentia, multo minus eorum vlla ratione
sustentanda est superstitio. The second way whereby the Cross is supposed
able to bring in profit, is, that complement that is in it ad ornatum. O say
the Procters of it, The Cross Ric. Hook vb. sup.
must not be pulled of. Will ye so strippe this Sacrament from the attire with
which the wisdom of man has clothed it? The wisdom of man had devised
chariottes in Christ's time. But what he? Even when he was to show forth his
greatest pomp, Francis. Iun. paral. 36.
recalled he not the ancient simplicity of the Judges in Israel, who Judge
5.10. and 10.4
rode upon Asses? Whereupon one against the Adiaphoristes: Herman. Hamelma^. de
tradit. pa. 1. lib. 4. colum. 373
Christus non opus habet isla externa sapientia in suis Sacramentis. Venit
pauper sedens in Asina ad filiam Syon, in quo aduentu noluit aliquam
exornationem, ergo non vult quoque illam in suis Sacramentis. Shall we think
the Baptism of the primitive Church was not as richly attyred as ours, for
want of the Cross? or that the Baptism of the modern Churches now, is more
beggarly clothed then ours, because they do not use this sign? Think not to
say: we clothe Baptism with the Cross, not as with an ornament of
necessity, but of decency only. Bellarm. de cult. sanct. ca. 6.
Bellarmine him self will plead so much for the whole wayne-loade of popish
ceremonies. Do but think the robe of man's wisdom to be necessary for a
decency, and run into Montanisme. which pleads in like manner: Chemnit.
examine p. 1. de tradi. genesis 8. page 93.
The rawnes of the first times must be perfected with an ampliation of
Ceremonies, such as may be vestimentum quodammodo fidei quae retro erat nuda.
and into papisme, which reasons in like sort: Marcell. Corcyrens. in praefat.
ad lib. de ceremoniis
Religio sine debito ceremoniarum ornatu inculta est informis and omni
pulchretudine vacua. And last of al into Lutheranisme and Adiaphorisme, which
contend for images, and all [ad ornatum]: in like fashion out of Rupertus,
Herman. Hamelma^. de tradit. pa. 1. lib. 4. colum. 373
fides Apostolorum rudis fuit: A posterioribus vero adhibitis ceremonijs
exornata. But if there were needful some robes of man's wisdom, he is a bad
tailor that has chosen the cross, whch indeed dishiteth baptism more ways
then one. First, because it is to gaye in the eyes of the people, like the
brave attire of a servant that turns away the peoples eyes from his Master to
him self; or like the painting of a woman's face which disfigureth the natural
beauty of this sacrament, and makes men think that Tertul. de cult. foeminar.
plastica Dei and the ordinance of the water is not beautiful enough,
reprehendunt^n. qui emendant. As it is an injury (says August. de tempore.
sermon. 247.
Augustine) to a painter when another comes to add ornament to his picture: so
is it an injury to God when men will presume to add beauty to his creature,
and so by consequent to his ordinance. Cyprian speaking against those who added
beauty to their faces by painting, Cypri. de habitu virgin.
opus Dei est (says he) omne quod nascitur, diaboli quodcunque mutatur. So
likewise here: All that is instituted is Gods. all that is added against the
word of God by man (indeed) is the Devils. Secondly, The robe of the Cross is
too fleshly for baptism. Know we not the Queens garment (says August.
epist. 86. ad Casula^.
Augustine) which is wouen of ceremonies, must be suitable to her inward
beauty, and so be spiritual? especially in this time of the gospel? Thirdly,
the robe of the Cross smells too much of the stews. whereas the Churches
simplicity in outward ceremonies makes her like unto a woman that does
modestly put in her hair Cant. 4.1. ex Tremel.
within her kercher, and does not frouze it like the wanton. Cloth her now with
the Cross and Surplice, and the habit of the harlot is upon her. against which
the Fathers cry out so much, Tertul. de coron. milit.
Si in Idoleio vesci vetitu^ sit, Quid in Idoli habitu videri? Again, Idem in
li. de Idolola.
Nullus habitus licitus est apud nos illicito actui ascriptus. habet. n. ab
idolo profanationis suae maculam And last or all. Tunicam si induas inquinatam
poterit forsitan illa inquinari perte, sed tu per illam mundus esse non
poteris. Is not the Surplice the Idols habit? the sign of the cross the
Idol him self? Fourthly, The robe of the Cross is of too light a culler. For
it is vain (as has been showed). and even a Bellarm. de cult. sanctor. cap. 6.
Bellarmine him self will banish all things used ad ornatum, if they be [ vana
or inepta]. We have freed Baptism (you will say) from all Romish immodestie,
in that we have packt all other of her gaudes away. But what said one Socrat.
histor. lib 5. cap. 22.
once, receive the Passover of the Jews, and receive all the rest of their
Ceremonies also: So receive the Cross and Surplice (which are their cheifest
badges) and then give countenance to all the rest of their ceremonies [ad
ornatum]. which (me thinks) we should the less do, because the Jesuits
blaspheme for them, as if God Bellar. vbi supra.
delighted in them: which is to make him flesh not spirit; yea took such a
delight in them, as to take charge bestowed upon them in better sort, then if
it were bestowed in mercy on the poor.

#Sect. 4. The profits alleged to accompany the cross, for commendation
thereof, as to keep from sin, confusion, cause zeal, and to help in the
instant of temptation, are refuted.
THE third way whereby it is thought the Cross is profitable, is that sensible
efficacy of it whereby it works on the mind, after the manner thus
described: Ric. Hook li. 5. ca. 65.
The forehead is the closet of fancy: upon fancy our mind beats day and
night, as upon an anvill: the Cross (then) set in the forehead, awaketh the
fancy, and stirs up tht imagination, and becomes a powerful worker on the
mind, especially to make it ashamed of sin, and to stay it in the instant of
the tentation. Now well fare a wet finger, (say I). For will ye know? The
Chrisme of confirmation lays claim to this Panegyric, and pleads it is
stolen from her. who must be in the forehead, even for the same cause, to wit,
Thom. Aquin pa. 3. qu. 72. ar. 9
propter propinquitatem imaginationis, the nearenes of the imagination. But
view we the several pagentes of this Architecture. The first commendation is
drawn from the place, to wit, the forehead. Which the Fathers never knew
from whom (we say) we receive our light. It appears they did not cross
according to this project, because they signed them selves in those parts
which dwell far from this cell of our fancy. It was the Hieron. Epist. 27.
cap. 10.
mouth and the stomach of Paula her mother that Eustochium croste, when she
lay upon dying. and Paula her self Ibid. c. 13.
morti vicina crucis signum pingebat in labijs. and the counsel given by
Hierome is this: Hieron. epist 8. ad Demet. c. 6
Claudas cubiculum pectoris, as well as this, and signo Crucis munias frontem.
The counsel given by Prudentius is, Prudent. in hymno. aute somnum.
fac cum vocante somno castum petis cubile frontem locumque cordis crucis
figura signet. Ephracem is old, though counterfeit. Now he thus: Ephreem. de
poenite^. cap. 3.
Pingamus in ianuis atque in frontibus nostris and in ore and in pectore and in
membris omnibus vivificum signum. Chrysostom wills us on our hearts to
imprint the sign of the Cross, Chrisost. homil. in Matt. 88.
ad cohibendos and continendos turbatos animi motus, and effrenatos
concupiscentiae impetus. Luther in catec.
Luther followed this counsel it seems. For he also crossed in pectore. And
when the Fathers crossed in the forehead, it was because the forehead was the
openest place for profession, and the best member in the body. Non sine causa
signum suum (says August. in Psalm. 30.36. ca. 3.
Augustine) Christus in frontibus figi voluit tanquam in sede pudoris, ne
Christi opprobrio Christianus erubescat. Idem de catechi. Zaud. rudic. ca. 20.
Crucis signo in front hodie tanquam in post signandus es. Chrisost. in
oration. advers. ge^til. quod Christus sit Deus.
Subinde omnes cruce se signant inscribendo in nobilissimum membrum nostrum: in
front enim nostra tanquam in Columna quotidie figuratur. The second
commendation that here is given to make the Cross profitable, is drawn from
the manner of his proceeding, in awaking the fancy by stirringe up the
imagination, and thereby workinge on the mind.

But this, is it not the right Suarez. tom. 1. in Thom. disput. 54. sect. 1.
Image working of popery? Nichol. S^und. de imag. ca. 7.
where the painting of Christ's death moves the eye: the eye advertiseth the
common sense; the common sense informs the fancy: out of our fancy reason
draws a consideration, etc. and wherein? there is an abstraction from the
matter of the image to the form so abstracted, and from the form that is
abstracted to the apprehe^sion of Christ him self, for that our fancy does
consider it to be his Image. I for my part can see no difference between this
cross and image-working, therefore let it receive the same answer. These
abstractions (says D. Fulk ag Saund. of imag. p. 612
D. Fulke) are Metaphisicall and too hard lessons for the people to learn: and
when they have learned them, they are nothing worth. And as for conjoying the
outward sign which Christ signified by means of our fancy, it is a toy to
mock an Ape. Ibid. page 163.
Last of all. A Christian is taught by hearing and not by seeing. Blessed are
they (says Christ) which believe and have not seen: and he has learned that
an Image is profitable for nothing, that he is a teacher of lies; and that he
is cursed that says an Image shall teach him. It will be objected that this
abstraction and progression, and moving of the fancy is found in the
Sacrament. which, what is it to the purpose? For where as in the working of
outward signs, it is the passage of the mind from the sign to the thing
signified that does August. in epist. ad Ianuar. 119. cap. 11.
enkindle it after the manner that a firebrand takes flame by being wagged and
shaken, there is in a Sacrament a fire of the spirit to enkindle this passage,
which has thoughts and imaginations that are grounded on the word: whereas
in the Cross it is a straung fire that does enkindle with fancies sensual and
imaginations fantastical against his rule, who writes thus against
crosse-worship: Jonas Aurelianens. l. 1. de cult. imag.
Ne sit religio nostra in phantasmatibus nastris. The 3. commendation which is
here given to the Cross, is drawn from the effect. which is a restraint from
sin, through shame conceived and that in the very instant of the temptation.
Concerning this, who will not commend the cleanly conveyance of this Author,
who will have the cross a weapon against the Divill still. howbeit, not so
gross a one as the papists or as the Fathers themselves do make it. These
hold that the sight of the cross drives the tempter away even Bellarm. de
imag. cap. 30.
ex opere operato, through Gods ordinance, and because it is a Trophe of
Christ, and puts the Divill in remembrance of the foil which he received by
Chapter death. The Fathers some excuse as if they held that the sign of the cross
drives the tempter away Perk. problem. in sign. cruc. Athanas. li. 2. cap. 16.
page 153.
ex opere operantis only, as it is a sign of faith and gesture of prayer. Who,
whether they be right or no, I will not here determine: only I will uncover the
fountain from whence Mr Hookers doctrine flows unto the papists, and from
them with some cleansing and refining unto him self. Constitut. Clement. lib. 3.
Crucis signum infractum signum quia cuflodia munitissima Crux. Cypri. advers.
Iudaeos. cap. 21.
Hic est lapis quo David frontem Goliae percussit. quo signo nos and tuti
semper sumus and vivimus. Orige homil. 8. in diverse. Evangel. loc.
Immortale lauacrum portemus in frontibus nostris cum viderint demones
contremiscunt, qui aurata capitolia non timent crucem riment. Ephraem. de
armatu. spiritual. and de poenite^.
Signo crucis teipsum muni, validissima. n. armatura est. sieve dormias, five
iter agas sieve evigiles sieve operi insistas sieve ma^duces sieve bibas sieve maria
naviges sieve flumina tra^smittas, hac te lorica circumtege membraque tua omnia,
salutari signo exorna, atque circu^sepi, and non accedent ad te mala hoc. n.
signo circu^specto adversariae potestates conterritatrementesque recedent.
Cyrillus Hierosol. Cateches 4
Signate front vt daemones signum regis videntes, trementes procul fugiant.
Idem Cateches. 13.
Crux signum fidelium and timor daemonum. Gregory Nazianz. speaking of Julian
crossing himself when the Divill affrighted him, Gregor. Nazianze. oration 3. in
Julian.
Valuit (says he) cedunt daemones, pellu^tur timores. Theodor. histor. li. 3
cap. 3. Tri. par. hist. li. 6. cap. 1.
Theodoret speaking of the same, Daemones trophei dominici figuram respicie^tes
and sua recordati devictionis repent disparuerunt. Hieron. in epistol. ad
Heliodor.
Muniar crucis tua signo quod videntes potestates adversae fagiant confusae and
discedant ame. Gregor. Mag. dial. lib. 3. c.
Gregory tells us that a Jew in a Christian church saved himself from a
Senate of Divills by signing his forehead with the sign of the cross. An
Guilihel. Non bringens de reb. Anglor. li. 2. cap. 21.
Angel chideth one Ketellus for not crossing himself, giving him warning, ne
in posterum insidia^tes hosts inerme^ eum invenirent. Pervse this fountain
from whence this profit of the Cross flows against tentation. Consider with
what puddle the papists, infect it when they use it as weapon against the
tempter, being thereunto confirmed by these authorities, and then resolve
whether they do not better service, who Calsh. again Mart. ar. 1. fo. 28
reject the cross quite in the combat of temptation, because it is none of the
Christian weapons, but is omitted by Paul where he rehearses the whole armor
of God: and D. Fulk reioynd. art. 2. pa. 145.
esteem all use of the Cross against the devil, to be superstitious, and the
Cross it self no better then a straw to run at tilt withal; or they who
dubb it with this honor, that it is a forcible mean to keep from sin: a
mean to save from confusion: it causes zeal and shame of sin, and helps
at the instant against the temptation of the devil? It fell Co^manta. de stat.
religion. in Reg. Galliae Collect. of Massacr. in France.
out once by the great mercy of the Lord upon the Protestants of Beziers in
France, that a drunken Drummer saves the whole Town by waking of it, at the
very instant that their walls were surprising, by ringing of their Towne-bell,
as he was going home at midnight from his drink. If the sign of the Cross
save at the instant of the tentation by awaking the fancy, he saves like
this Drummer. And as the Senate of Beziers would not suffer dronken men to ring
the Larum bell of the Town, when soever their drink should move them;
notwithstanding this straung deliverance: so though some drunken (but not with
wine) shall think themselves awaked by the Cross at the pushe of their
tentation, yet will not the D. Fulk reioynd. art. 2. pa. 145. Andr. Willet. de
cruc. art. 3. Ioh Reynold. confet. cap. 8. diuis. 4.
Senate of Divines permit to bless our selves with it, or to use it in
common use. So (then) neither by the contentement of it, nor by the complement
of it, nor by the efficacy of it, does the cross any good, but the promise of
much good by it, proves like the promise which papists Nic. Sau^d. de imag.
cap. 17.
make of much good to be done by Images, both which are the promise of the
apple: promising much good, but paying much evil. If any reply, this comes
of the abuse, the answer is ready: Chemnie. examine. pa. 2. tit de rit. p. 39.
every ceremony must be remoueth, that does degenerate into abuse when it is
found to be incorrigible, as the Cross has proved it self for more then
these forty years. And so far of the Crosses sin, against the letter of
this Law.

#Sect. 5. That the Cross is now not only unprofitable, but also very
hurtful.
WHen we come to examine it according to the sense and meaning, we find it
hurtful, not unprofitable only, Jewel. art. 1 diuis. 2. pa. 442.
as one of our writers says: verily in the house of God, that thing is
hurtful that does no good. All the ceremonies of the church ought to be
clear and lively and able to edify. This speak he of dividing the bread of
the Sacrament into; parts, of which Harding demanded of him, what many now
demand of us concerning the Cross: [what hurt is there in it]? Too much hurt,
and more then we would more (also) then Master Jewel could find in the
breaking of the host: we need not reply as he of that. The Cross does hurt
in that he does no good: for behold many hurtes which he does by hindering
good, and furthering harm. The first is seen in the bearing of Gods name
before the papists who are his enemies, where it stays profession, and
stayneth or hinders it, or makes it halt. This we see in our Magistrates,
who have ceased to execut Iniunct. Elizab. art. 23. can. Episcop. anno. 1559.
art. 59.
law against the Crosses of Church-windowes for the Crosses sake in Baptism.
This we see in our writers; who when they write against the Cross, are calm
(if not cold) where foreners are seruent, and are feign to come in with
[though] and [if] and the like provisoes as if they were put to the same
exigent for the excusing of our Church in the use of the Cross, as Cy^ill was
once (by our Do. Fulk reioynd. art. 9. page 104. 2 Samuel 2.23
own confession.) When Julian the Apostata took advantage from the reverence
which the Christians then gave unto it. This we see in our Preachers whose
lips in a manner are sowed up from speaking against the very abuse and
superstition of the Cross, least they should seem to speak against the
Cross in Baptism, and to break the Law and that per contemptum. This we
see in our people, who be at a stand in their zealous pursuit of popery,
because they stand as men discouradged, yea amazed to see the falls of their
Asahelles and of their Amasaes, I mean their spiritual captains whom the
sign of the Cross has wrackt. And as the Cross stays profession against
the papists, so does he stayne it with that conformity with him, which has
ever been esteemed a flaw, yea a bracke in Christian zeal. For what they who
retain the old ceremonies of the Jews, who are not so bad as popish rites
Hieron. apud Augu. Epist. 11.
dum volunt and Iudei esse and Christiani, nec Iudei sunt nec Christiani.
Augustine speaking of women wearing man's attire August. solil^qu. lib. 2. cap.
16.
Nescio (says he) vtrum falsas mulieres an falsos viros melius vocem: veros
tamen histriones verosque infames sine dubitatione possumus vocare. The
communion of rites confounds sects, more then the communion of attire
confounded sexes: who then would judge us to be good protestants, who
communicate with popish rites, besides our selves? Thus Gualt. in Hos. cap. 2.
one of our writers, bominum traditiones etc. The traditions of men defile the
confession of faith, whereupon the scripture reprehendeth those who in the
reforming of the Church, left the high places, because these retained in face
the footsteps of former fornication. And in like manner now a days they have
not taken their fornications from their face, who retain still in their
Churches popish Images and Chalices, and playerlike vestures with the like, who
all of them do (as if an adulteress after she is reconciled to her husband)
should bring the gifts and love tokens of her former adultery impudently into
his sight, and go about to procure his goodwil by them. What Protestant
hitherto ever renounced the common tenent, we must have Buces. in Censur. ca.
5. pa. 458.
nihil commune with papists in their ceremonies and their rites? The first
excuse here alleges there is such an utter difference made between the
popish crosses and ours, as that there is no scarre or blemish to our
confession by the same. First, suppose there were some dissimilitude (which yet
in sight and show is none) what say we of the Socrat. histor. lib. 5. cap. 2^.
Samaritanes, were they not foolish when they thought they made a goodly
separation from the Jews by keeping their Passover at a diverse season? And
what judge we of the Narrat. de Tartaror. relig. ad David. Ch^ tree. mist.
Tartars? Do we not hold them absurd when they think they differ
sufficiently from the Jews, because their circumzion is at the. ^. or. 3.
year of their age, as their Pope shall think fit? Last of all, what think we
of the men of Ioh. Sacran. de rit. Ruthenor.
Russia? Do we not imagine them fond when they think they spite Rome with a
marveilous difference of their Images, for that they are not of the same
fashion, but according to their own country making? Secondly, God forbids
all likeness of ceremonies with Idolaters: I say all [likenes] that comes
near the rites of the aliens, as a Levit. 19.28.
like cutting and marking of the flesh. A like Deuteronomy. 16.21.
grove to that of Idolaters. Hos. 6.11.
A plant taken out of Samaria, which is like hers. 2. cro. 13.9
A Priest like unto the Priests of other Countries. Harmon. confess. sect 13.
Wittem berg. confess. c. 10.
Qua authoritate, etc. With what authority and profit we may take example of
administering Sacraments from Ethnickes, that speech of Moses testifies: Take
heed thou imitate not the Heathen, nor ask after their Ceremonies* saying: As
those Nations worship these gods, so will I worship. Non facietis similiter
Domino Deo vestro. ye shall not do the same unto your God as they do to
theirs. Thirdly, the practice of the Church has ever shunned all similitude
with exterior rites, the better to bear up the profession of the Gospel. The
Council of Nice chose a diverse Easter Day from the Passover of the Jews,
Socrat. histor. lib. 5. cap. 22.
vt ecclesia cum Iudeis nibil co^sor^^ babere videatur, which was according to
the scripture, as one of our writers whitaker: controvers. 1. quaest. 6. ca. 9.
page 408.
Qu^^t^deciman^ fuerunt ex scripuris expugnati, quia sci diver sum esse debebat
Chisti^^^rum and I^d^^um Pascha,

To make the Cross him self his own judge. Was there any other cause that
chose him at first, but that the Gentiles hating him most, G^^^^^^^. Gro^^l^g.
li. ^. in ^n. Chri. (...)
he served best to make separation from them* Neither is he well used at this
day unless it be in the East Indies; where the Christians are said to have a
cross in their church, and nothing else to distinguish them selves from Pagans:
and at Constantinople where the Patriarch Idem in ann. 1549.
pays a great tribut to have a golden Cross stand on the pinnacle of his
patriarchall Palace, to distinguish from the Turks. Chrisost. de ieinn. Iudeor.
Chrysostom holds it better to be drunk then to fast the Jewish fast: he
means a fast upon the same day with theirs. And August. in Epistol 86 ad
Casula.
Augustine condemns all likeness of fasting with the Manichees, Die Dominico
iciunare scandalum est magnum, maxim post quam innotuit haeresis Manichaorum
qui suis anditoribus ipsum constituerunt ad iciunandum tanquam legitimum diem.
Per quod factum est vt ieiunium die Dominico horribilius haberetur. Leo will
not have incurvation toward the East like to that which Heathen use, Leo Sermon.
7. de natiu. Domin.
upon this reason, u abstinendum est ab ipsa huiu smodi specie officij, quam
cum in nostris invenit qui deorum cultum reliquit, nonne hanc secum partem
opinionis vetustae, tanquam probabilem retentabit qua^ Christianis and impijs
viderit esse communem? Gregory the great abolished an auncienter cermonie then
the Cross, to avoyde communion with the Gregor Regist. in dict. 9. c. 41
Arrians quia hucvsque ab haereticis infans tertio mergebatur, a pub nos
fiendum esse non censeo. Bernard. in Apolog. ad Willihelm. Commit.
Bernard will not have any thing in the Church (the pompous adorning there of
by name) that may quodammodo representare antiquum Iudeorum ritum. Come we
down to modern times. The Censur orient. cecl. c. 10. p. 137.
Greek Church objected to the Roman that it Iudaizeth: because it uses
unleavened bread like to the Jews. The Stanislau. Socolu Ibid in c. 21. page
416.
Roman objected to the Greek that they Iudaize because they use abstinence
from blood and strangled like them. The Churches of France, Heluetia, Germany
have a form of prayer changed of purpose to be unlike the Masse-booke, and
these Churches as they have abolished the whole dross D. Bilsho^ cont. apo.
log. page 1 page 31.
of popish doctrine, so they retain not so much as any one dram of their
ceremonies. What our own Church at home (though at the first it tolerated the
Cross) whereas the papists pray toward the East, our Church bidds the
Ministers to stand at the North side of the communion table: the reason whereof
is this: as the Primative Church (says D. Fulk. ag Rast. sect. 4. page 710.
Doctor Fulke) did choose to pray toward the East, to avoid the superstition
of the Jews, that prayed toward the West: so we do now pray toward the
South to avoid the superstition of the Papists: who use to pray toward the
East. Nay our very adversaries themselves will yield to us herein: A Lutheran
Herman. Hamelma. de tradit. apendic. ad page 1 Colum. 456.
affirming the veil is how unfit in marriage which was used in Ambrose time,
because it is a rite of the Jews, and Bellarmine himself condemning them who
have more care to adorn Churches then to fill them with Preachers, because
howsoever their meaning be diverse, Bellar. de cult. Sanct. cap. 6
yet videntur factis aliquo modo affines esse superstitioni Iudeorum. So is the
nakedness of this first excuse detected, which denies a communion with
papists, because the Cross is not used with us, as it is with them, for as
much as we see that not only the same use but the same rites themselves are
unlawful, yea all likeness, all nearnes, all imitation, all show, all
representation, and as Bellarmine himself speaks, all affinity in fact with
them.

#Sect. 6. The second excuse, that the cross is imposed by Christian
Magistrates, is taken away, in diverse respects, especially because it is
taken as a consenting in a part to the ceremonies of the Church of Rome.
THe second excuse fumbleth thus. If the Cross were imposed by papists, for a
mark of their profession it were somewhat: but being imposed by Christian
governors to an other end, now the use of him no way crazeth our confession
against them. First, the papist drawed the very command of the Magistrate it
self to a certain kind of confession and approbation of his rites, and in
them of his Religion which makes his rites unlawful. This is that which a
whole Church says, Cum Adi^phora rapiuntur (mark rapiuntur) Narmon. confess.
sect ^7. in Hel^^^i. post.
ad confessionem libera esse de sinunt sicuti Paulus ostendit: licitum esse
vesci carnibus si quis non submon^as Idolis esse litatas, alioquin fore
illicitas; quod qui his vescituriam vescendo Idololatriam approbare videatur.
Now it is easy to show the papists do draw the ceremonies controversed to
an approbation and confession of their religion. Mart of the Cross. in praefat.
Martial justifies the popish cross by the cross which stands in the
Queens Chapel. Nic. Saund de imag. cap. 13.
Saunders justifies popish images by the crosses which we use. Harding. ag.
Apolo. in praefat.
Harding justifies his church service by our Cross and Surplice and other
rites which we retain from them. No Parsons of the 3 convers. of England p. 2.
little advantage do they suck out of our communion book, which they term
an English translation out of the Masse-booke, and out of the difficulty
whereby it came in, many Protestants them selves adiudging that the stable of
popish superstition was not thoroughly purged out of it. Does no Bristowe
Brist more. 34.
draw the likeness of our service book to a countenancing of their
Masse-booke? Will Reynold. in praefat.
Raynoldes draw our private Baptism to a proof of that necessity that they
put in the Sacrament? The Rhem. in Ioh 20. sect. 5.
Rhemistes draw the absolution of the sick prescribed in the communion book,
to an approbation of their absolution, auricular confession, and Sacrament of
penance? Our home Humble mot for tolerat.
Pseudo-catholiques, draw they not the sign of the Cross to a motive for
their religion as which they hold a special cognizance of their faith? Seeing
these things be thus drawn to confession, it skilleth not whether we intend
to confess their faith or no. Secondly, our governors profess an intent to
give contentement to the papists by the retention of the Cross and Surplice
which the zeal of English Preachers if they cannot endure, it is to be
pardoned, as Conrad: Schlusselburg. li. 13 pa. 566.571.
having the Divines of Germany before them, who stood out with a greater edge
against the ceremonies enforced upon them in the days of Charles the fifth,
because they saw their Princes sought no other thing in them, but to please
the popish faction. And until these ceremonies be abolished, they will be
abused to the gracing of popery it self, to the disparagement of the Gospel,
and to the gagging of the mouths of many a painful and profitable a Preacher.
so that we are in Paul's case then refusing to circumcize when his liberty
was spied into and spited at, and when the Gospells disgrace was sought by his
conformity. In this respect we are also often in the case of Iulians
soldiers, then disclayming all incense burning, when by the relation of their
host they saw it was a decipula to grace Idolatry by a show of their
conformity and approbation. The third excuse of the Cross now follows,
which infers that though lightness of ceremonies stayne profession, and that
then when they be drawn to countenance popery, yet that in the Cross there
is no such hurt, it being a trifle and a thing of nothing, than which there is
nothing that can be more rashly spoken. First, what though the ceremonies
controversed were small and little, we are to follow that constant Marcus
Arethusius, who when his adversaries were contented with any thing from him so
he would give somewhat toward the repayring of a paganish Temple which before
he had pulled down, made this reply, Tripart. histor. li. 6. cap. 12.
Ne obulum quidem. Moses yielded not in an house. Daniel forbeareth not so much
as the ceremony of opening his window toward Jerusalem. The name of Passion
Sunday is less then the making of the Cross, and it was never so much abused,
and yet on the other side puts us in mind of the passion of Christ, as well
as the sign of the cross does, yet Jewel. repl to Hard. arti. 1. divis. 4.
Bishop Jewel refuses to call it so, as unwilling to yield even so much to
the fancies of the papists. The Surplice is a lesser matter then the Cross,
yet Peter Pet. Martyr. in epist amic. cind. in Angl.
Martyr would never wear it, no though his Canons place in Chapter Church required
it of him. The square cappe is less then either yet Pilking. in epist ad
Commit. Leycest. an. 1570.
Martine Bucer would never wear it. and being demanded a reason why, he said
because his head was round. Secondly, since the time that the Cross saw the
sun, he has been as king in the midst of ceremonies: especially in the
case of profession. Consider we it but as papists use in for an Image, even so
serves it for [ special Bellar. de imag. c. 10
confession]. For hereby (say they) we especially testify against the
novelties of the Lutherans and Calvinistes, whiles we religiously worship that,
which they sacrilegiouslie do destroy. Consider we it, as they use it apart by
it felfe. Here the Sacraments (say Bellarm. de effect. Sacra. c. 31.
they) do not so well distinguish from heretics: where the ceremoninies
(notwithstanding) make an excellent difference: as now a days the sign of the
cross, is a notable sign (says one) whereby to know a Catholic How can we
hold up our foreheades for shame of the beasts mark, whiles our ears hear
this? or with what forehead can we say the Cross is no great badge of popery,
when the papists call it the great Epist. aposoget. sect. 7. pa. 54.
Character of their glory. Hippoli. in li. de co^sum. mund.
Hippolitus foreshewed, that as the Cross is Christ's sign, so Antichrists
sign on the other side should be [non vti signo Crucis] sed illud potius
execrari and abolere. As counterfeit as this Hippolitus is, yet Bilaem. de
Roman. Pontif. lib. 3. cap. 11.
Bellarmine with the rest of the papists accepts his judgment, making the
Cross to be the very sign of Christ and Christian Religion: and counting the
Calvinistes the forerunners of Antichrist, because they do not use this sign.
This saw our Fathers that saw our deliverance out of Egypt and were more
sincere: They accounted in the matter of profession, that the Cross is as
dangerous now as a false Calfh co^tia Mart. art. 1.
ensign is in war, which most deceyueth and breeds most confusion. And
this confusion bred by the Cross, is so much the more horrible, if it be true
which some do Io Napier. in Apoc. proposit. 31 Apoc 13.17
teach, that the sign of the Cross is that special mark of the beast, and
that Antichrists sign (by name) which the Apocal. does foreshewe. Amongst
these one writes thus: And. Willet. in Synop. de character. Anti. page 199.
The superstitious marks of the Cross arise out of the beasts name, to wit,
from the number of it, thus expressed in the greek original Xx s for the
letter is a Saint Andrews cross. the letter x is in latin X which is also a
sliding cross. the last letter s contains (...) and r, the latter whereof is
an headless cross: and thus it appears that the marks whereby they say they
honor Christ, are a dishonor to him, and the [cognizance] of Antichrist. But
if the Cross be not in special sort the beasts mark, whether made simply as
these conjecture, or with oil which Bulling. in Apoc. 13.
others judge, yet all our Ioh. Fox. Johan de Vado. Ibid D. Abbot. Antich.
demonstrat. ca. 11. sect. 25.
writers do consent that the ceremonies of the Roman church are a part of
this mark, amongst which the cross is chief. Sin they not grievously who
with certain instruments Pet. Martyr. in 1. Cor 7.18.
gathered their vncircumcizion again, to be like to the Gentills? Alas then,
what is our sin, who not only receive the cross our selves (one of
Antichrists marks) but also with it as it were Sixth. Senens. bibliothec. li.
4. pa. 305.
spatisteri quadam, and as it were with a pair of pinsers do draw on others
the vncircumcizion popish, or at the least a likeness with the papist? Let it be
considered with what probability the Divines of Conrad. Schluss^lburg. li. 13
pa. 593.594.572.
Germany held that the Adiaphorisme of rites popish retained, is the very
Image of the beast, Cuius notae and characteres, and nomen sunt haec ipsa
adiaphora: and that the third Angel who preaches against the Image of the
beast and the receiving of his mark, represents the Preachers that withstand
the tail of Antichrist, left behind in the Church of God. But whether this be
so or no, there is some certainty in this that follows, which is that the
retention of popish ceremonies under pretense they be These. de adiaphorism.
Theolgot. Saxonr. p. 593
Adiaphora, is a countermaund to that precept exite ab ea populus meus, seeing
hereby men do even Conrad. Sceluffelburg. li. 13 pa. 515.
redire, yea introire ad Antichristum, not only not [exire] from him.

#Sect. 7. That the Cross fostereth hypocrisy in the mids of our Church,
and hinders spiritual worship.
FRom the hypocrisy of the Cross in bearing Gods name before the Papists,
come we to the hypocrisy of it found in the bearing of Gods name in the
mids of our own church. Here our maine foundation is, that this commaundment
forbidding all occasions them selves as well as other commandments do, the
sign of the Cross must pack away for that occasion of hypocrisy which is in
it, even as one of our D Fulk. reioynd. art. 1. pa. 140.
Writers: Well, seeing the Cross has been a cause that the inward faith has
been neglected, nay if it be but an occasion hereof, that were sufficient to
remove it. To remove the hypocrisy of the Jewish ceremonies, God removed the
August. Epist 5.
painted wall it self of the Iewishe priesthood. so to remove the hypocrisy
of these ceremonies controversed, the ceremonies them selves must be removed.
The purity of the Gospel requires of us to retain the verity of the Jewish
August. cont. Faust. Manich. li. 31. cap. 11
azimes, but to let the azimes them selves alone. So the purity of a Churches
reformation requires now to retain the verity of the popish Crosses (which
is Christ crucified) but to let their Crosses them selves alone. For know we
not, they have defiled verity, fervencie, singlenes, all the three parts of
that Vprightnes which this commandment does enjoin, with the leavin of all
the three parts of contrary hypocrisy. preposterousnes, vacuitie and
pollution? An example of the first we have in the Crosses that certain women
bare in their boosomes, for these are censured as Hieron. (...) Math. 23. Ioh.
Reynold. co^fer. ca 8. divi. 4 D. Fulk. reioynd. art. 6. page 184.
tythers of Annis-seed and Commin, to the omission of a greater duty: which
was to bear the power of the death of Christ in their hearts? Example of the
second we have in that common and vulgar opinion which comes from Gregory, to
wit, that a Christian is safe enough from the Devil, though Gregor. dialog
lib. 3. cap 17.
Vas vacuum, if he be but signatum with the Cross. Which, while the papists
defend as good, and much people at home do practice, the pens of our Calfh.
ag. Mart. arti. 1. page 36.
Writers, are embittered against the Cross, as against an occasion of much
empty hypocrisy: to make the spirit to reenter again, as Gregor in Job. li.
17. cap 13. 2 Cor. 6.17 Agge. 2.14. John. 4.23.
Gregory more truly teaches els-where. Corda fide vacua Diabolo sunt
subdita. As for the third the word is plain, that the touching of
Antichrists things, makes unclean now in the soul, as the touching of
meats unholy, defiled the body in Moses law, for a figure of this pollution.
Now to particulars.

For the sanctifying of the sensible and reasonable soul, as they use to
work, together all signs devised by man, must be displanted out of Gods
service, as occasions of sensual service: yea as enemies to the spiritual
worship of God: after the example of God him self, who to be served in spirit
and truth, removed the ceremonies of his own ordinance: not to make place for
Image or D. Fulke ag. Saund. of imag. p. 697.
Cross, or any other carnal rite ordained by man, but Origin. in Numb. ca.
28. homil. 23.
vt animas nostras avelleret ab hoc intuitu ad Contemplationem retum spit
itualium, Cultumque suum a visibilibus ad invisibilia transferret. This
doctrine we are to hold fast, against crosses, against Images, against all
other carnal objectes in Gods service, even as we have received it not only
from the mouth of Christ, but from the writings of the Fathers likewise. For
whereas Origin commends the Jews for banishing all Image-makers from amongst
them upon this reason, Ne Origin. cont. Celsum. lib. 4.
qua hiresset fabricandorum simulacrorum occasio quae ad contemplanda terrena
animae oculos retorqueret. Whereas Lactantius condemns all Images upon this
reason: Lactant. instirut. divin li. 2. c. 19.
Galcanda terrestria vt caelestia consequamur, and wills spiritually to look
up to God. that so Idem de Justice. li. 5. cap. 8.
in domicilio pectoris eum statuamus. Whereas Epiphanius is cited, exhorting
thus: Council. Constantinopl. 7.
Ne in Ecclesiam Imagines inferatis, sed perpetuo circumferte Deum in cordibus
vestris. Non enim fas est Christianum per oculos suspensum teneri, sed per
occupationem mentis. To which D. Fulke cont. Sa^id. of imag. c. 15. p. 685.
our writers use to add [we walk by faith and not by sight] [blessed are they
that believe and see not]. Last of all, whereas the whole Argument of St
Bernards Apology (even in Bellarm de cult. sancto. cap. 6.
Bellarmines own confession) is this, That the Cluniacenses were carnal in
that they used outward spectacles qui impediunt affectum, dum retorq^ent
aspectum. The Cross being as much guilty of hindering spirituull worship, of
retorting the sense to an earthly sight, of hurting of the hearts affection as
any other carnal object formerlie mentioned, he must be thrust out as well as
they. From this preposterousnesse of the Cross setting the sense before the
spirit, come we to his Vaaeuitie for his inward Devotion. which being the
Thom. Aquin. 2. 2.quaes. 82.
fatt of every sacrifice, yea the Durant. de rit. lib. 3 c. 24. sect. 18
marrowe of every service, how great is the sin of the Cross to cool it?
how great also their oversight that putt such a cooler in trust to kindle it?
First choose we a Cross to stir up reverence and devotion to the Sacrament,
and leave we our selves without excuse for excluding the Oil, Salt* Spittell,
and the like, because these are annexed to Baptism for like reverence Thom.
Aquin. pa 3. qu. 66. art. 10.
and devotion toward it: and open we a window on the other side to other of
their Jewish ceremonies as to their Incense, since it serves only to admonish
Duran. de rit. lib. 1. ca 9 sect 8
Con nostrum ignitum veluti thuribulum coram Deo odor atissimum facere.
Secondly, our Ioh Reynold. confer. cap. 8. divil. 4. pa. 101.
writers hold the Cross with other ceremonies of the Papists, beggarly
ceremonies. Beggarly, that is wanting power to entic he with grace spiritual.
And when Saunders obiecteth, the Cross and Images breed devotion. The Devil
they do (quoth D. D. Fulke cont. Safid. de imag. cap. 17. pa. 697.
Fulke.) Censure him not. The scripture says, the Apoc. 9.^0.
Cross is a Devil. the greatest effects of whose devotion, when they are
registered are said to be these: Pic. Miran dull. tom. ^. de mort. chapter li. 1. ca.
10.
The Image of the Crucifixe found pictured in the heart of S^ Clara, and the
wounds of Christ imprinted in the body of Saint Frauncis. which pretty images
of him self begotten by him, puts me in mind of him that Ludovic. Vives in
August. de ci^it. Dei. li. 10. ca. 2^.
going in to his wife in the habit of a divill through his wifes imagination
(and it is through imagination whereby the sign of the cross does work
says Mr Hooker) begat a child in a Devils shape likewise. Let not Master
Calf hill be forgotten. It is impossible ( Ma Calfh ^ont. Mart. praefa fo. 6
says he) that Christ should be served as he ought, where a cross is erected
in his service, because the mind is rapt from an heavenly consideration to the
earthly creature; from the soul to the sense; from the heart to the eye.
Thirdly, the dregs of the popish doctrine stick (to this hour) in the teeth
of the people* in regard whereof the cross cannot but slay devotion For it
even teaches hypocrisy when it avoucheth an opus operatum in it: although the
heart be not upright. And how many drugges are ingredients to this poison. For
thus Bellarmine: the cross has Bellarm. de effect. Sacrament. cap. 31.
spiritualem virtutem, yea miram virtutem, even ex opere operato, and that ex
institution Idem de imag. ca. 30
divina, even to blessing with Ibid. etc de cul^. san^t. cap. 7.
bare touching. The third hypocrisy of the cross upon the soul and sense
together, is [Pollution.] For who feels not a popish qualme in the use of
this sign: sees not a popish humor nourished by it in the people? Is not our
zealous retayle of the cross, our lovely entertaynement we give him in
baptism, our devout gracing him there, as good as a spiritual Osculum, a
spiritual amplexus of him, at least in show? In the show we have no excuse:
seeing it sets the alluring harlot before the eyes of incontinent men,
against the warines of our Chrisoft. in Math c. 23 Homil. 74.
Forefathers, who set a wall of separation in the Church, even between honest
men and women, that they should not have the sight of one another there. And
consider we the effect that commonly follows and falls out. For as Thom.
Aquin. 2.2. quaes 154. art. 4. vide Caiet. ibid.
Oscula and amplexus, in that they are circumstances of adultery bodily, sunt
libidin^s^ for the delectatio tactus which is in them, though no concubitus be
intended. So though the people have no intent to adore the Cross, and pretend
that they use it for decency only, yet their delight in it, their ^agernes to
defend it, their malice to revenge it, their intemperate desire to have it, is
a spiritual kiss and embracing, and delighting which does pollute them with
adultery toward it. Against these occasions of hypocrisy in the Cross, he
sets up a paper wall that apposeth the counsel which a certain Council
gives: this may be amended. Council. Magunt. cap. 39.
Si Past^res sedule deceant against the hypocrisy of opus operatum, and
inform the people that the Cross does all per Divina virturis operationem,
and san^tisici Numinis invocationem, which I repeal by an appeal even to the
Adiaphoristea them selves, Interim Caroli quin^.
si quid in Ceremonijs, succreverit ex quo superstitio ca^sari possit, illud
tollatur, would the Lord Christ or Paul (think ye) suffer a Pharisaicall
garment in the service and worship of God, after a virtue is once place in it,
Math. 23.5.
to make men holy, who so mightily invayeth against it for that occasion and
purpose of hypocrisy which was in it: which is the case of every garment that
deceyueth? Zach. 13 4.
Naaman thinks the earth of Israel is able to make holy a sacrifice. The
Jews think the ceremonies sanctify. 2 Ring. 5.17
Is teaching against hypocrisy sufficient here? Does not Elisha deny the
earth it self unto Naaman? God Rolloc. in Ephesians. 2.14
take away the Temples ceremonies them selves from the people? But the Fathers
when they saw the Cross abused hipocritically contented them selves with a
reproof of the hypocrisy, but still retained the cross it self, Orig. in d^
verse. Evangel. loc. homil. 8
Cruces non solum in frontibus, sed in animabus quoque nostris habere debemus.
Chrisost. in Mat. homil. 55.
Crucem non simpliciter digito in corpore, sed magna profecto fide in mente
formare oporteret. August. in Johan. tratat. 43.
Christus elegit vt in Cruce pe^deret, vt ipsam crucem in cordibus fidelium
figeret. Signum Christi ex pellit exterminatorem, si cor nostrum recipiat
Salvatorem. Ambros. de Isaac. and anima. ca. 8
Signaculum Christus in front est; signaculum in cord; in front vt semper
confiteamur: in cord vt semper diligamus: in brachio vt semper operemur. The
Fathers were not free from superstition in this sign, and these reproves of
theirs, show that the cross was an occasion of hypocrisy in their time that
they wayned the people from this hypocrisy by these reproves in vain: and
the Fathers who lived to see the grossnes of the hypocrisy popish, they did
not content them selves with such reproves, but proceeded to the remouall eue^
of the cross it self. So it is Alphons. de cast. in verb adorat.
testified of John Wicliffe, that he took away all outward use of the cross,
and taught only a cross spiritual to be used. Does not Elmar in Harbor of
faithful subject.
Elmar run on a cross spiritual when he writes of Q. Elizabeth that she was
the English Helena that dug up the cross out of the rubbell where papists
had buried it, in that she restored the Gospel? Sure our foundest writers
teach, Ioh. Keyn. conference ca. 8. divi. 4 page 491.493. Andr. Willet. de
templ. page 3.
that popish rites renew a Jewish and a carnal worship, and are but vayles
which must away, that the inward veil of the heart may be removed the sooner,
and Gods worship become spiritual, whereby the cross is cast.

#Sect. 8. The hypocrisy of the cross in preposterating, evacuating, and
polluting the understanding, which is the first part of the soul reasonable,
is proved.
WE are now to examine the Crosses hypocrisy in the several powers of the
soul reasonable. The understanding whereof (which is the first) the Cross is
said to instruct like a very effectual Ric. Hook li. 5. ca. 65.
teacher. Against which brag we take upon us to prove that the Cross is
guilty against this comment, both for preposterating, and for evacuating, and
for polluting [knowledge.] The preposterousnes of the cross appears heerin,
in that the sign is matched with the word, yea in some sort preferred before
it. The least of which two hipocrisies can be no little sin. To begin with
the first. Add the cross for a teacher to the word and pull down at once all
the blockhouses which our writers from time to time have reared against the
popish teaching of it, such as be these: D. Fulk ag. Saund. of imag. c. 11.
pa. 638
though all other things may be taught by the eye, yet faith and religion can
not be taught save by the eat. Romans 10.17. teaching to the eye is sufficiently
performed by the Sacraments, D. Bills co^t. Apolog. p. 4. pa. 349.
the word and the Sacraments were appointed by Christ to teach us (says one of
our Opposites) a Crucifix was not, ergo, not a cross neither, which to add (
D. Fulke reioind. arric 9. page 205.
say our writers) is injurious Zanch. de imag. these. 3. fol. 370.
unto them, and presumptuous against the Lord. as when a scholar will choose
him a book and not keep him self to that which his Master has set him. At a
word, it is the fountain of al Idolatry. From whence came the Io. Calvin. in
Act. 7. Iosi. Simlet in Exo. 32.
calfe, but from a desire to have a visible sign of Gods presence? And the
heathenish Hospin. de orig. imag. so. 56 Romans 1.23.28.
Idolatry, whence? but from a desire to advisible signs to the book of the
creatures. The injury whereof, if God revenged so severily on them, what
revenge reserveth he for us, who to the contumely of his word written seek to
the cross to teach us? The second preposterousnes of this sign does yet
much worse. It does not only match it self with the word Council. Nicen. 2. in
Tharas. apistol.
quidquid sanctum Evangelium per lectionem nobis demonstrat, hoc idem Imagines
per inspectionem. Hosius.
And a cross is able to teach a simple man al things necessary to salvation.
Io. Dowley instruc. cap. 1.
And the Cross is the sum and the abridgement of the christian Faith. But it
prefers it self before it: Bellarm de imag. c. 10.
Melius docet inter dum pictura, quam scriptura. Council. Senonens.
Per picturam plus discimus brevi temporis spatio, quam longo sludio
scripturarum. Council. Nicen. ^.
Imago mator est quam oration. Which, whiles Saunders defends, he makes the
Cross D. Fulk agai. Saund. de imagine. ca. 15 pa. 681.
better then a sermon. As also Martial does, Mart. of the Cross art 9 fol.
117.
The Cross is needful (says he) though we may have godly instructions by
reading of scriptures, and hearing good preachers, because every man cannot
read scripturs or understand them when he reads them: and every man cannot at
all times so conveniently hear a good preacher, as he may see the sign of the
Cross: and things seen do move more affection then those which be heard or
read. Add to this, that for this common and continual; and this speedy
teaching sake, they Nie. Saund de imag. cap. 11.
teach the Cross is worthy of worship and adoration. How can we find it in
our hearts to make it a teacher to our selves, which cannot be done without
giving show of justification to this injurious presumptuous, sacrilegious and
Idolatrous teaching? But from this preposterating of the means of knowledge,
come we now to the Evacuating of knowledge it self. Here our ground is what
one of our Jewel. art. 10 in si^e.
writers lays: The Cross and the Image must be removed in that he is an
occasion of ignorance, Deuteronomy. 27. Cursed be he that leads the blind out of
the way. And Levit. 19. Thou shall not lay a stumbling block before the
blind. First, the Cross is an occasion of ignorance, because he deceyueth
those that look to be taught by him, it being a mute D Fulk. reioynd. art.
3.59.
character and dumb sign, a Calfh ag Mart. art 9 pa 170.
blind guide, the sight whereof teaches a man no more then it does an Ibid.
page 167.
horse: yea more a doumbe Ibid. page 169.
Vicar of the Devil. Secondly, if it teach any it is to no good. Claudius
Catalog. testium veritat. in vita eius.
Taurinensis would not suffer the Crosses and Images of his time to meddle with
teaching, because it was not Christ glorified which they taught, but Christ
according to the flesh. In which manner we know him no longer. A Co^^il
Co^stantinop. 7
Council, yea our own Homil ag. pe^l of ido lat.
Doctrine finds fault with the picture of Christ, because it represents him
as man, not as God also: which is the Crosses lamnes. A French The true
honoring of the cross. part. 1.
discourse that answers a Placard about the Cross disclaymeth his teaching
for that he presents the bodily sufferinges of Christ only, and not the
sufferinges of his soul withal. Calth. ag. Mart. art. 9 pa. 166.
Another of our Writers lays against it, that it stays men in the general
history of Christ his death, and neither teaches for whom he dyed nor to what
end, or what is the power of his death, or how we may apply the same to our
selves. Thirdly, let the event speak. For as Bucer affirmed of our land,
touching ceremonies retained in general from the Papacy, Bucerus in censur. ca
2 pa. 458.
They are no where cared for, where the Gospel is painfully preached, whereas
in places where the Gospel is unknown, they are highly reverenced. That
truly (by one) is applied to the sign of the Cross by name, Calfh. art. 9.
fol. 171.
They who most set by him, are grossly ignorant of the power of Christ's
passion. May this be the event of the Cross and he no occasion of blindness*
hen repeal we our Jewel. art. 14 divis. 10 pa 560.
writers reasoning against Images, proving they are the occasions of blindness,
because they are most in request with the blind, and were brought in, in the
Holpin de re templ. c. de imag.
deepest times of blindness; and sway most where Christ is most untaught May.
Calfh ag. Mart. art. 1.
and unknown: and then devise we also a better answer then a m bare denial,
to the papists that reason thus: D. Hill in quartron of reasons. rat. 20.
The Cross is a profitable teacher, because our lay people who are used to it,
have more knowledge in the mysteries of religion, then some of your ministers
who use it not. The third hypocrisy of the Cross in Man's understanding soul
is a pollution. The old proverb is known, (...) Council. Nicen. 2. art. 1.
an ill doctor teaches naught but ill doctrine. Now the Cross is an ill
teacher, it has no instructions in it (says Calfh. art 9. fol. 169.
one of our writers) but only the lessons of Cross Idolatry pe^ned by the
Devil. The same affirms in an other Ibid page 170.
place, That the Cross teaches errors many. If you ask me what errors? I
ask again, what were the errors which Peeter taught by his conformity to the
ceremonies of the Jews, by which he is said to have Andre Hipeonid de stud.
Theolog p. 73. Fulk ag. Rhem. in Gal. ca. 2.
erred in the faith, and to have walked not with a right foot in the preaching
of the Gospel. And there be many private errors which he broacheth. Agenerall
faith that Christ dyed, suffices. The Cross is an holy sign of his death.
The Cross does dedicate our children to God. The sign of the Cross does D
Fulk reioynd art. ^ pa 140.
bless. with diverse others before rehearsed. Oh but it teaches a diverse
good things touching Christ Jesus crucified* True. As the ligatures of old, and
as the charms of late have the name of Christ, and diverse other good things
in them, which Augustine calls honny mixed with poison vt August. 1 Pet. 2.2.
2 Cor. 2.17
perid quod dulce est, lateat quod amarum est. Ought not the milk be (...)
unmixed, which is taught in the Church? when there is but water mixed with wine,
is it not a tapsterlike marchandizing to be abhord? but here is mingled not
only Tho. Morton. Apol. page 2. li. 1. cap 49. Ezech. 34.19.
water with wine, but also puddle (moddy water at the least) I might say also
poison. But suppose the Cross were never abused in teaching, does this suffice
to authorize a ceremony in the Church, That it does teach good things? The
Cross teaches not out of the scripture, the horn does Hieron. in Psalm 91.
Omnia sacrificia cornuta fuerunt. and of the Godly it is said, exaltauit
sicut vnicornis cornu meum: so that, unless a man has a strong faith, tanquam
cornu quo inimicos ventilet non est dignus immolari Deo. The Cross teaches
not out of the scripture, the dounge does, August. de verb. Dom. in Luc. sermon.
31.
cophinum stercoris in bono intellige sordes sunt sed fructum dant; Sordes
cultoris dolores sunt peccatoris. If therefore the sign of the Cross as a
profitable ceremony must be received because it teaches good things (howbeit
without the word) then by the same reason a minister may wear an horn as
Moses is painted, and bear dounge upon his head, as the Jews once ashes, since
these teach very good things, and that out of the word of God.

#Sect. 9. That the Cross is not a monitorium to the memory, but defiles it
with the hypocrisy of preposteration, with vacuitie of the remembrance
pretended, and with forgetfulness of God, and of his word.
THE memory which is the next power of the reasonable soul receives great
profit, men say, by the Cross, it being a monitorium of it. whereas in deed
it will be found that the cross even here (also) defiles like an Harpie
whatsoever he touches with all his hipocrisies. Concerning preposteration.
First, whereas it is the meditation of the spiritual Cross of Christ that
only pleases him, August. in Psalm 118.
dum diligentissima pietate Christus ipse crucifixus attenditur, quam intuentes
salutiferam crucem omni calumniantium superborum virus expellimus: the use of
this sign poyzeth men down to a carnal crossing, and diveth (as it were) the
spirit into the senses channel: And it is too carnal a remembrance, to which
this preposteration binds, and unwarrantable by the word. For the Cross
cannot be set up for a remembrance^, but upon that popish ground, Council.
Nicen. 1. ar 6 p. 177
Omne quod in recordationem Dei erigitur, acceptum illi esse constat. Which
while our Writers refute by the word, we approve by our practice of the
cross. Hereby also we open a gappe to draw in Lutheranisme, whose Images
serve for like memorialls: to draw in Interun. Carol 5. in ca de ceremon.
Adiaphorisme, whose crosses are for like monuments: at a word to draw in all
Idolatry. For Fulke ag. Rhem. in Philip. 2. ver. 10.
if it be once lawful for us to bring into Gods worship all memorialls we will
our selves, all Idolatry may be excused. And for the present we are
indaungered to a participation with the crosses idolatry present: for under
what pretense is it worshipped, save this of remembering and putting us in mind
of Christ? So the counterfeit August de visit. infirmor. l 5 c 3
Augustine. So Damasc de fid orthod. li. 4 ca 12.
Damascen. So the Council. Nic. 2. act. 2.4 p. 69.
Nicene Council, whose doctrine a late papist thus expresses: Alphons. de
Castr. lib. 8. in ^ebi. and adorat.
Non aliam ob causam veneramur Imagines quam quod nos venire faciunt in
memoriam exemplaris and inde affectus nostros monent. To clear our selves from
all foresaid guiltines, return we to the ancient [tenent] of the
protestants, and to their reasoning of old. The old Zanch. de Imag. these. 1.
fol 351. Iosi. Simle^ in Exodus D Bilson.
tenent is, that besides the word and the Sacraments, we are not to seek to
any further memorialls outward. The old reasoning is this: The Cross is a
memorial not Fulk. ag. Rhem. in Luck. 24. sect. vlt.
ordained by the Lord, therefore unlawful: chosen by our selves, Idem in
Philip. 2. verse. 10.
therefore unlawful. Forbidden by God, therefore Idem in reioynd. art. 1. page
209.
unlawful.

The second hypocrisy of the memory by the cross occasioned is the vacuitie
of the remembrance which is pretended. First, no memorial is lively and
powerful for the sanctifying of our remembrance but such as God him self
does bless: which are such as him self ordained; to which when we add the
cross Calfh. ag. Mart. praefat. fol. 12.
as we put them out of their function, so rob we our selves of the blessing
annexed: annexed I say and tied to them, because the spirit that blows where
he will, And. Wiiler. de bap. cap. 8.
will only blow upon his own ordinance, and not to lackey after a cross or
any mean else to which man presumes to tie him all in vain. Secondly,
outward signs hinder remembrance which should be perpetual as Hieron. ad
Cela^tiam epi 14. c. 3.
Hierome tells us: We are now to keep (says he) not a literal (by
outward signs) but a spiritual memorial of Gods law, which commands, vt
non tam frequenter recordanda sint praecepta Domini, quam semper cogitanda.
While we depend (says Calfh art. 9. fo. 174.
one) on such a memorial as the cross, our remembrance vanishes with the
cross; whereas by the meditation of the word we may (as we are bound)
remember Christ always without it. Hence Charles the great, Caro. mag. de
Imag. li. 4. cap. 2.
infoelix memoria quae vt Christi memoretur qui nunquam a pectore iusti hominis
recedere debet imaginariae visionis est indiga. A third hypocrisy which in the
memory the cross occasioneth is [pollution] through that forgetfulness of God
and his word, Hospin. de imag. fo. 56
wherewith we charge papists, when they set up images for remembrancers, out
of Judges 3. Hose. 2. For what reason but that a cross should cause such
forgetfulness of him, as well as other images do, being as warrantlesse by the
word of God as they. But it was used by the Perck. problem. page 82.
Fathers as a common Monitorium, whereof thus Cyrill, Cyril. cont Julian. li. 6
Haeo omnia recordari nos facit salutare signum: and counterfeit Augustine
thus, Augustine. sermon. 19. de sanct.
Crucem nobis reliquit Christus in suae memoriam passionis. Our answer is the
same which Cassander and Martial received: when the one Cassand. in consult.
pleaded the oil cannot be left: the other Mart. of the cross art. 5.
that the sign of the cross cannot be disvsed but we must needs dishonor the
Fathers: why may not the Cross be left as well as other of their Ceremonies
without D. Fulke reioynd. art. 5. page 177.
injury to them? as their honny and their milk, yea their ministering of the
communion unto infantes? Did not Hezechias abolish the monument of the brazen
serpent without dishonor unto Moses that set it up? The Council. Constantinop.
6. c^. 82. Vid. Caranz. ibid.
Council of Constantinople abolished the Agnus in memorial of Christ Jesus,
without dishonor to their auncesters? what that the abuse of papists has
made it naked of all former privilege? For even Alphons. de Cast. in verb.
imag.
papists them selves do yield out of the example of the brazen serpent, that
Crosses and Images must be abolished, when the greater part abuse them, and
not our own writers Jewel art. 14. in fine.
only. As for our selves, how can we think better of a Cross which Hieron.
in Mat. 23.
Hierome himself condemns when it is borne in the bosom for Pharisaicall:
then of a Phariseis (...). The Phariseis added writings to their foreheads for
memorialls, and are Ianson. concord. Evangel. cap. 120.
condemned by papists themselves: and is not the cross of the forehead of the
same rank? When the Phariseis did but enlarge their fringes which were
Phylacteries and memorialls by God ordained, we see our Lord reproves them. In
Ibid.
Hieromes time they added sharp thorns, to put them selves in mind by their
pricking when they walked and sat down. Our Reverend Fathers not only
enlarge baptism with the cross, under pretense it is a Philacterie, that is a
preserver of memory, but also in enlarging it, disgrace it, even as the
Phariseis disgraced the fringe of the Lords ordayning with their
inlargementes. What, that it is a thorn not in the Fringe of a Phariseie only,
Pr^veth. 26.9.
to prick him self for his own remembrance, but in the hand, as it were of
a violent man, to hurt others, and to undo them?

#Sect. 10. That the Cross occasioneth, and breeds a canker in the
conscience, and that which the Opposites allege, that conscience is but a
pretense, is anticipat.
THE third hypocrisy of the reasonable soul which the sign of the Cross
occasioneth much (like a canker) breeds in the conscience. Here (often) we
hear our plea of conscience is but a pretense: we leap over blocks, and
stumble at a straw (men say) which accusation would move us much, if it were
made manifest, either what the blocks are over which we leap, or that the
cross is no more then a straw, which we know to be a block, and that of
stumbling, which, who so counsels, let him remember Balaam. But what if it
were a straw only? Apoc. 2.14.
even a straw that does offend, must be taken out of the way, as well as
cummine and anniseed tythed. and wherein will our governors spare us, or show
their mercy and clemency toward us, if not in a straw? For Illyric. in lib
de Adiaphor.
Conformitas in minoribus ceremonys, non est perinde necessaria to them, and
yet this mote and gnatt (as they speak) is of great peril unto us, Mat. 7.5.
for that the conscience being tender (like the eye) a very mote molesteth it
much: and strait in passage like an infantes throat, a very gnat is able to
choke it, as once it did Pope Adrian. But the help is to reform our
consciences. Alas tell us which way: we are loath to walk with a Ephesians. 6.15.
barefoot conscience without any shoe from the word shaped; especially in the
Luke 3.5.
rough ways of subscription, where every step will (we fear us) be a gashe.
Iosu. 5.15
Loath are we also in so holy a ground as baptism in steed of putting of foul
shoes, to put on shoes on this Eccles. 4.17.
foot of our soul so foul, as have not to this hour shaked Luke 10.11.
of the dust of Romes streets, which they ought to have done long since. And
with the wings of our meditation we have soared over all the region of this
controversy, and find no place where the Genesis 8.9.
sole of our foot may rest, or whence we may pluck an olive leaf for a
pledge of peace to our selves. Here we meet with a doubting conscience, there
with an accusing conscience, elsewhere with an audacious conscience: in another
place with a benumbed conscience: there is also where we find a conscience
superstitious. The sight hereof strikes many fearful thoughts into us.
Better to keep us in the Arc where now we are, then to venture abroad,
unless we can content our selves to rest (as it were) on the outside of it.
Howbeit, who knows whether God will deny unto us even this houering of a
raven about his Arc, and not throw us rather into the surges of that Deluge,
wherewith we shall find our earth swallowed, whose place we have bought with
so dear a price, there to taste of the unquietness of that conscience of which
it is said: Isay. 57.20.
The wicked are like the raging Sea that cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire
and dirt. This I presage of our selves only, who must make shipwreck of a
good conscience if we conform; for want of that full Ioh. Piscator.
sail of a (...) which some of our brethren (they say) have attained, which if
they have, we count them blessed. They may congratulate to them selves the
warm side they walk in; beak them selves in their sunshine, and sail
merrily whether the present gale does carry them: while we in our leapers
tente, and in the house of our mourning (as men rejected out of the host, and
in whose face the Lord has spirt) must go and mourn for our old sins
which have made us unworthy of that place in the house of our God, which they
enjoy, and which we our selves had once, till now that judgment is begun at
his house: Who is he that says, we may help all this if we will? Is there
any such savor in the white of an egg as that any will taste it for delight?
Job. 6.6.
what pleasure now in the learning of some new trade or occupation whereby to
live? what pleasure to bow down at the gates of other men (it may be of
papists) for a morsel of bread? Last of all, What pleasure now in our old
years when our strength (wasted in the labors of the Church) does fail us,
and when the natural days draw on, of which men naturally use to say, we
have no pleasure or delight in them. now I say to lie under the walls of those
houses which once were ours, to bidd long farewell to our long-loved harbors,
to go and embrace the thistle for a dwelling, and the rock for a covering,
the dongue for a pallat, the Ostriche or Pellicane for a companion: where
Ismaell starveth, Hagar weepeth, Elias faints, and weary of life, desires to
dye, because by reason of disastrous times, he is no better then his fathers.
Howbeit all this is welcome, all while there is walking in the midst of us
one that is like to the son of man: Cyri. lib. 4 epist. 6. 2 Samuel 25.31.
solus non est, cui Christus Comes est. Tiburtius martyr apud Baron in An. 168.
Omnis nobis vilis est poena, vbi pura Comes est conscientia. We know, we feel
what force Abigaels persuasion has: So shall it be no grief of mind.
Whereas on the other side, how do we fear the grief and knowledge of an
ill conscience upon the eating of this fruit? We stand now on the holy of
holies, and look up boldly and have hope. Nevertheles let it be proved that
the throwing down of our selves into some other conscience, is warrantable by
the word of God, Psalm. 91.11. Mat. 4.6.
and we will adventure to be borne up. But if this clause [in his wayes] be
left out in this temptation (as of old) then blame us not, if we shake, if we
shiver, to see, to surveye, the stones, the flatts, upon which we are like to
fall. For what? the douting conscience foundeth heavily like a shalme [to him
that doubted to him it is sinne] and if our hearts condemn us, God is greater
then our hearts. The accusing conscience chattereth dolefully like a swallow
or a crane: 2. Reg. 5.18.
The Lord be merciful in this point. 1 Gro 13.15 1 Samuel 13.10.
The benumbed conscience which sees not what sin is committed when baptism
is carted with a Philistines carte, will be awaked to sense and feeling by some
judgment. The audacious conscience is too profane. It says with Saul: I
will be bold whether it be well or no. and as for the conscience superstitious,
it cries like a prisoner out of the chains wherewith the Council of Trente
has fettered it. Council. Trident. de Sacram. can. 13. ses. 7.
It is damnable sin to omit any of the rites of baptism that be commanded.
Neither will it be comforted or reformed by all our Chemnit. examine. p. 2. tit
de rit. Sacrament.
Writers, standing for our christian liberty against this bondage. By this it
appears, to what exigent this unworthy rite has brought us. Unhappy times
you must hear again the old complaints of the Conrad. Schlnssenburg li. 13
page 506. 589.
Germane Divines, when the Adiaphorisme ceremonies were pressed on them: the
heart sigheth, the mind is troubled, the spirit is sadd, the joy of the holy
ghost it self is obscured. Have pity upon us, have pity upon us, O you our
governors, how long will you feed us with that you tread on? how long fill us
with the puddle and the mudd? how long make us in your presence as a troubled
and muddy spring, and all for a beggarly ceremonies sakes? Are ye not ledd
from such a course to an abolition of the cross by the example of Epiphanius?
he takes down Hieron in translat. epist. Epiphan. ad Johan. Hierosol.
Anablathaes Image, and forbids all other Images, because occasions of
scrupulositie in the Church. And as for the conscience superstitious, (which
this sign breeds) may it be any other way remedied save exemplo Zach. Vrsi.
de Adiaphor.
omissionis? For besides that the scripture (like an Notrh wind) scatters
away all the humane co^stitutions that tie men's consciences to themselves as it
were with a Io. Piscator in 1 Cor. 7 35.
cord, or Colos. 2.20.
burden the soul, or Gal. 5.1.
enthrall liberty, or bring the free men of the Lord into 1 Cor. 6.12.
subjection, we have a plain censure that wipeth the Cross out of our
Leyturgie when there is found an Bucer in censu. c. 12
elementi servitutis in it: as also every ceremony else a Ibid. ca. 8.
Cuius inviili servitute populus abstrahi se aegre patitur.

#Sect. 11. The hypocrisy and preposteration of the Cross, in the Will, in
respect of the means for ^^cayning to the right end, is proved.
THE fourth hipocrie of the Cross is in the Will: which when is upright, when
it desires Thom. Aquin. 2.2. ques. 9. art. 7.
bonum sub ratione boni for the end, and electeth bonum propter bonum in the
means whereby the end is compast. This sincerity of the election, the cross
preposterateth first of all. in that it is chosen being an unlawful ceremony
before those that are lawful: being a tradition of man's before Gods precept:
and being but Annisseed and Cummin before waightier things of the Law. For
consider we the Cross (first) as an ancient custom, Master Bucer speaking
against the consecrating of the Font, Bucer in censur. cap. 16. p. 482.
sunt perquam multae constitutiones Patrum (says he) etc. there be very many
constitutions of the Fathers and many observations of theirs pertaining to the
discipline of the Church, which are taken out of the word of God it self:
these (alas) most severely are trodd under foot, when they seem to be contrary
to our humors. what a preposterous thing is it then to borrow those rites from
the Fathers which as they agree not with the word of God, so they serve Sata^s
turn amongst too many me^, for the confirming of manifest superstitions and
opinions plainly magical. That this lights on the Crosses back in
comparison of other ancient observations, an instance in one or in two of them
will make plain: when Cassander strove for the Chrisme and pleaded the
antiquity of it, it was replied he dealt absurdly to Herman Hamelma. de
tradit. appendi. ad primam colum. 499
arripere from the Fathers, Quod humanum, omittere quod diuinum (to wit) the
government of the Church communi consilio Praesbyterorum. This may we not
apply to some who enforce the Cross upon us by reason of the antiquity of it,
when in the mean time they shut the door against this government, which is Io
Whitgifc. defense. of the ans. to the admonit. page 638 Mat. Sutclif. de Roman.
pontifi. c. 5
confessed by some of their own to have been used in the primative Church, and
that long before the Cross; that which the Irenae li. 4 cap. 43. Tertul.
Apolo. ca. 39. Hiero. in Tit. 1. Ambros. in 1. Tim. 5. ver. 17.
vewe of the Fathers does confirm. Again it was an Cypri. in sermon. de
eleemofin. Irenae. lib. 4 ca. 32.34. August. retractat. lib. 2. cap. 11.
ancient custom that none should receive the Lords Supper empty handed, but
guie somewhat to the poor, which certain Deacons did distribute to the needy
that did work, the idellbeing excomunicated out of the Church: of which thus
Bucer once again g, Nimis magno. etc. It is too great a shame for this
Kingdom that this part of Ecclesiastical reformation has been hitherto
neglected: whereas in the Low countries it has been long a go received, where
nevertheless the true profession of the Gospel is punished with death. I
ask, is there not a preposteration to renew a Cross so zealously, while we
burry so carelessly this ancient custom? raising up in the room thereof new
courses of our own which do no good. Again, there was in old time a custom,
there should be a communion every Chrisos^^ homil. 3 in Ephesians. Regino lib. de
Ecclecsiast. Discipline. cap. 191. Hugo Cardinal. in Luc. 24.
Lords day, every one not receiving without lawful excuse being Nicol. Cusan.
Epist. ad Bohe. 7.
excommunicated, which Ansegis. in leg. Franci. lib. 1. c. 132
Charles the great in some sort renewed, Bucer in censur. cap. 4 page 464.
and which Bucer advised King Edward in this land to restore Bucer. in Censur.
c. 3 p. 460. 461.
again. what now? There is not any one piece of the canon for the Cross which
is not egerly pursued, whereas all the Canons made for the Sacrament of the
Supper, it self lie low in the dyrt: men thinking it sufficient to come for
fashion once a year, as they were wont to do in popery, and that without all
examination (for the most part) reconciliatio^ or separation of offenders
though most notorious. Last of al, it was the custom of the primative church to
have no assembly without a sermon (as shall be showed in the next chapter,)
which through the hypocrisy of the Cross is now neglected: this rite must
have place, whether Preacher or preaching have any or no. Alexan. Ales. in
proaem. Lieturg. Anglic.
Quo tamen neglecto frustra in alijs constituendis apice sci: and cultu
ministri de gestu rituque sacrorum opera sumitur. Inducitur. n. ita parieti
vicioso and labanti tectorium quod ruinas and hiatus diu non poterit tegere:
vel erunt haec potius sepulchra incrustata intus refer ta foeditate
abhominabili. Secondly, consider the Cross as a custom which for the present
is in use, and we cannot miss of an other preposteration in it. We prove D.
Whit^. cont. Dureum. lib. 9.
hereby the papists prefer their own traditions before Gods Laws, because
they punish more severely the breach of one of their own fastes then when the
Law of God is broken by fornication or the like. It is also observed amongst
Saules hipocrisies that he was more ready to punish with death the breach of
a Law of his own in Jonathan, then to punish the people with the least
mulcte, when they brake the law of God in eating blood, which fact of his also
when an Ambros. sem. 25.
Ambrose alleges to make the sin of a man sinful that does break a
Lenten-faste, he is Herm. Hamelma^. de tradit p. 1. lib 5. folio 446.
censured as one in error. Ought not the Non-Residentes, the Idell and Idol
ministers be rather punished, who break Gods Law in feeding (not on the blood
of beasts) but on the blood of the souls of men, then those poor Ionathans
transgressors of an humane law, and that in a trifle, whose deserts to the
Church have not been so small but that they call for a better reward? What a
thing is this there should be no law to punish a loyterer that hides his
talent in the ground, to put out a dumb dog that can not bark, or that a
drunkard, a fornicator, a gamster, should scarce have their names called into
question; nay that Math Sutcliu. in answer to the humb. motit for tolerat.
papists them selves should be used kindly, while the paynefull and
profitable Minister is pursued even to proscription for a Cross, and is made
the Poenicentiarius Asini Act. and Monument. p. 359.
Ass that must dye for a straw, when the Gualt Mapes in Cathalog. testium
verit. fol 422.
Non pastor ovium, sed pastus ovibus, much like to the Fox or the Woulfe
escapes in his soul murder? Chrysostom began with the life of the Ministers,
he did not for the breach of a Ceremony thrust out the most paynfull that
were in the Church, but those who answered not to their calling: Theodoret.
histor. lib. 5. c. 28.
A sacris arcebat quod negaret frui Sacerdotali honor cos oportere qui vererum
Sacerdotum vitam non sequerentur. We taking on the other side run within the
censure of Augustine, August. ad Ianuar. epi. 119 c. 19.
sed hoc nimis doleo. etc. This I much bewail, that the commandments of the
holy Scripture, which are most wholesome, are neglected, and all things are so
full with so many presumptions, that he is punished more grievouslie that
touches the earth with his bare feet per octauas suas, then he that shall
drown his mind in dronkennes. A like hypocrisy unto this is that which an
Historiographer mentions, Socrat. li. 5 cap 22.
Nonnulli islis neglectis omnem scortationem rem quidem indifferentem
arbitrantur, sed tamen de diebus festis tanquam de vita deceriant. Is not the
breach of the Cross more severely punished then dronkennes? Is there not more
stir to uphold this Ceremony, then the preaching of the word? We cry out
upon the papists, because they take more care about the ceremonies of the
sacrament, the^ about the Sacramentit self. as because he will have Durant.
lib. 2. cap. 4. sect. 8.
Missa sicca, without consecration when he is on the sea, be cause of the
logging of the ship. On dry land when he consecrateth, he will not
minister the Wine ad Durant. li. 2. cap. 41. sect. 6.
evitanda quaedam pericula. Last of all, though the color of red wine
represonteth Christ's blood far better to the edifying of the people, Council.
Mediolan. 1. c. quae pertinent ad celebr.
yet white wine must be used to prevent the stayning of the clothes of the
Altar. What if (as Diogenes once) some bid us here, Begin with our selves?
who although it be apparent, that integrity of Baptism and the peoples
edification would be far better provided for, by the remoouall of the Cross,
yet keep it still, being as loath to see it stained, as the papists their
Altar clothes, and to see it fall to the ground as they, as they some drops
out of their Chalice, an hypocrisy so much the nearer touching the Cross, in
that it came in with the Cross, witness Tertullian: who in the same place where
he speaks of this sign has these words: Tertul. de coron. milit.
Calicis and panis etiam nostri aliquid decuti in terram anxie patimur.
Thirdly, consider the Cross, as retained in our Church to win the Papiste
(upon supposall) it is the best that might be chosen amongst all his other
rites: which, is it not preposterous? A Council Council. Cabilone^s. cap. 3^.
cries out upon them, who being under penance, abstain (in deed) from Wine
and flesh, as they are enjoined, but in the mean time in tantum delitijs
indulgent vt delitio sius his interdistis aliorum ciborum vel potionem appetitu
vivere cognoscantur. Hierome Hieron. epist ad Ne potian.
invayeth against their hypocrisy, who pretending to fast from Bread and from
Water, used (notwithstanding) quasda^ sorbitianculas magis delicatas, which
they did sorbere non Calice sed concha. August. de moribus Manicheor lib. 2.
ca. 13
Augustine lastly thinks it an hypocrisy execrable to drink no wine, to
eat no flesh, and yet to have pomorum nonnullorum expressos succes vini
speciem satis imitantes, vel etiam suavitate vincentes. After the proportion
hereof we exclaim against papists that will eat no flesh, and yet swill
wine: and gobble sweet delicates which have greater power to stir up lust.
Now here that of Plato would do well: Numnam and nos tales sumus? For we
pretend hatred and zeal against the very reliquies of popery, and thereupon
defile their Oil, quench their Tapers, spue out their spittell, when in the
mean time their Cross and Surplice we keep in with might and maine, which
are Idoli sorbitiunculae magis delicata, that do vincere superstitiosa
suavitate, and more imitate speciem papalem, and stir lust popish a great
deal more. Here I expect the old song, It is not their cross we use, which
sauoureth it not of their fancy who thinking it Council. Vormatiens. can. 65
unmeet to eat swines flesh, hanged up their bacon for a year in the smoke,
and then did eat it; as if it were now the same no longer. Nay has our
Cross had so much changing, as a years drying in the smoke comes to? It
seems not so much: since our diversity is in the different manner only of our
using, which makes no difference that may be sufficient in case we mean to
keep our ground against the papists. We lay to their charge a communion with
Corpocrates in worshipping Images: with the Hieraclionitae in annoynting the
dead with oil: with the Tatiani in abstayning from marriage: with the
Pepusiani in suffering women to be priests: with the Manichees in abstayning
from meats: with the Angelici in worshipping Angels: with the Apostolici and
Hieraclitae in their Monks, Nuns and Friars with the like. When yet our own
hearts do know they can shifte with distinctions to make Parsons of the
conver. of England Caesar Baron. Annal. in an. 120.
appear (for manner and meaning) a certain distance between these heritiques
and themselves.

#Sect. 12. How the Cross is urged by our Opposites for sinister end and not
in synceritie.
WE have seen how the Cross defloureth the election of the Will, which is for
the means. Now proceed we to examine how it defiles the intention of it,
which is for the end. Singlenes is the virtue here which this commandment
does enjoin, which aymeth at the right end of all humane actions which is
the glory of the Lord. This singlenes we plead for our selves like to the
Ioh. Dubrauius in histor. Bohemic. li. 4.
Thaborites, who when they were accused for purging their Churches, made this
replye, they were wooden Images and Crosses which they had thrown down, and
not silver and golden stuff, such as Sigismond had taken away. O that the
world would consider but that of a Roman Judge, cui bono, who stand for
their gain, who for their conscience? who for wooden, who for silver and
golden stuff? would not singlenes of heart be hereby found out on which side it
stands? yes, or else Paul reasons weakly, when he proves himself
single-harted because he Gal. 5.11.
suffered in his refusal of Jewish ceremonies: whereas his adversaries
conformed them selves to enjoy their ease and Gal. 6.12.
their credit in the world. And Theodoret after him, sufficit vel perpessionum
testimonium ad ostendendam veritatem predicationis. Let no man (then) put us to
business, they are the marks of Jesus which we bear. God grant our Opposites
a godly care, they bear not the marks of hypocrisy wherewith a Jesuit beyond
the seas has branded them. The Protestants (says Odoard Weston. de triplic.
hominis officio.
he) abolish some of our traditions, but they are lean ones, fatt traditions
they keep still, and will not leave them. To wipe away this imputation it were
to be wished: first of all that our Oppos^es would stand less for the
superfluous Lordly pomp, which the Hierarchy of the papists has left behind
in diverse churches, against the position of John Wickleffe, Council. Constant.
sess. 8. art. 32. and 39.
ditare ecclesiam, est contra regulam Christi. Did not Moses forbid that
superfluity should be brought in to the use of the Tabernacle? and our Perck
in Epist. Iud.
Divines do they not conclude from hence, that where there is a superfluity
in church goods, there abatement should be made to a mean, that so the wantes
of the church elsewhere may be supplied? For even an heathen Traian him self
thinks it unfit the milte should be suffered to swell, to the pyning of the
rest of the members, as now we see it comes to pass, whiles some few do
superabounde, the country parishes are in want. Council. Lateranen. ^ub
Innocent. 3 c. 32 Judge. 17.8.
Hence does there arise the ignorant ministry, the very bane of all things,
as God him self shows when he brings in a Levite seeking where he may
serve: for the origin of al corruption amiddest his people. Secondly, To wipe
away this imputation, it were to be wished our Opposites would less stand on
the fatt tradition of sole ordayning, sole excommunicating, of confirming young
men, which as John Husse long since has detected, have been reserved unto
Bishops Council. Constant. sess. 12. art. 19.
ad sui exaltationem propter Ibid. art. 28.
cupiditatem lucri temporalis and honoris, and Ibid. page ^34.
vt episcoporumi solemnitas and necessitas plus credatur. Thirdly, to wipe away
this imputatio^, it were to be wished our Opposites would stand less on the
fatt tradition of Nonresidencies and Pluralities, against which, how many
Canons and Councills fight, as against most horrible merchandise, Decret. pa.
2. cause. 21. qu^. ca. 1.
Clericus ab instanti tempore (says one of them and which shall serve for all
the rest) non connumeretur in duabus ecclesijs: negotiationis enim hoc est and
turpis lucri proprium, and ab Ecclesiastica consuetudine pemtus alienum.
Fourthly, for the wiping away of this imputation, it were to be wished our
Opposites would stand less on the fatt tradition of Substitutes and Curates,
which ancient times would not endure, as who allowed not a Decret. p. 2 cause.
21. qu. 2. ca. 5.
Conductitious Presbyter to be an out leate for the lazines of others. Fifthly,
To wipe away this imputation, it were to be wished our Opposites would stand
less on the fatt tradition of rigor in ceremonies: as in which a Papist or a
Brownist would draw suspision of many hipocrisies. First, they will suspect a
spirit of Demetrius pretending the public, but intending own private state
in them, who Cry out, No Ceremony, No Bishop, and thereupon proceed in such
rigor against the Preachers of the word as give show they use the ceremonies
for a mean to thrust out of Sibaris every clamorous cock that interrupteth
their quiet sleep, and for an Ostrachisme to expel out of Athens, qui
excellunt in paynfulnes, in faithfulness, in sobriety of life, least they
should foil the lazines, the man pleasing, and the flaunt of others. Secondly,
a Brownist will suspect that they are frogs of Euphrates, and not single
before the Lord that take on against good men, Apoc. 16.12.13.
because they like not the corruptions of of Church whereby they gain and
live, for as much as it is a property of those froggs to crook most when
their waters are nearest to drying up. Thirdly, a Brownist will suspect he is a
Demas who was with the reformation till the taste of the present world
changed his understanding against it, and he will resemble him to Islebius the
Master in Germany, of whom the common proverb rann, that he defended the
Chrisme and the Oil, Ioh. Sleydan. comment. li. 21.
vt ipse vnctior discederes. And to Georgius Mayor the scholar, who when he
turned Adiaphorist, had these verses made upon him:

Conrad. Schulsselburg. li 13 pa. 696.
Mayor eras quondam, cum nondum bella tenebant.
Dum saeuit bellum factus es ipse minor.
Maximus esse potes tibi cum quingenta dabuntur,
Sic Minor and Mayor quilibet esse potest.
Fourthly, A Brownist will suspect a Pharisaicall spirit in them, laying
burdens upon others, Matthew. 23.4
which they will not touch them selves with their least finger: who charge good
men with authority in things indifferent, wherein they keep not the Law
themselves. This is to be seen in their apparel against the statute: in their
eating flesh on fish days against the law: in their neglect of more
profitable Canons; yea by their omission of the like ceremonies, as the Alba,
the Cappa, the Casula, the Baculus Pastoralis, all which are enjoined by law as
well as the Cross and Surplice, because Anglic. leiturg. in regul. de ceremon.
ap. Bucer. page 455. statut.
named in K. Edw communion book, to which our Eliz. 1. c. 2 rubric. in init.
leiturg
Law and Rubric sends us. Is it a small thing that we are able to object as
Gal. 6.13
Paul did once, they them selves keep not the Law wherewith they press us?
Fifthly, A Brownist will suspect, the heart is not single in them who use
extremities in these trifles, both because of the ancient rule Decret. p. 1
distinc. 4^.
Qui asperitatibus student suas illi magis quam Dei causas probantur attendere
and also of our modern tenent against the papist, which is this, Tho. Morton.
Apol. p. 1. lib. 2. cap. 18.
their cruelty by fire and faggot shows they seek not the glory of God,
but their own wills and pleasures. Sixthly, A Brownist will suspect their
heart is double, that make Decrees for the strengthening of their own state
rather then for the reformation of Gods house, where that Augustine has place,
August. de civit dei. li. 19. cap. 21 Ludouic. Viues. Ibid
Non iura dicenda sunt vel putanda iniqua hominum Constituta, faisumque est
quod a quibusdam non recte sentientibus dici solet, id esse ius quod ei qui
plus potest vtile est. For as much then as our Lord when he saw gain was
intended by the Oxen of the out-court, howsoever the furtherance of Gods
service was the thing that was pretended, took a whipp and drove them out,
least the house of his Father should become a shopp of Merchandise: and whereas
our forefathers also have hereupon thrust out of the Durant. de rit. li. 1. ca.
26. sect. 7.
Churchyard all things whatsoever exposed for gain; these ceremonies (to whom
gain is godliness) must be scourged out, rather then be permitted to be a
scourge unto good Preachers, that so Andre. Hipper. de sacr. stud. non
deserend. p. 112
Oxen and Asses may keep in not only in the out-court, but in the holy place
and all.

#Sect. 13. That the Cross preposterateth, evacuateth, and polluteth the
affection of fear.
THE fifth hypocrisy of the reasonable soul neasteth it self in the affections
of the heart: the first of which is fear. This is preposterated by the
ceremonies in them who conform for fear of man. For quae Council. Chalcede.
act. 1.
ex necessitate est, fides non est, says the Council. And August epist. ad
Ca sulan. 86.
quisquis metu potestatis veritatem occultat, iram Dei super se provocat (says
Augustine) and Decret. p. 2 cause. 11. q. 3 cap 81.
melius est pro veritate pati supplicium, quam pro adulatione recipere been
ficium. For this cause they are better to be judged of who at this hour do
suffer, then they who are within the compass of that censure which the Germane
Divines past over them, who yielded to the Interim, not with an upright and
single heart, but Conrad. Schlussel. burg. li. 13 pa. 565. and 173.
ad grati ficandum Caesarem only. Does not Paul make it heinous in Peeter that
he conformed to the ceremonies of Moses law, to please the Jews of whom he
stood preposterously in fear? which fear of his (also) he terms gross
dissimulation? Secondly, the Cross evacuateth fear, partly by reason of the
popish persuasion that it drives the Divill away, even Bellarm. de imag. c. 30.
ex opere operato, though a man have not the fear of God, as Mart. art. 1 page
35.
Julian had not; and partly because it is a playgame of it self, as well as a
Mat. Sutcliu. in answer. to mot. for tollerat. Mat. 21.25.
Cross raised out of a toumbe on Easter day, to represent the rising of
Christ. Men think they may be ever bold with the work of their own hands,
and seeing the Cross is not from heaven (as every Baptismes sign should be)
naught can be in it to procure reverence* as well Lanctantius, Lactant.
institut. li. 2. cap. 19.
si religio etc. If religion be a divine thing, and nothing be divine but that
which is heavenly, the Image must want all religion, because there can be
nothing heavenly in that which is from the earth. Now for this cause he must
be removed from the service of God, in Bucers judgment, together with every
ceremony else that is an occasion Bucer in Censur. cap. 9. pa. 478.
profani Iudi, illudit. n. nobis continenter Satan, and seria Domini salutaria
convertere in fuos noxios ludos conatur. As every occasion of playfulnes is
dangerous in the service of God, because of Satan's illusion, so also by reason
of Man's For know we not we are as prone to trifle in the service of God, as is
the Gualt. in Luc cap. 7 Homil. 70.
child to play in the market. Thirdly, The Cross polluteth fear even with an
Ironie and contempt, it being subject to irreverence as much as the Image is of
which Lactantius, Lactant. de orig. error. li. 2. cap. 19.
There is no religion, where there is an Image. of which Varro, they took away
all fear of the Gods who first set up Images to them* Lastly, of which thus
Augustine, August de civi^. D^i. li. 4. ca. 31
simulacrorum (so Crucium) stoliditate facile contemnitur Deus. When Alexander
Cabala historica.
met Iaddo the high Priest of Jerusalem in his priestly attire, he fell down
and adored because God had appeared to him before he came out of Macedonia in
the very same habit, what hence? the profane is not brought to reverence by
the appearance of any Ceremony whatsoever, unless it have assistance of a
Majesty from the Lord, which the Apparel of Iaddo had: but the sign of the
Cross has not. The sign of the Cross must be made (say some) by us as well
as by the ancient Fathers to make profession against the Atheist, that is
amongst us. But if any Atheist be amongst us to laugh at Christ crucified, let
him be nailed to a Cross, but let not a Cross be made with a finger against
him, which will but increase his laughing. Dyonis. Hierrarch. Ecclesiast. cap.
vlt.
Dionisius me^tioneth that some laugh at the answers which the Godfathers made
for the child, as if alius pro alio were Baptized. Gregor. Nazianz. lib. 4.
rat. 4 cont, Julian.
Gregory Nazianzen reports, that Julian laughed at the sufflations of
Baptism. Is there not as great an occasion given in the sign of the Cross
toward laughter and contempt, as in either of these? The former of which is
abolisht by the Churches that are reformed as Zepper. de polit. Eccle siastic.
li. 1. cap. 10. page 52.
a ridicle, the later by our selves and all. Because the Jews laughed at the
Papists for painting Moses like a Devil with a pair of horns, the Sixth.
Senen bibliothec. lib 5. annotat. 116.
sounder papists would have removed it, it being an error of antiquity
brought in by Hierome interpreting [Moses facies erat cornuta] instead of [erat
radians.] The profane deriding our masking attire and iuglinge gesture in our
Church. now we have as great cause to have them abolished, they being (if
ancient) yet ancient errors, like to the horns of Moses.

#Sect. 14. How the sign of the Cross is an enemy to our affiance in the
merits of Christ.
THE second affection of the heart which the sign of the Cross defloureth, is
Faith and affiance in the merits of Christ: where I had rather lament then
express how near our Opposites come to the Papists. For, hold they not the
sign of the Cross to be a profession and a testimony of our faith, not
fearing Bellarmines society, Bellarm. de effect. Sacrament. cap. 31.
Crux est exercitium fidei? Valde. n. etc. For we do very much exercise our
faith when we do arm our selves with the sign of the cross against the
Divill. For we do protest by this ceremony, that we do believe that the
power of the Crucified is so great, as that the Divills are forced to fly
before his very Image it self. They hold that our profession of the faith by
the sign of the cross is an honoring of the merits of Christ his death, not
fearing the society of Durantus in all other Images, Duran. de rit lib 1. c.
4. sect. 11.
Imaginibus Christi non minuitur eius honor, sed augetur. For if Christ be
honored by a cross, then why not by an Image as well? Why not by a Crucifixe
also? Last of all there be who give forth, that our defacing of the Cross
diminishes the honor of the merits of Christ. not fearing a society in that
old and rotten slander, The Armenians deserve confusion, who use not the sign
of water with the wine in the Sacrament of the supper: Theophil in Ioh. c. 19
Non. n. credunt vt videtur, quod aqua ex latere egressa sit. For in that new
devised slander of the papists, the Rhem in Annotat. in Philip. 2. sect. 2.
Protestants in disvsing Crosses and Images, do nos only dishonor Jesus
Christ, but also deface him in Oblivion: and open a window wide to Atheism.
It is like also that slander of Dureus: For (as he says) we do Ioh. Durae us
cont. Whitaker, fol 380. in respons Whitaker.
resurrectionis fidem quasi cuniculis evertere, for that we fast between
Easter and Whitsonty de, and make not the good cheer which they have devised
for a memorial of his rising. So this imputation charge us with a
dishonouring of the merits of Christ, for that we use not the Cross, which
man has chosen, not the Lord for a remembrance of the same. Now we doubt not
but we shall be justified when that tincture of hypocrisy is well considered,
wherewith it infecteth our faith. Here we find, that first he does
preposterate it much in that he occasioneth trust in himself: yea more trust
often times in him self, the^ in Christ Jesus represented How can it be
otherwise the papists doctrine being still on foot? Mart in reply art a
There is a virtue flowne into the Cross from Christ's death. The Pan^ epist
11. cyted by Rhem* in Ioh. 19. sect. 1
Cross whereon Christ dyed, drunk in virtue from his blood* not for himself
only but for Bellarm. de imag. cap 26.
all other Crosses also that are like to him. Thom Aquin p 3. quaes 2^. art 4.
In Christi cruce ponimus spem salutis: Cantat enim Ecclesia, Aue Crux spes
vnica. Men must believe still in the sign of the Cross (when Act, and
monument in his 7. art.
Thomas Man would not believe in it, he was burnt.) Last of all: The Bellarm.
de cult. sanctor cap* 7.
Cross with other sacramentalia apply Christ's blood unto us to the washing
away of sin. and that as a fellow worker with our faith. And the complaint is
true of them which one of our writers Phil Mornaeus de En charist. li. 1 cap.
6. p 49
makes roundly and altogether at a blow: we see them come down from this
cross that is the death and passion of our Lord, See Fulk reioynd. art. 5.
the effectual powerfulnes whereof is adored of the Angels to the only figne
of the Cross. and there passing over according to their custom from the
signs to the things, and from the things to the signs, they come to attribute
all whatsoever is said by the Apostles or by the old Fathers of the true and
very cross of Christ, unto this dumb and naked sign. By means hereof
crossing has bredd such inconvenience (says M. Calfh. cont. Mart. art. 1. fo.
^6
one) that the externe action had in reverence, has made the inward faith to
be neglected: and that virtue ascribed to the sign which only proceeds from
him that was signified, in regard whereof it may well be left. PLACE="marg"
Philip. 3.19.
In deed as Moses ceremonies became enemies to the cross of Christ, when men
began to believe in them (for which cause they were removed) so the sign of
the Cross now is an enemy to Christ's cross much people trusting in it, for
which cause it ought to be displanted. Had it been fit for the Apostles to
have used in Gods service the Robe, the Reed, the Crown, the Scepter,
wherewith Christ at that time was mocket? but now it is with the sign of the
cross in popery that Christ and his cross is mocked? when they have robbed
him of his Scepter, and of his Priesthood, they give him a Cross to mock him
withal (says one And Willet. contro. 4. Q 10* p. 3. art. 2.
of our writers.)

#Sect. 15. That the Cross evacuateth and polluteth Faith.
SEcondly, The figne of the Cross does evacuat faith. Whereas Paul says, 2.
Cor. 5.7. We walk by faith and not by sight, it may And. Willet controvers. 9.
qu. 6. pa. 3.
be inferred, that the sight of outward representations which are earthly
hurts faith which is of things that are spiritual and not seen. Upon this
ground (as I take it) reasons Arnobius against the Heathen, Arnobius contr.
gent. lib. 6.
Convincitur non habere sua religioni fidem, cui opus est videre quod credit,
ne inane forte sit quod non videtur. Upon this ground it was, that when Cyrill.
con. Julian. li. 6
Num^ would invre his people to serve the Gods spiritually, he built temples
to faith: whence he removed all Images and all representations, as which he
thought contrary unto faith. Last of all, upon this ground it is that our D
Bilson cont. Apolog. page 4. page ^49.
own writers dealing for a [sound fayth] beholding and adoring God in spirit
and truth, cashier all [dourn be shewes] that man's wit can furnish to win the
eye or moon the heart binding us only to the hearing of his word, and
partaking of his mysteries which only can instruct ciur faith. Another way the
sign of the Cross does hinder faith in that it occasioneth diverse to rest
in the historical knowledge of Christ's death only: all of which he
remembers not, neither because not the sufferings of his soul, which are the
chief, whereof one thus: M. Calfh. cont Mart in praefat. fol. 1^.
Suppose the Cross tell me, that Christ died, what am I the better for that,
unless I know that he dyed for me: and the mean how his death may be applied
to me? which no picture can express* the promises of the word must declare me
that without the which the Image is nothing (yea worse then nothing). Thirdly,
the Cross polluteth faith, and that with infidelity. For as when Bellarmine
teaches: charges expended upon garnishing Churches, is an action of faith. It
Lambert. Dane. cont. Bellarmin. de Cult. Sanctor. cap 6.
is replied that it is infidelity rather and disobedience, because a
presumption without the word. So when it is said, [the Cross is a gesture of
faith] it may be replied, It is a gesture of infidelity and unbelief, seeing
is has no warrant from the scripture. And look on the effects it works:
For as a man in danger of drowning, catches even at a rushe or a flagge for
want of better stay, so it is out of fearful distrust of better refuge that
men catch at the cross to help them. For example: Act and Monu in Histor.
eius
Thomas Becket armeth him self with a Crucifixe in his boosome, and with a
Cross in his hand when he comes to the court in danger. The Historica
collect. of Massacr. in France, in Hen 3.
Archbishop of Lions of late at the sight of the executioner, as he first
entered into the prison, fled strait to the Crucifixe. Certain Act and Monume^.
heads of houses in Oxon. being in St Mary's, and thinking the Church had been
on light fire, betook them to the Crucifixe on the Altar. Compare not this
with Sozom. li. 2. cap. 29.
Alexanders flying to the Table of the Lord, when the Arrians straightened him.
with Ambrose his flying to the same table when Ambros. Epist. 33.
Iustina the Empress pursued him. with Gregor. Nazeanze. orat. 11. de Land.
Gorgon.
Gergonia her flying thither in the dark night when she was extreemly sick.
Lastly, with Theodosius his circuting Ruffin lib. 2 cap 33.
Omnia orationum loca, when Eugenius made war against him: neither say that
this is no other, then that which the Christians did when they always crossed
themselves in the time of danger, for these men fledd to these places
mentioned, because they were the fittest for prayer, as it is said of Epiphan.
in epist. ad Ioh. Hierosolomit.
Epiphanius, that seeing a light at Anablatha, and thereby perceyving it was a
Church, he took occasion to go and pray in it. As for the custom of the
Christians crossing them selves in time of danger, let it be surveyed first in
these ensamples, and then be rightly judged of. A Deacon when he entered the
ship to go into exile, Theodor. histor. lib. 4 cap. 22.
signum Diuina Crucis fronti afformauit. When Christians Eusebius. histor. lib. 8.
cap. 7.
stood ready to be devoured by the Panthers, they clappe their arms athwarte,
to express a cross. Tiburtius Caesar Bar. Annal in ann. 286.
when he is to walk barefoote upon hoate coals, signeth him self with a
cross, and so prepares him self to the miracle. The stuff of Ibid in ann.
293.
Domnax Macrina and holy Christians wherewith their chambers were wont to be
furnished, are said to be a book of scripture, a Cross, a censor, and a
little box to keep the Eucharist. Glycerius Ibid. in ann. 301
crosses him self when now he is to be tied to the stake. Ibid ann. 303.
Anisia fenceth her self with the sign of the cross, when she is tempted to
adultery. Ibid ann. 303.
Emplius does the like when he was to be examined. Ibid. anno 253.
Gregorius Thanmaturgus cleanses a Temple from Devils with the sign of the
Cross, and teaches others to work miracles by it. Will any justify this
ancient crossing as an action of says? For mine own part* I will not
justify it: if there be any good in it, it is profession against the Pagans,
which now having no place amongst us, it ought to be left. For that with
papists and in the people it is become a sign and cloak of infidelity and
distruste. For this cause it is termed by Andre. Willet de Cruc art. 4.
our Writers, a deceytfull toye, because it causes men to come to it, but
confounds them when they are come (like Theman waters) even as diverse
examples show. The history is common of the Bishop of Bizantium, who signed
him self against Satan in vain, answering him thus: Leoniter. Theatru^.
Historical. fol. 1 ^0.
Signate signa temere me tangis and angis, as common is the story Vide*
Calfhil. art. 1. fol. 37.
of Sylvester the 2. arested by Satan even in the Chapel sancta Crucis, and
in the time of Mass too, when as he was in his deepest crossing. The french
discourse of the true honor of the Cross page 2.
We are told, the great Bodin. Daemonolog lib. 3. cap 6.
Doctor Picardus in the year 1552. spent many crosses all in vain, to chase a
spirit out of a maid in Paris. In the year 1554 a Cardinal sends for an
holy Monk of St Bennets, to dispossess some 82. may dens at Rome; who were
belabored with infinite Crosses for the space of six months, but to no
purpose. so Cripin Chrondlog.
Certain soldiers come into the field (like the Iamnites) with Crosses and
charactes in their bosoms: which, what good did they? For after the fight they
were taken up dead with these Crosses in their bosoms. The Ioh Lasicius
theolog Muscouit ca. 7.
Priests of Russia overcome, come footh with Crosses about their necks, which
they kiss often; and their Images they bring in their hands, holding them
forth like so many bucklers, and are hewed all to pieces. Act and Mo nu. 2104.
Pauckney and Harrington two fellows of new College in Oxon. drowned
themselves, and were taken up with their Crucifixes about their necks. Jews
II. of France, after he had kissed every Relic he heard of to get his
health, Io Crispin Cbronolo. in an. 1479
and well near worn out his hatt and his boosome with Crosses, dies most
unwillingly, and without comfort, and with great fear and horror of death,
as shows the exceeding monthly pay which he gave to his Physicians for the
prolonging of his life. Oppose to this the death of the greatest enemy that
ever Crosses or Images had, to wit, Constantinus Ioh. Crispin in Constant 5.
Isay 50.11. Deuteronomy. 17.17.
Coprominus, whose last words are said to be these: I am delivered from the
fire eternal. We see in these, we might see in more, that they who kindle this
spark to them selves, meet with the thret: This shall ye have at mine
hands, ye shall lie down in the sorrow. And shall we not remove it then,
as God him self does use to remove the occasions of vain confidence in men?
And as a Council does command, Council. Coloniens. p. 9. ca. 16.
Quicquid in Ceremonijs ad abusum and superstitionem spectat, and quo populus a
Deo ad collocandam in rebus externis fiduciam abduct poss it, prohibemus. The
Fathers (as the ordinary shift) will be objected here: Who used the Cross as
a testimony and profession of their faith. First the Fathers are not justified
in this their practice: Our Writers say, the Cross at the first was a Calfh
ag. Mate. in praefar. fol. 12 and art. 1. fol. 26. and 30.
faithless invention taken up without all warrant, yea without all good
occasion, and without all need. The most that can clear them is this, that
they command the printing of the merits of Christ's passion in the mind
first, and afterward the sign of the Cross in the body. Now to this it is
answered: Frustra fit per plura quod fieri possit per pauciora. there is
nothing in the world that the cross can do, but faith can do without it:
Leave we therefore that which may tend to superstition and is uncommanded,
and betake we our selves to that which is of faith and force thorough Gods
commandment. Secondly, what though at first the Cross were devised well to
testify faith, now it is abused to the crossing of says (even Calfh. ar^. 1.
fol 25.
as one writes): That which was at first a testifying of Christianity, came
to be made a magical inchauntement. That which was a reproof to the enemies
of the Cross, became in the end a cause of conquest against Christians. But
these abuses may be spoken against the cross it self remaining, which
president the Fathers give us. Does not Origin exhort, that this sign be
Origin. in Exodus cap. 15. homil. 6.
consignatum fideliter? Cyril in Catech^s. 13.
Cyrill that it be ostensum fortiter. Chrisoft. in Math. homil 55
Chrysostom, that it be made magna side in Cord? August in Ioh. tracta. 43.
Augustine, that it be fastened in the heart? And what of this? For this
shows that the sign of the Cross has bredd hypocrisy even from the
beginning and that the pruning knife of doctrine was never able to this hour
to lopp off the abuses of it. so that now we are taught by experience, there is
no reason but to root and pluck it up. Another of our Writers well advises,
Fulke reioynd. art* 15. pa. 17^.
Although the elder and better ageretained and used this sign tollerably, yet
considering the shameful abuse thereof, it ought now of right and of
conscience to be condemned, as Master Calf hill faith.

#Sect. 16. That the Cross evacuateth and polluteth love and zeal, both for
matter, and measure.
A Third affection of the heart does this sign season with the leaven of
hypocrisy, and that is love and zeal. whose vacuitie is thus described:
Bucer. in censur. c. 10. page 478.
The white Garment is not far to be used at baptism, because it is hypocrisy
to multiply love signs where love it self is not superabondant. As for
others to kiss so often as does the mother, it is hypocrisy because their
love is not so tender. In regard whereof our Forefathers at the first might
better multiply signs of love in this Sacrament, then we may now. Flagrabant
enim summa De^ observantia and gratitudine adversus eius benesicia, and p^p^lus
ad bapi^smum magna religione advenerat. Whereas now thorough the coldness of
these our days, ista signa hodie singula apud minime pauces magis retinendae
and augendae superstitioni and ludis, quam pietati serviunt and religioni. Who
is then desirous of the Cross to be added to the water for a sign to express
his love to Christ Jesus crucified? For he must confess his love and zeal
does so burn and abound in him, that the one sign of the water does not
suffice to express the same. Which, if any will say of him self, I would gladly
see with what face he looks* For mine own part I could thus resemble him:
Carionis and Pencer. Chronis. lib. 5. in Adolph^ Nass^niens. pa. 849.
Margret Countess of Turinge being loath to depart from her children, and
constrained to fly at midnight to save her life, sits by the bedside of
Fredericus her eldest son, embracing him, kissing him, bedewing his face and
breast with her tears, and when the companions of her flight pulled her away
for hastening departure, out of a strau^g motherly passion, she biteth his
cheek in kissing of him, so that he was surnamend admorsus ever after. The like
is done now by them in Baptism, who not contented to express their love to
Christ by the ordinary sign of the water, must needs kiss him with a second
sign, the sign of the cross, which fayeth so illfavoredly, as that in
kissing him they bite him so deeply in his members, that if not in their
names, yet in their goods, wines and children, they bear the mark all their
lives after. One Pliniu^ natural histo. lib. 7. ca. ^.
apple in an eye is wholesome, when two in women do hurt and bewitch: so the
one sign of the water in baptism which God has ordained, is always
comfortable, when the sign of the Cross (unnaturally doubling what God would
have single) does under the mask of counterfeit zeal, who can express what
hurt: as to the soul which it bewitcheth, so to the body which it blasteth,
and goods which it wastes without all pity. The bewitching is with a
loue-drench toward Antichrist, to the quenching of zeal: the manifest signs
whereof are these. First, Zeal B^cer. in Mat. 1^.
nihil penitus far potest Antichristi, no not the name of any thing that
belongs unto him and is defiled by his polluted members. When Nebuchadnezzer
is zealous for Bell, does he not abolish the very names that savor of piety
toward the holy God of Israel? When Carol. Sigon. d^ reg. Ital.
Constantine the Pope has a zeal against Philippicus, does he not abandon
his name it self? and that from common coin and all, not only from the
diptich? When God is ielous against Hatt^ the Archbishop of Meniz, does he not
send rattes as to consume his body from the face of the earth, so to gnawe
Genebrard in Cronolog. Ann. Chri. 970.
out his name it self out of all papers, parchementes walls? to wit, this is
the love that has fiery coals and vehement flames, this is the jealousy that
will not abide the sight of ransom; this the zeal that is strong to the
death, and cruel to the grave: which if we bear to our heavenly husband in
any good measure, we will entertain no policy to spare to ransom. I say
not the Idol of the cross it self, but the sound of his name so much from
death, and from the pit of full destruction. Secondly, Bucer. in Censur. c. ^.
p. 460
Omnia quae sunt Antichr. Romoni habentur abhomination^, saltem quo ad externam
speciem attinet. It is a sign the^ that the ceremonies co^troversed, have
crazed our zeal in that we stick not at the show and appeara^ce of popery
that is in them. God so detesteth al show of idolatry eue^ in the eyes of
papists themselves, as that they Vasq. de ad^rat. li 1. disput. 5. cap. 2.
think God forbad images to the people of Israel, to avoyde all show of Canaans
jmages. Wherefore chose God the form of an Arc for a testimony of his
presence, but to be in show Idem. lib. ^ disp. 4. c. 4.
contrary to Idolaters, for there was never any people that ever did abuse this
form? Wherefore does God forbid to set up stones and monumentes in Israel, but
to avoid all show of likeness with Idolaters? Idem lib. 2. disput. 4. cap 3.
per titulos. n. intelligit statuas quas Gentiles in sui memoriam posteris
relinquebant, vt docent Isichius and Rodolphus Flauiacensis in eum locum.
Caesar. Baron. Annal. in anno 10^.
The primitive church could not endure that any should look toward Jerusalem
in time of prayer, to avoid all show of Iudaisme. Although to continue fasting
until midnight to hear the word, be lawful enough upon a Sunday, as the
example of Paul does show, yet because the Manichees appoint that day for
fasting, Augustine thinks it to be unlawful, for that show that it bears
toward them, and thence forbids it, Augustine. Epistol. 86 ad Casula.
Ne maius malum incurratur in scandalo quam bonum percipiatur ex verbo. It is
lawful enough to singe songs Council. Toletan. 4 Can. 10.
of Halleluiah and of joy in the Calendes of January, yet because the
Heathens then solemnize the feasts of their chiefest mirthe, therefore propter
errorem Gentilitatis, and to avoyde all [shewe] toward them, the Christians
keep no feast of mirth throughout that season. Does not the equity hereof
shine in the hearts of Caesar. Baron. Annal. 184.
papists them selves, who condemn Christians for madness and lightness, who
personati agere consuescunt, the like plays in the beginning of the Spring
which the Heathen were wont to perform about the same time to the Mother of
their Gods? When diverse abstayned from the trimming and garnishing of their
houses, and from the dressing of their victualles upon the Lords day, they
were forbidden this show of Iudaisme in these words: Council. Aurelian. 3.
Can. 27.
Quia ad Iudaicam magis quam ad Christianam observantiam hoc pertinere
probatur. The consideration hereof may make us ashamed to count our selves
zealous, who forbear not show of likeness with the papists, no not in the
cheifest ceremonies. Thirdly, Zeal cannot endure any conformity with aliens,
no not in civil guises: as the primitive church does show, of which one truly
gives this testimony, Magdebur. Centur. 3. cap. 6. column* 141.
hoc vnum egregie maxim inter caetera Christianos cavisse videas, ne quid
Ethnicorum moribus, and consuetudinibus commune haberent. A Christian would not
be seen in a Theater, wherefore? because this place Tertul. in lib. de
spectacul.
ad idololatriam pertinere videbatur. A Christian man and woman must not wash
together in one bath, wherefore? haec est u.n. apud gentiles prima
repraehensio. A Christian must not celebrate a birth day, wherefore? Decret.
page 1. dis. tin. ^1. c. 28
because it is a rite and a custom Orig in Levit. homil. 8.
Ethnicorum and peccatorum. It is of private use, of which Tertullian speaks
thus: Tertul lib de coron. mili^.
Ego mihi gallum gallinacium macto and si me odor alicuius loci offendit
arabiae aliquid incendo, sed non eodem ritu and habitu, and apparatu quo agitur
apud Idola. The Christians were thought to be enemies to the Emperor, because
they do not set lights and bay bows at their doors as others do. yet for all
this, Caesar. Baron. Anal in ann. 200
Nefas sibi esse putant because the temples of the Idols and the doors of
Idolaters were wont to be thus adorned. Fourthly, If zeal cannot endure any
civil fashion of Idolaters, then their religious rites, much less such as the
Cross and Surplice are. Tertullian will have no lights in worshipping God,
because it was [ Tertul. de Idololatr.
mos haereticorum]. The Tolletan Council will have no such shaving as does
leave long hair below, Council. Tolet. 4. cap. 40.
quoniam ritus haereticorum est. The Christians may not observationes agere
Calendarum, neque lauro aut viriditate arborum cingere domos; wherefore? because
Decret. page 2. cause. 26. quest. cap. 13
omnis haec observatio paganismiest. The readers must not Council. Bracarens. 1.
Can. 29
demittere granos or gradus gentili ritu. The feasts of the Martyrs
birth-dayes are misliketh wherefore? Council. Aphric. temp. bonifac. 1. Can. 27.
Quia a Gentili errore attracta. The old dauncinges August. de Tempore. Sermon.
215.
ante basilicas sanctorum are unlawful. wherefore? quia haec consuetudo ex
paganorum observatione remansit. The Synod. in Trullo. Can. 82. 2 Cor. 6.14
Council will have no lamb to represent Christ. wherefore? because it comes
to near the Jews. Fifthly, Zeal can not endure any countenance toward the
persons of Idolaters or of heretics. For when Paul forbadde fellowship with
Idolaters upon this reason: What communion has light with darkness, Christ with
Belial, he taught there ought to be as great difference between the professors
as there is between the Rolloc. in Daniel.
professions. Now in this duty, how many ways do the ceremonies cause us
to fail? Ne dixeris aue (says the text) but when there is an imitation of
their ways, then [aue] is given not only to the person, but also to the
superstition, Tertul. de coron. milit
For either oderis ea, quorum authors odisse non poteris; Hieron. ad Nepoti.
aut si aurum Iudaeorum placet, placeat and Iudai. It is the wish of zeal,
Tertul. de spectacul.
vtinam ne in saculo (quidem) vna cum illis moraremur. but because this may be
wished, but not obtained, therefore it is wary to make such a separation, that
though we be Idem in li. de coron. milit.
Compossessores mundi, yet [non erroris] by partaking with them [in saculo]
only Idem. in lib de spectacul.
quod Dei est, non in saecularibus quae sunt Diaboli: Against this separation
there be who offend by too much leaning to the errors of the papists while
they are in their company, whom they admonish not, neither reprove, much less
leave or forsake after once or twice admonition, as the Apostle does command.
These the Canon does excommunicate, because it is a thing intolerable vt vasa
misericordiae vasis irae misceantur, and because Decret pa. 2. cause. 24. qu 3.
cap. 34.
superfluo extra ecclesiam positis resistimus si ab his qui intus sunt in ijs
quos decipimus, vulneramur. Again, when men for bribes favor papists, spare
them, shifte them from punishment, or give them countenance, and who are
separated from the body of Christ: because [ contra fidem Christi Council.
Tolet. 4. Can 73.
agit qui Christi inimicis patronus efficitur.] The papists should not be
suffered to mix them selves in common company with the weak protestants,
Decret p. 2 cause. 28. q. 1. cap 12.
saepe malorum consortia bonos corrum punt, quanto magis pronos ad mala:
neither Ibid c. 13.14
should a protestant be suffered to feast with a papist, or dwell with him, or
receive physic from him, with the like. And whereas the Church of old kept
her self in the mean between Caesar Baron. annal. in an. 255.
foelicissimus that would receive into the church those that were fallen,
though they made no confession nor showed any signs of repentance, and Novatus
who would not receive them into the church at all: we, though we deal with the
most polluted heretics that ever were, yet receive the^ into our church when
so ever they will them selves, without sit trial of unfeigned conversion,
whereby we arm them to more hurt by their secret dissimulation, then when they
were our open enemies and without our churches pale. Against this there goes a
Canon even of an Idolatrous Council it self: Council. Nicen. 2. can. 8.
Quoniam Hebraeorum. etc. because certain Jews fayning them selves to be
Christians, do privily and in secret deny Christ: keep Sabbothes and observe
many other Jewish rites, we decree, that they be not received to the Communion
nor to Prayer, no nor suffered to enter into the Church it self. Sixthly, Zeal
cannot endure any relics of Idolatry, such as Cross and Surplice are. where
I would there could be observed amongst us what a very popish Council it self
decrees, Jews must not retinere priores ri^us reliquias: this is Council.
Laceran. sub Innocen. 3. c. 70
Christiana religionis decorem mixtione confundere, and to put on a garment of
Lynsey-woolsey, statuimus vt tales per Praelatos Ecclesiae ab observantia
veteris ritus omnimode compescantur. How do we suppress in papists or any
other popish old rites, who give them countenance in use religious? Seaventhly,
Zeal cannot abide any confusion with Aliens, but in all religions has ever
desired a manifest and open distinction from them: Irenae. li 1. cap. 25.
Ireneus tells us, the Carpocratians being zealous to their religion, did
dextere auris posteriorem partem perforare, vt eo signo ab alijs secerni atque
dignosci possint. This was superstitious: not so superstitious was the scutum
which the old Waldenses bore in sotulari and in Sabbate, whence they were
called [ Conrat. Lutzenbu. in Catalo Hae^eticor.
insabbatati] to make a difference and distinction. As for the first love of
England, it was admirable herein* Master Act. and Monum in hu^o. ^oru^
Rogers, out Proto Martyr refusinge the Cappe unless there were a Challice
set on the Masse-priestes sleeue, that so there might be a difference between
them. And M^ Philpot choosing to loose his place in the co^vocation house
rather the^ to enter thither with capp and tippet. we must bidd this zeal
farewell all while we confound our selves with papists, even in the cheifest
badges. And thus we see how the present Adiaphorisme slays Zeal in every
matter wherein it uses to show it self. Now what for the measure whereby it
is wont to be strong as death, cruel as the grave, having sierie coals, and a
vehement flame, which much water cannot quench? Me thinks all while we
symbozise with Antichrist, we are but as Lukewarm water, as a Cake half
baked; Apoe. 3.16. Hos. 7.8.
or as a beta Hieron. Comment. in If lib 14 cap. 51.
semicocta in Hierome. By whom will we be tried? If by the papists, we are
cast. They John Dowley.
plainly profess, that the more our Church does despise the Cross, the more
their Church does reverence and honor it. we then, if we had their measure of
zeal would we not the more disgrace it, by how much they honor it
Idolatrously? sure we would, if one of our writers had his wish whose words
are these: Pet. Martyr. epis^o. Amic^^uid. in Angl.
vtinam hostium nostrorrum. etc. I would we could learn a little more zeal
by the perverle zeal of our adversaries, they carefully avoid all things
whatsoever savor in any sort of our religion: and swerue of purpose as far
as they can, from the simple worship of Christ, and from the most ancient
rites of the Apostles. why then do not we take care (on the other side) to
fly as far as possibly we can, from their pernicious customs, and follow
the simplicity of the Apostles, not only in doctrine, but also in the
administration of our Sacraments? Tertullian counts it a coldness in zeal
(not to be excused) when Christians fly not as far from the ceremonies of
aliens, as they do from the ceremonies of the Christians: Tertul in lib. de
Idololat.
Melior fides nationumin suam sectam, quae nullam Christianorum solemnitatem
sibi vendicat, timerent. n. ne Christiani viderentur, nos ne Ethnici
pronuntiemur non veremur. To this there appertained the old Canon which forbad
a Christian to feast with a Jew: Quia Consil. Meldens. cap. 73.
sic incipiunt Catholici esse inferiores quam Iudai. si nos illis quae ab ijs
apponuntur vtamur, illi vero a nobis oblata, contemnunt. To this also there
belonges the zeal of the Council of Nice, who would retain none of the
ceremonies of the Jews upon this reason: Niceph. Calift lib. ^. cap. ^^.
Omnium absurdissimum est, illos gloriando iactare sine illo. rum
obseruationibus, Christi institutis obserua^dis nos sufficere non posse. It is
a great sin to be less careful not to seem Heathens, then Heathens are not
to seem Christians, we in retayning of popish ceremonies, when papists will
retain none of ours, are apparently less careful to avoid an approbation of
their rites, then they are to eschew all good liking toward ours. It is a
sin to make religion inferior to heresy, by receiving what is theirs, when
they comtemne that which is ours: we in this case make our religion inferior to
popery, by retayning some of their rites, when they abhor all ours. It is a
sin (last of all) to cause heretics to boast, that we are not able to serve
our God, without their ceremonies. Our retaining of Cross and Surplice, has
caused the Sons and Daughters of the Philistines thus to boast, witness Hard.
answer to the Apolog. in praefat.
Harding by name, craking the very words themselves of this boasting. Thus if
we compare our selves with papists, we come short in zeal. Compare we our
selves with the reformed Churhches of Christ, and we are shamed yet worse.
what Cross, what Surplice, what one drame D. Bilson cont. apolo pa. 1. p. 31.
of popish ceremonies is found in them. condemn we these, or contemn we
their providence, and look we to hear that of the Apostle. Are you of
England the mother Church? Came not the word first from these unto you, and is
not your Church a near Daughter of these? When Constantine would deside the
question, 1 Cor. 14.36
what course did he follow, but that which Mayor Ecclesiarum numerus did
chalk forth to him? Heerevpon we must be diverse from the Jews in the
observing of the passover, because this course Eusebius. de vir. Constant. lib. 3.
c. 18.
servant omnes Ecclesiae, quae orbis parts vel versus Occidentem, vel versus
Meridiem, vel versus septentrionem, sitas incolunt. Again, upon what reason
does a Council establishe a rite, but upon this, Consil. Tollet. 4. Can. ^.
Quia haec obseruatio per multarum loca terrarum in Ecclesijs commendatur? When
home-custome was objected to Tertullian for the casting off of the veil, he
opposes the custom of other Churches which did retain it: huic Tertul in
lib. de veland. virgin.
consuetudini alia opponitur (says he) per Greciam n^plures Ecclesiae,
vergines suas abscondunt. ex duabus igitur consuetudinibus ca est eligenda,
quae virgins includit. Hitherto (then) even from the beginning the general
example of the Churches has been much made of, which now is cast behind the
back. what though all other Churches abandon the cross, abolish the Surplice,
(say our Opposites) this is nothing unto us? to wit, wisdom must live and dye
with us. with us I say alone. But this may suffice to show how the Cross
evacuateth zeal, and polluteth it, both for matter and measure.

#Sect. 17. The hypocrisy of the Cross in prayer, is proved in respect it is
thought to be operatine, sanctificatiue, and helpful thereto.
WE have discovered (as we are able) the hipocrisies of the Cross, as they
show themselves in general sort, over all the powers of man's soul: now see
we some special obiectes, wherein they budde and blossom forth. particularly
such as is prayer first, and then our common conversation, concerning the
former: The ancient crown, of the Crosses commendation, was wont to be this;
that it served as a stone of Horeb to help to hold up the hands in prayer, of
which prayer it was a Perek. problem. page 84.
gesture; but the hypocrisies of it now, has laid this honor in the duste.
The first of them is, that it is no longer an indifferent gesture in prayer,
but an necessary, holy, yea an operative one: a gesture, that prays not for
holiness only, but also Mart. of the Cross art. 5.
conferreth it. which our D. Fulk. reioy. art. 5 page 174.
writers esteem no less then gross hypocrisy. Secondly, the Cross is not
now annexed to prayer, as a circumstance of it, but he is besides the word, and
besides prayer, scored up for a third Rhem. in 1. Tim. 4. sect.
sanctifier by himself. the English whereof may be picked out of Bellarmine,
who teaches that besides mental and vocal prayer, the Cross is a Nutuall
prayer by him self. Bellarmi. de effect. Sacramen. cap. 3^.
De inde vim habet (says he) etc. this sign has virtue, by the devotion of
the person who signeth himself, after the same manner, that vocal prayer has
virtue; for the sign of the cross is a certain invocation upon the merits of
Christ expressed by sign, loquimur. n. ore, cord, and Nutubus. No mervell if
this doctrine seem harshe unto our D. Fulk. reioy. art. 5
writers: for neither has this sign warrant from the word to be a prayer:
whereof one thus: Andre. Willet. controue. 9 quest. 7. page 5.
they have no word of God for their warrant, neither do they use a prayer of
faith but a superstitious kind of crossing* neither can there be found that
reverence in it, which a warrantable prayer has. There is a custom to knole a
bell, at the hearing whereof, the papists fall down on their knees to prayer,
may a protestant fall down on his knees at these knoles, and say good prayers
when papists say bad? our writers Hospi. de orig. Campana. go. 84
say no: and they aledge amongst other reasons, that here wants reverence and
preparation, for one is a dancing, another is a drinking; another a working,
another a walking: when suddenly they are all down on their knees, as if some
plannet (as they say) had strooken them. Is it not as great a show of
conformity with papists to use a Cross, for a gesture of prayer, as they
do, as it is to fall down on our knees, at the knole of a bell? and leap we
not, as suddenly without preparation unto prayer, in the one as in the other?
And the sign of the Cross is guilty of hypocrisy, for want of devotion, in
time of the action, whether outward or inward, both of which must Damasee. de
sid. lib. 4 cap. 13. Mas. 1.8.
kindle prayer, to make it incense that may ascend. I speak with the words of
Malachie, offer it to thy Prince, will he receane thy face, or take it
acceptable at thine hands? if having a petition to him, thou should nothing
but nodde and beck, which was the proud and scornful gesture, which
Nazianzen observed in Julian, nutus, renutus, absque sermon? Now we know
iudignum Distinct. 49. c. sacer.
est dare Deo, quod dedignaretur homo. One of the Fathers. well, if we make
petition but to some earthly king (says he) Cassian. ^ollat. ^3. cap. 7.
totam in cum and mentis and corporis aciem defigimus, and de nutu eius trepida
expectatione pendemus, non mediocriter formidantes, ne quod forte incongruum
verbum audientis, miscricordiam avertat. And shall we (then) hold it
sufficient reverence toward the Lord, to give him a nutus of our own only, in
steed of that fearful dependence on his Nutus, which we yield to one of his
creatures? The same Father goes forward: when we are but before an earthly
Judge, we compose our selves to all humility, and to all carefulnes, against
every Tussis screatus, oscitantia, eructatio, whereas this nutuall prayer of
the Cross, what is it else, but an eructation of the mind, per ossitantiam,
which Pet. Martyr. in 1. Sam. 1.
we worthily tax? and that euagation of the soul, which is not Basi. se^m.
de aman. Deum.
ex fragilitate or negligentia, but as it seems ex proposito, which very Tho
Aquin page 3 quest. 83. art 13
papists themselves condemn. But are there not Durand. de ri. lib. 3 c. 14.
sect 9 Romans 8. Exo. 14.15.
orationes i^culatorie? amongst these what hinders, but that the prayer of the
Cross may be one? Because this kind and sort of prayer, being the most
fervent in the time of greatest need, and out of the depth of most heavy
temptations, is less nutuall then any prayer; for either the groans and the
sighs of it cannot be expressed at all, or if they be uttered, it is not an
[nutus] that bears them up, but some scalding (though brief) out-crie, as we
see in our Lord: who although in the days of his flesh, spent whole nights in
prayer, yet Gault. in Lu^. ^ i. homil. 106
postea cum mortis hora instaret, quo propius ea accescit, eo preces breuiores,
ad patrem quasi eiaculatus est. So (then) the nutuall prayer of the Cross
wants inward devotion. What now of the outward? why that we find discribeth
thus: Salutan. de prou^^ent. lib 7
Corpora humi sternimus, mixtis cum fletu gandij^, supplicamus. Ambros.
Hexamer. lib. 6. cap. 9
Flexibile genu quo prae caeteris domini mitigatur offensa, ira mulcetur,
gratia promouetur, August. lib de cura. pro mort. agend. ca 5
Orantes de membris sui corporis faciunt quod supplicantibus congruit, cum
genua figunt, cum extendunt marius, vel etiam prostern^ntur solo, per quae, cor
dis affectus; qui vt fierent ista, praecessit, quia facta sunt cres^it. Hieron
li. 2. commen. cap. 3. a^ ephesians.
Deu^ genu po sito suppliciter adoramus, and fixo in terra^ poplite, magis quod
ab eo petimus impetramus. This last Father commends Hieron de viris.
^^lnitrib. in Jacob.
James surnamed Iustus, for a man, and Idem. epist ^5. ad Marcel.
Asella for a woeman, that they hardened their knees in praying like a Cammells
house. These signs are not always necessary (you will say.) No, but the
reverence which they signify, is ever needful. As we see in them who stand
in the presence of the Lord, for the Greek Ioh. Pise^. in Luke 19.8.18.11.^^
word signified a settelling and composing of their bodies to al reverence.
standing seems the least sign of outwardreuerence, yet it brings with it
all the members of the body: not so the Cross, which brings the worst part
of the body like him that brings the worst of his flock, for what is the
sign of the Cross, (says Calfh. ^ 1. fol. 29.
one) but the breaking of a little air, with one of our thumbes? Last, of all
whereas when our prayer is done, we are Cassian vb. supra.
grauissime crimine ad stricti, si subito a conspectu Dei, qua si ab oculis non
videntis, nec andientis, cogitationis improbae vanitatem secuti abcesserimus.
We ought to use no gesture of ours at our leaving of his presence, but that
which may serve for such a stay as Muscul. 1 Psalm 39. verse. 5.
Selah is, to retain meditation. Whereas the Cross dispatcheth a way this
meditation with a quick finger, and is found worse then the Duran. de rit.
lib. 2. c. 17. sect. 5.
sectile, or the pupillum amen, which the Rahbines and the papists them selves
condemn. For these causes, as the Catalog. cest. verita. in Walden.
Waldenses stood out against the Creed to be used for a prayer which was none,
so stand we out now against the Cross, used for a prayer when it is none: or
if it be any, a prayer vnreuerent. Suppose a man should lift up a shoesole for
a prayer Nutu. I ask because Act. and monu. pa. 95^.
Robert Couper (a Confessor) affirmed once, that blessing with the sign of the
Cross, was no whit better, then blessing with an old shoe sole. The third
hypocrisy of the Cross makes it not only a prayer but also an operative
prayer, that helps our vocal and mental prayer, as if it were not so
powerful without it as when it has the help of a Cross which is the aim of
these words. Mart in reply. art. 4
It is evident that as soon as paayer is duly made and the sign of the
Cross made, the holy ghost according to the promise of Christ, comes down
and sanctifies, and the Devil is driven away. This hypocrisy how can it not
breed a disgust of this sign amongst us? For it turns the sighs and groans
of the holy Ghost in prayer to a bringing of him down at the D. Fulk. reioyn.
art. 4 page 163.164.
wagging of a finger: and tied the D. Willet. de Bapt^s. que^t. 8.
holy ghost himself to a dounghill cross that will not in this manner be tied
either to Act 7.
Temple, or to Gal. 6.
Circumcizion, or to Mar. 3.
Baptism it self, or to any other of his own signs. When in a plague at Rome
some dyed with sneesing, some with gaping, there was a custom taken up when
any sneesed, to pray God help, when any gaped to make a Cross Carol. Sigon.
de reg. It^l. in anno 590.
praesidium querentes in this sign unto themselves. We may see here a picture
and Image of the vulgar sort of people in this land, using the Cross as they
use prayer, and flying to the help of the Cross as they seek for help by
prayer, for the curing of which disease why abandon we not the Cross as we
have done other things that in like sort have been annexed to prayer? August.
de symbol. ad Catech.
Whereas the symbolum (that is) the creed and the Crucis vexillum were wont to
be joined for fellow-helpers together with prayer against the Devil, dislike
we not this unequal kind of yoking? whereas Sanctus Gregor. Turonens. de vit.
patrum, ca, 6.
Gallus, and Nitephor. lib. 5. c. 22.
Sanctus Martianus join with prayer the book of the Gospel which they take
in their hand when they go forth to repress the fury and the flame of fire.
whereas it has been a common custom in common distresses to carry about
Images and Relics which men have added unto prayer to help the same: in
which manner the Image of Rochus and the Gregor. T^tonens. in lib. de glot.
confe. cap. 79.
Pall of Remigius is carried about upon a Cross in time of a plague: and the
Tunica Idem. lib. 3 histor c. 29
Vincentij ad Augusta when once it was beleguerd^ we disclaim and disunite
this combination: the bells are joined by papists to prayer as helpers of it,
as the trompets in Moses Law stirred up God to mercy, so do the bells now
(say Durant. de rit. lib. 1. c. 22. sect. 4.
they) which have also power against the Devil. witness this* The Devils before
day ran away from certain weomen whom they had ledd and molested the night
before as soon as they heard the morning bell sound. Ioh. Reynold. de
Idololat. li. ^. c. 6. sect 7
The beads also are joined to prayer as helpers of it. we that have freed
prayer from the creed; from the book of the Gospel; from the Images, palles,
coats, and relics of saints from the beads and bells of papists, how are
we bewitched that we cannot leave the Cross, in which each part, of their
hypocrisy and superstition ouerfloweth? It will be replied, that this abuse
implies not the Crosses ruin, but a restoring to prime use. First the prime
use of the Cross in prayer was not so good, Magdebu. Centur. 3. cap. 6. tit.
de mor. Christi.
since it did adjure and u charm, and that the very beasts themselves. for
thus Tertullian: Nobis Tertull. in lib* de scorpiac.
fides prae sidium signandi statim and adiurandi and vngendi bestiae calcem.
And the Cross at the first did bless and sanctify things void of life as
Beat. Rhenan. in Tertull. de Coron. milit.
beds and Orig. lib. 3. in Job.
meats: which while the Catalog. test. verita. in W^lden.
Waldenses preposterously followed, they retained the sign of the Cross in
the blessing of their meats. which though we mislike, yet the restoring of the
cross his ancient use will bear them out as well as us, who must have this
sign in Baptism. Secondly, to pray standing between Easter and Whitsontide
in memorial of Christ his glorifying, is a gesture of prayer as ancient as
the sign of the Cross, as also to pray toward the East which we must
restore again to ancient use if this axiom on which we stand, have strength
and force, even as one of our writers well: D. Fulk. reioynnd. art. 5. page 177.
seeing none of these ceremonies have been worse abused, then this custom of
Crossing, this ought to be abrogated of every Church as well as those.
Thirdly, there is a Mat. 6.7.
commandment we must not be like the heathen in our prayers. whereupon one
Gual^. in Luke 11. page 106.
Communis sensus admonet Christian^s ab omnibus ethnicorum atque infidelium
ritibus aut ceremonijs abstinere debere. Take we a standling from the first
Churches, whereas Idolaters use certain ceremonies in their praying, as a
washing of the hands before a putting off of the cloak in the action it self
and a formal sitting after, there was a special Tertull. lib. de ^ratione.
prouiso taken that no Christian should use the like in time of his prayer. It
is very needful we should eschew the Cross and Surplice at prayer-time with
as great care, if it be but for the show which gives countenance to popish
hypocrisy in the simple of the land. These use the Cross as papists do.
they think it is a prayer. they think it helps prayer. they think it make
holy. they think it drives away the Diuill. which whosoever will not
acknowledge, I must say of him as Mr D. Fulk. reioynd. page 17^.
Fulke of Martial once: whereas Martial will acknowledge no abuse in this
sign, what else should we say but whose blind as he that will not see?

#Sect. 18. The special hypocrisy of the Cross is evidently declared in the
life and conversation of those that did bear it.
THE second special hypocrisy of the cross is seen in the life and
co^versation. Where once it was a true principle (how now it holds I know
not) Calsh. co^t. Mart. art. 9 fol. 174.
There are no worse livers in the world, then the likers of the Cross. Indeed
from of old has the cross marshalled the hipocrites band: one of which he
did long since christen with his own name, to wit, the order of the Volater.
hist or. lib. 21. Bergomens. l. ^3.
Crucigeri. whose rule Innocent the fourth perfected, bidding them to carry a
cross always in their hands, after that Innocent the third before him in the
Council of Lateran had authorized their order. All other ecclesiastical
orders, although they have not the name of the cross called upon them like
unto this, yet they call upon his name: and they bear him for their badge even
to the Abraham. Fransus. de insignib.
Knights them selves that have entered into any religious order. One order
there was of these knights in Io. Funct. in Cronol. comentar. ad ann. 1 204.
Libonia who wore in a white vesture a redd sword with a star on the topp,
and therefore were called Fratres gladiferi: but these at the length (the Pope
so willing) united themselves to the order of the Crucigeri, and so took the
cross upon them. As for the rest they wear all the crosses, amongst whom, who
more famous then the Knights of Jerusalem? who lie buried with cross legs
upon their graves, quia Camden. in Britan in Trinoban^.
crucem susceperunt. Now Naucler.
four orders there were of these. the order of the Canons of the sepulche of
the Lord, and they had double redd crosses. The order of the knights of St
John, otherwise called the knights of the Rhodes, they wore black apparel
with white crosses on their breasts. The order of Templars, they wore a white
habit with a red cross. and lastly, the order of Teutoniques or Almaines,
otherwise called the knights of the Virgin Marie, who had white habites and a
black cross, and these arose from the East (I omit their hipocrisies, for
which at the last they were destroyed: the Templars by Cronie. Carrion. li. 5.
in Alber. Austriac.
name, through a privy conspiracy of Clemens the Pope, and Philip of France)
after the holy war begone under Goddefi it of Bullen, whose voyage thither
if it had any Gualter. in Luc. Homil. 87.
hypocrisy in it, the cross (be sure) was at one end of it. since then it was
that every country chose their crosses which they bear in the wars this
day. From the West since these holy wars begun, it is incredible how many
assembled armies of hipocrites the cross has guided, it being a policy which
Urban Sigon de regn. Ital. lib. 9. in ann. 1095.
the 2. set on foot. and his successors after continued that when they would
weaken christendom, and send out the strength of it to pray upon it at home
the while, or when they would gather some great sum of money, there should a
Croysade be proclaimed against the Turk, and that (O Lord) with how great
hypocrisy! Thus one Auent. in Annal. li. ^
of that time. To stir up the people to Asiaes and Aphricaes wars the
Bishop of Portua and others preached, Quicunque sceleri obnoxious, parricidio,
incestu, sacrilegio pollutus, continuo vbi cruciculam vesti assuerit, solutus
est and crimine and poena. Plerique ansa hinc arrepta, inimicos suos prius
tollebant: hinc in militiam sacram nomina dabant. Another thus: Vsperg. in
Fredri. 2
In the year 1221. under Frederike the 2. Conradus Portuensis sends forth
preachers: and amongst the rest one Johannes de Argentina, who preached to them
that would take the cross, not only expiation of their ownesinne, but also
deliverance of their friends souls that were in Purgatory. Hence grew a
common speech: faciam igitur scelera, and postea crucis receptione, ero
mundatus. The Georgians and Armenians have the cross for a standart to lead
their superstitious pilgrimages to Jerusalem. whose lay men also have shaue^
Magdebn. Centur. 3. cap. 5. col. 563.
heads in the form of a cross. The Lambert. Dane. in. Augusti. de Here Is. c 97
Iacobites in Chald^^ and Arahia have a cross or crosses printed in their
faces with an hottiron. as also diverse nations and people under Pretions John
in Afric, of whom before. And this Emperor him self, when he goes any
whither, a wooden Cross is borne before him. When he goes to war 12.
Crosses of gold. A Beda hist. gent. Anglor. lib. 1. c. 25.29.41
Cross was the harbinger of all Romes ceremonies, when they first entered into
England. I mean the Cross that was borne before Augustine when he arrived:
which Cross of his if the British sea had swallowed with his rellowes in the
passage, the Church of the Christians at Baleus in histor. Augustine.
Bangor had still enjoyed their peace and purity, both from Romes trashe and
tyranny. The great abuse of the Cross in Russia is too well known: the
hypocrisy of it there, may be seen in one for all, to wit, in that great
Tyrant Johannes Basilius, then whom the earth never searce saw a more fell
monster. and yet none more devout in the use of the Cross then he: none could
more often adhthere signum Orucis fronti pectorique, or more religiously collo
suspendere, To. Lasicide Theolo. Muscourn. c. 6. fol. 56.
as speaks the story: at whose death also (as is reported) three bloody
Crosses appeared in the firmame^ over the great city Mosco where he dyed with
a bar that went thorough them. Thus we see the Crosses hypocrisy is
catholic for place: so is it also for persons and times. The Io. Crispin
^^an, 1350
Eagellantes (notable hypocrites) in their whipping of them selves, used to
prostrate them selves on the ground in the form of a cross, and as they went
ordnarily with their whippes tied to their robes, so they all carried Crosses,
both before and behind in their apparel, hattes and cappes. Saint Francis is
also a renowned hypocrite. Now he had (they say) Pisan. de conformit. sancti.
Fra^cisci.
the 5. wounds of Christ printed in his body and he has for his Rhemist. in
Margin. in Gal. 6.
Gospel upon his holy day, I bear in my body the marks of the Lord Jesus.
And, God forbid I should rejoice save in the Cross of Christ. Here of late,
none came near in same of hypocrisy to Magdalena Crucia, and Maria de la
Anuntiada in Spain. The former of whom, as she bare the name of the Cross, so
the Cross bare up her name with such an estimate of holiness that the Queen of
Charles the fifth being great with Phillip the second, must needs send before
hand to her to bless with the crosses of her holy hands, the Leonicer.
Theatrum histor. page 134.
swaddling cloutes wherein the infant was first wrapped. The latter in the time of
her greatness before her five wounds (like those of St Frauncis) were washed
away and her hypocrisy detected, she feated her chiefest and greatest miracle
with a wooden cross, as in her Cypri de Valera. page 431.
story may be seen. The same story or hers shows, that the year before
she was detected, the sign of the Cross became in her hands a traitor to
England, blessing the standart Royal of Spain, and delivering it to the
General (the Duke de Medina Sydonia) with promise he should returned a Victor,
and a conqueror of this Realm. The next hipocrites most notorious in these
our days I take to be the Jesuits. especially those of the East Iudies, whose
miracle-worker that famous Xauerius, like unto another Iambres (as The auth. of
the Iesuite^ cathee.
some papist him self discovers him) sends little children with little Idem
lib. 1. cap. 17.
crosses to certain men that were possessed, whom as soon as his crosses
touch the Devils roar, wallowe, tumble, and lastly fly away like madd. Did
not Henry the third of France make him self famous by the Crucifixe devoutly
carried Collect of Massacr. in Franc. in Henry. 3.
about his neck, till he obtained this word, Non ego iam vivo, sed in me
Christus? Did Calsh. art 8. fol. 156.
not a paper in the forehead at Windfor take up the reversion of the infinite
crosses which a Warde^ of New college did make there? who for the time that he
was in Oxon. never missed any one of his hours before the Crucifixe? And Idem.
art. 5. fol. 129.
Martial (that marshall champion of the cross) taught Wincester boys, being
Usher there, that iniquity, which a modest adversary is loath to utter. And
what they were who in the days of great Elizabeth pursued the Preachers about
the Cross and the rest of the ceremonies, I will not censure some of them
proclaimed themselves hipocrites in this, that striving for the cross, which
signifies patience to sight under the cross of Christ, they were so far of
from this duty of suffering, as that they offered it unto others, making many
companions in the patience of the word. When Blandina was nailed to a cross,
the Christians that saw her, Caesar Baron. Annal in an, 179.
ipsum Christum qui pro nobis crucisixus est, oculis corporeis quodammodo vide
bant. Will you have an outward spectacle, wherein to see Christ, go not to a
cross that is made at a Font, but go to a Christian that bears the cross.
While I speak this, I may take up what one of our writers speaks, D. Willat.
controver. 4 q. 10. p. 198.
who taught you, that the sign of the cross is to be borne in men's
foreheades? You know the marks which Pause bore in his body were the signs of
his sufferings? And Chrisost. de crnc. and latron.
Chrisostomus thus: An vt vnusquisque lignum suum ferat iubet dominus? Non
quae. n. haec virtus est sed vt ad pericula instructi simus. When Mr Harding
objected profanes against us for breaking down Crosses, Bishop Jewel. art. 14.
diuis. 3 pa. 502.504.
Iewill replied, we have (God be thanketh) more true Cross-bearers then you.
because our church yeldeth more sufferers for the truth. The same is our glory
now, we that refuse the sign of the cross do more truly bear the cross
then our pursuers; who while they strive about the sign, let go the
substance. Our Lord has commanded us (says Claudius Jonas Aurelianens. de
cult. Imag.
Taurinensis) to bear the cross and not to worship it. who performs this
commandment best? they who will not make the cross for fear to countenance
the worshipping of it, and so bear it in their bodies, goods and names, or
they who bare it in the finger only upon a pretense to putt them selves in
mind of fighting under the cross? which when it comes to performance, they
mistake their brethrens shoulders for their own, and find none to fight
against, or on who^ to lay the cross save only them? Sure if Augustine be our
judge, he will give his sentence with us. by occasion of the stone that struck
Goliath in the forehead, he speaks of the sign of the cross in the forehead,
affirming the making of it there to be nothing, in these words: Pe. Martyr in
1. Sam. cap. 17.
Deus delectatur non pictoribus, sed factoribus. what these doers are, we may
learn out of Hierome, who cries out against superfluity in Church and Church
men in these words: Cum Decret. pa. 2. cause. 12. qu. 2. cap. 71.
paupertatem domus suae pauper dominus dedicarit, portemus crucem and divitias
lutum putabimus. As long as our Opposites will not leave their superfluities,
and bear the cross that way, but to uphold and maintain them rather, retain
a cross in sign, to bring their brethren underneath the cross, in suffering,
we may well renew toward them, what Charles the great spoke once to Boniface
Archbishop of Mentz, when he covered his cross with gold, Ioh. Crisp.
Chronolo. in An. 798
Is it thus that you make profession of the Cross of Christ? Innocent the 4.
gave redd hattes and gowns to his Cardinals at his Council held at Lions,
for a Christian Marssaeus. Genebrar.
sign to admonish them they were to suffer for the truth even to blood. This
sign lets not but these Cardinals make other to suffer in steed of them
selves: no more does this sign of the Cross which our Opposites do retain
in very like manner, to remember them selves of the very same sufferinge
which they lay upon their brethren. And so an end of the vanity and
hypocrisy of the cross against this third commandment, which I shut up with
the words of one of our Writers against Images in general. howbeit Images
set up for edification and decency only: So that our Cross is one of the
number. Zanch. de Imag. these. 4. p. 370.
Summa, vt concludam. etc. To conclude, in two words, the sum of all is
this: Our men have nothing whereby (I say not they may defend, for defended it
cannot be) but whereby they may cover so gross an error save fig leaves. to
wit, reasons humane, and those very lean, whose root is pertinacie. An other
chief cause of this error is, that men will be more wise then God, and for
their humane wisdom sake, oppose them selves against the wisdom of God. For
neither have they scriptures to stand with them, nor any consequences
necessary or probable, that may be gathered out of the scriptures, nor good
antiquity, nor any reasons a vero, vtili, atque honesto, deductas.

DEO SOLI GLORIA.
The impiety of the Cross. Chap. 4.
WHEREAS the dounge that polluteth the Sabbath must be cast out by us, or be
cast in our faces, the sign of the Cross though it were guiltless otherwise,
Malach. 2.3
yet because it diverse ways polluteth this day, it must either pass thorough
the dounge-port, or pass over our own backs for a deserved cross unto us.
The doctrine which heretics broach is as the dounge of Hieron. comment. in
Abac. 2.
Saul's cave. The Idem in lament. Iere. cap. 4. and Ezech. ca. 4
ceremonies of the Jews retained, are by the Apostle esteemed as dounge. The
Deu. 29.17
scripture calls the Idol dounge. In Malachie the worships themselves of God
are termed dounge, when in manner of worshipping they are defiled. Is it
possible for the cross (then) to pass through all these censures and not be
attainted for a Sabbath dounge unlawful? The doctrine of it in the papacy is
it not heretical? the retayning of it in churches reformed, is it not worse
then the retayning of the ceremonies of the Jews? Is it not an Idol in the
papacy? Is not the religious use of it in churches reformed worse then a
worship of the Lords which only is defiled in manner, and by the worshippers
misbehauiour? Begin we with it, as it commits a Sabbath breach among the
papists. Do we not fear (if not this expostulation, have you brought a
stranger into my Sabbath day to mock it?) yet surely this, what does 4
stranger in mine house that mocketh my Sabboths through so many Antichristian
churches as be in the world? Now first the Cross mocketh the Sabbath, by the
And. Willet contro. 9. q. 8 p 4
mock sabbothes which it has set up to it self. The first of these, the feast
of the invention of it though it be wounded and stricken thorough as Apocriphal
by a Gelas. de Apocriph. decret p. 1 did. 15. c. 3
Canon of it own law. The feast of the exaltation of it, though it be
fabulous, as the miracle Io. Beleth. rational. diuinor. officior* c 151 Ia, ob.
de Vorag in lege^d aur. Breuiar. Roman. in fest exalt. crew.
diversely related, shows. and the uncertainty of the institution of it: some
referring it to Council. tom. 1. epist. Eusebius
Eusebius; some to the time of Niceph. li. 8. cap. ^9.
Silvester the first: some to the time of Genebrad Cronolog in An. 616
Heraclius the Emperor, yet must they both of them be esteemed Rhemist.
annotat. in Gal* 4. sec. 5. Bellarmi. de enle. sanctor. cap. 10. proposit. 3.
as holy and as necessary as the holy Sabbath day which the Lord him self
ordained. There be but nine great Masses in the year that do require special
solemnity, and the Council. tom 2 in Epist Pelag. 2 ad episco german and
Galliae.
eight of them is for the Cross. And where there is a difference made between
the crosses feasts, these are in the first rank who bear this title, Concill.
Tom. 3. in constitut. Oxoniens. aedit. per Stephan.
Statuimus quod festa subscripta sub omni veneratione serventur. The Sabbath of
the cross then are holy in an high degree; now the keeping of them holy, what
blasphemy and what Idolatry has it? Consider first the prayers made:
Breniar. Rom in sect. inven. Cruc.
Crux Aue spes vnica, in hoc paschali tempore, Auge pus iustitiam reisque dona
veniam: and salva presentem cateruam in tuis laudibus congregatam. Again,
Ibid. in exaltat.
O Crucis victoria and admirabile signum in coelesti curia, fac nos captare
triumphum. And Salva nos Christ and servator per virtutem crucis Ab inimicis
nostris libera nos Domine. Again, Miss. second. vsum Sarum in fest. invent.
Cruc.
Protege Domine plebem tuam per signum sanctae crucis, and sacrificium nostrum
placatus intend, vt per vexillum sanctae Crucis ad conterendas potestates
aereas, noi in securitate constituat. Again, Potifotiu. Sarisburie. ib^d.
Adesto nobis, and quo sanctae Crucis laetari facis, honor eius quoque
perpetuis defendas subsidijs. After these prayers, consider these praises.
Breuiat. Roman.
Tuam Crucem adoramus Domine; nos gloriari oportet in Cruce Domini: hoc signum
erit in coelo cum Dominus ad iudicandum venerit. Again, P^^^tif^^. ^arisburie.
in miss. de Ofux.
horrificum tue^ semper signum inimicis, Crux sancta saeuis. quam mors pauet,
infernusque timet; quae Christo suos reconsignas. Again, u O Crux gloriosa; O
Crux adoranda: O lignum praeciosum and admirabile signum: per quod and Diabolus
victus est, and mundus Christi sanguine redemptus. Crux alma fulget, per quam
salus reddita est mundo. Crux vincit, Crux (...) Or^^ ^^pe^^^om^e c^i^^en. Ecce
Crucem Domini, fugite parts adversae. As for the Hymns; Crux pellit omne
crimen: fugiunt Crucem Ibid. in fest. ex altat.
Prudent. in hymn.
tenebra: tali dicata signo men's fluctuare nescit, with the like. and the
homilies that are set forth upon these feasts for the honor of the Cross,
although they contain much horrible blasphemy and Idolatry, yet must I omit
them, co^tenting my self with this one Hymn, the Missal. second. vsu. Sarum.
in fest exalta. Cruc.
pride (as it seems) of all the rest.

Lauds Crucis attollamus,
Nos qui crucis exultamus
Speliali gloria.
Dulce melos pulsat coelos
Dulce lignum, dulci dignum
Credimus melodia.
Voci vita non discordet
Cum vox vitam non remordet
Dulcis est symphonia.
Serui crucis crucem laudent,
Qui per crucem sibi gaudent,
Vitae dari munera.
Dicant omnes, and dicant singuli,
Aue Salus communis populi
Arbor Salutifera.
O quam faelix quam preclara
Fuit haec salutis ara
Rubens Agni sanguine?
Agnisine macula.
Qui mundauit saecula
Ab antiquo crimine.
Haec est scala peccatorum
Per quam Christus Rex coelorum
Adse traxit omnia.
Forma cuius hoc ostendit
Quae terrarum comprehendit
Quatuor confusia.
Non sunt noua sacramenta
Nec recenter est inventa
Crucis haec religio.
Ipsa dulcis aquas fecit
Per quam silex aquas iecit
Moysi officio.
Nulla salus est in domo
Nist Cruce munit homo
Super liminaria
Neque sensit gladium
Nec amisit filium
Quisquis egit talia.
Ligna legens in Sarepta
Spem salutis est adepta
Pauper mulier cula.
Sino lignis fidei
Nec lecythus olei
Valet nec farinula.
In scripturis sub figuris
Ista latent, sediam patent
Crucis beneficia.
Reges credunt hosts cedunt
Sola Cruce Christo duce
Hostis fugat millia.
Ista suos fortiores
Semper facit and victores
Morbos sanat and languores
Reprimit daemonia.
Dat captiuis libertatem
Vitae confert nouitatem
Ad antiquam dignitatem
Crux reducit omnia.
O Crux signum trium phale
Mundi vera salus vale
Inter ligna nullum tale
Fronde, flore, germine.
Medicina Christiana
Salua sanos, aegres sana
Quod non valet vis humana
Fit in tuo nomine.
Insistences crucis laudi
Consecrater Crucis audi
Atque seruos tuae Crucis
Post hanc vitam verae lucis.
Transfer ad palatia
Quos tormento vis seruire
Fac tormenta non sentire
Sed cum dies erit ^re
Nobis confer and largire
Sempiterna gaudia.
What is here less then Israells Idolatry? Qui dicit ligno pater men's es, Et
lapidi tu peperisti me? Ier. 2.27.
For that this is said to the cross and not to Christ crucified only, yea to
the aereall sign of the cross, and not alone to the material, there are many
manifest reasons. Upon these words of Prudentius his hymn [ tali dicata signo
men's fluctuare nescit] Lib. expo. hymnor secund. vsum Sarum. fol. 25.
this is the commentary, men's confirmata signo sanctae Crucis nessit dubitare
de fide and errare a conscientia intentionis virtuosa* upon these words
formerly mentioned [Quae Christo suos reconsignas] Ibid in exposit. sequentiar.
fol. 34.
this is the exposition, Crux reconsignat, id est marketh again, cui, sci.
Cruci laus, id est honor, sit in auum, id est eternaliter. The Fathers and the
papists, do they not apply the figure of the blood sprinkled on the posts,
the wood that made the water sweet: the two sticks of the widow of Sarepta,
even to the aerial sign of the cross? One of our Lambert, Danaeus cont.
Bellarmin. controuer. 7. l. 2. c. 29
writers, speaking of the aereall cross: etiam isti Cruci (says he)
Innocentius Sextus anno Dom. 1460. festum solemn instituit. And the homilies
of these feasts entitle even the cross aereall to the honor of these
sole^nities as one Frederic. Nausea. centur. 2. homil. 92. in feriis. exalta.
5. cru.
may show in steed of al: In who^ this very sign is praised as signu^
vivificum cut in nostram salutem Christus mirabiles contulit virtutes and
vtilitates, and of which his will is that it should be tanto honoratius and
gloriosius quanto crebrius efformaretur. One of our Sam. Hars. in Declara. of
weston. imposture. Cap. 20.
Opposites refers also a piece of the last hymn, morbos sanat and
languores, deprimit damonia even to the aerial Cross. Consider all these
premises and then think with thyselfe whether the stommakes of the people
will ever be eased of these surfietes of the Crosses idolatrous Sabbothes
until there be a vomit given them to cast the sign of the Cross it self out
of our Church?

#Sect. 2. That the Cross mocketh the Lor. Sabboths, in darkning them: guiding
the popish processions, and with whorish braverie, in the worship of God.
SEcondly, the Cross mocketh the Lords Sabbothes in that it darkeneth the
light of them with a latin tongue unknown, since this tongue holds his title
by the title of the Cross, which set over the head of our Lord when he was
crucified, is said to Rhem. in Johan. 19. sect. 1. Item in Annota. in 1. cor.
14. sect. 14
hallow it to his service. Thirdly, the Cross mocketh the Lord Sabbothes in
that he is becomme the guide of the popish processions, as one of them
Polider. virgil. de inventor. rer. l. 6. c. 11
writes Modus iste. etc. This manner of supplication is brought in that being
marshalleth in the order of a certain heavenly army we should joyfully
triumph of the victory purchased in the Cross of Christ, for which cause it
is that the Cross it self is borne before as a standart of Christ his
warfare. The same writer detecteth the Crosses Sabbothes breach herein, when
he makes little better of this procession then of an heathenish may game, and
a pompous Athenian sacrifice, not so acceptable as a simple and chaste offering
of Lacedemon. As for our Ioh. Reynold confe. ca. 8. diuis. 4. pa. 495.
writers they draw the first original of it from the Graecians who bare their
Idols in procession in like manner: and from the C^lfh. art 7. fol. 138. D.
Fulk. reioyn. art. 7. p 186.
Montanistes and the Arrians who of Christians were the first that set it on
foot. And our Matyrs they chose rather to dye then to bare a cross or a taper
in it, eue^ as Act. and monum 20 33. in his article. object. 7.
Richard Gibson did, to omit others. Of the same kind is their creeping to the
cross, like to the Sicilians Io. Reyno. vb. Supra.
creeping to Hercules, which offers indignity more to man then any other
Idolatry else, because it makes him subject to a worse thing then a creature
(which is the point whereby the Cypri. co^tra Deem. tria^. Lacta. lib. 2.
institut. cap. 2.
Fathers use to amplify the Idolatry of the Heathens) and how subject? even
by a beastlike fower-foot creaping, then which there is nothing more unworthy
of him, who is created to look up when he worshippeth: as the ancient
Christians did witness: Tertulli. Occulis ad Co^lum sublatis adoramus. Fourthly,
the cross mocketh the Sabbath through out all the Churches of popery, in that
it together with Images and other ornaments, bring in a certain whorish
bravery into the service of God: the worship whereof they make to be Andr.
Willet. contro. 2. quest. 4. p. 1. Doct. Fulk. cont. Rhem. in 1. Tim. 4. sect.
1. Baeza in li. ^^nf^ss. de ^ccle. art. 1^.19.20.
Carnal: Council. Nie^^. 2. act. 1.
Templi nulla ratio quod non ornatur Imagine, says the Council of Nice. The
protestant Church is like a barn (says Bellarmi. de effect. Sacramen. cap. 3^*
Bellarmine, it has only a pulpit ad Concionandum and a table to take the
Sacrament, therefore there must be Crosses in it to draw men thither with
delight for which end in Durand. rational. lib. 1. c. de pictor. and ornamen*
Eccles.
other will have Ostrich eggs with the like rare sightes to be hanged up in
the Church likewise well and truly Hospin* de re Temp. lib. a c. 1^
one of our own: vera causa. etc. the true cause of this is, that the stupide
people having their minds occupied in these external sightes, should neglect
Christ Jesus, and his merit and his word. Indeed this was that which Satan
aimed at from the first day that the Cross drew breath, thefore has he from
time to time set him out to the vttmost like a Virgin of Moab. Evagri. lib 6.
ca. 21.
Theodora confecrateth two Cross of pure gold to Saint Sergius Church at
Antiohe. Paul. Diacon lib. 16
Belifarius gives a golden Cross of an hundred pound to Saint Peeters
Church at Rome and the same adorned with most precious gemmes in qua suas
victorias inscripserat. An other sets up a Cross of solid gold in the
Church of Mentz with this inscription Beat. Rhenan lib. 2. rer. germa.
Auri sexcentas habet haec crux aurea libras. Honorius at Rome sets up a
great Cross, adorned with pearl, so that it is said the Council of
Aquisgrane did not well like it. St Ludouicus redeeming the piece of the Cross
which Baldwin the Emperor had laid in morgage to the Venetians Genebra.
Cronolog. lib 4. in ann. 1243.
in Regio saecello Lutetiae condidit institutis ibi sacrorum ministris. What
should I speak of the famous Churches that have been built throughout whole
Cristendome, as to the name, so to the honor of the Cross? For from the mother
which is the Church de sancta Cruce at Jerusalem, standing in Rome adorned
which no less then Baleus in Honor.
3. great stations every year, to the least of the daughters, On^phri. de
station. vrb. Romans
they are all enriched with the spoils of Christ Jesus. It is observed in the
church of Simon Stellites Euagri. lib. 1. c. 14.
Templi aedificium extructum est in mod im Crucis: are not other Churches built
in the same form? If they be, there is an ambition in the Cross to be
honored in every Churh, and with what honor one of his proctors will plainly
show us: In this position, Detzesin^ de indulge. Amand Polanus in orat. de
scient. cruc.
Crux rubra. etc. A red Cross set up in the midst of the Church with the
Popes arms according to the similitude of the Lords Cross, has no less
power to do away sins quam Crux ipsa domini nostri Jesus Christi. The Cross
so many ways Idolized must when it stands in [an holy place] come within
that general dooume [ where is ought not] more then the people of an Idol,
Mar. 13.14
when they stand only without the walls of a city that has been holy. For
are the people of an Idol abominable and not the Idol it self much more? or
may not they be better permitted to stand in an holy place then it be suffered
in an holy worship?

#Sect. 3. That the Cross corrupts the simplicity of the Sabbath.
But if the popish Sabbath breach be not a sufficient guilt to condemn the
Cross, we have further cuidence of home pollution, for that even amongst our
selves he both corrupts the simplicity, and hinders the sanctity of this
day. Touching the former, the Cross being not found in the Leiturgies of the
primative Church, it ought not to appear in ours; no more then the surplice
ought of which thus one; Bucer. in Censur ca. 2. page 458.
Consentaneum est. etc. It is meet that we should aspire as in all outward
things, so in the attire of the Minister unto the simplicity of Christ our
Savior, and of his Apostles. when Jewel, Bullinger, Mornaeus and the rest of
our writers cite the Leiturgies of the first Churches as Justinius and Irenaeus
do describe them to exclude the ceremonies of the Mass, dispute they not upon
this ground: the simplicity of the first Church is a pattern for us to
follow? The purer Church of those whom we term sub vna in Boheme, bear the
torche (as it were) before us in this duty: David. Chytreus in oration.
prelect. Cronic. an^. 1569.
Pontificios ritus. etc. They have altogether hissed out all popish rites,
either as impious of themselves, or otherwise unprofitable to edification, and
to the discipline of true piety: and have recalled omnes Ceremonias, even all
their ceremonies; to the gravity and to the simplicity of the first
Apostolical Church. Ascend we upward and we find the like doctrine: Gregor.
Nazians. ad Gregor. Nissen. orat. 3.
Sanctorum patr^m constitutiones qui proximiores fuerunt Christo agnoscamus.
Come we downward and we meet (again) with the like doctrine: Act. and monu.
pa. 1494.
Those orders be most pure that come most nigh to the ensample of the primative
Church, says Saunders holy Martyr; when we are come quite down we find the
same doctrine: Those times be purest (says one Andre. Willet. controner 2.
quest. 4.
of our writers) that be nearest to Christ and to the Apostles, as the waters
be cleerest that be nearest the fountain. yea, when we are come home to the
cross it self we find the like doctrine. Philip Motnae. de Euchari. lib. 1.
cap. 6. page 50.
Dispute we not against the Papists: the Cross was not used in the Lords
Supper, in the primative times of the Church as apppeareth by Dionisius
Areopagita, who amongst so many Ceremonies which he rehearses, makes no
mentioned of the sign of the Cross? It is here replied that the Cross was an
Ecclesiastical and a Sabboths rite before Tertullian. for in his book de
praescriptionibus which is one of his first works, among other ancient rites
of the Christians (which Satan imitated) he reckons the sign of the Cross
for one, in these words: Tertul de prescript.
signat and illic in front milites suos. First, we are made believe Genebr.
lib. 3. in anno 220.
by some, that this book was one of the last he wrote for a testimony of his
return from Montanisme. Caesat. Baron. Annal.in hi^tor eius.
Others tell us it was one of the first he wrote before Montanus had infected
him; Neither of which conjectures is probable, because in this very place
cited, he approves the Monogamie of Montamus. which bears witness unto us,
who hold the Cross came into the Sabbath by Montanus and grew to credit with
the rest of his inventions. Let it be [then] the sign of the Cross which
Satan does imitate in the words of Tertullian. so in these words of
Tertullian he does imitate the Monogamie which is no auncienter then Montanus.
Secondly, why should it be the sign of the Cross that here is imitated, or
not rather some Jewish ceremony, seeing the conclusion of the whole treatice
is this: that Satan does imitate morositatem Iudeae. he makes mention of a
summus pontifex; which, was it not the high Priest of the Jews? the devil in
Mytraes bread does imitate panis oblationum, that is the bread of proposition.
For Mytraes bread is more ancient then the bread of the Supper. Will our
Opposites say that though the bread of Mytrae be more ancient then the bread of
the Supper, yet that Tertul does say that Satan does imitate it: then we say
on the other side, that this place proves not any auncientnes in the Cross,
because Tertullian may refer it to some ceremony of the pagans which was
auncienter then it self. What then? we cannot read of any Idolatrours sign
in the forehead, unless it be the foreheads garlands, which may be said to
imitate the oil in the Forehead or the priests petalum, as Rhenan. ibid. in
aedit. Basil. 2528.
Rhenaenus in his first notes seems to insinuate. Thirdly, Tertullian says,
it is Satan that imitateth Morositatem Iudeae in her rites. is Rome better
then Jerusalem, that we may imitate her morositie in her ceremonies, and yet be
ledd by a good spirit? frons cum signo Dei pura (says Cyprian) diabolt cotonam
far not potuit. no more will the water in Baptism abide the Cross. which
being an heretical and Idolatrous rite of the forehead, it is as badde as a
pagane garlande about the forehead, else is Tertullian much deceived who in the
very place affirms: Non distat Haeresis ab Idololatria.

#Sect. 4. That the sign of the Cross defyleth the sanctity of the Sabbath.
SEcondly, Sect 4. Exodus 31.17 1. cor. 10.17
the sign of the Cross defiles the Sanctity of the Sabbath both in the
general end thereof and also in the special worships which it performs. The
general durie of the Sabbath is, to be a mark of outward difference between
the Church and Andr. Willer. Contro^e. 9. quest. 5. p. 1. p. 4^^.
other religions. This does appear by the change of the Sabbtoh day it self.
For did not the Apostles change it from the last day of the week to the
first, to make difference and distinction between the Christians and the
Jews, even as Bellarmi. de effect. Sacramen. cap. 31. Jacob. Ledesin. de di
vin. etc. ca. 24. Thomas Morton. Apolog. p. 2. li. 1. c. 43 Ignarius in epist.
ad Philadelp^^ Decret. p. 1 disti. 30. c. 7 Decret. p. 1. distinct. 30 cap. 17.
Augustine. epist. 86. Decret. pa. 2. cause. 26. q. 7. ca. 6. Epiphan. here is. 42.
Caesar Baron. Annal in an. 146. Idem in ann. 102. Council. Eliber. ca. 26.
Ignar. Epist. 1. Council. Nicen. 1. in Concilior. tom. 1. pa. 352. Can. Apostol.
8. Council. Carthag. 4 can. 89. Carol. Bouius in Cl^ment. li. 5. cap. 8.
Epiphan. haeres. August. haeres. Nicephor. li. 8. ca. 1^. Council. Laodicens.
Can. 29. Clement. constitue; lib. 7. ca. 24 34. August. n 1 Epist. 86. Carol.
Bouius in Clement. ibid. Tripartit. histor. lib. 6. ca. 4^.
Bellarmine him self does tell us, the Jews did fast on that day in
contempt of it. And when the Manichees fasted upon this day, says a Jesuit
(howbeit falselie, for the Manichees sprange up long after) but when the
Jews in deed fasted upon this day: the Christians, to be unlike unto them,
appointed the contrary: Nefas est Sabbato ieiunare, as speaks Tertullian.
And that it were the Jews which the Church herein avoided: it is plain,
first by Ignatius words which allude to them: Ieiunare in Sabbato, est
Christum occidere: and then by the reason of after times, which bends them
selves in this custom against all Jewish contempt of this day. Afterward the
Manichees fasted upon it: and now to avoyde all likeness with them, Qui
ieiunaverit die Dominica sicut Manichaei, anathema sit. So Augustine affirms,
that since the time that the Manichees appointed that day for fasting, it is a
fearful and an horrible thing for the Christians to fast like them upon it.
This conformity was the more horrible, the more earnest a man was in it: (as
men now are eger in Cross, and Surplice) in like manner to conform with
papists, Qui Dominico die studiose ieiunat, non creditur esse Catholicus. The
like care had the primitive Church to avoyde the Saterdayes fast, because it
did conform with Marcion, Qui Sabbato ieiunavit in odium Dei Creatoris omnium.
Before this fast of Marcions, the Christians of the West did use to fast upon
the Saturday: after he once arose, this fast was forbidden to a lay man upon
pain of excommunication; to a Cleric upon pain of deposition by the
sixtiefifth Canon of the Apostles, which was not devised till now, even in the
judgment of Baronius. If they left an ancient fast, when once heretics did
abuse it, should not we leave an ancient Cross, now the papists do abuse
it? The like care we see taken, to avoyde likeness with the Jews in the
celebration of their Passcouer, or any other of their festiuities. This being
found in one of the Epistles of Ignatius, Si quis cum Iudaeis celebrat Pascha,
aut Symbola festiuitatis eorum recipit* particeps est eorum qui Dominum
occiderunt, and Apostolos eius. The Council of Nice did after appoint a
diverse day upon this reason: There ought nothing to be common between the
Jews and the Christians. The Canons of the Apostles of Christ excommunicated
him, that folemnized his Easter upon the fourteenth day of the month like to
the Jews. and so do the Councilles. A contrary day to make unlike unto the
Jews was thought to be fit and convenient by all. In so much that the
Audaeani and Quartadecimani were censured for heretics, that did concur in
the same day with them. When certain Countries in the East did the like, how
did Constantine take on against them? Further yet: Do the Jews rest on a
Saturday? The Christian that does the like, is excommunicate he may on the
Saturday meditate; there may be an Assembly upon that day, but he that
rests upon that day Iudaizeth, and is not to be suffered. We read amongst
Iulians policies for the subversion of Christianity, this to be one: that he
set on the Jews to set up their Temple and the Sabbath service thereof,
partly to disgrace the Christian service, which used not that outward
splendencie in their ceremonies to please the eye; and partly to grace the
Ethnicke worship which concorded with the Jewish in sacrifizing and in diverse
other rites. I add this to the former, that by the comparison of contrariety,
it may the better appear unto us how necessary a duty it is to make our
Sabbath a distinction between our selves and the panistes: let our Sabbothes,
our feasts, and the rites and ceremonies of them be different, and we trace
the steps of the primitive Church, and keep our faith in purity, let them
be like, and then we disgrace our Sister Churches that are reformed, but
grace the Antichristian Synagogue with whom we choose to concur, then to
concord with them. As if a Cross or a Surplice (say our Opposites) were such
matters of importance to breed concordance or concurrence? Who must consider
that we do concur with papists in holy day Tertul. in Apolog. cap. 21.
and in feasts themselves, in singing and chaunting and in church Music, in
Coapes, in Cappes, in fastes, and I know not how many things besides. But
speak we of the Cross alone and of the Surplice. Council. Laodicon. Can 37.
Council. Meldens. cap. 73.
Neque de victus exceptionibus, neque de solemnitatibus, dierum neque de
signaculo corporis cum Iudaeis agimus. It should seem by this that signaculum
corporis (such as the sign of the Cross is) when it is like to that which
Jews and heretics use, does breed an unlawful conformity between us,
as well as the same solemnitas dierum and the same Sabbath does. Theodor.
histor. li. 3. cap. 16.
Non oportet a Iudaeis vel haereticis ea qu mitru^tur muncra festina suscipere,
nec cum ijs festa celebrare, nec a Iudaeis Azyma suscipere, and co^municare in
pietatibus ipsorum. It seems by this, that as we may not solemnize the same
Sabbothes and feasts with papists, that so we may not use any rite of their
Sabboths or feasts, whereas we know the Sabboth-service of the papists has
not any ceremonies more regardable then those which our church retains. Even
one drop of heathenish holy water seems intolerable to Vale^tinian when it
lights on his cloak, and that in the church porch. what would he have said to
the Image of Mercury translated out of Iulians Labarum into the service of the
Sabbath and lighting on the forehead it self the seat of profession? He that
comes to a Sacrament (says August. epist. 73.
Augustine) with an heathenishe earing, such as the Gentiles superstitiously
use in the service of their Gods, comes to the Lords table with a badge of
the devil. But the sign of the Cross being an Idol it self of the papists
and not only an appurtenace thereof, is it not a badge of the devil more
lively and more sinful? especially seeing it does not hang in his ear that
comes to our Sacrament and Sabbath service, but is sodered (in a manner) into
the very forehead of the Sacrament it self? When certain observed like
dauncinges August. de Tempore. 215.
ante basilicas sanctorum, to them which the heathens did observe in their
Sabbothes and their feasts (he says) they come Christians to Church, but go
away pagans. The same is mentioned in an other place thus: August. Epist. 11.
si licebit (says he) Iudaeis obseruare in Ecclesijs Christi quod exercuerunt
in Synagogis Sathanae dicam quod sentio, non illi Christiani fient, sed nos
Iudaeos facient. It is apparent by all this that if we keep not our Sabbothes
pure and holy from all the rites and ceremonies which the popish Synagogue
used in her Sabbothes, we defile our Sabbothes and make them popish, and we
our selves participate with popery. Neither shall it avail to say, that the
Cross and Surplice are but trisles and slight matters, for even one dead fly
marreth all the ointment Seneca.
etiam capillus vnus habet vmbram suam. and the German Conrad. Sch^ussel. lib.
1^. page 572.
divines, who withstood the Adiaphorisme pleaded from the example of Marcus
Arethusius: Ec^les. 10.1.
tam est in peccato qui confert obolum, quam qui confert omnia. But, the Cross
is none of the popish rites and ceremonies, it was used before popery. How
can that be, seeing popery began to work even in the Apostles time? But O
Marcellinus, dull of wit, and the rest of you Mittentes, yea Thurifieati, you
could not tell how to excuse your selves as we can excuse our selves now.
What is one grain of Franckeneense, since it is but one? besides Franckencense
is not an heathenishe ceremony: for why, it was used in the Church of God long
before ever Idolaters knew it. 2 These. 2.7.
Therefore I will set a Duran. de rit. lib. 1. ca 9. sect. 3
papiste himself to pull that vizard from our faces: apud gentiles. etc.
although Frankencense were not in use among the gentiles at the first as
largely it is proved by Arnobius in his seventh book, yet after they began to
sacrifice with Franckencense, the burning of Franckencense, became a certain
token of sacrifying, so that they taught Christians did sacrifice though they
did but with the top of their finger, take a little grain of Frankencense,
and put it but into the Censor. What (then) though the cross was used before
popery? I mean before popery grown up to the full, now that they coeperunt to
use it in their Idolatry, Tertul. in Apolog. cap. 16.
it is become theirs: so that if we use it but with a little finger, it is
certum inditium of fellowship with them, at the least in their credence. But
this Sabboth-crosse of ours being not used eadem ratione makes a difference
sufficient by the plea of Tertullian excusing Christians because they do aeque
diem solis laeticiae indulgere, yet they do it long alia ratione quam
religione solis. This instance is ab imparibus: the Sabbath is commanded one
[die solis] the Cross is uncommanded. Therefore the Sunday is amongst the
things in which August. de Doct. Christian. lib 3 cap. 4
non vsus rei, Decret. p. 1. distin. 41. cap. 1.
sed ratio only and libido vtentis est in culpa: that which Thomas Aquinas
calls Tho. Aquin. commentar. in Epist. Iud.
corruption modi: whereas the very use it self of the Cross is evil, it
being not necessary nor commanded, even as the papists them selves confess:
Alphons. de castr. in verb Imag.
illa quae necessaria non sunt, etsi bona quantumlibet sint, saepe tamen
tollenda aut prorsus abroganda sunt, propter mala quae inde oriri cognoscuntur.
Augustine holds it sufficient, in necessary things (as in meats and in
marriages) with the like, to differ from Heathens ratione vtendi only. non
aliud edendo (says he) sed aliud sentiendo. because in these things August.
cont. Faust Manich. lib. 20. c. 23
long aliter ijs vtitur, qui in alium finem refert, who in the Sabbath fast
unnecessary, cannot endure a same day with the Manichees, although he knew the
Christians might fast (long diver saratione) from them. Our own Andt. Willet.
controuers. 9 quest. 5. page 1. page 429.
Writers, do they not hold the popish holy days to be Jewish? though
Bellarmi. de cult. Sanct. c. 10
Bellarme frames many differences between the Jewish [vse] and theirs?

#Sect. 5. That the Ceremonies, and the Cross in special, steal away true
devotion from the heart, and are occasions of irreuerence.
FROM this general use of the Sabbath which the ceremonies do pervert, come we
down to the general manner of Sabboth-worships, which in like manner they
defile. For whereas it is a mere doctrine of hypocrisy taught by the
Bellarmin. de cult. sanct ca. 10 proposit. 4
papists, that the internal act of the mind pertayneth not to the Sabbath
duty, but the external only. And again, Tollet instruct. lib. 4 cap. 24.
Homo tenetur sub mortali ad sanctificandum Sabbatum sed non ad been
sanctificandum. the smatch hereof is so bredde in the bones of our country, as
that it will never out of the flesh, as long as so strong occasions of of it
do remain. To speak but of the cross it self, is he not among those
gestures of the papists which Andre. Willet. controvers. 13. quest. 7.
one calls frivoulous and hipocriticall? stealing away true devotion from the
heart, and making men rest in the outward gestures of the body? Who prepares
him self to the worship of the Sabbath any other way (I speak of the
Crosse-mongers amongst the vulgar and simple people) then by the crossing of
his foread, when he enters into the church, and when he kneeleth down in his
seat? And as for the affection of the heart in the time of the Sabboth-worship,
there is nothing that either sooner reviveth the fault that aunciently taxed,
Arnob. cont. gent^ lib. 2.
dissoluti est pectoris in rebus serijs quaerere voluptatem: or renueth the
complainte auncientlie made, Lactant.
adeone Deorum religio nihil aliud est quam quod humanos sensus delectat? then
the sight of the Cope, Cross and Surplice, and the hearing of the descant and
the Organes in Gods service? Even in the singing of a Psalm, Bernar. meditat.
ca. 1^
libido audiendi sonum magis quam sensum: Hieron. in Ephesians. 5.
modulationes, magis quam verba: August. lib. confess. cap.
concentum magis quam sensum: thorough which the vox does Glos. decret.
distin. 92.
praedominari non votum, cordula non cor, is very sinful. But for this
carnal delight in singing, must singing it self be quite removed, (as
Hilarious thought August. retractat. li. 2. cap. 1^
once) and was censured as heretical? I answer: The singing of Psalms and
the Water of Baptism do symbolize. The Descant and Organes, and a carnal
delightful serving of God, are of the very same stamp, therefore the singinge
of Psalms, must not be abolished, though some abuse it because it is a thing
Ephesians 5.19. Coloss. 3.16.
commanded, when the Hieron. in Ephesians. 5.
Theatralis musica must: and the Hieron. Zanch. in Ephesians. 5. Pet. Martyr.
loc-commun. de music. Reforma. ecclesiastic Edward. 6. page 43. Jewel ar. 3
divis. 2. to^. etc.
musica fracta of Cathedral churches. and light Council. Coloniens. page 2. c.
12 Erasm. in 1. Cor 14. Harmon. Confess. in obserua. sect. 15. obseruat. 2.
Hospin. de re templa. cap. de organ.
playing on Organs, and the q Organs them selves Quibus fit vt ad Templum
concurratur tanquam ad Theatrum. Lastly, there is wherein the ceremonies
co^troversed defile and hinder the after duty of the sabbath, that rumination
of the word especially, whereof the Bereans do give us ensample. For the
appearance hereof set we down the Crosses pagents, which I take to be so many
instruments of exsection, that have cut out the cudd from the people, that
might chewe the wholesome word which on the Sabbath they receive. The Deacon
(forsooth) must be blessed with a cross before the reading of the Gospel,
because Duran. de rit. lib 2. ca. 23. sec. 3
Quomodo predicabunt, nisi mitt antur? Two Sect. 8.
tapers are carried before him when he goes to the deske, to signify the
illumination of mankind by the preaching of the Gospel; and with them a
Censor of incense to signify the Sect. 9.10.
sweet savor of it wheresoever it is preached. This done, he ascends the
Sect 11.
pulpit vt ab omnibus audiatur. iuxta illud Esaiae, Super montem ascend tu qui
Evangelizas Syon. being there, he sets his face toward the North Sect. 14.
vt ostend at verbum Dei, and annuntiationem spiritus sancti, contra eum dirigi
qui semper spiritui sancto contrarius existit. Having thus placed him self on
the stage, he saluteth the people, Dominus vobiscum, illud obseruans quod
Dominus iusserat in quamcunque domum intraveritis, salutate. The people make
answer (as men that have received their [cue] and cum spiritu tuo: then the
Deacon Sect. 15.
he falls to crossing himself in the forehead, vt cum Aposto lo non
erubescat de Evangelio Christi, and in the breast, ne aliqua suggestio Diaboli
eum impediat quin puro cord Evangelium Dei annuntiare valeat: and in the
mouth, quia praedicamus (inquit Apostolus) Iesum Christum, and hunc crucifixum:
and then begins, sequentia sancti Evangelij. etc. The people hearing the
Gospel named, cry out: Gloria tibi Domine, glorificantes Dominum quod ijs
miserit verbum salutis, and so fall a Sect 16.
crossing, mouth, breast, and forehead, vt contra Diabulum se Amalar. lib. 3.
c. 18.
muniant; and a Alemin. de offic. ca. de celebrat. Miss.
malis cogitationibus corda sua emundent, vt ad intelligenda verba salutis pura
permaneant: and as one sings in verse thus.

Neue Hildebert. Cenoman. de myster. Miss.
superveniens zizania seminet hostis
Frontibus imprimitur mystica forma crucis.
Add to this that the very making of the Cross in Baptism has been
commonly held to be Duran. de nt. lib. 1. c. 19. sec. 12
praedicatio crucis. and what of this? This shows the Origin of the common
tenent of our Opposites: that reading is preaching of the Gospel. of the
common error of the people, that a bodily presence at a lesson or a Gospel
sanctified with the sign of the cross, is hearing sufficient and learning
enough* which, though it be an notorious Sabboth-breach, yet are they hardened
to this hour in it, by the same pulpit where the Gospel is read: by the same
attire wherein by the same gesture of standing up, by the same answers which
they used of old: yea by their crossings in the forehead too: which none will
reprove, or leave, all while they see the cross countenaunced by our use
thereof in Baptism. And whereas the papists set up the Mass for a proper
work of the Catechis. Trident ad Parocho* page 649. Eccles. 4.17.
Sabbath, whence the error is grown that it is sufficient to afford a bodily
presence in a fools sacrifice; I mean an ignorant seeing and praying: the
ceremonies in present controversy can not be cleared from occasion of like
Sabbath breaking now as the even it self does witness, since in the churches in
which are preachers that do disvse them, the Sabbath is spiritually kept and
with great holiness; but in most churches where Curates use them both Bucer. in
Censur. ca. 7. page 466 1 Cor. 11.17.
sacra ipsa perturbate leuiter and praecipitanter recitantur, and the people
unprepared by their Levites to Sabboth-worship, non plus ea quae legu^tur
intelligunt, quam si lingua recitarentur Turcita aut Indica. Now because in
this manner me^ come to Church [to their own hurt] so that qui ingreditur ad
placandum, Saluian. de provident. lib. 3.
egreditur ad exacerbandum, these ought to be present order taken for means of
better reverence. Amongst these none like to the vision that awaked Jacob unto
reverence; or to the sounding of Aarons belles which stirred up revere^ce in
the people, when he entered into the sanctuary, I mean the preaching of the
word and the sounding of the Gospel which these ceremonies have laid waste:
But reverence is procured not only by this, but also by outward signs and
rites. which I acknowledge out of Thom. Aquin 2.2. quest. 84. art. 3. ad 3.
Aquinas, the people must be stirred to reverence in the Church per illa
sanctitatis signa quae ibi conspiciuntur. But (alas) what are these but dead,
when the preaching of the word wants which is the life and the light of
them? If they were avaylable, what is that to the ceremonies controversed which
are not such? First, they are them selves parts of irreverence. For as rudenes
of habit and gesture are parts of irreverence offending a King (witness the
Emperor Caro Sigon. de occidental imperio.
Valentinian, who grew to such collar by reason of the base apparel and rude
gesture of the Legates of Sarmatia as cost him his life) so the habit and
apparel of an Idol (as the Surplice is) and the gesture idolatrous (as the
Cross is) can not but thorough an odious irreuerence offend the holy one of
Israel. Secondly, they are occasions of irreuerence in regard of the
Minister: none must be put to 1. Cor. 11.22.
shame in the Church, the man of God be least of all made either an hatred Hos.
9.8.
or offense in the house of his God. Whereas these ceremonies are shameful to
him by so much more, and are by so much the more hateful then a fools coat,
by how much Idolatry (the chiefest and most odious sin) is worse then folly
which is a judgment from the Lord. It being so, these ceremonies punish a
Preacher worse for his reverent and holy attendance on Gods service, then the
Cuspini. lib. de origin. and relig Ture.
Cauda vulpina ad collum sispensa does punish the Turk, when for his
neglegence or irreuerence in Mahomets service, he is led up and down the
City, in this fools attire to shame him. Thrdly, these ceremonies are
occasions of irreuerence for that they give a beck to popery which is as
badde as mus^itare or nutus facere in the Church, fore the suppressing where of
in ancient times there was a Deacon Clemens. constitut. Aposto. li 8. cap. 11.
sert to walk up and down the Church to find them out and punish them. What
Chrysostom once spoke against the love signs, which some in the Church did
make one to another: Chrisost. in Math. 23 homil. 74.
pro stibulum tibi videtur Ecclesia and foro ignobilior? that may be applied
to these ceremonies. no modest man will so much as in foro wear the cullers of
an whore or make show open of her loue-tokens toward him, where as these (alas)
bring into the Church the badges of Antichrist: and the loue-tokens of former
adultery which are polluted by him.

#Sect. 6. That the ceremonies controversed, not only defile but hinder the
worship of the Sabbath.
FRom the manner of Sabbath worship defiled, come we to the matter of it: not
only defiled by these ceremonies controuersed but also hindered. Walafrid.
Strab. de reb. Ecclesiast. c. 24.
Boniface the Martyr can not think a Sabbath well sanctified with golden
Chalices, if the Preachers be wooden and therefore wishes for the golden
Preachers that were in the Church when the Chalices and Cups were wooden.
The ceremonies in present strife have drawn their patrons (as it seems) to a
contrary strain. better to have these golden ceremonies (say they in them
selves) to adorn the Sabboth-worship, then golden preaching, whereupon they
exchange (not like Glaucus gold for brass) but like the people of Boniface
his age, golden preaching for wooden ceremonies: or at the least for a wooden
kind of preaching. For to supply the want of Preachers: which the ceremonies
have brought upon us, they set up the reading of homilies, which they dubb with
the name of preaching, yea which they hold a preachinge sufficient for the
sanctifying and for the saving of the Church. But (alas) an homily is too
lean a sacrifice for a Sabbath* reading being the weeklie lamb which every
day we are to offer. there is in the Sabbothday. required a Numb. 28 9. Cant.
1.7.
special one over and above which is the hearing of the word preached. An
homily is also too lean a feeding for the Sabbath: a fatter pasture in the
tents of the sheepheards has the Lord for his kidds provided, to wit, a right
and discreet cutting of the word. 2 Timothy 2.15
whereas an homily shows a loaf but does not divide it, yea shows a Gualt
in Luc. homil. 76.
Medicin, but does not apply it to the sore. and a Ministry of the spirit
whereas the homily is but a dead letter. What wants in it (say our
Opposites?) There wants in it the gift of the spirit which is given for
edification there wants in it the art of the husbandman which uses to make
the Viniyard fat. 1 Cor. 12
there wants in it the heat of the Nurse that does digest and concockt the
milk to make it sweet. there wants in it the opening of the book, without
which it is but shut. there wants in it the dressing of the meat which
gives it a powerful taste. there wants in it that interpreter which is one
amongst a thousand, and without whose guidance none understands there wants
in it that ordinance of God which only brings the blessing with it, through
B^cer in Censur. cap. 7. page 463.
viua vox quae aedificat dante domino incrementum. to which we may add that
out of Hierome: Hieron. Paulino. 1 Epist. ^30.
habet nescio quid latentis energiae viua vox and in aures discipuli de
auctoris ore transfusa fortius sonat. But the people that have homilies may be
glad: better homilies then nothingh: and many there are which want them for
their spiritual comfort. Just as once Macarius told Anthony coming to him in
the extremity of his thirst for want of water: Tripartit. histo. lib. 8. cap.
2.
Vmbratibisufficiat, says he, multi namque nunciter agentium aut nauigantium
etiam hac releuatione priuantur. Now I know not whether it were not better for
the people of this land, that may repayr to preaching elsewhere as the
Sunamite did on every Sabbath and new Moon: if they wanted this shadow of
preaching by an homily in their parishes at home. because then they would know
their want, and the famine of the word in which they are: and run to and fro
to increase knowledge: and go forth with their kiddes to the tents of the
sheepheardes, whereas now this shadow makes them hope they are well enough
already, and the Church Governors would for shame provide golden preaching
indeed if this wooden shadow of preaching did not shrowde them. Is not golden
preaching the water which the empty thirsts after? or this water, may it not
be had? For the state of our Church is glorious (say our Opposites,) the state
of our Church will be glorious (say we) and many golden preachers would enter,
if the bar of subscription and the clogg of ceremonies were (like unto the
stone of the sepulcher) rolled away. It was hard with the people of Israel,
after their return from Babylon, they had but a little stone (some Genebrard
lib. 2. in anno mundi. 3640.
3. fingers high) with a Censor on the topp of it, instead of the glorious
Arc whence before the Lord did teach them. and in place of the Oracle by Vrim
and Thummim which never failed them that sought counsel of the Lord, they were
only taught per Bathkol, which was a little slender voice sounding in the ears
of the assembly met together once at the hundreths end. Now what should I say?
that the state is very like of those places which have homilies for to teach
them in steed of preaching. Oh therefore that the Lord would in his goodness once
awake to restore us our Arc again and our Oracle, and our Vrim and our
Thummim: and to that end remove these ceremonies, as one exhorts (speaking
of the Surplice) Bucer. Censur. ca. 2. pa. 458.
Doctores si desint idonei. etc. If there want fit Preachers, both the using
and the removing of these popish garments will be hurtful and they make
themselves guilty of an outrageous injury against the blood of the son of
God, and will pull down the wrath of God insufferable upon the whole Kingdom,
by whose means it shall stand that before all things there be not caretaken,
that as Christ our Lord both in word and deed has taught there be appointed
able Preachers to all Baptized in his name, to teach them to observe whatsoever
he has commanded, Mat. 10. and vlt. Ioh. 10. and vlt.

#Sect. 7. The Ceremonies hinder the preaching of the Sabbath, both in part and
in whole.
SEcondly, as the ceremonies controuersed transform the peaching of the
Sabbath into reading after this manner aforesaid, so also they hinder it both
in part and in whole* In part, they streighten it by a long Leiturgie touching
which (least I be mistaken) we premise these two prouisoes and premunitions for
our selves; First, we are no Brownistes, we condemn not a Leiturgie, but like
well enough of that Council. Laodien. Can. 59.
Council that forbadd (...) in the service of God, and those forms of service
which are not antea Council Carthag. 3. can. 23.
probata in Concilio, vel cum prudentioribus collata, Council. Milenitan. ca^
12. African. can 17. Microlog. de Ecclesiast. cap. 5.
ne forte aliquid contra fidem vel per ignorantia^ vel per minus studium sit
compositum. Charles the great Ansegif. in legib. Franc.
constituit vt omnia missalia viderentur, and quae ab Ecclesia probata non
essent, reijcerentur, Walafrid. Strab. de reb. Ecclesiasti. c. 22.
Gelasius and Idem and Microlog. c. 24.31.
Gregory are said politius limasse and in ordinem redigisse. the Leiturgies
that were before them. Augustine approved this industry who lived in the time
of the aforesaid Philip. Mornae. de Eucharist. lib. 1. cap. 6. page 44.
Council of Malta. Did not Io. Calui. in Epist.
Mr Calvin aduertize the Bishops of King Edward that they were to limare
politius the communion book? What have been our seeking from time to time,
arazing of the communion book? no, but a purging and a filing of it, after the
pattern of that care which the former examples set us. Secondly, we condemn
them who out of a profane mind, and out of a lothing of holy things distaste
the length of a Leiturgie, which sauoureth not only of that short service, for
which Roger Act. and mon. in vit Henric. 1.
B. of Sarum was once preferred (to wit) because he whipped up the whole Mass
before the King, and the rest of the hearers has thought he would have been
half way over: but also of that blasphemous Atheism of John the 23. Pope, who
lothing the length of morning service was wont to say to the Deacon that
helps him, Andre. Hiper. de stud. sacr. page 155.
deligamus in libre horario, precationes matutinas breuiores, de memoria
alicuius diui in nomine centum diabolorum. What then? the length of a Leiturgie
we mislike, when thorough an unnecessary tediousnes it wearieth the people
before the Sermon begins, in which if our adversaries cross us they are
more opposite then some papists: who mislike the men that Durant. rationali.
lib. 4. c. 15. Petr. Alliac. de reforma. Ecclesi. c. 3.
extra modum and ordinem orationes multiplicant: vnde auditores sibi ingratos
efficient and populum Dei potius, faslidio avertunt quam alliciunt: and even so
to the contrary, vt non tam onerosa prolixitas quam deuota breuitas seruetur.
We mislike also the length of a Leiturgie which cloyeth the Minister
prolixitate and multitudine precationum quotidie recitandarum and which must
not be omitted for study to preach, or be shortened to have time for
preaching. The former joins against our own Law, which permits to a
student of Divinity which does preach the omission of the weeke-dayes prayer.
which that axiom of the papists Durant. de rit. lib. 3 c. 23. sect. 6
melius est exse orare quam studere and legere. and maledictum studium propter
quod pretermittitur diuinum officium: to which the patrones of the ceremonies
lean to much. The second is against the old Bucer. in Censur. page 455.
rubric of King Edward communion book: propter concionem ad populum. etc. For
a Sermon or for some other just cause the Minister shall as he will himself,
omit the Letanie; the creed. etc. and it joins with an other position of
papists: Duran. de rit. lib 3. ca 5. sect. 5
Diutnum officium clerici recitare debent perfect, and nullus Minister Council.
Toletan. 7. cap. 2. 1 Cor. 1.17. Act 6.4.
vel sacerdos cum coeperit, imperfecta officia prasumat omnino relinquere. Now
we find that even Baptism it self must be omitted rather then preaching
should be hindered, that the attendance of the poor themselves must be left,
that a Preacher may the better give himself to the word. So that we need not
to speak of Council. Roman. sub Grego. 1. can. 1. decret distinct, 92. cap. 2
Gregory, who commands to give over singing for the study of preaching, or
of Philip. Mornae. de Eucharist. lib. 1. ca. 4
Hierom that first cut short the lessons (when whole books were read in order
before) that so there might be time for preaching. or of the Council that
Council. Colonies. page 2. c. 12
commands the Church-musicke be omitted rather the^ preaching should be
strai^ned, which our And. Will. let. contro. ^3. quest. 7 Harmon. confess.
obserua sec 15 obseruat. 2
Divines approve. Know we not the length and multitude of Collects was first
brought in, to fill up the Lambert. Marty. vid. Whitak. cont. Dureum. li. 8. pa.
726.
room of preaching? even as the 7. Canonical hours brought in by Pelagius, or
by Sabinian, thrust out the reading of the Cypr. de Valera. in vita. Sabin.
Bible? so that a Breuiarie is to be found in all the Cells of the papacy,
which now is termed the Catholics book, where a Bible is not to be found,
which they term the book of hereticques?

#Sect. 8. That the Ceremonies controversed, hinder the word in whole.
Moreover, these ceremonies controuersed hinder the preaching of the word in
whole, Sect. 8.
whereof no maruaill. For whereas they arose in barbarous times out of a want
of preaching, either they see they must scant it still or loose their
possession: for they know too well, Salust. in lugurth.
Regna seruantur ijsdem modis, quibus parantur. Now their first hinderance is
by their strife and burden, even as they who write of the impedimentes that
hinder from the Ministry, write down these two for special ones: Andre.
Hipper. de sacr. stud. non deserend. p. 152
A too rigide exaction of certain troublesome traditions: and the observation
of certain unprofitable ceremonies, to which in many places they are tied
which are set over charges. and then Ibid. p. 140
An heat of differences and diversities in judgment about jurisdiction, about
rites or ceremonies, or the like. It being so, the present ceremonies must be
abolished, because Ibid. fo. 23 Math. 9. vlt.
occasions that deter from the ministry, must very carefully be weeded out:
and all means possible brought in place that may thrust (I say thrust) into
the Vineyard. Tripartit histor. lib. 7. cap. 8.
Valentinian rejoiced when he heard that Ambrose was made a Minister, whom he
before had made a Praetor, and praised God for it. The like rejoicing spirit now
to see many enter into the ministry of the word, if it were in all men, how
would the Cross and Surplice be handled, the two Gilliadites that keep the
passages of our Church to stay (if not stabbe) every able and worthy scholar
that will not pronounce their Shibboleth, Judge. 12.6.
and dance roundly after the pipe of their subscription. Alas that ever such
sworn servaunts to the man of sin, should be made porters of Christ his
house. or that the keys should be committed unto them to open and shutt, who
cannot longer stay in office then whiles the keys of heavenly knowledge are
taken from the people away. So Bucer, Bucer. in Censur. ca. 2. page 458 and de
re vestiar. page 706.
The Ceremonies and the preaching of the word do mutually, for the most
part, expel one another. where knowledge prevayleth, through the preaching of
the Gospel, there the love of them withers, and where the love of these
prevayle, there knowledge decays. Who can express the good that one good
Preacher is able to do (through Gods blessing) for the spreading of his
glory: for the building of Christ's kingdom; for the gathering of the
Saints, and for the comforting of the called. On the other side, what loss is
there even in one able preacher turned to some other course of life: and how
irrecouerable? For it is a plague of all plagues, when Ministers want: a
judgment of all judgments, when in the want of a Church already Satan is
suffered to trompe hindrances in their way, who are able to make supply. And
seeing God (the only Father of a Prophet) enableth not without the means of
long study and education when he sends any, 1 Samuel 12.10
and is provoked to send no more when those whom he has fitted already, are
spurned out, what hope is there now of our Church, 2 Cron. 36.15.
when Gods wrath is likely to kindle because his Messengers are refused: and
when the contempt of his great grace rising early and sending to us, because
he has compassion on us and on his holy habitation amongst us, grows up to
so full a measure as that there seems to be no remedy. Now this abuse and
refusing is committed in our Church by the subscription in the highest degree:
which has put thee (O England) to the loss of preachers, thou know not how
many. O take up a lame^tation ye that love Syon over the many that are gone
over, some to Gallen, some to Justinian, some to Littleton, whom we might long
since have seen in Moses chair, had not the subscription like the blade of a
fiery Cherubin kept them out. And can we see the Harpes of the Sanctuary
hanged on the Willowes: the silver Trumpettes of the Temple hanged up like
Trophies on the Walls of these arts, and not curse the Cross and Surplice,
by whose treason they are lost? Sure, since the word preached is the tree of
life, these Ceremonies in that they do hinder preaching, are as badd And^.
Hipper. de sacr. stud. non deserend. page 22. 23.
as the serpent, and bring in all manner of evil into the world: error,
wickedness, Atheism, Papisme, blindness, darkness, and an utter desolation of
soul and body. He that does Digest. li. 47. tit 14. de abiges.
abigere but alienum pecus invite domino, is held worthy of most sharp
punishment. What indignation (then) from the Lord do these Ceremonies in
justice deserve, that drive from his service many and many worthy Ministers,
which he with long and much preparation had bredd and brought up to his work.

#Sect. 9. That the Ceremonies with their subscription, shut out good
sheepheardes, suffers and foster byrelings, ignorance, plurality, and
nonresidencie.
SEcondly, as the Ceremonies with their subscription hinder the preaching of
the Sabbath by shutting out good Preachers, Sect. 9.
so do they hinder it by opening the door to hirelings, idle and Idol
shepheardes, and by suffering, yea fostering of them when they are in. There
are found in an old manuscript certain verses made in King Petitio.
Lollardorum. ad H. 5. manuscr.
Henry the 5. his days, when he conjoined France and England.

Rex ne curet mundi sonum
Mundus vocat malum bonum
Dicat Coeli vox de eo
Regna iuncta iunxit Deo.
Tum vos tandem muti canes
Puerorum Christi panes
Quos voratos nunc tenetis
Suffocati euometis.
Tum qui verbo sunt Sodales
Erunt etiam facto tales
Nunc in Clero hi sunt oues
Illi a Basane boues.
Sunt Aselli, sunt and apri
Pardi, Vulpes, Lupi, Capri,
Romanostram in ruinam
Hic egessit hanc sentinam.
Christus dixit quodam loco
Vos non sic: nec dixit ioco.
Dixit suis; ergo isti
Cuius sunt? non certe Christi.
This happy purging of the Church now at the instant of a more happy
conjunction of kingdoms then that of King Henry the fifth, what one thing
has hindered more then the unhappy and wretched ceremonies: loath to part
company from this drove of their own country cattle, for that ever since
they came forth of Rome together, they have enterchaunged mutual help for
conjoyning Antichrists kingdom. In consideration hereof we digest easily the
doom of some who demand of us, why we bend not our selves rather against the
Idol and doumbe ministry, Bucer. (...) re vestiar. page 706.
which are the very sinnowes of Antichrist, which once if they were cut of, the
Geremonies which are but shadows, must needs vanish of themselves. For it is
not out of the ignorance of Attila his policy, Carol. Sigon. de occidentall.
imperio: lib. 13.
Contemnentes leaves Romanoru^ acies Alanos Gothosque invadite, his. n. tanquam
neruis earum praesectis totum corpus ad terram collabatur necesse est, that we
do this: but for that we see these Roman troops of the co^trouersed
ceremonies do so gaurd the strong Garrisons of the forsaid ministry in which
the sinowes of Antic. lie both on the right hand and on the left, that unless
these be first quited the place, we cannot drive out the other. Therefore ar
they most obstinat enemies to the preaching of the Sabbath, since even the
armorie of Rome it self, yields weapons sufficient against this unworthy
ministry. For what their Canon Law it self Decret. p. 1. distinct. 49. ca.
2.
caecum animal offert, qui ordinat indoctum in loco docti, magistrumque facit,
qui vix discipulns esse poterat. Claudum offert qui lucra terrena quaerentem
locat, vtpote pedem in diuersa ponente^ vnum in diuinis alterum in carnalibus
cui potest inferri illud de libro Regum vsquequo claudicatis in duas parts?
Languidum offert qui vitiosum habet pro religioso, qui tardum and pigrum
probat. Has it not an whole Ibid. disti. 48. ca. 2.
treatise against the admitting of raw Divines that want experience, that want
knowledge: and does it not compare them unto green timber which in the end
lays the whole building in the ground? Against pluralities it speaks thus:
Decret. p. 2 cause 19. q. 3. ca. 3.
sed and hoc necessario instituendum diligimus, vt plures ecclesiae vno
presbytero non committantur, quia solus per totas ecclesias officium non valet
persoluere. and whereas there be diverse places that are not able to maintain a
Pastor, it commands that such places be united to other parishes. Again,
Ibid. cause. 13 ca. 1.
Ecclesias singulas singulis presbyteris dedimus. again, Ibid. cause. 16 q. 1.
ca. 38.
satis incongruum est, si cum vnum ex his praesui magnitudine diligenter quis
non possit explere, ad vtrunque iudicetur idoneus. Again, the church is the
wife of the minister, and therefore in Ibid. cause. 21 q. 3. c. 4.
vnaquaque ecclesia, vnus praesbyter esse debet. if he have more churches then
one, it is a polygamie. Lastly, Decret. p. 1. distinct. 89. cap. 1.
Nulli quantumlibet exercitatae personae duo simul officia committantur:
singula ecclesiastici iuris officia singulis quibusque personis singulatim
committi iubemus. What their Popes? Gregor li. 1 epist. 33
Gregory denies the minister to be sent of God, or to be able to beget faith,
that is not able to preach. o Damasus compared Non-Residentes that set others
in their charges, unto harlots that put out their children to Nurse, that they
may give them selves to lust. Clemens the fourth, having an Nephew that had
three prebendes, he took away two of them, affirming that he was resolved
Genebrad li 4 in ^n. 1271.
acquiescere Deo non carni and sanguini. Idem in an. 1363.
Innocent the sixth could not abide Non-residents, and compelled them to go
home to their charges. Pius secundus has these Apothegmes, Plarin. in Pio
secund
indoctus Episcopus asino comparandus: corpora mali medici: animas imperiti
Sacerdotes occidunt. What their Councills? Io. Molan. Theolog. practic.
tractat. 5. cap. 13.
Quoniam Ecclesiasticus ordo pervertitur and auaritiae fomentum praebetur, cum
vnus plurium sinitur occupare officia clericorum, salubriter post complures
sacrosanctos Canones a Synodo Tridentina cautum fuit, vt vnicum singulis
ministris beneficium conferatur. What their Cardinals? The choice Ioh. Sleid.
lib. 12.
Cardinals that were selected by Paulus tertius, for reformation, were
pictured by Luther with long fox tails sweeping up and down the house, and
raising more duste then ridding: yet even these can freely cry out of the old
ground; beneficia sunt incompatibilia, and protest a desolation to the Church,
if pluralities were not redressed. What their Universities? when pluralities
first arose, Hipper. de sacr. stud. non deserend pa. 122.
grauissime de ijs disputatum est vt memorat qui historiam congessit
inscriptione fasciculi temporum ciciter annum 1050. semper autem optimi quique
definierunt nullo modo ferendum, vt quis diuersarum Ecclesiarum prouentus
recipiat. Io. Crisp. in an. 1056
The University of Paris was then of only account, which did condemn
pluralities. Whereas Genebrad cronolog. in an. 1237
Genebrard adds, si vnum sufficeret, he adds it to salve the practice of
his own time. what their Writers? That great Parisiens. de vitiis p. 4 ca. 21.
Parisiensis has a great Treatise against pluralities, and he affirms
amongst other things, that he that lets out his benefice to an other, is
like to a man that marieth a wife, and then sets some other man to begett
issue for him. Dominic. Asot. de justice. and iure li. 10. q. 3. art. 1, 2, 3.
Dominicus Asoto condemns plurality and Nonresicencie by the law of Nature,
by the law of God, by Councills, and by Fathers. not omitting to cite that
sentence out of Damasus, that was before alleged. Claudius Claud. Espehe. in
Timoth.
Espencaeus writes, that they who serve God and his church by others not by
them selves, shall be saved also by others and not in their own persons.

It were too long to set down the speeches of other papists about this point:
therefore I refer my self to their several treatises against Non-Residencie
and Plurality especially these: Alphonsus de Castro de puniendis haereticis.
lib. 3. cap. 3.4.5. Caranza de necessitute. Residenc. Ministrorum. Ruffinus in
praxi beneficiortim, Pet. Alciac. de re sorn^. cap 2. Iacobus de Vitriac.
histor. Occident. lib. 2. cap. 30.
part 8. tit. de dispensat. ad plura beneficia. Duaren. de sacr. ministerijs.
lib. 8. cap. 5. It is written of Genebrar. lib. 4. in an. 1503.
Georgius. Amboesius, although he were a Cardinal and a Legate of France, yet
that he contented him self vnico Rothomagensi Sacerdotio absque vllis
Abbotijs, and is thus commended Vir antiqua virtute and fide, nondum
conscientijs ad Sacerdotiorum poligamiam prostitutis. One of the papists
Poets (on the other side) takes this boldness to him self against the
ignorance and idleness and epicurisme of the Clergy of his time, Ma^cel.
Palingen. lib. 9.
proh pudor hos tolerare potest Ecclesia porces: du^ taxat ventri, veneri,
somnoque vacantes* But we live in the times of which Aventin. annal Boiorum.
praefac.
Auentinus (speaking of the negligence, ignorance, and riot of the Clergy)
such is the misery of these times, that we may not speak that we think, nor
think that we speak. Our Hyper. de sacr. stud. no^ deseren. pa. 121.
Writers heretofore could call these men the uomica and Carcinomata of the
church, but now if we commend with Genebrard the conscience, that brooketh not
a polygamie in benefices we are enemies to the church, if we speak like
Palingenius against the riot of Non-Residents and Pluralities, we are held
enemies to the Law. By this means there hasteneth apace upon the land what
was long ago fore-prophecied: Some of you (quoth Act and monu. histor cius. p.
1355.
May. Rogers holy martyr) to his fellows in Newgate, shall live to see the
Gospel again restored in this land. Commend me to my brethren then, and tell
them from me, that if Mass-priestes and ignorant ministers be not displanted,
and the congregations furnished with able Pastors, their end will be worse
then ours. What? worse then theirs? then must it be more then lamentable. Pars.
in conversion of Engl. pa. 2 ca. 12. sect. 37.
Parsons recording this prophecy, says, Rogers threatened this desolation, if
his and Hoopers plot t were not followed different from that of Crammers and
others. From this mouth have our brethren borrowed their exprobration, when
they say all our sturring is to have our own plott; all our difference,
because we cannot have what we will: but willing to have the remouall of
subscription and of ceremonies. For the remouall of a doumbe mininisterie, we
shall (I trust) when God rises to judgment, feel the less what we will
not, the more that we will this now, according to his holy will.

#Sect. 10. That the ceremonies controversed, hinder preaching, shutting out
the Preachers, and putting the light under a bushel.
THirdly, these ceremonies controversed hinder the preaching of the Sabbath, in
that they lay wast the chair of Moses, and thrust out good preachers, for the
thrusting in of which we are willed to pray and to do our best endeavors. It
is written of the ancient destruction of Britain that this was the forrunner
of it, Beda histo gent. Anglor. lib. 1. cap. 14.
Odiu^in veritatis professores tanquam subuersores, omnia tela and odiu^in hos.
It is written Commentar. de stat. relig. in Gall. in Carol. 9.
of the Massacre in France, that the forrunner of it was, a delight in a
tickling and in a pleasing kind of preaching, joined with a loathing of those
that preached simply, purely, powerfully and sharply against sin. It is
written by one of our writers thus, Hyper. de sacr. stud. non deserend. p. 243
when God does mean to destroy a society or a commonwealth, he puts out
good and wise men, and suffers ungodly and unwise men to prevail in the same,
speaking of preachers disgraced or degraded. The application hereof unto our
times I leave to the wise, let him consider whether in the putting out of
preachers, the diuill does not now as of old bend himself against the
pastors, Cypri. lib. (...) i. 3.
vt in grege^ atrocius grassetur? If it be so, what evil did our church
deserve of them who at the first set up subscription, to the putting down of
preachers? For whom (I trust) there will be one day renewed the law of Theodosius
and Valentinian: Theodoret. histor. lib. 4. ca. 8.
Nostrapotentia vbique edixit nequis persequatur, neque exagitet, neque irritet
operarios Christi. This if any think may be done subscription remaining, he
forgets how it has been fleshed ever since the first years of
Elizabethes reign. Then fedd the flocks quietly every one in his place, when
it came into the heart of the ceremonies not well purged from their ancient
Roman pride, to advance themselves over the preachers of the land, to try
their power upon them. Here, when some Mordecayes could not bow nor find
quiet in their conscience to honor such Agagites, they got them horns
wherewith they pushed toward the East and toward the South, and thrust with
side and shoulder, till many worthy Pastors were strooken, and great flocks
scarred. This was (in comparison) the prima labes of our Church. which the
less it was regarded at the beginning, the more it got strength according to
that Axiom of August confess. lib. 9 cap 8.
Augustines, Qui modica contemnit, paulatim decidit. which while a Council.
Toletan. 8. ^an. 9
Council repeateth, it puts in [minima] in steed of [modica] qui minimo
despicit, paulatim decidit: that which another Council enlarges even unto the
danger of very great evil in the end, Council. Ma^scolnens. circa temp. Pela.
^. can. 1^.
Solent and minima paulatim despect in malum magnum trahere The ceremonies are
trifles and small matters (men say) but we see with our eyes they do great
hurt. What say I, they do now that they are grown to strength? when they
were but newly borne, their hurt was not little. They said to the Sun, shine
not; and to the stars withdraw your light, and did prevayle. They called for
a bushel to measure forth into the Preachers what they should preach, Math.
5.15.
and to stint them in their zeal, and it was done accordingly. The light of
the Gospel being hereupon clapped underneath a bushel indeed, so that the
people did eat their bread by weight and measure. It began also to be put
underneath a bed, Isay. 56.11.
because captiued to their bed-sides, who slept stretched upon their beds,
and delighted in sleeping. From this time downward, men rarely sanctify them
selves to be Levites: the Aarons sanctified enter into the Congregations, and
their belles sound not. Chrysostom is thrust out, and Arsatius ( proh
Nycephor. histor. lib. 13. ca. 28.
pudor quis cui) succeeds him. Homilies stand up in empty pulpins
Church-gouernours delight to enhau^ce their credit by being terrible upon their
brethren. Finally, Jordan is turned backward, and every thing grows out of
course. Who has not seen this with his eyes, and sorrowed even through the
cloud of those mistes which have been cast to cover it?

#Sect. 11. An answer to there proche of the Opposites, which is, that these
who stand for Discipline, are unlearned.
NOw the first fogge is, that they who stand for the Discipline and the
reforming of the Church, are men of no worth. There is not one learned man
amongst them: It is pity a church should be troubled with them. First, this
cannot be objected without that suspicion, Hieron. cont. Hel^id.
arbitror te veritate convictum ad maledicta conuerti. we are asses and fools
and not one learned man amongst us: which is indeed the ancient hissing of the
serpent which gave forth in like manner, the Christians are no Genebrad chron.
li. 3. in an. 406.
scholars, they have no learning in them: which constrained Hierome to write
that book of his de viris Illustribus. What is this also but the new language
of Stapleton against D. Whitakers, whom he calls an Ass, a clown, and a
fool? which our Hireon vt slip.
Writers censure as inhumane and barbarous, and fitter for women ( And Wilter.
t^rras^^lon. p. 1. pa. 22.23.
as Hierome speaks) then for scholars: especially when the adversary is
known able to make his part good against such raylers, as the churches of the
Discipline have ever been and will be able against all Bishopps in the world.
Allen and Champion give forth great words of the learning of their side,
debasing us as having no learning at all amongst us. This comparison would
rather beseem boys in the schools, then Divines in the church (says one D.
Bills. p. 1 page 5.
of our Opposits) and this vaunting of learning is fit for phariseis, unfit
for Christians. Harding obiecteth to Jewel, that he and his side are men of no
learning. he Jewel. in epist. ad Harding.
replyeth (as we do now) take from us what learning you list, we plead for
truth and not for learning: He is over well learned that bends his learning
against God. Secondly, this cannot be objected without pride intolerable, in
men whom knowledge has puffed up* even as one of our Opposits proves out of
Solomon, D. Bills. vb. sup.
let another man praise thee, and not thine own mouth what that this pride is
as the same most truly affirms: the very just reward of error. what that it
serves for nothing but to raise irrision in all foreign protestant churches
which are without the reach of that perch whereon we clap our wings and crow
without co^troulment? what that it debaseth al foreign churches; for they
being all of our opinion, we may here reply with Hieron: Hieron. cont.
Vigilant.
si omnes tecu^ fatui sunt; sapiens quis esse poterit? Howbeit the hurt of the
church is the worst. for what will this co^ceite of learning but overthrow al in
the end? as the beginnings shrewdly threaten which are these: Amand Polan. in
Dan 9 ^er. 20.
Doctrinam recte tradita^ ab antecessoribus. etc. The doctrine that has been
well delivered by our predecessors (he means Calvin and Beza) they carpe and
cauil at, by their censures, and make it suspected, always seeking the truth
but never finding it they trauill with newe-found doctrines* as if they were
with child lothing the old and ancient doctrine which they have learned. who
swel with so great a conceit of learning as that they think they are the only
men that are wise: and that other wander like shadows in comparison of them,
to whom no man is learned enough, whom no man satisfies, that they them selves
might be esteemed most learned. who seek not Disciples unto Christ but to
themselves. Hence is it that so many scifines, so many heresies have invaded
the Church: whereby (as it were with a weighty burden) she is oppressed. Some
has rather be Lutherans then Christians, they that would seem to be the
chief prelates of Evangelicall Religion what books set they forth and printe?
what broch they? the purposes and proiectes of these men, the more grateful
they are to Epicures and to the enemies of piety, so much the more bitter and
the more grievous be they to good men: as they move laughter to them; so what
can they wring from these but sobbes and sighings? Thirdly, minus est malum (as
August. cont. Academic. li. 3 cap. 8.
Augustine says) esse indoctum quam indocilem as our Opposits are unteachable.
whereas of us it may be well and truly said, we have learning enough, who have
learned the truth. Now as long as we match our Opposites in the knowledge of
the word, the vaunt of other learning is but the vaunt of a Gnosticke whose
deep learning is but the dept of Satan. Apoc. 2.24.
This I speak not against secular learning unless it swerue from the
wholesome word as does the learning of our Opposites in the controversies that
are between us. Hence it comes that their learning is like Decret. p. 1.
distinct. 37. ca. 7.
honnie, very sweet and pleasing, but unholy for a sacrifice. their knowledge
like the August. quaest Eua^ gelic. lib. 2. cap. 33. Iansenius concor. Euang.
c. 94.
husks of pescodes, sweetish in the mouth but swelling in the stomach and not
having power to feed like the bread that is in the fathers house, their
acutnes in reasoning (last of all) like the Decret. quo sup.
Cyniphes of Egypt, their pomp of words like the Froggs of Egypt, which serve
for naught but to sting the minds and to trouble the cares of men. Famous
Zozomen. hist. lib. 7. cap. 6.
Eunomies for eloquence, learning, and for sharpnes in disputing is against the
Orthodoxe, and they have not any one amongst them all but is afraid of him.
what is this to the cause? so Theodor. histor li. 5. cap. 34.
many good, great, and learned men are against Chrysostom, as that Theodores
stands amazed, and sinketh under the credit of them when he comes to write
his story: was chrysostom therefore in the wrong, his enemies in the right?
But the puritans have been ever overcome. August. Epist. 174.
Augustines Apology (in the very same reproach) shall serve our turn, facile
est vt quisque Augustinum vincat. videris vetrum veritate an clamore, non est
meum dicere: nisi quia facile est vt quisque Augustinum vincat. quanto magis vt
vicisse videatur, aut etsi non videatur, vicisse dicatur, facile est? noli
mie^dore q^om^do vincatur Augustinus qualiscunque vnus homo, sed attend potius
vtrum vinci potest Veritas, non bonum hominis est hominem vincere, sed bonum
est homini vt cum veritas vi^cat volentem, qui^ malum est homini vt cum veritas
vincat inuttam. na^t ipsa vincat necesse est: five negamen five confitentem.
Fourthly, what though we be not so learned? the more^^ are we for the Churches
and Congregations of the land which must have precept upon precept, line upon
line, here a little and there a little, thut which great learning will scorn
to do. As there be charges one under an other, so there be vessels one under
another in the Lords house (says Hyper. de sacr. stud. non desere. page 36.
one) as there are places higher and lower in the Church, so there are talents
greater or less bestowed on the Preachers (says Gualt. in Luc Homil 73.
another.) In regard whereof they who contemn the meanly learned, call the
wisdom of God into question, and wrong the mean assemblies, Gregor.
Pastoral. lib. 3 in prolog. council. Aquisgran^. cap. ^ 4.
saepe alijs officiunt, quae alijs prosunt, panisque qui vitam fortium roborat
paruulorum necat. quid sunt intentae mte^es auditorumnisi quaedam in Cytheram
tentiones tractae chor darum quae vno plectro sed non vno impulsu feriendae.
Great learning therefore boasted of, hurts: the middle Congregations of a
Church because it straineth the weak stringes to a keye too high, and cloyed
their infant-like stomachs with meat too strong: whereas mean learning will
not disdain to condescend unto the weakest weakness. Let the effect of our
ministry be examined without parcialitie: 2 Cor. 3.1.
and if the churches in which we have labored be not letters of commendation
speaking for us, we will be contented to preach and speak no more to them. Let
the Churches of our learned Opposites be surueyed on the other side, they are
such for the most part as are little profited or nothing at all, because not
fed with milk and honnie. No merueil, for it is not unknown what a windy
kind of teaching this affectation of great learning in our Opposites has
brought forth, making the Decret. page 1. distin. 43. c. 1
Preacher unclean like one that does pati fluxu^ seminis, because the seed of
the word that he sows begets no issue, and making our Auditors like those
of the Iudiens, where one does mulgere hircum, another does supponere cribrum,
because Th. Morton. Apolo. page 1. lib. 2 cap. 18.
naught is understood. and our preaching to a sacrifice that has tortum nasum
and is misshapen, because not shaped to the hearers proffit: qui enim ea docet
quae ab auditoribus non valent intelligi non adeorum vtilitatem sed ad sui
ostentationem facit. Decret p. 1. distinct. 43. cap. 5.
And seeing Decret. ibid distin. 59. cap. ^.
rarum est (...) qu^d magnum est the preaching of great learning will make
preaching rare: for great learned Preachers are thinlie sown, and great
learned preaching bringht forth seldom (as it is in the proverb) vnum pario,
sed leonem, great learned sermons also, must be strawbery Sermons, against
which Latymer cried out so much. Fifthly. A life unspotted in the world, a
conversation wanting covetousness, a sober carriage free from ambition and from
seeking of great things, Ier. 45.5.
does ever in the Church more good, then great learning in great men which for
the most part is accompanied with great vices contrary: Howsoever, experience
shows that God does bless the labors of the paynefull Minister (though his
learning be but mean) so that he bringth in a greater harvest for the most
part, then he that stands upon his learning. This he does to have the glory
to himself. 2 Cor. 4.7. 1 Cor. 1.27. 1 Cor. 1.17. 1 Cor. 4.20
This he does to confound the wise and learned. This he does to show the
power of his Cross, which eloquence and affected learning does evacuate. This
he does to show the power of the spirits evidence, and how spiritual his
working is in them that be called. Last of all, This he does to build up the
faith of his chosen, that it might not depend on the learning of me^ but on his
own wisdom. Cor. 2.4.5
For these causes it often falls out, what fell out once at the Council of
Nice Ruffin. histor. Ecclesiastie. lib. 1. cap. 3
where a Christian of no great lerning conuerteth one learned with whom all the
learned Bishops could do no good vt oslenderet Deus (says the story). etc.
that God might show that his kingdom consists not in words but in power,
even as the convert himself acknowledged. Hearken (says he) O ye learned men,
as long as the matter went by words, against words, I opposed words again. and
that which was spoken I ouerthrewe by the art of speaking: but when in stead of
words power proceeded out of the mouth of the speaker non p^terant resistere
verba virtuti, nec hom^ aduersari potuit Deo. The like fell out before
Constantine. Soxomne. histor. lib. 1. cap. 17.
Alexander Bishop of Constantinople: vita magis quam doctrina conspicuus,
converted a man famouslie learned, whom the learned could not persuade. Non in
dialectica complacuit Deo saluum facere populum suum, regnum enim Dei in
simplicitate fidei est, non in contentione sermonis. Decret. p. 1. distinct.
37. cap. 6.
Sixthly, I think our heuiestand hardest adversaries will not deny, but we are
likely to do more good then either a Non-resident, that preaches not at his
charge, unless he dropp now and then a shower which never makes fruitful,
Heb. 6.
because the rain must often come upon the earth before it be able to bring
forth fruits: meet for their use by whom it is dressed, or then the doumbe
dog which is not able to preach at all: whom notwithstanding they suffer still
to reward if not his creeping yet his capping to the Cross. They shall not
need to degrade us as Rusticus was degraded once: Decret. p. 1 distinct. 85.
cap 1
Quia psalmos ignorant, we have as much learning as their Canon Ibid distin.
38. cap. 6.
Law requires of a Bishop himself we do omnibut modis psalterium noscere
and in promptu habemus legere scrutabiliter and non transitory diuinam
scripturam and for that purpose for the most part we have the knowledgs of
the tongues which [many] of our Opposites want. At the least we have the
priests knowledge, we Ibid cap. 5
scann our communion book, the liber Sacramentorum we are skilled in the
Computus, we know the Psalterium, and we can fetch the homilias per circulum
anni Dominicis diebus and singulis festiuitatibus aptae. Alas what hard happ is
ours, others can be held white sons that have the learning to do this, we
have this learning (and somewhat over and above) and yet we can find no
favor. Luc. 9.50.
But blessed be he which que^cheth not the smoking flax, but does at this
power speak from heaven in our behalf unto our Governor: forbid them not.
what though we be the feet? Leo. 9. in epist ad Michael. Constanti. epi^cop.
Tho. Morton. Apolo. page ^. lib. 5. cap. 19.
frustra matris familias caput et faciem magnifieat, qui minimos filiorum eius
impugnas, tamquam digitos pedum illius conculcat. The head, says Ambrose,
cannot be without the feet, nor the superior without the inferior ferrum potest
quod non potest aurum.

#Sect. 12. That the fault why faithful Ministers are cast out of their
Ministry, lies not upon them selves.
THe second excuse brought for the ceremonies, Sect. 12.
and their proceedings against the Preachers, casts the whole fault on them.
The ministers are to blame (say some of our Opposites) who leave their
ministry for such trifles: if they would be ruled, what needed deprivation?
First of all, it is not nothing that this objection: Ecclesia non est deserenda
comes from Wittenbergh, infected with the Adiaphorisme: when now the students
had ceased to Flaccus. Illyric. in li de Adiaph. p. 3. in solut Argume. 1
hortari pios ad constantiam vt tales viros omnino facere oportuisset, and had
begone to languefacere pios, and labefactare totas Ecclesias, and to
confirmare impios by an yielding to the ceremonies which the Interim did
command. But this University followed the direction of Philip Melancthon
(will our Opposites say) whom who can in this cause remember without that
sighing of King David, how was the mighty overthrown? Council. Philip.
Melantho^ ad Eccles. Marchiaca.
discernenda est confessio priuata (says he). etc. A man must put a difference
between his own private confession, and between the counsel which he is to
give, to others, that be weak, and not like to himself. Laurentius did well
that he preferred death before the edict of Decius, for the delivery of the
Churches money, for his confession was made the more glorious by this occasion,
and such a celsitude of spirit, was helped by a singular motion of the holy
Ghost. Another more fearful would have rather delivered the money then have
lost his life, and his infirmity had been excusable. here (therefore) I will
prescribe nothing to the strong who are resolute to show an illustrious
confession upon their own danger, even on every light occasion. Again, let
us remember that in a place near Basil there was one burnt for eating flesh,
although we justly detest the cruelty of the Judges and worthelie praise the
constancy of the good man in his confession, yet he had not done amiss if
he had avoided this danger. and certainly no man may bind others to throw
themselves into danger upon the like occasion. Again, I am not ignorant multa
horride and stoice dici, seeing the beginnings of a chaung do confirm the
adversaries, indifferent things are not to be accounted small. This hard opinion
if any good will embrace let him embrace it with his own danger and not with the
danger other me^, speaks good Melancthon in these words? shall I think it my
duty to confess, and give others contrary counsel not to confess together
with me? may a man do well to suffer in things indifferent, and others do well
in not suffering for them? might Laurence have delivered the money and not be a
traditor, as the church called those that delivered either books or goods
unto the persecutors? sure thy good mind I easily acknowledge, but I cannot
see how thy counsel may be good, and speaks great Melancton in these words?
then let the soul of him that hears them advance it self to greatness of
courage. for how ca^ he animate us more to suffering then by comparing us with
Saint Laurence and with the Martyr that dyed for a thing that was more
indifferent then these things are for which we stand, or shame more those
that suffer not with us then beholding them weak, and wanting that celsitude
of mind vpheld by Gods spirit which willingly embraces that danger which
others will not venture on, but are contented to say unto us: take you the
crown from us. A straung thing, though he doubled his own spirit: Idem. in
Epist ad Christop. Carolou.
fortassis sum ingenio seruili, and much grieved at the banishment of honest
men, put out of their ministry about the Interim: yet the fig-leaued excuse
wherewith he lulled his conscience a sleep: Ibid.
pax^st seruanda, doctrina and inuocatio non est impedienda and considerandum
est quid mediocribus pastoribus persuaderi possit not only drew him largiri
multa and multa dissimulare which were amiss, but also to yield to all the
ceremonies of the Interim and to leave the Church to the government of popish
Bishops Conrad. Schlusselb. lib 13. page 490.
etiam in ipso actu persecutionis conslitutis if we may believe what is written
of him. If we may believe also what is set forth in his name it drew him even
to protest touching Rome her self Phili. Melanth. in Epist. Theophi. Orato.
parati sumus obedire Romanae Ecclesiae modo. etc. and touching the Pope
himself, Romani Pontificis authoritatem and vniuersam politiam Ecclesiasticam
reuerenter colimus modo nos non abijciat Ramanus Pontisex, yea touching the
popish doctrine it self: Nullam aliam ob rem plus odij sustinemus in Germania
quam quia Ecclesiae Romanae dogmata summa constantia defendimus. For mine own
part I can hardly believe that this epistle was his own, but if it were his
fall was fearful: and the pretense of keeping the ministry and of doing
good, and the preserving of the Churches peace, is a pretense much Conrad.
Schlusselb. quo supra. page 5^5.
to be feared, seeing it turned the heels upward of this great servant of
the Lord, and who can but fear where such a Cedar fell? Velleius. Paterculus.
has there not place here even what an heathen man advises: vbi semel a recto
deerratum est in praeceps peruenitur?

#Sect. 13. The calumny of peeuishnes and foolishnes imputed to the Ministers,
for not receiving Capp and Surplice, is answered.
SEcondly, Sect 13.
whereas we are censured as pecuish or foolish for leaving our ministry for
a capp or a surplice, beit known there are things more material whereat we
stick. as the subscription (we know) is larger, then a surplice though never
so wide sleeued. Howbeit, why should Christ be again exposed to laughter in a
white garment Illyr. de Adiaph p. 2.
as Illyricus says he was by the surplice in Germany in the time of the
Adiaphorisme there? Did not the Germane divines at that time disclaim that
Adiaphoristicall principle, Conf. Eccles Mansfeld. aedit. an. 1560.
Rem paruam esse de linea vest? others exclaim against the depriving of
profitable pastors, Confess il. Iustris prin. cip. and Ducum Saxo^. aedit. 1560.
tantum propter sordidam lineam vestem? others proclaim, that Flac. Illyric.
quo sup.
plurimae Ecclesiae sunt in quibus conscientiae and externa forma Ecclesiae per
paruas mutationes vt per paruam vestem misere turbatae sunt. And when the
divines of Misnia asked counsel in this question, whether they were to leave
their places or put on a surplice the answer has first this Lamentation
Respon. N Galli and Plac. Illyri. ad quorun. Mis^e. con^ionatores literas apud
Conrad Schlusselburg. lib. 15. p. 641
Quale obsecro est. etc. What a thing I pray you is even this, most cunning
invention of the Devil about the white garment? which if it be resisted, there
is a small thing [to the seeming] stood upon: and so the Godly preachers fall
into dislike and hatred, and are thrust out with every man's good leave: as if
they were removed upon just causes, but denied conformity out of a seditious
spirit, and out of a desire to contend. but if they yield unto this garment,
the^ open they a beginning and entrance to greater chaunges. Then this
reprehension. It is Page 641.
evident that those preachers do willingly deceive themselves who receive the
Exceptum, and after forge unto themselves I know not what interpretations.
that they do not this for the Pope but for the Church, and that therefore they
still preach against popish errors; and that they will not have men's
consciences to be bound to these ceremonies as if they were worships, and
therefore they do them one day and omit them another: for they know for what
purpose this new Interim is pressed: they know also that howsoever some such
liberty may be granted the^ at the first for some few weeks, yet that
within a while that odious song will be chaunted to them: Non si^ut tibi
libet sed ad verbum: this although they know well, yet wilfully they will not
know it: and give miserable counsel unto the Church: Nihil adhuc mali adesse,
that so the beginning of the disease may not be resisted. Then this Page 644.
admonition. Again, we answer we do not see how they are likely to leave
other things free unto you seeing they will not promise you to be contented
with a white Garment. Page 645.
Often does Aristotell beat upon this point, we must take heed of small
chaunges, because they make way to great. therefore in our judgment it is not
only the white Garment that is aimed at, but by it the preparing of a passage
unto greater evils. Then Page 646.
this refutation, whereas you say this limen shirt is not now the Popes
Vesture but the Churches Garment, Paul commaundes 1. Cor. 10. that we should
diligently consider what the wicked do think of the Idolothites: therefore
it excuses not that it is your Prince, and state, and people, that do require
the same things of you which the enemies of Christ do, for their own
tranquillity sake and for the avoiding of dainger: for whosoever they be that
are the procurers and promotors of these chaunges although they be learned,
holy, and sound in the religion, yet these things do not therefore cease to
be the characters of Antichrist their chief and sovereign Lord and last of
all this Ibi. p. 64^.
counsel* we would have you ask of them seeing they are such wise men, that
they would show what great and weighty causes they have thus to trouble the
Church of Jesus Christ about a white Garment? whether they do know that they
be able to appease the diuill, Antich. and the wicked world by these means? Or
to effect some excellent discipline and order by this divine vesture, or what
at length is that singular excellent good thing which they are sure to obtain
by the same?

#Sect. 14. The calumny of leaving the ministry, is answered, and the
ignorants and others, who subscribe, to abide in the ministry, are by the way,
challenged and convicted.
THirdly, it is a ieste that we leave our ministeries: whom Angels, men, and
all the world see thrust out against our wills. Decret pa. 2. cause. 15. que. 1.
c. 10
No^ habent crimen quae inferuntur, reluctantibus: and what can there be more
against our heart then the loss of that which is the comfort of our lives:
August. epist. 204.
Quis nescit nec damnari hominem nisi merito malae voluntatis, nec liberali
nisi habue^it bonam voluntatem. have we a good will to go out of our
ministry? So have we to go to Golgotha too. indeed we are in Ambrose his
cause. Decret. p. 2 cause 25. que. 8. c. 3.
Fugere and relinguere Ecclesiam non soleo, resistere nec possum, nec debeo.
for unless our Opposites would have us resist, thereby to show our selves
willing to keep our ministry, I see not what they can require more then we
have done, what goodly means have we omitted which are lawful for us in the
fear of the Lord? have we not sued and that with tears? have we not written
and that with invincible reasons? Have we not made our appeals which against
all equity are bardd? have we not also kept possession until by force we have
been pulled out? but we will not conform to stay in? No, nor to be preferred
neither, which has been offered unto some of us, who think it our duty to
reply with Beneuolus: Carol. Sygon. de occidental. Imper. lib. 9. fol. 200.
Quid mihi pro impietatis mercede, altiorem promittis gradum? hunc ipsum quem
habeo auferte dum integram fidei conscientiam tuear. this spoken Protinus
Cingulum ante pedes Imperatricis abiecit. which though we imitate in laying
down not only our benefices but all that we have at the feet of our reverent
Fathers, yet cannot we be said voluntarily, wilfully, sinfully to give over
our ministry, no more then he his office. Fourthlie, it is not the Ioachim.
Westphal. in explicat. sentent. e duob. mal. minimum.
leaving of the ministry that is a sin, but the causes why, the end
wherefore the circumstances wherein, that makes the leaving of it sinful.
which we have described John 10. Now the leaving of the flock condemned there,
is the leaving of the hireling for his gain, we if we leave our flocks it is
not only to our great loss, but also to our utter undoing. Again, the
leaving of a flock condemned there, is the leaving of an evil shepherd that
flies danger, we if we leave our flocks, leave our security and peace
withal, and throw our selves into a sea of troubles. The leaving of the
flock condemned there, is the leaving of a careless shepherd: who leaves
them to the claws of the woulfe: we (if we leave our flocks) we do it to
keep them by our example from the woulfe and from all liking of his
faire-shewes whereby he lies in wait to deceive. The Council worthily
condemns them: Council. Aquisgran. sub. Ludo. nic. 1. c. 17.
Qui parere vtilitati proximorum in predicatione refugiunt for the ease of a
private life, for the sweetness of private study and for the quietness and delight
of contemplation, whereas our Lord that he might proffit many by preaching,
came down even from heaven it self, from the boosom of the Father. The canon
Law worthelie condemns them: Decret. p. 2. cause. 21. ques. 3. c. 1.
Qui seipsos a ministerijs sanctis per desidiam seperant by taking themselves
to secular businesses for filthy lucre sake. Cassiodorus Tripartit. histo. li.
c. 11
reports of diverse that they left their stations in the ministry and
conveyed themselves, into woods and deserts, because of the difficult times of
the Church in which they lived. amongst whom I know not whether I may reckon
Suppleme. Cronic. in. Valen.
Hilarious of Arles who is said to have left his charge and to have gonein to an
heremitage for his quietness and for his private speculations. Such men who can
excuse? for they do Decret. pa. 2. cause. 7. q. 1. c. 46
eligere vacationem ab episcopatus laboribus, and appetere in silentio at que
otio vitam degere magis quam in his quae sibi co^missa sunt permanere. whereas
it is Ibid. c. 47.
pernitiosum pro re tam in tranquilitate nauim deserere, they leave their ship
committed unto them even in fluctibus which is more wicked and more dangerous.
At such a time they should Ibid. c. 48.
ex aduerso ascendere and in die belli seipsos murum apponere pro domo domini,
and animas suas ponere pro ouibus suis, vt exemplo suae passionis accendant
quos sermon doctrinae diutius confirmare non valent. Blame these who are blame
Hiper. de Sacr. stud. non desere^. page 169.
worthy, blame not us who in the leaving of our ministeries perform that duty
of suffering: for the avoiding of which these men are accused when they do
leave their charges. It is our ease to keep our benefices: in leaving of them
we loose that pleasantnes of that land, and that rest, for the sweetness
whereof because it is good, many lie down as Issachar did under that burden
of subscription and conformity which wring the shoulders of their consciences,
Genesis 49.14.15.
which indeed if they could tell how, they should shake off. Is it not so,
that we do now ex aduerso ascendere and oppose our selves as a wall in the
gap vt accendamus eos passionis exemplo quos sermon doctrinae diatius
confirmare non valemus? for we would continue our preaching still, but we are
not suffered, in which case with what face can our Opposites inpute any blame
unto us against their own law, which says thus: Decret. p. 2. cause. 7. ques 1.
c. 36
Aliud est mutare, aliud mutari: aliud est sponte, aliud coacte aut necessitate
transire, no^ isti mutant civitates sed mutantur, quia non sponte sed coacte
hoc agunt. quia no^ Ibid. c. 34.
ambitu nec propria voluntate faciunt: sed vi a propria sede pulsi and
necessitate coacti Fifthly, we may retorte this imputation on our accusers, who
leave their flock in staying with them in Zacharies sense. O Ido^l shepherd
who leauest the flock. Zach 12.16 and 17.
Ammonius to avoyde the ministry, cut of his right ear, which made him
incapable. Evagrius inveigheth against him, but when after being elected by
Theophilus of Alexandria, him self secretly fled away. Ammonius meeting him:
Socrat. histor. lib. 4. cap. 18.
Tueuagri (says he) etc. Thou Evagrius that did taunt at me for cutting
off of mine ear, do thou not think that God will plague thee for that for
love unto thy self, thou cuttest out thy tongue, because thou would not
take pains to use the gift that God has given thee? Sure we cut not of our
right ears but we have them (like Malcus) cut of by the sword: whereas our
Opposites many of them cut out their tongues. For either they use not their
gifts at all or they have no gifts to use, or abuse their gifts or use them
to no purpose. so according to their own distinction of a non Resident, loco,
and a no^ Resident officio, whiles we loco leave our flocks against our wills,
they officio leave them willingly to follow after their lusts and pleasures.
As for the ignorant sort amongst the^ a time will come when they will wish
they had left their ministries, for which they rail at us so loud, because
the^ they shall perceive Decret. p. 1. destin. 50. cap. 6.
satius est in inferiori habitu Domino famulari in hac vita, quam alta indebite
appetendo damnabiliter in profundum demergi. Zach. 13.5.
which if they had done with the penitent Prophet in Zachary I am no prophet,
but men taught me to be an Husbandman from my youth, then had they escaped the
wrath to come, which James denounces: be not many maislers, Iam. 3.1.
knowing that ye shall receive the greater condemnation. As for those that be
negligent amongst them, what are they else but the ill servants that hide their
talentes in the ground? yea what do they else but hide the wheat underneath
the earth, and that in the time of want (whom Solomon and Gods people curse)
until it be rotten there, Pro. 11.26.
whereby they make the^ selves guilty of as many souls as by the diligence of
some other might have been wo^ne. As for those who by their co^formitie grace
popery, and who for the upholding of their co^formitie broach many popish
points in their preaching: they in plain and open sight leave their flock,
in keeping it as they did in Flac. Illyrin lib. de Adiaphor. page 3.
Germany, who by their co^formitie to the Interim, opened the door of the
found for the wolf to enter, barked not against him: winked at the entrance of
him: yea bargained and trucked with him, giving some of the sheep in
Merchandise, to give contentement and to have peace them selves. The reason
was, because whereas the woulfe hurts none of the sheep till they assent,
these ministers by their yielding, induced the sheep to like well of him,
because they saw their Pastor came in some things to agreement with him, and
in other things did not resist him seriously as if he were an enemy. Sixthly,
Apoc. 1.16.
whereas Christ holds the stars of the Church in his right hand, whence
none can pull them against his will; it is certain that not one minister is
deprived in this land but by his sufferance and tolleration. Now he will not
tolerat the silencing of any Preacher until he be perfected like himself: and
until the work be finished unto which he did call him. Luke 13.32.
It being so, we are called from the ministry by the same that called us to
it, and the work of our ministry is ended and finished for the which we
were called. Should we in this case stay in a servile and power-lesse ministry
which he will not bless: in which we can find no comfort: and wherein we are
disabled from doing good? For we cannot discharg a good conscience, nor do our
duties as we should, which being so, why may we not lament with Gregory
Gregor. epist lib. 4. cap 78.
unhappy man that I am, what make I here in this Church? It is approved that a
Minister should leave his flock Decret. pa. 2. cause. 7. quest. 1. cap. 48.
si soluatur, provided that he leave it like a dove, quae dilectionem non
amittit sed semper gemit, and seperateth corpore non amore quibus non potest
prodesse. Are we not loosed? do we seperat so much as in dody? are not our
bodies distracted rather? ye our bowels rent and torn because we can prodesse
no longer, those bowels of ours which we desire to profit and benefit eue^ to
loss of life it felse in case we might be suffered?

It is also approved that a Minister should leave his charge Ibid.
quando subditorum est obstinata malitia, nec prodest ijs Praelatorum
praesentia, ne and illorum nequitia semper in deterius proficiat, and isti
quidem fructum amittant, quem de aliorum profectu possent invenire. Is it not
so that many of our charges are sturred up to a contempt of us? that our
Governors do disgrace us, and disable us from doing good? Is it not so, that
our ministry is wounded by manifold slau^ders, yea defiled with many
unconscionable observations in case we stay in? so that we may say with
Martyrius, Theodor. Lector. collectan. lib. 1.
populo rebelli and ecclesiae contaminatae renuntio? All these circumstances
make our leaving of the ministry much the more excusable in case we willingly
did leave it (which we do not) unless it be in this sense that we willingly
submit our selves unto the providence of the Lord, who for the present calls
us from it. Now because his mercy is great, we have confidence he will one
day return again and build up Syon. therefore we stand upon our watch to
hear what he will speak of us, and in hope wait for the time when he will
take the filthy garments away from Iehosua, Haba^. 2.1.
and cloth his priests with glory and beauty; Zach. 3.4.
and cleanse his house, and then we doubt not but that he will in mercy give us
a room amongst his servants again. When this time comes, then shall our
sufferings be in cause that we shall Cypri. lib. 3. epist. 1.
maiores redire ad Ecclesiam, for the which how ready are we eue^ at an hours
call, if the Lord call us, the Church need us, or we find in conscience we
must reenter.

#Sect. 15. That the loss of the ministry, unto the faithful Ministers
rather then to approve the Ceremonies, shall be the Lords gain also, as the
judgment of our best divines, is so to do.
SEventhly, the loss of our Ministry shall (we doubt not) be the Lords gain
and the Churches, and that many ways. The Lord shall gain glory by us, the
truth receive a patient and constant witness from us, the Church a pattern and
example to be constant in that we have taught them, and to suffer when need
requires, even as Cypri. lib. 1 epist. 1.
Cornelius when he suffered he did retundere Diaboli conatus Constantia sua,
and became pulcherrimo exemplo suis auditoribus. Flac. Illyric lib. de Adiapho.
page 3.
Christus ex Nazareth discedens. etc. Christ leaving Nazareth, and meaning to
return as soon as occasion offers it self, does not forsake that Church
but by his constant confession and exile edifyeth it, and confirms it against
the Phariseis superstition which in his preaching he had before impugned. But
if to have the more liberty and sufferance to gather his assemblies he would
have taught the doctrine of justification fearfullie, coldlie, or (as we now
speak) modestly: and have toutched the Pharisees but softly and gently and
observed their traditions, and have sought their love and good liking being
manifest enemies to the truth, then had he [forsaken indeed] both that Church
and the truth it self also. So Elias, when he fled, he did not forsake the
church, or leave it to Baalls woulfes, but by his constant confession and
sorrowful exile, he did confirm it in the truth: but if he would have
received some of Baalls ceremonies, have painted them, excused them, if he
would have spared the Baalites and reproved their abuses in general only,
and so have served the time, then had he (indeed) forsaken the church. So Paul
departing from Ephesus, and purposing to confirm the Ephesians either present
by voice, or absent by writing did not forsake that church, but by his constant
confession and affliction did confirm it. but if for peace and quietness he
would have brought into the church the vestiments, rites, Images, and other
ceremonies of Diana, or have restored the observations of the Phariseis, and
have wincked at many things, then had he forsaken (indeed) that church, and
many other infinite churches which he had built, yea all posterity. So
Athanasius choosing rather to go from his church, then to yield any thing to
the Arrians, or to come to composition with them, or to use generalities and
ambiguities in the cause that was between him and them, he did not forsake the
church, but by his constant confession and manifold afflictions and writings,
he does strenghten and confirm it to this day. When we consider these things,
as we clear our own consciences with joy from all scruple of guilty leaving
of the church, so we fill them with a trembling fear of guilty leaving it, if
we should leave our former faithfulness, and thereby leave or rather loose our
selves. Upon a false alarm of late that some had yielded, the papists cried
out, O foolish Protestants to believe your preachers any more, for their
sakes, or your religion for which ye see there is none that will suffer as we
do for ours the common people they swore they were turn-cotes that had yielded,
and that for their sakes the would neur^ believe any more in deed, preach while
they would. Neither would this frustration of our labors only follow, but a
deprivation also of former gifts, Mal. 2.9.
zeal, love, paynfulnes, joye, yea knowledge and all, until the threat were
brought upon us, I will make you also vile. The Hebrews have a proverb, Io.
Drusiu. in adag. ^ Hebraic. decur. 9. adag. 5.
Camelus cornua quaerens aures amisis: and it is spoken of Balaam, who to exalt
his horn on high by the preferrements which Balaac offered him, lost both it
and the spirit of prophecy, which was before within him. Were not we well
help up, trow ye, if for a benefice or some other preferrement, less then
that horn which Balaam sought, we should loose a better spirit of prophecy
then ever he had? a better ear bored thorough and opened, together with a
cloven tongue touched, purged, and enkindled with the coal of the Altar?
Better a desertion of the benefice then this defection from the Lord* better to
be deprived of earthly then of heavenly graces; yea better to loose earth
then heaven; a living then life spiritual. As for the Church, if any hurt come
to it by our departure ipsi viderint who are the cause (to wit) our
ecclesiastical Governors even as their own Law witnesses: Speaking of them
who are constrained to leave their charges: non ipsi in hoc peccant ( Decret.
pa. 2. cause. 7. qu. 1. c. 36. Genesis 19.
says the Canon) quoniam non sponte sed coacte hoc agunt, sed ili qui eos
persequuntur, nec ipsis episcopis hoc imputari potest sed illis qui hoc agere
cogunt. In respect of us, the hurt comes per accidens only, and we cannot
help it, who may not do evil that good may come of it, which was Loths
fault, nor yield unto a lesser sin to avoid a greater that which was Epiphan.
cont. haeres. lib 2. c. 64.
Origens. Whereas it is objected to us as once to the divines of Germany in the
broyle of the Adiaphorisme there: e duobus malis minus, Ioachim. Westphal. in
exposit. sentent. e mal. mini.
the answer has been given by them: that this holds not in malis culpae,
but in malis poenae only. Cleave we (then) without separation to that which we
know is good, and do we our duty as it becomes us, and leave we to God
the care of his Church, Council. Roman. tom. 2. pa. 282.
Deus dat successores. When Zeno had obtained a Bishop for Carthage, the
Clerici there resolved thus: Victor. de persecut. Vandalic.
si ita est interpositis his periculosis conditionibus Ecclesia Episcopum non
delectatur habere: gubernet eam Christus qui semper dignatus est gubernare.
Eighthly, and last of all: the judgment of foreign divines directs us to
this course. For in the controversy of the Adiaphorisme in Germany, the whole
church of Epistol. Hamburg. ad Philip. Melantho.
Hamborough: of Io Sleida^. lib. Illyric. lib de Adiapho.
Magdeburgh: of Io. Calui. in epist. ad. P. Mela^th.
Geneua: with diverse others, thought it the better way to depart then to
conform to the Surplice and some other popish ceremonies then imposed. Diverse
private men have written to this purpose, some of which write purposely even of
our English ceremonies. Io. Calui.
Master Calvin writing his judgment to the English Church at Franckforde,
does utterly condemn the ceremonies now controversed. Mr Theodor. Beza.
epist. 12.
Beza writing his judgment to the Ministers of England, advises them to give
over their places rather then to subscribe to the ceremonies and the rest of
the corruptions controversed, or by silence to foster them. Mr Bullinger and
Pet. Martyr. in epist. amic cuida^ in Angl.
Pet. Martyr gave advise to conform to the clothes at first, who after
perceiving what hurt came of them, reclaymed their judgment, as these words
show: At de vestibus and sacris. etc. as for the holy garments which are to
be used in the ministry, seeing they resemble a show of the Mass, and are
mere relics of popery. Mr Bullinger thinks they are not to be used least
the thing which tends to scandal be confirmed by your example. I my self,
although I was ever an adversary to the use of such ornaments, yet
nevertheless because I saw there was present danger least you should be
deprived from preaching and that perhaps there would be some hope that as
altars and Images are taken away, so also those shows of the Mass should be
removed if you and others of the ministry would do your best endeauours,
which parchaunce would not be done if another should succeed in your place,
which should not only not seek the remoual of these relics but also defend,
maintain and foster them, therefore I was the slower to persuade that you
should rather refuse the ministry then reaceaue the use of those garments.
Notwithstanding, because I have seen scandals arise which are unavoidable
therefore now I have easily condescended to Mr Bullingers Judgment. what then
these men have to the contrary in their epistles, that ought not be
prejudicial to us, since here they recante it: and in that which they wrote they
prescribed no rule to Beza. vb. sup^ and in Epistol. 23 Bullinger. in epist.
ad. N. and M.
bind: and the counsel which they gave for direction was general, only such
as left men to their own discretion touching circumstances which were
particular: Pet. Mart. in epistol. alia amico. cuid. in Angli.
tu autem qui es in ipso certamine concilia hic non expecta, valde quippe sumus
a vobis procul, in ipsa consultetis arena. And our case differs much, they
when they couselled yelding, they hoped the ceremonies might the better be
abolished by the staying of good men in the ministry, which hope is
superannuated, and they intended a forbearance and Theodor. Beza. epi 12
tolleration, whereas we are pressed, under our hands to approve them: and
this tolleration they limited also to be continued for a Idem epist 8.
while: they ever condemned the reducing of the Ceremonies controuersed into
the Churches, where they had been difused before, which thing is sought for now.

#Sect. 16. That the small estimation of preaching, under pretense to care for
praying, as the Opposites allege, is the abaddone or murdering sin of
these days, and takes away the right use of the Saboth.
THe third and last refuge is, that it is no great matter though the
proceedings of conformity have no such great care for Preachers and preaching
as we do wish, because preaching is not so much to be cared for as praying
is, a praying ministry will do well enough in a Church already stablished if
there be Preachers here and there to preach now and then, that which I may call
even the Abaddon, I mean the destroying and murdering heresy of these last
days. First, the Saboth being Council. Parisiens. lib. 1. ca. 50
insigne Christianitatis, how chaste should we keep it from all aliene
adulterations? after the example of the ancient Christians, who preserved it
pure from carnal mirth, from superfluity in feastinges and apparel, and from
strowing the ways with flowers upon this reason, Gregor. Nazianze. cont Iulia.
orat. 2.
haec enim Gentium sunt. This reason little prevayleth with this heresy, which
what broacheth it, but ea quae sunt gentium? The little power which it
ascribes to preaching, is the Swenckfeldians, the Libertines, and the
Anabaptists: for Whitaker. cont. 1. q 1. cap. 3. page 8. John. Calvin. cont.
Anabapt. art. 5.
even so hold they that the word preached, is of no great efficacy, and that
the hearing and preaching of it is not necessary, against which not only our c
writers, but our D Babing. on the Lor. pray peti. 2
Opposites are wont to inveigh. The greater care which it has of a praying
Leiturgie, proceeds from the papists, for even so hold they that the Saboth
is sanctified well enough by hearing Mass said, although there be no sermon:
which what Do Willet contro. 9. que. 8. p. 2.
sound protestant can endure? And seeing the contemner, the negligent, the
ignorant, practice that other position of papists, auditio Missae, est
praeferenda auditioni verbi, which our Thom. Morton. Apolo pa. 1. lib 2. cap.
21. Luc. 20.9.
Writers distaste so much: is this a time to spredd the infection of this
heresy to their encouragement? Secondly, this Abaddon overthrows the good
which the Church should reap by the Magistrates office, who cannot be Lord of
the Vineyard to do in it what please himself, without great wrong to Christ
the heir: who sells not the inheritance of it unto any, but lets it out
to hire only, that it may be tilled and made fruitful, which this heresy does
forbid: yea so forbids as that withal it bids the quite contrary.
Lording and plowing (said Latimer once) cannot agree, but this heresy sets
up Lording, not caring whether the plough stand still. The Cornel. Iansen.
concord Euangel. ca. 114.
Lord commands the Isa. 5.2.
stones to be cast out of his Vineyard, and a Watch-towre build: that the Marc.
11.15.17.
Oxon be thrown out of his Temple, and a pulpit erected forthwith filled: that
Math. 21.33.
a hedge be made about the Vineyard, and a Wine Press set up therein that may
continually run with wine for the comfort of his called: whereas this heresy
cries to the husbandmen, Let the stones alone in the Vineyard, Let the Oxen,
yea Asses alone in the Temple, and what needs such forwardnes of reformation,
to fill the tower with watchmen, the Temple with Preachers, the wine press
with dressed and mingled wine? There was goodness out of question of late
intended toward Gods house, but this heresy has supplanted this intention
and averted the blessing from us: by that mockage of the Council of Trent,
Pro. 9.5.
when it bound Bishopps to diligent preaching to give hope of reformation: for
we have cause (sithence nothing is done) to complain again, Number Claud.
Espencaeu. apud. Tho. Morton. Apolog. P. 1 li 1. c. 10.
ludimus in re seria vel potius decretorum specie reformationem poscentibus
illudimus? Far better fared it with the Church, when Carol Sig de regn.
Italic. lib. 5. in ann. 835
Ludouicus the second Emperor of that name, was blessed with better Bishopps.
They excused not the unpreaching ministry of those days, much less did they
maintain and defend it as do our Opposites in this their heresy. Being put
in trust by him, they took pains to find out the evils of the Church: and
when they perceived the want of preaching was the most dangerous, they
faithfully informed him of it, plainly confessing, Sacerdotum unlla est
excusatio: whereas lay men excused them selves in their not repair to sermons,
by their home Chapels of ease, they moved him to suppress those Chappells,
that so all sorts might be drawn to come to such Churches as had mayntenance
for Preachers, and Preachers accordingly laboring in them. In deed to cramme
a few Bishopps superfluousnes, is mere hypocrisy, the Church cannot be
nursed as it should, until all such high places be put down as can not have
preaching, and all such dens and chappells of ease Toletan. co^ncil 16. c. 4
Parisien. lib. 1. ca. 49 Decret pa. 2. cap. 9. quest. 3. c. 3.
be united to other Churches which cannot be Synod Aquisgranen. cap. 16. 2
chro^. 17.7 and 31.4.5.6 Nehem. 13 10.11. Malac. 310
supplied by one: until also these churches have in them maintenance for a
Preacher, and that in abundance, as the word of God enioyneth, and the
Council. Lateranen. sub. Innoc. 3. cap. 32.
practice of all ages. Thirdly, this Abaddon overthrows the ministry of the
word, by encouraging the Clergy in their dumbnes, Idleness, Nonresidencies,
Lordlines, the shames of this rich Kingdom, and blaynes of this poor Church.
It is out of this heresy, that men adventure to sue for benefices, to buy
them, all conscience and sense being quenched in them of unableness and
unworthiness, or of a true and good calling if they be worthy: against the old
and ancient Canons which thun der thus: To suffer men to sue for benefices,
Decret. p. 1. distinct. 61. cap. 5.
non est consulere populis, sed nocere, nec praestare regimen sed erigere
discrime^. Integritas enim praesidentium est salus subditorum, principatus
autem quem ambitus occupauit, etiamsi moribus atque actibus no^ offendit,
ipsius tamen initij sui est pernitiosus exe^plo: and difficile est vt bono
peragantur exitu quae malo sunt inchoata principio. Howbeit this heresy has
brought about, that many seek for church dignities, which sue for them only,
against which the Cano^ Decret. p. 2. cause. 1. que. 1. c. 28
thus: Vulnerato pastore quis curandis ouibus adhibeat medicina^? aut qualem de
se fructum producturus est cuius graui peste radix infecta est? And it is out
of this heresy also, that Bishops think they may discharge themselves by
governing, though they preach not, eue^ as they were in a manner told in the
speech that Mr Barlowe once made to them at the beginning of a Convocation.
Now it is somewhat, that this is the vomit of Bellarmine Bellarmin. de pontif.
lib. 1. c. 14.
him self, Etsi Pontifices non co^cionantur, tamen multos alios pastorales
actus exercent, ligant, soluunt, controuersias iudicant, etc. even that Maldon.
in Sun ques. 10 act. 3.5.6.
a Maldonate him self abhors it. Notarunt Hieronymus in caput 4. ad Ephesians.
and August. epist. 57. Propterea palam non distinxisse Pastores and Doctores,
quia omnis Pastor debet docere, and nomen Pastoris significat actionem
personalem, sicut nomen medici. As for the hurt which comes hence, the church
eue^ groneth already under it, which cannot be at a worse hand then when
Decret. vb. supra.
loco vltoris ipse vlciscendus is advanced in it, and they set to punish
others. who are to be deposed sooner then they that be negligent in the duty
of preaching? For the Cano^ Apostol. 58.
old canon runs thus: Episcopus non docens deponatur: whereas now these men
are advaunceth to the place of preaching and deposing, who should for their
negligence this way, be first of all deposed themselves. Whence also it
follows that none but Preachers are deposed, who should alone stay in.
Moreover it is out of this heresy, that men think it sufficient, if they
preach by others, which iumpeth again with that position of the Papists,
Bellarmi. de pontif. lib. 3. c 24.
Satis est si ista curent ab alijs praestari. And again, Idem ibid lib 1. ca.
14 Ez 44.8.
Episcopi quod per se concionando non saciunt, hoc faciunt per alios. Now God
contesteth against this setting forth of the charge of the Sanctuary unto
others. Our Thom. Morton. Apolog. p. 1 li. 1. c 10
Writers affirm, That he that preached by others, shall go to heaven by
others, but to hell in his own person. There be Maldon. vb. supra.
Jesuits who teach, a Minister can no more feed by another, then a Physician
can cure by another. And that if a Minister would labor by another, then he
must eat by another also, but himself eat nothing. Last of all, this heresy
seareth the conscience of hundreds, so that they pass over many Sabothes
without preaching, and some of them, preach not at all, neither by them selves,
nor others. But Gregor. in pastor. p. 2 cap. 4.
Gregoric, the Decret. p. 1. distinc. 43. cap. 1.
Canon Law, yea our D Babing. on the Lords pra. page 194.
Opposites them selves have taught, that a Minister can no more enter into the
Church upon a Saboth without preaching, and not be culpable of a damnable
sin: then Aaron could enter at any time into the Congregation without death,
in case he sounds not his bells at what time he entered. Some Idem. in. 4
commaun. p. 165.
of our Fathers have also taught, that he sins the sin of a dumb dog,
that passes over a Saboth-day without preaching: and that he suffers the
people to pollute the Saboth for want of teaching, in so sinning: To this Thom.
Morton. quo. sup.
does Origene, and out of him Espencaeus draw and apply that Law of Moses:
which commands the Priest not to depart from the Tabernacle of the Lord. But
as for them. whom this heresy has so paded and benumbed, that they think
they are well enough discharged, if the Leiturgie be read, though preaching
be wanting eue^ for whole months together: I leave them to a papist doom,
which is thus passed over them: Ioh Ferus in comment. in math. 16
Olim portenti inslar habitum fuit, si pro Episcopo haberetur, qui non etiam re
ipsa, verum Episcopi munus exhibuisset, quod hodie plusquam monstri loco
habetur, si quis exhibeat, quos cum temporum natura, scriptura, Ecclesia,
Consilia, Pontifices, Patres, Superi, Inferi, accusent, damnentque, quis est
qui absoluat? Further, this heresy lays wast the Saboth, since it dismembreth
it of preaching, the chiefest worshipp of all the rest. It is more principal
then the administering of the Sacraments, as Paul was sent to preach the
Gopsell, rather then to Baptize, that which our Opposites D Bilson. agai. Apol.
p. 2. p 360
them selves confess: who also add, that it is better then governing is, and
the administering of the discipline, when they say, God Ibid pa. 3 page 300.
gathers his Church by the mouths of preachers, not by the summons of
consistories. It is above reading, where the Apothecarie breaks not the
perfume to cause it to smell, the householder cutteth not the whole loaf, that
every one may have a full morsel, nor the bellows stir up the fire, to
cause it to flash into the hearts of the hearers, as preaching does; even as our
D. Babing. on the lords pray. p 185 1. Cro. 14.1. Eccles. 4.17. Eccles. 4.17.
Opposites themselves have taught. It is more excellent then prayer also,
because Paul himself prefers prophesying, even where he speaks of prayer:
and prayer must be sanctified by the the word, and be directed by preaching of
it: and prayer is a speaking of ours to God, whereas preaching is Gods voice it
self to us. To come to Church then, and there to pray but not to hear, were
the vnmanerlines of a clown, that being in his Princes presence, will have all
the talk him self, and not suffer his Prince to speak: it were also that
Thom. Morton. Apolog p 2 li. 1 c. 24.
Popish barbarousnes, which holds that the duties of the Saboth, serve not
to edify the Church, but to serve the Lord forsooth, with the sacrifice of a
fool, with a sacrifice that is blind, because without knowledge, which his
soul abhors. In respect hereof a whole volume suffiseth not, to show the
indignity of this heresy. Why then conclude we not with our D Babing on the
lords pray. page 189.
Opposites, who confess some of them, that the Lord has ordained preaching as
the most notablest of all other means, and as Page 194.
the chiefest, for the erecting of his kingdom in the word: which if it be
true, Exodus 10.19. Deuteronomy. 18.17.
must not prayer give place to sit below it, althought an holy worship? But
whether it be the most principal of the Saboth worshippes, or no, a worshipp
it is that is necessary, so that a Saboth can not be sanctified well without
it. This all reason yields, forasmuch as it is an ordinance of the Lord, a
Math 231 Ro^ 1.7.
commandment of Christ's, a Act 18.4. and 17.1 2 3
practice of the Apostles, yea ever thorough all ages, till here of late in the
Nehe. ^.8 act ^^ 14.
old Church and in the new, Act 2 42 and ^5.21.
there was preaching every Saboth, Am. 8.10.11. 1 Samuel 3.1 2. C^o. 15.3.
so that the meeting was thought to suffer a notable deformity, whenever it
was wanting. In Justin. Martyr Apolog. 2.
Justinius days, reading and opening of the word lasted for an hour long
ordinarily on every Saboth: In Tertullians, Ter^ullia. Apolo c. 3
there was not a meeting of the Christians, but their souls were fedd sacris
sermonibus, before they brake up the assembly. Now it is precisenes to say, a
sermon is needful in every Saboth, not so of old: Fuerunt ante haec tempora*
sanctissimi Patres, (says Roffeus. art. 33.
a papist himself) qui singulis Dominicis homilias ad po pulum declamitarant.
Which our Tho Morton. Apolo. page 1. lib. 1 cap 80.
Writers require, as needful to be performed and practiced now. This Homely
declaymed, was a Sermon preached: read and homily, the Minister could not, and
so be discharged in ancient times: the rising Valens. council. 2. cap. 2.
of Homilies was this, when the Minister of a Countrey-parish was sick, and
could not preach, then the Deacon was set to read an Homily: I say, the
Deacon at the first, and not the Pastor, who never failed to preach the
word, if he were able to come to the Church. Hence is it, that another
Mogunti. council. Iub. Carol. Magn c. 25
Council took order in Cities and Towns, that though the Bishop were
sick, yet the place should be supplied, vt nunquam defit Dominicis diebus aut
festiuitatibus qui verbum Dei praedicit, iuxta quod intelligere vulgus possit.
To the same purpose tend the Decrees of other Councills, to wit, vt Synod.
Trullan. can. 10.
ouibus diebus praecipue Dominicis populum doceat pietatis eloquia, which, that
it passed through all ages, we have this witness: Council. Coloni. page 9 ca. 9.
Dies Dominicus a temporibus Apostolorum celebris, vt in vnum oues co^uenirent
ad audiendum verbum Domint. The Leiturgie of public prayer yielding thereto,
as these words show: Synod. August. cap 18.
Euangelia et Epistolae diebus Dominicis lingua Germanica exponantur, eoque
tempore nulla Missa, ne populum ab auscultatione distrahi contingat,
celebretur. Indeed the reading it self of the Law, the Psalms, the Epistles
and Gospells reverently used, did not prejudice preaching as now it does, but
furthered it rather, forasmuch as the cutting of the Lessons Ioh. Belet. diume
offi. cap. 56.
by Hierome (before Philip. Mot^ae. de Eucharist. lib. 1. cap. 4
whom whole books were read in order, as they be now in the Churches reformed)
was to shorten the Leiturgie, that so there might be time for preaching: and
the Lessons did ordinarily yield lord. p. 31.
textes for the Preachers, or the Psalms, unless it were on the feasts of the
Nativity, Easter, and Pentecoste, when special textes were wont to be
chosen, fit for the solemnity of those times. Hence it is that the Durant* de
rit lib. 2 cap. 23. Act. 13.15. and 15.21.
Papists themselves can allege for the antiquity of their readinges such
places only, as prove they were afterward preached upon (after the example of
the Church of the Jews) as these do show: Ambros. lib. de offic. 1. cap. 8.
Pulchre dum legimus hodie Euangelium, spiritus sanctus obtulit nobis l
ctionem, etc. Audiuistis lectionem Euangelij. etc. with the Ambrof. epistol 75.
and 33. and in lib de Ele. and Ieiu ca. 20. August in epistol. 1 Joan. etc.
like, which were their entrances into their sermons. The modern Churches
continue preaching as a necessary duty of the Saboth, both in their
judgment and in their practice. As for their judgment, they teach, Pet. Ram.
commenta de Relig lib. 2. ca. 6.
Schola Domini praecipue commendatur in the precept of the Saboth, and they
set down Philip. Melancth.
pie fungi ministerio verbi for a principal duty of it. As for their
practice, whereas we think it a point of precisenes to have a sermon every
Saboth, the laws of Geneua command in praecep. 4 Ioh. Reyn. de Idolola. lib.
1. cap. 8. sect. 3.
two in every church within their territory: and of other places we have this
testimony, which shows our coldness. Bucer. in Math 12.11
Diebus Dominicis apud nos in singulis parochijs ad minimum duae, si non tres
habentur conciones. Fiftlie, this Abaddon slays all piety and religion in
the people, and quenches all zeal, through contempt of prophesying. This of
Constitu. Aposto. cap. 61. Act. 1.12.1 1^ eg. 4.23. Cantic. 1.7 Dan 12.4. Deuteronomy.
33.19. Psalm 84 7. Is. 23.
old they held it a matter without excuse, to be absent on a Saboth from the
hearing of the word: whereas now to seem to excuse such a manner, is become a
show of precisenes, and that out of this heresy. This of old appointed a
Sabothdayes journey to travayle abroad to hear the word, when no sermon was at
home, and that in our D. Rabing 4 commau. page 157.
Opposites own confession: whereas now so to do, is sermon-gadding, and
sermon-ringe, and that out of this heresy. This of old ruminated the word at
home which had been preached, and meditated on it even the Saboth throughout,
yea in private Conrad. Heresbach Christian. Iurisprude^. edict. 4 page 105.
conferred about it, as our q Opposites them selves have taught: which now is
become factious, gathering of conventicles, and that by reason of this heresy.
This last of all will abhor all hinderance of Aureliane. council. 3. Can. 27.
travayling, Cabilone^. conerca^ 18
husbandry, Matiscone. 2. can. 1.
sitting upon civil causes, Colenien. page 9. c. 10
keeping of fayres, Mogunt. cap. 61.
stage plays, dauncinges, with the like: that use to hinder this one duty of
hearing the word, Luc. 10 42
which only is necessary; all of which now are lawful enough, upon any
pretended excuse, and that out of this heresy. Sixthly, this Abaddon brings
the curse of God on men, and eternal damnation of soul and body. For the
preaching of the word being the ordinary means of 1. cor 4.15. Gal 4.19. 1.
Pet. 1.23. Iac. 1.18.
regeneration; and the special applying of the word by the same, the
ordinary mean of our special Romans 1.16 and. 10.14. 1 Cor. 1.21.
faith, without which there is no grace, or favor with God, or salvation to
be looked for: this heresy that scanteth preaching, and makes men to be
careless of it, is it not a murderer? Ro^ 10.14.
How shall they believe without a Preacher? Marc. 9.50.
How shall they be seasoned without the salt of the word? Cant^^. 8.
What shall be done for the sister that has no breasts to feed her young? These
speeches do they not even as it were, despair of them that want the practice
of the word? So Decret pa. 2. cause. 8. q 1. cap. 18.
Hierome says: The Minister that preaches not, is sent for a plague, sub quo
famem and sitim populus patiaetur, non famem panis neque sitim aquae, sed famen
audiendi verbum Domini. Espencaeus, a papist him self accords, under a
Minister that is not diligent to preach, paeruuli petunt panem (says he) and
non est qui frangat ijs. Which our Thom. Morton. Apolog. p. 1. cap. 20. Exodus
16.25
Writers do approve. If this matter should be handled to the full, there
would be none end. To conclude therefore, whereas all means of Saboth
pollution must be abolished, as God him self does give example, in taking the
Manna out of the way, when once it grew to be an occasion of Saboth-breach: and
the ceremonies of present controversy are many ways guiltier of his impiety:
pray we against them, as Mr Fox prayed heartily once against the Surplice: Act
and Monumen. page 1873.
It is pity such baytes of popery are left (says he) to take christians in.
God take them away from us, or else us from them: for God knows they be the
cause of much blindness and strife amongst men.

AMEN.
A Table of the contents of the several Chapters, and Sections of this book.
The Idolatry of the Cross. CHAP. I. THe Cross in Baptism is Idolatry
against God, and teaches that God is delighted with will worship, Sect. 1. The
doctrine of the cross teaches merit, satisfaction, and pardon for sin,
sect. 2. The effects of the cross spiritual, great and mavelous. Two
objections to the same answered, Sect. 3. In grace given and received by men,
as also in forms of Oaths, the cross is not only joined and matched with
Christ, but sometime overmatcheth him as being more effectual then he, Sect. 4.
The sign of the cross, a part of the Devils worship: A character to effect
things supernatural and devilish miracles. An instrument of witchcraft: an
inchaunting rodd, a magical sign, Sect. 5. The Surplice as a Priestly and
holy vestiment, is to be adored, Sect. 6. The Cross, Surplice, etc. incurable
and irrrecoverable Jdolothites: the cross no creature of God, therefore
utterly to be abolished, sect. 7. Two several sins committed in retayning
the cross: the first reserving it as a special and scandalous monument of
Jdolatrie past: with six reasons against the retayning of it, sect. 8. The
second sin committed in retayning the cross, is the danger of Idolatry in
it for time to come, Sect. 9. How some contrary to the Papists meaning and
writing deny adoration to be given to the aereall cross, sect. 10. How the
ayrie sign of the cross is Jdolized and worshipped tho transeant, sect. 11.
Reasons with objections answered, why the cross may not be entertained by us,
etc. sect. 12. We commit Idolatry in receyving the cross, because we do not
zealouslie banish it, sect. 13. The second kind of participation with
Jdolatrie is, when we may hinder it, and do not, Sect. 14. Three objections
fully answered, whereby the Opposites endeavors to prove that to
communicate with our Cross, is no Idolatry, sect. 15. An objection of the
Opposites answered, saying, they may use the Cross, because they have changed
the cross. Though there be four sorts of things that may be changed, yet
the cross is none of them, Sect. 16. An enlargement and continuance of the
matter contained in the former section, sect. 17. Our Cross not changed from
the Papisticall cross, whilst ours as also theirs resemble Christ's death:
and whilst the old piece of his figure and form remains, sect. 18. The
Opposites first difference, why our cross not the same with the Papists, sz
because not the same Numero, sect. 19. The opposites second difference why our
cross not the same with the Papists, sz. because ours is made at the fount
only: theirs at the church door also, sect, 20. The oppesites third difference
of our cross and theirs, is in the meaning, end and use, sect. 21. Our use of
the Cross, the same with the Papists in seven respects. The opposites
distinction of effective and significative in defense of it, answered, sect.
22. Evils occasioned by the cross it self, people, Minister, and Governors
that urge it, sect. 23. Five defenses of the cross objected by the Opposites:
The first whereof is answered in this section, and that which follows, sect.
24.25. Objections of the opposites for the cross confuted in this sect. and in
the 27. following. Ceremonies honorable in their ancient beginning, must be
corrected, not remooved. sect. 26.27. The abuse of the Cross can not be
remooved, the Cross it self remaining, Sect. 28. Preaching as it is now used
in England, is not sufficient to remove the abuses of the cross, the cross it
self remaining, Sect. 29.30. Opposites objection answered, which is, the
abuses of the Cross are sufficiently reformed, because the Altars, Shrynes,
Images, etc. be utterly removed, etc. Sect. 31. Reasons why the aereall cross
ought rather to be abolisht then the material, Sect. 32. It avayles nothing to
remoove the material cross, retayning the mystical, sect. 33. Another
Opposites objection answered: which is, we use it as a civil ceremony, not
religious, sect. 34. Pretense of a civil end of the cross, excuses not the
cross used in the worship of God, sect. 35. The use of the Cross is religious
not civil, as the Opposites prooved in this section, and that which follows,
sect. 36. The 5. objection of the Opposites answered: which is, he is not
worshipped in the Sacrament, but is only an attendant upon the sacrament, sect,
39.
The superstition of the Cross. Sect. 1. CHAP. II. THE Cross is an Image
flatly forbidden by the second commandment, sect. 1. The Cross is directly
an Jmage, sect. 2. The Opposites saying, the second commandment forbids
only material Images, are confuted. The cross now used is not simply
aereall, sect. 3. The Opposites saying our cross is no Image, because they
intend no expression, are confuted, sect. 4. The opinion confuted, which not
able to deny the cross to be an Image, affirm Images to be lawful in case
the Magistrate command them, etc. And the aereall cross is worst of all
Images, sect. 5. The aereall cross is a new sign directly against the
entendement and rule of Gods worship. The danger of retayning old popish
ceremonies, Sect. 6. The cross sins against this maine principle of the
word, he that adds or takes from it, etc. Popish ceremonies worse then
Jewish, sect. 7. The Opposites that affirm their ceremonies to come from the
primitive church immediately, and not from popery, are confuted, sect. 8. and
9. The second defense of the cross confuted: that is, we receive it not as
superstitiouslie abused by the papists, but as first used by the Fathers,
sect. 10. Its no good defense of the cross to say we have it from our
Fathers, not from the papists, because the fathers also abused both, the
simple use of it, and as it is mixed with oil, sect. 11. The Cross is
condemned as a superstitious ceremony: as superstitious will worship, and for a
superstitious ceremony, and will-worshippe sacramental, sect. 12. The cross
is a Wil-worshippe, prooved by three reasons. sect. 13. The holiness and
necessity of the cross, cause it to smell very ranklie of superstition, sect.
14. The Opposites first reply answered: which is, that the law commaundes not
the cross as an holy worship like the Papists, sect. 15. The second pretense
for defense of the cross, is necessity, sect. 16. We can hardly accuse the
Papists of any abuse of the cross, because we abuse it almost as much as
they, sect. 17. The third abuse of the cross confuted: which is, that the
cross is urged of necessity without omission, even as with the Papists,
sect. 18. The pressing of the cross confirms popish principles: the urging of
the cross, establishes a popish necessity, Ex consequenti, sect. 19. The
cross as the Opposites use it, is prooved to be sacramental, sect. 20. The
Opposites saying the cross is Sacramentale, is four ways faulty, sect. 21.
The Fathers urge a necessity of the cross very superstitiouslie: the
Papists more indifferent then they, therefore their authority is of no value
for the cross, sect. 22. The Opposites give that to the sign of the cross,
which is only proper to an essential part of the sacrament, sect. 23. The
opposites objection saying the cross in Baptism is inferior to the water,
because it comes after, confuted, sect. 24. A third fault wherein the opposites
usurps upon sacramental offices, sect. 25. Though the devising of new signs
corrupt the simplicity of Sacraments ordained by Christ, yet it hinders not
but something is left to the Church concerning circumstances, as time, place,
order, etc. sect. 26. Though it were lawful for the Church to devise new
signs, yet not for religious use, especially where God has ordained signs
for the same purpose already, sest. 27. And although it were lawful there to
ordain new signs where God has already ordained, yet is it not lawful to
annex them to the holy signs of God, as with us the Cross, Sect. 28. No
outward sign ought to be added by the churh to Christ's institution, sect.
29. Though it were lawful to devise new symbolicall signs in the Sacrament
where God has ordained already, yet not to take a Cross from the
brothelhouse of superstition, Sect. 30. Objections of the Opposites: the cross
is sooner to be used in that it teaches good things, and has a profitable
signification: therefore every ceremony is significant, or else vains: that
the Lord delighted much in signs which the woman showed, and blamed Simon for
not showing the like, etc. sect. 31. The second objection of the opposites:
there be many similitudes in scripture drawn from Gods creatures, which
employ so many signs, etc. sect. 32. The third objection of the Opposites:
there be diverse signs added in the scripture by man lawfully as the knife of
stone, and such like, sect 33. The fourth sign alleged for the defense of
the Cross, is the imposition of hands: and why should not the sign of the
cross be as lawful as it, sect. 34. Four offices which the cross
performs in baptism, sect. 35. The fourth sin that makes this cross
Sacramentale, in these words: We receive this child into the congregation of
Christ's flock, sect. 36. It follows not, because we use the Lords prayer
and Creed in Baptism, that therefore we may use the cross. For the word
cross implies three senses contrary to the word, sect. 37. The opposites
saying, that the cross is the sign of Christ crucified, confuted, sect. 38.
Though Tau were in the text, yet can not acrosse be collected from it, unless we
ground doctrine upon the mysteries of letters, which the Gnostickes,
Valentinians, and the Cabalistes use, sect. 39. That the sign of the cross,
is not the sign of the Son of man, sect. 40. An answer to the argument of
the Opposites, which is taken from Visions and Apparitions, sect. 41. Answers
to the arguments, which the opposites take from miracles, sect. 42. the refuge
which the opposites seek to have by the Fathers, remooved, both because they
passed measure herein, as also, that the case and time is now far changed,
sect. 43.
The Hypocrisy of the Cross. Sect. 1. CHAP. III. That the using of the
Cross, is but an idle apish toye, and lighter then the Surplice, which is also
too light, Sect. 2. That the cross is unprofitable, fleshly, smelling of
Idolatry, and of too light a color, Sect. 3. The profits alleged to
accompany the cross, for commendation thereof, as to keep from sin,
confusion, cause zeal, and to help in the instant of temptation, are refuted,
sect. 4. That the cross is now not only unprofitable, but also very
hurtful, sect. 5. The second excuse, that the cross is imposed by Christian
Magistrates, is taken away in diverse respects, especially because it is taken
as a consenting in a part to the ceremonies of the church of Rome, sect. 6.
That the cross fostereth hypocrisy in the mids of our church, and hinders
spiritual worshipp, sect. 7. The hypocrisy of the cross in preposterating,
evacuating, and polluting the understanding, which is the first part of the
soul reasonable, is proved, sect. 8. That the cross is not a monitorium to
the memory, but defiles it with the hypocrisy of preposteration, with
vacuitie of the remembrance pretended, and with forgetfulness of God and his
word, sect. 9. That the cross occasioneth, and breeds canker in the
conscience, and that which the Opposites allege, that conscience is but a
pretense, is anticipat, Sect. 10. The hypocrisy and preposteration of the
cross, in the Will, in respect of the means for attayning to the right end,
is proved, Sect. 11. How the cross is urged by our Opposites for sininister
end, and not in synceritie, Sect. 12. That the cross preposterateth,
evacuateth, and polluteth the affection of fear, sect. 13. How the sign of
the cross is an enemy to our affiance in the merits of Christ, sect. 14.
That the cross evacuateth and polluteth faith, sect. 15. That the Cross
evacuateth and polluteth love and zeal, both for matter, and measure, sect.
16. The hypocrisy of the cross in prayer, is prooved in respect it is thought
to be operative, sanctificatiue, and helpefull thereto, sect. 17. The special
hypocrisy of the cross, is evidentlie declared in the life and conversation
of those that did bear it, sect. 18.
The Impiety of the Cross. Sect. 1. CHAP. IIII. THAT the Cross mocketh the
Lords Sabboths, in darkening them: guiding the popish Processions, and with
whorishe braverie, in the worship of God, Sect. 2. That the cross corrupts
the simplicity of the Sabbath, sect. 3. That the sign of the cross defiles
the sanctity of the Sabbath, sect. 4. That the ceremonies, and the cross in
special, steal away true devotion from the heart, and are occasions of
irreverence, sect. 5. That the ceremonies controversed, not only defile, but
hinder the worshipp of the Sabbath, sect. 6. The Ceremonies hinder the
Preaching of the Sabbath, both in part and in the whole, sect. 7. That the
Ceremonies controversed, hinder the word in whole, sect. 8. That the Ceremonies
with their subscription, shutt out good shepheardes, suffers and fosters
hyrelinges, ignorance, plurality, and non residencie, sect. 9. That the
Ceremonies controversed, hinder preaching, shutting out the Preachers, and
putting the light under a bushel, sect. 10. An answer to the reproach of the
Opposites, which is, that these who stand for Discipline, are unlearned, sect.
11. That the fault why faithful Ministers are cast out of their Ministry,
lies not upon them selves, sect. 12. The calumny of peevishnes and
foolishnes imputed to the Ministers, for not receyving Cappe and Surplice, is
answered, sect. 13. The calumny of leaving the Ministry, is answered, and
the ignorantes and others, who subscribe, to abide in the Ministry, are by
the way challenged and convicted, sect. 14. That the loss of the Ministry,
unto the faithful Ministers, rather then to approove the Ceremonies, shall be
the Lords gain also, as the judgment of our best Divines, is so to do, Sect.
15. That the small estimation of Preaching, under pretense to care for praying,
as the opposites allege, is the abaddone or murdering sin of these days,
and takes away the right use of the Sabbath, sect. 16.

The end of the contents of the several Chapters and Sections of the first
part of this book.

An Alphabeticall Table of some special points interlaced here and there in
this Book.
A.
God accursed the presumption of the Fathers in using other fignes besides his,
pa. 99. To add new signs is to usurp the office of the holy Ghost, pa. 97.
and to defile the institution, ibid. and pa. 112. We may add rost-meate, or
sod-meate to the Supper of the Lord, as well as the figne of the cross to
Baptism, pa. 102. Any addition in Gods service, without his warrant, is an
Image which he detesteth, pa. 62. The addition of a new Altar by Solomon, was
upon special warrant, he being a prophet, and it was added out of the equity
of Moses law, p. 100 All that is added to the institution, by man, is the
Devils, pa. 129. R. p. 1. The Adiaphorisme of popish rites retained, is the
very image of the beast, pa. 136. and a countermaund of that precept, Reve.
18.4. ibid. The affectation of great learning has brought forth a windy kind
of teaching, pa. 184. The Altar of the two Tribes and a half, was not in state
religious as the cross is, nor in use, but was civil, pa. 100. Antiquation of
popish ceremonies bewailed by the papists, as a downfall of their religion it
self, pa. 68. The Apostles them selves cannot absolutely command in things
indifferent, pa. 87. The Armorie of Rome yields weapons sufficient against
the dumb Ministry, Pluralities, and Non-residencie, pa. 180.
B.
The Beads and Bells of the papists not so bad as the cross, pa. 162. The
Braze^ serpent, after it had served idolatry, was no longer the serpent of
God, but the serpent of idolaters, and the serpent of the devil, pa. 40. Bread
and cheese in the Lord Supper as lawful as the cross in baptism, pa. 95.103.
A pair of Bulls horns put upon the forehead of the baptized, is as
warrantable as the cross, pa. 109.
C.
The Calfe of the Israelites was an Image of God, pa. 59. Every ceremony
unites a man to the Religion to which it belongs, pa. 75. Ceremonies which
have been abused to superstition, can never serve for order or comelines, pa.
78. Our ceremo, a scourge to good preachers, and a means to keep in Oxen and
Asses, pa. 151. The ceremo. in controverse (viz the Cross and Surplice) have
been not only offered privately, but they have also been publicly consecrated
to idolatrous service, and so are become Idolothytes in the highest degree, pa.
9.10. They are idols, monumentes of idolatry, and incentiues to the same, pa.
13. They are relics of popery, p. 12. They are notorious brokers of popery,
and poysonfull, pa. 22. In retayning of them we approve of popery, ibid. and
23. They are harlots that have proceeded out of the loins of man's brains, and
pedlery wares of popery, pa. 23. No Church or holy society can make the^
holy, pa. 24. they are mere inventions of man, page 26. They have no needful
use to proone them selves Gods lawful coin, ibidem. They are no otherwise to
be thought of then we think of the devil him self, pa. 38. They have been
instruments of the service of devils, pa. 49. If they were cut off and gone,
the word of God would flourish more, pa. 66. They hazard the substance of the
dectrine it self of our Church, ibid. They have been defloured by that man of
sin, and have drawn in the yoke of Antichrist, pa. 76. They are vain, and
light, and hated of good men, pa. 78. They disturb the churches that have
discontinued them, and set the churches that nourish them in their bosoms, in
a combustion of endless co^tentions, ibid. There is an opinion of too great
holiness had of the^, p. 84. there is no use of them pleasing to the Lord, but
that which most disseiseth them of that honorable estimation which they have,
pa. 85. There is in the^, a smatch of the popish leaven, and such a twange^ of
holiness, as is proper to worship, ibid. They are creatures of Antic. pa. 108.
They are relics of idolatry, pa. 158. They cause the sonns and daughters of
the Philistines to boast, page 159. they are more shameful and hateful to a
minister of God, the^ is a fools coat, pa. 175. they are badges of Antic. and
love tokens of former adultery, ibi. they are the two Gileadites that keep the
passages of our church, to stay (if not stabbe) every able and worthy scholar,
that will not pronouce their Shibboleth. and dance roundly after the pipe of
their Subscriptio^, pa. 178. they are sworn servants to that man of sin, and
yet made Porters of Christ's house, ibid. the keys are committed to the^ to
open and shut, and yet they can no longer stay in office, the^ whilst the
keys of heave^ly knowledge are taken away from the people, ibid. They are as
bad as the Serpent, and bring in all manner of evil into the world, pa. 179.
they drive from Gods service many worthy Ministers, ibid. They hinder the
purging of our church, as being loath to part company from that drove of their
own country cattle, that came from Rome with the^, ibid. they are most
obstinate enemies to the preaching of the Sabbath, pa. 180 They lay wast the
chair of Moses, pa. 181. They are not well purged from their ancient Roman
pride, ibi. They are Agagites, which have got the^ horns, and they thrust with
side and shoulder, to the smiting of the shepheardes, and scattering of the
flocks, pa. 182. When they were newly borne, their hurt was not little, ibid.
Chapels of case would be united to other churches, where there may be
provision for preaching, pa. 193. The Church barreth her doors against all such
things as have been co^secrat unto Idols, pa. 55. It must be fed with the
word, and not with dumb signs and dead images, pa. 114. The state of our
Courch would be glorious, and many golden Preachers would enter, if the bar
of Subscription, and the clogg of Ceremonies were rolled away pa. 176. Many
Churches have been built to the name, and honor of the cross, pa. 169. The
Churches of France, Helvetia, and Germany, as they have abolished the whole
dross of popish doctrine, so they retain not so much as a dramine of their
ceremonies, pa. 134. R. 3. p. 2 Our Communion book termed by the papists an
English translation of the Masse-booke, pa. 135. R. 4. p. 1. It is not
thoroughly purged of popish superstition, ibid. We concur with papists in holy
days and in feasts, in singing and chaunting, and church music, in Coapes
and Cappes, and in fasts, pa. 172. Confirmation at the first was only within
the solemnity of Baptism, p. 97. It robs Baptism of his honor, pa. 101.
Our co^form* with papists in their rites destroys that difference and
separation which ought to be between the church of God and aliens, p. 69. All
Coparturship with aliens in their rites and ^ustoms is unlawful, pa. 78. 79
133, R. 3. p. 1.171 A Cow is as good a sign of Christ's death, as is the
cross, pa. 60. A Cross was the harbinger of al Romans cerem. when they first
entered into England. pa. 163. The Cross is an Idol many ways polluted, p. 3.
5. 18. 48. 169. It is held to be a necessary instrument and mean of man's
salvation, pa. 4. 85. It is supposed to bless, convert sinners, sanctify,
drive away the Devil, work miracles, and save all that are marked with it. p.
4. 5. It is a Devil and adored by the papists as a distributer both of
temporal blessings and heavenly graces, pa. 5. It is an idolatrous sign, as
bad as the serpent idolized by the Jews, and it cutteth too neat upon the
office of the H. Ghost, ibid. It partaketh of Gods worship both inward and
outward, pa. 6. 7. It is a Rite of the devils, an instrument of witchcraft, and
a very inchau^ting rod. p. 7 It will never go from the possession of private
houses, until the public house of God do spue it out, ibid. It is made an
Amulete against the devil, ibi. It passes the pollutio^ of al other
Idolothites, pa. 10. It is a grand Consecratour of all things in
idolatr-worship, ibid. It must be cast out of the Temple of God, and thrown
to the moules and backs, the common receptacle of al defiled relics, p. 10.
It is a principal badge of popery, pa. 11. 12. R. 1. p. 2. 136. It is not to be
mentioned honorably with the sign of the Covenant, pa. 12. It is a jewel of
the harlots, a Prophee of Antic. conquest, a sign of co^moderation with Gods
enemies, a stu^bling block to the popishly minded, a snare like to one of
Canaans monuments, and a vanity no way profitable, ibi. It must pack out of
gods worship, pa. 13. If but the carcass of it be left above ground, the
stink thereof will be intolerable, pa. 19. It is an unlawful imitation of the
popish crossing, though it be pretended that with us it is used to a diverse
end, pa. 21. 72. 73. 74. 134. R. 3. p. 2. It is leprous and ought to be burnt,
as being (when it was at the best) but hay and stubble, pa. 25. 39. It is too
too like the popish cross, p. 26. 28. 32. 34. 80. It has too honorable a
place in Gods service, pa. 26. 27, 41. It retains with us (and that entirely)
his old idols office, pa. 27. It is not only signify ^tiue, but effectiue, pa.
33 91. 129. 160. People are prone to dote upon it in popish manner, so long as
they see it before their eyes after their old popish fashion, pa. 34. It had
never any ancient use that was laudable, pa. 39. Many other superstitions
ceremonies as ancient as it, ibid. It has received in popery all the abuses
which can be named, pa. 40. It is not the ancient Fathers cross, ibid. and 75.
A poysonful rust has so deeply eaten into it, that it cannot be cured, pa. 41.
It is a ring-worme that spreads mightily, ibid. It has been a fertile mother
of much superstition, even from the infancy of it, pa. 42. 57. The aereal
cross much worse then the material, p. 47. It is a harlot that is talkatiue,
pa. 49. It is a ceremony abused to the depth of al miquitie, pa. 52. It is an
Idol an Idolothite, an Image forbidden, a sign humane, a ceremony popish,
pa. 55. It has been no where more a^used then in Baptism, pa. 56. It has a
deep hand in all the incantations of the water in baptism, page 57. It is a
breach of the very letter of the second commandment, pa. 58. 59. It is
greater then any other Image, pa. 58. It is the great^st Devil amongst all the
Idols of Rome, pa. 59. It reaches with a fescue, and keeps the church still
in her infancy, pa. 66. It sins against a maine authorament of the 2.
command. pa. 68. It is a member of the harlot of Rome united to Antichrist. p.
75. It is partner with the Oil in all the horrible superstitions of it. It is
the chief cognisa^ce of the harlot of Rome, p. 78. It is the very Queen of all
other Traditions, pa. 82. It ought to be as odious to us, as is the Gallouse to
a child, on which his father was hanged, ibid. It is preferred before preaching
and deeds of mercy ibid. It is made as necessary with us as it is in popery.
pa. 85. It is an Hagar that has a long time not only crowed against her
mistress, but also crowded into her place, pa, 89. It is a Sacramental, if
not a Sacrament, pa. 90. It fitteth with Baptism, and dedicateth out seed to
God, pa. 94. It is worse then the worst of the Romish symbolical signs, pa.
99. 104. 149. It is an Altar fetched from Damascus, and set in the Temple
cheek by ioule with the Altar of the Lord, pa. 101. It is sacrilege, pa. 102.
It is taken from the brothelhouse of Gods great enemy, and must out to the
dunghill, pa. 104. It is as swines flesh to the Lord, ibid. Among all the
signs of Rome, there is not a more gross or dirtie harlot, ibid. It is
cashiered out of all protestant Churches, pa. 105. 159. It being a plant of
man's, it must be rooted out, ibid. It is beheaded with the same Axe that
cutteth off other popish signs, pa. 112. It was used by the Fathers as a
gesture of prayer, without any word annexed unto it, pa. 114. It is a
superfluous, unlawful, and insufficient Teacher, no better then the Devil,
pa. 115. It is incorporated (even with us) into the Sacramental actions, ibid.
It is not Christ's banner, page 116. It is a Character of the Beast, page 120.
It has no ground in Gods word, ibid. It ietteth in the name of Christ's
sign, whereof it has robbed the water in Baptism, pa. 133. Out of our church,
it is no where used but for a sign of Antichristianitie, ibid. It is needles
and superfluous, a Jewel of Antichrist, and a fruit forbidden, page 134. It
is a very play-game, no better then fast and loose, pa. 135. It is too merry a
gesture, to represent the sorrowful torments of Christ, ibid. No fether
lighter, no not the feathers of the Masse-flap, page 128. Q. 4. pa. 2. It is a
soule-murtherer, and a stirrer of sedition in our church, ibid. The more
ancient it is, the worse? and the more contentment it gives, the more
superstition it breeds, pa. 129. R. pa. 1. As much may be said for the whole
waine-lode of popish ceremonies, as the Proctors of the cross say for it,
ibid. It smells too much of the stews, ibid. It is a strange fire, pa. 131.
R. 2. page 1. The use of it against the Devil, is no better then a straw to
run at Tilt withal, pa. 132. R. 2. p. 2. It stays and stayneth out
profession, ibid. It is the special mark of the Beast, and the cognizance of
Antichrist, page 136. It is a beggarly ceremony, wanting power to enrich with
grace spiritual, pa. 138. It is matched with the word, and in some sort
preferred before it, p. 136 It is held to be better the^ a sermon, and worthy
of worship and adotation, pa. 140. It is a mute character, and dumb sign, a
blind guide, and a dumb vicar of the Devil, ibid. It has no instructions in
it, but only the lessons of gross Idolatry, penned by the Devil, ibid. It
defiles like an Harpie, whatsoever it touches, with all his hypocrisies, pa.
141. By retayning it, we open a gappe to Lutheranisme, Adiaphorisme, and all
Idolatry, page 141. It is a thorn in the ^ande of a violent man, to hurt
others, and to undo them, page 142. It is but a Tradition of man's, and yet it
is preferred before the laws of God, pa. 147. There is more stir to uphold
it, then the preaching of the word, pa. 148. It is a deceiptfull toy, page 154.
It was at the first a faithles invention taken up without all warrant,
occasion, or need, page 155. It is made a Magical inchauntment, Ibid. The
pruning knife of doctrine was never able, to this hour, to loppe of the abuses
of it, ibidem. It bewitcheth the soul, it blasteth the body, and wastes the
goods without all pity, page 156. It is a mutual prayer. page 160. The
maintayners of it have nothing to cover it withal but figge-leeves, pa. 165.
It is dounge that polluteth the Sabbath, pa. 166. It mocketh the Sabbath by the
mocke-sabbaths which it has set up to it self, ibid. It is not found in
the Leiturgies of the primitive Church, page 169. It came into the Sabbath by
Montanus, and grew into credit with the rest of his inventions, pa. 170. It
is an heretical and idolatrous rite of the forehead, as badde as a pagan
garland, ibi. It is a badge of the Devil, fodered into the very forehead of
the Sacrament it self, pa. 172. Blessing with it is no better then blessing
with an old shooe-sole. pa. 161.
D.
The Deacon was wont to teade an Homily, when the Minister of a
Countrey-parish was sick, and could not preach, pa. 195. The Devil does bend
him self against the Pastors, that he may make the more havoc of the flock,
pa. 181. To devise new signs is to set the church to school again after the
Jewish manner, pa. 98. and to vilify the signs which God has appointed. pa.
100. Every new devised sign is a new devised sacrament, page 90. Great
diversity and doubtfulnes touching the fashion of the cross, pa. 60. A Done
let down of old upon the baptized, for a sign of regeneration by the spirit,
an unlawful sign, pa. 101. The duties of the Sabbath serve to edify the
Church, as well as for the service of God, page 195.
E.
The Ephod set up by Gedeon in short time made Ophra more famous then the
Tubernacle, pa. 100.
F.
The Fathers hold the water in Baptism to be nothing worth without the
cross, pa. 77. 90 92. 113. They can be no vizard for a ceremony which has
been abused since, page 75. They called the sign of the cross a sacrament,
pa. 89. They are very vnsavourie in the matter of the cross. pa. 90. The
Feast came after the worshipping of the calfe, and after the substance of
Idolatry: and yet the Apostle counts it a principal part of the Idols
service, page 95. Formalistes for livings sake lie down under the burden of
Subscription and conformity, which wring the shoulders of their consciences,
page 188. Many of them cut our their tongues, either not using their gifts at
all, or having no gifts to use, or abusing their gifts, or using them to no
purpose, page 189. Some of them are non-residentes loco, others officio, by
their conformity gracing popery, and for the upholding of their conformity
broaching many popish points in their preaching. Ibid. Master Fox prays
heartily against the Surplice, pa. 196.
G.
GOD bestows no grace upon any, but by his own means; which the cross is
not, pa. 4. He allows no Teacher but him self, nor means of Teaching, but
his holy Word and Sacraments, pa. 62. There were no Godfathers in the
primitive church, pa. 71.
H.
Heathenish Jdolatrie sprang from a desire to add visible signs to the book
of the creaturs, page 139. Hezekiah was bound to demolish the braze^ serpent,
pa. 36. 37. 41. The holy kiss is cast out of the church, though it went before
the solemnity of the Supper, and was a mere natural sign of peace, and had
no state in the Sacrament it self, page 111. Holy water a mere profanation,
and repetition of Baptism, page 101. Homilies dubd with the name of preaching,
and held to be a preaching sufficient for the sanctifying and saving of the
church, pa. 175. A Homily is too lean a sacrifice for a Sabbath* Ibid. It is
but a dead letter, pa. 176. There wants in it the gift of the spirit, the
art of the husbandman, the heat of the nurse, the opening of the Book, the
dressing of the meat, the interpreter which is one amongst a thousand, and
that ordinance of God, which only brings the blessing with it, Ibid. It is
but a wooden shadow of preaching, and nothing worth, Ibid. How Homelies
began, pa. 195. Honey added to the wine of the Supper, and to the water of
Baptism, is as ancient as the cross, and has been less abused, and yet is
unlawful, page 103.
I.
An Jdole is to the Lord as doungue, pa. 3. Jdolaters defile whatsoever
belongs unto them, if their use which is religious, has but touched it, pa.
9. Yea so as it cannot be made clean to us, pa. 18. 24. Things that have once
served Idolatry, are Idolatrous, pa. 40. 56. An Jdoles name must not be
mentioned in common talk, page 53. The Idol and ignorant ministry is the
bane of our church, page 150. It is the very sinnewes of Antichrist, pa. 179.
An Jdolothite defined, page 9. A thing being known to be Idolothious, a
protestation that we honor not the Idol, serves not the turn, page 23. All
Jmages in churches dangerous and unlawful, though not worshipped, pa. 64. 65.
Jmages of God in popery are as vile Idols as the Images of the Pagans were,
pa. 38. Imposition of hands is used with us effectiuely, pa. 34. All
Inventions of man in the worship of God, are forbidden in the second
commandment. page 61.
K.
Sundry sorts of Knights, which bear the cross for their badge: and why?
pa. 163.
L.
In what case the leaving of the Ministry is sinful, pa. 188. A long
Leiturgie wearieth the people before the Sermon begins, cloyeth the
Minister, and fills up the room of preaching, pa. 177. Liberty turned into
necessity, is liberty no longer, pa. 87. Liberty to devise new signs, is
but a young wanton novice, which the licentious Adiaphorisme has begotten,
page 100. All likeness of Cerem. with Idolaters forbidden, pa. 78. 133. R. 3.
pa. 1. 134. R. 3. p. 2. 171. No worse livers in the world, then the likers of
the Cross, pa. 163. Lordlines in Prelates is one of the shames and blaynes of
this church, page 193. The Love-feastes were more ancient and far more
tolerable then the cross, and yet romoved by the Apostle, pa. 95. 102.
M.
Melanthons fall was fearful, and all formalistes may take warning by him, pa.
186. Milk added to the Lords supper and to Baptism is as ancient as the
cross, and as significant, and has been less abused, and yet is unlawful,
page 103. No one Minister deprived in this land but by Christ's sufferance and
toleration, pa. 189. A Minister that labors by another, must eat by another
also, but him self eat nothing, page 194. A Minister that enters into the
church upon a Sabbath without preaching, is culpable of a grievous sin, ibid.
He sins the sin of a dumb dog, and suffers the people to pollute the
Sabbath, Jbid. All monumentes of Idolatry are to be demolished, pa. 12. 36.
37. 41. 43.
N.
Nonresidencie unlawful, pa. 150. 180. It is one of the shames and blaynes of
this church, page 193. The Nonresident droppeth but now and then a shower,
which never makes fruitful, pa. 185 Non-residents, idle and Idol ministers,
dru^kards, fornicators, and ganisters, should be punished rather then the
painful and profitable Ministers, who notwithstanding are pursued, whereas
there is no law to punish the other, page 148.
O.
All occasions that may reduce to Idolatry, are to be removed, pa. 13.
Occasions that defer from the Ministry, must be very carefully weeded out,
and all means possible brought in place, that may thrust men into the
vineyard, pa. 178. In the Old law no signs were lawful which were not showed
in the pattern in the mount, page 98. Those Orders be most pure that come most
nigh to the ensample of the primitive church. p. 170. No outward sign must be
added by the church to Christ's institution, pa. 102. 103. Oil is as ancient
as the cross, pa. 76. and yet to be abolished, page 93. The Oil and the
cross are twins of one birth, page 98.
P.
Papisme will sprout up again, unless all the customs of it be heawen down
at the root, page 73. Plurality of Benefices unlawful, page 180. Popery is
furthered whilst such notorious brokers of it (as the Surplice and the cross)
are not resisted, pa. 22. Popery is the greatest heresy of the new Testament,
page 37. It is the quintessence of all Paganism, ibid. Popish ceremonies are
worse then Jewish, pa. 31. 69. 133. R. 3. pa. 1. 166. The establishing of them
is a devise to draw in the whole body of popery, and carries a show of
inclination thereto, page 67. The retayning of them keeps still on foot many
popish principles, and will in the end rob and rifle our faith, pa. 68. They
must be grubd clean out of the church, page 31. Popish rites renew a Jewish
and carnal worship, and are but vayles which must away, page 139. Popish
consecrated Oil good to greaze shoes withal, pa. 64. The Popish Procession is
little better then a heathenish May Game, and a pompous Atheman sacrifice, pa.
168. Popish Saints are painted in their churches with the beasts which they
loved, as the Pagan Gods were with thens. page 72. No Popish rite should have
to do in our service, especially it should not meddle with the office of the
Sacrament, page 74. One good Preacher is able to do exceeding much good: and
there is a great loss of such a one turned to another course of life. pa. 178.
The painful Preacher (though not so learned) brings in a greater harvest
for the most part, then he that stands upon his learning: and the reasons
why, page 184. Preachers lips are in a manner sowed up from speaking against
the abuse of the Cross, lest they should seem to speak against the cross in
Baptism, pa. 132. R. 2. p. 2. The Preachers which refuse the sign of the
cross, do more truly bear the cross the^ their pursuers, page 165. The
Preachers who have their mouths gagged, are in Paul's case, and in the case of
Iulians soldiers, pa. 135. R. 4. p. 1. and in Ambrose his case, pa. 187. They
can not conform without making shipwreck of a good conscience, page 145.146.
They have learning enough, as having learned the truth, pa. 183. Their
Churches are letters of commendations speaking for them, pa. 184. They leave
not their Ministry, but are thrust our against their wills, their ministry
being the comfort of their lives, pa. 187. They have used all lawful means
for the keeping of their ministry, ibid. and 188. They are called from their
Ministry by him that called them to it: the work being ended for which they
were called, yag. 189. They are ready, even at an hours warning, if the Lord
call them, the Church need them, or they find in conscience they may reenter,
page 190. They leave their Churches no other ways then our Savior Christ,
Elias, and Saint Paul did, ibid. None but Preachers are deposed, whereas none
but they should stay in page 194. Great learned Preaching is very fruitles, and
great learned Sermons are strawbery sermons, page 184. Preaching by others is
not sufficient, pa. 194. He that preaches by others, shall go to heaven by
others, but to hell in his own person, ibid. Preaching is the chiefest worship
of God more excellent then administering the Sacraments, exercising the
Discipline, reading, or prayer, ibid. It is the most notable and the chiefest
means for the erecting of Gods kingdom in the world, pa. 195. A Sabbath
cannot be well sanctified without it, and the reason why, ibid. It is the
ordinary means of regeneration, and of our special faith, pa. 196. The
Prelates, by their rigorous exaction of ceremonies, give suspicion of many
hypocrisies, pa. 150. 151. They retain a cross in sign to bring their
brethren under the cross in suffering, pa. 165. They exchau^ge golden
preaching for wooden ceremonies, pa. 175. Their deep learning is but the
depth of Satan, p. 183.
R.
Reverence to the Sacrament is best procured, by laying open the institution by
the preaching of the word, and the^ delivering it in that simplicity in which
we have received it, pa. 112. The Ring has too honorable a place in marriage,
pa. 96. All Rites abused popishlie (if they be not ordained of God) must be
abolished, p. 26. 77. 93. All Rites, which are held necessary by the
papists, are to be disvsed, pa. 88. Rome the greatest enemy that ever Christ
had upon the earth, page 38. It is an habitation and cage of Devils, her
factors the spirits of Devils, and her Idols even Devils themselves, ibid.
S.
A Sacrament and a Sacrame^tal, all one, pa. 90. The second commandment
authoriseth the word to be the rule of all Gods worship, pa. 66. All show of
Idolatry, even in the least ceremony, is to be avoided, pa. 11. No signs now
should burden the church, save those which the Lord has left, which are not
burdensome, pa. 98. The sign of the son of man, what it is, pa. 129 The
simplicity of the first church, is a pattern for us to follow, pa. 169. R. 4.
p. 1. A square cap, unfit for a round head, pa. 135. Subscription is a rough
way to walk in, where every step will be a gash, pa. 143. It spurneth out of
our church many Preachers, whom God has fitted for his work, pa. 178. It has been so fleshed, that it will hurt so long as it is retained, pa. 181. Suing for
benefices and church dignities, is very pernicious, pa. 193. That is
Superstition, which is supra statutum, pa. 58. The Surplice is a filthy Idol.
p. 9. In retayning it, we approve of Popery. pa. 22. It is the Idols habit.
pa. 29. 130. R. 1. p. 2. It is one of the pedlery wares of popery, pa. 23. It
may be worn no where out of Gods service, pa. 53. It is the cast apparel of
the harlot of Rome, pa. 71. 78. 129. R. 1. p. 1. It is as indecent for the holy
spouse of Christ, as a harlots weed is for a grave matrone, pa. 78. It is used
no where out of our church, and in that regard also is indecent, pa. 108. It is
player-like apparel, histrionicall, scenicall, a vain vizard, and a pretty
apish toy, pa. 135. By it Christ is again exposed to laughter in a white
garment, pa. 186. It is a cunning invention of the Devil, pa. 187. It is a
character of Antichrist. ibid.
T.
A Temple built on Garezim, soon overtopt the Temple at Jerusalem, pa. 100.
Things of them selves free, become necessary to be used when they edify, to
be disvsed when they edify not, pa. 87. Those Times be purest that be
nearest to Christ and his Apostles, pa. 170. The three hundredth soldiers of
Gedeon resemble the 300. Ministers, who now stand out against the cross, pa.
120. The Traditions of men defile the confession of faith, pa. 133. R. 3. p. 1.
The fat Traditions of the papists are retained still amongst us, pa. 149. 150.
V.
Valentinus the heretic was the father and first begetter of the cross, pa.
75.
W.
The Wafer-cake was never half so superstiouslie abused as the cross, pa. 80.
Want of preaching is very dangerous, page 193. 196. Water mingled with the
wine in the Lords supper, is more tolerable the^ the cross in baptism, pa.
52. 95. 102. 103. The White garment, not fit to be used at baptism, pa. 156.
All Will Worship is carnal worship and flat idolatry, pa. 3. Gods Worship is
wronged by all new devised signs, and popish rites, pa. 66. Worshipping in the
Papacy is as abominable as the pagane adoration, pa. 38.
Y.
We must not Yield one whit to papists, page 135. R. 4. p. 1. They yelding of
Ministers opens the mouths of papists, and of the common people, pa. 191.
Upon yielding to Conformity there follows a deprivation of former gifts,
zeal, love, painfulnes, joy, yea knowledge and all, pa. 191.
Z.
Zeal ca^ endure nothing of Antich. no not the name of any thing that
bolongeth unto him, and is defiled by his polluted members, pa. 156. It
abhors all show of popery, ibi. It cannot endure co^form. with aliens, no
not in civil guises p. 157 much less in their relig. rites, such as the cross
and Surplice are, ibi. It will show no countenance toward Idolaters or
heretics, ibi. It can abide no relics of idolatry, pa. 158.
The Names of the Authors, Treatises, and Councels cited in this Discourse.
A.
ANtonius Nebrissensis Antonius Historiens. Antonius Gubert. Antonius Sadael
Antonius Posseuin. Antonius de Corduba Antonius Fayus Antonin. Histor. Aeneas
Syluius Aelianus Varro Aegidius Hunniu^ Aegesyppus. Athanasius. Auentinus.
Amalar. Alcuinus. Albertus Magnus, Abraham Scult. Agrippa. Andreas Frisius.
Andreas Hipperius Augustinus. Andradius. Amandus Polanus. Alexander Alesius.
Anselmus. Ambrosius. Attil* Serranus. Alphonsus de Castro. Agathias
Scholasticus. Ad^ianus. Aulus Gellius. Arnobius. Abraham. Fransus. Arius
Montanus. Andreas Masius. Alphonsus Tostat. Aubanius. Alexander ab Alexandro.
Apuleius. Aratus. Abbots Auent. Angesismus Albertus Crantz. Adrian. Papa. Answ.
to the petit. by the vicechanc. and Doctor of Oxon. Author. lib. de singularit.
Clericorum. A discourse of the conference at Fontainbleau. Anglic. Historia.
B.
BIlsonus Bellarminus Breuiar. Romanum. Bucerus. Beatus Rhenanus Bullingerus
Brissonius Balaeus. Babington. Blond. Basilius Beda histor. Burchardus
Bernardus Bridenbachius. Bartholom Laran. Becon. Bristow motives Benedictus
Aretius.
C.
CAjetanus Catharinus Chemnitius. Caesar Baronius Costerus Carolus Sigon.
Cal^hil. Coelius Rhoding. Chrysostomus Clemens Cyril^us Hierosol. Canisius
Conradus Schlasselburg. Cyprianus. Conrad Lutzenburg. Carrion Cambdenus
Cassiodorus Cod. Theodofij Carolus Magnus Cornelius Tacitus Carolus Bouius
Conradus Worstius Cicero Constant. poly histor. Christianus Marseus Cuspinianus
Cyprianus de Valera Claudius ^spenc^rus Cor^elius Iansenius Cousius Canus
Cathechism. Regin. Mari. Censura Coloniens. Cantel Miss. Catalogus Testium
veritatis Comment. de statu Relligion. in Gallia. Catalogus Haereticorum
Confessio Theologo. Saxon Colloquium Torger habitum. Censura Oriental. Eccles.
Capitul. Graec. Synodor. Confessio Scotiae Collect. of Massac. in France
Catechism. Trident. Confessio Eccles. Mansfeld. Confessio Princip. and Ducum
Saxon. Charta Magna Canon Episcopal.
Concilia.
Nicenum Nannerens. Carthaginens. Tridentinum Chalcedonens. Constantinoposit.
Aquisgranens. Pistense Aphricanum Epaunense Laodicenum Antisiodorens*
Gerundens. Meldens. Turonicum. Arimenense. Florentinum Neocaesar. Rhemens.
Bracharens. Vacens. Iardens. Agathens. Cabilonens. Coloniens. Matiscoinens.
Mileuitan Lateranens. Sardicens. Wormacens. Elibertin. Mogunti. Constantiens.
Toletanu^ August. Parisiens. Romanum. Trullo. Senonens. Aurelianens. Hipponens.
Mediolan.
D.
DEtzelius Damascenus. David Chytraeus Dominicus Asoto. Dion. Dionis.
Ecclesiast. Dionis. Areopagita Decret. Damasus Digest.
A French discourse of the honor of the Cross. E.
EPiphanius Euthym. panopl. Ennodius. Erasmus Eusebius Extravagant Elmar
Ephreem Erasinus Sarceriu^ Euagrius. Edmund Bonesid. Epistol. Hamburg.
Examinat. of the Declar. of the ministers of London. The answer thereunto.
F.
Fennerus. D. Fulk. Francisc. Iunius. Feuardentius. Francisc. Aluares D. Foen.
in count. Oxon. Fredericus Nausea. D. Field. Fitzharb. Fasciculus Temporum
Fascicul. rerum repetend.
G.
GOulartius. Gregor. Nissenus. Gualterus. Gabriel Powel Gregor. Martin Gelasius
Georg. Cassander Gabriel Biel. Gregor. de Valent. Gregor. Turonens. Genebrardus
Guliel. Alanus Guliel. Wideford Gaudent. Brixian Godescal. Sleweccius. Guliel.
postella. Guliel. Nonbrigens. Gualt. Mapes Gregor. Pastoral. Gratianus Guliel.
Lindword. Gaguin.
H.
HIeronimus Hospinianus Herman. Hamelma^ Hamburgensis Hugo de saucto Victor.
Hilarious Holcot Hector Pintus Henricus Stephanus Harding Hippolitus. Hosius D.
Hill. Hugo Cardinal. Hildebert. Cenoman. Hispan. Hostiens. Homil* Anglic.
Humble motive.
I.
Jonas Arelianens. Joan. Reynaldus Joan. Sarisburiens. Jacob. a Vitriac. Joan.
Howset Jacob. Ledesima Ioannes Calvinus Ioannes Wolfrius Joan. Eckius Joan.
Gropper Joan. lauterbach. Joan. lauterbach. Jacob. de Vorag. Jacob. Vitriac.
histor. Josephus Scaliger Joan. Husse Jacob Billius Joan. Sarran. Joan. Napier
Joan. Fox Joan. Dowley Joan. Whitegift. Joan. Duraeus Julius Scaliger Joan.
Crispin. Joan. Picus Mirandula Innocentius. Ieremias Patriarch Joan. Gerson
Joan. Brentius Joan. Molanus Joan. Sleidanus Joan. Bohem. Auban. Isidorus
hispalens. Joan. de Vado Joan. Piscator Jacob. Paniel Julius Obsequens Joan.
Dubitaviu^ Joan. Lasicius Jacob. Ledesin Ignatius Joan. Drusius Ioachim
Westphal. Joan. Ferus Joan. Bodin Ioachim Vadianus Josephus antiqui. Iudai^.
Josias Symlerus Irenaeus Joan. Albinus Iustus Lipsius Isidor. Etimolog. Jacob.
Pammel. Joan. Iuellus Iustus Origelitan. Joan. Ziscar Joan. Funccius Joan.
Wigand Julius pap. Joan. Dearing. Joan. Beleth Ignatius Laiola Ioh. pap Julius
papa. 1. Iujunction. Elixab. Index expurgat. hispan^
L.
Luc. Marinaeus Lindanus Laurent. Surius. Ludovic. Vives Ludovic. Lavaterus
Lyranus Laurent. Saunders Lactantius Lutherus Leonicer Liberatus Carthag.
Lampridius Lambertus Danaeus. Lib. Ceremo. Lib. pontificial. Lib. supplicat.
Theolo. herman. Lib. Concord Lollardorum petitio.
M.
MArtial Magdeburgensis Macrobius Microlog Math. Sutclif Marcel. Coicyrens.
Musculus Matthew. Flaccus Illyricus Michael Glycas Minut. Foelix Melciad. Math.
Iudex Maximin. Marcell. Palingenius Martin Bracarens. Maldonat. Math. Beroald.
Math. Kellison Missale de invention. Cruci^ Missale Sarum.
N.
NIcol. Saunders Nicol. Lyra. Nicol. Hemingius. Nicol. Cragius Nicol. Galasius
Niceph. Calist Nauclerus Nicol. Cusan. Nicol. Gallus. Nowel Nicephor. histor.
Nicol. de Clemangis Nilus Thessalonicens. Nanar. Enchirid. News out of
Holland.
O.
Ouidius Origines Onuphrius Oedoard. Weston Otho Frisingens. Offic. Missal.
P.
Perkinsus. Polycratie. Portifor. Sarisbur. Philippus Melanchton Pettus Martyr.
Pelag. Photin. Plutarchus. Polydorus Virgilius Petrus Viret. Philippus Mornaeus
Petrus Lombardus Prudentius. Parsons. Petrus Crinitus. Peresius. Paulus Diacon.
Paul. Lancelot. Park. Pisan. Pet. Aliacus. Paul. Odorbor. Plinius Secundus
Parisiensis. Poliaen. Stratag. Philo. Pet. Alciac. Plinius nature. hist. Petrus
Cantor. Platina. Petrus Bellan. Panormitanus Pilkington. Paulin. Nolan. Pet.
Serranus. Prosper. Peucerus. Plutharchus. Perald. Primasius. Pererius. Paul. 4.
Pet. Cluniacens. Pontific. Roman. The humble petition to Q. Elizabeth.
Q.
Quintus Curtius.
R.
Rhems annotations. Richard Hooker. Rodolph. Ardens. Rabanus. Rollocus.
Rodolphus de Riuo. Rodolph. Goclenius. Ruffinus. Ribera Regino. Rabidinera.
Rudolph. Tungrens. Roderic. Toletan. R. Bretius Roffensis. Regul. luris*
Rubric.
S.
Suarez. Sozomen. Sebastian. Munsteru^ Sixth. Seriens. Sedulius. Sam. Harsnet.
Soto. Seneca. Syluest. Prier. Socrat. histor. Segedinus. Sigebert. Stephan.
Guard. Seuerus Sulpitius. Stanisiaus Socolouius. Simeon Thessal. Sadolet
Saluian. Sigon. Sibrandus Lubert. Stanleton. Siluestrin. Sanctes Pagninus.
Saluian. Salustius. Stephan. Durant. Sigebert. Sigon. Sixth. 3. Suidas.
Supplementum ad Chron. Joan. Crispini. Statuta Reginae Elizab.
T.
Tertullianus. Thomas Aquina^. Torrensis. Tholossan. Theodoret. histor. Thomas
Hutton. Turtian. Thomas Morescin. Theodor. Beza. Trelcatius. Thomas Morton.
Tole^us. D. Tailor. Tremellius. Tiburt. Martyr. Titus Livius. Thom. Waldens.
The telat. of the religion of the western, etc. The humble motive for tole.
Tripartit. historia. Theses Theolog. Saxon. The author of the Ies. catechism.
The treatise whether it be a moral sin to transgress a civil praecept.
Turcica historia.
V.
VAzquez. Vegetius. Virgilius. Victorius. Vincentius Beluacens. Vellerus
Paterculus. Volateran. Vsperg.
W.
Willet. Whitaker. W Bishop. Wolfangus Lazius. Walafrid. Strab. Walsingam. W.
Giffor. Wilfridus.
X.
Xistus Betulei.
Z.
ZAnchius. Zepperus. Zagazabo alias Christopher Lichanati. Zacharias Vrsinus.
Zonaras. Zozom. histor. Zosun. Pap.
To the Reader.
CChristian Reader, I must advertise thee, that, either through the negligence
of the Printer, or for want of a diligent Correctour, many faults have escaped
in the printing of this Book. Diverse of them are very gross, and do quite
mar the sense of the place, which I would pray thee to amend with thy Pen,
before thou begin to read. As for the rest which be but literal, I would
entreat thee in love to pardon them, or to correct them as thou read.
Amongst other things, I think it not amiss, here in this place, to admonish
thee of one in particular, namely that the figures set to number the pages are
very faultily set; after the number 120. there following the number 129.130.
and so on forward, till thou come to the number 135. and after that there
beginning again the number 128.129, etc. from which number 128. till thou come
to the number 136. I am constrained in the Table to ad to the number of the
page, the letter and page of the sheet: for example, pa. 128. Q. p. 129. R.
and so in the rest: which I thought good to let thee understand, lest thou
should be mistaken in seeking for any thing contained in this Table.

Faults escaped in the printing of the first part.
Page 3. in margin litera (h) put out 4. page 4. li. (q) read 25. ibid. Suar.
and lit (a) supra Iosu. pa. lit. (f) fol. 26. and l. (p) cap. 21. ibid. put out
21. ibid. sigura (5) read 2. Reg. page 5. linea. 22. read liver. ibi. lin.
25. Olympus. and lin; 49.50. an Idol now: page 6. lin. 9. why for which. lin.
37. to the desk. page 7. sect. 5. li. (c) readecont. Mart. pa. 8. lin. 51.
(then) and sect. 6. lit. (s) teade disput. 54. p. 9. lin. 15. offerendo l. 29.
touch and take l. 31. that a ball. p. 10. li. (o) art. 3. p. 11. l. 45. monet
p. 12. l. 36. implement ibid. li. (f) 3435. p. 13. l. 5. solent and l. 11.
medicina and l 38. Homilye p. 14. l. 48. now ibid. li. (c) cap. 5. p. 17. lit
(m) sect. 1. p. 18. lin. 31. issue page 19. lin. 17. Divill. page 20. lin 43
horror page* 21. lin ^. liking. page 22. lin 15 hand page 25. lin. 50. liking.
p. 29. l. 22. individually* l. 41. shambles. l. 42. and 43. own for one. p.
30. l. 29. memorial p. 33. l. 40. coals. l. 41. it is as good p. 36. l. 38.
away 37. l. 31.32. Rome paganish, p. 39. l 44. statues p. 40. l. 21 Egyptians
set up. p. 43. l. 6. rasing p 45. l. 39. we should l. 44. is somewhat p. 48.
put out the last line. p. 49. l. 34. Graeciae p. 52. l. 29. has use. p. 57. l.
21 they take l. ^7. rased l. 34. anili. p. 58. l. 29. or worship. p. 59. l. 44.
nullam p. 60. l. 10 floating l. 31. rain for beam p. 61. l. 17. of the pillar
l. 28. sacram. l. 33. paynt for make l. 44. januis p. 62. l. 1. absit ibid.
inanimatum p. 63. l. 26. put out the cross of p. 65. l. 29. gerens ibid in the
mangin^ at the letter (e) add Auton faius de obitu Bezae. p 67. l. 31.
conformare. p. 68. l. 10. qui for quae p. 69. l. 35. introductum and l. 36.
eadem very Deicultu. p 70. l. vit. Mars. p. 71. l. 10 fideles p 72. l. 7. with
the beast l. 47. Hooper l. 51. evidence p 73. l. 10. epularum l. 35. mortuis
suis sacrificaba^t p. 75. l 9. his aeones p 76. l. 23. before Christ's. l. 38.
it is out of p. 77. l 22. every* step. p. 83. l. 29. coloris l. 32. pleased p.
86. l. 34. put out which p 87 l. 36. acceptu^ in him p. 89. l. 19. cannot for
can l. 30. cogetur l. 42 haec p. 95. l. 41. formally p. 97. l. 2. ill apply. l
19. both there p. 101. l. 30. (...) 102. l. 9. feasted p. 104. l. 19. up in his
p 105. l. 30. inclusively l. 34. vnproffit. we p. 106. l. 19. in case l. 46.
reference p. 107. l. 2. now it is l. 31 relieved p. 109 l. 2. proof bid. put
out to p. 110. l. 42. excused p. 113. l. 36. replied l. 37. it there p. 115. l.
15. wrested l. 20 prevent l 51. put out this p. 116. l. 16. seeing for says l.
48. his Quin. p. 118. l 8. so do Aquila and Symmachus p. 120. l. 2. put out in
Romanos l 31. ly down p. 128. Q. l vlt. Quid p. 129. R. l. 7. place here l.
nullo l. 34. disheriteth p. 130 l. 40 put out not l. 45 (...) p. 31. l. 6. the
adored p. 132. l. 24. remained l. 25. torn p. 133 l. 41 scarce any where p.
134. Q l. 22. discarde and l. 27. of our own church p. 128. l. 42 first by. l.
48 served Symmachus p. 133. R. 2 l 10. with Christ p 132. R. l. 25. removed p.
134. l. 14. faciendum l. 46. draws p. 135 l 3^. likeness of p. 130. S. l. vit.
put out and purpose p. 139. S. l. 15. our fathers l 30. commandment p. 140.
S^l. 38 be no ib. then p 141. l. 31. omne p. 142* l. 8. put out to l. 37. (...)
p. 135. 8. l. 34. peace for place. p. 146. l. 44. elementi seruitus p. 147. l
8. securely l. 29. raising up for the poor in p. 148 l. 38. put out as they
and l 39. that the seed^ of it came and l. 47. potionum p. 151. l. 13. that of
Aug. p 152 l. 24. Mosis and l. 25. church now, and l. 46. and in that p. 153.
l. 29. mocked p. 156. l. 21. fadgeth and l. 42. to spare or ransom p 158 l. 2.
placeant l. 11. put out in ijs quos decipimus and l 13. for they are and who l.
33. priotis pa. 161. l. 14. discribed and l. 14. signifies and l. 48. tyeth p.
162 l 14. at Augusta and l. 40. a sca^tling p. 163 l. 13. Livonia and l. 17.
put out the p. 166 l. 31. betwee^ feasts p. 167. l 7. speciali. p. 170. l. 12.
mention p 172. l. 1. concur rather p. 173. l. 38. that is p. 177. l. 16. a
rasing and l. 22. had and l. 24. helped and l. 30 and who wish to and l. 36.
with that p. 181. l. 26. And for p. 185. l. 8. hurts thee and l. 9. cloyeth
and l. 21. their for our p. 185. l. 14. aptas and l. 17. hour and l. 18.
Governors and l. 20. impugnat p. 186. l. 2. put out good ibid. of other men
and l. 13. then by holding and l. 16. doubted p. 187. l 45. liberati p. 188. l.
45. would p. 193. l. 29. superfluously and l. 45. put out which sue for them
only and l. 52. for that which even that p. 194. l. 1 put out it and l. 2.
Paulum and l. 6. others, who are to be deposed themselfs and l. 15. preaches
and l. 36. put out temporum. p. 195. l. 30. praedicat and l. 31. omnibus p.
196. l. 9. put out whereas now to seem to excuse such a manner and read which
doctrine now is and l. 13. sermon running.

The end of the first part.
The second part of this Treatise.
Of the Injustice of the Cross. Chap. 5.
THe sins of the Ceremonies against the fifth precept, we mean as much as we
can to cover, for the love and reverence sake, which we bear to our Christian
Governors; whose hard measure toward us, though it run over, yet are we
desirous not to run beyond those bounds of the holy Apostell: I have naught
to accuse my Nation of: and brethren ye have not hurt me at al, Act. 28.19.
Gal. 4.12.
Nevertheless, least our speachlesse silence should hurt our good cause, we
are to crave leave, though not to expostulate or accuse, yet after the example
of the same Apostle, to appeal and beseech, that which (we trust) none will
deny us, especially seeing we appeal no further, then from Philip
displeased to Philip appeased: and beseech no other way, then children use to
beseech the men whom they hold for their Fathers. The very Canon Law it self
affirms: Fasciculter. expete^d in appellat. Parisiens. fol. 34.
Nullus Princeps tollere potest appellationis remedium, eum sit quaedam
defensio, que iure diuino, naturali, and humano, cuique competit. Neither are
the children (or rather slaves) themselves of Antichrist, so bound in judgment
unto their Church, their Pope, their Councels, but that lawfully they may
appeal from them, male consultis, so it be to themselves Ibid.
been consultis, and to Nichol. de Clemangis sup: materia concilgeneral.
examine by the word, whether been or male, they have advised themselves, or
no. In regard hereof, we have good confidence, our humble petitions will be
admitted into the presence of our reverend Fathers, the first of which is, that
they would remove these ceremonies controuersed, for fear the Lord will plead
against this church of ours: I have a few things against thee, because thou
have them that maintain the doctrine of Balaam, to put a stumbling block
before the people, that they should eat of things sacrificed to Idols. Apoc.
2.14.
Against this petition reasonable, we hear hitherto, naught objected, which
sauoureth not of some injustice against this precept. First it is said, that
the Doctrine being reformed, no matter is to be made of Ceremonies: and as for
the Cross and Surplice, which are in the number of minores Ceremoniae, the
Magistrate would be counted unwise, and it would be a dishonor unto him, if he
should trouble himself about them. First, he that stands upon the smalnes of
these Ceremonies, let him consider whether he stand not on Hardings ground,
when he pleaded the things were small, wherewith Jewel charged his Church;
seeing, what Mr Jewel Jewel in defense of Artic. ag. Hard. praefac.
returned to him, that serves us in our whole cause. How great or small these
matters are, it forces not: indeed they are avouched with very small proofs,
as if they were small. and yet as small as ye would have them, it appears
ye keep no small ado about them. Nothing ought to be accounted small,
wherewith so great multitudes of Gods people, may be deceived and scandalized:
the matters wherewith Christ charged the Scribes and Pharisees, were not so
great, and yet he says: ye strain at a gnatt, and swallowe a Cammell. Saint
Paul says, a little leaven, soureth the whole lump: an hair is small, and
yet we read it has chooked a big man. Plato says, Robbery is no less in
a small matter, then in a great: the Cyniplees were but small, yet are they
reckoned, among the great plagues of God. alia sunt frivola and innoxia, alia
frivola and noxia, says Gregor. li. 6. epi. 30
Gregory. Though these matters be small, yet the evilles that rise of them,
are not small: remove them, and popery receives no small wound. To
conclude, if these ceremonies be great, they are the more worthy to be
considered. if they be small, there is the less hurt in leaving of them, and
the more wilfulnes in defending of them: Christ says, qui in modico iniquus,
and in maiori iniquus. Verily the greatest part of the land, is weary of
them: thus far out of Jewel.

Hear we the judgment of one of the Crosses friends, speaking thus of him,
to make him great and not small: Ric. Hook lib. ^. c. 65.
Ceremonies are more in weight then in sight. they work by commonnes of use
much. Another will not have the Surplisse, upon pretense of any smalnes, to be
made unworthy of a Princes care, and therefore averreth, Examine. of the
declarat. of the Minist. of London.
Princes have thought it their service, not only to establishe sound doctrine,
but also to ordain and redress rites. Last of all, thus says Master Bucer,
Bucer. in Mat. 18.
Nibil dicunt, qui perpetuo iactant, maiora esse quae vrgeri oporteat, quam
reformationem ceremoniarum, Antichristi reliquis, patrocinantes. Ceremoniae
enim sunt testes religionis. Secondly, The case so stands now, that the
Magistrate must be a remoouer, or reviver of the Ceremonies controversed: a
weeder or a waterer of them. For, whereas in the latter times of Queen
Elizabeth, they grew toward an Antiquation, now let them prevayle against
the suites of the godly Ministers, who have put them in feate, and they will
crow [vae victis] and triumph more then ever before. Like the pride of women's
apparel in Rome, when being feared by the Lex Oppia, it got the victory over
it. The superstition of these weeds, has grown mightelie heretofore, Mat.
13.25.
even in the husbandmans sleep and negligence, how much more will it sprout
then now, when they shall receive a wateringe from his countenance which is
like dew, Pro. 19.12.
and that to the hurt of the good wheat it self, Heb. 6.8. Ier. 23.29. Pro.
24.31.
for whose sake the Lord has appointed a fire to burn not only an hook to
cut them down?

It is well that Iehu throws down Baal, but it was Pet. Martyr in 2. Reg c.
10. 2 King. 12.3.
expected of him, that he should have banished the Calves of Dan and Bethell
also. It is well that Ioash reformeth Idolles, but his Gualt. in Hos. c. 2.
duty was to down with the high places too. Pilate in policy whippeth
Christ, to save him alive, and to content the Jews. Let the Lutheran follow
this policy, who reformeth popery but in part: Let us think on Master
John Calvines speech: Ioh. Calvin in comment. in Io han. 19: 1.
At qui praestare sepultam esse doctrinam, quam sic flagellari: and upon that
of Peter Martyr, who, speaking of reforming the Doctrine, and not of
Ceremonies, Pet. Martyr. vt sup.
Non est ad hunc modum, in religione agendum (says he) tota enim repurganda
est, and ad viuum eme^danda. If Gods glory move us not, yet let our own
shame. For if a stranger should come over, and see in one prison a papist
committed, for not conforming him self to England, and an Antipapiste
punished, (I mean a Preacher) for not co^forming him self to Rome, would he
not take up again the old Italians admiration, Act and Monum. 1096.
Deus bone, quomodo hic viuunt gentes?

#Sect. 2. Objection answered: If our Church were now in her first
constitution; it were fit to remove the Ceremonies: but being established,
they are to be let alone.
SEcondly, It is to this our most just petition replied, that if our Church
were now in her first constitution, it were fit to remove the Ceremonies,
whereas being already established, they are to be let alone. First, this
supposes that the law has established these ceremonies, and that to
continue, which is not so. they were tolerated for a season, not established.
the law expects a time convenient for the altering of every rite that shall
degenerate or grow to abuse, as these words do plainly show, Stat. 1. Eliz.
c. 1. service and Sacram.
until other order be taken. As Augustine says of the abuses of Martyrs
memorialls, Augustine. epist 64. 2 Samuel 3.39
quod erat tunc dolendum, nunc auferendum est, that lays hold on popish
ceremonies, which though at first they were to be lamented by us, all while
that Zerviahes sons were to hard for Queen Elizabeth; yet now they must be
done away by that power, into whose hands God has given power, to do it
without peril. In deed the time has brought an opportunity with it, which our
Forefathers could not see. then they could not, but now they may, Cicero ad
Artic. li. 11 epist. 9.
quam minimo sonitu be divorsed. Why (say our Reverend Fathers) seeing they
were not done away at first, therefore now they must stay still: seeing
policy calls for Augustus course and defighteth to Cornel. Tacit. Anal li.
1.
insurgere paulatim. which another Dion. li. 5^
Historiographer thus describes, non omnia statim vbi decretum erat executus
est. veritas ne parum succederet, si simul homines transfer and in vertere
vellet, sed quaedam ex tempore disposuit quaedam reiecit in tempus. Secondly,
this reason holds (me thinks) to the contrary. John 4.31.
because the imperfection of predecessors, is by the successors to be
perfected: as what is left in the herb by them, that must by these be ripened:
Cant. 8.9.
and where predecessors have set up a door of wood, there successors must
build a palace of silver.

A worthy example does Iehosaphat give herein: 2 Chronicles. 1^.6.
For when the spirit of God commends him in these words, elato animo suo ad
vias Iehova, amplus adhuc amouit excelsa, and lucos ex Iehuda: what does he
else prescribe to successors, but that they reform amplius adhuc, then the
maine doctrine: and that amplius adhuc then their predecessors did before, as
he reformed the high places adhuc amplius then Asa his Father: who, though he
reformed much, yet left them standing? Would David let alone the Ark of the Lord where Saul did leave it? Or Solomon suffer it where David his Father left
it? Pulled not Hezechia down the high places, which Iehosiphat threw not
down? Josias the Idolles Temples, which Hezechias did not raze? The same
Josias, reformed he not the feast of the Passover? Nehemias the feast of the
Tabernacles, more then ever it was reformed, by any godly or zealous
Magistrate, that went before him? What adverse power (then) envieth that
honor, to our most gracious Sovereign now, above famous Elizabeth, which
she got above King Edward, and which Constantine got above Philip, and
Theodosius above him? Of Constantine it is reported, Caesar Baron. Anal. An.
127.
perfecit Constantinus, quod Philippus iam coeperat. Concerning Theodosius,
thus goes the story, Theodor. histor. Ecclesiast li. ^ cap. 20
Magnus, dignissimus omni laud, qui primus exornavit Imperium pietate, cum
adhuc insanire cerneret orbem terrarum, interdicto suo: sacra Daemonum prorsus
sustulit; fand (tamen) non subvertit; sed Theodosius, funditus subversa,
oblivioni dedit. Whence it came to pass, vt Ruffin. histor Ecclesiast lib 2.
cap. 19.
Idolorum cultus, qui Constantini Magni instituttone negligi, and destrui
coeptus fuerat, eo imperante, collapsus sit poenitus. It King Edward, or Queen
Elizabeth did not poenitus overthrowe popery, we must mark and consider,
they had all the world, (as it were) in fury against them, as Constantine
had. Now the Gospel shines amongst us, as at Math ^urcleef survey o^ discipl.
cap. 28.
high noone. and is it not a shame (then) for us, if any of their morning
clouds (which eclipsed their reformation) remain to be seen in our Horison?
And the day star was not risen so high in their days, when yet Elizabeth
reformed the defectes of K. Edw. communion book; and K. Edw. the defectes of
his own, (and that in the Bucer in Censur. cap. 12.
case of the cross it self) by the edition of a second: Even Rome her self,
(though affecting immunitie from error) has suffered her Breviaries to
bereformed, once under Breuiar. Roman. ex sacra scrip. per Cardinal. Quignonium.
Paul the 3. another time under Pius the 5. Go but to reason, it will not
have us to follow Senec. in lib. de beatitud.
Antecedentium gregem, so preciselie, as if we were sheep, and not reasonable
men? Go to equity, it forbids a Cornel. Tacit. histor. lib. 1.
priscus rigor, cui iam pares non sunt homines. and the Ceremonies grow more
intolerable every day then other, on men that are less able to brook them.
Go to policy, it condemns a perverse affectation of constancy, which does
not turn the stern Plutarch. in Phocion
of the shipp, to serve for every wind and water; both which are now against
the ceremonies, throughout the most part of the Churches. Go to Religion (last
of all) what more Bucer in Censur.
contrary unto it, then old popish fashions? The Kings of Judah were not
blessed of God, but when they purged the land of Jury from all D. Bills. ag.
apolog. p. 1. p. 32.
ceremonies, not prescribed by Moses law. When Valetinian took the course,
which our Opposites now think best, which was to meddle with nothing in Church
affairs, but to leave them as he found them, he escapes not the Censure of
the Godly, no nor of some, of our D. Bills. ibi. p. 2. p. 243
adversaries them selves. Anastasius for peace will have nothing changed, but
he will have every Bishop to be thrust out that either defends or condemns
the Chalcedon Council against the tenent and the custom of his place. what
great hurt he did by this not changing, the Euagr. li. 3 cap. 30.
story will tell you. Germanus stands for Images, the course which he takes
to keep them up, is the same which our Opposites now do follow (to wit) he
charge the Emperor with his oathe, Carol. Sigon. de reg. Ital. lib. 3. An.
729.
se Diuinos Ecclesiae ritus, nulla ex part moturum. Their excuse (therefore)
is nothing worth, which think the ceremonies controversed, must stay amongst
us, because at first they were not thrust out.

#Sect. 3. Answer to this Objection: There is difficulty in the Remo^vall of
Ceremonies, Therefore they are rather to be let alone.
THirdly, it is objected against this our petition, that there is difficulty
in the remouall of the Ceremonies, which rather then it should breed
inconvenience, they are to be let alone. First of all it excuses not the
sluggard when he says there is a Lion in the way, nor the bad husband when he
sows not, because he fears there is foul weather toward. Pro. 26.13.
Ecclesi. 11.4.
The Priests of Theodor. histor. li. 5. cap. 22.
Serapis in old time made the people believe, that if any should draw near
his Image to remove it, motum exoriturum and omnia occidione interitura. The
like craft use our Opposites in their maintayning of the corruptions of our
Church: They bear men in hand, the reforming of them, would bring heaven and
earth together. Here who is wise, like Theophil, of Alexandria, to discern
this scar-crowe? In deed, what difficulty in this business, unless it be in
the continuing, and perpetuating of them, since their remouall is ever looked
for: the people of Parliament speaking now as once of old, Rise, for the
matter pertayneth to thee, be of good courage, and do it, Ezra 10.4. Secondly,
This excuse has place, when there is no need of a change, as there was no
need to change the old Calender, for the Popes new one, whereupon happened
great hurly-burlye, both at David Chytre. in Rodolph. 2
Riga in Lyvonia, and at Augusta: whereas the remoual of these needless
ceremonies, is most needful, for that they make against faith and good
manners, as has been showed: in which case Augustine. epist. 119. cap. 19.
Augustine will not have them to be tolerated in a Church. Thirdly, this fear
of difficulty and inconvenience, goes for good payment, when the evil to be
changed, is likely in time to languish of it self in case it be let alone,
but to get strength, if it be sturred, the Magistrate being as a Physician, who
the^ must let an abuse alone, Titus Liuius lib. 22
quando quiet magis proficit, quam agendo and mouendo: which here has no
place, because it is impossible that either the scandal, or superstition of
these ceremonies, should in their lives time dye, or be healed by their rest,
which does (indeed) much strengthen them. Fourthly, fear of inconvenience and
difficulty then holds water, when time convenient is not stayed for, and
therefore served for Q. Elizabeth and K. Edward, if for any, when men's weak
vessels newly converted, could not bear (without breaking) the new wine, of
an exact reformation in all things: whereas to us there may be applied, Mat.
9.17.
what one of our writers has, Bucer in Mat. 18.
non pauci, etc. not a few fearing trouble, indeavoring in vain to please God
and men together, even where the Gospel has been a long time preached, and
where the word does now require example of deeds, pretending the infirmity
of others (whereas their own weakness does only withholde them) do both
themselves serve man's traditions, and compel others thereunto. Fifthly, this
fear of inconvenience, does pass for current, when a Magistatte is unable to
reform: in this case only Senec.
honest succumbit, qui seruit tempori. at this time only Cicero ad Attic. li.
12 epist. 1.
parendum tempori. they being Cornel. Tacit. Anal. lib. 3.
adulta, and prevalida vitta, which are alone to be tolerated, in which
potius est omittere, quam illud assequi, vt palam fiat, quibus flagitijs
impares simus. And the physic which must be forborne, as immature, is when
the sickness being in full strength, it rather Senec. de consolat. ad Heluia
Matrem.
irritateth then cures. even as the old counsel goes; multa August. epist.
119.
tolleranda, vbi facultas non datur resecandi, and the new, Francis. Iun.
instit: princip. in praefat.
expendere convenit, non solum quod debeas, sed quid possis. Now what strength
in the corruptions of our Church, to make resistance? who are struck through,
throughout the Realm, and have no means to maintain life, but the plasters,
drugges, and salues which the Bishops and their dependantes; minister to
them? Now by the judgment of Saint Augustine. ibid.
Augustine, we are not only to leave them languishing, but also even to stop
their breath. for his words are these: Though a Ceremony have not evident
hurt, yet because it is unfit, the Church (now) should be burdened with
humane presumptions, if it have no authority from scripture, nor from general
Counsels, nor from the custom of the Universal Church, but is of a variable
and doubtful beginning, vbi facultas tribuitur, absque omni dubitatione,
resecanda. Are not our ceremonies humane presumptions? are they not burdensome
to the Church? does any modern Council command them? does any Church,
beside our own, use them? are they not in nature variable, and uncommanded in
the word? Nay, are they not (indeed) to be varied, because contrary to the
word? I end with the words which one writes against the Cross, Calfh.
against Mar. praesa. fol. 10.
Beware of these Siren tunes, these inchaunting charms, that the wise men of
the world are wont to use, bear for a time; use discretion; be not rash in
reformation. etc. we are rather to hearken to Christ him self, To walk in the
light, whiles we have the light: if the miste, thorough our sufferance, once
ouercast the clear shining of the Sun, darkness sooner will overtake us, then
we would.

#Sect. 4. Answer to this Objection, The change of a law brings dishonor of
an Innovation, and extenuates the laws authority.
FOurthly and last of all, It is replied to this our petition, that though no
inconvenience be discerned, nor difficulty seen, yet the very change of a
law, brings dishonor of an innovation, and extenuateth the laws
authority. First this excuse holds, when there is no need of change, nor
profit by it: even as Augustine. epist. 112. cap. 5.
Augustine does restrain it in these words: mutatio quae vtilis non est,
perturbatione infructuasa, consequenter noxia est. In the cause of Ceremonies,
as it swerueth too far from the true line, P. Martyr. in 1. Sam. cap. 14.
Hester 2.1. and 1.8. Dan. 6 13.16.
when ceremonies once cease to be profitable, they are without all sticking to
be removed. So also it draws too near the iron leavell of a Persian
affected constancy: which while some imitate, they draw upon themselves this
censure, Magistratus Amand. Polan. in Dan. ibid.
ne quidem inconsideratum edictum retractabunt, ne vilescat ipsorum authoritas;
and quia affectant laudem constantiae, quam non discernunt a perversa animi
obstinatione, tum denique ne videantur concessisse quicquam servis Dei recta
monentibus. This excuse holds also where the change infers a violent,
burdensome, and notorious noveltie; as Augustine does restrain it again,
August. epist. 18.
ipsa mutatio consuetudinis, etiam quae vtilitate adiuvat, novitate perturbat.
which in the ceremonies has no place, because the Churches long since have
banished them, and many Parishes here at home, a long time disvsed them, with
the good and willing contentement of the people. In the third place this excuse
holds, when the change is for the worse, even as an historian does restrain
it Cornel. Tacit. Anal li. 15.
melius atque rectius olim provesum, and quae convertuntur in deterius,
mutantur: which in the ceremonies has no place neither, because the corn (I
mean the doctrine) will prosper the better, when they are purged of these
weeds: in which case Ambrose is to be heard, Ambros. in epistol. ad Theodos.
and Valent.
Nullus pudor est, ad meliora transire. And Augustine. epist. 45
Augustines comfort: Foelix est necessitas, quae in meliora compellit. There
will be perchance objected, what an Emperor has, Augustine. Imperat apuddion.
lib. 52.
Quae in suo statu eademque manent, etsi deteriora sunt, tamen vtiliora sunt
reipublicae quam quae per innovationem vel meliora inducuntur. But what is this
to rites religious? the end of which is not properly l pax politica (as the
German Divines once held against the Adiaphorisme Ceremonies) but the glory
of God and the edifying of the Church, both which require that every custom of
Forefathers, which is amiss, be presently purged, and new rites setteled in
their room, which may be fitted diverslie as the times them selves are
Ludovic. Lavater. in Hest. Homil. 34.
diverse. where the Canon law takes strictest order for the Churches
observations, that none should change them, there Gratian puts in this
caveat, Gratian. decret. p. 2. cause. 35. q. 9 cap. 2.
quae illi^tte a praedecessoribus admissa inveniuntur, in melius revocari
oportet. And in the chapter that next follows, when the decree it self
speaks thus: Ibid. c. 3.
Qui in causis Dei, quod perperam fecit abolere, aut quod a praedecessoribus
suis male invenerit admissum vitare noluerit, in se quicquid in alio non
resecaverit inveniet: it plainly teaches, that though in civil affairs, an
old bad custom may seem better, then some good new one, yet that in causis
Dei, an old bad custom must be cut of, or punishment expected. A little
after, a change is commanded Ibid. cap. 6
pro consideratione aetatum, vel temporum, as Paul did some things without
lenity, quae postea dignoscitur reprobasse. In this case Augustine has this
similitude: As a patient may not mislike or call in question his physicians
skill, Augustine. cont. Paust Manich. li. 32. c. 14.
si aliud ille hodie praecipiat, aliud cras, prohibens (etiam) quod antea
praeceperat, sic. n. se habet sanandi, eius corporis ratio: so none must
mislike a variable, or a contrary change, in the ceremonies of Gods service,
because the Churches edification does require it. Secondly, the imposition of
the ceremonies, breeds the greatest change that may be in the Churches
where they have been long time disvsed. Can there be any change like to this,
that the people after twenty or thirty years, must now in the Church see
dumb dogs in stead of Preachers? in the pulpit hear Homilies in stead of
Sermons, and have those ceremonies return again, of which some say, we have
lived long enough, if now we must see this popish trashe reenter? Never yet
did the reducing of popish ceremonies, but breed disguste: to continue them is
one thing (say our Beza in epist. 8. and 12
writers) to reduce them, an other. To reduce them (said the Conrad.
Schlusselb. ^o^. 13.
Divines of Germany) is to disturb the peace of the Church, to grieve the
Godly, to wound the weak, to countenance popery, by show of inclination
toward it, or of commoderation with it. It will be said the fault hereof is
in the men, who first disvsed them; whom the Canon Law excuses, Siluest.
Prier. in summa verb. conluetud. sect. 6.
si consuetudo contra legem sit contra privatam vtilitatem and in nullius
preiudicium, and superior scit and tolerat legem abrogat, and no^ requiritur
alia prescriptio secundum Dominum Antoninum, quia ex quo superior vidit and
tolerat, non videtur velle inijcere vinculum. Et Panor. dicit: quod sufficit
binus aut trinus actus vt tollatur. Thirdly, whereas laws sometimes, must be
changed, upon some causes, these causes (all of them) will be found in the
ceremonies controversed. The Thom. Aquin. 1.2. qu. 97,
first Cassander him self yields to (though most infamous for Adiaphorisme)
Herman. Hamelman de tradit. appendic. ad p. 1. colum. 498:
In traditionibus ratio and causa spectanda est, qua manente, and ipsas manner
vtile est: cessante vero, and ipsae cessare, vel possunt vel debent. For
example; abstinence from blood and strangled are they not ceased, now that the
reason is extinct, for which the Apostle did command them, which was the
weakness of the Jews, and the coalition of the Gentiles with them? change but
the name, and this is spoken of the ceremonies now in handling: for as much as
they were left by K. Edw. and Q. Elizabeth, for our own weakness, and for the
winning of papists to us, the former of which is now out of date, the latter
out of place. The second cause to abolish ceremonies, is, when Thom. Aquin.
1.2. qu. 97. art. 1.
thorough change of times and persons, they do even hurt (as Augustine. epist.
118.
Augustine says) propter fidem and bonos mores, velemendare oportet, quod
perperam fiebat, vel institui quod non fiebat. What a thing is it, that the
Ceremonies which first were tolerated for the winning of papists, should
still be suffered, now that they harden them? Must incurvation toward the East
be still continued, because Forefathers left it in use? No, a Leo Leo sermon. 7.
de Not. Dom.
will change and alter it, though never so ancient; because he sees, it
hardens Pagans in their adoring the Sun. Must the custom of oblations for
the memorialls of the Martyrs be still continued because it is ancient? No,
Ludouic. Viues in August de civitat. Dei. lib. 8. c. 27.
an Ambrose will change and alter it, for that show of conformity which it
has with the heathen. A Council. Antisiodorens. can. 5.
vigil in Ste Martins honor was changed and altered, though very ancient.
Feasts Martin. Braccarens. in collect. Sinodor. can. 60.
at the sepulchers of the dead were changed and altered though very ancient.
Council. Cabiloneus. Can. 19.
Dancing at the dedication of Churches and Festiuities of Martyrs was changed
and altered, though very ancient. It may be objected, that tracte of time,
makes aliene rites more lawful then they were at first, as bays set up
before the door, was in the primitive Church unlawful for that conformity,
whereof it made show with Idolaters, whereas afterward Nepotian is praised by
Hierome, Hieron. epist. 3.
Quod Ecclesias Martyrum diversis floribits, vitiumque pampinis exornaret. But
either Hierome was too blame to allow of this conformity with the Pagans, now
that the time of their weakness was paste, or else there were no Pagans near,
to be hardened by the same. The third cause to remove a Ceremony, is to
vindicate Christian liberty, from the servitude of the element, as Bucer
says, Bucer. in Mat. 18.
It is time when the Gospel has been long preached, exemplo tueri libertatem,
for which he wishes the Surplice away: inferring thus: It is our duty Idem in
Censur. c. 2. p. 458.
libertatem Christianam, in rebus quibusvis, praeclare tueri and prae nobis
far. It is to be marked, that in rebus quibusvis, we are to abstain, though
never so small, and use exemplis libertatis contra adversarios pertinaces, I
mean the Papists, as Luther taught, and many Conrad. Schlusselb. Catalog.
haere^cor. 573.
Divines in Germany after him: in following whom, we trace the stepps of the
holy Apostle, who though he circumziseth Tymothie, yet refuses to circumcize
Titus to uphold the Christian liberty against those Jews who thought
Circumcizion necessary, as now the papists think of the Cross and Surplice.
And such is the equity of our first petition, Gal. 2.16
that these ceremonies may be removed.

#Sect. 5. Second suit, that Ceremonies may neither be judged good or
indifferent in regard of circumstances being hurtful.
Our second suite is, that if they must needs have a tente amongst us, that
then it be pight without the host amongst the leapers, I mean amongst things
acknowledged evil, that so they may be no longer approved either for good or
for indifferent, but be in policy tolerated only for the hardness of men's
hearts, like Moses divorce. For what though the Cross and Surplice [per se]
be things indifferent, ratione circumstantiarum, they are certainly evil. If
any here renew the tenent of the ancient Adiaphoristes, Mat. 19.8.
Libellus supplicato. Theolog-German. ann. 1561 Romans 14.14 (...) Flac. Illirc.
in lib. de Adiaphor. 2 Cor. 10.23.
Quod per se malum non est, id ratione circumstantiarum, malum fieri non
potest, we make our appeal to Scriptures, Fathers, Schole-divines, new
Writers, or whomsoever. Paul affirms of meats (...) per se they are good,
or as Chrysostom, Theophylact, Erasmus, render (...) natura, when by reason of
a circumstance, by him there mentioned, they become unclean and evil. Neither
has Paul the words only of the former distinction, but also the doctrine,
which "one delivers in these terms, saepe accidit, vt ea quae sua natura
licita sunt, vel etiam aeliquatenus piae, tamen ob circumstantias aliquas,
fiant illicita in quam sententiam Paulus inquit, Tertul. de coron. mili
Omnia mihi licent; sed non omnia expediunt. Thus the scriptures. Now what the
Fathers? Substantia munda, vt Dei resest, says Tertul. and hac sua condition
communis vsui, sed ipsius vsus administratio interest. August. epist. 86. ad
Casulan.
August. holds a fast on the Sabbath, a thing per se indifferent, which yet
because of this circumstance that it is scandalous, by reason of the Manichees
fasting, he holds to be unlawful. What now the Schoole-divines? as actions
(say Thom. Aquin. 1.2. q 18 art. 3.
they) are qualified to be good or evil, formaliter by their obiectes and
their ends. so accidentaliter they are qualified to be good or to be evil by
the circumstances, that do attend them. Thus the Schoole-divines. What now
the Canonistes? They Gratian. decret. p. 2. c. 22. q. 4. cap 23.
teach a thing is lawful or unlawful, not only natura sui, but also ex causa
extravenienti. And what our own writers? They make Ceremonies Conrad.
Schulsselb. catalog. haereti. tom 13. p. 466.
vel per se, vel per accidens superstitiosas. and the doctrine in general
which they deliver touching things that are indifferent, runs thus: Ioh.
Brentius in lib. de Adiaph.
Adiaphora neque bona sunt neque mala, respectu sui, ex conditionibus ergo suis
iudicanda sunt. Zanch. co meant. in Ephesians ca. 5. loc. de bap
Zanchius speaking of salt, spittle, and the rest of the Crosses fellows in
baptism, these are not per se mala (says he) yet by reason of the
circumstance of superstition, they must be abolished. Our Opposites busily
object against us, Pet. Martyr in epist ad Hooper Glocest.
that Peter Martyr holds the ceremonies that are in controversy, to be
indifferent. and that Master Beza says, Theod. Beza epist. 11.
the Cross and Surplice have nihil impium per se. we answer: though Peter
Martyr held the Surplice indifferent per se, yet for some circumstance he held
it unlawful. witness this, he never Pet Mart. in epist. amie. ^uida^ in Angl.
wore it, though his Canons place at Oxon did require it. Mr Beza, though he
hold the sign of the Cross to be indifferent per se, yet ratione
circumstantiarum he says of it, Beza epi. 8
multo minus velim Crucem inter Adiaphora numerare, quam aeneum illum serpentem
Hezechias. Thus another of our Writers, Calfhill. cont. Mart art. 5. fol. 125
Certain provisoes had, the order of the Church must be kept in things
indifferent, but in this number ye can not justly comprise the Cross. and
although of some of the Fathers it has been accounted such, yet must you
remember they did not always build gold and silver but sometimes hay and
stubble on Christ. Now the circumstances which make these ceremonies to be
unlawful being general, and such as always cleave to their religious use, as
their Idolatry, superstition, and hypocrisy, whereof before with the rest
that must follow, we cannot hear them, who would have us, for the testifying
of our obedience now and then, to use them: even as the Conrad. Schlusselb. tom
13. p. 641.
Divines of Germany could not allow of those Pastors of Misnia, which one day
performed the ceremonies of the Interim, but an other day omitted them. Our
own doctrine makes Homil. tom (...) ag. peril. of Idolat pa. 1. page 43.
Images of themselves indifferent, whereas their circumstance of standing in
churches makes them evil and no longer Ibid. pa. 3 p^. 96. 97.
indifferent. So it is with the ceremonies, the circumstance of their religious
use is totally unlawful: And this for their first error, who deny us this
second petition, which is, that things indifferent per se, do not become by
reason of circumstance to be indifferent no longer. A second error they run
into, like the Adiaphoristes once Libellus s^o^li^^^o. Theolog. German. 1561.
semper perinde licet ceremonijs vti, as if the things were the same in
particular action which they are in their kind, and so as well in the one, as
in the other indifferent alike. For thus one, examine. of the declar. of the M.
of London.
there may be a good use of these ceremonies, therefore the Magistrate may call
for the execution of them: meaning such an execution as is exact and absolute.
For the breaking of this spear, we tender a second schoole-position, Tho.
Aquin. 1.2.18 art. 9.
Indifferency rests only in the general kind, when we come to the
particular execution, every action is good or evil. So that in actu exercito
nullum datur indifferens. To this our Writers do agree, Atque de his rebus,
etc. about things indifferent, this must be received for a sure rule (says P.
Matyr in comm^^. in 1. cor. 6.12.
Peter Martyr) that they have their indifferency seated in their kind and
nature only, but when we come down to election, there nothing is indifferent,
because our election must of necessite be either good or evil. Ioh Brent. in
lib. de Adiaphor.
Si bona est conditio. etc. A thing indifferent becomes good, when the
condition of his practice is good; and then his observation is commanded: but
he becomes evil, when the condition of his practice is evil, and then his
observation is forbidden. May. Thomas Morton. Apolog. p. 1. li. 1. c. 47
Morton citing this sentence of Vasquez, Nulla est individua actio, humana quae
est indifferens, sed propter circumstantias necessario vel bona vel mala, si
Thomae and omnibus Thomastis credimus, adds of his own for his judgment
herein, credendum est omnino. what a loose reasoning (then) is this, there may
be a good use of these ceremonies, therefore the Magistrate may call for an
exact execution of them? For as there may be a good use of the^, so may there be
an ill: else are they not indifferent. For what is the meaning of the word, but
this, Benedic. Aret. Problem lo 58
Adiaphora sunt indistincta, dubia, vtroque vergentia. What is the definition
of a thing indifferent, but this, P. Martyr commenta. in 1. Sam, cap. 14.
Adiaphora sunt quibus been aut male vti possumus? So Hierom. Hieron. cont
lo^iman li. 2. cap. 29.
Indifferentia nec bona, nec mala sunt, sed velut in meditullio posita, vsu and
eve^tu, vel bona vel mala fiunt. Again, Idem in Isay ca. 55.
Indifferentia sunt nec bona nec mala, and pro vtentium qualitate variantur.
August. August. epist 19.
considering a Saterdayes fast in general, calls it [medium] when he
co^sideres it done expediently, he calls it acceptabile. By all this it is
apparent, that the use of a thing indifferent, may be ill as well as good: what
reason to the contrary? For Ca^^tan. in Thom. Aquin. vb. sub.
non est in re indifferenti pa^ticipatio boni sed abnegatio tantum. Let the
Magistrate then command an exact execution of a thing indifferent, and let it
also be lawful for him, sometimes to command a sin. I trust I need not
fear here that any opposite will affirm, that the evil use of a thing
indifferent becomes good when the Magistrate does command it, seeing one of
the most learned of the^ has given us a quietus esto from this objection, when
he says, D. Bills. ag. the Apolo. p. 2. p. 338.
Good and evil are to be measured by Gods laws, not by man^: for as no man is
good but only God, so no man's law is the rule of good and evil, but only
Gods. And te^porall things are neither good nor evil but altogether
indifferent, ergo Princes were not ordained of God for temporal things, but the
goods, bodies and lives of their subjects be committed to them for the
preservation of faith and good manners. In the margent hereof we find these
words: Worldly things be neither good nor evil, Romans 13.4. 1 Pet 2.14.
for which two causes Princes bear the sword. I marvel what those Opposites
of ours will say to this, who have nothing in their mouths against us, but
this, that if we leave not an absolute power in things indifferent to the
Magistrate, that the^ we leave him no power at all. For what have we here
affirmed? Princes are not ordained for worldly things, because they are
indifferent. Princes are ordained for good and evil, to further the one, and
resist the other: worldly things are not such, and indifferent things are not
such: therefore the power of the Prince does not consiste in worldly things,
quatenus worldly. nor in things that are indifferent, quatenus they be
indifferent. This out of our Opposites own confession: to show that the
Magistrate has no other power, but that which the Apostle had, to wit, a power
to edification, and not to destruction: which in things that are indifferent,
furthereth the good use thereof, because it does edify, but corrects the
evil use, because it does destroy. But what if it were granted, that the
Magistrate had absolute power in a thing indifferent? know they not, that when
an il circumstance cleaves to their use, that then Benedict. Arct. Proble.
loc. 58.
desinunt esse adiaphora? Magdebu. centur. 1. li 2. cap. 10.
Adiaphororum naturam exuunt? Harmon. confess. sect 17. ex Helvet posterior.
libera esse desinunt? Ibid. confess. Augusta. art. 7
Non iam sunt medio. Josias Simler. in Exodus 20. mandat. 2. fol. 85.
Iam non sunt libera. Zaueh. de Imag. c. 15. page 357.
Iam est ab illis abstinendum.

#Sect. 6. 3. Suit, that practiced commanding of Ceremonies be reformed for
time to come, and the Church freed from diverse greevances: As that there be 2.
Gods. etc.
Our third suite is, that the practiced commanding of them be reformed for
time to come, and we freed from diverse greevances, brought upon us by the
same. First we are grieved to hear, that there are two Gods, the one in
heaven commanding absolutely in matters necessary: the other in earth,
commanding absolutely in things indifferent. Bellarm. de Pontifi. lib. 4. c. 16
Bellarmine him self speaks not so audaciouslie: for he draws the absolute
authority of Man, not from God as he is God, but as he is Legis-lator only.
Now this distinction notwithstanding, Mat. Sut. de Pontifi. lib 4. cap. 7
Sybrand. Lubbert. de pap. Roman. li. 8. c. 7 Fran. Iun. controuers. 2. lib. 4.
ca. 16. not. 8.
our writers all hold his allotting of an absolute power to man, is
blasphemous. his allotting it to the Pope, makes him Antichrist, sitting in
the Temple of God, as if he were God. And whereas Andradius agrees with
Bellarmine, and so holds that man may partake an authority non limitata, our
common writers build up against him this sure principle, Chemnit. exam. page
202.204.
Nulla est plenitudo potestatis amongst men. Fran. Iun. controuers. 3. lib. 4
ca. 16. not. 89.
Plenitudo potestatis non est instrumenti, sed solius principalis causae. A.
Willet. controuers. 4. qu. 5. p. 3
The Princes high, and sovereign authority, we make not infinite; the word of
God must be his rule and square. So that the Idem controuer. 2. que. 4. p. 2.
ceremonies which he commands, must be limited to the rules of the
scripture, which require order and decency, for the glory of God, and the
edification of the Church. This is that which Tertul. wrote long since and
August. after him. the former of which, requires in a ceremony, Tertul. de
coro^. milit.
vt fidei congruat, saluti proficiat, disciplinae conducat. The latter denies
that to be indifferent, which is August. epist. 118. cap. 11.
contra fidem and bonos mores. Ibid cap 4
freeing us from every ceremony that has either of these faults, as these
ceremonies now in handling have them both. Here of late Peter Martyr P. Martyr
comment. in hunc. loc
taught, No rite by any man's authority, is well ordained, unless the rules be
observed, which God sets down, to wit, in the 1. Cor. 14. The latest of
all, thus one of our Opposites: D. Bills. ag. Apolog. p. 2. pa. 344.
To devise new rites and ceremonies of the Church, is not the Princes vocation,
but to receive and allow such as the Scriptures and Canons commend, and such
as the Bishops and Pastors of the place shall advise, not infringing the
scriptures or Canons, and so for all other Ecclesiastical things and causes.
Princes be neither the devisers, nor directors of them, but the Confirmers and
establishers of that which is good, and displacers of that which is evil.
Secondly, we are grieved, that we have these ceremonies enforced upon us, by
the mere will of our Reverend Fathers, who have thought us unworthy that any
reason should be given us, or assuming us unto conference, 1 Cor 11.6.
have expected we should obey although they have given us no better reason then
such as (for the sleightnes of them) have confirmed us in our opinion more then
before. Paul him self will prove the covering of the woman to be decent, both
by the law of God and nature, before he throw it on the church. Tertuli. in
Apolo. cap. 4.
Nulla lex sibi soli conscientiam iustitiae suae debet, sed ijs a quibus
obsequium expectat, (says Tertull.) coeterum suspecta lex est quae probari se
non vult, improba (autem) si non probata, dominetur. When Augustine was asked
his judgment about the ceremony of the Satersdayes fast, he would not (...)
epist. 118. cap. 11.
admonere sola sua authoritaete, nulla addita ratione. The same thrusts out
every ceremony of which it is doubtful, Idem epist. 119.
quam rationem sequuti sunt, who first ordained it. Constantine in the question
of Easter, followed that, which Socrat. histor. lib. 5 cap 22.
accurata ratione appetebatur. Hieron. epist 152.
Hierome condemns every Pythagoras in the Church, that looks to be believed
or obeyed for his own credit and authority without good reason. The papists
themselves affirm, that Andr. Piris de leg. lib. 2. cap. 2
ratio is anima legis. yea the most ridged and sternest papists, that it is
Siluest. Prier. in summa. verb. consuetud. and alib. passim
de essentia legis to be r^tionabilis. They which gainestande this tenent, Io.
Bodin de re publi.
attainte the justice of our English Laws, which always come forth with a
reason premised, showing the cause, the ground, and the equity of them. As for
Ecclesiastical ceremonies, the admonition prefixed before our commun. book,
thinks well of none, which have not Bucer. in Censur.
ratione^ manifestam for edification. There is objected unto this, Senec.
epist. 95.
lex iubet, non disputat. It belongs to the nature of a law, vt Aristot.
ethic. lib. 10. cap 9.
vim habeat cogendi. And the Apostles impose their Canons on the church
Chrysostom. in act. honul. 33.
per breuem epistolam neque epich remata, neque sillogismos habentem, sed
imperium. But the best is, none but Bellarmi. controuers. 3 li 4. c. 16
papists hitherto have thus objected as for our F. Iun. controuer. 3. li 4. c.
16 Nota. 8.
writers, they thus confront them, seeing the laws of man come short of that
perfection which is in the law of God, and that which is best in them,
receaueth weight, not of it self, sed a ministerij authoritate, therefore they
bind not to obedience, without some reason, that can prove, that they agree
with the law of God most perfect, and have warrant from his word. They reply
besides, that F. Iun vb^ sup. nota. 86.87.95.
dispositiones ecclesiasticae, non sunt verae leges. they are (...) rather, and
(...), as they are usually called, Canones, quae dirigunt agentes voluntario,
non. a necessitatem faciunt, vt leges solent. who have the administering of
these laws, but the Bishopes? Now it is not for a Bishop to Mat. Sutcliu. de
Pontific. li. 4. cap. 7. ex Origin.
offerre vim and necessitatem. It is for them Chrysostom. tract 12. in Math.
suadere only, not vim offerre.

As for the Magistrate, let him consider, how Constantine the great, proceeded
in the ceremonies of the Church. For when he took orders for Easter, and that
as Bellarmine will have it, with this direction, Bellarm. de cult Sa^ctor. c 12
visum est vt omnes obtemperarent, he presented it with a letter of exhortation
Socrat. histor. lib. 5. cap. 21.
only. wherein he proves it with such reasons, as fight directly against the
ceremonies controversed. this one especially he will not have Easter kept the
same day with the Jews, Eusebius de vit. Constant. li. 3. c 18
vt nihil nobis cum illorum consuetudine sit commune. Neither did the Apostles
enjoin their Canons on the Church imperio only. James and Peter alleged very
good reason for them: the rest of the Assembly had great disputation and
reasoning about them before they were concluded. In regard hereof we wish
that equity were now surviving, which we find in a little book that
begins with this treatise, whether it be mortal sin to transgress a
Civil Law or no. The whole book was set forth, by some great man at the
beginning of this broyle; it contains the judgments of learned men for a
conformity to these rites. It were hard if our Reverend Fathers now would
not allow us the bread it breaks, which is this, Alleging Gerson, he
makes even the civil laws which are for necessity, and which are for
comeliness only (such as our ceremonies controversed are pretended to be)
members opposite in one division: and then infers, this difference likes
me, not only because [REASON] breeds sundry bonds, but rather because the
mind of the Magistrate is evident, which in the former matters that serve for
common peace and quietness, as of theft, murder, and so forth, simply
requires obedience. in other lighter matters which are only for comeliness
(as that a woman marry not, till she has left mourning for her former
husband) he does not so exact it. By this our Governors should not intend
any simple obedience in a matter of comeliness; much less intend it without
good reason: whose bond we see tyeth not men necessarily to observation. G.
Cassander, speaking out of Erasmus about Church Ceremonies: G. Casia^. in
Consult. art. 15.
Nullus est vere pius (says he) qui si rem attente consideret, non mallet in
his rebu obligationem versam in exhortationem. What? shall an Adiaphoriste be
more moderate, then Orthodoxe Bishops? Cardinal Aliacus in the binding of
Clerks ad Matutina and vespaereina officia, and to the fastings of their
Church, has these words, Pet. Aliac de reform. Eccle. ca. 3.
de his (says he) and de multis alijs similibus videtur expediens declarare,
quod non sunt praecepta, sed consilia. What? shall a Cardinal be a better
reformer, then a true Christian? wherein are our ceremonies better accounted of
by us, then the Aue Maria, the palm, the holy water, with the like, by the
papist? which are not enjoined Bellar. de pontific. li. 4. cap. 8.
tanquam leges sed tanquam admonitiones, and vt piae institutiones sine
obligatione ad culpam. What? shall Antich. give more liberty in his
ceremonies, then the true church of Jesus Christ? D. Bilson vb. sup. p. 3 page
75.
Princes have a warm suite (says one of our Reverend Fathers) to depend on
his laws, a reason of whose fact, no man may ask him? The Ibid. page 2. page
316.
same thinks it sacrilegious in the papists to apply the words of Samuel,
not to obey is the sin of witchrafte to enforce obedience to the
constitutions of their Church. Mr Morton imputes it as heinous to the Romish
inquisition, that as Agrippa said before, Thomas Morton. Apolog. p. ^. li. 2.
c. 19
si quis opinionem suam defendere conetur, mox iratis buccis respondent, non
esse illi negotium cum scholaribus ad cathedram, sed cum iudicibus ad tribunal.
Now I appeal unto the consciences of our heaviest adversaries, whether they
have not known us scorned for asking a reason? Whether they have not heard the
words of Samuel laid to our charge? Finally, whether it be not to their
knowledge a common answer, ye stand before your Judge; you come hither to be
judged: ye are not now in the schools, but before a tribunal? Against these
courses, we tender this our third petition in the words of their own law,
si ergo de hac re. etc. If ye can give a reason (for Conformity) I would you
would show it us, Decret. p. 2 c. 24. quest. 3. cap. 1.
vt possimus and nos (that so we may remain in our Ministry, and conform
with you.) But if you cannot, consider what rashness it is for you to do that,
vnde si interrogati fueritis rectam ratione^non valeatis invenire?

#Sect. 7. Diverse instances wherein the imposing and defense of Ceremonies, are
found greevous.
THirdly, we feel the imposing of these Ceremonies to be greevous and
burdensome, in that as we have received hitherto no satisfaction from our
governors,, Sect. 7.
by any sound reason for them, so liberty is denied to us, to satisfy our
selves, by seeking reasons whereon to ground, either our judgment in their
general nature, or our conscience in the use individual of them. Touching the
former, for a subject to examine the Law of his Magistrate (says See the
answer to the examinat. of the declarat. of the M. of London. page 27.
one of our Opposites) is to presume, and usurp authority above his
Superiors, more then is allowed now: that the prophecy is fulfilled, Kings
shall be their noursing Fathers, and Queens their noursing Mothers. If this
were spoken of Civil laws, it had some color, but in matters that are
religious, it has none. Civil matters are proper to the Magistrate, private
men have not to do with them, but matters religious are iuris publici. In
civil matters also, it is often Gods commandment, that the reason with the
whole project, should be kept close, whereas the matters of his service, all
must be clear and manifest to all men's consciences; and every thing preached
and published (as it were) upon the house topp. Upon these and the like
grounds, thus one of our writers, P. Martyr commenta. in 1. Sam. cap. 14.
magnum est discrimen inter ecclesiastica decreta, and politica. quorum necesse
est, illa minus obstringere conscientias. nam in ecclesiasticis spectanda est
eutaxia, in politicis (autem) parendum est, quamvis tu eam eutaxiam non videas.
In these ceremonies (then) controversed, what hinders a private man to say,
what a F. Pic. Mirandula. in orat. ad Leonem. to de reform moribus.
papist said once to a Pope, out of that desire of reformation, which now
sincerely is in us, Quod suapte natura pertinet ad omnes, id a me alienum esse
non cogito. To think the contrary, to wit, that private men have not These. de
Adiaphor. Theolog. Saxo^: apud. Conrad Schlnsselb. Tom. 13. page 464.
potestatem repudiandi Ecclesia ceremonias, quantumvis pias and iustas, causas
proferre pos^int, sieve ea obtrusio a politicis, sieve ab Ecclesiasticis fiat, is
to nenewe that ancient servitude, of the Germane Adiaphorisme, wherewith the
Godly would never suffer them selves to be entangled. And (indeed) what reason?
Is not the law of Nature against it? For what Chrysostom. 1 Thessalonians. 5.
Chrysostom pleaded, for the duty, that may we plead for the liberty of
examining: Oues estis, sed rationales. Is not the law of Gods word against
it, prove all things, hold fast that which is good? On which Hieron. Epist.
152.
Hierome, estote probati nummularij, vt si quis nummus adulter est, and figuram
Caesaris non habeat, nec signatus est moneta publica, reprobetur. Is it not
against the doctrine of the Fathers? Origin (I grant) requires obedience in
the Churches observations, Orig in lib. Number.
et si ratio non pateat. and Chrisost. is alleged as peremptory, Chrysostom.
in These. homil. 4.
traditio est, nihil amplius desidera. which if they mean not de ratione
priuata, they rushe against that, which is more truly delivered thus,
Chrysostom. in psalm 95. homil 1.
Si quid dicitur absque scriptura, auditoris cogitatio claudicat, mutatque. And
again, Tertul in lib. de coron. milit.
rationis diuinae patrocinium expostula, saluo traditionis respectu: quocunque
traditore censetur: nec authorem respicias, sed authoritatem. Is it not against
the doctrine of the modern Churches? Thus Muscul. loc. co^mun. de tradit. cap.
5.
one of our writers, There needs diligent discretion, that a Minister accept
not those things for indifferent, which either because they are against the
word of God, or because of superstition, and wicked service, deserve just
abomination. Another thus: Chemnit. exam. page 2. fol. 35.
Liberty must not be taken away, to condemn or disvse a ceremony, whe^by
the word of God, it is found that he serves not for edificatio^, neither can
be kept without impiety. Another thus: Willet. controuers. 4. q. 5. p. 3
This we hold, that it is the duty of all Christians to try and examine the
truth of all things, which they are to receive, though they sit not formally
and iudicially as in Co^sistories, to judge their spiritual Pastors. Last of
all, when Martial inveigheth against us, as curious (as now we are by our own
brethren inveighed against) for that in the custom of the cross we require
scripture: It is our duty (says Master Calfhill) to have an eye to Gods
law, and to see what accords with it. seeing our Opposites receive not this
Divinity of theirs, neither from the light of nature, nor from the word, nor
from the Fathers, nor from the late writers, from whom (I marvayle) do they
borrowe it, unless it be from papists. Surely not from all of them neither.
Thomas Aquinas upon these words [Iudge you what I say] demands the
question, whether an inferior may judge of the factes of his Superior, and
resolves, Thom. Aquin. in 1. cor. 10. sect 4. see D. Bilson aga. Apolog. p. 2.
pa. 353.
non debent iudicare iudicio superordinationis, sed licet iudicio discretionis.
Whereas Bernard de praecept and dispensat.
Bernard speaks somewhat blindly for blind obedience imperfecti cordis, and
infirmae prorsus voluntatis inditium est, statua Seniorum, studiosius
discutere, haerere ad singula quae iniunguntur exigere de quibusque ratione and
male suspicari de omni praecepto cuius causa latuerit. Thus Molanus (though a
papist) to make him plain, Io. Molan. de fid haeretic serua^. li. 5. ca. 22.
etsi non deceat. etc. Although it be not seemly for private men to search
too curiously the commandments of their Superiors, yet a subject may
modestly and reverentlie examine when an oath is tendered to him, whether it be
hurtful to his conscience or not. Bellarmine him self affirms, that the ill
laws of the Pope himself, are not only not to be received, (as though they
did bind the conscience) but also that they are to be rejected. Hence it
follows, (says Sibrand. Lubbert. de pap. Roman. lib. 8 cap. 7 page 693.
one of our writers) that Christians have power to judge even of the Popes
laws themselves, whether they be good or ill. What then? this divinity
questionless flows from the sink of Iesuitisme, and from the Canons of
Ignatius Laiola, which are these: If Jesuit. Catechif li 2. ca. 17. and 18
a man's judgment be against the commandment of his superiors, he must
remove it Caeca quadam obedientia. Prudentia non obedientis, sed imperantis
est. Nothing more contrary to obedience, quam mora in superiorum iussis
examinandis, which he holds to be arrogancy. Non est dignus nomine
obedientis, qui legitimo superiori non cum voluntate iudicium etiam submittit.
He that thus submits his judgment caeca quadam obedientia, does perform
sapientem sanctamque stu^titiam. Accordingly the punie Jesuits do profess,
they work in regard of the commandment of their superiors, as dead
carcases. howbeit, not to depend upon the testimony of one man, talem, etc.
This obedience (says an Rabidinera. Ies. de vita Ignatii lib. 5. ca. 4.
other) did Ignatius profess, I must not be mine own, but his that created
me, he means his governor that made him a Jesuit: and I must suffer my
self to be drawn and framed by him (like tender wax) quae sequitur fingentis
manum. Erasm Annota in colos. 2.23
Erasmus opposes himself against this obedience, thinking it to be that
counterfeit humblenes of mind, which the Apostle by name condemns. And he
thus describes the absurdity of it: Col. 2.18.23.
It is the part of an abject mind, for a man to suffer him self to be ledd
by the precepts of men, as it were a calfe by the nose. The Index expurgato.
Hispan. in Erasm.
Inquisition commands these words to be blotted out of him. What? because
they dislike this humblenes? No, but because they will not have it esteemed
calvishe, which yet (notwithstanding) an other makes to be the patience of an
Ass, which is worse then a calfe. Patientia Asinina est (says Perald.
Episcop. sum. virtur. tom. 1. de Beatitud.
he) non curare quid ei imponatur, aurum aut lutum. Does not the subscription
require of us, that not will only, but that iudegment also be submitted? Do
not the tribunalls cry out against us, as against men presumptuous and
arrogant, for our reasoning against our betters and superiors? Do not the
modern pulpitts proclaim us Anabaptists, for that we cast a veil of
scripture over the commandments of our governors? Teach not the pamplettes
of our Opposites, Thom. H.
that we must obey a law though we have some probable, or some forcible
reasons against it? was it not long since written as God has given power to
the Church to ordain ecclesiastical laws, so has he also examine. of the
decla. ^at. of the M. of London. in the answ. p. 56
promised his spirit to Synodes, yea for ordayning rites and ceremonies? Is it
not rise, and every where said, to obey in the Lord, is to obey the
Magistrate, by acknowledging his ^oyce to be the voice of God him self? which
is the very corner Jesuit. catechism. vb sup.
stone of the Iesuitishe blind obedience. Being thus many ways called to an
obedience counterfeit, which (as it has been showed already) better befitteth
beasts then men: we must crave pardon to reply with Ambrose (breaking a
ceremony prescribed at Rome, which very willingly he would have followed)
Ambros. de Sacram. lib. 3. ca 1.
and nos quoque homines seusum habemus. For our justification herein, we will
not cite what one of our Reynald. de Idolola. in epist. ad Anglo. Rhemens.
writers has against this obedience blind, but I conclude out of Augustine,
August. ad frat. in Erem. sermon. 7.
Cauete in obedientia (fratres mei:) tenete, and in cordibus alligate, quod
obedientia sine discretione, cassa est and vana: and obedientia sine honestate
privata, superbia est* discretio, honestas, Iusticia, and humilitas, socij sunt
sanctae obedientiae: sine quibus, omnino obedientia vana est, and invtilis.

#Sect. 8. The warrant of Ceremonies ought to be Rerson and Edification,
neither Will nor Authority.
A Thanasius is approved by our Thom. Morton. Apolog. p. 1. li. 1. c. 68
writers, when he writes to Eustachius, they do renovare, nay superare
cunctas haereses, qui iubent accipere simpliciter, quae dicuntur, vt nemo
exquirat quid deceat, aut non deceat, quid vtile, quid proposito consentaneum,
quid mysterio dignum, quid concordans cum veritate. These words (to mine
understanding) reprove not only that injustice which takes away from us a free
and modest examination of the lawfulnes of these ceremonies controversed,
whereof we have spoken, but also that, which barreth particular examination of
the expediencie, which they should have in use and practice, of which now we
are to speak. For as Bellarmine Bellar. de Pontific. lib. 4. c. 16.
holds there is no ceasing of a law of a ceremony quomodocunque (he means
upon particular circumstances which do occur) until it cease vniversaliter,
so here at home it is denied, that the rigor of the law cease in these
ceremonies, at any one time, in any one place for any circumstance whatsoever,
until it be removed away universally. We grant (say some) the ceremonies must
not be used, when inexpedient. But who shall judge? For if it be left to every
Minister, then what confusion? First, 1 Cor. 6.12 1 Cor 12.8 Colos. 1.9.
Eccles. 8 4. Pro. 25.11.
as there is (...) to see what is lawful, so is there (...) to judge according
unto circumstances what is Zanch comentar. in Colos. 1.9.
expedient. If then the Magistrate permit not the minister to judge expediencie
in what he does, as present circumstances shall change or vary; he
forbids the practice of a virtue and the use of a gift which God has given
him; and without which he can no more profit the souls of them that are
committed to his charge, then Conci. Aquigranen. cap. 24.
a physician can cure the body when it is not permitted to him, to use his
discretion according to the present circumstances of the cure. Secondly, we
see that which is good per se, grows evil per accidens if it be not duly
Caietan. in Thom. 1.2. que. 9.
circumstantionatum. For Lambert. Dane. Ethi* cor. l. 1 c. 16
non tantum considerandum est id quod agimus, sed etiam quibus circumstantijs.
To give instance: An alms though good of it self, yet grows to be evil, if
it be faulty in the circumstances of due time, measure, manner, and of fit
persons upon whom it is bestowed. How much more (then) do things indifferent,
which are not good (such as the ceremonies are held to be) then grow to be
evil, when by the discretion of the Minister, they be not guided to right
circumstances, and ridd from evil? Thirdly, the Magistrates power is no
greater then Paul's. Now he leaves the managing of things indifferent, to the
discretion of every man. For his words are these: Let every man use his
judgment, that he lay no stumbling block before his brother. In deed as the
Magistrate is bound to institute, abrogate, and change rites generally,
Chemn^t. examine. pa. 1. de tradit. page 84.
pro generali ratione aedificationis, locorum, personarum, temporum: so it is
his duty to oversee the Minister, that a ceremony be privately changed or
omitted, as private circumstances do change and vary, seeing private
circumstances have power to make evil the private use, as well as the general
ones have power to make the whole genus evil, as has been showed already.
Fourthly, seeing the expediencie of the ceremonies consists in particular
circumstances, which a law general cannot comprise, therefore a good law
will give liberty to omit them, in case they do not edify, even the papists
them selves being judges. Tho. Aquin. 1* 1. q. 97. art. 3 respo^s. ad ^
Leges humanae. etc. The laws of man in some cases are defective, in which it
is not expedient for the public good, that they should be kept. whereupon it
may fall out sometimes, that a man may do besides the law, to wit, in a case
in which the law fails, and yet the action shall not be evil. Fifthly, See
we the judgment of the godly: August. epist. 118. cap. 2.
totum hoc genus liberas habet ob servationes. The observation of things
indifferent, is free. A Harmon. confessi. sect 17 ex Helueri. post. art. 25.
godly man may at all times and in all places use them freely. howbeit he must
use them only to the glory of God, and the edificatio^ of his brother. Men
Ibid. exconfes. Bohemic. c. 15
must be taught to acknowledge that there is no perpetual or inevitable law
to be made about man's traditions; but as for just causes they are ordained, so
for just causes, and re ita postulante, they may without sin be broken,
abrogated, and changed, even by the example of the Apostles. who brake the
tradition of the Elders, when they did eat with unwashed hands, and kept not
the fastes which others did keep, and yet never sinned therein. A. Hiper. de
sacris stud. non deserend. page 156.
Potest qui praeest. etc. A Pastor of a church may by his private authority,
abrogate rites and observations, when they degenerate from true piety, or
grow openly superstitious. Quid vero dico potest? immo si functioni tuae
facere vis satis, debes medijs omnibus in id laborare, idque ne aliorum
peccatis te contamines. Again, Idem page 158.
Ceremonies, although they be not of themselves impious, yet it is certain
they may be omitted, if the circumstance of time, person, place do so require,
or rather profitable and necessary causes do occur, as the set number of
prayers, which the Bishopps do prescribe, may be omitted upon need of time.
other like things upon due circumstances may be left, nay (indeed) they must
be left, and pretermitted. And such is our third petition against the
greevances which the commanding of the Ceremonies in present practice hurleth
on us.

#Sect. 9. 4. Suite, beseeches that they may not be thought to offend against
a law, who observe the intention of it.
Our fourth beseeches, a mitigation of those rigours, which the execution of
this command has hitherto brought with it. Here (as we take it) we have
missed not only of equity, but of ordinary justice also. It is a common
saying, that equity must ever dwell in the bosom of the Prince. which as the
Aeneas Silui. de gest. council. Basiliens. li. 1. fol. 4.
cou^cill of Basil interprets, is to leave the letter of the Law, and to
follow the reason of it. This the Tho. Aquin. 2.2. q 120. art. 1.
schoolmen thus enlarge; Law makers respect that, which most usually falls
out, and frame their law accordingly* which law notwithstanding in some cases
to observe, is against the equality of justice, and the common good which the
law does intend. As for example: Sometimes it is hurtful to restore that,
with which we are put in trust withal, to wit, to restore a sword to one that
is madd. where to follow the law, is to his hurt: but it is for his good
(leaving the words of the law) to follow that which justice, reason, and
common profit does require. ad quod ordinatur aequitas. This considered, we are
cleared when we omit the Cross and Surplice, because we keep the intent of
the law, which intends edificatio^, which is bonum commune, but condemned
when we use them, because then in giving scandal, we follow the letter against
the certain The treatice of the ceremon. prefix. before the communi. book.
stat. Elizab. 1. c. 2. in fin.
intent of the law, which is resolved to be malum. What are the Cross and
Surplice but knives wherewith the simple hurt them selves? but equity we see
forbids, though generally the law commanndeth, I say not to give a popish
knife, but to give a man his own knife, when he is likely to hurt himfelfe
with it. And there is an other instance of common equity, which serves our
turn. The letter of the Law forbids Cicer. de offic.
transcendere muros, when equity bids a man to climb them, and leap over
them too, so it be to repel the enemy: This now is our case. For if we break
the laws letter, and so leap over Cross and Surplice, and some other
ceremonies of our church, yet we keep the Laws equity, in that we do it to
fight against the common enemy (who is the papist) and the common superstition
popish, which men place in them. An Inquisitor himself cannot condemn us in
this case, in case he stand to his own decision, which is this, he is
Siluest. Prier. in Summa verb. inobedientia.
not guilty of disobedience, which does against the words of the Law,
keeping the intent thereof; so that it may be probably thought, if the lawgiuer
him self were present, he would not oblige and bind. Speaks he not of a
Lawgiver, whose intent is upright and rectified? if he do, then has Pilate
him self washed us, from imputation of disobedience, because not only it may
probably be judged, but also it is certainly known, that our lawmakers, whose
hearts are upright within them, would never bind unto the ceremonies
controversed, if they were in re presenti, and saw that hurt, which we see
daily to come of them.

#Sect. 10. The Opposites in defense of Ceremonies, offend against ordinarium
jus.
FRom equity which we have not received, I come to ordinarium ius, which
walks in the midst between this equity and contrary rigor, of which we
suppose we have failed likewise: whether the ius of a good law in general be
respected, or the ius of this law of our land in special. Touching the first
for as much as the end of the law is love, which has two daughters Goodness and
Justice, we are to consider this ius ordinariu^, first as it is ouerswayed by
goodness, then as justice does direct it apart by it self. The first goodness
that makes intercession is gentleness, which will not be Nehe^ 5.24
burdensome, but abstain rather from the bread of the governor: nor be (...)
1. These. ^.7.
grievous, but forbear rather the 1. cor. 9* 15
power of the governor. which leads with the bonds of Hos. 11.4.
Love, takes away every hard yoke, delights in willingness of obedience
rather then fear, and therefore enlureth, not terrifieth only, which is Sum.
Siluestrin. verb. just.
proper unto rigor. Gregor. epist. 126. tit. 6.
Ipsa gubernacula sunt mag no moderamine temperanda, ne potestas mentem
surripiat. Then is the government righteous ( Idem in rescrip. Faeli^i.
Siciliae. Tom council. ^. p. 7^2.
says he elsewhere) quando nihil potestati, sed totum equitati tribuitur. what
though (then) our Reverend Fathers have a power to exact these things: does not
gentleness entreat them, not to use this power of theirs, rather then to
enco^ber and burden quiet consciences and hearts single before their God? Let
none say, they may choose (also) whether they will forbear their power or no,
but he that thinks it is in their choice whether they will be gentle or no.
which how can they be, since they must needs make their little finger heavy, who
make a gesture of the finger so heavy, 1 Reg. 12.14
toso many prophets of the Lord? This is not with Irenaeus to be gentle in a
ceremony; this is rather to walk with Victor, like unto the^ of whom Erasmus,
his Erasm. in Schol. virae. Irenae.
modis and nos magna^ orbis partem per didimus, dum omnes ceremonias ad viuu^
exigimus. Know est thou not (said Pharoes servants once to him) that Egypt
goes to wrack? know not out Rever. Fathers now, what a great part of the
church is wasted? If things were in integro, we would beseech the^ to be left
to our selves, even as in Zozom. histor li. 7. cap. 19.
Easters controversy, all were at the first permitted to do as they would. But
seeing now there is a law made, which binds to one side we wish that gentle
carriage toward us, which has evermore been showed in matters of like
quality. August. speaking of the Lenten fast, which was by the church in his
time commanded, gives liberty to keep it August. conita Faust. Manichae lib.
30 cap. 5.
quanto magri^ quis^ue vel minus, seu voluerit, seu potuerit. Theodoret
speaking of the s^^ (...) notwithstanding it was a custom) yet has these
words: Theodor: epi. divine. decret.
Abstinentia. etc sas parti ^^^tie s^nt ^^mentis potesi^te. Prosper, affirms
the commandment of fasting was ^^gently ^^^cted, that men fasted, Prosp. de
vin contem: 2. c vlt.
no^ coacti, sed denoti. to wit, the commandment was a canon rather then a
law, as appears by Primasius. Primas. in Romans 14.
De ieiunto (says he) ^ex no^^est posita, sed quomodo potest vnusquisque and
vult. Chrysostom is alleged by Bellat. de Pontifie. lib. 4 ca. 17
Be^^armi^, to prove a necessary observation of this faesting, who yet
notwithstanding leaves both it self and the circumstances of it, in Chrysostom.
in 1. cor. homil. 9. Mal. 2.6. Mat. 15.3. Isa. 10.1.
cuiusque opinione. I need not show how we have failed of this gentleness in
these ceremonies, who have sued for it to this hour, and yet sue to our Reu.
Fathers, without any other answer the^ this, There is a law, it must be
obeyed. But does it suffize thus to say, without respect to him that will ask,
should not my law, the law of truth be in your mouths, that so ye might have
walked with me in peace and equity? Is it not so that ye have broken my law,
to set up your own? and that against my heavy threat, woe unto them that make
heavy laws? The second goodness tempering Justice is indulge^ce, which exacteth
no performance in a ceremony, but that which the party is ablero do, and that
without an Inco^venie^ce to himself. For may not the Sabbothday be broken, when
the observatio^ of it does hurt the body? Mat. 12.12^
the Sabbath being made for man, not man for the Sabbath. The^ are we bereaved
of christian indulgence, when to these ceremonies we are enforced to the hurt
of our co^scie^ces, or else forced to loose our states, as if we were made for
the ceremonies, and not the cerem. made for us* which were themselves never
made by God, as was the Sabbath Hierom for the necessity of the Lenten fast,
leaves men notwithstanding to do in their fastings Hie^on. episto ad Nepotian.
quantu^ possunt, and requires moderatu^ ieiunium only, as the body is able to
bear: further the^ which, if any man fast, he calls it superstitiosum. Nay
Bel^ar. de Poncific. li. 4* ca. 18.
Bellar. exacteth not now the cano^ of fasting, though his church severely
enioyneth it, either of children, old men, or sick, who cannot bear it, or
whose health it would hurt, so that, it seems, it were well with us, if we
had but the bread which Antichrist himself breaks to his children in any
good proportion, for as much as we can protest against these ceremonies, that
they stand not with the health of our souls which are more precious then our
bodies, and that our consciences are made sick with them. This is our weakness
(some will say) as if Christ spared not to conform his disciples to the rigor
of the Pharisees fastings, yea of the fastings of John's disciples* when by
reason of their infirmity he saw they were as vessels weak, Mat. 9.17.
that could not bear it without bursting. In regard hereof, if we call on our
Reverend Fathers to be spared, we do but recall their own doctrine to their
minds, which even speaking of the Magistrate has these words, Doc. Bills.
cont. Apolog. page 1. page 46.
we may not for things indifferent, trouble the weak minds of the brethren.

#Sect. 11. Thirdly, Justice borrowed temper from Equinanimitie which
dispenses on just cause. Fourtly, from forbearance, which passes by a
ceremonial transgression.
THe third goodness, from which justice is contented to borrow temper, is that
equinanimitie, which dispenses upon just cause, and accepts a just excuse,
which yet the cross would never. The doctrine of the first Bishopp of this
land, when this controversy first brake forth, was this, The treatise whether
it be mottall fin to transgress a civil precept
A man without sin, may transgress a civil law upon just excuse. No
marvel, the very papists teach the same: Tho. Aquin. 2.2. quest. 147. art.
4. in conclus. and respo^s. ad 1
statuta ecclesiae, non sunt per se, de necessitate salutis, sed solum ex
institutione ecclesiae. and ideo non obligant si affuerit rationabile
impedimentum. Nam legislator in ijs statuendis attendit id quod communiter
habetur, and in pluribus accidit; si quod. a. sit impedime^tum, non intendit
legislator tum obligare. Another: Bellar. de Pontific. lib. 4. c. 18.
Impeditus iusta de causa, non tenetur Missam audire. An other: Nauar.
Enchirid. praelud. 9. Number. 8.
A man may break the laws of the Church, Quando habet iustam causam non
parendi. Yea, they so enlarge our liberty herein, as that not only Siluest.
sum. verb. ^obedien.
vera rationabilis causa excusat (say they) sed etiam aestimata. Now, have
we not cause to forbear the ceremonies? Is there not an impediment? are we
not able (I say not to excuse, but also) to defend our cause? Suppose we were
not able to give cause reasonable, to give cause vera causa aestimata,
injustice her self cannot deny us, who have on our sides the common estimate
of all the reformed Churches of God, that are in Christendom, besides our
own. As for our private estimation, David thought the feeding of his body, was
cause sufficient to break the law of the shewbread. Christ thought the
satisfying of the Disciples hunger to be cause sufficient to break the
ceremony of the Sabbath* He thought also that the healing of the Leapers
bodies, was a just excuse, to break the law that forbad the touching of
them. Much more (then) may we think now in our estimation that the feeding of
other men's souls, the satisfying of our own consciences, together with the
consciences of other men, and the healing of men's spiritual leaprosie and
superstition, are causes sufficient to break the law of the ceremonies and of
the cross, which are not Gods, but men's. The fourth goodness by which justice
suffers her self to be couselled and directed, is that Forbeara^ce which
passes by a ceremonial transgression, because it is of small consequence in
comparison, and takes no forfeiture of it. This a Reverend Bishop once awarded
to us, whose words are these: I^wel. art. ^. deuis. 9. fol. 117.
Ceremonies should be used freely, and not with rigor, as Cyprian says; why
(then) are they so precise and earnest in ceremonies, that be the abuse of them
never so great, they will remit nothing? This he spoke upon occasion of the
Trin-immersion, which though it were in Cypri. time, a tradition and order of
the church, yet does he Cypr. lib. epistola. 4. epist. 7.
allow the omitting of it, and the using of Aspersion. And out of him, an
Harding him self ca^ justify a Co^pe^dious baptism, though all the ceremonies
of the church be not observed: and our baptism, when we do not use the cross,
what is it but such a co^pe^dious baptism? and Harding. answ. to May. lew.
Challeng. art. 2. diuis. 9.
Harding gives this toleratio^ even after that canon of Trent was given, which
makes the omission of any rite which the church of Rome commands in any
Sacrament, to be no less the^ damnable sin. so that, excuse who can the
severitie now showed to us, against Chemnit. exam. p. 2. page 37.
our writers affirming the servitude of this canon to be heavy in that it
takes away al liberty of omission. For this severitie, as it is practiced in
visitations, not only denies liberty to us, to omit the cross in baptism,
but also to add, omit, alter, any one word of the whole Leiturgie; a plain
renewall of the Germane Adiaphorisme, which was, that the book should be kept
Respons. Nichola. Galli. and Flac. Illiric. ad concion. Misniae.
ad verbum, and n ad amussim: at a word, Hambur. epist. ad P. Melanc. h.
absque omni violatione whatsoever. The late famous Maria de la Anuntiada told
her confessor, that Christ her hus band did daily come down, and in his own
person helped her to say her canonical prayers. Her co^fessor beleueeth it, yet
being told, that because Christ himself was present, she used to say Gloria
Patri, and tibi, and spiritni sancto, he condemned her upon this reason, there
must no Cyprian. Valera. in histor. eius.
word of the churches use be altered: and therefore enjoined her to say and
Filio. Leo the 9. Albert. Crantz li 4. histor. Saxo^. c. 45.
Pope of that name, being with Henry the 3. at Mass on a Christmas day at
Worms, deprived a Subdeacon, and that forthwith, because he song the Epistle
vnconformably, not to the tune of the church of Rome. The Archbishopp refused
to go forward in the Mass till he were restored again. Such hurries about
conformity, if they had never visited this Church of ours, it had never been
deprived of so many Godly and profitable Pastors, as are deprived now.
Tertullian misliketh Tertul. de prescript. aduers. haeres. Rhena^, in annotat.
ibid.
morositatem Iudeae, when any Church does imitate the same in a precize and
strickte observing of ceremonies. Now what should I stand to prove that by us
it is imitated, when our Leiturgie is more priest, then the book of God it
self: and the prayers thereof, so stricktly observed, as that (in a manner)
they be turned into a charm: We may not alter a word of the Leiturgie, and
yet make bold to alter I know not how many words in our Church-translation
of the Bible, and that of them to a contrary sense; which is the only
corrumpent Bellar de pontific. B. 4. cap. 17.
altering that can be named: and compel men by subscription to approve it
when we have done. And we must not add any thing to the Leiturgie, and yet we
are bold to add to the Baptism of the Lord, a sign to his seal, a cross
to his water, which is additio ad opus praeceptum: as if the Jews in their
passover in stead of one Lamb, had eaten two, that which a Bellar. ibid
Bellarmine himself condemns: to omit that our addition of cross to water,
is not an addition eiusdem generis, as when a lamb to a lamb is added, but an
addition of a sign of a diverse kind, which yet as we add it, is made to be
of the same use, the^ which, Fran. Lun. controuers. 3. lib. 4. ca. 17. nota. 4.
Apoc. 11.8. Exo. 32.3.4
no addition can be worse. whereas then the treasure-house of our prayers, has
Jewels in it which have been borrowed from the spiritual. Egypt of Rome,
which are thus enhaunced, we may well divine that Jewels from without
borrowed, will never scarce thrive well, since even at first when Jewels were
borrowed from Aegipt bodily, they proved but matter at last, for the making of
a calfe. Do not the Evangelistes them selves alter in their citations the
words of the old text often, as Act. 7.43. Heb. 10.5. and 1.6.7.? A. Willet.
controuers. 11. quest. 1, appendic. ad page 2.
affirm we not the words of the Lords prayer and of the Sacram. may be
altered without fault? Condemn we not Bellar. de sacram. in genesis ca. 21.
papists on the other side when they will not permit so much as an accidental
change in the word of the Sacram. and think their peevishnes in this respect,
not only worse the^ that scrupulositie which Augu. August. cont. Donatist. de
Bapti. lib. 6 ca. 25. and de Doctr. Christian. lib 4. ca. 5
condemns in cleaving too much to the words themselves of scripture, but also
to be a kind of charm? And how is the popish charming in our praying spread
abroad by this our servilitie to the words of the leiturgie? For let the
minister chang but some words for explanatio^, (which Rome it self holds to
be lawful, and no church ever yet condemned except the Ceusur. Orient. eccles
cap. 1. Stanisla. Socolon. ibid.
Greek, in our adding to the Nicene Creed; filioque, to express the
proceeding of the holy spirit) and such a stir presently follows, as
justifies the ancient proverb, There is much dust raised, when an old wise
daunceth. In deed they can no more pray to God many of the common people, when
the wounted Idea of their common Leiturgie is taken from them, the^ could one
Serapion once (as I remember) when his Anthropomorphitishe and his carnal Idea
of God was taken from him. Alas (says he) I have lost my God, how shall I now
pray? And thus have we hitherto missed of justice as it is overlooked by
charity, and counseled by goodness. Come we now to consider her as she
walks in her own equality for distribution of good and evil.

#Sect. 12. Imposition of Ceremon, as now urged, take away Christian liberty.
WHereas Justice gives to every man his own, the ceremonies have taken from
us (as we take it) our Christian liberty, both for the obiectes and subjects
of it. Concerning the former; first they enslaue us unto Antichrist, which is a
great grief to us, even as it was our Conrad. Schlusselb. Catolog. haeret.
tom. 13. p. 466.
brethren in Germany to have the ceremonies of the Pope enforced upon them, as
wherein they thought they were reduced under the yoke of Antichrist again.
They add, they were reduced aliquo modo, which I mention that our Opposites
may perceive there is aliquis modus of bondage to Antich. although it be not he
that does command the things imposed: and although the necessity of the
commandment does not bind after his manner. Paul held it was subjection to
them of the circumcizion, if their rites were received in what manner soever.
Gal. 2.4.5.
Nolite iugum ducere cum infidelibus: quae.n.est societas luci ad tenebras.
this was cited by the Lib. Concord. apud Conrad. Schlusselb. Ibid. p. 596
Divines of Germany, to prove the inforcement of popish ceremonies does bring
us under the yoke of bondage. Whence it appears that it is a yoke, if we do
but draw with Antichrist by conformity unto his rites. Libellus Supplicat.
Theolog. anno 1561 Ibid. p. 590
Others more bold affirm the imposing of popish rites enthralleth ecclesiam
sponsam Christi even to his yoke, and compels her service etiam agnito
Antichristo. the reason is, because we borrowe these rites from him, and the
borrower (we know) becomes a servant to him that lends: and our religion is
(thereby) made inferior to his, because we debase it, to receive from him,
while he scorneth to receive from us. and (finally) because he triumphs while
we are made sad, yea prevayleth by the countenance of these ceremonies while
we are worsted in our ministry; Nay he is countenanced by these ceremonies,
when we are put to shame. Miserrimus est qui misero servit; not little
therefore is the servitude, to which the sign of the Cross does sell us: we
cannot say of it as Hector once, if we were soulde to be slaves, we could have
borne it. Secondly, we are enthralled to man, which although we can bear
better, in respect of our selves, yet in respect of the glory of God, 1 Cor.
7.27
we cannot wholly bear it neither, because it is said, be ye not the servants
of men. whereupon our Fran. Iun. controuer. 3. lib. 4. ca. 17. nota. 19
writers observe, that Christ has freed us not only from the Law, from sin,
and from the ceremonies of Moses law, but also a servitute hominum. for we are
pressed with the bare will, and with the bare pleasure of our reverend Fathers,
which is a servitude both by the scripturs, Colos. 2.18. Heb. 12.10, and also
by reason. For it is the will of God only that can make a thing to be good,
therefore it only must be obeyed. Let us not be worse then papists: even they
Stapleto. controuer. 5. q. 7. art. 2
affirm that the will of the Magistrate of it self, cannot bind any, why
hear we so often, it is the pleasure of our superiors, D. Field. of the
Church. lib. 4. c. 33.
non ex voluntate Legislatoris, sed ex ipsa legum vtilitate. Do humane laws
bind to obedience? As the ceremonies do enthrall us to man's will, so much
more unto his power. It is written of an Adiaphoriste him self, that he
accused the Adiaphorisme of the Interim which was in Germany, that it did
Conrad. Schlusselb. vb sub. pa. 590.
exequare homines potentes Deo, and perinde adorare. If I should say the like
of our present Adiaphorisme, I should be asked wherein? For answer to which, be
it considered, whether absolute power ascribed to man in things indifferent
does not equal him to God or no? And when the practice of our church brings
into greater fear to break a ceremony of man's ordayning, then to break a
law of Gods, in that it presses more precisely, and punishes more stricktly
the one then the other: who can deny, but that it induces an adoring of man,
as if he were God, or at the least a servitude to him? Thirdly, we are
enthralled to the ceremonies them selves commanded, against that part of
christian liberty, Gal. 4.10.
which sets us free A servitute rerum and elementorum huius mandi, both by
the scriptures and by all Fran. Iun. vb. sub 1 Cor. 6.12
good writers. I will not be brought under the power of any thing (says Paul)
but we are brought under the power, both of the Cross and Surplice, when we
are constrained to use them, whether they edify or destroy. For qui vtitur eo
quod non expedit, sieve licitum sieve illicitum, redigitur quodammodo sub rei
illius potestate, says Tho. Aquin. in 1. cor. 6. lect. 8
Aquinas. The Law of the ceremonies inflicteth punishment ipso facto, but if
the fact it self be punished which omitteth any rite, the^ is it for the rite
sake it self that the punishment is inflicted. which cannot be but the person
is made subject unto the rite, for which he is corrected. when without
impeachment of christian liberty, a law bears rule, it is by reason of the
prossit which it brings to common good: which profit when it cease, then
the law it self does cease, as the canon law does teach: Decret pa. 1.
distinct. 61 cap 8.
Ecclesiasticae prohibitiones proprias habent causas, quibus cessantibus,
cessant and ipsae. so that punishment rightly executed, Ibid pa. 2 c. 1 q. 5.
c. 3
is not ex rigore Canonum, but ex intuitu rationis. If then it were to the law
only, that we were subjected, the^ should we not be punished but for an
hindering of the reason and of the profit of the law. These do we keep,
because we edify in what we do. If then we be punished, it is ex rigore
canonis, non ex consideratione discretionis, according to the letter, not
according to the reason of the law: and so it is the rite it self, for which
we are corrected, whereby it appears the rite it self does bear rule over
us. And these are the obiectes to which the ceremonies do enthrall us, to the
impeachment (as we take it) of our christian liberty.

#Sect. 13. Ceremonies as now urged, take away liberty of Conscience.
COme we now to the subjects wherein, whether inward or outward. Concerning
the former, the law of man binding no further, then where he is able to take
notice of a transgression, and where he has power to punish, reaches not to
the soul of any, but binds only the outward man, on the inward man, if it
make any invasion, a breach is made upon the liberty of the same. what then
(will some say) is not the affection of the heart required, in the obedience of
humane laws? yet by the general law of God, by the law D. Field. of the
Church. li. 4. ca. 34.
of man, it is not required, which may be obeyed although the affection of the
heart be bad: whence comes the rule, A man may be a good Citizen, that is not
a good man. But now the law of the ceremonies sets up a throne within our
hearts more ways then one, both for the matter, and for the manner of their
proceeding. They impeach our christian liberty in the matter of their
command, in that they require a submission of our judgments without any
reason out of Gods law: as appears by the subscription, which requires us
to believe that all is well, which now is in force for the government of the
Church. They impeach it also in the matter of their punishing, because they
threaten to kill the soul, with which no man has power to meddle, as it is
evident by the Canons, who excommunicate ipso facto, which is to deliver unto
Satan, and to thrust out of Christ's kingdom. And is there not a curse
pronounced, and an Anathema to the breakers of the same Canons If so, then is
the soul usurped on, as a man famous among our late writers has lately
taught, D. Field. vb. sup. cap. 32.
mortal men forget them selves, when either they command under pain of
damnation, or take upon them to prescribe inward actions of soul or spirit.
Again, Ibid. c. 33.
they impiously usurp, who publish all their Canons and constitutions in such
sort, that they threaten damnation to all offenders. As for the injury, by
the manner of proceeding, be it considered that in Ioh. Gerson. de vita
spirituali animae lectione. 2.
Gersons opinion, they only leave our liberty free, who deal now as he
thinks the best and wisest among the guides of Gods church dealt, who have
not so ill a meaning as to have all their constitutions to be taken for laws
properly so named, but for threatninges, admonitions, counsels and directions
only. The ceremonies quite contrary set upon us with the power of a law to
force, which what does it effect in our hearts but grief, whereby is not the
joyful liberty of the spirit impay^^d much in many? Siterrerentur (says
August. epist. 48.
Augustine) and non docerentur, improba quasi dominatio videretur. Therefore he
prescribes elsewhere: Augustine. epist. 64.
Non aspere quantum existimo, non duriter, no^ modo imperioso ista tolluntur,
magis docendo quam iubendo, magis monendo qua^ minando. Now if the Law of the
ceremonies would proceed by this way of persuasion, and show us reason, and
teach us out of the word of God, then should it in all sweetness lead us, as
when a Nurse does lead a child. Terrifying without this teaching, is for a
slave: even as indeed, it does begett a servile spirit in men's hearts, like to
the Germane Adiaphorisme, of which one Flace. Illyrie. in lib. etc Adiaph.
complayneth thus: libertatae quae a Christo donata est, privamur, neque. n.
per istas ceremonias politica libertas tollitur, sed religionis; vbi tristis
servitus est in Ceremonijs (sicut ipsemet Adiaphoristae affirmant Ceremoniae
istae tristi servitute ecclesiam onerant) ibi certe non potest esse laeta
Christi libertas. From the thraldom which the ceremonies bring upon our inner
man, come we now to that injury wherewith it cloyeth the outward. First,
remember we the general neglect, and antiquation of this Law, in the days of
Q. Elizabeth. This is D. Field. of the Church. li. 4. ca. vlt.
one difference between the laws of God and man, that every prescription or
contrary use is a corruption and a fault, which is against the law of God,
whereas a long continued disvse prevayleth against the laws of men, and are a
just abrogating of the same. This may be gathered out of that common and beaten
tenent, lex instituitur cum promulgatur, vigorem habet cum moribus vtentium
approbatur. Howbeit, it must be granted, that the common use and disvse of the
inferiors is not to be thought to have any force or vigor, either to stablish
or to abrogate without the consent, and the contentement of those that have
authority. What then, from hence perchance some will say: seeing the
governors are not consenting to the remouall of the corruptions controversed.
First, the greater part of the land do even desire a remoovall of them, when
we go from Bishopps, and from others that are parties in them; much more does
it consent to the disvse and antiquation that is past. They that consent not to
it, should consent. If they do not, they make this law, like unto the law of
God, as if no disuse could prevayle against it, as none prevayleth against Gods
law, and strive against the society in which they live, and that for a
ceremony, which is too high an honor for him, and throw a necessity thereof
on them who have given forth sufficient show of their unwillingness, by their
general disvse aforesaid: in all of which, as the ceremonies are advaunced too
high, so christian liberty is too low depressed. As the proceeding of the
ceremonies, oppress our liberty in regard of former disvse, which the
inferior has showed, so also does he impeach the same in regard of the
present use which the superior presses. This is a necessary observation, the
fountain, and the ground whereof do show sufficiently what it is. The
fountain of it is popery. To what end should Canons be made (say some) if
men should not be tied to a necessity of keeping of them? Just so Bellarmine,
Bellarmin. de Pontifie. lib. 4. ca. 17
actus indifferens, si praecipiatur iam erit necessarius, alioquin frustra
praecipitur. The ground from whence this fountain issues, is an opinion, that
man's law does bind the conscience: even as it appears by Bellarmine, who
being to speak of a necessity of observation in the outward use of
ceremonies, Bellarmi, de effect. Sacrament. cap 31.
hoc dependet (says he) ab alia quaestione. Anleges ecclesiasticae obligent
conscientias? This fountain thus flowing our of this ground, falls into a
marishe (to speak with Ezechiel.) where stands a poole of unwholesome water,
which is this, Bellarmi. controuers. 5. li. 3. c. i 1
as Gods commandment makes actions indifferent to be virtues, his inhibitions
to be sins, so men's precepts do likewise. This blasphemy of theirs,
equaling the creature with the Creator, how do our D. Field. vb. sub. cap. 34.
writers handle? which notwithstanding our Opposites must fortify, or else
their whole tower will like to a Babell down to the ground. For if the
ceremonies be of necessary observation, and must absolutely be kept, then must
they become things absolutely good, forasmuch as there is nothing to be done
necessarily, but that which is good and virtuous. And as the papists equal
man with God, so shall we by this our conceyt of a necessary observation: that
which we may see by Gers. de auferibili. papae. consideratio. 8.
Gerson, who complayneth that men will have their constitutions to be observed
aequali tenore with Gods laws, because they will have them necessarily kept
Quemadmodum custodiri divina^ legem, absque vlla variatione necesse est.
Sweeter waters are they far, which flow from the sanctuary of our home
writers, upon these grounds, The law of man is not infallible as Gods is.
rules not over the heart, as Gods does: is not absolute and perfect, as Gods
is: comes not from a supreme Lord, as Gods does. therefore there is due unto
it no certain obedience; no obedience in the heart at all, no absolute
obedience in the outward behavior, in the outward behavior only. such
obedience is due to it, as is proportionable to the right end, of that
subordinate power and authority, to which the supreme Lord has chosen him.
This being bonum commune, which nothing hurts, but scandal only and
contempt: it comes to pass, that extra casum contemptus and scandali, the
observation of hamane law is left free to us. This do all our D. Whitak.
controuers. 1. quest 6. ca. 16. pa. 503 Sibrand. Lubbert. de Pap. Roman. li. 8.
cap. 8. Mat Sutcl. lib. 4. cap. 7 Pran. Iun. controuer. 3. lib. 4. ca. 17. D.
Willet. controuers. 9. qu. 8 page 2. etc.
writers testify. yea this whole churches confess unto us; yea this our own
church holds. There be books lately set forth, (says the Harmon. confess.
sect 17. ex confess Saxon. 228.
church of Saxony) full of labytinthes, in quibus scribitur peccata esse
mortalia violationes talium rituum extra casum scandali, but the true
consolation, is the voice of the Gospel, which will have a contrary
understanding of our liberty to be known in the Church against this error. An
other church thus: Ibid. Augustan. co^fest. p. 218.
sentiendum est quod res adiaphorae extra casum scandali omitti possunt. And
again, Ibid. page 224.
contra libertatem nostram sancitam authoritate divina, non est recipienda
opinio, vt violatio rerum mediarum, extra casum scandali sit peccatum. Yea, The
trearise whether it be mortal sin to transgress a civil law.
whole home treatises affirm as much: yea our own communion Admonit. de
ceremo. praefix. leiturg.
book: yea some of the very papists themselves, as the Author of summa Sum.
Sisuestrin in verb. inodience. and verb. neyligen. Ier. 35 11. 2. act. 15.19.3.
1. cor. 1^.27.
Angelica, and as many as follow his way. The apposition of examples, I trust
will not be tedious. The Rechabites retire unto Jerusalem, when Nebuchadnezzar
invadeth the land, so breaking the commandment which their Father Ionadab
gave them, against dwelling in any city, and are guiltless, because they
break it on private occasion without contempt. and a 2 Corinthian eats an
Idolothire, breaking the Apostles decree, and 3 sins not because he breaks
it without scandal. But Bellar. d^ Pontifie. lib. 4. ca. 17
Blandina thought it a sin, to break their law against blood, even in
private, where was no danger of any scandal, and even in secret did other
Christians abstain from blood as well as she: Our answer is, she with the
rest abstained for danger of Fra. Iun. ibi. nota ^0
future scandal, which might have followed. They were charged by the pagans to
spill the blood of infants in secret, if they had not even in secret abstayned
from blood, how could they have contested openly as now they do? It is not
likely that we should eat the blood of infantes, whose custom is, to abstain
from the very blood of beasts. Spiridion doubted not to break the order of
the Church in Lent, and to use his christian liberty when without scandal it
might be used. For when his gueste said, I can eat no flesh in Lent, because I
am a christian: he replied, Sozom. histor. lib. 2. cap. 11. 2 Cor. 6.17.
tanto minus recusare debes, quia omnia munda mundis. we have more cause to
omit the Cross, then he his fish. he only did it because he had none ready,
we because the Cross is a meat unclean. It was the Concill. Gerunden. and
Melden. cap. 6.
order of the church to baptize solemnly at no other time, but at Easter and
Pentecoste only, so that Leo de co^secrat. distinct. 5. ca. vt Ieiuni.
Leo calls it a rash presumption to baptize at any time else. and a certain
Council. Antisiodor.
Council excommunicateth them that do so. and yet this order did not all men
keep. some Socrat. Histor. lib. 5. cap. 22.
wrote against it, because by this means many dyed unbaptized, others Chryso.
in Genes. homil. 40. Bafil. in orat. ad Bapt. Nazianze. orat. 3. ad sanct. laua.
preached against it, and so (by all likelihood) practiced against it too,
because all times werealike for baptism. When the whole Socra. hist. li. 5.
ca. 22.
Church received the communion in the morning, they of Alexandria and Thebais
did use to receive it after Supper, and did not sin; even as at Antioche in
Syria prayer was made toward the West, against the order of all the whole
Church, and no transgression made. In Nicephor. lib. 12. c. 34
Epiphanius it is a tradition of the church to have a public assembly and
meeting thrice every week, which was broken without sin. So August. epist.
vlt. ad Hieron.
Augustine justifies Rome, against the order of the whole church in a
Satersdayes fast. give unto us our liberty (then) and we are free in our
disusing of the ceremonies, because it is without contempt, and without
scandal, that we disvse them.

#Sect. 14. Non-Conformitie is neither contempt nor scandal.
THis are we now to make manifest against our Opposites, who lay to our charge
both these transgressions, and hotly charge us, that our forbearance of
conformity, does both contemn and scandalize. Concerning the former, A man
may omit a thing commanded without contempt, and so do we, whereas our
Opposites think the contrary, and imagine our bare omission is a contempt,
for that they think us bound in conscience to observe what is commanded,
they may have Bellarm. controuers. 5. li. 3. c. 11
Bellarmine to back them, who out of Romans 13. ye must obey for Conscience
sake, obiecteth the same against our Writers, but other Divines they must
expect to have against them, whether they be old or new. Contumaciae crimen
est (says August. de verb. Dom. in Ioh. sermon 57.
Augustine) quod iubetur contemnere, quod praecipitur nolle, quod imperatum est
declinare. so that, it is not a contempt [non obedire] simply, but nolle
obedire. that which another more plainly explicateth after this manner. He
observes, that when Samuel charge Saul with a contempt, he does not say,
Bernard. li. de praecept. and dispensa.
non acquievisti verbo Domini, but noluisti acquiescere, whereupon he
infers, non est id ipsum, nolle obedire, and non obedire, hoc quippe
interdum erroris est, nonnunquam and infirmitatis, illud vero aut odiosae
pertinatiae, aut contumatiae non ferenda. Non ergo qualiscunque mandati
praeteritio criminalem facit inobedientiam, sed repugnare, sed nolle obedire.
The schole-men Tho. Aquin 2.2. quest. 1^6. art. 9. respons. ad. 3.
teach the very same; to wit, that to omit, is not to contemn, but to omit
for this, because we [will not be subject.] Of the same judgment are our own
Writers: Non censendi sunt illi (says Mat. Surcliue. de Pontifie. lib. 4. cap.
7. pa. 352.
one) Magistratum contemnere, qui aliquam ei^s legem particularem
transgrediuntur. Apostolus enim vbi dicit, necessitate subditi estote propter
conscientiam, de generali obedientia loquitur, and non de particulari. An other
to the same sense: D. Whita, cont. Dureum. lib. 8 page 731.
Quoad genus parendum est propter conscientiam, quia generali praecepto iubemur
Magistratni parere, particulares tamen Magistratuum leges, nullum habent in
conscientias dominatum. An D. Field of the Church li. 4. cap. 34.
other more plainly: we answer first, that the matter of Conscience due to the
Magistrate, is to be subject to him in all things: for subjection is required
generally, and absolutely, where obedience is not. Secondly, it is even to
obey when obedience is profitable, and for the good of the common wealth: even
as the reason why we are to obey a law humane is this, because it makes a
thing to be good, and to be profitable, by a general observation, which before
was not profitable when it was observed in private. This considered, our
Opposites cannot lay contempt unto our charge, unless they will break into our
consciences, and take upon them to see our hearts, and censure our thoughts,
and pass this sentence and doom over them, that it is even Decret. p. 1.
distinct. 30. cap. 8.
superbiendo that we omit the present ceremonies, that we break the law
stimulo propriae cogitationis impulsi, and because we challenge to our selves
perfectam in nostra scientia ratione^, whereof (we thank the Lord) we are
clear. They cannot object it unto us neither, as long as we subject our selves
unto our Governors to do to us whatsoever they please, which excuses from
contempt, when obedience is not profitable, as in our case it is not. This have
we sealed even with the testimony of an adversary: suffering ( Do. Bills. ag.
Apolo. p. 2. p. 349
says he) is as sure sign of subjection, as obeying. Secondly, what is
omitted ex necessitate, is not omitted ex contemptu (say the Siluest. Prier. in
summa. in ver. contempt.
schoolmen) to whom one of our Sibrand. Lubbert. de Pap. Roman. li. 8. cap. 7.
page 705.
own accords, He that omitteth what he is commanded, sins not si it a
affectus sit vt libenter esset facturus, modo non impediretur. as we are now
willing to keep these rites and ceremonies, were not their sinful and
scandalous circumstances, so many lettes and impedimentes to us. Thirdly, that
which is done ex fragilitate aut ex ignorantia non affectata, is not done (as
the Siluest. P. vb. sup. and in verb. in obedienc.
Schoolmen do imagine) ex contemptu, so that we protesting before God and
man, we think we do well in forbearing the ceremonies: and doubt we should
sin, if we should use them, we are in charity to be judged to offend (in
case we offend at all) of weakness, frailty, and of error, and not of
contempt. Thus Augustine, August. de sermon. Dout. in mont. lib. 2
Si quis conquastus de stomacho, ieiunare noluerit, and tu id non credens
edacitatis vitio tribueris, temere indicabis. Now we complain our weak
stomachs brook not the cross, judge us (then) to have omitted it of
contempt, and thou have rashly judged. Fourthly, whereas our Opposites object
against us, that our former continued custom, and present purpose not to
conform for time to come, are evident signs whereby they may judge us of
contempt: we answer first, that this contemptus inter pretatiuus is no sure
and certain ground. The ground it stands upon is this, Zosim. Pap. epist. ^
contumeliae studio fit, quicquid interdictum toties vsur patur. and a custom
without purpose to amend, does argue an habit of contempt. This
interpretation, is not secundum veritatem always (says Siluest. P. vb. sub.
one) but secundum praesumptionem oftentimes. The party may use (says Tho.
Aquin. 2.2. quest. 186. art. 9. ad. 3.
another) an accustomed omission, for some other cause, then for an
irreuerence, and the same wilful against the Law: which when he so does, it
is not out of contempt he does it.

Now God be thanked our witness on high, who has not left us void of causes
more then many, which we are able to allege out of his word for that we do.
Secondly, for as much as this interpretation leads us, to judge by outward
signs, we desire our Opposites to remember, that ancient equity, Ioh. Pap. ^
epist. 1.
de occultis cordis alieni, temere iudicare, iniquum est: and eum, cuius non
videntur opera ni si bona, peccatum est ex suspicione repraehendere. We appeal
(then) to the carriage of our selves, in the accustomed course of our lives.
August. de sermon. Dom in mont. li. 2. pa. 1154
Augustine speaking of one that was singular in his attire, and brake in
apparel the common order, ye must judge him (says he) ex caeteris operibus,
vtrum contemptu superflui cultus aut aliqua ambitione hoc faciat. Nam ex
fructibus cognoscetis eos: One of our late Writers treads in the same
steps, A. Hiper. de sact. stud. non deferend. page 161.
u Ex certis signis facile deprehenditur, number quis per contumaciam seu
contemptum aliquid insolens faciat. Piorum igitur est dare operam, vt ea
conspici in ipsis signa possint, quae simplicitatem, modestiam, charitatem
fraternam teslentur. For example: If Socrat. histor. li. 2. c. 32. conci. to^.
1.373.
Eustathius be held scismaticall, he evidently shows forth many signs
and tokens of pride: amongst the rest, the affected peregrinitie of his
strange attire, is one. when Eunomius is censured for a Zozom. lib. 6. cap. 26.
contempt, in breaking of the Trin-immersion, used downward from the Apostles
days, there appears an audaciousnes in his spirit, an insolency in his
words and carriage, yea and in his doctrine. Last of all, the
ceremony-breakers of Augustines time, bewraye plainly an affectation of
strange things, seen in their travill and peregrination, August. epist. 118.
cap. 11.
Quam eo doctiorem putant, quo remotiorem a suis. together with a waywarde
pride, vt nisi quod ipsi faciunt, nihil rectum existiment. So it is not the
omitting of an Ecclesiastical fast which the Council Can. 19.
Gangrense condemns, but when some propter superbiam communia totius
Ecclesiae ieiunia contemnunt. And the Council Council. Toletan. 9 can. 9.
Toletan does punish them only, Qui ausu temerario omnia contemnunt, in their
breaking of the Churches fast. When the contempt of the Bogomilici, is
condemned, it is withal thus described, Decret. p. 1. distin. 30 cap. 8.
Omnia sibi indifferentia putant, nullisque praeceptis obligantur. Augustine
and Epiphanius condemn Aerius, not for his not fasting simply, according to
the Churches custom, but for Mat. Sutell li. de pontific. 4. ca. 7
disturbing of the Church, with his insolency and his pride. Put us then in an
even balance: waighe us as we are found in our selves, and not as we are
transformed and metamorphized from our selves by our accusers. What signs see
men in us of pride or contempt? What be our caetera opera that bewray such an
humor? Do we despise all the ordinances of the Church? Refuse we to be
obliged to any? And what be our ausus temerarij? What disturbance also of the
Church can they justly lay to our charge? Nay (indeed) on the other side, do
we not as our infirmity does permit, give forth signs of faith, charity,
simplicity, modesty, which give savor to the contrary? There is in August.
de tempor. sermon. 62.
Augustine, a man excused, for breaking of a Church fast, that does break it
by him self, and inviteth not others to break it with him. even so we: we
incite no man to the refusal of the ceremonies for which we suffer, but suffer
all men to abound in their own sense^. Chrysostom Chrysostom. in Genesis homil.
10.
clears a man in breaking the same, that upon a fasting day spends the
time in prayer, alms, reconciling of enemies, and such like duties. in quibus
infirmitas corporis nihilob stat. a just proportion from hence clears us, if
we conform in other things, in quibus animi conscientia non obstat, though
otherwise they bring their burden with them.

Now let it be named wherein we go not two mile when we are commanded to go
but one. Mat. 5.41.
yea, wherein we go not, as many miles as any shoe of the preparation of the
Gospel, Ephesians. 6.15
will bear us? What payment, what pain, what labor, what taxation, made us
ever to murmur? Survey our charges, where we have labored, if they be not
found to be of the faythfullest subjects that be in the land, we deserve no
favor. Nay there is wherein we stretch our consciences to the uttermost to
conform and to obey in diverse matters, which our best Writers find fault
withal. Doctor Willet. controvers. 9. quaest. 8. page 2.
One of these speaking of the heathenish names of the days which are used,
which the Rhem. in Annotat. in Apoc. 1. verse. 10.
Jesuits them selves condemn, applies to them that of Augustine, Augustine.
in Psalm. 93.
Nolumus vt dicant, and vtinam corrigantur vt non dicant. The same we may well
apply, I say not to these names, but to many other ceremonies; to the feast
days of saints; therefore Ioha. Reynold. conferenc. c. 8. divis. 2.
worthy to be abolished, because they breed an error in men, as if the saint
him self were honored. to abstinence from flesh, and fastings, comformable
to those of the papists, which the These. de Adiaphor. Theolog. Saxon. apud
Conrad. Schlusselburg. Tom. 13. page 510.512.514.
Germane Divines condemned, although commanded as they are here, for polity
only and not for religion to the seiunctio chori a reliquo te^plo for the
minister alone to pray in, which Bucerus in Censur. cap. 1.
one holds Antichristian. to the going up of the priest to the communion
table to say all the prayers of the canon till he come to the offertorie, which
is called Ibidem cap. 3.
quoddam coenae simulachrum, idoneu^ ad confirma^dam missae fiduciam, with
others like, of which we may say, Nolumus vt fiant, and vtinam corrigantur vt
non fiant. to which notwithstanding we do conform, and are we yet
co^temptuous? we are able to say, are we refractarie in other things, as
Balaams Ass said to his Master: have I used to serve thee so at other times?
therefore the Canon law does clear us, for they are without fault (says it)
who when they disobey their Prelates, are able to plead in the words of this
Ass, Decre-. p. 2. cap. 2. qu. 7. ca. 41
cur nos verberibus affligit is? cur nobis unjust irascimini? nunquid vobis
inobedientes fuimus, nist nunc cum ad malum cogimur? videte illum qui prohibet
ab incepto.

#Sect. 15. They that disobey or displease in unlawful Ceremonies, do not
scandalize.
I comme now to Scandal, which is also laid to our charge, to make us sinners
when we omit these ceremonies. You make show of conscience not to give
scandal, say our Opposites, and should ye not (then) be chiefly wary, that
you do not offend the Magistrate, which is the greatest scandal that may be?
This objection seems to implye, that the Magistrate is scandalized, as often
as he is displeased, which is not true. Our Opposites in their conformity
perchance please their Reverend Fathers, when yet they scandalize them. We in
our not conforming do indeed edify them, although it may be we displease
them, of which we are sorry. Ioab despleaseth David, 2 Samuel 24.3
when he contesteth against the numbering of the people which he was commanded
to do. Iehosaphat does not please King Ahab, when he speaks for the
Prophets, 1 King. 22, 8.
of whom he thought ill without a cause. Daniel did not what Darius did
command, when he honored him not before his people, by praying unto him
alone. Yet did not Ioab scandalize David, but edified him. even as Iehosaphat
edified Ahab, Dan. 6.10.
and Daniel Darius, so did Isaacus edify Valens, though he displeased him,
when he requested, Theodor. histor. li. 4. cap. 34.
read gregibus optimos pastores. even as Terentius did, in the very same
case. He Ibid. c. 32
returning with victory out of Armenia, and being willed by the same Emperor
to ask what he would, he put up a petition to him, for a Church to be given
pro Apostolica doctrina sufferentibus. The Emperor tare the petition to
pieces, and willed him to make his suite for somewhat else. which he gathering
up the pieces, refused to do with this reply, Accepi inquit, habeoque
Imperator abs te domum, neque aliud petiturus sum. quid vero ego spectaverim
iudicet huius vniversitatis iudex. Ibid. c. 33.
Traianus his general was more rough, yet did he edify him, when he
displeased him, in these words: non ego sum victus, sed tu victoriam corrumpis
Imperator, qui adversus deum aciem instruis an te fugit quos ab ecclesijs
abegeris, and quibus eas commisseris. Theodo. histor. lib. 2. cap. 16.
Liberius at the first defends the innocence of Athanasius, and suffers
bannishment rather then he will subscribe to his condemnation. afterward being
weary to live in exile, he subscribed. at which of these times did he edify
Constantius the Emperor? or at which scandalize him? Did he not scandalize him
at the last when he pleased him, by subscribing? seeing thereby he did confirm
him in his badde course? for all the while he did displease him, with this
apology what the Synod did against Athanasius, it was done gloriae and metus
a te, infamiae causa, and coram he was never condemned; the Synod heard him
not speak for him self ne vlciscaris inimicitias (O Imperator) in Episcopos:
manus. n^ecclesiasticorum sanctificationi vacare debent. proinde si tibi
videtur, iube in suum quenque locum restitui: so long he did edify him. By
analogy from hence it appears, that men are far from scandalizing their
Superiors, when in a righteous cause or suite they do offend them. But by
omission of the ceremonies (will some say) you do vilify the authority of
the Superior, which, as it is an hurt to him, so is it a scandal to the
people, before whom it foundeth (as it were) the alarume of disobedience, and
make many bold against the law in greater matters. First, this comes not per
se, from our omission of the ceremonies, but per accidens only: and the
scandalum is not datum by us, but acceptum by the people. Daniel will not omit
the ceremony, Danial 6.10
of looking out of the window toward Jerusalem. Mordecay omitteth the
ceremony of bowing the knee to Haman. Christ will not use the ceremony of
washing hands, Hest. 3.2.
though a tradition of the elders, and governors of the church then being: Mat.
15.2.
The authority of the Magistrate was violated by these, and an incitement of
disobedience was in their ceremonial breach, as much as there is now in ours,
yet were they guiltless notwithstanding, because they did, but that which was
their duty to do: and we now do the like. Secondly, our covering of the
laws imperfection is such in our preaching (for we iumpe with Melanct. in Romans
ca. 13.
Melancthon in this, if the faults of a private neighbor must be covered,
then of the public ones much more) our preaching for obedience is also such,
as that no hurt accrueth at all, unto authority, by our omission of the
ceremonies, while great good comes by our preaching for the sanctifying of the
heart to true obedience, even as the subjection of our charges in which we
labor, give evident witness to all the world. As for the good which our
Opposites boast of in their conformity, in that they think it teaches
obedience to the people, let them consider, whether they edify not the people
to such an unholy kind of obedience, which the Germane Confess. eccles.
Mansfeld. aedit. An. 1560. apud Conrad. Schlusselburg. tom. 13. p. 530.
Adiaphorisme once brought forth: which was, that men were to obey what was
commanded without examining, without trying by the word. the least occasion
whereof now cannot be little sin with us, considering the general prophanes
abroad, which is thus resolved already; Let the Magistrate look to my soul,
he has charge of it: If I be not right he shall answer for me: I need meddle
with no matters of religion, he that is bound, he must obey. Thirdly, If there
come any hurt by our forbearance of co^formitie, as it is per accidens, so is
it less the^ that which conformity brings forth per se. and we know that in
things indifferent, we must always avoyde that course, which threatens
amplius detrimenti, and follow that which offers to us August epist. ad
lanuat. 119. cap. 18.
maiora lucra to be hoped for. First the hurt of our omission is the less,
because it may be more easily prevented. many rites may be omitted (says A.
Hippe. de sacris stud. non deserend. page 159.
one) without offense, yet so as we be not authors of public scandal. This
danger will be prevented, if the weak brethren, who are likely to be
offended, and to judge that we omit them of contempt, be fully instructed in
the whole matter: that so they may understand, that we do not omit them, for
any contempt of public authority, but for other just causes. Our Reverend
Fathers I trust will be contented with that measure which themselves meat to the
Lord, but behold we afforde them better. The dishonor of the Lord (say they)
in the use of the cross will be sufficiently preve^ted, by the Ministers
preaching, but far better (say we) may the Magistrates dishonor be prevented,
by the Ministers preaching, and all other hurt that may follow his disvse,
because his preaching against contempt and irreverence of the law, is more
vnderstandable, remarkable, approuable, then his preaching against the abuse
and superstition of the cross, when he does use it: which is seldom
understood by the people for the hardness, regarded for the show which it has
of precisenes, obeyed for the harshnes, in that it ouertwhattly crosses their
old inveterate custom of crossing. Secondly, the hurt that ensues upon the
disvse of the ceremonies is less, because it may be more easily remedied in
that authority (if at any time it be defaced) has power in her hands to
right it self, whereas the hurt of the cross, as long as the cross it self
remains, admits no remedy. Thirdly, in the hurt that comes of the
ceremonies there is [amplius detrimenti] to wit, the loss of the precious
souls of men, more worth then a world. For these Christ Jesus lost his life:
will not our Reverend Fathers (then) loose one jott of their authority, nor
forbear so much as a ceremony, that is hurtful unto them? then if any not
repenting hear at his coming, thy life shall go for his life, and thy Soul
for his Soul: yea as his soul was vile in thine eyes, so shall thy soul be
in mine. 1 King. 20.39.
let him be justified in his judging* we know that Theodor. Beza epist. 24.
art. 12.
nulla causa est cur ob privatorum quorundam offensiones, Ecclesiae hoc vel lud
recte constitutum mutet. but what is this to the retaying of Cross and
Surplice which are ill constituted? and in which to plead after this manner,
is to plead as Saunders pleads for his Images: It is better ( Saund. de imag
c. 17. or 16. apud Fulk. page 696.
says he) that some one should do amiss, then to falsify the whole law. To
this Alphonsus does accord: Alphons. de Castr. verb. imag. Deuteronomy. 27.1^ Mat.
18.6.
Si vnus aut alter, simplicitate deceptus erat, ille docendus est; and non
propter illum imagines prorsus sunt tollendae. Leges siquidem and statuta, non
pancorum numero, sed maiori populi multitudini prospiciunt. Did these men never
read, Cursed is he that lays a stu^bling block in the way of the blind,
and all the people shall say Amen? and woe unto him, that does offend any one
of these little ons? Thus being cleared, both from contempt and from scandal,
in disvsing of the ceremonies, we hope we may justly entreat for our liberty
from them.

#Sect. 16. The punishments inflicteth for not conformity, are greater then
the faults committed.
IF justice will give us that liberty which is our own, Sect. 16.
in her distribution of good, then in her distribution of evil she will
overpasse us, at the least she will forbear to suspende, to deprive, to
excommunicate, as being punishments in a triste, against the light of nature it
self, Cauendum est, ne paena mayor sit quam culpa. Cicero lib. de offic.
An Innekeeper looks to be paid for the fume and smell of his flesh: within
which a poor man did eat his own bread. his recompense was, that the poor
man should pay him, with the sound of his money: then which sentence,
Panormit. in c. ad nostram Ext. de consuet.
Cato him self could not give a better. An ayerie commodity, requiring but an
aereall payment, it seems our transgression in an aereall Cross, deserves
but an aereall punishment, such as is a christian reproof. If it had been
injustice, if this poor man had paid his substance for a commodity which was
not substantial, then what justice on our transgression in a matter of no
substance, to lay that punishment, then which transgressions in the matters of
great substance, cannot receive greater? Against this, there is broached of
late, a strange position: Contempt is greater in a small matter, then in a
matter of greater moment: and that of purpose, to make our punishment the
greater, the smaller the cross and the Surplice are, in which we offend. They
pretend in which we contemn: but of that we have cleared our selves
already. now examine we the point it self. The dround of it seems to be
borrowed out of Bernard, Bernard. de praecept. and dispens.
In difficilioribus agendis obetitio gratior, quam gravior pravaricatio
indicatur. in facilioribus minusque onerosis contemptus damnabilior quam actus
laudabilior aestimatur. which if it be, then may the raude of the allegation
(for they even translate these words) be with one eye discovered. First he
esteems not contempt in a small matter, a greater sin the^ contempt in a
great. he only holds contempt in a small matter to be worse then an actual
breach of a great. because here the difficulty of the thing extenuateth the
fault, and man's infirmity pleads some excuse. For what can be replied to
these words of his, in the same treatise, maioribus mandatis mayor, minoribus
minor, opera nostra and cura debetur. de quorum etiam contemptu iuxta eandem
consider ationem gravior leuiorve offensa contrahitur. Makes not this plain,
that contempt is greater or less, as is the matter wherein it offends? the
reason is, because according to the matter, grows the commandment more
stricke or remiss, even in the will and right intent of the Superior, of which
thus Bernard a little after: pro varijs necessitatibus, vel vtilitatibus
agendorum iniungentium affectio variatur. quodque putauerint rectius and
commodius, hoc amplius cupiant and exigant observari. Tam ergo qualitas
praceptorum, quam authoritas praecipientium, and obedientiae praefigit metam,
and inobedientia terminat culpam. quando vt dictum est in praelatis quibusque
maioris authoritatis, and in eorum mandatis, quibusque maioris vtilitatis, quo
diligentior debetur obsequendi cura, eo and culpa gravior incurritur. Secondly,
suppose he co^pareth a contempt in great and small matters, together in the
foresaid allegation, yet what is that to our cause, wherein the small ceremonies
imposed (as it often comes to pass) are very burdensome, hard, and difficult
to our consciences: seeing it is apparent, that he speaks of matters small in
such manner, as that they be easy also, which these commanded rites are not.
In regard whereof I return home to them the argument thus: The easier it is
for our Superiors to forbear their command in these controversed rites, the
greater is their contempt of us: whom they burden needleslie. Is it a small
fault (think ye) to lay heavy burdens upon other men's shoulders? especially
when it is done by them, who should be the first to take of the heavy
burdens, Isai 58.6.
and to let the oppressed go free, and to break every yoke? Thirdly, Bernard
does not hold every breach of an easy matter (in case these ceremonies be
easy to us) to be a contempt* much less a contempt punishable more, then the
contempt of a matter great: which our Reverend Fathers have both held hitherto
against us, and executed on us, but he affirms (indeed) the contrary, Non
qualiscunque mandati praeteritio criminalem facit inobedientiam, sed repugnare,
sed nolle obedire. and he prescribes a more just proceeding, such as puts a
great matter into the balance, when it does punish with great punishment
minorum mandatorum transgressio parit peccata leuiora, nec vnius subinde
discriminis iussorum est omnium censenda transgressio: vnde pater Benedictus,
secundum inquit mensuram culpae excommunicationis extendatur censura. Here let
me mention, what Anachar sis says, in Plutarch: O rem publicam breui
interituram, vbi Principes consultant, populus decernit. Wherefore? Bulling.
comment. in Act. ca. 12.
quia huic proprium est in minimis maxim formidare, in maximis minime
prospicere. leaving it to the judgment of all that are indifferent, whether
the practice of the foresaid principle, excommunicating and depriving propter
haec minima, while the maxima (to wit) Nonresidencie, dombe ministry, with
the like, are not prevented, were not to renew that preposterousnes, which in
his judgment decays a state? From this course, does Io. Cris. in Carol. Mag.
Charles the great call us, renowned for reforming the Cleargies idleness. and
Idem in Carol. 4.
Charles the fourth, whose chief care was to remove their superfluity. And
Idem in Sigismund
Sigismund, who strove at the Council of Constance, with all his power to
redress their enormities: yea Idem in Benedict. 12.
Benedict the 12. Pope him self, who is said to have removed many Priests,
that were unlearned, out of the Church. Our Opposites taking a contrary
course, show themselves most guilty in that, which they are wont to lay to
our charge. For who now are the men (I pray you) that strain at a gnatt, but
swallowe a camel? For to make an omission of a tryfling ceremony, an heinous
sin, is to make a gnatt a monster, and to live in soul murder thorough
Nonresidencie, and thorough doumbnes, Zacha. 11.5.
and to say, I sin not, like the Pastors of Israel. They that keep them
slaye them and sin not, is to bring down a cammell, not only to smalnes, but
also to nothing. And (me thinks) if it were but for shame of papists, we
should mitigate this mood. Ambros. lib. 10. epist. 83.
die Dominica ieiunare non possumus (said Ambrose once) qui^ Manichaeos (etiam)
ob istius diei ieiunia, iure damnamus. In like manner we can not well punish,
with deposition or excommunication, or the like in such small matters, who
justly condemn, the papists injustice in some proceedinges. When Bellarm. de
Ponti. li. 4 cap. 16.
Bellarmine obiecteth, that certain Councills have excommunicated lay men, and
deprived Ministers for breach of ecclesiastical canons, this answer he
receaueth from one of our writers, Fr. Iun. controver. 3. li. 4 c. 16 nota. 74.
Negamus primum Concilia prisca, olim de re qualibet leges talisse, sub poena
anathematis, vel depositionis. tum si qua fecerunt (causam fundamentalis
doctrinae excipio) negamus fecisse legitime potestate sua ad destructionem, non
ad aedificationem, abutentia. what was the worst of the Adiaphorisme of
Germany, save this, Adiaphor. Theolog. Saxon. apud Conrad. Schluf. selburgh.
tom. 13. pa. 466.
persequi vera membra Christi, ereptione bonorum aut honorum, exterminatione,
captivitate, famosis libellis, qui ceremontarum receptionem, cum laesione
propriae co^scientiae modeste and grauiter sine omni seditione improbant. Ibid.
page 179.
another more roughly: who calls them Achitophells, by whose means the two
Preachers Ecclesiae Torgensis were thrust out, because they would not consent
to the innovations of the Interim; not sparing them in the mean season, who
propter albam vestem, laid the Church wast of Preachers, in miserable manner.
When Socrat. histor. l. 7, cap. 17.
Chrysostom was deposed, it was thought by some to be a just judgment of God
upon him, because before he had deprived diverse of their churches, because
they differed in the ceremony of Easter from him: Yet might he better deprive
them, then our Superior can now deprive us. If he deprived any, it was for a
rite which all the whole church observed. If we be deprived, it is for a rite
which all the churches (except our own) have banished. and he deprived men
that conformed them selves to aliens, we are deprived because we will not
conform to aliens, (to wit to Antichrist) but to the true churches rather.
Zanch. in comment. in epist. ad Philippen. c. 1. doct. 2*
Zanchius handles the question of deposing ministers about the ceremonies, and
he turns the edge of the Magistrates sword against them, who will not disvse
popish ceremonies, when the Magistrate does abolish them. that a Minister
should be deprived for disvsig popish ceremonies, when was it ever the
judgment of any of note for learning unless he were interessed in the
quarrel? If any were then to be deprived it should be those who countenance
popery, savor of it, and thereupon hold fast her rites* we least of all other
should be deprived, who most resist popery, and who have deserved no
deprivation, unless it be for our hatred of Antichrist, and for our zeal
against his relics. And considering the season, though we were worthy, yet
should we least be deprived now, when popery rises like the swellings of
Jordan; yea makes invasion like an armed man when there wanting many on the
other side in many churches, to stand up in the gappe against it. Does not
the Canon law it self spare depriving for greater faults, when there is
Decret. pa. 2. ca. 1. q. 5 c. 3.
penuria sacerdotum? and quando vtilitas Ecclesiae exigit?

#Sect. 17. The jus of the law of the land whether comprehensiue or extensiue,
does not justify our Opposites rigor against us.
FRom the ordinary ius of a good law in general, whereof heretofore we have
often missed, we come to the ius of the law of the land, which lays not on
us the rigor practiced, if the true meaning be well waighed: whether
comprehensiue or extensiue. The comprehensiue meaning of it, Statut. Eliza.
prefix. before the commun. book.
bends it self totally against the refusal of the form of the service
book, not against a bare forbearance of some one or two Rubrickes, and it
punishes no bare omission at all, but only an obstinate kind of refusal, and
the same joined with contempt: of which, if we cannot clear our selves, we
crave no favor. But the meaning extensiue of the Statute, does perchance in
all equality reach home to us: Not it neither. For the extension of the law,
being but identit as rationis non scriptae, out of this ground de similibus ad
similia idem est iudicium, and this law being made against popish recusantes,
or recusants of the whole book, it can not now in any reason be extended, unto
any other then to such as do recuse more simili. what that we are free from
this law, and from the sentence whether comprehensiue or extensiue of it,
because it is not the same book, with that of K. Edwards, but is altered in
very many and sundry points: yea so altered as that when it was proposed to
be confirmed to the most honorable court of Parliament, it was refused.
Secondly, as we have missed of ordinary ius, in respect of our judgment, so
in respect of our Judges also. we are not to think so ill of our law, as that
it has any purpose or meaning, to overthrow the law of nature. c Nemo in
suae cansa iudex and pars, and testis esse potest. Why then are we cast into
the hands of the Bishopps, who are known to be parties against us. I compare
them not to the Arrians, yet when it is said to us, Victor. de persequut.
Vandalic.
vade ad Episcopos, quiae ipsihabere, huius rei cognoscuntur, per omniae
potestatem, we are put out of hope to have any remedy, their bowels are so
barren toward us. And why should we not claim the privilege, which we have
by Charta Magna, and so be shielded from the loss of our freehould, unless it
be by the verdict of 12. men? If the Bishops were judges indifferent, yet
were it hard, from the wise counsel and deliberation of ^2. men to be turned
over to the will and lust of one, which by their canon law it self, can not
depose Charta. M^gu. c. 19
alone. But if the law put us into the hands of such one man, yet does it
not leave us there, but gives issue out of these straites, by the remedy of
an Eccles. 4.1.
appeal, which with what justice it may be barred and stopped against us, it
will one day be decided by the great Judge of the whole earth, when he shall
set up his throne for judgment. until that time we must be subject to the
sentence which is past, and not be amazed seeing our sufferings have been
fulfilled in our Fathers heretofore, behold the tears of the oppressed, and
none comforted them, and lo the strength is of the hand of them that oppress
them, and none comfort them. Howbeit, heavier is this yoke of ours then
ordinatie, Capitul. per Adria^. Pap. ex Synod. Collect. council. tom. 3. pa. 25
5. Dent. 23.15
placuit vt accusato, si indicem suspectum habuerit, liceat appellare quia non
oportet negare andientiam roganti: and again, si quis Iudicem aduersum sibi
senserit, vocem appellationis exhibeat, vt cum ei concessum fuerit integro
negotio apud alium Iudicem possit audiri. we fly for rescue from an hard
Master, why are we refused, and turned back into his hands again? We fly
to the sanctuary of holy justice, why are we drawn back, to try the mercy
of unmercifulness, yea of contempt and wroth? But do I not forget my self, who
now at last begin to accuse against my promise at the first? for this promise
sake, I stay myself, and lay mine hand upon my mouth, and commit the whole
cause to him, that judges righteouslie. as for that which has been spoken, I
desire the consideration of three things. First, of the necessity that lies
upon me, to speak for the truth: in regard whereof, Gelasius. in epist. ad
Anastas. August.
pietatem tuam precor, ne arrogantiam indices divinae rationis officium; absit
(quaso) a Romano Principe, vt intimatam suis sensibus veritatem arbitretur
iniuriam. Secondly, that the very Canon it self, which forbids the sheep
to accuse the Pastor, has this exception, nisi pro sua iniustitiae, even when
it says of other faults, Council. Roman. 5. tom. 2. pa. 34^.
Pastorum actus gladio oris non sunt feriendi, qua^quam rite reprahendi
astimentur. Last of all, that what here is spoke, is spoken with reverence,
non adcontumeliam tuam, sed ad defensionem meam, as August. epist. 174.
Augustine speaks, yea with grief, as once Cyrill. Apolog. in tom. ^. Council.
pa. 662.
Theodoret, verae lamentis dignasunt haec quod Sacerdotes co^tra Sacordotes
talia dicant: verum hoc dicimus, non quod tantum accusemus, quantum nostricuram
gerimus. And so an end of the injustice of the Ceremonies, and of the Cross.

The murder of the Cross: Chapter 6.
FOR as much as the instrument it self of cruelty, is by the equity of Moses
law to be abolished, Exodus 21.28
which destroys the beast it self, though not capable of any sin that has
been a mean of any man's death, the Cross and ceremonies must away, or else we
must hear the Lord complain, The instrument of cruelty is in mine
habitation. Genesis 49.51
This laws equity is acknowledged by a Council. vormatians. can. 64.
Council, yea too much acknowledged; the murder of the Cross and Ceremonies
is known, yea too much known. For to begin with the blood of the body first
of all, what wars have the crawling frogs of the Dragons mouth, raised at
any time in the world, of which the Cross was not a guide, like Judas? It
guided first the wars of the holy land, Act. 1.16.
wherein the strength of christendom fell, as one does Carol. Sigon de reg.
Ital. lib. 6. in H. 3. ann. 1095.
witness, The sign of that expedition, was a cross of purple cloth, which
Urban the 2. first gave in indulgence for a sign of expiation to salvation,
which he commanded to be affixed to their garments upon their right shoulder:
whereupon, they that went into that war, they were called Cruce signati, and
the expedition it self Cruciata. Secondly, It has ledd the wars that have
been raised against the Emperors, and States of Christendom, for as much as it
has been used from time to time, for an agent and a solicitor to arm the
people of the earth, against their lawful Lords. It is Thom. Morton. Apolog. p
2. in epist dedicat.
acknowledged, that the head of all monstrous attemptes against Kings and
Princes, is the 3. Canon of the second Council of Lateran, where a power is
given unto the Pope, to absolve subjects from their fidelity to their
Princes, that neglect to purge their kingdoms of hereticques, that so
Catholicques may posse them. Now it is not fit that the world should be
ignorant, that the very next words of the Canon, ordain the Cross, for the
best vizard that can be devised, to call these wars, and for the fittest and
wisest Factor to manadge and to set them forward in these words, Catholici.
etc. As for the Catholics which shall assume the sign of the cross for the
rooting out of these heretics, they shall have the same indulgence and
privilege, which is given unto them, that go to war for the holy land. How
the cross deserves to be used, for this most prodigious treason, it may
appear by that worthy fact of Carol. Sigon. de reg Ital pa. 2. lib. 18 in
Frederic. 2. D. Bills. ag. Apolo. pa. 3. pa. 198. 2. Sam. 15.8 12
Frederick, who to recompense the Crosses which were borne in the field by
Gregoric the 9. against him, cut the heads of them that were dead in 4. parts,
and laid them crosse-wise on their shoulders, and with an hott iron burnt a
cross in their foreheades, whose lives he spared: and caused the crowns of
the clergy to be cut square to the very skulles. Thirdly, the cross has
served for an Absolons sacrifice, to grace the conspiracies that have been
made, and the wars that have been moved against the people of the high
saints. In the war against the Albingenses, Vincent. Belnac. specul histori.
lib. 29. cap. 103 and lib. 30 cap. 9.
many thousands were slain: and at one time Bellarmin. de laic. ca. 22.
1080. burnt together in one fire. all which was cou^tenanced by the cross.
For Antonin. histor. p. 3. tit. 19. ca. 1 tect. 3.4.
Crux in Gallia predicabatur, ex Innocentij tertij mandato, contra Albingenses.
and Sze Dominic (the ringleader of the whole voyage) made the sign of the
cross his broker, Theodor. Appold. lib. 1. de vit. sanct. Dominic. ca. 7. ap.
Surium de probat. sanct. histor tom. 4.
ad quem congregabatur caetus fortis viribus cruce signatorum. And the war
which was after levied against the Hussites in Bohemia, was an expedition
called Ioh. Dubrau. histor Bohemic. lib. 24.
cruciata. the Guil. Lindwood prouintial.
voyage it self being not excepted, which was furnished out of England against
them. Such was the war which Io. Sleyda^. comment. lib. 26.
Paul the third, moved against the Protestants, under the conduct of
Farnesius, who when he took his leave of him, promised to spill so much
Lutheran blood, as that his horse should swim therein. This war was, before
intended by Act. Paul. 3. Willet. controuers. 7. in praesa.
Marcellus secundus, holding it a better deed, to make war upon Lutherans,
then against Turks: whose confidence was such in the cross, that he purposed
to discharge his gaurde upon this reason, Onuphri. in Marce. 2
The cross is a better weapon and defense, then any sword or shield. This
confidence is not of late sprung up, which I will make plain, that all may
see, what a deep hand a cross has had in the murder of all the wars
forenamed, A great Epist. ad Leonem. Imperator. council tom 2. pa. 254.
number of Bishops, writing in the defense of the Cou^cill of Chalcedon.
commend their Emperor, because he did pro purpura, virtutibus fulgere, and
armis vti adversus hosts venerabili Cruce. when Attila makes war on Rome,
Leo goes forth unto him, praelata Genebr. Cronolog. lib. 3. in an. 463.
argentea cruce, that which Lupus Trecensis also did at an other time, and so
appeased him: whence grew the jest, that Attila feared nothing, praeter Leonem
and Lupum. when Alexander the first, proclaimed the cross against Isilinus,
for the recovery of Padna, Philippus Fontaena his Legate in the voyage, when
now the whole troops were setting forward, under their ensigns, commands an
hymn to be sunge in honorem sanctae crucis. vexilla regis prodeunt, Carol.
Sigon. de Reg. Ital. lib. 19. in aun. 1257
crucis fulget mysteriu^, which while it was singing, 2000. men both on horse
and foot were seen to weep for joy. At Ibid. in ann. 713.
Ravenna, no way to stay the slaughter of a conflict, but to send in priests
amongst the weapons with a cross and the book of the gospel: at the sight
whereof all presently was hushed. On the other side, Pius. 2. in Europ. page
190.
Iacobus Benevensis at Orleance, comes with a crucifixe in his hand to
appease a tumult, and the seditious take him up, and carry him about, being
encouraged, as if now Christ him self were come amongst them to be their
captain. Hereby it appears, what an abettor, comforter, counselor, yea
commander, the sign of the Cross has been, Act. 7.58.
in bloody wars at all times. Fourthly, the Cross like a Saul, keeps the
clothes of the executioners of the Martyrs, for as much as at every execution,
in Spain and other where, there be two Jesuits at the least appointed to
stand by with holy crosses in their hands, to grace the murder: And many of
the saints of God, has the cross him self condemned. The denial of the
crosses worship was one Act. and monum. page 518.
of the Articles, for which the old L. Cobha^ died, Five men were put to death
at once, about the Ibid. page 940.
Crucifixe and Roode of Doner Court. Tho. Ibid. page 746.
Man was condemned, for that he would not believe in the crucifixe. Ibid. page
848.
Franciscus Romanus was martyred at Burges in Spain, An. 1540. amongst other
things, for refusing to worship the cross. Ibid. page 952.
Robert Couper was much troubled, for denying the virtue of the sign of the
cross in blessing. Tho. Ibid. page 1589.
Hawks was in part brought to the fire about the cross, as shows his
dispute with D. Chedsey. Ibid. page 1735.
Tho. Spicer, and John Dennye, died for refusing to follow the Cross in a
procession. Ibid. page 1829.
Ralfe Allerton for that he would not bear the cross in procession. Spicer,
Mandrell, and Coverdale, the three Martyrs of Sarum, had a combat even at the
stake with Friar Billinge (then Parson of Wilton) Ibid. page 1940.
about the Cross. he prooved the sign of the Cross by the 9. chap. of Ezech.
which in Hebrew and Greek was Tau he said, in latin Tee. which when a
Merchant of Poole heard, he set spurs to his horse; after that, with hands
lift up to heaven, he had cried out, O lamentable thing, Psalm. 116.15. Job.
16.18.
that poor men should loose their lives, for Tee Taw! Precious blood (then)
has the Cross spilt: which the earth will not cover. These Martyrs dying
against the second beast of Rome, the Pope, being as blessed, as those of the
Primitive church, that dyed against the first thereof, to wit, the Roman
Emperor, Renel. 14.13.
the more detestable should the name, not only the sign of the cross be to
us: Mal. 23.32.
who (God forbid) we should bring upon our selves, the blood of these Saints
by continuing their persecution against our brethren, about Tee Taw again.
Fiftlie, The Cross does murder as many Ministers, as he does undo. Exodus
2. 11.
For how could Moses punish the striking of an Hebrew, with the punishment of
murder, if violence were not a kind thereof? Or David the rapine of a lamb,
2. Sam. 12.5
if wrong outrageous, draws not near unto the bounds of it? Indeed as the
fire is quenched, by taking of the wood away, that does maintain it, as well
as by pouring on of water, so man's life is destroyed, by taking away the
maintenance and comfort of it. which the sign of the cross has done, unto as
many, as now sit weeping with their wives and with their children, who for the
wrack which the cross has put them too, are constrained eftsoons, to
ingeminate that of Rebecca: what avayleth it [vs] to live? This measure, Gen
27.46.
when Cassander that Hermon. Hao^elma^. de tradit. page ^. li 4. Column. 377.
Adiaphorist, measured once to a Preacher of Geistengem called Antonius,
because he refused with the sign of the cross, to consecrate the Font of
Baptism, he is censured thus: Illi satius fuisset amittere vitam, quam it a
misere incertis sedibus oberrare, in miseria and calamitatibus: and meo iudicio
satius esset, vt illi potentes qui in exillum pies viros eijciunt, potius
talibus vitam adimerent. When Dioscorus constrained certain Orthodoxe
Ministers, errare de loco in locum, and to fugere a creditoribus, and would not
admit the^ to dwell in any Monastery, where they might be relieved; nor him
self show any mercy on them, nor command that alms, according unto
Christ's commandment should be extended to them: he is complained on, to have
made men, Libel. Athanas. Presbyter. ad Council. Chalcedo. tom. 2. pa. 114.
omni miseria miserabiliores, and to have showed such wrongs, qualia nec
Barbari aliquando adversus subjects sibi commiserunt. Now we leave it to the
consideration of all those, who have not shut up their eyes against the sight
of our misery, whether the cross has not attempted to bring upon us, even as
much as this, seeing he does not permit unto us, any trade whereby to live,
drives us from place to place, to seek our bread, and not only not
commands, or provideth we should be relieved, us? And seeing all this is
purposed against us by the cross, we pray to the Lord, to give better bowels
of mercy to our Reverend Fathers, then to contemn his admonition, who speaking
of the elevation, retained to the hurt of the godly, has these words: Qui haec
ad exagitandum arripiunt, ipsi reddituri suntrationem tudici, vivorum and
mortuorum, inclementiae erga alios, non certe malos and impios suae: and
tumultus in Ecclesia Christi commoti, and audaciae decerne^di, iudicandi,
condemnandi, vel innocents, vel eos saltem, quibus parcere, vel quos revereri
etiam criminatores illos, and capitalium sententiarum pronunciatores, aequum
fuerat, And this for the crosses bodily murder.

#Sect. 2. The soul murder of the Cross.
THE soul murder of it, is through scandal, which how can it be little sin,
Sect. 2.
since it offends against Christ him self, and destroys those whom Christ
has redeemed. If any replye, none of the elect can perish, we easily grant
it, 1. Cor. 8.12 Romans 14.15.
since even a Jesuit Ribera. in commenta. in Amos. ca. 9. Number. 8. Rolloc. in
Romans 14.15.
him self will yield it. yet he that offends is said to destroy them,
because he does that, that is b apt to destroy, and of which destruction would
ensue, were they not by the Lord preserved, which is no thanks to him that
gives sca^dal. So the life of David is bound up in the bundle of life, and
none is able to take it from him: yet in that Saul rises up against him, and
seeks his blood, he is guilty of his murder. So David himself cou^teth the
water fetched from Bethlehem, to be the blood of the men that fetch it, 1. Sam.
25: 2. Sam. 23.17. 1. Cor. 8. vlt Mat. 5.29.30.
although God being merciful to them they have escaped, because he did that
which was apt to shed their blood, in that he put their lives in hazard. For
this cause every instrument of offense must be removed, even to meat; yea even
to an hand and eye: nay more to truth and Thom. Aquin. 2.2. qu 43. ar, 7
justice it self. for the truth must be concealed, and justice omitted in
punishing sin, when there will a scandal grow, even as the Summa Siluest
ver. scandal.
verses run, est veritas vitae, doctrinae, iustitiaeque: Prima semper habe,
duo alia propter scandala linque. Our Opposites in answering this, agree not
together. some of them yielding there is an aptnes in the Ceremonies to breed
scandal, to wit, an inconvenience: others hotly contending, they are most
convenient, and so apt for edification. And of the former, there are three
paths, which they choose to them selves in the course of their conformity.
The first sort of them stand on this, though a thing per se unlawful, can
never be done without offense, yet that things inexpedient may be yielded too
without transgression. The first scripture which I know alleged for this (to
wit the 1. Cor. 6.12. All things are lawful, but al things are not expedient,
makes more against them, then any scripture that I know, and that in Pet.
Martyrs judgment, who thus commenteth on it: Agit de indifferentibus. etc. he
handles things indifferent, and preventeth an objection. They boasted all
things indifferent are lawful for me, Paul replyeth, but all of them are not
expedient, P. Martyr in humc. loc
he beats down their boasting by this first exception. For although many
things be lawful of them selves, yet we must take heed of them, when they are
not expedient. The same appears by the practice of Paul, who abstaineth from
meats here, refraineth elsewhere from taking wages, because he saw
inconvenience in them which hindered the edifying of the Church. This hindering
must not be passed over without consideration. There are two Thom. Aquin.
commentar. in 1. Cor. 6. Lection. 2.
sorts of inexpediencie. the one totally excluding the end, which is
edification, as that which destroys. the other in part hinders only the
easy attayning of the end of edifying: and not only the former but the latter
also did the Apostle Paul forbear: witness this, he would not marry, because
it hindered, that facility of going about the world to preach, which now he
enjoys all while he remains unmarried. who then will bring this scripture
to prove a man may use the ceremonies though inexpedient, that has his (...).
wits about him, since they destroy as shall be showed, not only let and hinder
the means whereby easily otherwise men might be edified. The second scripture
alleged against us, pleads even the practice of this Apostle, who yielded
(say they) to an inconvenience, when he purified him self in the temple, Act,
12.12.
witness these words, As concerning the Gentiles, we have commanded that no
such thing be observed. we answer, that which Paul did here, was thought to be
convenient, because now he is amongst Jews, for the winning of whom, this
his purifying is thought to be a mean and furtherance. his purifying was
thought inconvenient, in regard of the Gentiles; amongst them (therefore) he
must not use it. this circumstance moving him to use it here, that he is not
now amongst them. By this means, that which naturally flows from this place,
makes much for us: to wit, that circumstances vary the case, making things
sometimes convenient, at other times inconvenient: also that when by reason of
circumstances, things grow inconvenient (as the ceremonies now are grown) that
then we must not use them. so much all reason does persuade. Is not that which
is expedient a duty, to which we are bound? that which is inexpedient a sin,
from which we are bound? then all hayle to the popish Rhem. annot. in Luc. c.
10. sect. 5
argument, There are works of supererogation, to wit, works of expediencie,
to which we are not bound by God, and works of abstinence, from things
inexpedient, from which we are not bound to abstain. Our writers cannot
answer this argument but with our former distinction, though Paul was not
bound D. Fulk in answer. ibid. Hiero. Zanch. in 1 These. ca. 2.
lege communi, to abstain from wages, when he was at Corinth, yet [lege
particulari] he was, because, by reason of particular circumstances, his taking
wages was inexpedient there; yea he had bereaved him self of the Gospel, if
he had yielded, or willingly run into this inexpediencie. ^ Cor. 9.22
From scriptures and reasons, come we down to the Fathers. Non quicquid licet
bonum est (says Tertul. in lib. de castitat.
Tertull.) Augustine, though he seem somewhat injurious to this truth, yet do
these words break forth, from the light of it, which shined within him,
August. de adulter. coniug. ad Pollent. li. 1 cap. 15.16
quae licita sunt, tractanda sunt sicut expedit; non praescripto legis, sed ex
consilio charitatis, that is, though not [lege communi] (as I take him) yet
lege particulari. Again, quae licita sunt, and non expediunt, in ijs dici non
potest, bonum est hoc, sed illud melius, to wit, that which is expedient, as
private circumstances are in place again, quod licilum est, quoniam non
expedit, non est vtique faciendum. Hieron. commenta. in Ezech. lib. 6. ca. 20
Hierome has this: there is bonum, good: malum, evil; and no^ bonum, not
good: by which, what can he mean but quod non expedit, that that which is not
convenient? Especially considering that later times speaking as it seems
after him, devide a scandal into that which is malum, and then into that which
is Ianson. concord. Euange. cap. 71.
ius rectum, by which they mean either a good thing or indifferent,
inexpedientlie done. From Fathers come we to the Canon law, Decret. p. 2. cap.
28. que. 1. c. 91
Id quod non expedit, Apostolus prohibet, dante sibi Domino, liberum prohibendi
locum. From the Canonistes come we to the Schoolmen, which call that which is
expedient, Thom. Aquin. in 1. Cor. 10. lect. 1.2. etc
necessarium. which is the phrase of the holy Ghost him self, which calls
the ceremonies which are expedient, Ceremonies necessary to be used, to wit,
as long as this expediencie of theirs shall last: as Hierome expresses,
Hieron. commenta. in epist. ad Galat. ca. 4.
fuerunt little infirmitati necessaria, pro temporis qualitate. From the
Schoolmen, come we to the papists their late disciples, Ioh. Mola^. de fid.
h^^retic. servan. lib. 3. c. 17.
id, recte dicimur non posse, quod expedit non facere. I conclude with the
doctrine of our own church; which when the Lutherans object, the greatest
thing which can be laid to the charge of Images, is only that they are
inexpedient, Homil. ag. peril. of Idolat. pa. 3.
acknowledges this inexpediencie of theirs, to be such, as makes them
unlawful, to be tolerated in the church: so that, the ceremonies, even for
their inexpediencie sake, must be thrust out.

#Sect. 3. Ceremonies may not be used in Relatione nor in Comparison.
THE second sort of our Opposites, who yield the ceremonies are inconvenient,
Sect. 3.
make this their issue, that though in regard of them selves they may not be
used, yet in relatione, and in comparison they may: because compared with other
circumstances they grow to be convenient. Now of these circumstances the first
is the avoiding of a worse mischief, which comes near to that conceyte of
some old Papists, who thought it lawful to commit a venial sin, to prevent
a mortal. against whom Thomas Aquinas replied, Thom. Aquin. 2.2. quest. 43.
art. 7. respons. ad. 5.
Nullum peccatum est eligibile. and that of Gratian, that when a man is
perplexed between two sins, he may choose to commit the less: which the
Gloss reprobateth: and late Summa. Siluestrin. in verb. lex. quest. 13.
papists them selves condemn. But e duobus malis minus. true, in malis poenae,
but we are in malis culpae. wherefore by no relation to greater offenses, does
any thing become lawful, which of it self is evil; because that which is
evil, does never become good, until it do exuere, I say not relativam only,
but also realem rationem peccati, as the Thom. Aquin. vb. supra.
Schoolmen do make plain. Now the real inexpediencie of the ceremonies, is
not put off, as long as any hurtful circumstance does cleave to them. so that
we have to plead against the^, with one of the Fathers words, Bernard. de
dispens. ex pr^c^p^.
prudenter advertendum est, scandalum scandalo non emendari; qualis emendatio
erit, si vt alijs scandalum tollas, alios scandalizas? It is not good to eat
with offense (says Paul) therefore to conform with scandal, is a thing
that is evil: but now we have a certain rule, We must not do evil, that
good may come of it, Romans 14.21
or less evil which is less. It is here objected, that Paul circumcizing
Timothy, after the council had forbidden circumcizion as scandalous, was
lawful enough although scandalous, Romans 3.8.
to do the greater good with the Jews, and to avoid a greater scandal of
them. First, if Paul had seen it had been scandalous, Act. 16.3.
he would no more here have circumcized Timothy, the^ other where Titus, whom
he refused to circumcize, because he saw it would breed scandal. The
Council having forbidden circumcizion when it is scandalous, will Paul now
disobey (think we) and circumcize with scandal? Secondly, there is no
scandal but that which is per accidens only and acceptum, when it arises from
doing of a necessary duty, but now it was a duty necessary unto Paul, to
use these ceremonies of the Jews to their edification, until such time as the
preaching of the Gospel, had made their abolition manifest. We have an
instance of the like in our Lord him self, who doing a necessary duty of love
in breaking conformity, with the common and usual fastinges of his time, yea
with the fastinges of John himself, for the sparing of the weak vessels of
his Disciples, and for the more convenient cleansing them from all old dregs
of weakness, the scandal which arises hereof in John's disciples, is a scandal
taken by them, and no way given by him. What then? we breaking co^formitie
unto ceremonies, Mat. 9.14.
which do more hinder edification, the^ the fastings of John's disciples, we
do but that which is necessary, to ridd the old dregs of popery out of
men's hearts, and to prepare them to the wine of the gospel: so that, if any
offense come of it, men take it only without any fault in us. Secondly, what
though the avoiding of greater mischief, made a thing inexpedient to become
convenient (which we see it does not) this were nothing for the ceremonies in
present controversy, because we may say the same of them, which the Germane
Divines long since spoke of the ceremonies of their Adiaphorisme, Ioachim.
Westphal. in explicat. sentent. e duob. mal. min.
Nihil mali ex ceremonijs istis reiectis, ex receptis vero provenit plurimum.
Take we a little pains to survay these evils. P. Melane. loc. theolo.
Melancthon, while he was upright, wrote thus of the hurt that comes by
ceremonies, which are borrowed and translated out of popery into the churches,
pertinacia eorum laudanda non est. etc. their pertinacie is not to be
commended, who when they acknowledge the doctrine is true, tam acerbe flagitant
omnes ritus. this partinacie is a manifold scandal, because it confirms the
enemies of the truth, and brings the weak into a doubting, that the use of
christian liberty is not approved, by those great men that are of learning and
in authority, and the holy ghost is made sad in the hearts of other
weaklings, who are much grieved to be accused of lenity. These. de Adiaphor.
Theolog. Saxon. apud Conrad Schluss. page 521.
The Divines of Saxony drew these inconveniences from the yielding of the
Adiaphoristes, even from their own mouths, and there is not any one of them,
but may be imputed to the corruptions of our church. By the reducing of popish
ceremonies, good me^ are troubled, and made sad, so that invocation is
hindered in them, Papists are confirmed and made glad: this change is so taken,
as if it were a beginning to greater things hereafter, mutatio ipsa per se, est
obscuratio doctrinae: Item, abalienant hae animos hominum a concionatoribus and
alijs. Confess. Eccles. Manifeld. aedit. Ann. 1560. Ibid page 554.
Others of them describe the hurt of the popish corruptions retained on the
one side of the cloth, and the good of their purging out on the other. First,
by yielding to popish Ceremonies, an evil example is left behind unto
posterity, if any persecution shall hereafter befall, vt and ipsi similiter
agant languide, vnde similia oriantur certamina and offensiones. Secondly,
Papists are exceedingly confirmed in their impiety, whereas if we had stood
steadfast, our constancy would have made them perpetually doubtful of their
own religion. Thirdly, certain weak men of our own brethren, are so
offended with our inconstancy, yea so weakened and cast down, that they are in
a mammering whether the doctrine be true or no, which heretofore we have
preached to them. Fourthly, the minds of our Divines are so distracted, vt
metuenda sint in futurum maiora mala. For where Divines consent not, there
truth is corrupted, and piety in the end quite lost. Fiftlie, there is
nothing more certainly to be expected, from the strife about ceremonies, quam
vt and alios novos errores pariat, sicut est error foecundus. Sixthly, these
questions will be so beaten into the minds of our young scholars, as that
there will be no hope of concord with our posteririe, and ita rursum aliud ex
alio malum. Seventhly, unless these quarells be appeased, all occasion of
conversion will be shut up against papists, and others that be uncalled, and so
the kingdom of Christ will be hindered. Eightlie, the opinion of
indifferency, will be always a veil, for all false doctrines quae iam
irrepserunt, quaeque postea excogitabuntur, ad palliandas eas and ornandas:
many other incommodities are there, which arise from conformity to popish
rites, which if they cannot move our Opposites, yet let them be moved by that
happiness which will reflorish, as soon as these scandalls, are removed out of
the way. For first, (say these men) all posterity will be admonished to take
heed, how they admit the least leaven of popery, or give occasion of
declining to superstition, or of dissipating of the church. Secondly, the
papist will be the sooner brought to doubt of his religion. Thirdly, the weak
and doubtful amongst our selves, will be raised and comforted. Fourthly, the
minds of our Divines shall be joined together in peace and unity, and shall
do and preach, many profitable things, to the glory of God, and to the
utility of the church. Fifthly, new errors lately sprung up, by occasion of
these controversies, shall quite be cut off, and petulantia ingenia occasionem
habebunt nullam, deinceps alia fingendi nova. Sixthly, the young Divines, after
the example of their Elders, shall be lovers of peace, and haters of
contention. Seventhly, great occasion shall be opened to convert papists: for
there is nothing more effectual, for their conversion, the^ our agreement, and
quis omnes vtilitates potest resensere? tempus vero plures dabit, quam quisquam
nunc excogitare queat.

#Sect. 4. Present Necessity pretended by the Opposites, makes not the Cross
convenient.
THE second circumstance, which in the opinion of our Opposites; makes these
ceremonies to grow convenient, though inexpedient in themselves, is present
necessity: for necessitas non habet legem (says Bernard. de praecept. and
dispensa.
Bernard) and the Canon law affirms, Decret. Gregor. li. 5. rit. 41. c. 4
Mat. 12.4.
quod licitum non est, hoc necessitas facit licitum: which our Opposites back
with David's fact. the show bread eaten by him, is termed (say they) unlawful,
and yet to him, in time of necessity, it did become lawful. First, that which
is spoken of necessity [non habet legem] [ipsa sibi facit legem,] must be
understood of Io. Molan. de Iurame. tyran. praestand. c. 24 Nauar li. ^. c.
27. Number 35.
humane laws: that when some sudden case falls out, so that the inferior
cannot have recourse to the lawmakers, that then he may him self Summa.
Siluestrin. in verb. lex sect. 8.
interpret the law, and break the letter of it, to follow the reason and
intent thereof. The law forbids to open the gate of the city: the enemy
comes upon a sudden, here necessity makes that lawful which was not so
before. Secondly, in the law of God, necessity has power to break a
ceremony, for the performance of some moral duty, even as it is said, I
will have mercy rather then sacrifice. This is the instance which the
decretall forenamed gives. Necessity made it lawful for the Machabies to
fight on the Sabbath, which before was unlawful. Such is the instance which
our Opposites bring likewise. For if Abimelech does that which is unlawful, it
is in the breach of a ceremony only, to perform a moral duty. This
strikes at those, who for the sacrifice, and for the ceremony of Cross and
Surplice, with draw mercy and love from us, and from poor men that are
scandalized by them: but justifies the course we take, who prefer love to
the souls of men (being a moral duty) before these ceremonies, even as we
ought. In deed, if Abimelech brake lawfully a ceremony of God, for the good of
the body, how much more (then) must we break these ceremonies of man's
commanding, for the good of the soul? On the other side, had Abimelech
sinned, if to keep this ceremony he had omitted this duty of love to David's
body, then much more sin they, who to keep these ceremonies of their own,
omit that duty of edification, which they owe to their brethrens souls?
Thirdly, the same Bernard that says necessitas non habet legem, affirms and
avoucheth, that no dispensation is admittable against Gods law. Whene the
Schoolmen, Praecepta decalogi sunt indispensabilia. This holds most in
negative precepts, which as they do oblige semper, so also ad semper. So
that, what necessity can dispense, with the scandal of these ceremonies, whose
precept negative runs thus, 1. Cor. 10.32 Ezra. 8.21.
give no offense to Jew or Gentile, or to the Church of God. Ezra is in
necessity, he wants horsemen and other soldiers, to conduct the people
safe, yet will he not for this necessity ask such forces of the King, least he
should scandalize him. Tertull. speaking of conformity to an heathenish
ceremony in wearing a garland, non admittit status fidei (says Tertul. de
coron. milit
he) allegationem necessitatis: nulla est necessitas delinquendi, quibus vna
necessitas est, non delinquendi. To this we may add that of Cyprian: Cypr. in
sermon. de lapsi^.
Non excusat oppressum, necessitas criminis, vbi crimen est voluntatis.
Fourthly, though necessity might make conformity lawful, yet no necessity
is in place, to make it lawful. as for the necessities which are pretended,
there is no necessity in them. First it is objected, we ought to conform, for
the performing of a necessary duty, which we owe to the weak to win them.
to which our answer is most just, Romans 15.2.
we must please the weak only in that which is good. charity rejoices not in
iniquity, 1. Cor. 13.6
but in the truth. Peter conforming scandalouslie to please and win, is
sharply by Paul reproved. The second necessary duty objected, 1. Cor.
9.16
is the continuance of our ministry; for a necessity is laid upon us to
preach the Gospel, therefore woe unto us in that we disable our selves from
preaching of it. That we disable not our selves, it has been showed elsewhere:
that being called from the preaching of the gospel, by the violence and
injustice of our Reverend Fathers, no necessity lies upon us, it is evident:
for as much as Paul speaks of them only to whom the dispensation is
committed, and who being called thereto, do it not willingly through their
negligence and their sloth: which is not our sin, who desire nothing more
willingly, then to have again that liberty of preaching: which while we had
once, we showed not our selves so unwilling and negligent, as many of our
Opposites do. The Priests of Holland were condemned by their own side, when
to remain with their flocks (forsooth) they took the oath, to the true
reformed church, in a sense secret, whereby they meant their own church of
Rome: excusing this equivocation of theirs, because they were compelled.
Somewhat is here, which touches our case. We are told it is lawful to bear
the servitude of these ceremonies, for our flocks sakes, seeing it pleases
our superiors to compel us unto them. to which we answer, as one answered
them, Io. Molan. de fid haeretic. serua^. lib. 4. cap. 9
primum; non videntur cogi, qui possunt abire: deinde nomen Dei, verbum Dei,
claram and apertam confessionem requirit. The third necessary duty objected,
is obedience to the Magistrate. For which (men say) we are bound to conform;
which Christ was not, in the ceremony of washing hands: nor Daniel (neither)
in the ceremony of opening the window toward Jerusalem, when there was such a
scandal toward the Magistrates law to ensue. And the doctrine of the
Protestants Churches denies this necessity likewise, which is this: Fransc.
Iun. cont. 3. cap 16. nota. 7.
Nemo efficere poterit vllo praecepto suo vt actus per se indifferens sit per
se bonus aut necessarius per se. The commandment of the Magistrate makes a
thing indifferent good per aliud only and propter aliud, to wit, by the word,
and for the profit of edification which the same word does enjoin, Ibid. nota.
21.22. Nota. 59.
which because it is not ever in place, therefore leges Principum non obligant
semper. And this we have against this supposed necessity in case the
ceremonies were indifferent, which we worthelie hold to be evil. Neither is it
any thing, when it is said, the Magistrate does not impose these rites, but
only as a political ordinance for order and decency. So did diverse Princes
impose the ceremonies of the Germane Adiaphorisme, to whom there was returned
that answer, which now fitly serves our turn, Io. Brent. de Adiaph. apud
Conrad. Schlusselburgh. page 564
etiam si politicus Magistratus postulat recipi Adiaphora, tanquam politicas
constitutiones, and res externas, e quibus tamen scandalum and contumelia
Evangelij exoritur, non sunt recipienda. In one only case, does necessity
dispense, and that is when it so alters a fact as that it takes away from
it al reason of sinning: as extreme necessity makes it lawful Bellarmn de
matri mon. lib 1 cap. 27.
tollere alienu^. wherefore because it is now alienu^ no longer. for the law of
nature it self makes all things common in such extremity. Now, the
ceremonies remain still scandalous, neither can the commandment of the
Magistrate bring it about, that they should do no longer hurt, therefore the
necessity of his obedience, dispenses not. what say I. the commandment of
the Magistrate does not take away from the ceremo. the real hurt and scandal of
them, seeing (indeed) it much increases it? the papists being the more
confirmed, the godly more greeved, the simple more inta^gled with the
superstition of them, the more the Magistrate does command the^. In this case
our Opposits saying, the Magistrate does bear out the scandal of the^, is to
affirm, that he has power to dispe^ce against the law of God, yea against the
law of nature: that which the papists are ashamed to do. when Molinaeus
affirms Quandoque Papa contra ius divinu^ dis pensat, the Inquisitors Index
exputgator. Hispan. fol. 40.
command his words to be blotted out. But a scandal still remaining in the
ceremo. is forbidden iure Divino; so that, if the Magistrate has power to
dispense with the^ he is able in the judgment of our Opposites, to dispe^ce
against the law of God. Again, to give sca^dal is against the law of nature,
eue^ as the Io. Howlet refusal. ration vlt.
papists them selves will confess, and all reason demonstrate. For scandalum
properly is such an obex in Ioh Piscat in Mat. 18
via, as enemies use to throw in war to turn the horse heels upward, and to
shed the blood of war in peace, and to do that hurt to a brother, which an
enemy does to an enemy, is it not unnatural? To this there is nothing to
reply, but that which Bellarm. Bellarmi. de matrimon lib. 1 cap. 27.
suggesteth, to make it lawful for the Pope to dispe^ce with those degrees of
affinity, which nature in marriage it self forbids. That which is against
nature in it self (says he) may become natural and good ob mutatas
circu^stantias. as to kill a man is in it self a thing against nature, which yet
commanded by public authority ob bonu^ common is agreeable to nature, which
does desire that societies be preserved. Our Opposits the^ must say, that the
commanding of the ceremo. does mutare the circumstance of their scandal, so
that they hurt no more. For the^ to say, that remaining scandalous and hurtful
as now they are, the Magistrate has power to make the^ lawful to be used, is
to be worse then papists themselves, whose tenent is, Bellarm. ibid ca ^^
Non potest inferior dispensare in lege superioris, proinde nec homo in lege
Dei. and ca^ 17.
quod est co^tra ius naturae, est indispensabile. I would feign know, whether a
Magistrate commanding ceremo* that be scandalous, comes not within the compass
of that threat, vae homini per que^vent scandalum? and whether the Germane
divines were not in the right, when they taught These de Adiaphor. Theolog.
Saxon ap. Co^^ad. Schlust. lb. rom 13. pa. 466.
Ecclesiae ceremonias rebus and co^modis politicoru^, sub praetextu politicae
potestatis and ordinationis, atte^perare velle, cu^ scandalo Ecclesiae, is an
heinous transgression? But our governors may be in sin to command, and yet
we bound to obey them. True, if the sin were only in the manner of their
commanding: but here their sin is in the matter, it being scandalous what
they command: in which case, Seneca.
bis peccat, qui peccanti obsequtu^ acco^modat.

#Sect. 5. Inexpediencie of Ceremo. makes not them guilty that only tolerate
them, confuted.
THe third principle whereupon this sort of our Opposites stands, Sect. 5.
who grant the ceremonies are inconvenient, is that the inexpediencie of them
makes not guilty, seeing we do but tollerat the^ only against our wills, for
the avoiding of a greater evil, which ever has bin lawful. First, beit
considered, that this was Melanct, song, P Melanthon respo^ ad script.
concio^ar. Hamburg.
plus rituu^ imponu^t, qui vtcunque tollerari possunt, ne de se^a^tur ecclesiae
vt in Sueuia accidit, vbi in multis te^plis ia^prorsus solitudo est, aut lupi
ia^ praesunt. whose co^formitie notwithstanding how odious it was to the best
divines of that age, it has bin showed elswher. Secondly, our co^formitie to
the ceremo. is more then a tollerating of them. For what is it to tollerat? It
is nothing else, but to omit the duty of punishing and of removing, to prevent a
greater hurt. upon this axiom, Ioh. Molan. de fid. haetetic. ser^and lib. 3
cap. 17.
imperatiua praecepta no^ ligant ad semper, sed ad aliquid, sci. ad id quod
expedit. Herevpo^ it follows, that tollerating is only a permission of others
void of doing, and of approving what they do. So Tertul. Tertul lib de Monog.
possum conte^dere non mere bonu^ esse quod permittitur: quod n. mere bonu^
est, no^ permittitur sed vltro licet. So August. August. epist 119. cap. ^^.
multa eccle sia, inter multa zizanta co^stituta tollerat, quae tame^ nec
approbat, nec docet, nec facit. Lastly, so the papists themselves (although
most gross in tolleratio^, as the tollerating of the stews does show) who
define a tolleration to be that, which permits others, Ioh Molan ibid.
non probando. Hervpon we reason 3. ways. 1. Conformity is a commission
against a negative precept, ^. Cor. 10.32
give no offense, which binds ad semper. whereas tolleration, is a bare
omission only of a precept affirmative qua^do expedit; which here also has no
place, because conformity is inexpedient. Secondly, conformity is a doing our
selves not only a permission of others to do, that which a lawful tolleratio^
only does. Here are mustered against us, certain cessions of the godly, who
yielded eve^ to the very doing of certain things imposed on the^, which they
yet held to be inexpedient. Gregor li. 2. epist. 61.
Gregory proclaimed the law of Mauritius the Emperor, forbidding a soldier
to become a Mon^e, writing notwithstanding to him against the iniquity of it.
Mr Beza. in vit. eius.
Calvin conformed to the wafer cake at Geneva, preaching still notwithstanding
against the inexpediencie of it. Mr Beza gives counsel to tolerate the
english ceremonies, rather then to be barred from the preaching of the word.
But Gregory's case is not the same with ours: he held Mauritius law to be evil,
not inexpedient only, therefore if he did execure it he was in sin, as Ioab
was when he executed the Kings commandment and numbered the people, when he
knew it was sinful. Howbeit, he executed it not, he only published what (as he
thought) Ioh Molan vb sup. lib 4 ca 2.
ad tempus modicum tollerari potuit. Mr Calvin's wafer cake and ours, differ in
circumstances of scandalizing, and yet our commu. book it self, does refuse to
tolerate it. Mr Beza Beza. epist. 12.
denying the sign of the cross to be indifferent, what reason have we to be
ruled by him, if he counsel us to use it? But these count conformity a
tolleration. They speak not properly; they mean it is mixtly a tolleration,
which is partly a suffering, and partly a doing like the Philosophers [mixta
actio] partly volu^tarie, and partly involuntarie: which they justify not
neither, if we do Beza. epist. 8.
fovere silentio, the inexpedie^cie of these rites, and not earnestly preach
against it, which we are not permitted to do, but are forbidden by the canon
to speak against them. Suppose then a man were in Turkey, where is a law that no
man speak Cario. Pencer. chronic. in H^racl^o. page 419.
against the Alcoran, were it a tolleration only, there to conform, were it
not a plain execution rather? Thirdly, conformity requires even an
approbatio^ of us. First it defiles us with an approbation real [in fact.]
against which Ambros. epist. 33.
Ambrose gives example: when the Emperor Valentinian required the church in
Millaine should be give^ to the Arrians, he was not behind to suffer and
tolerate; but to deliver the church door keys, he thinks it an actual
approbatio^ in fact, as we now sin, if by any fact of ours, we give
countenance to these ceremonies, that are imposed, or do any thing save to
suffer the punishment only. So is Peter Magdeb. centur. ^. li 2. ca. 10. in
vit. pero.
said to approve (facto) the necessity which was put in the ceremonies of
Moses law: and the Hamburg. epist. ad P. Melancto^.
Adiaphoristes in Germany to teach (facto) the superstition of the ceremon, of
the Interim, when they conformed to the use of them, though they preached
against the abuse: and when a man has more care to adorn the church with
outward ornaments, the^ with a preacher, though his mind be not Jewish, yet does
he facto (says Bellarm. controuers de cult. c. 6.
Bellarmine) representare Iudaicam superstitionem. Our not conformity is
judged by law, a Refusal in fact, and so punishable by the statute, though by
word of mouth, we protest all reverence to the law. Ergo our conformity on the
other side, is an approbation in fact likewise, though we testify never so
much by word of mouth, we do not approve them. Indeed, if conformity be in
fact an approbation of the popish abuse of them, the^ much more of the English
use: for which causes we must forbear, as these words show, P. Martyr. epist.
amic. cuida^^ in Auglia.
Quis paulo rectius de religione institutus, vidons te Christi nuntiu^, ad
altar vestibus indutum, coram imagine crucifixi precari, verba sacra recitare,
distribuere sacrame^ta, non existimabis abs te quoque ritus istos, non tantu^
ferri, sad etiam approbari? Secondly, conformity does require of us a
co^fessionarie approbation of the ceremonies by subscription, in which case we
are to depart, even by Mr Beza. opist. 8.
Bezaes judgment: and not of the ceremonies only but even of the imposing of
them, and punishing of the neglect of the^, to the justifying of our governors
in all their procedings, by their suspentions, exco^munications, deprivations,
degradations of good men, and to the co^demning of the generation of the just,
in their sufferings about the^. so that I know not whether here we have not an
Image renewed of Germans co^formitie, of which some thus, Confess. Man's feld.
apud Conrad Schluselburg. lib. 13. pa. 562
by our yielding we should condemn our selves, and offerre our brethren to the
severitie of the oppressors, as if they were me^ that stood in these matters
co^tumaciter, and sine aliqua iusta and necessaria causa: and our enemies would
hereby be confirmed in their hard proceedings, and be hindered from repentance.
Here are 3. excuses framed. First we intend no such matter in our subscription,
but an yielding only to the use of these ceremo. which what is to the purpose?
for all while our church inte^deth, that by thy subscriptio^, thou should
approve al her procedings mentioned, it is now dolus malus in thee, if thou
subscribe and conform not plainly, according to her inte^tion and meaning:
even as Cicero de offic. lib. 1.
heathens themselves and Ioh. Mol^^ de sid haeretic seruan. li. 1. cap. 15
papists, and not Amb^ of. de offic. lib 3. ca 10. 12 Isidor. d^ sum bon. lib
1. ca. 31
Orthodox writers only hold it fraud in oaths and contracts, not to follow
their intention with who^ we deal: much more then is it equivocation, when it
is a Magistrate that deals with us, who represents the person of God, and
of whom Bernard. li. de praecep and dispens.
Bernard well exvolu^tate iubentis pendet intentio exeque^tis. The 2. excuse
is, that the Bishops before who^ they subscribe, do allow them favorable
interpretations, exceptions, limitations in their subscribing, which help not
neither. first it is known, that the Bb. has no authority to give such
exception, limitation. etc. as no Thom. Aquin. 1.2. quest. 97. art. 4. cai^t.
ibid.
inferior officer has against the intent of any common law. But our law gives
special liberty to the Bishop to interpret the co^mun. book. true, to
interpret, by giving of the right sense of it, which is no ease to the
subscriber, seeing the original intent, of those that first framed it, is
manifestly corrupt. First it is a manifest corruption, that popish phrases are
left in it, which must needs turn to danger, howsoever by the Bishops
interpretation, they may be turned to some good sense. know we not, that the
Germane divines, thought it a sin against confession, Those. de Adiaphor.
Theolog. Saxon. ap. Conrad. Schlusselb. Isa 3. p. 467
phrases papisticas recipere in the Interim? and to Io Wiga^d in Synops.
Antichrist. ibid. p 300
imitari ambiguas and flexiloquas phrases Antichristi? Secondly, there be
rubrickes and sentences which cannot be solued, unless it be by some shifting
gloss, which swerveth from the intent of the book it self, and serves only
for a fig leaf to cover (as it were) the nakedness of it. This ingenuitie it
self abhors so much the more, the more it draws near to that glozing of
the Vale^tin. whereby the successors of that sect Lambert. Dane de haeres. c 12
tantu^ sibi permittebant, quantu^ lupae and meretrices faeminae, quibus forma^
quotidie suppurare solenne est as speaks Tertull. Tertul. de praescript.
vnusquisque proinde suo arbitrio modulatur quae accepit, que^admodu^ de
arbitrio ea composuit, ille qua tradidit. As for religion and a good
conscience, they much more abhor this painting, as we see by the Germane
Divines, who score this up for an Adiaphoristicall sin, These. de Adiaphor.
Theolog. Saxon ap. Conrad. Schlusselb. page 464.
Non necessarias, vel etiam scandalosas, imo etiam impias ceremonias, fucis ac
praestigijs artificiose pingere ac commendare, ad decipiendum simpliciores. But
this is the Bishops fault (you will say) that tempereth these paintings: As if
the minister that suffers himself to be induced to subscription by the^,
does not when he has done, defend his subscription by them also? whereby they
sin with those Adiaphoristes, who to decline from the duty of confession
Confess. illustris^i. mor. princi. and Duc. Saxon. aedid. ann. 1560. apu.
Conrad. Schlusselb. page 580.
humana sapientia latebras quaerebant, and (...) sieve astuta effugia captabant,
quibus elaberentur, ne propter confessione^ eliquid periculi sustinere
cogere^tur: and who pertinaci and sophisticae propugnatione, iniu ste factorum,
recteque sentientium, ac monentiu^ damnatione, no^ solum augebant dissidiam,
Io. Wiga^d. vb. sup.
sed and sibijpsis iram Dei accersebant, iuxta illud Isa. 5. vae vobis qui
dicitis malu^ bonum. To omit this, it is the duty of a Minister to preach to
others, what the third Angel in the 18. of the Apocal. suggesteth to him, to
wit, l Ne larva Ceremoniaru^ Antichristi induatur: and ne ipsius corruptelae,
aliqua callida glossula fucentur. Hear the Conrad. Schlusselb. lib. 13. in
epist. dedicator.
complaint which one makes against all those who swarne from this rule,
insuper palam and public. etc. openly and publicly they go about to
reconcile with the truth erroneous speeches, that is, the foundations of
errors with their violent expositions. Now these erroneous speeches, them
selves are still left remaining, sed inter pretationes illae fucosae and
fumosae disperiunt, so the Preachers suffer the fountain it self to be
troubled: they suffer sluttish chaunnels to flow: they suffer the sheep to
drink muddy water, and what (then) shall post ritie receive at our hands? Is
this faithfully to discharge our selves of that dep ositum which God has
committed to our keeping? page 58.
Again, erroneous sentences against the rule of truth, and their own
consciences, with glosses and interpretations, devised with exceeding craft,
they excuse, cloak, instill, contrary to the authors meaning. Now, is not
this to give false testimony before God and his Church? evanescunt. a. illae
philosophicae and bellae glossulae seu clusiones, in teneras a uras, ipsa vero
axiomata, ipsique nervi errorum, manent. Glossator ille subtilis, errores cuns
veritate concilians, non semper erit praesto, and textus ipse repugnat. As for
the exceptions and limitations, whereby subscribers excuse them selves, what
authority has the Bishop to allow them, in which their consciences may rest?
The best exception which is stood on, is that the Rubric and the Callender
sometimes are excepted of which we may say as was replied to the like
exception, wherewith the conformers to the Germane Adiaphorisme smoothed over
their consciences, Conrad. Schlussel. li. 13. p. 519
Caesar nequaquam vult esse contentus, tali partiali cessione, sed integram
postulat obedientiam, id quod extra omnem controversiam est. As for limitatio^
stood on they have the same evil in them, which the limitations of the Germane
Adiaphorisme had, These. de Adiaphor. Theolog. Saxo^, apud Conrad. Schlusselb.
page 510. Confess. Eccles. Mansfeld. ap. eundem page 529.
et si quaedam limitationes adduntur, tamen scandalum non tollitur. therefore,
the q Germane Divines would nullas recipere de rebus medijs conditiones, ne
haberent adversarij quod gaudeant, pij quo turbentur, and least themselves
should be proclaimed inconstant, and men trembling at every fear of danger,
seu tremit a quovis fraxina virga noto. The third excuse which our Opposites
bring, is, that they are suffered to use protestation by word of mouth, which
clears from a total approbation. Marcellinus is said to have used Chemnit.
Iudic. de Adiaphor. ap. eundem page 720.
protestation, when he threw his frankencense into the fire, yet did he
afterward repent deeply this fall of his. Saint Conrad. Lutzenbn. in catalog.
heteticor. verb. Ital.
Martine, for one hour has communion with the Priscilianistes, to deliver
certain captiued christians, which Maximus otherwise would have slain.
Notwithstanding this necessity, and notwithstanding that he did it with
protestation against their heresy, notwithstanding that he refused hanc
communionem subscriptione firmare, yet he lamented afterward this fact of his,
with many bitter tears. When they of Io. Molan. de fide haereti. seruan. li.
5. ca. 25.
Antwarpe, swore to the Duke of Alencon, they excused them selves in like manner
by protestation, and subintellect a condition, to whom it was answered (which
is common to this our case) quasi protestatio aliquid operaretur, vbi
protestans facit contrarium sua protestationi? ad hunc modu^, turare ad rem
turpem, subintellecta condition, non differt a protestatione Pilati, qui
Christum condemnavit, praemissa specie quadam protestationis. And thus far to
those, who think conformity may and must be performed to the ceremonies,
though they be inexpedient.

#Sect. 6. The second sort of Opposites confuted, affirming no inconvenience
in Cerem. nor any aptnes to breed scandal or offense.
A Second sort of our Opposites there are who stoutly avowe there is no
inco^venience in the ceremonies, nor any aptnes to breed scandal or offense,
It is but a Exam. o^ the declara. of the Ministers of London.
fancy that they be rocks or flattes. I acknowledge here the popish
carelessness of soul blood, and their hardines in hazarding souls; who plead
the same for the rest of their jmages, there is no Nichol. Saund. de imagine.
ca. 17. ag. Fulk page 606.
inco^venience in them: no, nor fear of any scandal in the worshipping of
them; so that no other reply here needs, but that which our writers have made
to them, this D. Fulke. reioynd. to Mart. art. 10. page 216
argument holds from the place of stoutnes, for other consequence there is
none in it. And least we should seem to offer wrong in this comparison, make
we a pararell between the reasons, which Saunders brings for no scandal in
Images, Mart in reply. art. 10
and those which our Opposites bring for no scandal in the cross. Thus
Saunders first. The new Gospel has so much prevayled, that there is no fear
that Images should be honored too much. Thus these. The preaching of the
Gospel may so much prevayle, that the cross, and the rest of the ceremonies
controversed, may not be abused. Thus Saunders for his second reason. The
Images are often polluted with cobwebes, and such like stuff, and so made vile
in the eyes of the people. Thus these. the cross is a base thing, and of little
account in the eyes of the people, and therefore unlikely that any will put
holiness in it. Thus Saunders for his third reason. It is less evil that some
one should do amiss, then to falsify the right of the whole law. Thus
these: better that some be scandalized, then that the law of the ceremonies be
repealed. Thus Saunders for his 4. reason. If the faith and intent be good, the
worshipping of an Image cannot be amiss. Thus these. Our use of the cross and
surplice are without superstition, and the law intends a good end in them,
therefore their use is good. Thus Sau^ders for his 5. reason. Christians now
must not be judged weak as were the Jews, but strong according to Isaies
prophecy, and full of knowledge. Thus these. The people of England must not be
judged either weak or ignorant, as they were in time of popery to hurt
themselves with these old popish ceremonies. Thus Sau^ders for his sixth reason.
Though some of the people may be weak, yet it is best to let images alone,
least they seek to worse superstition. Thus these. The people must be pleased
with Cross and Surplice, least in discontent, they wish for their old
mumpsimus altogether. Thus Saunders for his 7. reason. because the people have
not the sacrifices of the Jews, it is fit they have before the^ the Martyrs
Images, who did sacrifice their bodies. Thus these. The people want their old
Crucifixes and wonted Images, to put them in mind of Christ's sacrifice on the
cross, therefore the cross must steed them. Thus Saunders for his 8. reason.
Images are not given to the people for their weakness, but for the exercise of
their strength, and not to have them, were pusilanimitie. Thus these. To fear
hurt by the Cross and Surplisse were pusilanimitie. to remove them upon this
fear a dishonor, and to judge the people not of strength to bear them, a
greater discredit to our Church, then it deserves. Thus (lastly) Saunders for
his ninth reason. The place of John 4. which commands spiritual worshipping
is not against Images, because they increase spiritual devotion. Thus these.
The worshipping of God in spirit and truth, not only not excludes, but also
requires such outward helps of inward devotion, as are the Cross and
Surplice. There being such a near alliance between these two disputes, I
rely on the answer of D. Fulke, for what he D. Fulke 95.61. page ibid. 696.
speaks against this popish Magnanimity (as he calls it) in the use of the
Images, that lights down right upon this our magnanimity in the use of the
Cross and Surplise. Saul denies in vain to Samuel his disobedience,
all-while the bleating of the sheep, and the lowing of the Oxen, Sam. 15.14
did evict him. So all in vain is it now denied, that an Amalakitish beast is
living in the Cross, since the dinne of his crying and of his lowing, yea of
his stamping, nay of his goring, (whereby he hurts both sheep and
sheepherds) does daily evict us.

#Sect. 7. The Opposites confuted: confessing hurt to follow of the Ceremonies,
yet without their fault.
THere be a second sort of this opinion, who will ingeniouslie confess, there
does hurt follow of the ceremonies controuersed, Sect. 7.
howbeit (say they) without their fault. It is scandalum acceptum and non
datum: passiuum and not actiuum, thorough the peoples abuse without any fault
in the Minister, who uses it well. First, the occasion even of a passive
scandal must be removed by de Magistrate, and disused by the Ministers:
especially if it be a monument of Idolatry, that Homil. ag. peril of Idolat
page 2. pa 4.
has been, is, or is likly to be abused superstitiously. For example, the
scandal of the brazen Serpent was acceptum, through peoples abuse, the right
use of it was good: yet had not Hezechias been excused, if he had let it alone.
Again the hurt of Gedeons Ephod was acceptum, 2. King. 18.3
and passiuum: it was to a good end, it was first set up, to wit, Judge. 8.27.
to witness as a monument that his victory came from God. yet in that it is
let alone, Exodus 20.24
when hurt comes of it, it is the destruction of his house. last of all, the
hurt of the high places, came by a passive scandal: the altar at first is set
up in them to good use, yet if a Fore-father suffer his altar to stand still,
and does not deface it, he is guilty, because he has not prevented the
scandal and the offense, which by the degenerat abuse of time might one day
come of it. I come to an instance more familiar, which the Canon Law
remembers. Decret. p. 2 cause. ^3. qa. 3.^.3^
Qui vitijs nutriendis parcit ac fauet, ne contrislet peccantium voluntatem,
tam non est misericors, quam qui non vult cultrum rapere puero, ne audiat
plorantem, and non timet ne vulneratum doleat vel extinctum. For as much then as
the Lord has set the Magistrate and the Minister, Isay. 4^.23.
to be the Nurses of his Children, he will no more accept this excuse, It was
not an hurt [datum] by me, number. 11.12.
the children themselves they were in fault, I meant no such thing, ^. These.
2.7.
and now I am sorry it is so fallen out, then a man will accept the like from a
Nurse, who finds his Child dead under her charge, by a knife which she
negligently left abroad Does not a man expect that care in a Nurse to leave
nothing in the way, whereby a child may hurt it self? so God requires a care
in us to remove all ceremonies, whereby the simple may hurt themselves. Synod.
^u^onie. 2. Can 18.
Cauta est ad salutem provisio, ad effugiendam culpam delecti, aditum
delinquendi repellere, and that not in our selves only, but in all others
committed to us, a ^^thor. sermon de si^gui^m. eler^^ ag. Cyprian.
nobis exigetur quicquid per inertiam nostram male commissum custoditur. To
touch the matter a little deeper to the quick: in a passive scandal, a man
may be in fault, dolo, culpa, negligentia. Concerning the first. Dolus and
unfaithfulness will be chiefly laid to their charge (if there be any) who
suffer these Ceremonies to remain of purpose to reduce again to popery. as
for others, what though they have no direct purpose, to nourish popery in the
people by them, yet will they be guilty of dolus presumptus before man, and
dolus verus before God, if they seriously and deliberatively slack of the
diligence which should prevent it, seeing vbi Summa. Siluestr. in verb. culpa.
est deviatio seriosa, ab ea diligentia, quam communiter habent homines, qui
sunt eiusdem professionis, ibi est dolus: and dissoluta Ibid. in verb negligen.
G^^^ Lind woo^ prouincial. Pio
negligentia proprie est dolus, or at the least it is prope dolum. which is
backed by that of Solomon, The negligent man is companion to the Wasler.
Concerning culpa, it will be laid to their charge, who know these Ceremonies
to be dangerous, and yet want will to prevent the danger. Howbeit, what if it
be through inconsideration, that they know not the danger of them, are they
(then) guiltless? No, whereas it is Summa. Siluests. ibid.
culpa, when id quod potuit a diligenti prouideri, prouisum non est: culpa
lata, when that is not prevented with men communiter diligentes would have
foreseen: culpa leuissima, which comes short of preventing that, which
homines diligentissimi would have looked unto. I see not how a Magistrate or a
Minister may be excused, who suffers or commands, or does use the Cross,
and the rest of the Ceremonies received from popery, seeing it is evident,
they prevent not the danger which has been and is prevented, not only by the
churches abroad, which are most careful and diligentissimi in this respect,
but also by some at home, that are but communiter diligentes. Concerning the
third, August. contra Parmenian lib. 3. cap. 1.
Augustine speaks of the duty, of auferte malum ex vobis, ipsa negligentia
(says he) in re tanta grave malum est, and ideo sicut Apostolus admonet, si
auferat malum a seipso, non solum auferet audatiam committendi, aut
pestilentiam consentiendi, sed etiam pigritiam corrigendi, and negligentiam
vindicandi. Now this negligence to take away evil is found in the patrones of
the ceremonies, with all her complements. First, there is in them an affected
ignorance of the dangers of the ceremonies, and a careless not knowing the
need and sickness of their own flocks, Ezech. 34.4
which is it not even more then negligence? for Summa. Siluestrin. vb sup. sect
1.
ignorare quod communiter scitur, est lata culpa. Secondly, there is in them a
vacuitie of fear, an other daughter of Thom. Aquin. 2.2. q. ^4 art. 2
negligence. for whereas sagax est parentum cura least the child should hurt
himself, these spiritual Fathers cast that such fear about the ceremonies,
is pusilanimitie. Thirdly and last of all, there is in them a defect of care,
which suffers the ceremonies abroad with the same guilt, Exodus 21.29 verse. 34.
that a Master suffers a goring ox to go abroad, whereby he hurts. A
work man suffers a pit to lie open, whereby somewhat falls into it. A man
suffers fire to remain abroad, so that it takes into the dry hedges, and
consumes them. The equity of these laws must still be kept. If a man suffer
a goring ox to go abroad, he must by the civil law restore Summa.
Siluestrin. in verb. restitutio pa. 2. sect 10 17
the hurt he does. The ancient Carol Sigon de reg. Ital. lib 9. ann 1 105.
law of Millaine was, to prevent the danger of fire. Ne quis (slante vento)
ignem in aedibus haberet, so that when a Nobleman Ibid li. 10 ann. 1 106.
nuptiarum causa ignem spirante vento in aedibus accendisset, ac propterea novo
vrbem incendio afflixisset, ipse cum tota progeny, perpetuo exilio est
mulctatus. The equity of the middle law is to be seen in those courses,
which have been commanded, and practiced always, in which those things have
been quite removed from all use, by whose abuse there might any danger any way
ensue. For example: to avoid the abuse of Images, there is forbidden to the
Jews in the judgment of some Vazq de adorat. li. 2 dispu 4. c. 3
papists, that there be no use of any Image at all agmongst them. and to the
end there might be no Image at all, there was no Image-maker Origin. cont.
Celsu. lib. 4
suffered to live amongst them. So the Can. 36.
Council of Eliberis, to prevent all danger of Idolatry, forbadd there should
be any Image at all as Iuocarnotensis, Vazq. vb. sub disput. 5. cap. 2.
Martinus de Ayala, and Sixtus Senensis do interpret. This, does it nor
cashiere the Cross out of all use? to prevent the danger of Idolatry and
superstition which may come of it.

#Sect. 8. The Cross is scandalum datum, notwithstanding there be no intent to
draw any sin thereby.
SEcondly, it will appear, Sect. 8.
that there is even a scandalum datum in the Cross and the rest of the
ceremonies controuersed, it not hindering (which some do argue) there is no
intent to draw any to sin by them. First, who can think there be none in the
land, that retain and urge their use, with an intent to draw back to Egypt
again? Is our church happier (especially in these declining days) then the
church of Israel was in her growing time, in which there were found Egiptians
many, which not well purged from old Idolatry, took every occasion, to
solicit to a return. Secondly, a man may intend to draw to sin and
superstition, other explicit (which men for the most part do not in these
ceremonies) or a implicit, number. 11.4.
as a thing is intended in the occasion and in the cause, Somma. Silvestrin. in
verb sca^dal. sect. 2.
of which intent they must be guilty, who now do use them. For example, he
that intends to run thorough a river, does intend implicit to dirt and wet
his feet. he that intends to touch pitch, does intend implicit to defyle
his hands. she that intends to come into the company of him, that is in
love with her (necessary business only excepted) does intend implicit to
stir up love or lust. so in case we intend to use the Cross, we must
implicit intend of necessity, to dirt and defile, and stir up popish
lust. stand we a little upon this last instance. Is not the cross an harlot?
suppose she were but a bewtiful woman, that has no necessary business to do
in the service of God (even by our adversaries own confession) in this case
the Crosses presence it self is scandalous. This appears by Cypr. lib. de
singular. clericor.
Cyprian (or the author of that work which is commonly imputed to him) omnis
inconveniens sodalitas mulierum, gluten est delictorum, and viscus toxicatum,
quod diabolus aucupatur. this appears by the canon law, which forbids to
priests all cohabitation and presence with woman, where no necessary business
intercedeth: because Decret. pa. 1. distinct. 81. cap. 29.
vbi talis fuerit commorantium cohabitatio, antiqui hostis stimuli, non desunt.
This appears by Saint Gregor. li. 7. epist. 39.
Augustine, who would not dwell with his own sister, because quae cum sorore
mea sunt, sorores meae non sunt. as now the things which do accompany the
English Cross, are not the English Cross. This appears by the counsels.
Concill. Turonic. 1. Can. 3.
one of which thus, nullam clerici, cum exiraneis faeminis (and the Cross is a
strange women) habeant familiaritatem. quia frequenter per hanc indecentem
occasionem contingit, vt diabolus, qui in sidiatur ficut Leo in cubili suo de
ruinae seruorum Dei exultat. We read of Caesar. Baron. anal. in. ann. 233
Alexander (after Bishop of Comana) that being very bewtifull, he became a
Collier, ne alienis oculis, casus and offensiones materi^n praeberet. whose
example if we follow, we must remove the Crosses beauty into some cole-house,
which till it be done, there will be a matter left behind of stumbling to
Gods people. Thirdly, an active scandal is not only given by a purpose to
draw to sin, but also when having Thm. Aquin. 2.2. quest. 43. art. 1.
respons. ad 4.
no intent a man does that, which of it self is inductiue to it, because not
intentio operantis, makes up a scandalum datum only, but conditio operis also.
And this conditio operis makes scandalum datum, even when it is the corrupt
mind of the party scandalized, that is chiefly in fault. whence arises that
Ibid.
scandal, which is datum and acceptum, actiuum and passiuum also. In regard
hereof it is nothing which some say, none is hurt by the ceremonies, but
thorough his own fault. for so it is granted, that there is nulla causa
sufficiens scandali, Ibid. in respons. ad 3.
but i propria voluntas, it sufficing to a conditio operis scandalosa that it
do inducere aliqualiter, not as a cause, but as an occasion, to wit, as cause
imperfecte, such as the sign of the Cross is in the highest degree: as every
careful man does know in his experience that takes knowledge of common
courses. Further, that this scandalous conditio operis should inducere
aliqualiter, as an imperfecte cause, it is not needful it should be an example
of sin, it may do this, though it be but a Ibid. in respons. ad 2.
show of sin, a likeness of sin, a simititude of that which is sinful,
from which none without sin, can clear the Cross, as has been showed
elsewhere. Fourthly, the very hurtful event it self that follows of a thing
indifferent, is enough to evict a scandalum datum, because men being commanded
to forbear all things indifferent, to avoid offense, when hurt is known to
come usually of them, a scandal is given for the neglect of this duty of
forbearing. The scandal passiuum sine actiuo, is that, which is guiltless
only, now this is only in Thom. Aqui. vb. sub. art. 1. respons. ad 4. Math.
15.12
recte factis: Magdebu. Centur. 1. lib. 2. cap. 4 Col. 448.
or as our writers use to speak, quando impij offenduntur, in vera doctrina,
and bonis moribus. as when the Pharisees are, offended with Chirst, for doing
of an necessary duty, if it be in facto non necessario that hurt rises,
there it makes a man guilty, by whom after it shall be used. I come to the
very papists themselves, when Paul will eat no meat al while it offends,
they interpret it de Thom. Aquin. vb. sup. art. 8. respon. ad 3
tali cibo which is not necessary to be eaten, not de tali which is needful
to preserve life. Caietan. in comme^. ibid. art. 7
Even the popish school then holds, that things not necessary must all be
forborne, rather then offense should rise. So Caietan, abstinendu^est etiam a
bonis spiritualibus, non necessarijs, when scandal grows out of them. To
this tends, the decree of Gregory, Gregor. li. 9. epist. 39.
sunt quaedam scandala, quae omnino despicienda sunt: quaedum vero cum
vitarisine culpa possunt, despicienda non sunt, ne cum culpa seruentur, for
as much as he holds a man gives a scandal, when he does that, which is not
necessary to be done, but may without fault be omitted. Against this doctrine
I find there are two things objected: First, there is Summa. Siluestrin. in
verb. scandal. sect. vlt.
scandalum pusillorum, and there is scandalum Phariscorum, and though for the
weak man's sake a thing not necessary must be forborne, yet not for the
Pharisees sake that is malicious, whose, offense our Savior says, is not to
be cared for. If this be all the warrant we have, not to forbear in a thing
indifferent for the malicious, then have we no warrant at all, because the
scandal (there) not cared for, is when the Pharisees are offended, at his
abstayning from their washings, and his preaching of true doctrine: both of
which were necessary duties for him to do. Luke 13.15. Mat. 12.7.
And when he defends his healing on Sabbothes, and his Disciples plucking
ears, upon this reason they are duties of necessity and of charity, he
plainly insinuates, there is no defense for deeds unnecessary, when the
malicious are scandalized, when the thing was indifferent, does he not forgo
his liberty to please them? as when he paid tribute least he should offend
them, Mat. 17.27.
although he knew they were malicious? Hereupon Gregory, Gregor. Council. tom
2. page ^99
Quid est quod de scandalizatis, dicitur, finite illos: and alijs ne
scandalizentur a Domino tributum solvitur, quod etiam non debetur? Quid est
quod aliud scandalum esse permisit. alijs vero venire prohibuit, Nisi vt nos
doceret, and illa scandala quae non adpeccata implicant, contemnere, and ea
quae placare sine peccato possumus, modis omnibus mitigare They were malicious
at Corinth and seekers of occasion against Paul, that were likely to be
offended by his taking of wages there, 1. Cor. 9.11.
yet the thing being no necessary duty, he thinks it his duteie to forbear
his power therein. The Heathens are malicious to take offense, when Christians
go to Law for their own, yet because going to Law is not a duty
necessary, it must be forborne, and Christians rather must loose their own,
1. Cor. 6.7.
then give occasion of scandal to them. The papists are malicious now, if
they do rapere Bucer. in Censur. ca. 9. pa. 472.
absque data causa some accustomed ceremony of ours to an approbation of their
superstition, yet our writers do affirm, that to prevent, this offense of
theirs, we are to forbear all such things as are not necessary in Gods
service, and such as Christ himself commands. Secondly, it is objected,
that if we tender a reason for that which we do in a thing indifferent, then
the scandalum is sedatum and we are guiltless, though we do what
scandalizeth. This if it be true, then see we an end of all the duty of
bearing with the 1 Thessalonians. 5 14.
weak: of forbearing our Romans 14.16.
own liberty, 1. Cor. 9.12.
power, and 1 Thessalonians 2.7.
authority in things indifferent for their Act. 20.34.
supportance: yea, an end of all the Mat. 18.6.7.
care, to prevent their offense, by giving them Cornel. Ianfenius in concord
Euangelic. cap. 71.
occasion aut condemnandi factum nostrum, aut illud imitandi, contra
conscientiam, which we have so August. de morib. Manickeor. lib 2. cap. 14.
often, so seriously, with so many reasons, obtestations, yea woes and
threatenings, commanded to us throughout the word, what needed Paul to write
so much against the scandal of Romans 14.20.
meats, and against the scandal of 1. Cor. 8.
Idolothius meats? this one precept might have suffized, let the strong give a
reason for his eating, the Nicholaitan give a reason of his eating meats that
are sacrificed and there an end. Paul 1. Cor. 8. vlt. 1. Cor. 10.28
protests he will never eat meat as long as he lives, rather then offend
a brother. Foolish Paul, what needs this forbeara^ce, give him a reason of
thine eating and so eat on, omnia munda mundis. But he, though he has given
many reasons to them of Corinth, for the lawfulnes of taking wages: though he
has given diverse reasons, for the lawfulnes of all fortes of meats to them
of Rome, yet neither will he take wages himself, nor suffer others to eat
all meats, when others are offended. And what is that which he writes, Romans
14. take and receive the weak for their supportance? and not for controversy
of disputation? For disputing and reasoning here, being opposed to supportance,
is not a bare reasoning condemned, which works supportance by forbearing?
Further, when a Corinthian is told, this meat is sacrificed to idols, is he
willed only to give a reason, as to show that it was bought at the sha^bles? or
that in private use it was lawful, and so to eat it? must he not forbear it
also? Once more, Man. 5.29.
what need to pull out an eye, that offends, to cut off an hand that
offends, as Christ prescribes, if in case a reason given, appeaseth a
sca^dal sufficiently? Is the cross as dear as an eye? the surplice as near
as an hand unto us, with which so many are now offended, that upon a reason
give^ they must still remain? when the eyes, and ears them selves of the
churches, cannot be suffered to remain in their places, although they give many
sufficient reasons for their staying in: and against these offensive rites,
which are so far from being members, as that (indeed) they deserve not to be
called, so much as the humors or superfluities of a body? But whosoever is
offended, after a reason is once given in a thing that is indifferent, we may
hold him obstinate? God forbid: for what if God deny understanding? what if
peace and resolution of conscience? to receive a reason is a point of strength:
he that is weak, has this for a part of his weakness, that he cannot receane a
reason. The Romans have received reasons many, yet Paul does nor hold them
obstinate, that do not believe them, but wills the meats be forborne, that
do offend them. We are willed to receive the weak, and to bear with them, as
we would that Christ should receive and bear with us. Now are we contented,
that Christ should cast us off for obstinate, Romans 15.3.
when we receive not all his word, nor consent to it, nor perform it? and
what if the papists condemn this uncharitableness? sure thus a Caietan. in
Thom. Aquin 2.2 q. 43. a^^. 7
Cardinal. whereas it is said in the 7. article, touching the sca^dall of the
weak, if after a reason give^, the scandal do still remain, it seems to be
of malice, you must note the Author does not use [verbo assertiu e] [sed
opinatino] saying, it seems to be of malice. for it may fall out, that the
weak are not capable of the reason that is rendered, either by reason of his
former custom, which makes that to appear discordant which is co^cordant
with the truth, or for some reason which in his eyes is more apparent, or by
reason of some such like cause, and then it is not out of malice that he is
offended, but out of ignorance and infirmity. So it appears by these
premises, that this first exception of those who acknowledge the hurt of the
ceremonies heals no sore, to wit, that their hurt is not scandalum datum, but
acceptum only.

#Sect. 9. The second exception of elevating the scandal, confuted.
THe second exception stands not so much upon the denial, as the elevating
of the sca^dall: Sect. 9.
which they think to be trifling, and a matter not to be stood on by discreet
men. First this iu^peth with the papists, Hostiensis Silvest. Prier. in scandal.
no^ est curandu^ de sca^dalo, nisi sit grave. and when it causes Thom. Aquin.
2.2.^.41. art. 4
in pactione^ sine ruina, or rises only ex specie mali, cu^ aliqua leui
indiscretione co^missa, the^ it is no mortal sca^dal, but venial only. and as
for a Ibid art 5 respon ad tertium.
one of the^ enwrappeth within the woe that Chapter denou^ceth to sca^dalizers,
etia^ doctos and charitate plenos when they offend through a defect of
discretion qua etia^ optimos qua^doque destituit per cuius care^tiam Petrus
gentiles scandalizabat. Secondly, be the sin great or small, it must be
avoided, Hieron, ad Demetriad epist. 1.
contemptus cuiuscunque praeepti, pracipientis iuiuria est. Nay the smaller a
sin is, the sooner through Satan's slight, does it grow to be greater.
Whence Augustine thus: August (...). 9 v^ter^^ and novi Testament. ca. 1
Quantae minora peccatae sunt, tantum subtiliorae, and dum contemnuntur non
vitantur, maiora enim long apparent. What that this pretense has evermore
been insiduous. It is pity (say some of our Opposites) that the Church should
be distracted, about two or three ceremonies: in which, the word speaks
neither off nor on. So the Theodor. histor. li. 2 cap. 18.
Arrians of old, ferendum non est, vt Ecclesiacorpus distrabatur, propter duas
voculas; praesertim qua inscriptura nusquam reperiantur. By the clamor
whereof, how many of the simple sort, were couched and lauguefied? It is also
ever dangerous (as August. tom. 10. homil. 42.
August. relleth us, sed ipsa leuia and minuta, ne contemnantur. de minutis
guttis flumina implentur. non contemnantur velminora, per angustas rimulas
insudat aquae, impletur sentina, and si contemnatur sentina, mergitur navis.
Thirdly, the blood of souls is cheap with us, Heming. in Romans 14.
if we think the least scandal is not a great sin; since the scripture
holds it murder, not only to offer (...) which causes to fall. but also
scandalon which makes but to halt: yea, 1 Cor. 8.12.
every knock that does weaken, which is less then to cause to halt: yea, that
does but grieve the foot of the soul, which is the conscience, which is less
then to weaken, Romans 14.21
if any thing can be less. The equity hereof appears, not only from the
consideration of the tender love which Christ bears to our brethren, whom he
Isa. 42.
bears in his bosom, and Hos 11.3
leads in his hand, as a Nurse leads: yea Psalm. 91.11.
bears up with the hands of Angels, that they incur not the least jutt
against a stone, but also from the consideration of the great hurt which by the
least offense is done. a straw being able to clogge a little Mat. 18.10.
child. a dropp to quench a smoking Isa. 42.3.
flax and the least jutt that is, to put Heb. 12.13.
out of joint the foot that hanged loose before. It is Plini. natural. lust.
lib. 7. c. 53.
storied, that Q. Aemilius dyed incusso pollice limini cubiculi. C. Aufidius by
iutting his foot, when he was entering into Senate. no marvayle then, if the jutt
or rubb of a scandal, take away the life spiritual which is in a weaker degree
posssessed, then the life of the body is. Fourthly, the scandal of the
ceremonies must not be accounted small. The first circumstance (as I take it)
that will make a scandal great, is the manner of scandalizing with Cornel.
Ianssenius vb. sup.
contempt which then offends in the highest degree, when a little one is
contemned, by those that are n puffed up with their knowledge and with their
greatness, and so are void of charity. Now alitle Mat. 18.10.
one is contemned, when out own 1 These. 2.7.
power, will and credit only is cared for. when we seek only to Romans 15.1 and
1 Cor. 6 12.
please our selves, that is, to have our own forth and pleasure. to which the
schoolmen themselves agree: teaching that a venial scandal then grows
mortal, Thom. Aquin. 2.2. q. 43. art 4.
quando contemnitur salus proximi, vt, pro ea conservanda, non praetermittit
quis aliquid facere quod sibi libuerit. Ca^ there be any greater scandal the^
that which is thus described? Quis est proximus men's interrogant, and Enimund.
Bonefid. de iure Oriental. fol. 202.
sta^tium december millia deijcimus, vt nostram impleamus volu^tatem. What when
with this arrogancy, there goes a seeking of own things, the Helena of the
Cou^cil of Pisa, which one in these words describes, Nichol. de Clemang.
disput 2. sup. materiam council general.
Quae alia res in Pisana congregatione ecclesiam Dei, populumque decepit, and
clamare fecit, pax, pax, cum nulla esset pax, nisi quia carnales and cupidi
homines, beneficioru^ ardore succensi, prorsusque excaecati ecclesiastica^
reformatione^ (qua^ boni and fideles plaerique ante omnia fieri volebant
impedierunt) and promotionibus quas concupierant adeptis pacem esse clamarunt
solutoque co^ventu cu^ illa qua^ quaesierant pace hoc est promotione reversi
sunt. The author (though a papist) cannot think, that the H. Ghost would ever
assist such a Synod and such a co^vocation as this what, when with this
arrogancy and seeking of own things, there goes a pertinacie which will not
reform any thing, because it will not yield. When the Cardinals selected in
the time of Paul the 3. were about the business of reformation, Nicholaus Ioh
Sleida^ commenta. lib. 12.
Archiepiscopus Capuanus. omnis emendationis impatiens erat; magna itaque
contentione reclamabat, ne quid omnino reformaretur: ac inter alia dicebat fore
alioquin, vt Lutherani iactent quascab ipsis propemodum adacti illud fecerint.
What when with this arrogancy, this seeking of own things, this pertinacie
not to yield, there goes an obstinacy most vayne-glorious, Thomas Morton.
Apolog p. 1. l. 1. c. 1^
quae (malum) haec religio est, errores suos quamvis minimos retinere malle,
quam errasse videri (says one of our Writers against Bellarmine, refusing to
leave out the 8. verses which are added to the 13. Psalm, quia long ia^
tempore ibi fuerunt. The rest of the Papists are censured Ioh. Reynold conf.
cap. 8. diuis. 4. Tho. Mo^ton. vb. su. cap. 31.
by us, for that though the Latin tongue does not edify, yet it must not be
reformed to keep their credit: least there should be found an error in them
in any one thing. In steed of applying these things, I only pray, it be not
laid to the charge of some of our Opposites at that day, that they have hurt
our church and hindered the reformation of it, by answering our petitions by
their authority to command in ceremonies, as if in them liceret quicquid
libet, by seeking no other peace to the church in their assemblies, then that
which serves to their own promotio^, and sets their own neast on high, by
contending that nothing at all be reformed: least they should seem to be
driven by us, or to have yielded in any thing to us, by keeping in corruptions
still because they have been a long time rooted, and beggarly ceremonies that
edify not, least they should seem to have erred in any thing, in their
former government over us. If this be laid to the charge of any, and it be
true which them selves Answer to the petit. by the Vice. chaunc. and Doct. of
Oxon.
teach, the less the thing the greater the contempt, then must a great
contemptuous scandal be answered for, when the Lord at that day shall ask:
what? could ye not have forborne your brethren in a trifle? not so much as in a
trifle to have regarded so many glorious churches reformed beyond the seas? so
many worthy Gentlemen at home, representing the body of the realm? so many
sighs and groans of Preachers? so many tears of the rest of the brethren?
The second circumstance that does aggravate a scandal, regards the place
where it is done. and it is the Thom. Aquin. 2.2. quest. 43. Siluest. Prier. in
verb. scandal.
doing of it in public. whereas the ceremonies we see are used, not only in a
public place, but also in a place religious, to wit, in a church: the cross
in particular is used in a Sacrament also; then which, the very church it
self has not a place more honorable. The Apocrypha cannot be read in the
church where scriptures only use to be read, but they must presently be Council.
Carthagin. 3. Can. 47.
accounted scriptures. There cannot a Epiphan. in haeres. Aerii.
commemoratio^ of the names of the dead, be used in the midst of service,
where prayers only are wont to be used, but it must presently grow to be a
prayer for them: so now the ceremonies cannot be used in Gods worship and in
his service, but they must needs grow to be worships in estimation, and
parts of his service. The cross has been more idolized, then any of the
popish Images: of which one of our writers thus, Josias Simler. in exodus c. 20.
fol. 85
Locireligio admirationem illis conciliat, and ita occasio fiunt idololatriae.
homines procliues sunt ad idololatriam: quod si illis proponantur Idola, error
little alitur. What is holy water to the sign of the cross that halloweth it?
yet for the holiness that was put in it, we have banished it out of the
church-portch. our brethen (also) call the stick which does usually sprincle
it, even Stephan. Durant. de rit. li. 1. c. 21
clavem infernalem, the keye of hell. And what are the Bells to the sign of
the Cross, or to the Surplice that hallow them? (for cos Council. Coloniens.
page 3. c. 31
qui campanas pulsant congruit superpelliceis indui) to which our brethren that
are in Durant. de rit. li. 1. c. 22
France do bellum indicere for that power which was imagined to be in them to
drive away Devils. A strange thing, we would be accounted as zealous as they,
when yet we set up in the midst of the church, a grand idol of popery, the
very handmaydes whereof, they cannot suffer, so much as in the church-portch or
bellfraye. The third circumstance that does make a scandal great, is the
authority of the scandalizer: who, the more credit he has, the more he
multiplyeth transgression amongst men, and causes Israel to sin. Thus one
of old, Soxomen. histor. lib. 7 cap. 19.
possunt multi ritus per civitates and pagos inveniri quos propter reverentiam
velauthorum vel little qui eos primum receperunt, ij qui illis sunt innutriti
sine piaculo intollerabili praevaricari non posse putant. The cross and a
Lutheran image set up ad decorum, are of the same rank of which our writers,
Josias Simler. in mandat. 2.
Qui rebus praesunt, eas in templis far non debent, alioqui simplices qui
ipsas tollerari animadvertunt, eo nomine plus ipsis tribuunt, quod Principes
and Episcopos and Pastores eas vident non abijcere. Another thus, P. Martyr
loc. com^^n elass. 2 ca. 5. sect. 25.
No small spur to idolatry is the authority of the Dedicator. so that, the
scandal of the cross, cannot be small, backed with the antiquity of the
Fathers, strenthened with the authority of the governors: and credited with
the use and practice of the Pastors of the church. The fourth circumstance,
that does increase a scandalls guilt, is drawn from the matter of it. and what
more apt to work out a scandal then the cross? For as a monument of
idolatry, God has accursed it to be a snare: and so has it proved
accordingly. Deuteronomy. 7.25.
Whence one of our D. Fulke ag. Saund. de imag. ca. 13. pa. 659
Writers, Even from the beginning, the superstition of the sign of the cross
did creape like a ringworme: at the first as a tolerable indifferent matter:
then as an holy thing: next as an necessary thing: last of all into open and
gross idolatry. Indeed, the popish idolatry began out of the adoration of
the cross, which presently (in a manner) began upon the beginning of the use
of this sign. Thus Propert. in Apothe.
Propertius, iam purpura supplex sternitur Aeneadae rectoris ad atria Christi:
vexillumque crucis summus dominator, adorat. Another, Paulin. Nolan. epist. 11.
Crucem Episcopus Hierosolymitanus cum pascha Domini agitur adorandum populo,
princeps ipse adorantium promit. A third, Hieron. in. in Epitaph. Paulae
Prostrata Paula ante crucem, quasi pendentem Dominum cerneret, adoravit.
Again, Idem epist. 17. ad. Marcellam.
desideravit Eustochium crucis lambere lignum. More witnesses Durant. de rit.
lib. 1 cap. 6. and lib. 2. ca. 45
may be had, if they may be credited, that in the space of one hundred years
the sign of the cross begat adoration, being it self for public use, at the
D. Fulke quo. sup. page 659.
highest begotten but about Tertullians age, after the 200. year after Christ.
Come we down a little lower, to the year 540. or thereabout, and then the
crosses adoration is grown exceedingly, as appears by the Euagriu. lib. 4.
c. 25.
Apameenses, of whom it is said productam in medium crucem adorant and
amplexantur. Whereas therefore, some matters are more Thom. Aqui. vb. sub.
apta nata, to breed scandal, then others are, nothing at all comes near to
the cross in the fruitfulnes of idolatry: no not the braze^ serpent it self
which had far longer time to bring forth abuse, and yet was removed before it
had been so long time abused. The first circumstance which does make a scandal
great, is drawn from the persons scandalized. Where the sign of the cross
is, and has been from time to time an offense to all sorts of men both little
and great, touching the common and vulgar sort: Calsh. ag. Mart. art. 4 fol. 88.
whereas we see the people so prone, to repose their affiance in this earthly
sign, we are enforced to leave the same. And touching the learned thus, not
only the simple did in this case abuse them selves, but such as had more
learning then the rest, and ought to have been good schoolemaisters to others.
The sixth circumstance, that uses in a ceremony to make a scandal great, is
the vnseasonablenes of the time. The soul of the cross, which is the
profession of the cross against the the aliens being departed, what makes his
dead carcas above ground amongst us? For as August. ad Marcellin. epist. 5.
Augustine says, Non est verum quod dicitur semel recte factum, nullatenus
esse mutandum: mutata namque temporis causa, quod recte ante factum fuerat, ita
mutari vera ratio plerumque flagitat, vt cum ipsidicant non fierirecte si
mutetur, contra veritas clamet non recte fieri nisi mutetur: quia vtru^que hoc
erit rectum, si erit pro tem porum varietate diversum. And the continuance of
the crosses time is scandalous likewise. Claudius Taurinensis pulls down
Images, when the people out of an il custom, did abuse them. Who D. Fulke
reioynd. ag. Marvr. art. 10. pa. 213.
does not justify him? Jonas Aurelianensis Jonas. Aurelianen. lib. 1. de cult.
imag.
confesses some of his parts were sick of the same disease, who yet does
uphold them. which of our writers condemns him not? And such is our apology
against this second exception of them, which see some hurt do come of the
ceremonies, Their scandal is in a manner nothing, they are peevish that stand
upon it.

#Sect. 10. The third exception answered, viz. That laws must not be changed
for that a few are scandalized.
THE third, is drawn from policy: there are but a few that are scandalized
by the ceremonies, and must we change laws for a few sake? But what sort of
men are not offended by them, whether abroad or at home? Concerning the former,
whereas scandalum is aedificatio Tertul. lib de veland. virgin.
ad delictum, we cannot but scandalize the papists, by our retayning of the
ceremonies, by our strife and contention for them, by our pursuit of faithful
preachers to reveng them, and since hereby we build and edify them unto
idolatry and superstition many ways. First, they draw them to an approbation
of their religion, against which thus one of our Iofias Simler. in Exodus 20.
fol. 85.
writers, etsi aliquis bonus vsus imaginum esse possit, tamen propter illam
horrendam idolomanian Pontificiorum ijs abstinendum esset. Illi enim cum
imagines vident, in nostrorum templis, nos secum convenire arbitrantur, in
earum cultu and veneratione, and eas ad confessionem rapiunt. Secondly, whereas
they would be brought to doubt of their religion, if it were thoroughly
resisted by us, they now seeing it in part, received even by their
adversaries, put themselves out of doubt. against which our writers thus: It is
scandalum datum Magdebu. Contur. 1. lib. 2. cap. 4 colum. 450
quando iusta grauitas in ceremonijs adversus obstinatos non exercetur: as
Peter gave scandal to the Jews, when he conformed himself to their
ceremonies, because thereby, illorum prauam de illis opinionem fouebat. Thirdly,
P. Martyr loc commun. clas. 2. ca. 5. sect 25.
were as the chief way to win the papists, is to put them out of hope,
because man naturally Velleius. Paterculus.
sequi de sinit, quod assequi non potest, the reducing of their Ceremonies has
caused the people not well resolved, to say the rest will follow shortly: and
the recusant, what reason have we to come to you, seeing you so fast are
coming to us? Fourthlie, there is nothing that more hinders the conversion
of aliens, then when there is an occasion given them to rejoice, glory, and
boast, as men that have gotten the vpperhand, as a chief matter which was
objected to Marcellinus was this, Caesat Baron. anal. tom. 2. in Marcellin.
super te in illo die gloriabatur Imperator, and the offense that is given by
the strife of the Christians is this, Epist. Synod Arime. nens. ad Constant,
Imperat. Council. tom. 1. pa. 437.
quae nunc ab istis nouantur fidelibus quidem incredulitatem, infidelibus autem
ferocitatem adferunt. Does not our strife (now) about these Ceremonies adferre
ferocitatem to the papists? Thus Hierom. Hieron. commenta. in Abdiam cap. 1.
Quis haereticorum non despicit ecclesiasticos? quis non exultat in malis
little? Si qui in negationem corruerit, videas illos exultare, gaudere, nostram
ruinam, suam putare victoriam? Does not the papist make himself glee, to see
the preachers that were before most zealous against him, thrown down into the
depth of misery? and that for no other cause, but for their zeal against his
relics? and laugheth he not (on the other side, at their inconstancy, who
now conform unto his badges, who would not wear before, or bear the least
cognizance of his Church, as at a ruin of theirs, a victory of his own?
Ambrose Ambros. 1 Cor. 10
says, that the very eating of a meat idolothious, makes the idolater
gloriari, to boast and vaunt. Gregor. epist. 41. ad Lean dr.
Gregory will not use the Trin-immersion when haeretiques used it, ne morem
nostrum se vicisse glorientur. Our very use (then) of these rites, dedicated
to their idolatry, is sufficient to advaunce their spirits, as if they had
gotten the field against us. To these and some other ways of scandal, which
might be mentioned, there are three things replied. The first is that the
papists after this manner are scandalized with other things, with our saints
Rhem. in annotat act 1. sect 7
holy days, with our bowing at the Rhem in Phil sect. 2
name of Jesus, with our kneeling before Mart. in reply. art. 10.
images in glas-windowes, with the lifting up of our hands at Paul's cross,
with our bowing to the cloth of estate: and seeing swearing is a kind of
adoration with our swearing on a book: forasmuch as from hence they suck
adva^tage for their idolatry to saints, to the name Jesus, to images, to
crosses, and for their swearing by creatures, and yet all these may not be
abolished. For answer, first if these ceremonies harden the papist, then does
the use of the Cross much more, which is with him the Vaur. Catechism.
grande hallower and consecrator, of al holy things and actions. Secondly, if
the former ceremonies, which are not necessary duties, do confirm him, why
should not we make riddance of them, as well as other Churches have,
especially bowing to the name Jesus, which the most learned even of our D.
Fulke answer to Rhem in Philip. 2. sect. 2. D. Babington. in Leui^ie.
own church condemn. Thirdly, our holding up of hands when we pray at Paul's
Cross, and our bowing down to the cloth of estate are necessary duties, and
so not to be abolished like Cross and Surplice which are not necessary, even
as the Christians were not to leave, their reverent (not popish) bowing, when
they did curis Dei adge inculari (as speaks Tertullian) although the pagans
hence drew a scandal, that they did Caesar Baron. Anal. ann. 211.
Antistitis genitalia colere: or their lifting up of hands in prayer though by
reason of it, the Gentills accused them for adoring the clouds, as D Fulke
reioynd. art 10 page 214 and 217.
appears by Tertullian, and by a Poet of their own, qui puras nubes and caeli
Numen adorant. Secondly, It is replied to the scandal of the papist^^ that it
makes not the Ceremonies guilty, because it is [acceptum] by them, who for
that they are malicious, are not to be regarded. First, they are erroneous as
well as they are malicious: so that, to confirm them in their error were that
inhumanitie in us, which lays a stombling block in the way of the blind who
bath most need to be led aright. Leuit. 19.14 Deuteronomy. 17.18
They that were offended at Christ, were as malicious, of whom Bernard
notwithstanding, Bernard. in lib. de precept. and disputat.
magni peccatores, sed tamen and pusilli aestimatores, beati essent si non
scandalizati fuissent. nunc vero quid nisi miseri sed tamen and miserandi.
Secondly, this confirming of the papists is scandalum datum for that show
where by we come near him, or fly not from him so far as we should: for we
know that even a show is scandalous, as not only scriptures teach, These. 5.22
Iud. 23.
but also the auncientes with whom even similitudo venerationis idoli is
Glossae in 1. Cor. 10. and 8.
whose tenent is, Thom. Aquin. 2.2. quest 43.
etiam species mali scandalum confecit. and our Magdebu. Centur. 1. lib. 2.
cap. 4. Col. 450.
own writers whose position is in general the same with this tenent
mentioned. and in particular, that we are to avoyde from all things that do
bear but a show D. Fulke ag. Bristow mot. 24. page 98.
of popery. This last writer confesses that some of our english Ceremonies
are not wholly purged, from all similitude of popish actions, wherein he cannot
but include our cross, since it bears greater show and greater similitude of
a popish action then any other. But seeing he confesses it, he does approve it
(you will say.) No, but quite contrary he excuses it by this, they were only
tolerated at the first for the weak, whereby it appears we have since our
selves proffited well toward the confirming of our selves in error not only
the papists in that we are come to a continuance and to an approbation of
them. Let us consider the doom that was passed over the Ceremonies of the
Germane Adiaphorisme for the like show and similitude. Lib^rt. Concor. a^
Schlusselb. li. 13. p. 59^
inter res adiaphoras non numerandae sunt tales ceremoniae, qua speciem qua^dam
prae se serunt^dut quibus simulatur quasi nostra religio, a pontificia non
multum distaret, aut certe quasi ab ea animus noster non admodum abhorreret,
aut cum earum restauratio ita accipitur quasi hoc ipso dissentie^tes duae illae
religiones, iam in vnam redactae essent: aut cum periculum est ne videamur ad
papatum rursus accessisse, and a sincera euangelij doctrina recessisse, vel
paulatim recessuri. These. de Adiaphor. Theolog. Saxon. ibid page 504.
Again, pessima species est quod sicut Lutherus (vir Dei) nos ex larua
Antichristi extraxit, ita iam illi in ipsissimam veterem Antichristi laruam
spon sam Christi introducere conantur, cum summo dedecore sponsi Christi: Nam
is nequa quam vult nos colores and charecteres Antichristi hostis sui acerrimi
suscipere: neque vllus vir honestus id tolleraret, si sponsa sua vestem and
colores sui capitalis hostis, idque in gratiam illius sui hostis scienter and
volenter acciperet. Thirdly, though the confirming of the papists be in part a
scandal taken by them, yet it is withal a scandal given in part by us,
because the ceremonies being no necessary duties, they ought to be set a side
even for the malicious sake. The scandal is taken and malitiouslie taken, if
any arise by the single life of a Christian young widow, yet Paul thinks if
she marry not she will in this cause give occasion, mark: [giue] to the
adversary to speak evil. mark, 1. Tim. 5.1^
he will have us to incur no show of scandal, no not before a malicious
adversary. It is for Boos not only not to touch Ruth, Ruth. 3.14.
but also to prevent all show of touching her: as to prevent that no man know
she has been in the flower with him. So it is for us now, not only not to
defile our selves with the popish superstition, but also to prevent all show
of communicating with them, which we do not in the cross: for as long as it
is in church publicly used, it is more the^ in our flower, it is in the same
bed with us: and as long as we countenance it by law, we spread the winge of
our garment over it: Even as Plutarc. in vit. Caesar.
Caesar requires in a wife that she be free not only from the fact of
adultery, but also from the suspicion of it. And ought not the spouse of
Christ be as chaste even from all show of spiritual fornication? Whereas
Ambrose requires of an honest man, that he be clear not only a crimine,
Ambros. lib. de offic.
sed etiam a criminis suspitione: we will provide for our honesty, who put not
from us all show of dishonestie in popish rites and ceremonies. When certain
Divines of Misnia were purposed not to care for the grunnitus suum, they meant
of the papists in the use of the Surplice, they were advised by the Respons.
Nichol. Galli. and Placci. Ill^ri. ad Concionator. Mis^iae.
wiser sort of their brethren to take heed, how by the putting of it on, they
gave to these sues iustam causam grunniendi, which now is our case. Thirdly, It
is replied to the scandal of the papists, that it is prevented already
sufficiently: in that we have purged these ceremonies from their abuse, which
being done, we have liberty to retain them, and we turn them to a good use,
for the using of our Examine. of the declarat of the M. of London
liberty, from which why should we suffer our selves to be hindered by them?
First a scandal is not prevented in a thing unnecessary, unless for the
abuses sake it be removed as the brazen serpent was: for which Hezechias had
not such evidence, D. Fulke reioynd. ag Mart. art. 10. p. 216.
but we have as good now for the putting down of the cross. Did not Pius Ioh.
Crisp in vit. eius.
secundus put down the Nuns of the order of Ste Bridget, for the scandal
and abuse of their single life? For the like scandal whereof in Priests, he was
also wont to say, he saw more causes why Priests should marry, then live
single. Did not the selected Vide Whitak. conr. Dureuio. l. 5. fol. 378
Cardinals write thus to Pope Paul the third, Alius abusus in ordinibus
religio sorum quod adeo multi deformati sunt, vt magno sint scandalo, whence
they conclude, Conventuales ordiues abolendos esse putamus omnes. Thirdly, our
liberty we may use, 2. Cor. 10.8
but not to destruction, either of papists, or of any other: in this case of
scandal our liberty cease Josias Simler. in Exodus 20. fol. 85.
quae libera sunt in caesu scandali, desinunt esse libera. and our liberty
against papists is this, not to suffer our selves under their subjection for
one hour by conformity to their ceremonies, but to free our liberty as Paul
did from the servitude of that necessity which they put in them by a disvse
and removal of them. ^al. 2.
So then the ceremonies controversed, deserve a removal for the scandal which
they offer to the papists.

#Sect. 11. The Opposites opinion thinking greater scandalls would come upon
the Remoovall of Ceremonies, confuted.
SOme there are who oppose two greater scandalls toward the papists, which
would follow upon a remoovall of the ceremonies, Sect. 11.
for which they think it is most fit they should be still retained. First this
is the law of the Germane Adiaphoristes, Flac. Illiric in li. de Adiapho. p. 2.
accipiendae sunt aliquae papisticae ceremoniae, vt papistae nostra lenitate,
ceremoniarumque similitudine ad nostram doctrinam invitemus. Paulus factus est
omnia omnibus: nostra ista horriditate, and ceremoniarum dissimilitudine
absterre^tur papistae a nostra doctrina. that which also they extended thus
far, Confess. Mansfild. ^edit. ann. 1560. ap. Conrad. Schlusselb. tom. 13.
pa. 533.
nemini dandum est scandalum: quapropter non est ita malum, assistere
ceremonijs and missificationi papisticae ne illi offendantur. Secondly, ne
veniale quidem peccatum committendum est (say the Thorn. Aquin. 2.2. quest. 43.
art. 7. respons. ad 5. Siluest. Priet. in summa. verb. sca^dal
Papists) vt evitetur scandalum. Let us not be worse then they to commit a
great sin (for such we have prooved the cross to be) to avoyde a supposed
sca^dall only, which indeed is none at all. Thirdly, the papist is best edified
when he is most displeased by our refusal of his rites: as Christ to edify
the Pharisees, and Paul the Jews, took a course of not conforming which did
displease them. Against pleasing of them we have this sure and certain rule
levied against all conformity with the Ceremonies of the German Adiaphorisme,
Decret. Eccles. Ge^man. apu^ Conrad. Schlussel^. tom. 13. page 566.
Nulla est concedenda in gratiam adversariorum mutatio externi cullus seu
ceremoniarum, Ibid.
nisi prius nobis consentiant in fundamento: hoc est, in vera doctrina and vsu
sacramentorum are not the papists obstinate? now, contra veritatis obstinatos
hosts, exercenda est Christiana libertas. Fourthly, to please the papists,
whom we are to displease, and to displease our own brethren at home, whom we
are to please is to incur the fault of Peter which was this: Beza. in Gal. 2.
he chose rather to please the Jews by conforming to their Ceremonies, when he
should have rather pleased the converted gentiles by abstinence from them,
Docret. Eccles. German. vb. sup.
Offendicusum infirmorum quod existit ex abnegatione veritatis, vel
inconstantia in confessione pluris factendum est, quam omnium hostium gratia
and benevolentia. Josias Simler. in Exodus 26. fol. 87.
Si volumus consulere obstinatis papistis plures interea e nostris laedemus.
Peter so doing, who feared to displease the Jews, and thereupon displeased the
Gentiles, was reprehended of Paul. An Bucer. in Math. 18.
other gives a general direction in this comparison infirmorum rationem ita
hebebunt, vt eas and exemplis provehere dabunt operam, neque paucorum (qui
Antichristi Ceremonijs plus aequo addictiores sunt, and fortassis non ver^
fratres) morabuntur caecitatem vt plurimos interim alios offendant quibus
nunequam ista cogitatio non in animis versatur. Si ista tam male essent
abolerentur, si tam bona, opera ca cuncti prafertim qui Christ's haberi volunt,
am plecterentur. we are not then to use the ceremonies in regard of any
offense, which the papists may take of our disvse or any of our own brethren
at home that are popishly given. But now what might those offenses be, which
may arise on our refusal and remouall of their rites? First, it is said, that
if the ceremonies be removed, the papist will hold it a point of profanes in
us. as also an affectation of noveltie joined with a contempt of the gray
hairs of antiquity, which ought to be reverenced by us. First, the remouall
of these ceremonies has been proved a duty, therefore all obtrectations are to
be trodden under foot. was not our Lord held common and profane, Mark. 7.
when he refused the ancient ceremony of washing hands? Isa. 36.7.
was not Hezechias counted profane and new fangled for pulling down the
ancient altars and high places? was not Eunapi^^
Constantine esteemed profane for defacing the Idols temples? were not the
Christians held the most profane, and the most irreligious men in the world,
for refusing the incense of pagan Gods? well one. Bucer. in Cens^s.
Net quicquam no^itatis temere and irreligiose admissuri estis, vt maleuoli
semper obijcere solent de omnibus ijs qui expurgare student vetus Antichristi
fermentum, and nouam domino exhibere student populi conspertionem. Secondly, if
for this calumniation we must keep the Cross and Surplice, then must we
reduce the rest of their trash which we have long since abolished. They affirm
our communion will come at last, to a profane Rhem. in annotat. in Io. 4. sect.
4
sacrifice of Ceres and Bacchus, and the bread of our Fidem in ^. Cor. 11.
sect. 18.
communion they hold profane. as for the want of a Surplice, so for the want of
a consecrated altar, of a Priest unmarried, of hallowed hands, and of the
sign of the Cross. all which, seeing we have abolished notwithstanding this
imputation, why should it hinder us from the abolishing of the baptism cross
as well? where do they lay to our charge, that we abolishe all true religion
out of the world, and make men plain atheistes for the remouall of Crosses,
where they lay not the same to our charge for abolishing of other Rheum. (...)
Philip. 2. sect. 2.
Images we have abolished other Images notwithstanding this obtractation, why
not (then) this Cross as well? And we pull down unnecessary chappells and
Churches without all fear, which is more subject ten times Bristow. Mo^^^e.
to this slander, then the remouall of the Ceremonies controuersed: for they
Duraut. de rit. lib. 1. ca. 2. sect. 5.
match us for doing this even with Arrians, and with Donatistes, and with
Eustathians, and with what not? Neither can the remouall of present Ceremonies
bear the like color, or hear the like clamor of profanes as the breaking of
Images does, for which they yoke us with the Idem. li. 1. c. 4. sect. 13.
Manichees with Xenaias the heathen, and with Andrewe Mart. of the Cross^. art.
8.
Lampugnan beginning his murder of Galiatius Maria Duke of Millane, with a
stabbing of his Image to get him couradge. Finally, we break down their
altars still, though herein they make us D^rant. lib. 1. ca. 15 sect. 12.
Donatistes, and match us with Iulianus Praefectus for profanes, stricken with
a fearful disease, for his pissing against an altar: and lastly with the
soldiers of Stillico, torn in pieces with Leopardes, for that they violated
an altar by drawing one Cresconius from it, who had made it his sanctuary.

#Sect. 12. A scandal of the papists removed, saying, If Ceremo be removed,
it will harden them against us, and breed an hostile alienation of their minds
from our religion.
THere is a second scandal pressed, in case the ceremonies be removed, to
wit, an hardening of them against us, Sect. 12.
and an hostile alienatio^ of their minds from our religion, who by the
retention of these ceremonies might be won. First, this is to run with the
papists with Feuerdent. in Irenaeu^, lib. 1. c. 24.
Feuardentius by name, who knows no other course to win pagans, then this:
Gentium idolomania, and sudaeorum superstitioni opponendae sunt imagines. The
examine of the declarat of the Minist. of London
One of our Opposites to maintain this axiom [we must retain some of the
popish rites to win them,] wills us to see what course Gregory took with
Nellitus. This course we have seen: he Beda histo. li. 1. ca. 30. Gregor.
Epistol. l. 9. in dict. 4. epist. 7.
forbids Nellitus to pull down the idolatrous temples. he commands to
let their festivities alone: he will have their temples sanctified with
altars, holy water, and relics of Saints: he advises that on their birth
days of the Martyrs, whose Relics be there laid, the people should set up
green bowers about the church, and make holy banquets, such as the heathen
used to make in the feasts of their idols. See what a goodly popish course
for winning, we are set to see? Secondly, It is a duty, that there be a
difference in rites and ceremonies between Gods Church and heretics. Tertul.
in Il. de coto^. milit.
Longum divortium (says Tertullianus) mandas Deus ab idolatria, in nullo
proxime agendum: Draco etiam terrenus de longinquo hominis spirit^s absorbet,
Bellarmin. controvers. 6. ca 4. de Monach.
Bellarmine him self confesses, that the shaving of the head was forbidden to
the Jew, in respect of the Gentiles, least they should be like them: which the
reason of the text confirms, for ye are an holy people to the Lord. Hereupon
one, D. Willet. controvers. 6. q. 6. p. 2.
It was unlawful, because a superstitious rite of the Heathen which did not
beseem the people of God. In regard hereof, the only lawful course to win,
is that which accords with this duty, and that is to root out all
heretical rites and ceremonies and idolatrous observations. God is wisest: now
he ordained an abolition of all the idolatrous rites of Canaan, to win the
remnant of the Cananites, which he foresawe would be reserved as the offspring
of Rahab and of the Gibeonites, and all other proselites that should come over
to the Church. And the Fathers of the Church give like advise, August. de verb.
Dom. sermon. 6.
Si quaeritis vnde vincantur Pagani (says Augustine) vnde illuminentur, vnde ad
salutem vocentur? Deserite ^^^^as solennitates ipsorum. Deserite nugas eorum.
Et si non consentiunt veritati nostra, saltem pudeat paucitatis suae. The
Counsels (also) take like order: For whereas Council. Eliberti. can 34.
one of them forbids Tapers at funerals with such like, this reason is
rendered even by a Du^ant. de rit. li. 1. c. 4. sect. 11. and ca. 23. sect. ^4.
papist him self, because the people of Spain, but newly converted, were
still distayned with some of their old superstitious customs, therefore this
Council forbids many things ad extirpandas and funditus tollendas,
Gentilium superstitiones, quas novi Christiani, in ijs Hispaniae locis, tum
retinebant. But have ye never read (say our Opposites) that old rites and
ceremonies have been retained in the Church for their sakes, who would have
been alienated, if they might not have been permitted to use them, as they and
their Forefathers had done long time before? Yes, we have read, and now
allow of a certain tolleration of old customs; but that makes nothing for
our retayle of popish ceremonies, now controversed.

First, a tolleration is an involu^tarie permission against our wills. it does
Decret. p. 2. cause. 1 qu. 7. c. 18.
quaedam tollerare, quaedam amputare, with the same unwillingness that a Cap. 16.
Pilote in a tempest saves some of his wares, and others of them he does cast
over board. and when Ibid. cause. 23. qu. 4. cap. 5.
quod salvo pacis vinculo, excludere non possumus, equitate improbamus. yea
tolleration is with August epist 64.
grief: yea with lamentation, as August. Idem de ciuit. De^ lib. 18.
lamented those common sins, which he was constrained to tollerat, for that
he could not redress them. Now what like to this, in our retention of these
ceremonies controversed? Is it out of an unwillingness, that our governors
keep in these ceremonies? Is it not rather their will and pleasure? and do
they disprove them equitate, do they not constrayne us to approve them rather?
do they grieve at them? do they not rather increase the grief of them that
do grieve, and bring lamentation on them and theirs, who heartily lament to see
the Church so pestered with them? Secondly, a tolleration of aliene rites, is
only a liberty to new converts which cannot well be wayned from them: such as
the decree gave once to the Jews Decret p. ^ distin. 45. cap. 3.
omnes festiuitates suas sicut hactenus tam ip si quam patres eorum per longa
colentes tempora tenuerunt, liberam habeant obseruandi colendique potestatem.
the reason is given by Augustine, August. d^ vtilitat. ^eiun.
modeste vetusia vulnera pertractemus, and cauti simus ne inter manus medici
deficiat qui curatur, and by an other canon else where Decret. pa. 1. dinct. 4.
c. 6.
Quia tali consuetudine averti non possunt, ideo cum venia suo ingenio
relinquendi sunt, ne forte peiores existant si a tali consuetudine
prohibeantur. what like to this (again) in our retention of the ceremonies
controversed? Is it only a liberty to the raw co^verted papists that desire
them? Is it not a necessity rather thrown on the children of the church that
have been bread and brought up in it? yea on the Fathers of the church them.
selves that do abhor them, and that to the utter loss and impeachment of
their own christian liberty? Thirdly, a tolleration is only ad diem ne
Augustine. cont. Par^nem. lib. 3. cap. 1.
eradicetur triticum, not excusing either pigritiem corrigend: or negligenti a^
vindicandi after a long time and season, when now a scandal may without hurt
be done away, and it works on men that are not firma radice Decret. p. 2.
cans. 35. qu. 3^ cap. 20.
sollidati, giving milk not meat unto them ne bonum quod infirma adhuc radice
plantatum erat erueretur, sed aliquantulum firma. retur and vsque ad
perfectionem custodiretur. What like to this (once more) in our retention of
these ceremonies controversed, is it not after forty years preaching of the
Gospel that they continue? And has there been no opportunity found in so long
time to root them out? And is not the time of our Churches infancy past as
yet? Is it not yet fit for meat, so to lay this milk aside? Fourthly,
tolleration is only of those things, Ibid. ca^^^. 2. qu. 1. ca. 23.
quae sola nocere non valent, si caterorum confletintegritas: illa magnopere
praecavenda sunt [in a tolleration] quae recepi, nisi manifesta decoloratione,
non possunt. Again, Ea sinenda sunt, quae nullo detrimento aliquoties
indulgenda creduntur, and quae rerum temporumque cogit intuitus, velacceleratae
provisionis respectus excusat. To this August. epist. 64.
Augustine accords, who when the abuse of Martyrs festivities grew to an
height, he thought them to be no longer tolerable, upon this reason, res
sacrilega non tolleranda. The Schoolmen likewise walk in the same path: the
tolleration of heretical rites, is not held lawful by them, no not in the
raw converts them selves: Thom. Aquin. 2.2. q. 10. art. 1^
no not in the times of weakness but derationabili causa, such as is the good of
the Church, or the avoydinge of a worse mischief, meant by Saint Matthewe
chapter 13. least ye pluck up corn and all. a Ibid object. 2.
proof being brought from the example of Godly Emperors qui templaidolorum
primu^ claudi, deinde destrui fecerunt, which St Augustine approves. No reason
in the earth then left that these ceremonies should surviue, which do they
not hurt? Are they not a manifest blemishe to our Church? Are they not so far
from being such, as the state of the time exacteth, or acceleratae provisionis
respectus excuses, as that presently they must be abolished, if the voice of
the time may be heard or their suit that live therein? And if there be any care
left to make speedy provision of the churches good? are they not sacrilegious
also? Last of all, they do no good, they do draw in mischief, but drive
none away: the corn would far better thrive, if they were gone. F^stlie, a
tolleration proceeds thus, when by reason of the multitude an abuse cannot be
redressed, it first sets upon those that are the more spiritual. then it
does August. epist. 64.
monere till they be wo^ne: then are they set to admonish others, till what by
their counsel, what by their example all be reclaymed. Now I need not to say,
this course is not taken, in this our tollerating old popish rites and customs,
when all the world may perceive there is taken a quite contrary to it. no
winning here of multitudes from them, that will not leave them: there is an
enforcing here of whole multitudes to them who would not have them: no
admonishing here to leave them, there is a punishing here of those who do
leave them: no encouraging here of those, that are the more spiritual, that
they might draw others from them these are first nipped, crushed, and
discouraged, as men too forward when they endeavor to draw men from them.
Against this and the like courses in Africa a Council. Aphric. ^^n. 27^
Council thus requested, illud etiam petendum vt quae contra praecepta divina
convivia multis in locis exercentur quae ab errore gentili attractae sunt (ita
vt nunt a paganis Christiani ad haec celebranda cogantur. ex qua re temporibus
Christianoru^ imperatorum persecutio altera fieri occulte videatur vetari talia
iubent. how many things are there here to be observed? A law must be made
against all customs which do arise from the old and accustomed error of
aliens, none of the Christians must be compelled to the use of them though the
aliens them selves be suffered to use them. When the Christians be compelled,
it is a show of a secret persecution. this may fall out in the time of godly
Princes, if things be not looked to: the aliens themselves, will grow to such
height as that they will be able diverse ways to vex and molest the servants
of God that will not conform themselves to these their customs. Sixthly, a
prudent tolleration will consider whether it does win or no, Gregor. li. 11.
^pi. 15*
cur Iudais qualiter Cerem^nias suas colere debeant regulas ponimus, si per hoc
eos lu^rari non possumus. so to what end should papists be permitted now to
use their ceremonies: or to what end should we ponere regulas how our own
Church should use them, seeing the experience of more then forty years does
show, that by this means we can do no good, to gain and win them? For
mine own part I never knew papist yet truly converted, but he grew to that
religious detestation of popish Crosses which is Fenarden. in Irenaesi. lib.
1. ca. 24
imputed unto Beza, confiteor me Crucifixi imaginem, etiam ex animo detestari.
and as I remember on the other side, I have read in the story of France, that
the leaguers would never believe, when they had taken any town, that any were
Catholics until they did swear and cross hemselues. Indeed the papist
cannot think any to be truly converted to this faith, until he do cross
himself, by a principle of his faith, which is this, Jacob. Ledesima catechis.
vaux catechis. Doul. in^truction.
(that which also they set down in the beginning of every catechism that
they make) It is the sign of the cross, that is, the sign, mark, and badge
of a Catholic Christiam man, No pretense then to keep in the ceremonies for
the winning of the papist.

#Sect. 13. The defense of tolleration of ceremonies from Act. 15. confuted.
THe reply that is wont to be brought against this plea, Sect. 13.
is drawn from the example of the Apostles, and primitive Church, who are
said to retain certain Jewish, and certain hearhenish rites to win them.
And here is objected first, the decree made by the Apostles for the retayning
of blood and strangled. First, as an old Wilfridus ap. Bedam. in histor. lib.
1. ca. 25
stickler for conformity said once: there is a difference between the rites
of Idolaters, which by and by must be thrown away, and the rites of the Jews
which John and the Apostles observed for a time ad vitandum scandalum. that say
I here. there is great difference between the ceremonies of the Jews, and the
ceremonies of the man of sin, the Antichrist. they were instituted of God,
and therefore August. epist. 19.
non continuo deserendae, vel canum morsibus obijciendae: but they were to stay
till the Gospel was preached and the people instructed to a leaving of them:
and when the day of funeral came (which is Hieron. Zanch. de viti^s. exter.
cult opposite. These. 11. p. 40^
supposed to be the time of the Temples destruction) then to be laid in the
grave with honor: whereas to these there must be applied, what one of our
writers Io Calu^^ in act 13. verse. 3.
has, Nunc cum satis co^tat tales ceremonias, nec vela esse, nec sepulchra,
quibus tegitur Christus, sed foetida potius stercora, quibus obruta est sincera
fides and religio, qui promiscue faciunt liberum earum vsum, long plus Papae
arrogant quam legi suae Deus concedit. Secondly, the Apostles retained the
abstinence from blood and strangled for a time only, during the weakness of
the Jews: which reason ceasing, they are now August. quo sup.
mortiferae, quocunque, animo quis eas observaverit. as our rites at home in
controversy are much more, now that the time of weakness and of first coming
out of popery has overgone us. Even a Lyra* in act. 15.
Lyranus him self can comment hereupon, cessante causa, cessat effectus, to
show that aliene rites must cease, when the cause of their first stay is
ceased which is the weakness of them that are to be converted. The Council.
Aur^hanes. 2. Can. 19.20.
Counsel of Orliance some ^oo years after, renewed these ceremonies of blood,
and strangled, and it is Fran. Iun. controuer. 3. lib. 4* ca. 16. nota. 25. and
34.
censured as superstitious. Let them look to this, who deserve worse censure
for their renewing of these popish ceremonies. August. epist. 19.
August affirms, that the observation of Iewishe Ceremonies was at the first
time of weakness, to wit, in the Apostles time approbanda, but this time being
once paste, that nunc est detestanda, Let this be considered of them, that not
only continue still popish and Antichristian ceremonies, but also impose them.
It will be said, the abstinence from blood was still in use after the weakness
of the Jews was past: as appears by the Bellarmi. de pontifi. lib 4. ca. 16
Fathers. We confess it was but to an other end, which now cutteth the
crosses throat, to wit, to avoid the Fran. Iun. ibid. nota. 34.37.
offense of the Gentiles, an end drawn proportionally out of the Apostles
first decree which prevented the like offense against the Jews. And the
offense which this abstinence of blood preve^ted was all show of communion with
the Gentiles in bloody sacrifices: for which also the Idolothite was forborne
Origin. cont. Celsum. lib. 8. Ciril. Cateches* 4. Eusebius. li. 5. cap. 1. August.
epist. 154. Leo ad. Nicet. epist. 79. c 5
together with it. By a proportion drawn (then) from this objection against
the Cross: It must be forborne, to avoyde all show of participation with the
papists, in their superstitious and idolatrous crossing. This decree of the
Apostles (say our Opposites) retained in the Church cettaine ceremonies of the
Jews. but (alas) for their blindness which cannot see, that though some
ceremonies of the Jews were for a season suffered, yet that the idolothite
(such as the Cross and Surplice are) is in the same decree forbidden, and not
permitted to remain in use, so much as one hour. Thirdly, Act. 15.29.
no humane lun. vb. su. not. 24. and 57. Math. Sutcliu. d^ pontlfic, li* 4.
cap. 6. pa. 334. etc c. 7. p. 348.
law can have like force now to retain Ceremonies popish, as this decree had
of the Apostles to retain ceremonies Jewish, seeing as it was (...) it came
from men, that were authorized extraordinarily not to William Perk. in epist.
Iud.
err in their decrees, and as it was (...) it came from the King of the Church
Christ Jesus: and from the most blessed holy ghost-Fourthly, and last of all,
the law of the ceremonies now retained, is more heavy then that of the blood
and strangled: for as much as it enforces a necessity of observation which
that did not. For Calvin's argument is strong against Bellarmine, seeing the
Apostles intendement was, to deliver the Church from the [ Iun. vb. sup. not^
27.29.
yoke] of the Jews ceremonies, they cannot be deemed in any sense to enact
these ceremonies of blood and strangled with an intent to have them observed
necessarelie. But they call them necessary. This makes against those, who
impose a necessary yoke upon this church in these ceremonies which they
acknowledge to be tryfles: which if they be they are not necessary to
edification, like these ceremonies which the Apostles do enjoin, especially
for perpetual continuance which now is sought, which if they be also, they
are made more necessary then these Ceremonies of the Apostles, which they held
necessary for a time only and no longer: and necessary only so Whitak. cont.
Durium. lib. 8. page 731.
far forth as they should edify the weak of the Jews, and no further: and
necessary propter aliud only, to wit, the word. what that the Apostles August.
cont. Faust lib. 32. cap. 21. Herman. de tradit. Col 498.
eligerunt pro tempore rem facilem, and nequaquam obsernantibus onerosam (...)
in qua cum Israelitis genies aliquid communiter obseruarent. for even the
gentiles were before accustomed to abstain from blood and strangled,
especially they which had been, Harmon Confess. sect. 17. ex confess. August.
page 224.
domiti a Iudeis, and were bordering round about them. Whereas these ceremonies
received from popery are not easy but burdensome: nor accustomed, which we
our selves have long time used, but uncouth and quite contrary to us: yea they
are as the bread of mourning: nay more as gall and as wormwood to our souls.

#Sect. 14. The argument of tollerating Ceremonies drawn from Paul's
purisying, and the Jewish observation of Penticost, confuted.
I Come now to the second allegation against us drawn from Paul purifying
himself in the Temple: Sect. 14.
and observing the feast of the Jewish Penticoste, both which conformities to
Jewish rites, Act. 21.26. Act. 20.16.
with every other which he used I join together, gether, because they may D.
Willet. controuer. 9. qu. 8. p. 2
receive one answer. First, this reason runs with all Adiaphoristes, both
of all times and sorts: Symmachus drew the example of Christ, living in the
Nazarites vow as he supposed, out of Math. 2.23. to prove that the observing
of Jewish rites must be perpetual. The heretical Nazarites proved the same by
these examples of the Apostles which we have touched, Lambert. Dane. in August.
de ^^^res. ca. 9
Augustinus scribit ex conatam haeresin, quod quae Apostoli concesserunt ad
tempus, inter Iudaeos obseruari, illi semper eavellent esse retinenda inter
omnes Christianos. Let them look to this, who out of these examples of Paul,
and of the rest of the Apostles endeavor in like manner to prove a perpetual
retention in the church, not of Jewish ceremonies, but of popish which are
far worse. Sure if they look not well unto it, they will do great hurt by
justifying those, who reason from hence in very like manner, not only for an
Adiaphorisme (as they in Germany) Conrad. Schluffell^. com. 13. page 520.
Apostoli quaedam concesserunt Iudaeis, vt abstinere a fanguine and suffocato,
ergo and nos fratribus and cupientibus iuuare ecclesiam aliquae concedamus: but
also for a Nichodemyisme, for why may not we present our selves in a popish
temple and adstare missificationi (say Zanch. vb sup. page 492. Col. 2. Conrad
Schlusselb. romans 12.
the Nichodemites now) as well as he affoorded his presence in the temple, of
the Jewish and stood before their Altars there in the time of their
sacrificing? Secondly it is doubted, whether Paul's conformity in the temple
were lawful or no. there be Zanch. de vitil^ extern cult opposite. These. 11.
pa. 491
many that condemn it, both of Tertul. cont. Marcion. lib. 1. cap. 20. Hieron.
apist. 89.
old and of Gualt. in Act. 21. homil. 138 Bullenger. commen. in Act. 11. verse.
26. Magdebu^entur. 1. li. 2. ca 10. de vit. Paul.
new writers: and with very great show of reason. The Jews were Zelo
accensi toward the ceremonies of the law. against these Paul has preached
elsewere: and it is after twenty years, that the Gospel has now been
preached: and God did not bless it: so that his conformity strengthened the
perverse zeal of the Jews; gave occasion to them, to think he was a
dissembler: and lastly, nourished them in their Iudaisme over long. Receive
these reasons, and then conformity to our ceremonies controversed is likewise
unlawful, because we know it will harden the papist in his superstition: open
men's mouths to report of us, as of turnecoates, keep our own brethren in
their popery ouerlong, and God will not bless it in us, especially who
cannot conform without sin against our consciences in his sight. Thirdly,
though this conformity of Paul's were lawful, yet is it not able to justify
us, because our case and his are diverse in sundry respects. First, this was
counseled by James and performed by Paul, upon a supposall the Jews were
weak, and as yet not well instructed in their liberty from the ceremonies of
Moses law: which error of theirs (as August: epist. 19.
Augustine terms it) their charity in part excused, whereas the papists
have been instructed against their idolatry and superstition in these
ceremonies, and are grown obstinate in the same. Paul's cause here was the
same that it was at Corinth, when he took the vow of the Nazarites, to draw
on them, who were though already coming onward. Ours is now against his then,
when he would not circumcize Titus to drown them deeper in superstition, who
were drenched already in it. Secondly, there is a difference in the time.
Though the ceremonies of Moses were deprived of life, yet the Zanch vb. sup.
492. Willet controvers. 6. quest. 3. p. 1
time was not come that they were to be actuallie buried; their funeral day
being past, to wit, the day of the Temples A mand. Polan. in Dan. 9. verse
ruin, (for it was the rubble of the temple under which all the ceremonies of
it lay healed and buried) now Paul might not as he might before, conform him
self to them, nor in August. epist. 19. Colum. 76
Augustines judgment, any man use them, because now tanquam sopitos cineres
eruens, non erit pius deductor and baiulus corporis, as Paul was here in his
conformity, sed impius potius sepulturae violator. Now the ceremonies
co^troversed, coming not from heaven but from the land of the uncircumcised,
we never owed to them any honorable burial which was due to these of the Jews:
but the burial rather of the uncircumcised, which was to cast them to the
Moules and to the backs: Isa. 2.20, 1^
and to throw them away like a menstruous cloth. Isa. 30.22.
But if for a time they were to be kept to a solemn funeral day, yet who
knows not, this funeral day ought to have been long since hastened, even as
our writers teach. One of them thus: Gualt. in hunc loc. Act. 21, 26.
Docemur hinc quanto incommodent, etc. we are taught hereby how much hurt
comes to the Gospel by those superstitious patrones of ceremonies (he
speaks of them who labor still to keep rites popish above ground) who
nourish infirmity of faith, by their too long continuing of them, and sud
indulgentid, ardentioribus ministris remoras obijciunt. So another* upon
pretense of the peoples weakness (says Bucer. in Math. 18.
he) they defer the reforming of popish rites, whereas it is nones weakness
(indeed) but their own that does withold them. Ceremonies (says Laurenc.
Saund. Act and Monument page 1494.
another) are ordained for man's imperfection, so that popish ceremonies
retained, must needs both argue imperfection, and also nourish it. The papist
must be healed like the Melancholy man, who was to besmoothed up a while to
get credit with him, when he thought his nose was great. howbeit still to have
soothed him, now when credit was gotten with him, or when no credit was to be
gotten at all, this had been to have nourished his conceyte, as we now nourish
the conceyt of the papists, in that we endeavor to please them still in the
use of these ceremonies, now that we see there is no good to be done with them.
Thirdly, between our, and Paul's conformity, there is a difference in regard
of the place. If Paul conform him self to the ceremonies of the Jews, it is
at Jerusalem, where they have not been Ioh Calvin. in Act. 21. verse. 26
preached against, or if preached against at all, yet very remisslie, would he
have conformed him self at Ioh. Reynold. de Idololat. lib. 1. cap. 4. sect. 18.
Antioch, where he him self had preached against them, to the strengthening of
the Jews in their error, and to the discouradging of the Gentiles, in their
zeal? it appears by his withstanding of Peter's conformity in that place
that he would not: which now is our case: for as much as it is at Antioche that
we must conform our selves: and in those very churches, where they have been
disvsed, where we our selves have preached against them: where the papist will
be encouraged: the christian cooled in his zeal against popery. Fourthly,
there is a difference in the end: For Paul was reported to be an Apostata
from the law, and in his August. Zanch. doct willet. vb. suq
prophanes to have condemned as well these rites, as he condemned the idolatries
of the Gentiles: and it was to wipe away this scandal that he conformeth:
thereby to get audience to preach unto them. This end of his we are only to
follow by conforming our selves to all good works, thereby to defeat the
imputation of profanes and loose life, which the papists obiecte unto us. in
conforming to the ceremonies we cannot follow it, unless our governors will
have us show by our conformity to these their badges, that it is false we
hate their religion, and condemn it, as idolatrous. Fiftlie, there is a
difference in the subject, and the same double. First, the ceremony in which
Paul conformed him self was indifferent, till the total abolishing of all
the rest: whereas the cross we hold to be evil, which answer we hold by
them, who when a Nichodemite argues, I may be present at mass as well as Paul
in the temple, give this Zanch. vb. sup pa. 492. Colum. 2.
reply, The mass and popish service, is evil, but Paul's vow was
indifferent. Secondly, the ceremony to which Paul conformed, was a moral
ceremony: to wit, a ceremony of thanksgiving: it was none of them in which
the Jews placed then salvation: in regard whereof, it had not then Ioh.
Galuin. in Act. 21. verse. 16 Fran Iun. alibi.
been lawful for him to have gone to the braze^ altar to offer there an
expiatorie sacrifice for his sin; that which we must do now if we conform
our selves to the cross. For do not the papists hold him necessary to
salvation, and expiatorie of venial sin: and meritorious, as has been
showed elsewhere?

#Sect. 15. The practice of the prime Church retayning Rites to win them that
were without, and to content them that were lately converted, confuted.
I Come to a third reply objected against us, Sect. 15.
drawn from the example of the primitive church, which retained rites to win
them that were without: and to content them that were lately converted. First
the prime Church took not this course ordinarily, as has been showed, and
may further appear by Constantine, who first set up the faith of Christ. He
would not retain the auncinet Labarum, which the Pagans were accustomed to
adore, as the papists have been accustomed (we know) to adore the cross. But
he Zozom. I^. cap. 4.
changed it into a cross? true, because then nothing more proper to christian
profession, nothing more hated by the Pagans, nothing more separating from the
Gentiles, to which end he caused it to be Nicepth or lib. 7. ca. 46
engraven on their armor, vt frequenti hoc spectaculo in Zozom. ibid.
desuetudinem prislinae superstitionis venirent. and vt sensim Nicap. ibid
ita pertraherentur ad Christi crucifixi religionem. As the Labarum was then
abolished (because in former times adored by the Pagans) so ought the sign of
the cross now, which the papists have made an idol. And as the sign of
Christianity was settled in room thereof (to wit the cross) so now some
contrary sign to the cross should rather be used, then the sign of the
cross it self: it being become the mark of the beast, and Antichrists
ensign. From public courses of (...) first church, come we to private. A
very Caesar. Baton. Annal. (...) ^n^. 256
papist him self will show us that be^^^ Constantines days, the christians
had a care to leave of, the very mourning attier it self, which the pagans
used in funerals and in their common garments, when need so required, to
distinguish them selves by wearing black in those places where they wore
white, and by wearing white in those places where they wore black. This duty
was not forgotten, no not in the days of Innocentius the* who commanded a
like distinction between the Christians and the Jews, to wit, that the
Christians should use one kind of Council Leteranen. cap. 68.
habit, the Jews an other, and when the Jews came over to the faith, that
they should not be permitted to continue any of their old customs, Ibid. ca. 70
Quia scriptu^ est, maledictus homo qui terram duabus vijs ingreditur, and
indui vestis non debet lino lanaque contexta. Secondly, when any old custom
of the pagans was retained, it stayed not long: whereupon Bear. Rhenan.
anno^at. in Ter^ul. de Co^on. milit.
one speaking of birth days, after the heathenish manner kept, hoc tames si
ethnicum aliquando ecclesia tolerauit, Concilium Nicenum and sequentia aperte
damnant: opus a erat olim mulia Christiants indulgere, quae plerumque iam senes
ad nostram religionem convertebantur difficulter ea relinque^tes, quibus per
omnem vitam assueuerant, secus est hodie. Thirdly, If the rites of the Pagans
were continued in the church, they did hurt, to wit, by corrupting the
christians doctrine, and by confirming the pagans in their idolatry. Here I
fear not, the wonted instance of the cross it self retained. Socrat. histor.
Eccles. l. 5. c. 17.
The Greek T. which does bear some form of the cross, was one of the
hieroglificall letters which the Priests of Serapis used: and it signified in
their mysteries, vitam venturam, life to come. When Serapis was defaced, this
letter of his escaped better the^ his fellows, because the christians changed,
and turned it into a cross. whose example why should we not follow (say some)
now, and so change the popish cross into the cross which our Church uses?
First, if this course of the christians be justified, it is because this
hieroglificall letter retained gave testimony of the christian faith like the
I^^^.
altar at Althens; which does the sign of the cross now? No, it gives
witness of the faith of Antichrist rather, whose mark it is since become.
Secondly, this course of borrowing a cross from Pagans, is by our writers
often censured. D. Fulk. ag Saund. de imag. c. 13. p. 663.
thus one: The mystical letter in the Temple of the Idol Scrapis, could have
no relation to the cross of Christ, which the idolaters knew not: therefore
the folly of those ecclesiastical writers is bewrayed, that thought
christianity much helped by such heathenish and superstitious fancies.
Thirdly, as another Calfh. ag. Mart. in art. 5. fol. 129.
writes, though the Cross did good then amongst the Heathens that had before
hand an high estimation of it, and might in like case do good again, yet
among Christians where Christ crucified is daily preached, and ought to be
known without such external means, great folly it is to have it. And so
far of the scandal which the sign of the cross gives to the Papist.

#Sect. 16. The second sort of men whom Cerem offend, are Separistes, of whom
more regard ought to be had then of a Turk or Jew.
A Second sort of men abroad, whom the ceremonies retained offend, are these of
the separation, of whom we are to have as great care as of a Turk or a Jew I
trust. we hate popish and Lutheran images, because they offend the Turks and
the Jews, not remembering that the cross, and the rest of the ceremonies
controversed, do give as much offense to those of the separation, which does
more nearlie touch our church. Thus one of our Zanch de imag. These. 3. p. 315.
writers, Negare non potest, etc. It can not be denied, but that the presence
of images in the church does partly offend the godly, and partly confirm the
wicked in their impiety, as papists, Jews and Turks: howbeit in a diverse
manner. the papists are confirmed by retention of images, which without
adoration, are set up in churches. the Jews and the Turks they offend,
because our retayning of images in our churches, is one of the chief
impediments whereby they are detayned from being converted to our christian
religion, vt narrant omnes. Translate this now to the ceremonies controversed,
and the case is all one. for the image set up ad decorum only, may as lawfully
be excused in the impediment which he offreth to Turk and Jew, as these
ceremonies may when they hinder that they of the separation do not join in
communion and fellowship with us vt narrant omnes, nay vt narant ipsi, and the
books which they have written. contemn their scandal with what conscience
ca^ we: who so much condemn the papist for the very same sca^dal which he
offreth to Turks and Jews? They D* willoe* contro 9. q 5. art. 3.
hear from us, that a Jew sailing on the Rhene told M. Georg Wiseheart, John
For in ein. histor. p. 1269. col. ^.
that the let which hindered him and others of his nation from the christian
faith, were the images which they saw in the churches of the christians. They
hear from us that Paulus Riccius a learned Jew, Hospin. de re templar. tit.
de imag. P. Morn. de Eu harist.
baptized at Papia, did protest that they were the christians images that kept
the Jews from Christ. Last of al they hear Calfh ag. Mart. praefat fol. 15.
from us that the Histor. Turcie. annexa alcho rano c. 10.
Legate of the Turk at Chios, and Haumar the Saracen long ago, and the Turks
to this Matthew. Sulcliui. Turco papism lib. 1. c. 4
hour, dash all the reasons that ca^ be brought for christian tie by the
instance of images in Christian churches what needs more? This shows these
ceremonies must be thrust out, because like images they hinder Separators from
the unity of the faith, according to the common tenent, P Martyr. loc.
co^muni. deimag. sect. 24.
ea in templis no^ sunt habenda, qua a Christi religione auocant homines.
Secondly, the scandal which the ceremonies give to the Separators is greater
then that which is give^ by images to Turks and Jews: first, is the scandal
small which is given them by the slovenly performance of Gods service, by dumb
dogs and scandalous ministers, with idolatrous attire, and with idols them
selves? let then the scandal of Hophni and Phineas be little too, when they
made the people to loath the sacrifice of the Lord. Secondly, there is an old
Canon, that a priest should not be put to public penance though he deserved
it, l ne grex fidelis in eo sca^dalum patiatur: and our Reverend Fathers
accordingly use now to cover the offenses of priests conformed, 1. Sam 2.17
Council Carthag^^ 3. Can 30
and all to avoyde the scandal (forsooth) which might ensue upon their public
and condign punishment. This shall condeme them, if they proceed to offer
scandal to the Separators, not only by not covering the deserved faults of
Preachers, but also by imputing to them faults which (the Lord knows) they
never knew. Thirdly, August in Psalm 49.
cum detrabitur bonis ab his, qui videntur alicuius momenti esse, and docti
esse in scandalum cadunt infirmi, qui adhuc nesciunt iudicare. The Prophet
Hosea reckons this amongst the greatest sins of Israel, for which it was
shortly to be captived, that by their continual invectiues, the priest was
become an hatted and offensive in the house of his God. ^^^os. 9.^.
Now, is it not so, that by the slanders of unclean mouths, and by the
daily revilings of inveighing pulpits, the most zealous, painful and
profitable Preachers in the eyes of the Separators, are made an hatred and
offense to their no small offense and scandal: when to this there is added a
thrusting of them out of the house of their God, the^ is their scandal much
increased. For what more common in their mouths then this, It can not be that
in a true Church one should persecute another. Fourthly, this was their sin,
who did eat Idolothious meat, August. de morib Manicheor. l. 2. c. 14.
infirmos offendebant, non ijs congruendo and faciebant vt putarent eos qui
fide omnia munda iudicabant in obsequium idolorum a talibus epulis and potu
nolle abstinere. Since (then) it is evident, that by our use of these
Idolothites, the Separatist is scandalized, with an opinion that we grace
popery by them, why do we not leave them, that so we may congruere with them,
as our duties is to do?

#Sect. 17. The third scandal given by Ceremonies, is to the Members within
the Church.
THE third scandal which the ceremonies offer, is to the members of the church
within: where (first of all) they offend the ministers and the Pastors, who
are principal members of it. Heb. 13.17.
Many of these are brought to an Acedia by them: as in the works of their
ministry, so in the duties of christian life: as grief (we know) makes
unprofitable in the service of God and of the Church. others are brought to a
crossing and conforming without faith, and so to sin. what reason then to
trouble the minds of me^ for such trifles? It is replied, that we are not
indeed to trouble the minds of the weak, about such indifferent things, but
these fellows be not weak, they take upon them, to teach the learned
themselves of the land, at the least being The examine. of the declarat. of the
M. of Land.
persuaded in greater matters, they may (if it please the^) be persuaded in
these the lesser. which if they will not be nor cannot, what good are they like
to do in the church? First, there is weakness in the strongest during this life,
that Gods power may be made known in weakness: that man's imperfection may
appear, Gal. 6.2.
and that there may be place for charity to bear one an others burden.
Secondly, strong men otherwise for doctrine, Romans 14.
have been left by God to weakness, in things indifferent. as the Romans were
resolved in greater matters of faith, who yet could not persuade them selves,
about meats which were indifferent. Science which co^templateth good and evil
in general, and Prudence which discerns in things particular, what is
convenient and what is inconvenient, are two Tho. Aquin. ^.2 q 47. art. 5 and
comment in Philippens. l^ct. 1.
distinct virtues, even as they are mentioned in the 1. Col. 1.9.23. verse.
Ephesians. 1.^. Philip. 1.9.
word for diverse: and God gives not every gift to every one: yea, of these 2.
Cor. 12.8.
two, he gives an excellency of the one to some, of the other, to others: so
that me^ may for their science, be profitable ministers, and yet fail of that
measure of prudence, whereby to judge of a particular use of indifferent
things, wherein others do excel them. They beyond the seas, judge they not
many of our ministers incomparable in doctrine, but weak in the discipline? Our
Opposites them selves, admire they not many beyond the seas for their
doctrine, whom yet in the discipline they despise. Thirdly, there is no reason
to count resolution in ceremonies a matter easy, there have been about
Bellarm* de effect. Sacrament. c. 31. proposit 4.
them from the beginning, very great controversies among the greatest. often
(aiso) more about them then about matters of the faith. so an whole church,
Co^fess Eccles. Mansfild. aedit an no 1560. ap. Conrad. Schlussel. burg. tom.
13. p. 526.
sic fieri solet, vt semper adiaphora, maiores excitent tumultus, qua^ ipsa
doctrina. they prove it by these insta^ces: the Prophets had more to do, to
dispute against humane traditions, the^ to deliver the true doctrine. Christ in
his time had many bickerings against the ceremonies of the Pharisees. In the
time of St August in, tanta fuerunt certationes de traditionibus humanis, and
rebus indiffere^tibus, vt secuta sit inde miserabilis vastitas in ecclesia, of
which he co^plaineth (say they) in his answer ad inquisitiones Ianuarij lib. 1.
cap 2. They proceed, nec dubitamus affirmare, quandocunque tandem erit
concilium plus nobis facesset negoiij controversia de adiaphoris, quam tota
doctrina. and they give two reasons hereof: the first is, because men contemn
the simplicity of Gods service, and are delighted with the magnificence and
with the splendencie of rites and ceremonies, vt expleantur aures and oculi. Et
quida^ veluti habitus nudo per se cultui accommodetur. whereupon they assume,
that ornament of ceremonies qui fuit adhibitus in papatu, etiumsiipsas
ceremonias non probant. The second is, because diverse men do hope, by
admitting and multip^ying the adiaphora, to mitigate, content, and appease the
papists. Against the first of these (say they) we must hold fast this
consolation, that God does choose and love that, which is base and abject in
the eves of the world. Against the second, that omnes spes, de placatione
hostium, frustra sunt, because they will never rest in our admissio^ of their
indifferent things until the whole body of their falsehoods be received withal.
To leave this church, go we to the greatest lights of the former churches,
where we shall find that many profitable for the ministry, have not been
able (often times) to be persuaded in things indifferent. as the controversy
of Easter shows. in which, Neque Eusebius. histor. lib. 5. c. 23.
Anicetus, Polycarpo persuadere poterat, nec Polycarpus Aniceto suasit. Take
another instance in the fast of a Sabbath day (where scripture speaks neither
one way nor other. Is this easy to be resolved, August. Epist. 86. ad Caesul^^.
when once controversy is moved about it? No, interminabilis est ista
co^tentio (says August.) generans lites, no^ finiens quaestiones. There may
another instance be given in the controversy about long hair of Monks: of
which August. again, August. l. de opere. Monachor. c. 33.
Existunt inter fratres infirmiores and firmiores, amarissimae and
periculosissimae contentiones: quod illi, forte si scirent, hoc quoque sine
dubitatione corrigerent; quorum caetera and miramur and amamus. Are there no
profitable ministers, that cannot persuade them selves in our retayle of popish
ceremonies, Quorum caetera, and miramur, and amamus? then are there no
profitable Ministers neither thorough out Germany, France, Helvetia, and the
rest of the Churches. One speaking about popish rites and ceremonies retained
in our church, Alexand. Ales. in proem. leirurg. Anglic.
magna and ardua res est indicium (says he). And as for the addition of the
cross to baptism, an proceres in ecclesia (says Herman Hamelman. de tradit,
p. 1. l. 5. in fine.
another) addere aliquid debeant in Sacrame^tis, magna est quaestio. In which
language another speaks likewise, Chemnit. Exam. p. 2. de rit p. 37
cum ipse silius Dei Sacramenta ita instituerit, vt ea certis a se institutis
ritibus, praeceperit administrari, valde ardua est quaestio, an hominibus
permissum sit, alios praeterea quocunque consili^ superaddere. Indeed though
adherent circumstances (which one calls A Hiper.
non sacramentales) be in the churches disposition, as time, place, etc. yet of
inherent that belong to the manner of administration, as eating, giving, etc.
or to the matter administered, such as the elements are, and the signs which
are ceremoniae sacramentales, he that doubts not whether the church may add
or no, he may perchance come too near the Jesuitical Bellarmi. de Effect.
Sacram. c. 31.
assertion, Christ ordained but a few ceremonies about the Sacraments, of
purpose to leave the adding of more, to the Pastors of the Church. And is it
an easy question to be resolved on, that the Magistrate has authority to
diminish from the signs? Now he may as well diminish as add, in all
proportion.

#Sect. 18. The 4. scandal of the Cerem. is that they offend all sorts of
men among the people.
A Fourth scandal give the ceremonies in that they offend all sorts of men
among the people. The first sort is of them, who as yet cleave to their old
mumpsimus. where their ancient cross most dear, how does it confirm them?
The Israelites must needs have a calfe, for a sign of Gods presence, it is
because of the old Ios. Simler. in Exodus 32. Ioh. Calvin. in Act. 7.1. Cronic.
17.6. 1. King. 22 44.
twange of Egyptes idolatry, which yet sticks in their stomachs. Iehosaphat
forbids the high places, yet the people will use them still: which
incorrigiblenes of theirs must be greater in a cross, then in a calfe or high
place, because it has the commendation of antiquity as well as it, and the
Magistrates command too boot. Because the Hospin. de origin. templor. c. 1.
viscus of an old Oak, was among the Heathens of old accounted signum a Deo
electae arboris, therefore the converted Christians could not be wayned, no not
from buying with their money this prisca stultitia. so that the cross counted
of old signum a Deo electum, yea sanctified with Christ's own blood, and being
commanded by law besides, how madd will men be upon it? The Gnostickes, have
they images like the Heathen? then will they grow at last to Epiphan. ^^^res.
27.
perficere Gentium mysteria about them. The papists, have they images after
the manner of the Gentiles? then will the Gentiles superstition be sound in
them. as one of their own, Ludoui^. Viues in August. de ciuita. Dei. l. 8. c.
vlt.
non video in multis quod sit discrimen inter little opinionem de sanctis and id
quod Gentiles putabant de suis dijs. In like manner, have the people a popish
cross in use amongst them? they will use it no otherwise, then papists use it
many of them, Quicquid lex praetexat (as one of Beza. Epi^^. 8.
our writers speaks) or what diverse use soever it prescribes. what means
else their decking of crosses in gang-weeke? their feasting and revelling every
holly-roode day? and their keeping of that day holy to the honor of the
cross? their sewing of redd crosses over right the hearts of the dead under
their shrowdes, their open proclayming the child wants his christendom when
he is not crossed? their putting off those children out of their wills and out
of their reversions, who were not crossed when they were baptized, as if they
were no better then pagans? their making of a cross in their own foreheades,
when now the child is to be crossed, and their making of a low courtesy at
the Font while he is a crossing, with the like pranckes many? To these it is
first replied, that we are to judge the best of the minds and of the meanings
of the people: which being the same that Mort of the cross art 10.
Martial pretends when the people do adore the cross, it deserves the
same answer which Doct. Fulke gives him, Let me then not judge amiss
(neither) when I see a Priest kissing an barlot. but as the Canon law
commands me, let me think he does it to bless her. Secondly, it is
replied, that this being but an event of the ceremonies not intended, brings
on us no guilt of sin: as when Augustine thus, August. in epist. 154. ad
Publi ^.
non reus est mortis aliena qui suae possessioni murum circumduxerit si aliquis
ex ipsius ruinis percussus intereat: neque reus est christianus si bos eius
aliquem feriendo and equus caleem iaciendo aliquem occidat: and ideo non debent
christiani boues habere cornua, aut equi vngulas, aut dentes canes. First, this
excuses, when it is good, and when it is necessary that which we do, not
otherwise, as it appears in the words following: Absit vt ea qua propter
vsus nostros facimus and habemus si quid per haec praeter nostram voluntatem
cuique mali acciderit nobis imputetur: whereas the cross and the rest of the
ceremonies are unnecessary, yea evil, as has been said. Secondly, this
holds in events, no^ praecogitatis, not otherwise, si Tho. Aquin. 1.2. q. 21.
art. 5
eventus sit praecogitatus manifestum est quod addit ad malitiam actus. cum. n.
aliquis cogitans quod ex opere suo multa mala possint sequi nec propter hoc
dimittit ex hoc apparet voluntate^ eius esse magis inordinata. For example, a
man has a wall that is likely to fall, and he ame^deth it not, nay he
compels men to go under it: or a beast does use to gore, and he does not
tie him up, nay he co^strayneth men to go unto him, this man is guilty of
what hurt follows by his wall and by his beast: seeing (then) our governors
cannot but see, that hurt follows of these ceremonies, and they not only
suffer them to stand, or permit them to go abroad but also compel men to
undergo them, and to go to them, can they be guiltless? especially
considering, that Decret. Hormis. Pap. ap. Council. tom. 2. p. 365.
ipsa est fidei innocentia vt provideat, ne vol casu possit errare. Thirdly,
the event makes none guilty, that is per accidens or when it follows in
rarissimis only the event The. Aquin. ibid.
cuius virtus praeexistebat in eo quod agitur. and which follows, vt in
pluribus, this does make guilty. Now this event follows the cross, and the
rest of the ceremonies in men, addicted to their old customs, vt in pluribus.
and the cross has a virtue in it: for it is a monument of idolatry, and
therefore is a snare (says God) to infect the heart. It is also a lay man's
book, and the same evil, Deuteronomy. 7.25.
and ill books must be burnt, Act. 19.19. see Rhem. annotat. ibid
if they do but contain (...) much more if they contain superstitious
doctrine Synod. Co^stantinop. 5. collat. 5. p. 530.
per hoc. n. radix impietatis amputabitur ne in posterum erroris semina
generentur, ad errorem simplicium qui facile ad illius laqueos collaba^tur. Our
Opposites hold the ceremonies to be teachers of good things, we have proved
them to be teachers of badde, so that the eventes that follow of them must be
eventes per se, even as the events of good writing and teaching, are events
Tho. Aquin. ibid. in respons. ad. 2. 1 Thessalonians. 2.15.16.
per se redownding to the reward of the writer and the teacher. These
ceremonies drive out good Preachers, therefore they come within the censure of
the Apostle: with whom though they that drove Preachers away, intended not that
the Gentiles should not be saved, yet because of this their fact it follows
that they are not saved, therefore this event is imputed to them, as if they
had intended it. The harlot intends not, that her lovers shall dye by her
adultery, Pro. 6.26.
yet because death is an event that most usually followed of it, therefore it
is imputed to her, that she hunteth after his precious soul: so that it is
nothing that our governors intend not the death of any by the harlot the
cross, as long as death does follow from the scandal of it. Once more. A man
may ask (says a Ribera i^ Amos. c. 2. ^^m. 19.
Jesuit) why the Prophet Amos says, they went in to a maid to defile mine
holy name. seeing they went not in to her with a mind to violate Gods name,
but to have pleasure. Touching this thing (says he) the canon is out of the
words of Chrysostom, Homil. 66. and 80. in Johan, that the scriptures phrase
puts the event for the cause. Thirdly, it is replied, that if it be thus
with the people, then the ceremonies are the more to be tolerated and let
alone, by Aagustines example, August. Epist. 119. ad Ianu^^^
multa buiusmodi propter nonnullarum vel piarum vel turbulentarum personarum
scandala devitanda liberius improbare non audeo. We say not it is thus with the
people, but with the popishly minded: about whom we need not Augustines fear
or care: besides the ceremonies are such as may not be suffered ad evita^dum
scandalum, by the doctrine above delivered; we must rather imitate Iosta^
Simler. in exodus 32.
Hur; who chose rather to be stoned by the people, then to yield to them in the
calfe. we must not be as Aaron was, who yielded to the multitude, which
yielding a very Canus. loc. Theologic. lib. 11. c. 6. 1. Cor. 8.12.
Papist him self condemns in Augustine and others, when he says their
scriptae are not perfecta, for that they did indulgere vulgo. This for the
scandal of the popishlie affected. The second rank of the people contains
such as be zealous, and these we scandalize through grief in the use of the
ceremonies (...) and hindering their zeal. By this latter we bring on our
selves Peter's fault in his conformity, which was Ioh. Reynol. de Idolat l. 1
cap. 4. sect. 18.
retardare zelum of the late couverted Gentiles: and so to incur the reproof
of them who do Gualt. in Act. 21. Gal. 5.7.
remoras obijeere ardentioribus by their retayning of popish ceremonies, if not
also the Apostles curse, our brethren ran well, who are these that have
hindered them? By the former we incur the censure of the Council of
Eliberis, which forbids to conform to the pagan ceremony of lighting
tapers at the monumentes of Martyrs upon this reason, Council. Elibetin. can. 39.
sanctorum spiritus non sunt inquietandi. does not our conformity to popish
ceremonies disquiet now the hearts of the saints, as much as that
conformity of theirs unto the Gentiles? For this is the disquieting which the
Council there forbids in the judgment of the most Vasq. de adorat. lib. 3.
disput 3. cap. 7. Durant de rit. etc.
learned, among the very papists them selves. The third rank of the people
contains such as be weak, and these this controversy troubles now, Act.
15.19.24.
as much as the weak were once encumbered, about the ceremonies of Moses law.
While they doubt which side they should condemn: whether the one for their
cruelty in pursuing their brethren for these trifles; or the other for their
nicenes to stand on trifles: for these are their censures on both. they end
in a loathing of the ministry of both: yea of the whole religion. They are
also hereby inclined toward Antichrist both by the reducing it self of the
ceremonies of which Melancthon, though he were a counselor of co^formitie in
the Germane adiaphorisme, P. Melanc. in epist. ad Christophor. Carlowit^.
Nihil tam tenerum est, nihil facilius iurbatur quam innovatio in mentibus
hominum (he means the innovation of the popish trash reduced) nec maius vllum
malum est, nec atrior vllus dolor quam innovationis languefactio. and then by
the common opinion which is had of this reducing, like to that which was had,
to wit, that we are a Lib. concord. ap. Conrard. Schlusselburg. tom. ^3. pa.
599.
vera Evangelij doctrina, paulatim recessuri. The first reply to this denies
there is any such effect wrought by the ceremonies: which, when it was replied
once in the Germane adiaphorisme, it was answered first by Augustins authority
in multitudine ceremoniarum, periclitatur fides, and then by experience, for as
the white and pale color of the inhabitants is a sign sufficient that the
air is vnhealthie, so the indifferency of religion, and the lithernes of
profession against popery, which is found in those places where these ceremonies
are in greatest estimate, is a sign sufficient they are unwholesome to the
soul. others thus reply unto it: The Libel. supplicator. Theolog. ann. 1561.
apu. Courad. Schlussel. tom. 13 p. 594.
Apocalips teaches, that after the revealing of the gospel, there shall other
Angels follow that shall command to come out of Babylon, and forbid to
receive any of her marks or badges. Woe (therefore) to them, that shall
extenuate the fightes and combats of these Angels, or go about to stopp
their mouths. For if the revealing of Antichrist be an unspeakable benefit of
Gods, then an Adiaphoristicall collusion with him, which is contrary to the
same, must needs include much impiety: Plurimum (enim) Antichristi
patefactionem obscurat. Sure from hence we have this evil unto this day, that
many altogether doubt, whether the pope be the Antichrist or no. The second
reply The Examim. of the declarat. of the Minister^ of Land.
throws the fault on us, we seed not the weak people with milk, nor
condescende unto their weakness, as we ought: we should have used the ceremonies
to please them, then would they have profited more by our teaching, in which
also we might have instructed them that these ceremonies are not imposed for
the Popes sake, but for obedience to the civil Magistrate. First our
forbearance of conformity is a necessary duty, there is (therein) no fault of
any scandal in us, either toward the weak or any sort of people else. Terrul
de veland. virgia.
Scandalum (ni fallor) non bonae rei, sed mali exemplu^ est. Bonae res nemine^
scandalizant, nisi mala^ mentem. Secondly, by the use of the ceremonies we
should not feed the people with milk, but with Antichrists leaven; or if with
milk, yet not with milk vnmixte. 1. Pet. 2.1.
whereas these ceremonies are denied to be a milk mixed with the leaven of
Antichrist, because they are co^ maunded only as things indifferent, and not as
any necessary worshipps of Gods, as Antichrist commands them, we reply with
the Germane Divines, Ap. Conrad. Schlusselburg. tom. 13. p. 599.
si qua^detalia sub titulo and praetextu externarum rerum adia phorarum
proponuntur, quae licet alius color illis inducatur, revera verbo Dei
adversantur ea nequaquam pro rebus Adiaphoris habenda, sed tanquam verbo Dei
prohibita vitanda sunt. Thirdly, this objection supposes, that we offend the
people, because we displease the^, and will not let the^ have their desire,
whereas the sick craving and calling for things hurtful, are the^ most
offended when they have that they ask for (as none more offended Julius the
third, then they that pleased him Onuphri. in Iulio 3.
capis e Caietta advectis, and with other gross meats which he desired) are
not the weak sick in soul? Are not these gross ceremonies fert from Rome?
too gross a feeding for them that be soul sick? Fourthly, where are the
people strong, if not where we have labored? where weak, if not where our
Opposites have been over the^? for we see fulfilled with our eyes which Bucer
foresawe, where the Gospelis preached, these shadows of Antichrist vanish
away, he means in regard of love and good liking.

#Sect. 19. The fifth scandal that Ceremo. give, is against the whole Church
and Gospel which it professes.
THe fifth scandal which is given by the ceremonies is against the whole church
of God, and the gospel which it professes. Sect. 19.
our conformity being now the very same which Peter's was, who then scandalized
the gospel, when he conformed to the ceremonies of the Jews: for which even
by a papist him self he is censured thus, Tho. Aquin. in Gal. c. 2. lect. 3.
veritas nunquam dimittenda est propter timorem scandali. In publicum ergo
crimem incurrit Petrus, neque levem dedit Paulo reprehendendi occasionem, sci.
periculum Evangelicae veritatis. Now these ceremonies hurt the Gospel many
ways. First they help to the restoring of popery in time to come: which as it
grows up, the Gospel must go down, like as we see in a pair of scales.
consider what our own Homil. ag. peril. of Idolac. p. 3.
Homilies by law established: A man must have regard of posterity and
therefore no Image must be suffered in the Church, nor any remnant of popish
idolatry by causse though n^w they be not honored, yet there is danger for
time to come. Gedeons Ephed is ill suffered to stand still, if it be but for
future danger. and the Altars of the high place must down, least hereafter
they should hurt. And Moses body must be buried out of the way, to prevent
occasion of future idolatry. Judge. 8. Exodus 20.25. Deuteronomy. 34.6. Genesis 34.2. Reg.
23.13.
that which also must be done with Rahells images. Salomons Temples stand now
forlorn, yet must they be razed because in time they may recover credit
again. and so must the temples of the heathens, of which one thus, P. Martyr^
loc. commun. de imag. sect. 24.
etiam extera etc. Images must not be kept whole, no not out of the church,
because if there be a chau^g they will be restored again. Constantine the
great shut up the temples of the Gods, but razed them not. These Julian the
Apostata opened again; which if they had been overthrown before, non tam
facile reaedificari potuissent, which Theodosius and other Princes marking,
either they razed them altogether, or granted them to the uses of Christians.
Gratian remooved the Ara victoriae which stood in Curia Senatoria, and at which
the Senators were wont to be sworn for fear of danger in time to come.
Symachus sued to Valentinian who succeeded to have it restored: the christians
them selves that were of his counsel yielded: those the Emperor accused
perfidiae, and further replied, Carol. Sigon. de Imper. oc^idental. lib. 9.
quomodo quod frater eripuit me reddere suadetis, cum and religionem laesurus
sim and fratrem, a quo nolo pietatis officio superari? These ceremonies laedunt
fidem, and laedunt fratres in other churches that have removed them, and they
will be a mean to reedifie popery magis facile. they embolde^ the popish
Symachus, not only to hope, but also to sue for tolleration: and they are a
root of bitterness to defile many in time. and lastly, a stompe of the popish
tree remaining to make it reflorish at last again. Heb. 12.15 Dan. 4.12.
I conclude (therefore) with that saying of Zisca the famous Ludonie. Lauat. in
Deuteron.
leader of the Thaborites. diruendi sunt etiam ipsi ciconiarum nidi neredeant.
Secondly, these ceremonies hurt the gospel in regard of the present
prosperity of it, and that many ways, which I will set down in order out of
one Flaccus. Illirie. in lib. de Adiaph.
of our writers. First the ceremonies are the sinews of popery in which they
place the whole sum of their religion. neither is it possible these
foundations of their superstitious standing to keep away from us their
superstition. we see our Preachers are scarce able to hiss out abuses, when
the foundations of abuses are abolished. nothing more light the^ the foolish
multitude, which can not be kept within the bounds of their duty, no not when
all occasions of impiety are taken away: how much less then can they be
contained, when occasion shall be restored. Secondly, these ceremonies breed
discord and strife. which weakeneth the gospel, devideth the church, and
gives adva^tage for popery to grow. Thirdly, these ceremonies both keep out
Preachers and turn out preachers until the flocks be left without
shepheardes, yea left to wolves or hirelings. Fourthly, the zealous when they
see these ceremonies reinforced, which they have despised, will loath the
service of God the more, the simple who will think the worse of all the
religion, because they will indge summan^ esse lenitatem ministrorum, qui iam
abrogant ceremonias pontificias and extreme vituperant, iam vero easdem
restituunt. Fifthly, when the Minister yields to these ceremonies, he being
their captain, and thus shrinking, it comes to pass what Chabrias said
once, Better an army of hearts with a Lion to their Captain, then an army
of. Lions with an Heart to their Captain. the people are most unwilling to
suffer, though there be never so great need, and when they can draw the
inconstancy of their Minister to cloak their coldness, they think they have
excuse sufficient. and the Minister him self whatsoever need should be, can
not exhort them unto perseverance and to suffering: if he do, his words move
not, because he is but held a turne-coat. Sixthly, these ceremonies hinder the
refutation of popery in the pulpit, they make men believe Preachers are too
vehement against the papists, as the Interim when it came forth, made men to
say of Martine Luther, he was not a man of moderation. they make the people
believe also, that the vehement and zealous Preachers against popery, are
Stoickes and precise, and inhumane, and too strickt and severe, even as the
Germane Preachers were judged of at the same time. Seventhly, by reason of
these ceremonies, the people will be induced to say as they did once when popish
ceremonies did reenter in Germany, we perceive now the Pope is not so black
as Luther made him: and that we may come to some agreement if we will: so by
these means the Preachers laboring to season men's hearts with an hatred of
popery, will see their labors come al to nothing. Eightlie, our yielding to
the ceremonies, will draw others by our example against their consciences, for
that the Germane Epiphonema will be taken up again, vide quid illi number tu es
illis doctior aut sanctior, qua machina constat partim oppugnatas, partim
subrutas Ecclesias tum in Germania, tum in Hungaria. Ninthly, These ceremonies
yielded to by us, will make the sons of Gath to rejoice, and the daughters of
the Philistines to triumph, which were little discretion in us, if the old rule
hold, neque tu tuae occasioni desis, neque sua^ hosti Dei. They make account
that their side shall now go up, and that as many as return to their
ceremoni. are coming toward them, and will be wholly theirs in the end, eve^
as Luther was wont to say, papistae nostras concessiones intelligunt large,
largius, largissime suas. a. stricte strictius, strictissime quod cum sctant
nostri Theologi, tanto malo occasionem dare non deberent. And the libertine,
who makes more account of his swine then of Christ, will hereby count him self
freed from all care of religion, as which he sees left in the suddes, even by
the chief professors themselves, when once they come ad vocem ancillae. for let
a Minister but conform (who before was zealous) and who will think better of
him the^ of one that is arundo vacua inclinans ad quemvis ventum? Here I apply
not to our Reverend Fathers, what once was spoken of this scandal, yet think
I it fit to set it down that they may consider of it, Hilar. l. 1. contra
Constant. defunct.
only dogs treturne to their vomit, and will you compel the ministers of
Christ to suppe up those things which they had spit forth? Tenthly, and last
of all, there be not preachers enough in the land (men say) and therefore the
Nonresidents and the dumb dogs must continue: what wound (then) will there
be give^ in this want, when the subscription shall sweep out a great part of
them which ordinarily preach on every Sabbath? that which will follow hereof
is this: the people will return to their old lipp-labour, which now for the
want of preachers, is said to be found in the Greek church. if their priests
(says David. Chytre. in praerat. Antelection Chtonie.
one) can read the common Orologie, they count nothing more required to the
duty of a true Pastor. And if the people hear it read, or read it them
selves in private, they think nothing unperformed which true devotion
requiteth of them. This who sees not, in great part, is come upon our church
already? but this may suffice for the murder of ceremonies thorough scandal.

#Sect. 20. The third murder of the Cross is thorough home contention.
FRom the crosses murder of the body through cruelty: of the soul through
scandal, we are to come now to a third murder of them both, thorough
contention. For the home dissentio^ which these ceremonies have raised amongst
us, has brought forth no fewer evils then the contention of Nazianzens days,
of which so tragically he Gregor. Nazianz. in Apalog.
co^playneth. whither we respect the co^suming quite of all remnant of love at
home, or our growing contemptible to papists, hateful to the churches abroad,
or the loss of our name and credit among the better sort of our brethren or
their building on our backs that are lewd, while what we object one against
another, they catch greedily to the common disgrace of us all. It being so, 2.
Sam. 20.21.
who is wise amongst us to cut of the make bates head, that the inheritance of
the Lord be no longer troubled, the peaceable in Israel no longer pursued,
Psalm. 35.20.
nor the quiet of the land molested. Ioachim. Vadian. in Iouia.
Claudius the Emperor was unjust: they were the Jews that raised the tumult
in Rome, but he exiled and banished the christians as if they had bin the
authors of it. To prevent the like injustice now, we crave of every in
different man before he condemn us, for the authors of this dissension which
is in our Church, to hear with patience this our Apology and defense: 1.
King. 17.18.
Fir^te, it is no contention to contend for the truth, or to labor to purge
corruptions out of the Church, in regard whereof, John. c. 4.
we can no more be accused for troubling the Land, who endeavor to cleanse it
of all relics of superstition then Elias could when he cleansed Israel from
the Altars of Baall: or be blamed more then the Angel was to be blamed for
troubling the water, since it is to cure the sicknesses and diseases of the
Church that we do trouble it. Let there be considered here the similitude
which Gelas. in epist. ad Anastas. August.
Gelaesius uses: It is the quality and condition of the sick, to accuse his
Physician rather then to repress his own hurtful lusts and humors: but if we
be proud who minister a salve for health, quid voca^di sunt qui resultant? If
we be proud who say there must be obedience yielded to Gods word, qui
refragantur, quo appella^di sunt nomine? If we be proud, qui diuinu^ cultum
puro atque illibato copimus tenore servari, what are they to be called, who
defile it with the things unclean of Antichrist? vbi spiritus superbiae
veraciter pugnet, veritas ipsa indicat. It must be the truth that must be judge
which side is co^te^tious. A strange thing (cry our Opposites here) that men
should be found crying out for truth in a church that professes the truth,
Zeph. 1.4.
and under pretense of the gospel, breeding disturba^ce in such peace of the
gospel, as by the infinite blessing of God our land at this time enjoys. As
if under Josias him self that great reformer of the church, there were not
remnants of Baal left, against which a Zephaniah is bound to contend and
strive, until they be removed and cleansed? the very idolatrous garments
themselves of the Chemarims not excepted: as badd as which, the Cope and the
Surplice are, or else our Gualt. in Sophon. ho nil 2.
writers are deceived. Thus one of the^, even when the Magistrate retayneth
rites of baptism popish, it is the duty of the Minister to Z^nch. in Epist. ad
Philippens cap. 1. doctrine. 2.
d^cere public and priuatim quid faciendu^ sit, modo placide and prude^ter hoc
fiat, absque seditione and turbatione ecclesiae. Secondly, wise men will
remember the loving consent, wherein the Pastors labored together, in the
beginning of Eliza. days: at which time, seeing there was no such ha^mering
noise in our temple, no^ cry in our streets (I speak in comparison) til the
subscriptio^ stepped in like an Usher, and cried room for the ceremo. they
will (I doubt not) judge this subscript. and conformity, to be the very evil
spirits that have divided Sichem. So Paul judges the circumcizion to be the
concision, because the stir began about it, whereas the church was quiet
before. When Ioab was accused by Abner, for devouring th'inherita^ce of the
Lord by civil dissension, Judge. 9.23.
he excuses himself thus, who provoked? which now is our Apology, who would
be quiet in our places, but cannot be suffered. who strike neither first nor
second blow, Philip. 3.2.
nor offer any occasion of strise, but suffer only, and only defend, and that
with a quiet Apology only. 2. Sam. 2.27.
and deserve not so much as that complaint that we do not totum telum recipere.
when did we ever offer to drink above them, who now tear us in pieces for
troubling their waters? when ever refused we to bow down our backs to the^,
although they have fetched the blood with their spurs in which case, is there
not Ioh. Sarisburiens. Exra. 4.15.
leave given eue^ to Balaams ass her self to open her mouth? Thidly, it is not
nothing, that it may be objected, The city has bin of old seditious now thus
a whole church: Harm. co^fess sect 17. ex confess. Saxonica p 228. 8. August.
223.
the necessity of imposing ceremo. is that which has bred contention from
time to time. let it be examined whether there was not more peace in the
primitive church, when no Socrat histor. lib. 5. cap. 22.
laws of an necessary observation in rites and ceremonies were enacted? Let
it be examined on the other side, since a necessity of rites and ceremonies
has been imposed, what controversies from time to time have bin in the church
about them? judge by the first tumult of all the rest: Victor goes about to
throw a necessity of conformity upon the churches in observing Easter day:
did not Irenaeus reprove him for this tanqua^ pacis perturbatorem, which our
Morton. Apolog. p. 2. lib. 2. cap. 2.
own Divines approve? Howbeit, Victor might better exact a conformity to the
observing of Eastet day, then our Reverend Fathers may drive us to these
ceremonies controversed, because being Idolatrous and Antichristian, they are
like to those heathenishe stage plays to which when Christians are compelled,
it is esteemed a persecution. which is thus complained against, Non Council.
Aphtican. Can. 28.
operiet quenquam Christianorum cogi ad haec speclacula, maxim quia in his
exercendis, quae contra pracepia Dei sunt, nulla persecutionis necessitas
adhibenda est. Fourthly, wise men will consider in every controversy, which
side it is that seeks their own, Marc. 11.18.
as it is easy to know the Priests are the authors of the trouble between
Christ and them, because they stand for their own gain, Act. 19.27.
when they gainstande his purging the Temple. That Demetrius with his
companions, were the bellows of the stir between Paul and him, seeing it
was for the upholding of his Schrines, that he contended. and last of all, Act.
19.27.
That the Papists are the sturrers of the dissension that now is between them
and us, because it is for fear their waters will dry up, Apoc. 16.12.13.
that like so many Babylonian frogs, they crook against the Gospel. Now as
for us, we are as little profitable to our selves in our forbearance of
conformity, as were the old Christians when they protested, Tertul. Apolog.
cap. 38.
si oblectari nolumus, nostri iniuria est. si forte nostra, and non vestra:
seeing we seek for nothing else unto our selves, but a troublesome and
paynfull ministry: forgive us this contention. whom wrong we save our
selves? unless it be that our wrong and loss of delights, redoundeth to the
loss of the church. Yes (mary) say our Opposites, ye go about to pull down
the church, and to beggar the ministry. to which we reply with the ancient
christians, we are only Tertul. Ibid c. 43.
infructuo si ijs quibus infructuosum esse maximus fructus est, to wit, to
po^pous Lords, to nonresidents, and idell ministers, to whom when we are most
unprofitable, then are we most profitable to Gods church. On the other side,
although we are loath to accuse any, yet for the clearing of our selves we must
desire indifferent men, to take knowledge of those presumptions, which make
probable, they be our Opposites in this controversy, of whom we may most
truly complain, Leo. epist. 23.
dum priuata causae religionis exercentur obtentu, commissum est impietate
paucorum, quod vniversam Ecclesia^ vulneravit. Amongst these, none so bitter
against us, as they who before were with us, but now have subscribed: of many
of which, may it not besayde, Ibid.
impijs subscriptionibus captivas manus dederunt, quod nociturum statui suo
scirent, nisi imperata fecissent? As for our Reverend Fathers, whose wrath
pursues always, we only apply to them these words of Cassander. I will
never deny (says he) but that many Protestants at the first, were sturred
up with a pious desire, to a sharp reproof of certain manifest abuses: and
that the chief cause of this distraction of the Church, Georg. Cassaud.
consultac* act. 7.
illis assignandam esse, qui inani quodam faslu, ecclesiasticae potestatis
inflati, recte and modeste admonentes, superbe contempserunt, and repulerunt.
Therefore I think there is no hope leaft for peace in the Church, until they
be begun with all, who first gave cause of this distraction: to wit, that
they, qui ecclesiasticae gubernationi praesunt, de nimio sue rigore aliquid
remittant; and ecclesiae paci aliquid concedant, and multorum piorum votis ac
monitis obsequentes, manifestos abusus, ad regulam divinarum literarum, and
veteris Ecclesiae, a qua deflexerunt, corrigant. Fifthly, Is not this a fruit
of strife and contention in our Opposites, that they cross us so much the
more, the more that in all humility we sue and seek for reformation of
things amiss? Exodus 5.10.
even as it was contention in Egypt taske-maisters, to grow the more heavy in
their burdens, the more that liberty was sought for? And in the Ephesians to
cry the more, Sigibert. Anno 712.
Great is Diana (as now men cry, Great is the cross) the more her idolatry
was oppugned? When Philippicus at Constantinople, to prevent idolatry unto
Images, scraped out the images of the Fathers of the sixth Council that were in
the portch of the church of Sophia, Constantinus the Pope of purpose to spite
him, painteth the^ up in the church portch of Saint Peter's at Rome? To no other
issue have there sorted the humble petitions that have been made for the
remoovall of popish rites and ceremonies out of this church, seeing our
adversaries the more they see them wiped out by us with the spounge of Gods
word, the more have they painted them with ill tempered colors, and that to
the wiping out of the images of the Apostles, which many an Act. and monu. in
histor. eius.
Huss had painted gloriously before in the spiritual walls of his Bethlehem.

It it written of Julius Ioh. Sleidan. comment. lib. 6
the third, that what he could find or hear to be most contrary to the
protestants, or if he knew any thing that would grieve them most, that he
caused to be decreed in the Council of Trent. Our Reverend Fathers have taken
the like course against us, in all their courses, especially of late; and is no
spirit of contention (then) within their bosoms? When the Thab^rites of Boheme
would have the popish rites removed, the Priests popishlie addicted, strove so
much the more, to have them retained: and because the Challice was chiefly
pushed at, they painted challices, till one (not unfitly) wrote underneath,
Ioh. Dubranius histor. Bohemic. lib. 26


tot pingit calices Bohemorum terra per vrbes,
vt credas Bacchi numina sola coli.
Have not the ceremonies in like manner been the more painted, preached,
commended, pressed, punished, since here of late that their removal has been
sought for? Sixthly, who have exceeded in this controversy? they are the men
that are contentious: and they be our Opposites. It was contention in Cynesias
at Athens, P. Melane. in respons. ad Hamburgens.
festos dies contrarios populi consuetudini celebrare: in Asiaticis sues
mactare and contrariu^ anni initium constituere: vt ostenderent prorsus se
alienos esse ab Israelitis. The like excess was contentious in the
Priscilionistes, when they fasted on the Lords day, Leo epist. 91. capit. 4.
vt per omnia essent a nostrae fidei vnitate discordes: and dies quae a nobis
in laet itia habetur, ab illis in afflictione ducatur. and in August. epist l.
86. ad Casialan.
Vrbicus when he condemned church assemblies on the Saturday, because the Jews
solemnized their assemblies then. such excess is contentious in the Cuspinian
de relig. Turcor.
Turk, choosing Friday for his Sabbath to be contrary to the christians: in
the Ioh. Laficius de relig. Muscovit. ca. 5.
Muscouite to reject the Sabbath wholly, and the whole law, in hatred of the
Jews. Our Opposites are guilty of this excess, in that to be contrary to
Geneva, they have opposed badd doctrines and orders to be against them: as in
the controversy of Christ's sufferings: of his descending into hell: of
divorse to separate a thoro only, and not a vinculo, with the like. Give we
instance in an excess of an other kind. which is to stretch a thing too
far. The Apostles observed certain days for a time to win the Jews, and
so was Whitak. controuers. 5. q. ^. c. 9. p. 405.
Easter kept at first. Hence it grew to a custom, which while some strove to
continue, a contention arose, whereby exilium rerum pretextu, alij ab alijs
seperati sunt: change but the name, and the case is ours. The ceremonies were
intended at first to be kept for a while for the winning of the papists:
hereby they grew to be a custorne: some are found that will needs continue
this custom still, and that with such contention, that the moderation of Victor
and Policarpe is quite forgotten: who thought it indecent Zo^om. lib 7. ca. 19.
Consuetudinum causa se ab invicem seperari: and the advice of August. epist.
86. ad Casulan.
Augustine trodden under foot, Nequaqua^de vestis regiae varietate litigemus, ne
ipsius reginae interiora membra vexemus. Another excess, The Fathers are
misliked in that Sint. Sene^s. in praefat. l 5. bibliothec.
dum vnu^ errorem deserunt, in alium incidere solent: Agricolaru^ more, qui
incuruum arboris stipitem corrigere volentes, immodica nonnunqua^ attractione
extra modum excedu^t plantamque in contrariam diversamque deducunt formam In
this contention of the ceremonies it were to be wished our Reverend Fathers
would turn their edge against the papists, and not against their own
brethren, whom now they wrythe and wrest too far toward the papists: upon
a supposall they are wandered too far from them. Seventhly, we are clear from
the Tho. Aquin. 2.2. q. 38.
effects of contention, contumely, slander, wrath, wrong, contempt, with the
like: which in our Opposites are more then manifest against us. First, what
their words and writings? it is noted for contention in the Fathers, that
often times non Hieron. Apolog. pro lib. cont. Iovinian. c. 4.
quod sentiunt, sed quod necesse est dicunt, adversus ca quae dicunt Gentiles.
how sick our Opposites are of this disease, their writings, and pulpit
invectives show: in which they that will judge the best of them, will deem
they speak not often times what in their consciences they think to be true:
but quod necesse est dicere contra fratres, as if we were Gentiles. what their
doings? for if they separate us not for trifles, in such sort as the Donatistes
did, yet separate us they do, and cast us forth out of the inheritance of the
Lord, as if we were schismatiques, yea heretics: or if they be our fellow
Ministers that be conformed, they break off all familiarity with us: and as
they are able by word or deed, do us all the spite they can. They Examine. of
the declarat of the M of London.
say we judge them: that we condemn them: which is one of the greatest fruits
of contention in things indifferent. The greatness of the fault we acknowledge,
the fault it self we disclayme. It was contention in Eunonius that he would
not enter into a church where the relics of a Martyr were, least he should
seem to adore the Martyr. Vigilantius is not of indifferent men condemned for
opposing himself against these relics for the danger of idolatry that was
in them. In like manner for us to oppose our selves against the relics of
idolatry, it is not contention. contention rests in the bosom of those who
wholly refuse to come to a church where the relics of popery are: Now if we
condemned our brethren that be contrary minded; we would separate from them,
as some do from us, and as we our selves do from the papists whom we
condemn. As long as we hold unity with them, they that accuse us for
judging and condemning of them, know not what it is to judge, or what to
condemn. when the Interim gives leave to minister the Communion under both
kinds, they give it with this condition, Conrad. Schlusselburg. tom. 13. p. 77.
sic tamen ne reprehendant cos qui diuer sum faciunt. It may be when they would
not have us to judge or condemn them, they aim at that the Interim did, to
wit, that we should not mislike them in quo diversum faciunt: nor so much as
reprehende them in their conformity: but it is one thing to condemn this
fact of theirs out of the word (which when we do it is the word of God that
judges them and not we) an other thing for this fact of theirs to condemn
their faith or persons, which is the only condemning or judging that is
forbidden. Now as for this judging or condemning thus forbidden, I would they
would pull out the beam out of their own eyes, who so deal with us as me^
use to deal with them that are not acknowledged to be brethren, partakers of
the benefit, members of the same Christ Jesus, and fellow heirs of the same
kingdom. Aidanus was uncomfortable in Easter, which Beda. histor lib. 3. cap.
17. p. cap. 17. q. cap. 25.
Beda much detesteth in him: yet was he cap. 17.
beloved of the adverse part, and judged a good man, cap. 25.
humble, peaceable, not contentious, not vain glorious so much the sooner that
though he did not celebrate Easter as the Church did, yet he did not celebrate
it with the cap. 10.
Jews: and when he did celebrate it, he preached the same resurrection that
others did. Preach not we the same doctrine that others do? in that we
conform not is it not for hatred against the papists (as bad as the Jews)
seeing we preach the same Christ, and hate the same Antichrist, why are we
judged more then he was, or miss of that brotherly love and fellowshippe which
was showed him? I hear some object unto us, the leaving of our ministry, as
if that were a breach of unity and a separation from them. I bear more love
to them that separate in this respect both us and them selves then to wish that
the Lord should judge them who are guilty in this fault. But in the same Beda
it is Ibid. c. 29. p. 124.
storied, that Colman did loco cedere, rather then he would conform, and
mutare consuetudinem, and yet notwithstanding the King both loved him and
maintained him. In steed of this measure, there is renewed, the miserable image
of that distraction which once arose about conformity between one Beda
histor. lib. 2. cap. 4.
Laurentius and the Scotts: Laurentius judged and condemned the Scotts, that
they were out of the christian unity, because their Passover was diverse; as
we are now judged by our Opposites. The Scotts on the other side, refused to
eat with Laurentius, as now they of the separation refuse their fellowshippe
and communion, who press the use of these ceremonies controversed, under a
color to maintain the peabe and unity of the Church.

#Sect. 21. The objection of the Opposites, that inferiors not yielding in
small matters be guilty of contention against Superiors, answered.
THe first objection against us here, is that we being inferiors, and not
yielding in so small matters, Sect. 21.
must needs be guilty of contention against those that be over us. This
objection would be our prejudice very great, if our superiors might not with a
better conscience for bear to commanude, 1. Sam. 17.25.
then we may perform what is commanded by them. when David was charged by his
elder brother, he replied, is there not cause? now this may we reply at this
time, have we not reason: and is not rationum efficacia praestantior omni
Maldonat. apud Tho. Morton. Apolog. p. 2. lib 2. cap 17.
authoritate, even in the eyes of a Jesuit him self, unless it be authority
divine? By which, we are so strengthened, as that we require but the measure
which another Papist meateth Arrius Montan. in Gal. 1.8.
in rebus divinis, authoritas divina spectanda est: neque decet conditionem
personarum, sed rem ipsam aestimari. The contrary is the same argument
wherewith the Adiaphoristes in cu^bred the Divines of Germany. Conrad.
Schlusselburg. tom. 13.
Caesar is to be gratified in the ceremonies. Thankfulness to him requires you
to yield. To which they replied, It is neither obedience nor thankfulness to
give to Caesar that which is Gods, but plain flattery rather. Must we not
take heed how by renewing Bellarmines principle Episcopisoli babe^t
authoritate^ iudicandi, no^ quia docti sunt, sed quia sunt personae publicae,
id est, principes habentes ecclisiastica^ iurisdictione^ (for we are bound,
men say, to conformity upon our obedience canonical unto these peers) we open
a way to that ruin of the church, which one of our Tho. Mor ton. Apolog p. 2.
l. 4. c. 8.
writers proves will come of it. out of Arelatensis, If all must be in the
hands of the Bishopps, what will become of the catholic faith cum praesertim
Episcopi delitijs indulgeant, soli fere praesbyteri provnitate Christi,
persecutiones sustineant: omnes dicunt voluntati regis parere se velle nullus
dei. Out of this Arelatensis many other things AEneas Siluius de gest. Council.
Basilions lib. 1. apud.
may be drawn to prove that we owe no such obedience to the Bishopps, as that
we are bound for the sake of their authority to conform. For he thinks by
the word of God we are equal to them, he proves by Hierome that they are sola
consuetudine preferred before us: of which custom he also adds, fieri vtique
potest, vt hanc consuetudinem contraria tollat consuetudo. In deed not only a
contrary custom may be introduced: but also must unless we leave him in
this tenent of his nihil esi quod magis sequi decet quam ecclesiae primatiuae
co^suetudinem to follow that of Ludovicus, which much astonished the Council
of Basil, we are not to follow the custom of the primitive Church, and by
name not in this, that in the Council of Jerusalem the Elders of the Church
were joined with the Apostles in all decrees and determinations. He affirms
moreover, that Praesbyteri debent Ecclesiam Dei cum Episcopis in com^uni
regere, and that no Episcopal authority binds any minister without the
warrant of the word which in this controversy is on our side. I conclude
(therefore) with these words of his, non dignitas patrum sedratio spectanda
est: nec aliquid est quod in singulis rebus spectari magis quam veritem
conveniat: nee ego cuinsvi^ Episcopi mendacium, quamvis ditissime, veritati
praeponam, pauperis praesbyteri. Orthuinus Fasciculrer. expetend. fol. 12.13.
Gratius sets in the margen over against these words: O pieta^, O vex
Christiana. which, may it not fill their faces with shame, who give forth, that
it is the voice of puritanisme it self, and of faction, and of scisme? Whereas
the smallnes of these matters is by our Opposites greatly stood on, we desire
that Basils answer to Modestus may be remembered. The Emperor is to be obeyed
(said he) what soever ye pretend it is obstinacy for you to gainestande him
in tam tenui exquisitione dogmatis* to which his reply was this: Theodoret.
histor. l. 4. c. 19.
Qui diuinis innutriti sunt literis, ij nullam syllabam illarum in discrimen
venire pati possunt. would Moses yield in one house? Christ in one rite of
washing hands? would Daniell forbear but one ceremony of looking toward
the Temple? would Eleazar eat but one morsel that might give scandal, nay
would he but seem to eat it? would Paul yield in one ceremony for one
hour? The second contention wherewith we are charged, is against the papiste:
because we set our selves against him in such things, wherein we have no need
to strive. First, the matter is good wherein we stand, therefore no contention
can be imputed to us, save that which the schoolmen call Siluest. Pry. summa
in verb Conte^tio.
contentionem per accidens, as when a man exceeds. This contention where it
is found, besides that it is personal, has this extenuation in the eyes of a
papist, Conrad. Lutzenburg. Catalog. haereticor. verb. Nouatiani.
venialiter peccant quando hareticifaciunt aliquem in quo est zelus infirmitate
excedere. For example, the Georgians forbid stouping down, though it be to
pull a thorn out of the foot, ouerright the church of the l Armenians, for
fear to countenance their religion. The m Grecians when they were in
contention with the Romans, washed every altar, where any one of their
Priests had said a Mass. The noble me^ of n Muscovia wash their hands as
unclean, when they have taken the Popes Legate by the hand, either at his
first coming or at his last farewell. Suppose a good cause in all of these,
and zeal will cover easily all that sauoureth of contention which seems to
be in them. Secondly, the popish ceremonies being Flac. Illiric. lib. de
Adiapho^.
etiam ipsa summa superstitionis papisticae, and that by their own Ioh Dowley.
instruction. cap. c. Gal 2.12.
confession the cross is the very abridgement of their faith, our conformity
to please them would be a Peterlike desire to please, if not a Manichees desire
to get liking, which was this, August. cont. Adamant l. 13.
videbatur velle favere simulachris, vt hac ratione ethnicorum etiam
conciliaret benevolentiam. let this be considered by them who giving way to
this desire of pleasing papists upon a pretense to avoyde the sin of
contention against them, have fallen at last into that coldness which was
reproved in Tymotheus: when the heretics saw him in the streets they were
wont to cry out to him Liberatus Car^hag. in breuiar. cap. 16.
vel si non tibi communicamus tamen amamus te. He puffed up with these
acclamatious mansuete agebat. and although the Emperor checked him for his
remisnes, yet would he not stir against them. Nay it were well if the effect
of this desire not to stir and contend against the papists bredde in our
Opposites, were nothing else but a remisnes against them, does it not breed in
them a fiercenes also against us their own brethren? For this is ill provided
for and can have no excuse, that some, not to contend with papists, should
contend with their brethren, and displease the sons of their own mother to
please the enemies of their Father: and beat, not the dog before the Lion,
but the Lion for favor of the dog, and make the natural child to weep,
while the son of the bound woman does triumph. Such would be loath to be
judged by the ancient tenent which is this, Agathias. scholastic. histor.
Instinian. l. 4.
hostis nomen, non et solum qui remot: ssime est dissitus convenit, sed cui vis
etiam populari qui hostibus gratificart studet. Now although I will not judge
them by this rule, yet may I not suffer them to go clear with that excuse,
which says that this their proceeding against us is the same which Council.
Chalcedo. act. 3. p. 134.
Martianus the Emperor took, who punished those that did contend about
religion before Jews and before pagans, to the scandalizing of them, and to
the public derogation of the catholic faith it self. For the contending
which in this case is to be punished, is when it is against the truth that men
contend such as was decreed in the council of Chalcedon in the days of
Martianus: for us to contend against that smatch of popery which attainteth our
religion, is to contend for the truth against their superstition. Little cause
has the papist to glory and boast of us, even as the Samaritan had little
cause to boast of them in Jerusalem, that stood with a sword in one hand to
fight and with a trewell in the other to biuld up against them. nehem. 4.17.
If the Samaritan has glory in any thing it is in this, that he has some
within the walls of Jerusalem that do savor him. But shall it be suffered,
that the papist shall glory in the unity of his church, and laugh at ours for
our contention? To omit all other replies, this glorying of his may be
raunsomed and repressed, without so dear and great a price, as is their
wrack, who for the truth contend against him, to wit, by returning home unto
their own doors this impatation of disagreement in the very same matters. For
not only the maine doctrine of images is in controversy amongst them, while
Bellarm. de imag. cap. 20.
some hold the image is not to be worshipped at all: others not with latria,
which yet is the common tenent amongst them: But also there is great strise
amongst them in particular about the worship of the cross. In Iosu^ cap. 22.
Andreas Masius says the cross is proposed in the, church, non vt illam
adoremus: the Index expurgator. Hispan. in Andre. Mas.
Spanish Inquisitors finding this, deleatur (say they) non vt illam adoremus.
Neithet was Masius the ringleader of this opposition: we find elsewhere,
Council. Colon. in explic. decalog Durant. de rit. lib 2. c. 23. sect. vlt.
non veneramur crucis materiam, sed id quod typo signoque exprimitur. But this
perchance more obscurely; more plainly that famous Earl of Ioh. Picus.
Mirandul. Conclus. 3.
Mirandula, nec crux Christi, nec illius imago adoranda est adoratione latriae
etiam co modo quo ponit Thomas. For the favorers where of there are G.
Cassander. Consultac. art. 21.
rehearsed. Durandus, Henricus de Gandauo, Johannes Guevarra, Robertus Holcot:
Petrus de Aquila, Franciscus Maronis: Gabriel Biel with others. And they may
remember that our difference about the communion book, comes not near the
contention that was of old about the Ambrosian P. Mornzus de Eucharist. lib 1.
c. 8.
and Gregorian order: with which whole Kingdoms were disturbed in Italy,
France, and Spain. Neither is our difference like to that, which fell out in
latter times about the French and English order within this land, which brake
forth to the shedding of blood, and that in the quier it self of Act. and
moun. in Guilhih^l. conquest.
Glassenbury. and no contention amongst us about the image of the cross did
ever proceed to that extremity as was found amongst them, when John Auentin.
Anal l. 7.
the 22. condemned them for Anthropomorphites, and brunt some with fire who
represented God the Fathers in the form of an aged man: the son in the form
of a young man, and the holy ghost in the shape of a dove. About the year 1321,
the Fransiscanes began to teach, that Christ was poor, and his Apostles far
from the pomp wherein the Prelacie then did live: the foresaid John thought it
his part to look to this matter, therefore he Ibid. fol. 751. Sabellie.
Aenead. 9. l. 8
condemned the^, and some of them he burnt with fire. And for the streng
thening of him self, he set the Dominican Friars against them, whence
crucifixes of quite contrary shape began to be seen in churches. Hospinian. de
retemplar. cap de imag. fol. 71.
The Franciscans painted Christ hanging naked on the cross with a crown of
thorns on his head. The Dominicans, they painted him on the cross with a
purple robe limmed with gold, with a crown of gold, with gilded shoes: and
though he had one hand fastened to the cross, yet the other was painted loose,
putting a couple of the fingers into a rich and costly purse, as if he were a
pulling out some store of monye. When will the papists show such an heavy and
yet ridiculous contention, about the sign of the cross amongst us? The 3.
contention that is objected, is against the greater part of our own church.
The fault of this contention, must needs be in the preachers (say our
Opposites) because being the fewer in number, they are in all reason to yield,
which was the course that Constantine Socrat. histor lib. 5. cap. 22.
took in the Council of Nice, to appease the controversy about Easter day.
First, this argument drawn from the many, is in our understanding, popish: who
have learned a contrary lesson, from the Fathers, August. in Psalm. 39.
no^ numeranda suffragia, sed appendenda* yea from our Opposites D. Bilf. p. 3.
p. 301. cont. Apolog.
them selves who fear not to say, that one man preaching the truth, has
warrant enough against the whole world. Nay from some papists them selves,
both old we are Gerson. de exam. doctri. p. 1. Confiderat. 3. Panormic.
extrauag. de election. c. significasti.
more to believe one man skilled in the scripture, though not authorized, then
whole Council that has no warrant out of the word: and new, Gregor. de
Valent. Analys. l. 8. cap. 7.
potest errare mayor pars. Again, Canus. Theolog. l. 5. c. penult.
scimus frequenter vsu venire vt mayor pars vincat meliorem. As for
Constantine, he decreed not with the multitude, but with reason, yea such
reason, as now makes againstour ceremonies in present ^trife, We must not
conform our selves to the Jews (said he) no more ought we to the papists
now. Secondly, all things well considered, this argument drawn from the
multitude, makes for us. Some two or three Bishops at the first were the
beginners of this strife and contention about the Ceremonies: at this day,
there be of the Bishopps, of the lay, Gentry, of the Clergy a very great
number, who (notwithstanding their conformity) wish the abolishing of these
rites and ceremonies. As for the rabblement of idle, and of Idol ministers,
what reason is there, they should come into the reckoning August. vb. supra.
multi sunt, and quis numer at? Again. Chrysostom. homil. 40. ad popul.
Antiochen.
quaenam (quaeso vtilitas est, multum esse foenum potius, quam paucos lapides
praetiosos? non in numeri multitudine, sed in virtutis probitate, multitudo
consistit. But suppose, not only the greater part, but also the whole English
church were for the ceremonies, is the English church all the church? their
very popish argument it self, commands Germany (a greater Church then
England has) to conform to the Latin service of Rome upon this reason, non
debet totum parti cedere, sed pars toti, which our T. Morton. Apolog. p. 2.
lib. 1. cap. 28. p. 101.
Writers do approve. If then in cceremonies the fewer must yield to the
greater part, then much more must England (being but a part) abolishe the
ceremonies controversed, so to yield to the whole Orthodox church, or at the
least to the greater part thereof, which long since has remooved them. Sure,
they can not say to us, as once Eugenius the fourth said, Council. Florentin.
in union. Armenior.
Conforment se Armenij, cum vniver so orb Christianorum. we may rather beseech
them to suffer us to conform our selves, with the whole universal Church of
Christ beyond the seas, that so we may be releeved, them selves delivered from
that objection of Beda histor. lib. 3. cap. 25. p. 125.
Wilfrid, All the world is against you, praeter Pictos and Britanes, qui contra
totum orbem, vano labor pugnant.

#Sect. 22. Ceremonies not only make the contention of the Church, but also
nourish it: neither will the Church be quiet, so long as they continue.
WE have prooved that the ceremonies have raised the strife and contention that
is in our Church: we come now to prove, that they are the maintayners of it:
Prouer. 26.20.
so that our Church will never have peace as long as they remain. Does not
this commandment enjoin to use all means of peace and concord? Or can
there be any readier mean, then to remove the matter it self of the
contention, if it may lawfully be taken away as here it may and must? So
Salomons strife is appeased as the fire is quenched by the remoovall of the
fuel that feeds it. To set peace in Abraham's house, Genesis 16.
Hagar must be turned out of doors, who is the occasion of the bate. To have
peace between Lot and Abraham's servauntes, Genesis 13.8.
the matter must be made out of the way whereupon they fall out and contend,
which is nearenes of pasturing. To come nearer to the matter, God to have peace
between Jews and Gentiles, Ephesians. 2.14.15.
abolished the ceremonies of his own institution and ordinance, because
otherwise the remaining they would be a partition wall between them to keep
them a sunder. Master Bucer is contended to suffer any Bucer da re vestiar. p.
708.
hard thing in his flesh to have the Surplice remooved and taken away, because
Idem in Censur. c. 2. p. 458.
rapitur ad contentionem magis pernicio sam, quam vt quisquam explicare possit.
Philippus Melancthon in like manner, Conrad. Schlusselburg. tom. 13.
though he conformed to the rites and ceremonies of the Interim, yet wished
he with tears that it were remooved, because as long as it remained, it was
(...) in the Church. Master Act. and Monu. p. 1873.
John Fox prayed to God for he remoovall of our Ceremonies by name, for that
they made much strife amongst us. At a word, all the P. Matyr. Bullinger.
Beza. in epist.
Divines who have written about the rites and ceremonies controversed, pray God
with one sigh to take them away, that so the home dissension amongst us may be
appeased. The Cross and the ceremonies not able to satisfy, fall into a rage,
which prompteth to them an other way, that is, to cut off and to destroy all
the Preachers that brook them not: which to effect, they give forth there
will be no quietness in the land, as long as such bellows of contention be
suffered in it.

First, this were right the course which once Platina in Innocent. 7
Ludovicus took (nephew to Innocontius the seventh) who when men came to him
to complain, he put them to death upon this reason, factions can by no other
means be ceased. Was Achitophel right, when to have quietness he counseled the
destroying of David? Haman when he advised to cut off the Jews, that obeyed
not the Kings laws, to have conformity? Or Cayaphas, when out of a persuasion
the land would never be in quiet as long as Christ lived, persuaded it was
expedient to put him to death for the good, and for the security of the land,
whether he did deserve it or no? Let no man think I compare our Revered
Fathers unto those, God forbid, least any of them should follow these. my
purpose is to prove by these, it is no lawful mean to gain peace by
oppossing the innocent. Secondly, as Hester told XERXES (for so it is in
Joseph Scalliger. Animaduers. in Eusebius. Chronic.
Hebrew) Hamans monny could not recompense the loss of the Jews, so peace in
rites and ceremonies and the proffit of them, can never recompense the loss of
so many worthy Preachers, and what wisdom to use a medicine worse then the
disease? Thirdly, we are commanded a contrary mean, which is easy and
without any hurt, yea to much good* for cast this Jonas out of the ship, and
what a calm will there presently follow? In the controversy about Images at
Constantinople, Germanus purposing not to yield, Carol. Sigon. do reg. Ital.
si ego sum Jonas (says he) mittite me in mare, and so resigned. It seems
he borrowed this out of Epiphanius, who writing against Manes has these
words: Epiphan. haerel. 66.
Nonne oportebat cum Iona dicere, tollite me and proijcite in mare: propter me
enim tempestas ista? What then? A man of Jonas spirit will not stick to throw
into the Sea, to gain unity and peace unto the Church, I say not such
tryfling wares as these Ceremonies are in strife, but also their honors and
dignities them selves, they being the matters of that strife and contention,
which does so trouble it vnnecessarilie. The wise and skillful Decret. p. 2.
c. 1. q. 7. cap. 16.
Pilote, tempestate vrgente, quaedam exonerat, vt caetera salva permaneant. yea
though the wares be precious. And shall we (then) cast out the Pilotes of the
ship them selves, and all to spare the wares of Rome, which are no lawful
Trafficque? And when Christ commands to pull out the very eye: to cut off
the very hand it self that offends: this course, to spare the paring of an
nail or worse, commands to cut off not the member that does offend, but
all the members, yea principal members (to wit) the faithful Preachers of
the Gospel, that are justly offended by it. Itane propter Consuetudines, audes
iubere, vt pij viri qui alias sincere docent, eijciantur, said Herman.
Hamelma^. de tradit. p. 1. lib. 4. col. 377.
one to Cassander once? And this is the first lawful mean, for the appeasing
of our contention, the remoovall of the ceremonies and subscription: who are
the make-bates of our Church. But if this cannot be obtained, then the next
way to appease contention, is that which is next unto it, to leave these
ceremonies, as they are held to be indifferent, so to be used indifferently,
as every man thinks good.

The example hereof we have in Polycarpe and Anicetus. Policrates and Victor,
who, though they dissented in the controversy of Easter day, yet communicated
one with another, and suffered all men to enjoy their own judgments. and by
this means Sozora. l. 7. c. 19. Nicephor. lib. 12. cap. 31.
sapienter extinxerunt hanc contentionem. The very same course was there taken
for unity and concord by certain Bishopps, assembling together, who made a
Canon which they called Socrat histor. lib. 5. cap. 20.
adiaphoron, because it left the observation of Easter day, indifferent as men
would them selves. The long war between the Greek and the Latin Church,
how was it comprimised at the last but by the same course? the decree of the
union running thus: council. Florentin. sess. vlt.
Item in Azimo sieve fermentato pane vnusquisque Domini corpus conficiat, iuxta
suae ecclesiae sieve Occidentalis sieve Orientalis morem. Augustine (speaking of a
Satersdayes fast or Dinner, has these words; August. epist. 86. ad Casulan.
In his nihil mihi videtur tutius pacatiusque servari, quam vt qui non
manducat, manducantem non spernat, sieve iudicet. and speaking of a like matter,
he has these; Idem epist. 118.
Si quis dixerit non quotidie accipiendam esse Eucharistiam, alius affirmet
quotidie, faciat vnusquisque quod secundum fidem suam pie credit faciendum.
Hierome speaking of receaving the communion (as it seems for private eating)
in a white linen cloth, Hierom. in Apolog cont. Iou^nian.
scio Romae (says he) hanc esse consuetudinem, vt fideles corpus Christi
accipiant, quod nec repraehendo nec probo, vnusquisque enim in suo sensu
abundat. Gregory speaking of the trim-immersion, Gregor. Epistolar. l. 1.
epist. 41
non est repraehensibile (says he) infantem vel semel vel ter immergi. Come we
to the Cross, Amalar. de Ecclesiast. offic. li. 3. cap. 24.
Satius est signum Crucis semel fieri super panem and vinum: non tamen est abs
re si bis fiat. One thus of our English ceremonies, Alexand. Ales. in proemio.
Leiturg. Anglican.
sunt haec certe eiusmodi cuiusmodi sunt illa de quibus beatus Paulus iubet vt
vnusquisque intellectu proprio abundare (hoc est) sine dubitatione sequi debeat
suam sententiam. This holds only (will some say) in the private use of
things indifferent, of which there is no Canon made: As if these things
forementioned, were not all of them overruled by the custom of the church: if
they speak of a Canon inferring necessity, they must know, there were no
such Canons in ancient time: christian liberty was more tendered in those
days: It was popery that first brought in Canons of necessity, Decret. p. 1.
distinc. 4. cap. 6.
Decretum necessitatem facit, exhortatio autem liberam voluntatem excitat,
says Gratian. Add to him Bellarm.
Bellarmine, aspersio aquae lustralis vtomnis traditio, quae traditur in forma
concilij, non in forma praecepti, libera dicitur. We see by these whence Canons
of necessity came, in rites and ceremonies, to wit, out of an opinion that the
Church has power in such matters to take away christian liberty. This
opinion, who will say is not popish, unto the ancient times unknown? One of
our latest writers of reverend and of great account, proves out of Socrates,
that holy days were antiquitus liberi, and that therefore Tho. Morton. Apolog.
p. 2. li. 2. cap. 9.
non imponendam esse christinis vllam necessitatem. to which he adds of his
own quod non docet papale iugum videtur excutere. A plain testimony that
necessity in rites takes away liberty. that antiquitus there was in rites a
liberty permitted and no necessity imposed, Lastly, that necessity in rites
is iugum papale never heard of the church til Antichrist began to usurp over
the liberty of christian men.

#Sect. 23. Conformity in Ceremon. ought not to hinder peace, though with
diversity of Ceremony.
AGainst this second mean of peace aunciently used, there is co^formitie now
opposed: which our Opposites hold so necessary, as that this liberty
forespoken of can have no place or hearing. But if she might be suffered to
speak, she would justify first, that variety of ceremonies no way impeacheth
the unity of faith, but sometimes adorneth it, in which faith the true peace
of the church consists. So Irenaeus to Eusebius hist. lib. 5. c. 23.
Victor, dissonantia ieiunia commendat vnitatem fidei. which how Lib. concord
apud Conrad. Schlusselb. tom. 13 p. 597. Articul. Smalcaldic. An. 1537. ap.
eundem. p. 608.
often did the Germane Divines allege to prove that conformity to the
ceremonies of their Adiaphorisme was not necessary for the churches peace?
Socrates has these words: Socrat. histor. lib. 5. cap. 22.
Nulla religio eosdem ritus custodit: etiamsi eandem de illis doctrinam
amplectantur. Nam qui eiusdem sunt fidei, de ritibus inter se dissentiunt.
Sozomen that the like, Sozom. histor. lib. 7. cap. 19.
stultum est consuetudinis gratia, se invicem seperari eos qui in primarijs
religionis capitibus consentiunt. Etenim easdem, and per omnia similes
traditiones in omnibus concordibus Ecclesijs in venire non datur. Augustine
resembles the churches ceremonies to the Queens garment, in which variety
serves for beauty: and adds, August. epist 86 ad Casulan.
sit vna fides ecclesiae vniversae, quae vbique dilatatur tanquam intus in
membris, etiamsi ipsa fidei vnitas quibusdam diversis observationibus
celebratur, quibus nullo modo id quod in fide verum est impeditur. Gregory
has the like, Gregor. ad Leandrum epist. 41.
In vna fide nihil officit consuetudo diversa. to which effect he wrote Idem
epist lib. 12. cap 3. epist.
also to Augustine the Monk, when for England he required of him some uniform
order in the ceremonies of the Church. Leo is of the same judgment: Decret. pa
1. distinct. 11. cap. 3.
Nihil obsunt saluti credentium, diversae pro loco and tempore consuetudines,
quando vna fides per dilectionem operans bona, quae potest vni Deo commendat
omnes. Waltramus Bishop of Nurenburgh, writes to Anselm. epist. 327.
Anselme about the question of leavened bread, and receaveth this answer: The
diversity of rites I think, is rather to be borne with in agreement of peace,
then to be condemned with offense: For we have this from the holy Fathers, that
if the unity of charity be kept in the Catholic faith, the diversity of
customs hurt nothing. But if it be demanded whereof this diversity of
customs does spring, I perceave no other cause thereof, but the diversity of
men's wits: which although they differ not in strength and truth of the
thing, yet they agree not in the fitnes and comelines of the ministering: For
that which one judges to be meeter, often times another thinks less meet.
wherefore not to agree in such diversities, I think it not to fwerue from the
truth of the thing. Our Harmo. conf. sec 17
own Churches that be reformed are of the same judgment. Yea some of our D.
Bills. cont Apolog pa. 2. p 305.306.
Opposites, and our own Jewel. defense. of Apolo. ^. p. 2. c. 1^. diui. 1
writers: One of whom cites Lindanus. Thom. Morton. Apolog. p. 2 li ^. c. 39
Paschae celebranda illa olim varietate per regiones diversitas, nihil fidei
officiebat. There is first replied to this, that though these ancient Fathers
have taught that the unity of faith may stand in diversity of rites, yet
that they have ever labored for a conformity in ceremonies for a further
strengthening of it. So a Council Council Toleta. 10 cap 1.
confesses, that vnitatem Catholicae regulae varietas nulla deser pit, who yet
will have a conformity in the celebratio^ of the Annunciation: least in time
the diversity of it might bring forth discord and dissension in the Church.
Others will have a conformity in ceremonies, least there should be thought to
be a diversity where there is none. So a Council, Council. Venetic. can. 15.
rectum quoque duximus vt vel intra provinciam nostram sacrorum and ordo
psallendi, vna sit consuetudo. vt sicut vnam cum trinit^tis confessione fidem
tenemus, vnam and officiorum regulam teneamus: ne variata observatione in
aliquo observatio nostra discrepari credatur. An other, Council Toletan. 4 Can.
5.
propter quod in Hispanijs quidam Sacerdotes trinam, quidam simplam mersionem
faciunt, a nonnullis scisma esse conspicitur, and vnitas fidei scindi videtur.
nam dum parts diversae in baptizandis aliqua contrario modo agunt, alij alios,
non baptizatos esse contendunt. The same Council before. post recte fidei
confessionem placuit vt nihil diver sum aut dissonum in ecclestaslicis
sacramentis agamus ne quaelibet nostra diversitas apud ignotos seu carnales
scismatis errorem videatur ostendere: and multis extet in scandalum varietas
Ecclesiarum. vnus ergo ordo orandi, atque psallendi a nobis conservetur. First,
this conformity was aunciently sought, These. de ^^^aphor. ^^^colog. ^^^on. ap.
^^ourad. ^^^luselb^r Tom. 13. p ^62.
quantum fieri potuit, and no further. in which manner the greatest resisters of
the conformity in Germany will allow of an honest, seemlie, and godly
similitude even as we our selves do now. This appears by Anselm vb. sup.
Anselme, If the Sacrament (says he) were ministered after one sort, and
agreeing throughout the whole church, it were good and laudable: but this
because it can not well be obtained, therefore a diversity is to be borne
withal. So a certain Council wishes that there might be an agreement
through the whole church in the single life of ministers: who yet because it
could not well or conveniently be brought about, gives this liberty of
diversity placet caeteros clericos ad hoc non cogi, sed secundum vniuscuiusque
Ecclesiae consuetudinem observari debere. In regard hereof, this conformity
gives no countenance to the uniformity present, which our Opposites do seek
after, which fieri non potest without innumerable hurtes, evils,
inconveniences, scandals, as has been showed already. Secondly, This ancient
conformity objected was therefore wished and sought, that every particular
congregation might be united to the whole universal Church. So Leo forbids
disagreement in the Passover, because Leo. epist 62.
ex coplerunque fit, quod non licet vt no^ simul omnes Ecclesiae quod non nisi
vnum esse oporiet observet. So a Council will have a conformity in a
ceremony upon this reason, Council. Tol^tan. 4 Can. 8.
quia haec observatio per multarum loca terrarum in ecclesij, commendatur,
dignum est propter vnitatem pacis, vt in Gallicanis ecclesijs conservetur. So
the Council of Nice will have a conformity in fastings and in the Passover,
Nicephor li. 8. ca 25. ap Council. Tom. 1 pa 352.
vt decens extet ordo quem omnes habitabiles orbis Ecclesiae observant. In
regard hereof, the ancient conformity sought for, gives no countenance (once
again) to that which our Opposites do now pursue, which is so far from
uniting our church to other churches Orthodox, as that it divides us from the^
all. so that thereof, there is like to ensue (unless this sparcle be speedily
quenched) as great a contention and distraction, as once there was about the
Adiaphorisme, or is at this present about Consubstantiation. Thirdly, the
ancient conformity objected was therefore wished for, that the catholic
church might join together, in rites of her own against all aliens, Jews, and
heretics. This appears by the Council of Nice (lastly cited): who if it
labor for a conformity about Easter, it is upon this reason, Nieephor vb. sup.
exactior ratio flagitare videtur, vt nihil nobis commune sit, eum infestissima
Iudaeorum turba. Aga^ne, M^nime decet in re tam sancta, aliquam extare
dissentionem: and pulchrius est sequi eam sententiam, in qua nulla sit alieni
erroris and peccati contagio. Another Council, Council. Toletan. 10. cap 1.
Hinc est quod Paschale festum vno die celebramus and tempore, ne in Iudaicum
decidamus errorem. When the stir was about the Beda in histor de gont.
Anglor. lib 5. cap. 21.
tonsura, there fell out this disputation, page ^37.
Simonis tonsuram, quis non simulcum ipsa magia detestetur? as we plead now,
zeal does require to detest popish rites together with their doctrine. The
other answered, that though he were Simon Magus [tonsura] yet he communicated
not in his Magia: Just like our Opposites now, though we communicate with the
papists in their rites, yet not in their superstition. It is replied: you must
show in facie, what you do in Cord: page 238.
sepera a tuo vultu illius habitum, qui a Deo seperatus est, and put on their
habit who truly love God. even as we do now dispute, we must show in outward
appearance the hatred we bear against ceremonies superstitious: and we must
separate our selves from their rites who are separated from God: conforming our
selves to the rites of those churches who truly serve him. We have this
confession from a Jacob. L^^esima lib de dium. quauis lingua non legen. c. 24
Jesuit, when the ^bionites heresy began to spread, which held the Jewish
rites necessary, and so by consequent required bread that was unleavened in
the Eucharist necessarily, whereas the thing being indifferent, the church
might have conformed unto them, we see at the first it took course quite
contrary, Ecclesia contrarium praecepit (says he) vt infermentato pane sacra
consice^etur Eucharisita. In regard hereof, the ancient conformity gives no
coun^e^ance (once again) to that which our Opposites seeks for, because it
combined the church to conform in rites of their own against all ceremonies
of heretics, whereas our Opposites would have us conform to the rites of
those heretics that are the most horrible and the most detestable that are
living. And this to the first exception which is taken against that liberty in
rites and ceremonies which we claim from the practice of the old and ancient
Church.

#Sect. 24.
THe second follows: and it says though the ancient church requires no
conformity as necessary to peace in diverse churches, yet that in one and in
the same church it is to be required. First, the Fathers did as well require a
conformity in the universal church, as in any particular congregation, as
has been plainly showed: and the difference about leavened and unleavened
bread was in diverse churches the Greek and the Latin. yet what the Fathers
spoke against the necessity of conformity therein, is applied by one of our
reverend writers against the necessity of conformity within this one church
of ours. To this letter of Anselme, I have (says Act. and Monu. page 170.
he) adjoined an other Epistle of his to the said Waltram: appertayning to
matters not much unlike to the same effect: wherein is entreated touching the
variety and diverse vsages of the sacraments in the church: where by such as
call and cry so much for uniformity in the Church may note peradventure in the
same something for their better understanding. Secondly, why should diversity
of rites break peace more in one church then in diverse, seeing the faith is
the same which is affirmed to be inviolat by this diversity: and diversity of
ceremonies is likewise the same in all places: having as great power beyond the
seas to disturb peace, as it has behither them? To have peace in the church
the papists require an uniformity in the languadg of Gods service, Bellarmin
de verb. Dei li 5 ca 1^ and de effect. Sacram. c. 31.
alioqui communicatio Ecclesiae tolleretur. Indeed who sees not that a
conformity in languadg is a necessaratie for peace as conformity in tryfling
ceremonies: whereupon the Interim imposed the Latin tongue to be used for the
peace of Germany as well as conformity in other rites and Ceremonies. Now
would not he show himself ridiculous that should thus reason: the diversity
of language will not break peace between England and Spain, but it will
break peace between England and Wales, between Cornwall and Yorkshire: and
England and Scotland can have no Union unless the languadg be first made one?
Surely the Council of Lateran made account that diversity of rites, would no
more break peace in one church then in diverse: even as the diversity of
language does not when it decreed Council. Latera. sub Innocent. 3. cap. 9.
quoniam in plerisque partibus inter eandem ciuitatem permixti sunt populi
diuersarum linguarum habentes sub vna fide varios ritus and mores, praecipimus
vt provideantur viri idonei qui secundum diuer sitates rituum and linguarum
divina officia illis celebrant, and Ecclesiastica Sacramenta ministrent. Give
we another instance: The Isles of Gersey and Garnsey differing in language and
discipline from us, have yet evermore agreed in the faith with us: and in
obedience unto one supreme Sovereign. Has not the disagreement of language
and discipline as great power to trouble peace as the diversity has of Cross
and Surplice? Giuewe a third instance. Some of our churches have Organs, some
not: some discant and broken singing, some plain: some none at all. has this
diversity ever disturbed or troubled our peace? Give we instance last of all
in the Cross and Surplice themselves: what breach of peace either in the state
or church did the Preachers raise all the days of Queen Elizabeth, who
differred in them from their fellows? For, as for the state, where more
peaceable or loyal subjects thoroughout the Land, then in the places where
they have labored? As for the church, the unity of it has been vpheld
against these of the separation, by no men's writings (that I know of) but by
theirs? As for the faith, show me one that has broached one point against it,
as some have done, who are for the Ceremonies? Thirdly, I see no reason why the
churches of this Island should be held to be one Church, and the churches of
the continent beyond the seas to be diverse churches, seeing if we speak of one
church collectiue, we believe out of the scriptures that there is but one
Catholic church over all the earth: if we speak of one church distributive,
we find by the phrase and speech of scripture, that every visible
congregation is one church by it self. Howsoever, of such diverse churches,
and such churches held to be one, the foresaid testimonies and these following,
mean indifferently, to wit, that variety in rites breeds jar in neither
of them. The Italians and Durant. rational li. 4 cap. 2^.
Germenes use two Corporalls without any breach of peace, from the French, who
use one only: and yet all the three make up but one church Roman. In Ni^ephor.
li 12 c 34.
Antioche of Syria altaria diuersum prorsus quam alibi situm habent: yet all
these make up one Greek church. That August epist l 19. cap 27.
Haleluiah should be soung only between Easter and Whitsontyde, non vsque
quaque obseruatur, nam and varijs diebus vary cantatur alibi. In the Union of
the Greek and Latin, they were both made one, and yet the diversity of
leavened and unleavened bread is permitted without all fear that it would
impeach this Union. Thom. Aquin p. 3 quest. 74. art. 4 vidi.
Thomas also and Caietan think that the difference of this ceremony is not to
be reckoned among the parts of the schism of that church, Walafrid. Strab. de
reb eccleasti ca. 15.
See Walafridus Strabus what variety he confesses in the celebration of
divine service, which never bredd any jar or discord: and consider that of
Socrat. histor. lib. 5. cap. 21.
Socrates apud nos Ecclesiarum and sectarum Ecclesias nusquam re perire poteris
duas qui in precand^ more inter se consentiant. It was a sacred order to have
7. Collectes in the Mass, neither more nor less: and a great matter was made
of it, vsu tamen Rodulph Tungr^ns. de canon. obseruat. prop of. 23
Leodiensi vltra quinque non di^untur: and all these vnco^formities were within
one Greek or Roman church. Fourthly, take the churches of England to be one,
and it is easy to bring examples of diversity in the ceremonies, even in one
and the same church, where they have broke no peace: In one and in the same
region (says Sozom. histor lib. 7. cap. 19.
one) permulti ritus per civitates and pagos in veniri possunt, quos sine
piaculo intollerabili praeuaricari non posse putant. At Rome the Gregorian P.
Morn o^ Eucharist l. 1. c. ^.
Leiturgie obtained: the Ambrosian at Millane was used the same time in the
same Italy: and yet after they were settled the peace and unity of the church
was not disturbed by the^. There were diverse forms of service in one Spain
for a long time. The Council Gerundense: first taking order that there should
be one form under one Metropolitan, which after the Counsel of Toledo the 4.
extended over all Spain: and while these rites were thus diverse, there was
more peace then after that one and uniform order which Alphonsus the 6.
brought in. At Socrat. histor. li. 5. cap. 20.
Rome it was decreed that christians might celebrate Easter day differently
with out any fear of breach between the^. Here in England of old the use
differed: and although the use of Sarum ouertopped all the rest, yet did it not
conquer them. even as in Germany Illi^i. i^l. de Adiaph
Brandeburg had one breuiarie: Magdeburg an other: and so in the rest when as
yet there Satan kept all his Ministers in a league and peace together. In
Russia to this hour, the Bishop of Durant. de rit. l 2. c. 9.
Nouograde differed in Ceremony from all the rest: wearing a white Miter with
two horns, such as the popish Bishops wear: whereas other Bishops wear round
Miters like the Turkish: black in color, and what hurt breeds this
difference there? Whereas (then) P. Morn. de Eucharist. l. 1. c. ^
Charles the great, having a purpose to unite the Church of Rome and of France
together, and being Romish abolished Cantum Gallicanum and established ordine^
Romanu^, which before Pipin his Father decertauit vt fieret though he could not
bring it to pass, so were it a worthy thing for our Sovereign, purposing to
unite the two protestant churches of England and Scotland, being himself a
Protestant to abolish, ordinem quemcunque Romanum, and to establish the order
of the Scottish church, and of the other reformed churches, with whom he is in
faith united. And this is the first plea of the ancient Christian liberty,
vnconformitie breaks no peace either in the whole Orthodox church, or in the
diverse parts thereof, or in any one church visible.

#Sect. 25. An exact uniformity in Ceremonies, has ever disquieted the Church
and hindered the growth of it.
THe second is, an absolut and exact uniformity in rites and in Ceremonies
has ever disturbed the peace of the church, and hindered much the grouth of
the Gospel: For the understanding hereof we must consider that there are
Maiores Ceremoniae and ritus Catholici, such as kneeling is in prayer, in which
conformity as it is easy to be made, so is it a Mother Bucer, in Censur. c. p
459. F. Illiric. in li. de Adiaphor.
of peace, a Nurse of reverence, a Preserver of decency. There are other
Ceremoniae which are minores, and not Beza. epist 24.
Catholicae. such as is the weomens sitting in the church behind the men. and
in these conformity is heavy and burdensome to be borne: hard and difficult
to be effected, so that Christian liberty is for the most part oppressed by
it, and so by consequent the church distracted. Hence come those protestations
of the Germane Divines against the conformity of the Adiaphorisme. F. Illiric.
ap. Co^rad. Schlusselburg. tom. 13. p. 166.167.
Nonest necessaria rituum conformitas: deinde and nimis exacta impossibilis. in
mediocribus Ceremonijs vere Adiaphoris conformitas sectanda est aliquatenus.
Confess. Eccles. Mansfeld. ap. eund. p. 560.
Dissimilitudo Adiaphororum prodest ad conseruandam libertatem Christianam.
statim. a. quando coguntur homines ad carecipienda, eaqueue obtruduntur ta^quam
res necessariae, amittunt suum verum titulum. Lib. Concord ap. eund. p. 597.
Quando ceremoniae constitutiones Ecclesiae, coactione quadam tanquam
necessaria obtruduntur, and quidem contra libertatem Christianam quam Ecclesiam
Christi in rebus eiusmodi externis habet, falsa doctrina inducitur, quam
oportet reijcere. For this cause they that tender the churches peace, will use
that moderation in rites and ceremonies which Aliacus once per swaded to the
council of Constance. No man more strict then Augustine for the observation of
the churches constitutions: P. Aliacus reformat. Eccles.
g mos populi Dei (says he) and instituta maiorum pro lege tenenda sunt, and
sicut prauaricatores diuinarum legum, it a contemptores Ecclesiasticarum
consuetudinum coerceudi sunt. yet can this Idem. epist. ad Ianuar. 119. c. 18.
August: in a thing truly indifferent (which our ceremonies are not) give a man
leave and scope to differ, August. epist. 86. ad Casulan.
when aliquorum infirmitas requires a breach: and when there is a detrimentum
in conformity. The trim* immersion was strengthened with I know not how long
continuance: in which notwithstanding was permitted Glossa. in distinct. 4. de
consecrat cap. de trina.
diuersa ecclesiarum consuetudo. The Gregorian order has been established a
long time in Spain, yet never was there an uniformity so precisely exacted,
but that to this hour from the beginning the old Nozorabique is P. Morn. de
Eucharist. lib. 1. cap. 8.
permitted in six churches of Toledo: in the Cathedral church it self of
Salamanca: in the chapels of Doct. Talabricas, and of the Cardinal Ximenes.
Secondly, though an exact uniformity in these ceremonies not Catholice were
lawful and good for the churches peace, yet not when it compels to
foreign rites, as our uniformity does. F. Illiric. apud conrad.
Schlusselburg. tom. 13. P. 166.
Cicero disputes much, de proprio decoro, which being now in every church, it
must have ceremonies of it own. Besides the people stay at home, and go not
abroad so much as to see the ceremonies of other churches. The divines of
Germany, These. de Adiaphor. Theolog. Saxon. ap. eund. P. 462.
non sunt cogendae Ecclesiae (says they) recte sentientes and been
constitutae, vt se prorsus aliorum ceremonijs accommodent, seu conforme^t.
Thirdly, though it were for the churches peace to press an exact uniformity
in the lesser ceremonies, and the same fetched from other places, yet were it
not either peace or piety to fetch them from Rome, the throne of Satan, and
seat of Antichrist, the Sodom and Aegipt of our times. Gelas epi. ad Anastas.
Augustum.
Gelasius well: Quomodo potest esse pax vera, cut charitas intemerata defuerit,
quae est de cor de puro and conscientia bona and fide non ficta? Quomodo
(quaeso te) de cord erit puro si contagio inficiatur externo? quomodo de
conscientia bona si prauis fuerit malisque commixta? quemadmodum fide non
ficta, si maneat sociata cum perfidis? Haec a me: necesse est tandius non
taceri, quandiu nomen pacis obtenditur, vt talem pacem doceamus, qualis and
solapax est, and praeter quam nulla esse monstratur. Ought not we to say to
Rome, as Iehu to Iezabel, what peace as long as thy witchcraftes and thy
whoredoms abound in great number? Sure we must according to the Germane rule,
De^^^. eccles. German. apud Conrad. Schlusselb. tom. 13. p. 666.
Nulla est concedenda gratia adversarijs in mutatione ceremoniarum, nisi prius
nobiscum consentiant in fundamento, hoc est in vera doctrina and vsu
Sacrameutoru^. What mean we (then) for a peace to our own church, to make a
kind of peace with Rome, for that conformity in these ceremonies does make
us to partake with her (according to Gelasius words) it has been showed long
Cap. 1.
since? Is such a peace godly? Suppose it were, it may be well said of this
way there is no peace in it: seeing it is easy to be proved, that uniformity
to popish ceremonies, whether in whole or in part, has continually (like a
fury leaped out of hell) set all in flame and fiery combustion. Nucler.
generat. 22.
Charles the great commands an Uniformity to the Roman order, what a do
this bredde, the complaints of those days testify. Alphon sus the sixth, of
Spain, enioyneth an uniformity to the Gregorian order, what hurly burly it
bredde, the Roderic. Toletan. lib. 6. c 14
records of that age do witness. P. Morn vb. sup.
Venofride an English man (afterward named Boniface) commands in Germany an
uniformity to the Roman order: the resistance of it bredde not civil war,
because Charles Martill did assist him, whom none in that age could match:
howbeit an hott contention it raised up, in which Vergilius Bishopp of
Saltzburg, Clemens Scotus, Sampson, and other great persons suffered great
things: one Albertus dyed in prison for writing against it. Augustine the Monk
commands the christians about Bangor to conform to Rome, which they
refusing, a cruel war is moved against them, as Beda shows. Augustine the
Monk required of them of Bangor (says Beda. hist. gent. A^glor. li. 2. ca. 12.
he) primum vt codem. etc. first that they should observe the Easter the same
time that Rome did. Secondly, that in the administration of Baptisine, they
should use the same rites and ceremonies which the Romans used. Thirdly, that
they should join with them to preach the Gospel genti Angliae. And not only
a total imposing of Roman rites, does breed this mischief, but also a
pressing of them in part thorough a certain kind of mixture. Does not our
Lord him self forewarne us, that peecing of old and new patches together,
makes the breach wider? That mingling old and new wine together, marreth
barrel and all? The first reconciliation made between papists and a church
reformed, was at Basil. 1436. There Rochezana with some other Hussites, yielded
to a certain mixture: they to have their communion under both kinds, and
liberty to be governed by the Senate of Prage, not by the Pope, with some other
few things: and the papists to retain the rest as of old. And what followed
of this mixture? The David Chytreus in praelect. Chronic.
sincerer sort of the Hussites separated them selves into Moravia, Polonia, and
other places where Pontificios ritus omnes plane exploseruut. And whereas the
followers of Rochezana thought hereby to have made their peace with the
papists, that also failed them, because it was not long after, that by the
preaching of Johannes Capistranus, they were reduced to their sub vna again,
and made subject to the tyranny of the Pope. This first conformity and
mixture (then) sped very ill, as failing in that peace which it promised with
the papists, and bringing war into the Church in steed of peace. The
conformity of Germany spedd as ill. Great expectation was there of peace by
the Interim, which notwithstanding brake forth like a fire, not only between
Protestants and papists, but also between the protestant Churches them
selves, just as the sincerer sort of Divines foresawe, and divined would
(questionles) follow upon such mingled compositions. Math. Index in lib. de
gravissimo mandat exeundi de Babylon.
One of them gives many instances: Constantius to have a reconciliation made a
mixture, to wit, homoousios must be turned into homoiousios to concord the
Arrians. Zeno to have peace makes an Henoticon to hushe the strife about the
Council of Chalcedon. Anastasins to accord all parts, establishes an
Amnestia, and commands every one to preach according to the custom of his
place. Heraclius to pacify the hott contention between the Orthodox that held
there were two Wills in Christ, and the Mouothelites that held he had but
one, enioyneth silence to both sides. These mixte conformities (says this
Author) made for peace, made all more war then ever before: which also has
followed of the like forms of late compoundings, such as were the Sphynx
Augustana, compounding matters of Religion, till there were a Council. The
Lypsicum Interim, where Christ and Beliall were made friends: The Pandora
Francofurdiana, and Cothurnus Neoburgicus, where an Amnestia was commanded, ne
dissidentes de quibusdam eapitibus confessionis Augvstanae, se invicem
damnarent. We might come down to the compositions that have at diverse times
been made, between the Lutherans and the Orthodox, which all have sorted to
like issue. Our Reverend Governors may hope (then) to make peace by this
mixture and medly of ceremonies, but little faith can we have hereof, when we
make our prayers for them, and for the public peace of this Church: which who
so loved not from his heart, O let him not prosper.

The Adultery of the Cross. Chap. 7.
THough the sign of the Cross may seem to be free from the sin of
adultery, yet being tried by the seventh commaundment, Romans 1.24.
he will be found guilty for that occasion which it contains of uncleanness.
First it occasioneth adultery, Apoc. 9.20.
in that it is an abominable Idol: it being a just thing with the Lord to
punish the spiritual adultery of the soul, by giving the Idolaters over to
defile their own bodies the Idolaters of the sixth trumpet by name (which are
the Idolaters of the cross) so far to defile them, Apoc. 11.8.
till Rome become as an Egypt for the spiritual, so a Sodom for the bodily
fornication. Secondly, suppose the cross were no Idol, an Idolothite it must
needs be, because it pertaketh of that definition which the Jesuits deliver,
Rhem. in annot. in Apoc. 2. sect. 8.
Though the creature be good by creation, yet does it become an Idolothite,
and is made execrable, by the profane blessings of heretics and of
Idolaters. Now God gives over to adultery, not only for the Idols sake, but
also for the Idolothites, as does appear by two examples. The first is of the
Israelites, who being presented with dainty Josephus Antiquit. lib. 4. c. 6.
dishes, that had been consecrate to Baall Peor, and not refrayning but eating
of them, were left by the Lord to commit uncleanness with Moabs virgins, who
brought these Idolothites to them. The other example is of the Nicholaitans,
number. 25.21 Apoc. 2.14.20.21.
who defiling them selves with meats Idolotious, were likewise by the Lord
relinquished to like uncleanness. Thirdly, the very monument of Idolatry not
detested nor abolished in the service of God, is cursed by him, for that honor
which it gives to foreign Idolatry, and for that occasion which is in it to
home superstition both for the present and for the time that is to come: even
as the doctrine of our own church teaches, which is confirmed by act of
Parliament: To throw out Images though vnworshipped out of the church (in whose
rank we most worthily repose the cross) it reasons thus: Homil. ag. peril
of idolat. p. 1. p. 16.
Usually spiritual and carnal fornication go together. Again, Ibid. p. 3^.
p. 21.
it is very agreeable (as Paul teaches) that they which fall to idolatry,
which is spiritual fornication, should also fall into carnal fornication, by
the just judgment of God, delivering them over to abominable concupiscence.
Again, the Image retained in the church, has annexed unto it (as an Ibid. p.
3. p. 44.
accident inseparable) an Ibid. p. 7.
unavoidable danger of idolatry: as the page 44.
image came unto us from the Gentiles which were idolaters: and as the
invention of them was the beginning of spiritual fornication, so will they
naturally (as it were) and of necessity, turn to the origin from whence they
came, and most violently draw us with them to idolatry. Thus, many ways
does the Cross occasion the fornication of the body, as a just deserved
plague of the adultery of the soul, which he commits as he is an Idol:
with which he partaketh as he is an Idolothite: and which he occasioneth as he
is a monument of Idolatry. Survey the continual execution of this plague from
time to time. First, whereas the papists make Io. Beleth. de divin. offic.
cap. 151.
Heraclius the author of their Idolatry which they commit in the feast of the
Crosses exaltation (although we might prove he adored it not as they do now)
yet omitting this defense we only will them to consider, how little cause they
have to boast of him, seeing the Lord did give him over to commit incest by the
marriage of his Niece: and further punished him with so Sigon. de reg. Ital.
li. 2. an. 629. Genebrad. Chronol. lib. 3. An. 616.
strange a disease; as that when soever he uttered his urine, it sprinkled
his face if a table had not been placed about his navell to drive it back.
Secondly, who are the greatest cross coyners of christendom, but the Popes,
whose open and impious tolleration of the stews ( Mat. Surclin. in Tur co
papism.
3000: Roman harlotts being at one time enrolled in the exchequor book of
Paul the third, that paid yearly tribute to him) shows how unclean they
are in body, to omit perticulars, as the famous Marozia of Sergius: the
Mathildis of Gregory the seventh, the Lucretia of Alexander the sixth: the
Magdalena of Leo the tenth: the Constantia of Paul the third (the three last
of whom were own daughters or sisters: and that which I am ashamed to speak
of the Riarius of Sixtus the fourth: the Germanus of Julius the second: the
Hippolitus of Leo the tenth: and (last of all) Innocentius de Monte, who was
the Ganymed of Julius the third. Thirdly, who are the greatest Crossmongers of
Christendom, but the inhabitants of the Monasteries? who what they were for
uncleanness bodily, some of their own do witness: who report of their Cells,
that they are become Synod. Aquisgran. de ordin. rectotum. c. 12. Aliacus de
reformat. eccles. c. 4. F. Pie. Mirandul in epistol. ad Leon. 1^.
mere stews? Fourthly, who are the chief champions for the Cross, but they
that write for it? of whom Bellarmine belcheth forth his bodily filthiness,
Bellar. de Monach. lib. 2. c. 34
Est maius malum sic nubere quam fornicari: speaking of a Votarie unable to
contain. Martial was a special writer for the Cross: Now he, when he was
Usher Calfh. ag. Mart. art. 5 fol. 129.
of Wincester, caused the boys to know that, which Master Hide scholemaister
there severly punished. In Queen Mary's reign, one being taken in adultery
in red cross street in London, made this excuse when his friends chodde with
him, Idem Art. 8. fol. 156
Yet I thank God I am a good Catholic, I think well of the Sacrament of the
Altar. whose ways I would fewer followed now a days: who amiddest all
enormitie of life, smoth up their consciences with this comfort, Yet I thank
God, I am no puritan, I live in order and obey the laws: For other examples of
the crosses unchastity, I refer my self to one of our Calfh. Ibi.
writers, who does mention them.

The wrong of the Cross. Chap. 8.
FVrther evide^ce may be brought against the ceremonies for the great and
manifold injuries which they offer: they consume many tanqua^ iniecta fauilla,
to use the phrase of the holy Ghost. Exodus 22.6
and can any spa^cle be left lawfully abroad, which may take into the rickes
or into the hedges of other me^, whereby they may be hurt? First, they wrong us
in our subjection to the Bishops, in taking away the power of binding and
loosing from us, by the censures of the church: and all things else that are of
credit and authority, leaving bare laboring in the word unto us: which also
must be limited by them, and referred to them, for they are the Pastors of the
Church (they say) we only are their delegates. This wrong the Greek church
counts not little he that chalengeth this pre-eminence over the Ministers of
the Gospel, under humble tytles of Paternall authority, with the like does
Nilus These salonicens. de Primat. Pap.
verbis magnam humilitatem praese ferentibus magnaraepere: seeing Ministers
Tho. M^t to apolo. p. 1. l. 1. ca. 21.
iure diuino are all equal, and succeed the Apostles all alike: from whom
(also) they receive like power not only for preaching, but also for binding and
for loosing. Secondly, they robb many a worthy and able Minister, in that they
keep him from preferment in the Church, it being theft even in the eyes of
Silvest. Prier. summa silvestrin. in verb. r^stitut.
papists themselves, to keep a man from a benefit whereof he is worthy. To
this it is replied by our adversaries, none is worthy to be preferred, that
cannot conform and like of the ceremonies and of the orders of our church:
which reply will be found Ecclesiam Dei pene vniversam verbis iniuriosissimis,
nequaquam August. epist. 86. ad Casulan.
lacerare timuisse, since all the Ministers of the Churches reformed, who iumpe
in judgment with us. Secondly, it will be replied by some, that in this
complaint of ours, we touch the boil which does indeed grieve us: the whole
quarrel arising, from a coffeehouse, taken for lack of preferment. Here,
what better then Dingenes course? for as his best refutation of one, denying
there was any motion, was to arise himself and move: so now not words, but
deeds are fittest, such as show contrary motions in us: I mean motions of
zeal borne to Gods glory and the Churches good: even to our own prejudice:
such as are these, our refusal of preferment offerred; our walking painfully
in poor livings, our leaving of benefices (as it is called) to keep a good
conscience: our readiness to preach the Gospel eue^ now, although we have no
benefice. And this slander has been too long in the Deck. So it was given
forth of Epiphan. haeres. 30.
Paul, that he turned Christian, because he could not be preferred to the
marriage of the high Priests Daughter. So was it given forth of Acts and
monum. in hist. ^io^.
Wickliefe, he raised a schism because he could not be a Bishop. So is it
given forth against Luther to this hour, that he fell into g apostasy through
disco^tentment, because he could not be preferred. The like imputation lay to
the charge of John Husse and Hierome of Prage, I keep till the last, because
it speaks in the language of this our slander word for word, AEneas Sil. in
Bohem. orig. ca. 35
his and non nulli, etc. there were joined with these two men others famous for
their learning, who because they could not be preferred, grew discontented to
see the greatest benefices bestowed on them, who were inferiors in worth unto
them. Hereupon envy blinded them, not to see what they saw or understand
what they understood: proruperunt in blasphemias, and cum aliquibus ignauis
fortasse and vitiosis maledicere possent in omnes latrare Sacerdotes caepere.
Last of all, this obiecton worst befitteth some of their mouths, who openly
show it is preferment that has made them adversaries to us: for as much as
some times they were with us till advauncement did choke them; so that now they
are feign to take up that of AEneas Siluius respuit AEneam, Balaeus in Pro. 2.
suscipite Pium howbeit, many of them (the Lord blowing upon their dignities
and pluralities) with that success which Alexander the 5. found in his
preferment. Ion. Crispin. in Alexand. 5.
Pauper Episcopus pauperior Cardinalis, pauperrimus Papa. Thirdly, the
ceremonies are guilty of robbery and of theft, in that they have wasted the
goods of many a godly Preacher in unnecessary travel, in suites of Law,
expenses of courts, yea in suspensions, and deprivations from their livings on
which their maintenance did all depend. This if it be not to thrust both with
side and Ezech. 34 21.
shoulder: to beat and Mat. 24.49.
punch a fellow servant: to strike Isai 58.4.
with the fiste of wickedness: and under pretense of a Ier. 29.26
Ichoiadaes zeal to put a rauing and frantic Jeremy in the stocks, I know
not what is? And how many circumstances are there in this wrong and violence
which make it great? First, the persons do exaggerate it, to whom it is
offered. For these amplfications must not be forgotten. 1 Samuel 22 18.
This he did, even to them that wore the Ephod. Do this to honor him, Genesis
20.7
for he is a Prophet. Psalm. 105.15.
Touch not mine anointed, do my prophets no harm. how dare ye do this
against Number. 12.8
my servant, even against my servant Moses? They misvsed his 2 Chronicles. 36.16.
Prophets and despised his Messengers, until there was no remedy: he that
Mat. 10.
despises you, despises me. He added this to all his sin, that he Luke 3.^0
put John into prison. not to be tedious, They drive us away (says 1 These.
2.16.
Paul) and forbidd us to preach that men may be saved to fulfill their sins
always, for the wrath of God is come down on them to the uttermost. It was
said once by Arioaldus an earthly king, [the heavenly King will now say it
much more] Sigon. de reg. Ital. lib. 2. An. 629.
minime fauebo eis qui negotium famulis Dei facessunt. The reason is given by a
Bishop of Rome, Julius Pap. 1. decret. ca. 33.
non vult Dominus tam leuiter suos tractari ministros; Columnas suas firmiter
stare vult, nec a quibuscunque agitari. Secondly, the fault pretended for this
punishment makes this wrong and robbery great. For we plead with David: what
have we done, what evil is in our hands? Or with the later Orthodox
Ministers, ^ Sam. 26.18.
Victor. de persequnt. Vandal.
vt quid taliter affligimur, pro quibus malis forte commissis ista perpetimur?
When our adversaries themselves can lay nothing to our charg: no nor an angry
Judge condemn us for any thing else, then for disvsage of a trifle, even as
themselves confess? what, and is the robbing of the church of worthy
Ministers in this great want, the robbing of the people of their great comfort,
the undoing of sincere Preachers of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, are these I
say trifles also? I fear how they will pass for trifles at that great day,
when it will be in vain to use that gloze of Julian, Theodor. histor. li. 3.
ca. 15.
Not for your conscience do I punish you, but for your obstinacy and
contempt. There was a Bishop not long since living, who misliked his
Chancellor, for excommunicating in light matters. he replied what now is
common, not for the matter, but for the contempt. to whom it was answered
(which now serves for our Apollogie and defense,) to a great contempt is
required [a subiectum eiusdem generis,] to wit, a great offense. Why did the
Vorm atiens. council. can. 13.14.
Council of Worms (I trow) forbid to suspend from the Communion, pro parvis
and leuibus causis? Why did it censure a Bishopp that should so excommunicate,
for one that had passed the bounds omnis sacerdotalis moderationis? was not
the wit then come into the world, which now is grown aged, though the matter
be small, yet the contempt deserves more punishment, then is suitable to the
subject of the crime and fault committed? The Empress Soxom. l. ^ c. 20.
Eudoxia caused Chrysostom to be deposed, for inveighing against the abuses
which were committed at the setting up of her Image, and all ages since have
abhorred her violence. Yet what show of contempt can there be imputed to us,
like that appearance which was in this fact of his? his opposition was in the
Image of the Empress herself: our forbearance in a popish image only. and he
had not so much cause to invaigh against the setting up of the one near to the
Church, but we have more cause against the other, used religiously in Gods
service, and in the very church it self. And make we comparison (once more)
out of a like story. Theodo^. histor li. 5. c. 20.
When the Image of Theodosius his Empress was broken at Antioch, and men of
war were now approaching near the City to revenge it, one Macedonius fell a
board with them in these words: the Emperor must consider, that man is the
Image of God, and therefore more to be tendered then the Image of the Empress:
which also may be repaired again, whereas the Emperor with all his power,
cannot restore so much as one hair of the head, when once it is perished.
These, with the like considerations did appease the Emperor well. but as great
now do plead for us. we break down no Image of our superiors: we only
profess that word of God, that does disable a popish Image, from use
religious in his Church. when yet notwithstanding there are wronged for his sake
the men that bear, more then a common Image of God: because the Ministers of
the Gospel, bear before their several churches, a special Image and
representation, Gal. 4.14.
which deserves they should be received as the Angels of God. yea even as
Christ Jesus. when John, Patriarch Zonoras. in hist. ei^^
of Constantinople pulled out the eyes of the Image of Marie, which in the
reign of Theodora, a whole Sinod had set up, she gives sentence, his eyes
should be pulled out likewise: which, what age has not disliked, although she
executed not the sentence but gave him pardon? But the ceremonies controversed,
(and the cross by name) have even executed eye for eye, tooth for tooth, upon
the preachers many of them: as they have disgraced the cross, so have they
been disgraced themselves. as by the word, they have thrust it out of
Baptisine, so through injustice have they been themselves thrust out from their
ministry and from their flocks, Thirdly, the matter of our punishment
makes the wrong great. It being true what the Thom. Aquin. 2.^. q. 66.
Scholmen teach: The theft is great, when res ablata (though of it self
little) is Chara possessori: or when the possessor or owner is poor, whom a
little (being taken away) does Summa. silvestrin. verb. furt. sect. 4. 5.
multum grauare. even as obolus aliquando is quid magis pauperi, quam aureus
diuiti, that which our Savior backeth, when he affirms, a Mite is as much to
a widow, as a Sehecle to one that is rich. For the first of these, that which
is taken away from us is dear unto us. When Theophilus thrust Chysostome out
of his charge which he had at Constantinople, he Sorom. l. ^ c. 18.
compares him to Pharoes servants, by whose means and incitation Abraham had
his Wife taken from him. Paul, 1 These. 2.17.
when the Jews of Thessalonica drove him away from the Church that was there,
he compared himself to an Orphan that had lost (as it were) his Father. So
that when the Cross bereaveth us of our flocks, there is a man bereaved of
his Wife: a child be reaved of his Father whom he loves: when it reaveth us of
our ministry, more is done then even animae dimidia pars is torn, rent, sawed
of from our bodies. As for the latter, the Cross and the cemonies take away
from us, what does multum grauare. for we are poor men; and that one benefice
which it takes away, is all the 2 Samuel 12.3.
sheep we had, and there with sustained we our Deuteronomy. 24.6.
lives: and now it is gonne, there comes in place wherewith shall we be ver.
15. Deuteronomy. 20.5.6.
covered? God so desires a man should have comfort in his own, that to go
home and eat of his vineyarde and dwell in his house, he is to be freed from
the war which is a service of the church, whereas the cross even to the
hinderance of the churches service, takes from us all comfort in the blessings
wherewith the Lord and not man had blessed us, and for which he is so careful
we should enjoy them. And the infamy which does accompany this great wrong,
must not be pretermitted. When Nehemiah would exaggerate the oppression of his
time: nehem. 5.9
Ought we not (says he) to live in the fear of God, because of the Cananites
our enemies? In like manner, ought not this to have stayed the hand of the
crosses revengers, that there be papists and libertines amongst us, that will
not only nodd the head, but also clappe the hand? And the papist has great
Bilkingto^. in epist. ad Comitem Leycestr.
cause given him to see his ceremonies (as he takes them) to find such
friendshipp: and he and the Libertine has this common cause of hatred, which
feeds it self in the sight of our ruin, 1 Samuel 18.7
Are not, these they of whom men say, they have slain their ten thousand of
us?

#Sect. 2. Unjust manner of proceeding and oath ex officio. etc. just causes of
complaint.
FOurthly, the manner unjust of proceeding against us, does exaggerate this
wrong of ours not a little. Where first we complain of the oath ex officio:
howbeit not first of all. we only renew the ancient complaint of John
Lambert, an holy Martyr of Gods truth. It Act. and monum. pa. 1022.
pittieth me (says he) to hear and see, what is used in some of our nation:
and such (also) as name them selves spiritual men, and should be head
Ministers of the church. who incontinent as any man comes before them, anon
they call for a book, and do move him to swear, without any longer respite.
yea and will charge him by virtue of the contents in the Evangelie, to make
true relation of all that they shall demand him. First we take this course to
be against the law of Nature it self registered in the civil law, Nemo
tenetur accusare seipsum: or, as the foresaid Lambert cites it, prodere
seipsum, to betraye him self. The Canon law has received some light hereof,
inrowling the oath of Sixtus the third, with this provisoe, Decret. p. 2.
causa. 2. q. 5. c. 10.
licet evadere satis aliter potuissem, suspicionem tamen fugiens, coram omnibus
me purgavi. sed non alijs qui noluerint, aut sponte hoc non elegerint, faciendo
forma^ exemplumque dans. Gratian (though much injurious in this case) is
constrained to gather from hence this observation, ecce qualiter. etc. See how
the chief Bishop purges Ibid. ca. 18
him self by oath, and yet prescribes no necessity of the like course to
others. Whence we are given to understand, that satisfaction of purgation by
oath, rests in the will of the accused, not in the will, choice, or pleasure
of the Judge. The ancient practice perverted not this natural equity, as
appears by an ancient Co^il. Neocaesar. cap. 9.
Council speaking of a Minister fallen into some sin, quod si de se non
fuerit confessus, and argui manifest nequiverit, potestatis suae iudicio
relinquatur. Secondly, this makes a breach upon the order which God has
settled and appointed in his providence, which Paul presses as an order, 1 Timothy 5. vlt
to which the Presbytery ought of duty to submitt them selves, in judicial
proceeding against Elders and Ministers. When he says, some men's faults are
manifest, and these are to be brought unto judgment. other men's faults are
secret, and these God has reserved unto him self, to follow after judgment.
The practice of ancient times fought not against this providence of the Lord,
as now the oath ex officio does: Decret p. 2. cause. 15. q. 6. c. 1.
Non potest humano condemnari examine, quem Deus suo reservabit iudicio.
Confessio in talibus extorqueri non debet, sed potius sponte profiteri.
Pessimum. n. est, de suspitione, aut extorta confessione, quenquam iudicare.
Again, Ibid. cause. 2. q. 5. c. 20
spontanea confessione vel testium approbatione publicata, delicta habito prae
oculis Dei timore commissa sunt regimini nostro iudicare. occulta vero and
incognita illi sunt relinquenda, qui solus novit corda filiorum hominum.
Gratian co^menting hereupon, affirms that purgation by oath is inhibited, by
this authority of the Pope, by which no man must be compelled to confess
against him self, but the confession must be voluntary, that must condemn a
man. Again. Adultery is not to be punished nisi flagitium detegatur. If it
cannot be proved, all judgment cease, Innocen. 1 epist. 3. ad Exuper.
Tholoss. c. 4.
non habent latentia peccata vindictam; probatione cessante, vindictae ratio
conquiescit. Last of all: Synod Rhemens. can. 19.
Episcopi and iudices iudicia discernant, quia sunt quaedam iudicanda modo
quaedam Dei iudicio reservanda. Thirdly, the oath ex officio fights directly
against Gods word: who requires two or three witnesses unto every lawful
eviction and condemnation. This holds in the Elder and in the Minister
especially: against others an accusation may be received, if the accuser will
bind himself to trial, but the Minister has this privilege, that it must be
tried before hand, whether there be two or three witnesses or no before his
name be called in to question. For this is the sense of those words Receive
not an accusation against an Elder under two or three witnesses. In deed the
governing Elder has this privilege by this place: 1 Timothy 5.
the preaching Elder is here meant by our Opposites own confession. And this
has been aunciently practiced. Council. Bracharen. 2. ca. 8.
Placuit vt si quis aliquem clericorum in accusatione fornicationis impetit,
secundum praeceptum Pauli Apostoli, duo vel tria testimonia requirantur ab
illo. quod si non potuerit (datis testimonijs) approbare quod dixit,
exco^municationem accusati, accusator accipiat. Again, Julius 1. cont.
Oriental. pro Athanas. c. 30.31.
when a Minister is to he judged, the proceeding must not slightly pass:
nothing must be done till the accuser come in place: none must go further then
the libell of the accusation which is put up, the rest must be reserved to Gods
judgment. man must not de illis quae ei inconcessa sunt, vllo modo iudicium
praesumere. What oath ex officio here? for the accusation is not so much as
received, till the accuser him self come in place, no captious interrogatories
are here proposed after he is come, beyond the libell of accusation, which he
did put up: and if proof fail to make good the libell, the minister remains
untouched: yea without any oath of his own he is sent away cleared, and the
accuser only is stayed behind to be punished for his slander. Thus the Canon,
Decret. p. 2. cause. 2. q 5. c. 1.3.
Nos sacramentum Episcopis nescimus oblatu^, nec vnquam fieri debet, nisi pro
recta fide. If a minister of old was put to his oath only in the causes of
faith, then now they swerue from ancient practice, who put ministers to there
oaths ex levi C 4.
causa, which the canon by name condemns, as upon some light suspicion, or
perchance some fancy only of their own heads: of which we may reply, as one
did once at the Council of Chalcedon, Chalcedonens. Council. act. 15. p. 183.
Praesbyter sum, and cogitis me iurare? Howbeit, they break the bounds which
the ancient Fathers pight much more, who so lift up and exalt them selves above
their brethren, as they use them worse then servants, who notwithstanding have
fellowship with the^ in the gospel. for is not this in criminal causes an
ancient decree, Council. Epaunens. can. 39.
de peccatis vero, vel quocunque opere, placuit a dominis iuramenta no^ exigi?
Is it not now thought sufficient, that they are our lords who put us to our
oaths, there being now no consideration taken whether we be their servants or
fellows? sure if in case we be slaves to the^ if we had lived in elder times
we should not in criminal matters have been thus used. How be it, the
indignity here rests not. their Canonical Lordship over us is so far
stretched, as that their ill conceit of us is sufficient prejudice against us.
It must be thought they will accuse none, but such as are guilty: which as it
makes way to the Spanish Act and monu p. 849.
Inquisition, into whose proceedings none must inquire, when they accuse good
me^ without more witnesses the^ themselves, which are unknown to the party
accused, upon supposal they cannot err so it offends against the contrary
justice practiced of old, Vacens. Council. cap. 7.8.
si quis Episcopus aliquem de crimine putet esse damnandum, accusatoris vice
discutiendum se sciat: Fas est enim vt quae vni probantur, probentur ab
omnibus: quod si tantum alieni sceleris se conscium novit, quamdiu probare non
potest, nihil proferat sed cum ipso ad compunctionem eius secretis
correptionibus elaboret. It follows in the Canon, that if the private
admonitions of the Bishops be contemned, what, that he should be bewrayed by
an oath? No such matter. only pro persona maioris authoritatis, he is to
abstain from the communion of the Bishopp him self: in the communion of all
others he still enjoys, until somewhat be proved against him. This course is
confirmed by times auncienter then this Council. Damasus epist. 6. ad Episcop.
^^al.
Christus ludam furem esse sciebat, sed quoniam non est presenttaliter
accusatus, ideo non est eiectus. nec vos vllo modo agere oportet, quod ille
noluit facere. Leges enim saculi accusatores presents exigunt, and non per
scipta absentes: Nullus (igitur) iudicetur, antequam legitimos accusatores
presents habeat. But there is alleged to prove this oath ex officio lawful
by the word, the oath to which the adultresse was put in Moses law. touching
this, let the world understand, that Decret. p. 2. Cause. 2. q. 5. ca. 21.
Gratian him self, though he cite this oath, yet rests not in it, neither
thinks it sufficient to approve in criminal matters any enforcement of an
oath upon a party that is suspected, against his will. In deed who sees not
that this law was not moral, but judicial: not general but particular to
the policy of the Jews? and that upon particular cause, to wit, the inborne
jealousy of that Nation which could not otherwise be appeased? Exodus 22.12
Besides, though in matters of controversy about goods, there was an oath
allowed, yet in what criminal matter besides this of adultery? Once more, If
our Opposites will have this law to authorize an oath ex officio in matters
criminal for purgation, then may they minister by the same an oath also in
causes of death: for, adultery (as it is known) was death by Moses law. Now
this seems to be even more then can be warranted by the example of the Act.
and ^^n. vb. supra.
Spanish inquisition it self. Sure example in the scripture we have none of it
but that of Caiphas, adiuring our Lord in the name of the living God. Matthew.
26.6^.
Upon which, let the Interpretours be consulted withal, they Bera. homil.
ibid.
will tell us how tyrannous such an adiuration is. We read in the Canon
Decret. p. 2. Cause. 2. q. 5. ca. 11.
Law, of one called Guillandus a priest, suspected to have killed his
Bishop. Touching whom the order taken is, that si certi accusatores
defuerint, that he should be restored to his Ministry, and to his Benefices,
although he was very vehemently grown infamous about the fact. Fourthly, The
oath ex officio, perverteth the duty of a righteous oath, which Master Act.
and mon. p. 1021. 1022
Lambert stood upon when he was examined about the oath ex officio, whether he
thought it lawful or no. It is not lawful (says he) for a man to swear when
a man knows not what they will demand of him, or whether it be lawful to
show them the truth of their demaundes or no. or whether the matter will
bear an oath, or if it will, whether there be no other means left to bowlt
out the truth. Judges have need to be spare in requiring of oaths: for in
customable taking of oaths, and that for every tryfle creapeth in betwixt times
some perjury or other. If the Judge require an oath in lawful and convenient
manner, as in controversies which can not otherwise be decided betwixt
neighbor and neighbor, I think my self bound to swear: but if he put me
to mine oath to bewraye my self, or to bewraye any other, this being contrary
unto charity, I count it inexpedient to hold me still. When the Ministers of
victor. de persecut. Vandalic.
Aphric were tendered such an oath as this, Nunquid bruta irrationalia (said
they) nos putatis, vt iuremus nescientes quid charta contineat? The oath ex
officio (then) we cannot take with reverence. Fifthly, the oath ex officio
perverteth the law and justice of all nations, times and countries. This Ap^d.
Plin li. 10. epist 98.
Traian sine authore propositi libelli nulla crimina locum habere debent. nam
and pessimi exempli, nec nostri saculi est. By the civil Digest. lib
law, there is no proceeding till some accuser has bound him self to pursue
the accusation. The Decret. page 2. cause 23. quest. 4
Canon law which is ancient, follows the same course, peccata quae publicis
iudicijs deseruntur punienda non sunt. The Canone^ Synedor. collect. p Adrian.
tom. Con^^li^r. 3.
Counsels that be ancient take the same course, there must be an accuser
present before any thing be done. When the accuser presents him self, Sixth.
3. in epist. ad Episcop. Oriental.
scribat se prius probaturum. without this course criminationes adversus
doctorem nemo recipiat. The Fathers are of the same judgment, Am^^^ o^. in
epist. 1. ad Corint. c. ^.
si quis potestatem non habet quem scit reum eijcere aut probare non valet,
immunis est. and iudicis non est sine accusatore damnare, quia and Dominus
Iudam, and cum fur esset quia non est accusatus, minime abiecit. Thus we see,
till the Church was corrupted, the oath ex officio in matters criminal, had no
access nor entrance. One of the first Council. Ilardens. tom. 2. p. 357.
Counsels that ordained purgation by oath, is late: and it requires this
oathe to be taken, because Leo the Pope had so purged him self before in the
presence of Charles the great. Hence we may gather the first rising of the oath
ex officio, how preposterous it was: Some voluntarily took an oath to purge
them selves, and by their example future times brought in a necessity:
contrary to the provisoe taken by Decret. p. 2. cause. 2. q. 5. c. 18.
Leo him self and Sixtus the third, who forbadd (as we heard before) that any
should bring in any necessity by his example: who, if he swore for his own
purgation, he did it voluntarily and of his own accord, without any meaning
to bind others to the like. There is a Council Council. A gathens. tom. 1. p.
716.
somewhat higher then this, that puts a Minister to his oath of purgation,
but it is after that his parish have come in and taken an oath that he is
publicly infamous, ne populus in eo scandalum patiatur. but what is this to
the oath ex officio, which now is tendered to us? Howbeit, the fountain of
this oath for purgation in common infamy, is neither so ancient, nor so
clear: it first came in ex superabundanti, as we may perceive by Gregor. ^. 2.
indict. 1^. epi. 2^
Gregory, who in the common infamy of one Leo, caused him to swear upon the
Relics of Saint Peter ex abundanti: that so no doubt or any scruple might
remain. The fondness of the times, when the oath ex officio first arose, as
it plainly appears by this superaboundance mentioned, so by another
superadded unto this: when an oath was not believed, he was put to an other
kind of purgation, ferventi aqua, vel candenti ferro se expurget, says
Decret. p. 2. cause. 2. q. 5. c. 15.
one of the Counsels. This course continued long, as may appear by an after
Synod, Synod. Mogont. sub Rabba^ c. 14
servus per 12. Vomeres ferventes se purget: till Gen^brar. chronolog l. 4. in
An. 892.
Steven the sixth forbadd the trial both of hott water and of hott iron, about
the year eight hundredth ninety and two. And the oath ex officio for purgation
had more fellows then either the Relics of Saint Peter, or this hott and
burning iron. for the same superstition that brought it in, brought in
Monomachie also. which was to try a matter in controversy by the sight of two
men. Lotharius was he that devised this way of purgation, not believing the
oath of Theuperga his wife, he would try whether she were chaste or no by the
fight of two men. But this was forbidden by the Decret. vb. sup. c. 22.
decree of Nicholas. An other companion of the oath ex officio for purgation
escaped better, which was to go to Mass and to receive the body of Christ, in
these words, Ibid. c. ^3.
corpus Domini sit mihi ad probationem hodie. Sixthly, the oath ex officio is
against the law of this Land: it grew first by the Statute of 2. Henry the
fourth, cap. 15. made for the punishment of Lollards, that is to say, of true
christians. which Master Fox in his book of Martyrs, in regard of that
proceeding ex officio, calls a cruel law, a bloody law, a law of
Maximinus. The statute of 25. Henry the eight, cap. 14. in that blind time
brandeth it with this mark, that the Ordinaries of this Realm were wont to
examine upon captious interrogatories. Besides, it stands not with the
justice of our Land, that any person should be convict, or put to the loss of
his life, goods, or good name, but by due accusation and witness, or by
presentment, verdict, confession, or process of outlawrie. How can it be
reasonable (then) that any Ordinary by any suspicion conceaved in his own
fantasy, without due accusation or presentment, should putt any subject of
the Realm, unto any infamy or slander of heresy, to the peril of life, or
loss of goods, etc. Note also, that by this Statute 25. of King Henry the
eight, c. 19. no Canons, Constitutions, or Ordinances, may be put in ure within
this Realm that are repugnant to the K. prerogative, or to the customs,
laws, or statutes of this Realm. So that, the laws of the land being
against the oath ex officio, no canon or constitution can hold it in. I omit
what the The humble perit. to Q. Eliz. p. 25. 62. 67. out of Crompt. 182.
Firzharb de nature. bre. p. 41. Regist. p. ^6. Rastal. pro. 5.
learned of the Laws have collected of this point. proving that the law of
the land tendereth no oath but in causes Matrimonial and Testamentarie only.

#Sect. 3. The violence of subscription justly complained off as most unjust.
SEcondly, Sect. 3.
we complain of the violence which is showed us in the emforcing of
Subscription. little less then that which Council. Chalcedo^. act. 1. p. 68.
Dioscorus afferred to the Bishops of his time. For though we fall down before
them and contest as they did then, noli per vestigia reverentiae vestrae, yet
are we exclaymed upon (as he cried out on them) seditionem mihi mouetis, da
commites. neither can we appease them, unless for fear we subscribe, as they
for fear subscribed to him. It will be the Law which here they will plead:
which suppose it were with them, what vizard have they gotten better then that
of Vlpian, Caesar. Baron. annal. anno 225.
Qui in libro quem scripsit de officio pro Consulis, cuncta qua valuit adversus
Christianos statuta, collegit. quo se in eos ture agere non impetu animi
demonstraret. Now this covers not their violence, as long as we are able to
replye with Lactantius li. 5. c. 11.
Lactantius, their constitutions together with the disputations of those
Lawyers that prostitute their help unto them, are unjust. Howbeit, what if the
Law be (indeed) with us, the violence which they offer against us in this
behalf, be a violence offered against the very laws them selves. For when the
statute Statut. 13 Eliza. c. 12
requires subscription with this exception to The articles of religion which
[onely] concern the confession of the true christian faith and the doctrine of
the Sacraments, the word [only] must needs exclude somewhat, which what can it
be but matter of ceremony and of Church-governement. to which the honorable
state of the Parliament would bind no man, because they saw them
controversed, not only by private men, but also by whole churches? Now it is
not unknown that our Reverend Fathers require a subscription not only to Faith
and Sacraments, but also to the Discipline, communion book, ceremonies and
all things else, so imposing articles of their own, which no subject by the
law is permitted to do. I say of their own notwithstanding the Canon. For
seeing the statute law is against it, no Statut. 25 of H. 8. c. 19.
canon, no constitution ecclesiastical can make it good. Howsoever, seeing
diverse Ministers have been repelled, and deprived that offered to subscribe
iuxta formam Statuti, so far forth as the law of the land does bind them,
it sufficiently appears we are denied the benefit of law, and that a
transcendent power above the law has been claymed, whereby to wrong us. And
what will be said to this, that if we were bound by the law to subscribe as
they would have us, that then we must subscribe against the cross in baptism.
For they will have us to subscribe unto the books of Homilies which are
established by act of Parliament, and to acknowledge no doctrine is contained
in them, but that which is sound and true, whereas we are able to prove plainly
by the principles that are contained partly in the homily against the peril
of Idolatry, partly in the homily for Whitsentyde which handles baptism,
that no room ought to be for the cross in the service of God, or in the
sacrament of Baptism, as has been showed in several places of this treatise.
Thirdly, we complain that we are put out from our benefices, which are
freeholdes, by the bare and sole sentence of a Bishopp; whereas the liberty of
an English man is this, to be put from his Magna Charta. c. 29.
free-holde by none, but by the verdict of 12. men. And as we are wronged by
the bare and sole sentence, so also by the mere will and sole pleasure of a
Bishop. What law have they else? For the Statute of Eliz. the 1. punishes no
bare omission with obstinacy and contempt of any one rubric of the service
book, especially in them who receive the whole body of it, so far forth as
a book of man's framing may be received. to omit that the book for which we
are punished now is not that communion book which the Statute of Eliza. does
establish but a new one, a diverse one, a different one. which when it was
afferred to the most honorable Court of Parliament to be confirmed, it was
refused, rejected, cast out and disannulled. Consider these things a while,
and then ask of thy self, why does not a Crozier staff appear in the
hands of a Bishopp, as well as the cross in Baptism: since the law Ordinat.
minist. Anglican. ap. Bucer. rubric. vltim. in the book of ordayning Minist. p.
65.
requires the one as well as the other? Is it because there is a meaning not to
use that gentle direction which the upper end betokens, but that rigor
which the lower end does signify, according to the ancient verse, Durant
d^rit li. 2. c. 9 sect. 40.
curva trahit quos recta regit, pars vltima pungit. In Russia the bacculus
pastoralis is cruciatus, whereof our Governors should not be ashamed, as long
as they love so well as they do the cross in Baptism But if they may spare
them selves at their pleasure, though they spare not us, yet (me thinks) it
can not but be hardly done of them to keep the Staff of this crozier still in
their hands for a trunchion wherewith to strike and beat their fellows. The
bird in the Act. and monu pa. 374.
parable of Johannes de Rupe scissa is deplumed by those who first clothed her
with her gay feathers, when in the pride of them she began with her beak to
punge and to tear with her talants. If our Reverend Fathers cease not to
punche us, and to tear us as they begin, it is the duty of every true
christian, Ezech. 3^.16.
to give the Lord no rest in his prayer, until he remember his merciful
promise to judge between the fatt and lean of his flock. And this we trust
he will do in due time, against their expectation: who according to ancient
hypocrisy, Isai 66.5.
look for a [blessing] from the Lord notwithstanding they thrust [out] as if
the whole fault were in us, who for such small matters as these, incur our
own vndoeing. But this is to mock both with God and with man: and that
somewhat like to Socrat. histor. lib. 3. cap. 12.
Julian (if I be not deceived) who when he had impoverished the christians,
laughed at them as at fools, because they would impoverishe them selves to
have the blessing which their Master gives to the poor, Now who are we to
be thus conformed unto the first begotten of God, who are now in heaven? as
now it is said to us, what great matter is it to make a cross, to put on a
Surplice: so was it said of old to them, what great matter is it to swear n
by Caesar? Nay we are herein conformed to our Lord him self, for so it was
said to him, truth, what is truth? John 18.38
Is that such a matter to be stood on? Is he wise that will cast away him self
for truth? And so much of the sin of the ceremonies against the 8.
commaundment.

The Slander of the Cross. Chap. 9.
Our ninth indictment against the ceremonies is the shame and defamation, which
they throw upon our church and upon sundry members of it, against the ninth
co^maundment. First, they defame our church before the papist, whose badges
they are. For seeing they make us like the spiritual Egypt Rome, Apoc. 11.8.
as the foreskin uncircumcised, Iosu^ 5.9.
likened the Israelites to the earthly, they must needs prove to be a shame
of Rome to us, as that was A shame of Aegipt to them: in regard whereof, we
must humbly beseech our Iosuahs to take them from us. Ioh. Drusius in Prov^rb.
Bo^. Sirae.
Qui honorat contemnentes se, similis est A sino, says the proverb of the
Jews, how base (then) do the Ceremonies make us, honoring the papist, by
wearing his cognizance when he scorneth to communicate with us, in the least of
all our rites and Ceremonies? Secondly, these Ceremonies do disgrace us,
before our brethren of the reformed churches. Is it not much, not to be able to
hold up the face before a brother? But now the Cross disableth us, to hold up
our crossed foreheades, before our brethren of other churches, who write it
amongst the marks of the beast. Sam. 1.22
Look (then) with what shame the Armenian army looked on their brethren, when
they came home with faces marked with the enemies Magdeburg. centur. 7. col. 92.
ink, and with no less do we look on them, because it is with the enemies
cross that we are blatched. Nemo est signandus in front (says the Cod. l. 9.
^it. 47. c. 17
civil Law) quia non debet facies hominis ad similitudinem Dei formata
fadari. we call for the equity of this Law. Be it that the cross in intent be
the sign of our Emperor: the forehead of a christian man must not be in
baptism defiled with any sign devised by man. but (alas) he is the sign of
Antichrist our Emperors enemy, which none will deny but that it defiles, and
that with the deepest stayne. From this dishonouring of our church before our
friends and enemies, come we to the defamation wherewith the Ceremonies stain
the principal members of it: making the very ancient vile. Mal. ^.3.
For has not God (true of his threat) cast this dounge into the faces of the
reverent Fathers themselves of this Church, that abroad amongst them that dare
to judge, they are held little better then Adiaphoristes, and the persecutors of
their brethren? Now the time was, when ^lmar. har borough of faithful subiect^.
one that after became a Bishop joined Adiaphoristes and Sattanistes together.
the more is it to be wished that every good and godly Bishop would be
careful, to avoid that imputation of Adiaphorisme which the similitude (if
not identitie) of these Ceremonies, pseudoadiaphoricall will otherwise (at
least in show) still cast upon them. But whether the ceremonies besprincle our
reverend Fathers or no, sure it is they plou^g the preachers over head and
ears: who what have they not heard for their sakes even from them who were
more bound to cover our faults with their rotchets, then Th^^dor. histor. l.
1. ^. 11.
Constantine was to cover the adultery of a Minister with his people.
Sacerdotum exorbitationes vulgo innotessere non oportet (said he) the reason is
given by a general Council, Chalcedonens. act. 3. p. 117.
delicta sacerdotu^ communis est turpitudo. Now we have against this rule
without all cause been termed Answ to the petir. of the M. by the Vice Chaunt.
and the doct. 10 pretat.
Puritans and Donatistes: been pinioned with Barrowistes, yea Anabaptists: yea
Familistes: been accused of singularity in our selaes, of schism in the
church, of sedition in the common wealth. The Lord rebuke thee Satan: yea, the
God of heaven rebuke thee in these lewd slaundes. For, are we puritans (first
of all?) No more then the Waldenses were, our predecessors in the faith: who
yet were termed Lambert. Dane. here is. 38. p. 96.
Cathari of old: and are now surnamed puritans by the papists. No more neither
then Master Rogers the proto Martyr, or Bishop Hooper that glorious Martyr
were: who yet to this day are Parsons in his convers. of Engl.
renouned for the puritans of their times. Howbeit, it was after the sect of
the Nouatians that they werd esteemed puritans: we after the sect, Genebrar.
lib. 4 in An. 1100.
of the Anabaptists which are far worse. And according to that ougly
description of a puritan in the Quodlibets; one monster of which shape where
will the author be able to find out of the Vtopia of his own brain? And they
were termed puritans by their en imies, we by our brethren and our friends;
whom God for give, for what have they done? First, whereas this odious name
was first brought up by the Saunders de monarc. Eccles. lib. 5. c. 4 Genebrar.
Chronolog. lib. 4. An. 1^60.
papists, of purpose to make our religion odious, as if it were the vomit of
those dogs to spitt it maliciously into our faces: who as little have
deserved it as themselves. Secondly whereas our writers, to clear our religion
from the infamy of division, which the papists do object, aver and avouch,
there is no D. Whitak in praefat. ag. W. Reynold. Matthew. Sutcliu. in answ. to
the humb. moti. for tollerat.
sect of puritans in the land, and prove this Ioh. Reynold. de Idololat. in
epist. ad Anglic-Seminar. sect. 5.
nick name does but fill up the old reproach of the christians termed Nazareni,
Physici, Homousiani, Eustachiani, Machariani, with the like: these spare not to
give them the lie justifying the untrue slander of the Jesuits and the
papists: and little careing though it be our religion it self, that is thus
wounded thorough our sides. Thirdly, where as the papists count all to be
Concertatio. Eccles. Catholic. in Anglia. concra-Caluino papistas. and
puritanos.
Caluino papistae, that is half papists that are not puritans: and daily
invite them to an association with them against the puritans: in Humble. mot.
for tollerat. Cant. 5.7.
consideration they can never hold out against them with out their help, or
stand in argument but upon their grounds and principles, these are contented
in giving way to this nicke-name of puritans against us: to give way also to
that other name or rather shame of Caluino-papistes or protestant papists
against them selves. Fourthly whereas this nicke name of puritans serves for a
color in eperie papists and Atheistes mouth to rail at religion and all
honesty under neathe the name of puritanisme, whereby it is come to pass that
zeal has her veil of holiness taken from her, and walks at this day
disguised (as it were) in an harlots habit, these notwithstanding keep this
vile name on foot, as if it were a small thing with them to see piety, zeal,
religion trodd under foot. Fifthly, whereas for the better nourishing of
concord, it was thought fit in the beginning Admonit. added to the book of
iniunce
of Elizabethes reign that none should use the odious name of papist and
protestant, but that every man should be acknowledged to be a good subject that
did acknowledge her highness Supremacy: they who uphold these names of
protestants and puritans (names sauouring of debate and division more
pernicious then the former) considering we acknowledge his Majesty's Supremacy
as for forth as themselves, they are to be held by the affore said admointion,
for disturbers of public peace. Sixthly as the Hugonotes were transformed in
France by the friars who made the people believe they were monstres with asses
ears and swines faces with the like, so are we transformed from our selves
before these who know us not, when we are described as puritans, a sect most
vile and monstrous. They Eusebius. lib. 6 cap. 35.
affected the name of puritans out of an opinion that they were pure. They
called themselves Hieron. in Hos. c. 14.
catharous idest mundos cum sint omniu^ immundissimi. Cathari sunt (says
Augustine) qui seipsos isto nomine quasi propter munditiem August. hercs. 38.
superbissime, atque odiosissime nominant. Decipiebant seipsos cathari
haeretici, (says Tholossan li. 13. de republ. c. 1.
another) qui haberi volebant alijs sanctiores, despicientes alios: quique
propter munditiem, catharos se nominabant: gloriantes de suis meritis. In
regard hereof we turn our selves first to the papist (the first deviser of
this name) giving him to understand, that he is (indeed) the right puritan him
self, in that he holds his church to be pure, Decret. p. 1 distinct. 21 c. 3.
non habens maculam, neque rugam, nec aliquid huiusmodi: and thinks he can
Bellarmin. l. 4. de Eccles. milit.
perfectly keep the law and be Bellaromin. de iustificat li. 4. ca. 10. etc.
pure from sinning against it: and trusts (lastly) in his merits Next we
turn our selves unto our Opposites: whom we put in mind, to follow the
steps of those who are famous in the Gospel: who turn this Tho. Morton
apolog p. a. l. 1. c. 29.
nicke-name of puritanes upon the papists who deserve it. But if any beso
malicious as to turn it upon us, we wish him to appease his malice, to
consider with him self and duly meditate both what an odious name it is that
he does give us, and what an odious malice it is for any to give it, to them
(especially) who least deserve it. To be a puritan is to be a new Pharisie in
Ribera in Hebreos. c. 6. Number. 11.
Nazianzenes judgment. To be one of the puritanes, is to be one of the
heretics called Tho. Morron apolo. p. 1. li. 2. cap. 20.
Essei, who were so called quasi (...) id est sancti. Yea, it is to be one of
the Anabaptists, who think they live an holy, perfect, and Apostolical life.
None but August. de here is. c. 46.
Manichees will call them selves puritanes. who have affected this name of
purity, since the days of Novatus, save only they? And will any man have the
conscience to call us Pharisees, Esses, Manichees? if they will, we must not
think much to be as our Master was, howbeit, we contest in the mean season
the God of heaven, even the good God of heaven knows, and all Israel
knows, yea our very adversaries I am persuaded, and our accusers, even they
them selves, they know the contrary. In the third place, we beseech our
Governors, to renew amongst us, Genesis 1.19.
if not the state of innocence when every name was according to nature, yet
the estate of that happy government which does provide that the name of every
man be answerable to his desert: Isai 32.5. Isai 33.15.
so that neque flagitioso amplius induatur nomen ingenui, neque tenax dicatur
liberalis. which then will be done, when informations of things manifest be
judged by knowledge, and not by the hearing of the ear: and suggestions of
things secret by those our demeanours which are manifest: according to the
ancient rule, Tertul. Apologer. c. 3.
iustius est occulta de manifestis preiudicare, quam manifesta de occultis
praedamnare. In the fourth place, we beseech our brethren, who are opposed
against us puritanes, as Calvino-papistes or half papists, and who are daily
called upon to associate with the papists them selves against us, that they
would bethink them selves whether some thing has not ben done by them which is
not well, seeing they please the papists so well in this their Opposition to
us, even as Hiper. de sacr. stud. p. 106.
Photion was wont always to be jealous of him self when he saw he had
pleased the people: and Antistines ever suspected ne quid imprudens mali
fecisset quando placuisset malis. Placui noverca? says Hippolitus. What have
ye pleased Rome (my brethren) the stepmother of all piety? Et haec sponsi
iniuria est expectare placituram. this cannot be done without injury to your
husband Jesus Christ, that his corrivall should look for love or liking from
you. Pereat. Caesar. Baron. Annal. in an. 304.
corpus (said this holy Martyr Agnes) quod amari potest occulis quibus nolo.
Away with these cercmonies (say you) which are beloved of their hearts which we
would not should love them. Last of all, of our brethren in Christ, which are
of the Laytie, we heartily crave, that now at the last they would take knowledge
of our innocence, and wisely consider whether papists be so unwise, as either
to love them best who do help them least, or to hate us most who do them
least hurt, If you can evict us of puritanisme, spare us not: if you cannot,
then remember what the ancient Christians pleaded, Tertul in Apologet. ca. 7.
in Ibid. c. 8
aut eruite si creditis, aut nolite credere qui non cruistis. Shall it suffice,
that by this name you often hear us inveighed against: answer you your selves,
m famae nemo credit nisi inconsideratus: quia sa piens non credit incerto. What
that the contumely of a nicke name is amongst all other reports, the most
unworthy to be believed, even as the same our Fathers contested, Ibid. c. 3.
nomen expugnatur, vox sola predamnat: quia nominamur, non quta reuincimur. But
if other nicke-names were worthy of some credit, yet not this which uses to
report well of us even while it does slander us: for thus runs the common
saying, he were an honest man, it he were not a puritan. as once the nickname
of the Christians spoke, Bonus vir Caius Saius, sed malus tantum quod
Christianus: tanti non est bonum esse quanti est odium Christianorum.

#Sect. 2. Seekers of Reformation, neither Donatistes, nor Anabaptists, with
neither of whom they have any thing to do.
THE second slander of the ceremonies accuses us for Donatistes, Sect. 2.
whom the Anabaptists revive. with either of whom what have we to do? For
besides that we make no separation, as they did then, and these do now, we are
as far both from their judgment and from their practice as our accusers.
This (then) is the same slander, that the ceremonistes of David Chytre. in
prefect. Chroni^.
Boheme raised against their sincere and faith full brethren that would not
conform* for even so they brought upon them, that they were Donaristes*
whereof they easily cleared them selves, as soon as they came to hearing.
Now the first position of the Donatistes was, That the Church is pure without
spott and without wrinckle in this life: and whereas Christian Churches
tolerated infamous men, advaunced also one Caecilian accused of relapse, they
held it their duty to separate from them, as being no true churches.

I see here a perfect image of the Brownistes and of the Anabaptists, but not
so much as any liniament of any English Protestant Preacher that is desirous of
reformation. And in our understanding, our accusers draw more near to this
error then we do. For whereas Doctor Whitguift accuses Master Cartwright
for an Anabaptist, in that he held the Church might be perfect for the outward
co^stitution of Discipline in points essential, me thinks he takes them by
the nose who hold that the Church of England is so pure, so perfect, as that
nothing, nothing at all needs to be reformed in it. Secondly, The Donatistes
held, the Magistrate might not compel to Godlynes, nor punish hereticques:
and because they were punished themselves by the Law of Arcadius and
Theodosius, therefore they barked at the Magistrate, (the holy ordinance of the
Lord) tanquam semper Ecclesiae Lupi, and pestes Magistratus essent. Of this we
are guilty (as Christ was guilty of denying Caesar's tribute: it being a mere
Bexa a^^ Saravia^^.
calumniation to affirm, that we do Principi omnia adimere, because we do
not omnia tribuere, to wit that unlimited and Pope-like power which does not
bind him to the rules which God in his holy word prescribes in the ordering
of the ceremonies of the Church. What, must Bellarmine now at last be
justified, Bellarmin. de notis eccles. l. 4 c. 7
iam re ipsa Calvinistis in Anglia mulier quaedam summum Pontificem agit? or
that speech of Constantius, Athanas. ad vitam solitar. de gent.
At quod ego volo, pro Canone sit, ita me loquentem Syriae Episcopi sustinent.
Aut ergo obtemperate aut exules estote. Which our D. Bilson cont. Apol. p.
Opposites themselves condemn. Shall we suppe up the error which Heart Ioh
Reynold. confer ca. un. p. 589.
him self retracted, or return to Gardeners vomitt, Ioh. Calvin in Amoi c. 7.
potestas est penes Regem vt statuat pro suo arbitrio quidquid voluerit. whom
King Henry the eight him self reprooved and checked for his flattery? Shall
we make our religion parliamentarie (as the D. Hill. quartron of Reasons.
papists obiecte? Or subscribe to that flaunder, Allen. in Apolog. of Engl.
Catholiq. cap. 4. sect. 6.
Absolute power is asscribed to the Polus Cardinal. de vnitat eccles. l. 4.
Parliament, so that nothing there determined must be counted error or schism,
what order, decree, sentence, constitution, or law soever be to the contrary,
holy Scriptures them selves not excepted? If we be blamed for not giving this
power to the King, then blame the Ambros. epist. 33. ad foror Athanas. vb. sup.
Hilar. cont. Constant. defunct Gregor. lib. 9. epist. 41.
Fathers, and all our la^te Nowell. in reproof of Dorman Ioh. Reynold. confer.
c. 10. P. Iun. co^trovers. 3. lib. 4. c. 16.17
Writers, one of whom because he is both learned and revered, I cannot omit;
over the Word and Sacraments ( D Bills. cont. Apolo. p. 2.235
says he) we grant Princes no power. Again, Ibid. page 237.
Princes have no imperial right over divine things, to alter and abrogate what
they think good: which is lawful for neither men nor Angels. Again, Ibid
page 298.
Dominion, power and majesty belong as right to God alone, and are by him
imparted to Princes to the end they should reign under him not over him:
command for him not against him: be honored and obeyed after him not before
him. Donatistes then we cannot be for denying the absolute power of the Prince
in matters of Gods service: or for tying him to the holy Word of God without
the company of the Godly. But now this absolute power excepted, who gives
any thing to the Magistrate which we do not? The admonition of the
injunctions acknowledges him for a good subject that will acknowledge the
Princes Supremacy, which we most willing lie both acknowledge and perform,
according to the statute Statut. 1. Eliza. ca. 11 and 13. c 12
made in that behalf. as also we give to the King the authority which the
book of Articl. ann 1562.
articles does. we say with August. epist 166.
Augustine, It is Christ him self that commands in Princes when they
command that which is good: when otherwise, we agree with Gregor. l. 9. epist.
41
Gregory, and bear it with silence, so long as we may without sin on our
parts. and last of all, in matters indifferent, we submit both our bodies and
goods unto him, and all save our consciences, which is all, that some of our
Mat Sutcliu de Pontific. li 4. ca. 6 pa. 338.
Opposites them selves require. But we hold that Princes must lick the dust of
the churches feet, and be subject to our Consistories. This latter clause, as
it is not found in our writings, so is it far from our hearts. The former is
taken out of Isaiah, and that we affirm in our D Bills vb. sup. page 2. page
224. and page 3. page 64. Psalm. 7. title. Psalm. 52.
adversaries sense: of a spiritual not temporal submission: voluntary not
coacted: of soul not of body: to the ministry not to the Minister. or if our
accusers them selves can frame any other interpretation more commodious, we
will subscribe to it. Not so, for we hold the Eldershippe has power to depose
a Prince. In deed I hear that some Shimeis have so given forth to incense the
power against us: for whose curse (also) we trust the Lord will bless us the
sooner, and look down on our affliction: Never was a church more impudent, a
Doeg more virulent, never an Onager that ever had an heart of more lead, a mouth
of more iron, a forehead of more brass the^ they that so speak. who if they
should be put to their proofs, must make that sluttishe shift again which one
of their D. Cousins answ. to the Abstract. p. 28
fellows was once driven to, when to prove the Puritans held, the people may
resist the Prince that hinders the presbytery, he was feign to cite
Franciscus Iunius in steed of Stephanus Iunius. or if they cite any man truly
of any foreign part whatsoever, we protest against him truly, We know him
not. And as for our selves, name one amongst us, that does claim more power
over Princes, then that which the Bishops themselves do claim and challeng to
themselves. whose words are these: D. Bis. v^ sup. page 301.342.
Princes touching the regiment of their own persons and lives owe the very
same reverence and obedience to the Word and Sacraments that every private man
does. And if any Prince would be Baptized, or approach to the Lords Table,
with manifest show of unbelief, or irrepentance, the Minister is bound
freely to speak: and rather to lay down his life at the Princes feet, then
to admit him. And they make Idem. pa. 3. page 65.
good the words of Nazianzen to the Emperor, The Law of Christ has committed
you to my power and to my pulpit, for we rule also: and that with the more
excellent and perfect government, you are a sheep of my fold, and a weanling
of the great shepherd. when they justify the fact of Ambrose excommunicating
Theodosius out of the c Homily, and drive us to subscribe unto it, they
subject the K. more then we subject him. that which they do in other matters
also. what means else the Sea Potit. to her Majesty, p ^ ^
license which the Prince must have in some cases under the Arch BB. hand and
seal? what means else their tying of him to the D. Bilson vb sup p. 2 p 33^.
Canons of the church, as well as to the word of God? what means else the new
tenent, That Bishoplike autho. over their brethren, is not from the Prince or
at his pleasure, as heretofore it has been Jewel
taught, but even iure divino, which Q. Elizabeth would never endure? Last of
all, what means else the new position, that the Prince has no Admonit. ag.
Mar^ in Marprel at p. 252.
power to dispose of the temporalities of the church, by alienating them to an
use profitable. which crosses quite the ancient divinity of Saint Ambrose,
Si agros Ecclesiae desiderat Imperator, potestatem habet vendicandorum: Amb^os.
cont Aurentium
tollat eos si libitum est. Imperatori non dono, sed non nogo: which words the
Decret. p. 1 cause. 11 q. 1 c 17.
Canon it self accepts. and the latter divinity of Ihon Wiclife, VValsingam
hist. in Rich. 2.
Licet Regibus auferre temporalia viris Ecclesiasticis ipsis abutentibus
habitualiter. yea and the policy of the Emperor Catalog. testi. verit. in
Freder 2
Frederic also, auferamus illis nocentes Divitias, hoc enim facere, est opus
charitatis. Thirdly, the Donatistes separated from their communion, all that
were not of their opinion, even in the least points. The Augustine. haeres 6 9.
Lambert. Dane. ^bid.
Circumcellians also amongst them thought it good service done to God, to offer
all violence to all that were not on their side in the fields, in the high
ways, and in every other place where soever they met them. Here let a man lay
his hand upon his heart, and ask of him self who are they who in these days
deprive, imprison, excommunicate, even their fellowe-labourers them selves in
the Gospel, when they will not in every trifle condescende to their opinion,
and he will easily see and perceive, that Donatisme dwells not on our side
of the street. If not Donatisme, then not Anabaptistrie, and Brownisme
neither. What we think of the subjects duty (says Master Beza) to the
Magistrate, you shall far more certainly learn by our doctrine, then by
their slanders, which are not ashamed to join us with the frantic
Anabaptists, subverting the Magistrates authority. The very same say we now
in the very same cause. for Mr Beza is one of us. so that when our D. Bills vb.
sub. p. 3. p. 268.
Opposites justify these words of his for true and righteous, therein they
clear us together with him from this most odious imputation. As for those of
the separation, who have confuted them more then we? or who have written more
against them? Some things of truth they hold, with which we think it no more
sin for us now to agree, then Cyprian once to agree with Novatianus, in that
which he esteemed right. Cypri.
Quid est quia hoc facit Novatianus vt nos non putemus faciendum? Augustine
thought it no sin in some things to be nearer to the Pagans then the
Manichees were, who thought they had gotten a great advantage against him, as
our Opposites now think they have great advantage on us in that we are nearer
to the Brownistes then them selves. Hear our Apology our of him, Augustine.
cont Faust Manich. li. 20. c. 10.
Si propterea vos putatis. etc. If you think yourselues to have the truth,
because you are farther of from the error of the Paganes, us to be in error
because we are more distant from you then from the Paganes, then let a dead man
be said to be whole, because now he is not sick: and let a whole man be
therefore reprehended, because he comes nearer to the sick, then the dead
man does. Or if the most part of the Pagans must be reckoned not as sick men
but as dead men, then let the ashes in the grave be praised because now they
have not the form of a carcass: and let the members of the living be blamed,
because for the form which they retain they are more like unto a carcass then
are the ashes which have not his form and shape. Howbeit wear not ignorant,
that the Brownists and we are iumbled together, and reported to be one in their
errors themselves: so that al their excesses whatsoever, are imputed unto us.
Let not any man think this strange; let every man rather herein acknowledge
the old cunning and the subtlety of the serpent. So whatsoever stir or
sedition was moved by the unbelieving Jews, it was imputed to the Jews that
were s Christians, who were thought to be all one with them. So the impuritie
of the Caesar Baron. Anal. in An. 201
Gnostickes was drawn to the defamatio^ of all other christians, no difference
being made between them. So whereas the Egyptians were Idem ex Vopisco. An.
283.
viri ventosi. furibundi, iactantes, vani, liberi, novarum rerum cuptentes, the
Christians and all, that are there dwelling, are thought to be the very same.
even as the narratio^ adds, Christiani sunt and Samaritae and quibus
presentia semper tempora cum enormi liberate displiciunt. Out of these last
words, it is easy for any to see, that our reproach is not an vpstart, or an
yesterdayes birth, which gives forth that all is an humor in us, which will
never be contented with the state of present things, or be subject to order of
Laws, we are so wayward, so given to contradiction, men of so unquiet a
spirit, so malcontented, so contemptuous also against authority, and desirous
to live at liberty: whereof if the Egyptians be guilty, therefore must we
Christians also? Last of all, I may well compare some of unbridled spirit, to
the Flaccians, whose intemperate fury made Amand. Polan in Dan. ca. 9.
Ernestus to deal the more hardly with the Protestants, out of a fear they
were all of the same spirit, and would in the end procure like mischief.

#Sect. 3. Defense of the Ministers against the imputation of schism, showing
what schism is.
THE third slander of the ceremonies, puts in a bill of schism against us:
to which we answer. First, this slander is directly against the admonition
added to the injunctions, which forbids to call any man a schismatique that
acknowledges the Supremacy of the Prince, and lives underneath the obedience
of it, as all the world knows we do. Secondly; there is no schism properly
where there is no separation, Schismaticus facit communionis dirupta societas
(says Augustine. questionu^ Evangel. secund. Mat. q. 11
Augustine) Schisma ab Ecclesia seperat, Hieron. in epist. ad Tit. c. 3.
says Hierome. Schismatici sunt (says August. de vera relig. ca. 5.
Augustine again) ijsdem vtentes Sacramentis, ac dissentientes opinionibus and
seor sim celebrantes conventus. Schismaticus est qui a communione seipsum
suspendit, and collectam facit, and altar constituit says the Decrer. p. 2.
cause. 23. q. 5. ca 42.
Council of Chalcedon. Cyprian held rebaptization an opinion more erroneous
then is any to us imputed, yet never was he counted an heretic or a
schismatique. Wherefore? because he then as we now (if error be with us)
August. epi. 48. Ide^ de baptis. con. Donatist. l. 1. c. 28.
nauum illum candidissimi pectoris cooperuit vbere charitatis and se ab
Ecclesiae vnitate nunquam seperavit. But you want this love will our Opposites
say, therefore ye are schismatiques, although in regard of outward communion
you make no utter separation. There is the churches unity, which who so
breaks, he is a schismatique. and there is the Churches peace, this who so
breaks, he is properly seditious. a schismatique sometimes he is called, but
thorough improper and larger sense. In which St Augustine speaks when he
makes a difference between those that separate and those that remaining in
the unity of the church, Gratian. decret. p. 2 cause. 24. q. 3. c. 8.
inter se dissentiunt, pro vt Corinthij faciebant: ad quos Paulus scribens
epistola prima, carnales eos vocat, quia dicerent ego sum Pauli, ego vero
Apollo. which is schisina long diversa ab illo de quo referi Apostolus Judah
qui segregant semetipses, animales, spiritum non habentes. Of this schism, I
would our Opposites were as well able to clear them selves, as we are able.
who run within that censure of Augustine, Andreas Hiper. de sacr. stud. non
deserend. p. 76
Quicunque invident bonis vt quarant occasiones excludendi eos, aut degradandi,
vel crimina sua sic defendere parati sunt, si abiecta vel prodita fuerint vt
etiam co^venticulorum segregationes vel ecclesiae perturbationes cogitent
excitare, iam schismatici sunt, and ab vnitate cord discissi etiam si non
inventis occasionibus, aut occultatis factis suis sacamento Ecclesiae corporali
conversatione socientur. Besides this abuse of their authority, their
authority it self is such, as will divide and rent the church, as is to be
seen with eyes this day. Rolloc. in Ephesians 4. ver. 11.
Dicunt Episcopu^ praesbyterio praefectum, remove^di fchismatis causa, sed (vt
de contraria experientia nihil dicam) quid ad hoc respondet Gregorius
Nazianzenus in oratione ad Maximu^: Vtinam (inquit) nulla esser Throni
prerogatina nunc autem dextrum hoc latus, and sinistrum, and medium, superior
and inferior seeds, and illa praeeundi, vel eodem gradu incedendi, invecta
consuetudo; nos in multas parts confregerunt. Pardon me if I relate the words
of another in some things against us, though I do not apply them, Alexand.
Ales in pr^em. leiturg. Anglic.
videat aliquis eosqui pastores gregis, and Episcopi populi esse debebant, vbi
studium doctrinae apud eos? vbi legum, vel pietatis verae, vel propriorum
potius, and ipsorum custodia? and quid iam inter horum, and tyrannica veteru^
imsperia distant? an minus ardent regni cupiditate? aut remissins expetunt
splendorem divitiarum? aut clementius dominantur? As I said before, I would not
apply this, so is it not needful to be applied. Suppose the inclemencie of the
present Bishops that be over us, be different from that which was of old,
distract the Church it does: and we have read, Ennodiu^ lib defens. Simach.
non interest quibus itineribus ad mundi Principem currat, qui a sancta vntiate
discordat. and the courses they run, breed much sighing in the church, and
pingues hostias litat diabolo qui contristat ecclesiam. and they keep in the
very make-bates of the church, which Satan in these days has raised to loose
the conjunction of it. and nimis armatus est qui illa quae adversarius
concordiae, ministrat, tela contemnit.

#Sect. 4. Defense of the Ministers against the imputation of sedition and
faction.
THE fourth slander of the ceremonies araygneth us for sedition and faction,
and that well near with Hamans words, There is a people scattered over the
Provinces, that are diverse from others. they keep not the Kings laws: Hester
3.8
it is not for the kings profitt to suffer them. First we break no lawful
law: we receive the Communion book in what we may; and in omitting of the
ceremonies, we do in equity keep the law, because of the end which is to
edify. Secondly, suppose the Law has no active obedience from us, as long
as it has our passive we perform subjection, as one of our D Bilson cont.
Apolog. p. 2. p. 349.
Reverend Bishopps writes, Suffering is as sure a sign of subjection as
obeying. so another, Mat. Sutcli de Pontisic. l. 4 c. 6. p. 338.
subiecteth bodies and goods only in things indifferent, which in all
patience we lay down at our Princes feet. Conscientia non est subditae
cuipiam legi, nisi quatenus ex lege divina praecipit: bona autem and corpora
quatenus praeter legem Dei quae ad decorem and ordinem in Ecclesia ab ea
legittime praecipiuntur. Thirdly, if we show our selves no subjects for
breaking the ceremonies, then our accusers much more who break more profitable
Canons then these: as the canon of The rubri. next the co^sien^at Instruct art.
44.
Catechizing their Parishes. The Ca^on Episcopal. p. 14. 16.
Canon of examining all men of all sorts. The Rubric. before the communion.
Iniunct. art. 21.
Canon that debarreth from the Communion all notorious offenders. The Iniunct.
art 20.
Canon that commands to keep holy the Sabbothes, by visiting the sick, and
reconciling of enemies at leisure times. The Canon Episcopal. p. 19.
Canon that prescribes admonishing of Parishioners privately, both by the
Ministers and by the Churchwardens. The Iniunct. artic. 11.
Canon that allotteth to the poor the 40th part of Nonresidentes livings. The
Ibidem artic. 12.
Canon that seperateth four pound yearly out of every living that is worth an
hundred pound, for the maintenance of a poor scholar at one of the
Universities. The Ibid. art. 3.4.
Canon that requires twelve Sermons every year in every Parish church of
England, Wales, and Irlande. The Canon Episcopal. p. 5.
Canon that forbids the granting of advousions. The Canon. Episcopal. p. 25.
Canon that says, Pluralities and Nonresidences are res in se foeda, in vulgus
odiosa, and Ecclesiae Dei pernitiosa. the Iniunct. art. 34.35.
Canon that enioyneth, that all superstitious pictures and payntinges in walls
or glasse-windowes should be abolished out of Churches and houses. In all these
things, good and profitable and well commanded seeing our accusers fail of
performance, who yet hold them selves good subjects, they are void of all
reason to sound so loud the blast of faction and disobedience against us, who
swerue in a few tryfles only not needful not profitable: and (as we take it)
not well commanded. Fourthly, we appeal to the common carryage of our lives,
to the loyalty of the parishes in which we labor to the effects of our
ministry, to which the Apostle Paul appealed: yea our very Lord him self
when they were burdened with this slander, a slander that has pursued the
professors of the truth from time to time without any ceasing. Athanasius
called in his time propugnaculum veritatis, could not enjoy his innocence long
in Constantius his court, by reason he had informers against him, that he was a
Socra. l. 1 c. 13. Soxom l. 6. c. 5. Niceph. l. 9. c. 29.
pestilent man, a sower of discord between Constance and the Emperor his
brother. one that troubles the Church: yea set whole Egypt and whole Lybbi in
a combustion. But our Sovereign (whom the Lord preserve) is not a Constantius
to believe any thing that is untrue: no, we compare him with Constantinus, who
the better he was, the more ready to think well of their informations who
were in place to be believed, till Athanasius lost his favor and his credit
even with him also. Epiphan. here is 68.
habebat enim divinum zelum beatus ille, non tamen novit quod sycophantae
essent propter aemulationem, etc. even Theodoret histor. l. 2. c. 11.
he that burned the libelles which were offerred against Bishopps, yet burned
not the libell which was presented against Athanasius to him, because they were
Bishopps that presented it, whom he trusted preposterously. And by such was D.
Bilson cont. Apolog. p. 2. p. 220.
Chrysostom also defamed before Arcadius, and that in such sort that
whosoever petitioned for him, was reproched as a troubler of the Empire: and
the more that he was sued for, the further was he sent in exile, and new
edictes were sent forth against all those that took part with him, or bore him
favor. For the preventing of a like mischief now, let it be considered what
Julian him self said once, Quis erit innocens si accusasse sufficiat? For
there will be accusers always, as long as the Maxim lives which one gave
once in Alexanders Court, fortiter calumniare. nam etsi vnlnus curetur,
cicatrix tamen remanebit. Be there no more captains (think ye) to lay to the
charge of Paul that he is the Egyptian? think not, why should these reports
be given of us unless they were true? for there was no reason in the world,
why Paul should be thought to be the Egyptian: Act. 2.38.
it must be considered, invidia loquitur non quod est, sed quod subest, as
Seneca tells us. As (therefore) we desired before, so do we still, let our
Carriage be remembered: of which we may say (as said the old Christians once,
we are defamed concerning the Emperors Majesty, but never yet Albinians,
Nigrians, nor Cassians, Albinus Niger, and Tertullian ad Scapul.
Cassius being rebels in those times) could be found to be christians. Thus
much to this slander in gross. Now to the particular branches of it. The
first of which is obstinacy. wherein we have the old Christians for our
fellows, who because they would not yield to the wills of their superiors in
matters of Religion, had this proverb passed upon them, Caesar Baron. Annal
nihil obstinatius Christiano. we have Chrysostom partaking with us in this
slander above all others. Severianus then saying of him as our accusers speak
of us, Tripartit. histor. l. 10 c. 13.
Et si nullo alio vituperandus Johannes est, eius tamen superbiae crimen est ad
damnationem sufficiens. Now one makes an apology for him which clears us,
Suidas in Chrysostom.
We must not think that he who refuses to flatter, is by an by proud: nor on
the other side, that he who yields out of a base and flattering spirit, is by
and by moderate. but that he is moderate rather who keeps him self within a
fit and a free course. For it beseems to be magnanimus, and yet not proud:
manly, and yet not rash: mild, and yet not basely, servile: free (lastly) and
not a slave. The second slander is that we are singular. But wherefore
singular? others conform but we will not. so the Proconsull said once to
Pionius Caesar Baion. Annal ann. 254.
caeteri immolarunt. to whom he answered for all that: ego Proconsul non
immolo. But they are the whole church that have co^formed besides your selves?
and all the Bishops of Asia subscribed when time was against the council of
Chalcedon upon the letters of the Emperor who would have them so to do: who
yet afterward came and acknowledged Evagr. histor. l. 3. c. 9
nos, non nostra voluntate, sed necessitate adducti subscripsimus: non animo
sed verbis duntaxat consensimus. what if the whole world did conform against
us? we might answer (notwithstanding) with Liberius, hoc orbis terrarum
comprobanit (said the Emperor to him) quota tu pars es orbis terrarum, qui
pacem orbis dissolnis? He replied, Theodor. histor. lib. 3. cap. 16.
non diminuitur solitudine mea verbum fidei: sicolim tres pueri tantum in venti
sunt, qui regis edicto non parerent. Howbeit (the Lord be blessed) we may
turn the scaffold and ask of our Opposites, how great a part they be of the
church, who in these ceremonies controversed, seperat themselves from the rest
that are called in the world? As Basil once touching singing, that may we say
now, Basil epist 66. ad cleric. Eccles. Neocaesari.
ad id vero quo accusamur, and qua re potissimum simpliciores perterraefaciunt,
qui nos traducunt, hoc habeo quod dicam: the course I take omnibus Ecclesijs
Dei concors est and consona. Tertullian thinks it no small argument, that he
has on his side the agreement of the churches: Tertul. in lib de prescrip.
advers. here is.
ecquid verisimile est vt tot ac tantae Eeclesiae errarint. nullus inter multos
eventus vnus, exitus variasse debuerat ordinem doctrinae Ecclesiarum caeterum
quod apud multos vnum invenitur non est erratum: I grant he speaks of
unity in doctrine, but the argument holds more strongly in the ceremonies,
because the conveniencie of them varying according to circumstances of time and
place, it is (indeed) admirable that so many churches should leave and abolishe
them, without finding any one inconvenience arising from their abolition. But
what if our church have more learned men within it, then all the rest of the
churches have. It becomes me to say no more, but I would it had. In the mean
season the men of Hamborough put this answer in my mouth, Hamburg epist. ad
Philip. Melancthen.
ipse sibi habeat suae eruditionis laudem Islebius, relinquat nobis
simplicitatem nostrae innocentiae, and vt sequamur sacrae scripture and
Orthodoxae Ecclesiae iudicium, quae Adiaphora libera pronuntiat, quae bis vult
Ecclesiam aedificari non destrui, scandalis mederi non ea suscitari,
superstitionem and corruptelas and impietates Ecclesia excludi non introduci.
The third slander bewrays it own venime: For when it gives forth, the
puritans are worse then papists, and more dangerous to be tolerated in a
common wealth then they, what faith it else but that Christ Jesus is worse then
Barrabas, and more dangerous to the state. why speaks it not out, like the
W. Giffoe, in Caluino Turcisin.
Frogs of the Dragons mouth, the Protestants are worse them Turks? for these
false puritanes are true protestants, and they that be but as bad as papists
be in some sort as bad as Turks, or else Math. Sutcli. in Turk papism.
our writers err Howbeit we see herein we are not better then our Fathers: so
the Christians were counted Caesar Baron. Annal ann 100.
omnium scelestissimi. quam obrem summa pietas, summaque visa est esse religio,
hos vrgere vexare, ac penitus profligare. they were counted also so dangerous
to the state, as that their very meetings together were forbidden upon most
severe punishment. All the Idem. anno. 170.
public evils also were thrown on then backs; it was never well since they
began, it never will be well until they be rooted out. So the Arrian Bishops
persuaded Valens that the Orthodox Christlans were worse then pagans: whereupon
he Theodor. histor. lib. 5. cap. 20.
cum cunctis alijs quam delegissent religionem eiusque cultum permisserit cum
solis propug natoribus dogmatum Apostolicorum, bellare nunquam cessauit. So now
in Rome the Jews are counted beter then Protestants: so that the Jews have
tolleration when true Christians are put to the fire. So in Io. Bodin de
republ. Genebrard Chron. anno. 1560.
Frankford the (exiled Caluinistes (are worste of all others, Papists,
Lutherans, deserve to be tolerated, they must be thrust out. But the fittest
for our turn is the division of Boheme. the Hussites there that were conformed
Pontificijs in suis ritibus esteemed better of the papists then of their
sincere brethren called the Waldenses and Picardi in despite: for these because
they were ab vtrisque seiuncti in their ceremonies and their rites, David
Chytre. in praelect. Chronit.
therefore they were held velut n Catharmata and peripsemata. here may men see
(as in a glass) the true picture of a false puritan: against whom not Ephraim
only but Judah also band them selves without all cause or merit.

#Sect. 5. Seekers of Reformation no Newfangelistes, no haters of Antiquity,
nor delighters in Noveltie. etc.
THE fifth slander of the ceremonies is, that we are Newfanglistes, hating
antiquity and delighting in noveltie: and through a certain giddines of head,
seeking after innovations. First let the fountain of this slander be
considered, for it sloweth both from papisme and from Adiaphorisme also. among
the papists we have Council. Tridentin. fession. 7. can. 13.
condemned by the Council of Trent, all those that shall think any ancient
rite of any Sacrament may be omitted without damnable sin. And as for the
Sacrament of Baptism in particular, they are novatores, that is newfanglistes
(in Bellar. de baptism. c. 24.
Bellarmines judgment) that shall now thrust out any rite, that has been
aunciently used therein. This he cries with open mouth against all the
protestant churches for dashing our the Oil and Spitle with the rest. Mart.
Art. 5. see Calfh Ibid tol. 119.
Martial more particularly reveleth at us about the cross: which in case it be
disvsed, all antiquity is disauthorized in his judgment. Among the
Adiaphoristes Harman. Hamelma^. de tradit. apendic. ad p. 1. col. 499.
Cassander contesteth all Antiquity is defaced, f the Fonts consecration, with
the oil and with the cross be left. why will our brethren take a shafte out
of the quiver of these men, to throw it at their fellows, which cannot hurt
but by the venime wherewith the enemy him self has dressed it? For the
ground of these our accusers must be the same with Bellarmines, as long as the
new-fanglistes cannot prove our baptism rites to be Bellamin. quosup.
contra sacras literas, it shall suffice si adferamus testimonia antiquitatis.
Secondly, we plead it is neither levitie nor noveltie, nor contempt of
antiquity for which we disvse and forbear the ceremonies, but we have other
causes justifiable, which induce us to that we do: in which manner to leave
antiquity, it was never deemed unlawful. For example: The administering of the
Communion to infantes, is now disvsed: a rite as ancient as Cyprtans Cypri. de
laps.
time: and a rite that did Ansegis de legib Fran cor lib. 1. c. 155.
continue in the church above 600. years. The custom of not fasting between
Easter and Whitsontyde, is disvsed although August. epist. 86. ad Casulan.
ancient: that which also we may say of Just Mart. q 155. Ba^^l. de spirit.
sanct.
not keeling in prayer between these two feasts enacted in the 20. Canon of
the Council of Nice. and after growing to be Cassand. in defens. libel. de
offic. pii viri.
firmata observatio, divina Ecclesiarum consuetudine. It is Cassander the
Adiaphorist that testifies this: who also affirms of the Satersdayes fast,
religio sissime celebrabatur: adding moreover of these ceremonies, ne vestigium
quidem superest, quia non tanti momenti putabantur vt earum observatio
retinenda putaretur. Come we to Tertull. ceremonies: amongst which the cross
arose the trin-immersion, the honey and the milk of Baptism, the abstinence
from washing for a wecke after baptism, the receaving of the L* Supper in time
of meat: oblarions on birth days, with the like. of all which, thus one of our
writers, D. Whitak cont. Bellarmin. controue^s. 1. q 6. c. 12. p. 450.
respondeo: omnes has traditionet quas Tertullianus laudat and pro quibus tam
acriter pugnat, abrogatas iam esse a Papistis ipsis si vnum signum crucis
excipias. An other Thom. Morton. Apolog. p. 2. l. 1. cap. 43.
of our writers glories to prove out of the papists them selves the
abolishing of these rites: one of whom affirms, that the trin-immersio^ in
baptism, was enacted by a Canon of the Apostles them selves, yet that iam diu
per contrariam consuetudinem abolita est. An other nor fasting on the Sab. that
since the Manichees began to fast upon that day, it is not only become
lawful, but also necessary, atque etiam hodie ex praeccepto recte ieiunamus
Sabbato. another Maldona^ comment. in Johan. cap. 6.
thus of another ancient rite and ceremony now left of. missam ego faciam.
etc. I omit the opinion of Augustine and Innocentius the first, that the
Eucharist is necessary to infantes, which continued in the Church about 600.
years has now ben left by the custom of many ages, not only as not
necessatie but also as not decent* the night Vigills (says another) which
Tertull. and Hierome, and other of the Fathers praise so much Ledesima. l. de
divin. quavis lingua no^ legend. c. 19
in desuetudinem abiere, and afterward in the Council of Eliberis, it was
decreed, ne foeminae ad eas se conferant: the same affirms that the Eucharist
was wont to be given into men's hands, at modo eius vsum non imitamur. If these
churches of popery and of the Adiaphorisme have left all these ancient rites,
the sign of the cross only excepted without newfanglednes, then why are we
newfangled now for omitting the cross it self, seeing it is confessed to be a
ceremony non tanti momenti: and seeing our D. Fulk reioyn^ ag. Mart. art. 4 p.
163.
Writers thus reason against it, why should not crossing be left as well which
has no better ground, and has been worse abused? And again, Ibid. art. 52 p
177.
seeing none worse abused then the cross, the cross must be abrogated as well
as they: The oblations of Martyrs memorialles were forbidden by Ambrose,
Luddovie. Vives in August do civit. Dei. l. 8 c. 27.
quia quasi parentalia super stitioni gentilium essent similima. and the
meliores Christiani, in August. l. retractat. c. 11.
Augustines time, did of themselves omit them, till at the last it was said
of them, in plerisque mortalium nulla talis est consuetudo. What more like to
the custom of crossing then this tradition? for it is ancient: and the Cross
is tam similis papistis, as that was to the Heathen; and in plerisque Ecclesijs
nulla est crucis signandi consuetudo.

Ambros. l. 3. de Sacramen. c. ^.
Ambrose striveth much for the rite and ceremnie of washing the feet in
baptism, against them who would have turned it out of baptism to civil use
only, to wit, to the washing of strangers feet. the succession of whom
prevayled so, both against him, and against antiquity, that August epist. 119.
Augustine was able to say of them, because it seemed quasi observatio
baptismi, quidam came de consuetudine auferre, non dubitarunt. Every thing here
speaks for* us, what if we doubt not to auferre the Cross from Baptism? it
seems quasi pars baptismi: Away with him (then) into civil use, if into any
use at all. Indeed, in that we abide the cross for his antiquity in Banners,
Coins, Princes Balls, and Noble men's arms, and every where else where he is
used without superstition, which is all the use that our writers require, D.
Fulkes answar to Rhem. in Mat. 24. verse. 30.
therein we show our love and reverence to antiquity: and that we do omit it
in Baptism for some other cause then for newfanglednes, even as the rest of
our carriage testifies. Popery has defiled doles at burialles, yet because
the custom is ancient to have oblations Origin. in Job l. 3. Ephreem. de
poenitent. c. 2 August confess. l. 6. c. 2.
at the funerals, and memorialls of the dead, and the use is civil not
religious, therefore (you see) we suffer it. Popery has likewise defiled
Lent, yet because the ancients had a certain fast before the commemoration of
the passion of the Lord, and the use thereof is also civil not religious,
therefore we tolerate it. Last of all, it is Math Beroald chronolog. l. 4. c.
2.
evicted by scripture and reason that the Nativitie of our Lord was about the
point of Aequinoctium Autumnale, so that we cannot approve the communion book,
which wills us to acknowledge it to have fallen out as on December 25.
Neverehelesse because this observation is ancient, and the use of it is mixtly
civil, although we subscribe not to it, yet we bear with it. Seeing (then) we
reverence Antiquity even in customs defiled by popery to the uttermost bound
and limit of a good conscience, what reason have any to condemn us for
contemners of the same or one or two ceremonies, that are said to be of light
moment? But it is made hey nous in Eunomius, that he brake a rite of baptism
the Trin-immersion, even for this, Zorom. l. 6. c. 26.
because it was in use downward from the Apostles. true, and he deserved to be
condemned who did this out of a pride and singularity to the corrupting of the
doctrine it self of baptism, there immediately eusuing out of it an opinion
that it was sufficient to baptize into the death of Jesus Chapter whereas the
Toletan Toletan. Council* 4. c. 5.
council did abrogate this rite and ceremony: and Gregor. epist. 11. ad
Leand^.
Gregory persuaded the omission of it, without any violating of antiquity,
because they did it upon just cause, to seperat the church from the custom of
heretics, who used it amiss; for which we now omit the cross. In Africa men
Zago. Zabo in Confession. Aethiop. aedit. 15.34
baptize themselves every Epiphanie, not for any worship of God, but for an
imitation of Christ only, which is far to be preferred before the imitation of
any of the ancient Fathers. Now would our accusers if they lived in that
church, think it newfanglednes and noveltie for them to forbear this ancient
rite? And whereas the communion is given to infantes both in David. Chythre. in
praelection. Chronic.
Bohemia and in Paul. Odorbor. de relig. Russo rum.
Russia, are the sincere forte of the Hussites called Waldenses to be condemned
for newfanglednes and innovation, because they will not conform them selves to
this ceremony old and ancient, like the cross?

#Sect. 6. Aiust excuse both in regard of the matter and manner of the Cross.
AS we are able to justify ourselves for the manner whereby we swerue from
Antiquity in the ceremonies controversed, so also for the matter it self in
which we leave it. First we plead with Arnobius, Amob. cont. gent. lib. 1.
quasi vero erroru^ non antiquitas plenissima matter sit? which we have by R.
Brottus in prefat. translation Simeon. Metaphor.
one applied against the antiquity of the cross by name. Tell me not here
what August. ad Ianuar.
Augustine has, Antiquns mos populi Dei pro lege habe^dus est. his meaning is
not we must follow the Fathers ad vltimu^ iota, as the gloss of the cano^ law
commands. The canon Decret. page 1. distine. 9. c. 3
it self out of August. himself condemns such slavish scrupulositie, as well
it may: since every one of the ancient Fathers had his errors, as not only our
own Philip. Mome. de Eucharist. in prefat.
writers, but also the Canus de loc. The ol. lib. 7. cap. 3 and li. 11. ca ^.
Villa. Vincent. de ration. stu. Theolog li 4 c. 6. obseruat. 2.
papists them selves confess. In regard whereof we have this liberty from
the mouth even of one of the slaves of Antichrist, non Claud. Espeus. de
adorat. lib. 2. cap. 8.
andiendi sunt qui circa Dei and sacramentorum cultum omnia reduci volunt ad
vesustum morem. non. n. semper melius quod antiquius. As for this matter of the
cross, who can excuse the necessity, the virtue, the effectiue power which they
put in it as has been already showed. unless he do it perverso fauore, which
August. in Ioham. tractat. 66.
Augustine condemns in the excusing of a Peter himself. or excogitato aliquo
co^mento, or sensum commodum affingendo, which is the trick that we our Io.
Reynolde Idolotat lib. 2. cap. 2. sect. 10.
selves condemn in papists. And seeing it was a sheepish kind of following
the Fathers, that has brought the cross down hitherto (an example whereof is
to be seen in Alcain. in Johan. lib. 7. ca. 19
Alcuinus, who is not ashamed when he writes of it, to write verbatim out of
Augustine) the more it is to be mervayled, that for the continuing of it still,
our Opposites will so cleave to the Fathers, as to reject all new writers, whom
some of the papists them selves Andrad. defens. fid. Triden. l. 2
confess to have received more light and knowledge, then ever the Fathers saw
of old. Secondly, we are less tied to the Fathers in ceremonies then in
doctrine, and to their practice less then to their judgment. Whereas then a
papist contesteth, Roffens. in proem. confutat. Luther.
contestatos esse volo, me prorsus nullius quantumvis sancti Patris,
authoritate cogi velle, nisi quatenus iudicio divinae scripturae fuerit
probatus. What folly were it now for us to follow them strictly in their
practice, which less binds then their says, as one of them says, August.
li. 2 cont. epi. Gaudent. 2
Non debemus imitari semper and probare quidquid probati homines urgent, sed
iudicium scripturaru^ adhibere, an illae probent ca facta. The Tertul. li. ^.
ad vxor. Durant. li. 1. ca. 16. sect. 10.
Fathers used to take the bread of the Sacrament and wrappe it up and carry it
home, and eat it in private: which we Bucer. in Censur.
mislike. The Fathers used Eusebius. de vit. Constantin. li 4. ca. 66.
tapers in funerals, and Origin. in Job. li. 1. Eusebius histor. li. 7. ca. 16.
Hieron. invit. Pauli. Eremit.
clothed the bodies that were dead with costly attire, and many other
solemnities of burial: which not only we condemn, but also our Aeneas. Silu.
de orig. Bohem. ca. 35.
Fathers that saw but the dawning (as it were) of the gospel. The Fathers used
Ducant. de rit. lib. 2. cap. 43. sect. 6.
anniversary solemnities for the dead, and anniversarie Tertul. de coron. milit.
oblations for the^ also: which had Idem de Monora Epipha he res. 23. Am (...)
of de mort Saryr and obit. Va le^tia. Chry in Act honul. 21. and in 1. Cor.
homil. 41.
prayers adjoined for the refrigerium of their souls, which we Bu^or in
cenfur. c. 9. p. 467.
condemn. Thirdly, the soul and the life of every practice being the cause
for which the Fathers used it, this cause ceasing, the practice it self must
cease, though never so ancient. which of our writers laugheth not at papists
for D. Fulke reioynd. art 7. p. 189
retayning diverse ceremonies for their antiquity, now that their ancient use
is ended? and for Chemnit. exam. p. 2. p. 38.
keeping vmbram veterum rituum etiamsi nullam habeant veram observationis
causam? as well they may, because absurdum est (says the law) ipsa origin
rei sublata eius imaginem relinqui. For example, were it not absurd now to
suffer every man to receive the communion at home in private without a
minister, because the Duran de rit l. 1. c. 16 sect. 11.
Fathers of old time used it. for the same reason is not in place. we may now
come to the church which they could not, who were compelled to live in the
woods where was no minister? were it not absurd now and smelling of
Anabaptisme to sell all for such a communion, as was in the Apostles time, for
we have not the like cause now to travel abroad into the world for the
spreading of the Gospel? we read in Beda. hist. gent Angl. l 4 c 3.
Beda, Cod lib 7 tit. 6. leg. 1.
that some ministers would not ride but go on foot like the Apostles. was
this wisdom in them think ye? was not the Archb. wiser then they who
constrained the^ to break of such imitation of antiquity? were it not absurd
now and savoring of Paganism, to have Plin. Secsid in epist 98
tapers and lights in divine service, such as were used in the g ancient
church, for we have not the like necessity to assemble in the darkness of the
night or in the morning as they had then? were it not absurd now and savouring
of popery to have Eremites, after the example of Paulus Thaebeus and others
ancient, for we are not driven forth by persecution into solitary and desert
places as they were then. Otho. Frisingens. l. 4 c. 3.
Paulus Thaebeus, Decij fugiens persecutionem vixit in deserto, necessitatem
vertens in volu^tatem. and Sozom l. 1 c. 13.
memorant alij persecutionum procellas homines ad hoc vitae genus suscipiendum
impulisse. what that Herma^ Hamelman. de tradit. appendic. ad p. ^rim. col. 498.
Cassander him self (that Adiaphorist) thinks it unfit that any ceremo.
should continue, unless he have ratione^ and causam perpetua^. of which, how
many is he able to name. For quis nescit temporu^ momenta and inclinationes
multa monere, quaeda^ subijcene, nonnulla etiam extorquere, as now in the case
of the cross is to be seen? For origin eius sublata (which was to profess
against the heathens with who^ we live not) and a cause contrary to the origin
of it being come in place, to wit a contrary disease in papists who too much
honor it, (amiddest whom we converse) this chaung of time and causes of use
changed by the time does not only monere or subijcere, but also eue^
extorquere, we should away with it. Fourthly, though a practice be never so
ancient, it must be abolished when it grows to abuse, even as Pope Stephen
him self ordayneth, Si Decret p. 1. distinct. 63. c. 28.
nonnulli ex praedecessoribus aut maioribus nostris fecerunt aliqua, quae vllo
tempore potuerunt esse sine culpa, and postea vertuntur in errorem and
superstitionem sine tarditate aliqua, and cum magna authoritate, a posteris
destruantur. Bellarmine in these words shows the practice of this Canon,
Bellar. de eccles. Triumphant. c. vit.
Quoniam occasion nocturnarum vigiliarum, abusus irrepere caeperat, placuit
Fcclesiae nocturnos conventus and vigilias (proprie dictas) intermittere: ac
solum in ijsdem diebus celebrare ieiunia.

Our Ioh. Reynold. de idololat l. 1 c. 9. sect. 12
Writers say, the papists here leave the Fathers and cleave to Vigilantius,
who required the abolishing of these Vigills. So that we require but that
their measure be meat to us, when in the room of Vigilantius, we desire that
our Opposites would leave the Fathers in the use of these rites and ceremonies
controversed, or at the least not throw them on us, being more grossly then a
Vigill abused, upon a vizardlike pretense of their antiquity. Know we not,
that this was the Sozom. l. 5. c. 16.
trick of Julian, when he removed the cross from the Labarum, thereby to
deface Christianity it self? for he pleaded the former labarum was ancient:
the Cross but an vpstart. the Pagan faith ancient, the christian Religion but
newly borne: in this manner abutens veteribus institutis ad suam libidinem? We
know there is no intent in our Reverend Fathers to reduce popery by the
reducing of the cross to her antiquity; but this is their fault that they
consider not what one of our Writers does advise, r As Elisha to heal the
streams went to the fountain and healed that first: So to reform an abuse,
we must stop the very fountain from whence it flows. which how can we do
in these ceremonies controversed, unless we both remove their use, and also
disclayme that antiquity, whereby it is graced preposterously? Fifthly, It is a
ruled case by the doctrine which now is published by the authority of our
church, that Tho. Morton. Apol. p. 2. l. 1. ca. 42.
Traditiones rituales quae ad ordinem and ritus cultus divini pertinent, are to
be received upon this condition only, modo ne veritati, pietati, simplicitati,
and libertati Christianae, adversentur. against all which, that the Cross and
Surplice fight, it has been showed elsewhere. And such is our first
exception, Antiquity is not of such authority, as to evicte us of
newfanglenes, the manner and matter being considered of our swerving from the
same.

#Sect. 7. The second exception proves that the Cross is neither truly, nor
soundly ancient.
OUR second exception denies that the cross is ancient with true, sound,
sufficient antiquity. First the antiquity of it is a prescription without
true title, which if it hold not against a King here below on the earth,
according to the common axiom, nullum tempus occurrit Regi, much less holds
it against the heavenly K. of kings, who is most ancient? This is that which
Arnobius once replied, when the heathens objected to him the antiquity of
their religion and the latenes of his faith spread Arnob. cont gent. l. 2.
prop. finem.
religionis authoritas (says he) non est tempore aestimanda, sed numine. Deus
omnipotens non est res novella. non quod sequimur nouum est; sed nos sero
addidiscimus quidnam sequi oporteat. The rest of the Fathers are of the same
judgment, which one of our D. Bilson against the Apol. p. 4. p. 392.
Reverend Fathers thus rehearses: In cases of Religion (speaking against an
ancient custom, to wit saying of service in Latin) we must respect not what
men have, but what they should have been used too. Cyprian says well:
Consuetudo sine veritate vetustas erroris est. And Tertullian, Quodcumque
adversus veritatem sapit, hoc erit haeresis etiam vetus consu^tudo. And the
Council of Carthage (last of all) The Lord says in the Gospel, I am truth,
he does not say, I am custom. We are to follow the word of God (says Mr
Bucer. in Censur. c. 10.11.13.
Bucer) which is most ancient. this who so has, he has antiquity on his
side (says D D. Bilson ag Apolog
Bilson.) We care not (says Mr Bullonger. Decad 5. serino. 9. p. 462.461.
Bullinger) how ancient the additions of the Sacrament are, si instituentis
authoritas, doctrina and sanctitas, si vetustas valere debet vicimus nos qui
Christum pro nobis habemus cum electissimo Apostolorum Choro. Hereupon he
enters into a large proof that the Apostles and the primitive Church that
followed them, added not so much as one rite in the administration of any
Sacrament, besides those that are mentioned in Matthew, Mark and Luke. Yea he
proves, that neither they nor any other may multiply or increase the rites,
which the Son of God has ordained sufficiently or perfectly, seeing even in
Moses time it self the Passover was simply administered as Moses left it:
and the duty of Sacrifizing was simply to be performed according to the
rites of Moses and no other: to which appertain the judgments of God upon
Nadab and Abihu, and upon Vzziah, when either a Sacrament of Gods was handled
otherwise then precisely according to the strict rites of Gods command, or a
new ceremony brought into his worship which he commanded not. For as much
(then) as the Lord ordained not either Cross or Surplice, it is only a mediat
Antiquity which they have: for which who so says they are old, he follows
Ier. 44.17
Idolaters, Ioh. 4.20.
Samaritans, Mat. 5.21
Pharisees, and that against the Fathers them selves, on whom he relyeth: whose
doctrine is this, Cypri. epi stolar. li. 2. epist. 3.
Non est attendendum quid aliquis ante nos facie^dum putaverit, sed quid
quiante omnes est Christus fecerit, and faciendum praeceperit. Our Opposites
perceaving thus much, strive as much as in them lies, to draw the antiquity
of the cross immediately from Christ him self, or at the least from his
Apostles. First, say they, it cannot be proved but that the Apostles them
selves did use it, or that at the least it has been used even from their
days. which kind of reasoning, is it not shameful? for ponenti non
inficienti incumbit onus probandi. we deny it to be so ancient. they put us
to prove it. absurd: Docret. p. 2. cause. 6. q 5. c. 2.
cum per rerum naturam factum negantis probatio nulla sit. I appeal to them
selves. A papist obiecteth, can ye prove the primitive church had no images?
just as now they object to us, how can ye prove that the primitive church had
no crosses? what the^ they answer to this objection, that serves us now, D.
Bilson ag. Apolog p. 4. p 351
does your discretion serve you to put us to preoue the negative? you cannot
prove they had, and that is cause sufficient for us to avouche they had not.
Again: the proof Ibid. p 346
must be yours since the fact is yours. Again speaking of a matter of
antiquity, Ibid p. 1 p. 56.
presume you no more then you can prove. Last of all, when the papist
reasons after this manner, sure the Apostles had some precise form of
service, though we know it not, the reply is to the^ (which may be in our case
replied) bid. p. 4. p 409.
since you know it not, why make you it your ancre hold, seeing what the
Apostles did observe, none would have dared, but have observed it after their
example. Another reason there is used to prove the antiquity of the cross to
be immediate, Did not Christ use it for an instrument of his death, why do we
call it his cross in case it be not his? To which D, D Fulke ag. Saund. of
Imag c. 12. p. 652.
Fulke thus answers: Christ did not choose the cross but the Jews and his
Judge, they appointed it to him. If any mean of his eternal counsel, so he
chose Judas and Caiaphas to be the instruments of his death, as well as the
cross, who gain no credit by this choosing. and if the cross be the
instrument of man's redemption, because the instrument of his death, then say
the Axes and Gallouse and Gibbettes are the holy instruments of the Martyrs
felicity. Whereas also it is objected, that we our selves do call it his
cross, to wit, Christ's: men must know we do it in the same sense whereby we
call Judas his traitor, the Jews his enemies, the soldiers his executioners,
and not otherwise his.

A third reason for the antiquity of the cross immediate, may chance to renew
the popish Albert: Magn. cum reliquis la^senius concord. Eva^g. c. vlt Rhem
annorat in Luc. 24. sect. 5 etc.
assertion, That Christ did cross his Disciples at his ascending: the bread of
his sacrament at his last supper: the little children which he took into his
arms when he did bless them. That he blessed the bread with the cross,
Amalar. de ecclesiast offic. l. 3. c. 24
Amalarius doubts: and a W. Alanus de Sacram. in genesis l. 1. art. 2.
grand Papist him self denies, not without reason. How is it likely (says
he) that Christ should cross when he blessed, seeing the sign of the cross
was execrable, and ever had been before his time throughout all ages? so that I
need not cite our D. Fulk agai. Rhem. on Luk 24 sect 5. D. Bills. ag. Apolog. p.
4 p. 466.468.
own writers in this behalf. A fourth reason to prove the sign of the cross
immediate is drawn from the Apostles phrase which comprizeth in the cross all
the sum of our redemption, by the merits of Christ's death. Better do our
D. Willet. controver. 9. q 5. ar. 3
writers prove from this phrase, that the sign of the cross is not mentioned
in the scripture, because all the crosses that are mentioned there, are either
the efficacy of Christ's death. 1. Cor. 1.17. or the preaching of Christ's
death, Philip. 3.18. or the affliction that does follow the preaching and the
professing of it, Galat. 6.14. But the use of the crosses sign was taken up by
reason of this phrase and speaking. But this is not to dispute but to divine,
and that absurdlie. For it is as if I should say, that Images took their
rising from those similitudes which Hospin. de re templar. c. de imag. fol 46.
Athanasiut and Basil, and the rest of the Fathers drew from Images in their
sermons. A fifth reason which is brought to prove the antiquity of the Cross
immediate, is, that the Fathers who are them selves ancient, do give it the
title of an ancient tradition: yea, they term it Durant. de rit l. 2. c. 45.
Apostolical. The auncientest Father that is said to do this is Rhem. in Luke
24. sect. 5.
Tertullian, who reckons it up for a tradition (indeed). howbeit not for an
ancient tradition: that is a sixth finger of the Rhem. in Luk 24. sect. 5.
Jesuits: No, he reckons it up for a tradition so new, raw and as yet
unsettled, as that he is feign to make a long exhortation to the Church, that
they would settle it by their receiving it: and conform it by the continuance
of their practice. And we may perceive by him how it grew to be Apostolical,
to wit, as did the honey, the oil, the milk in baptism, not because it came
from the Apostles, but as Tertul. de coron. milit
mos habiturus qandoque Apostoli authoritatem, to wit, through long custom ex
inter praetatione rationis, not otherwise. Thus goes the text in the Basil
editio^, Anno 1528. whereof I thought good to advertize the reader, least he
should be astonished at the edition of Pamelius or any other from which these
words are gelded. Basil is an other Father that is alleged to prove the
cross to be Apostolical. but his treatise of traditions I take to be
counterfeit: and since inserted. one reason is, St Ambrose translateth this
book of Basil de spiritu sancto (whether ex bonis Graecis faciens latina non
bona, or no, as St Hierome seems to ce^sure him, I will not judge) and leaves
it out. But beit he calls the cross Apostolical, know we not that tempera
Apostolorum (in Isidor. de council prae fix. tom. 1. Concilior.
Isidors account) last down to the Nicene Council? so that they who were
present at it might very well be called Apostles in that speech of Damassus,
Damass. op. 5.
haec sola fides, quae Nicea Apostolorum authoritate fundata est, perpetua est
firmitate servanda. Caesar Baronius mannureth much upon this, that Scithianus
and Terebinthus are said to live temporibus Apostoloru^, who lived in Aurelians
time toward 300. years after Christ. But the good man considered not, that
Epiphan. here^. 66.
Epiphanius spoke according to the ancient phrase, which termed the 300.
years after Christ even Apostolical. Again, diverse traditions are termed
Apostolical which rose long after, because they seemed grounded upon the
Apostles, and to be drawn from their practice and example. In which sense
speaks Hierome, Hieron. epi. ad Luc
vnaquaeque provincia, precepta maiorum, leges Apostolicas arbitratur. So the
Cyril in Ioh. ll. 12 c. 64.
threefold demand in Baptism, and the threefold confession of the baptized is
said to be Apostolical, because it rose up long after out of an imitation of
Christ's threefold demand and Peter's threefold answer. So Lent is held by the
Fathers to be Ambros. serin 25.
consecrate by Christ him self. and to proceed from Theophil. Alexandri.
epist. 1.
evangelicall constitution when it is certain (nevertheless) that fasting was
equal and alike at all times in the primitive church, Cassian. collat. 21. c
30.
per totum annum. and that the Lenten fast was enjoined, because the devotion
of men in fasting began to wax cold. So Monachisme is called Apostolical,
yea more ancient, because when afterward it arose it was fathered upon
Hierom. ad Paulina^ epist. 13.
Elisha and Elias, and Chryso on Mark homil. 1.
John Baptist, and on the Cassian. collat. 18. c. 5.
Apostles. whereas notwithstanding it is most true, that Chrysostom does
affirm elsewhere, in Chrysostom in epist. ad Hebre. homil. ^5.
Paul's time there was not so much as any vestigium Monachorum. This considered
it makes not much though the cross be termed Apostolical by some Basil. de
spirit sanct c. 27.
counterfeit, or by some Durant. de rit l. 2. c. 45
papist: whom let no protestant follow because all the grounds which the
Fathers have for it, are only these. Jacobs blessing with his vid Pereri um in
illum loc.
hands a cross: the Cyprian. fid advers. Iudeos cap. 16.
stone that wounded Goliath in the forehead: and the rod of Moses upon mount
Syna, wherewith Amalet was overcome: the Lactant. li. 4 cap. 26.27. Chrysostom.
homil. in Marth. homil. 88.
Pascall blood sprincled on the post: the Augustine.
two sticks of the widow of Sarepta: the wood of Ambros.
Marah making water sweet. And to make an end, the sign of the forehead in
Ezech. and in John's revelatio^. Behold by what string the cross holds his
antiquity? which he that will strengthen can find no other instances then
these, though he turn again and again over all the Fathers. Howbeit have I
said then these? I am deceaved. there be some other which are alleged besides
these. It is believed that the Church of Saint Gagvin. lib. 3. Chronic. Saxon.
li. 1. cap. 32.
Dionise near Paris, was hallowed by Christ him self. which if it be true, he
made the sign of the cross out of question. for without it no church can be
hallowed. It is a tradition also, that when the starte of the wise men was
scene first to shine in monte Victoriano, it had the form of a little child in
it, Chrysostom in op^r. imperfect. in Matt. 2. homil. 2.
and super se similitudinem crucis. He that sees such antiquities for the
sign of the cross and will yet refuse to conform and subscribe, is he not
worthy to stand without door and to sit without his benefice? Our W. Perk.
Problem.
Writers cannot endure those rites and ceremonies which are Apostolical no
otherwise then the new portch is Salomons portch which Herod late erected,
that are old Th. Morton Apolo. p. 1. l. 1. ca. 52.
no otherwise then the Gibionitish bread, and shoes and clothes were old. What
reason (then) to endure the cross which is no otherwise apostolical then the
Temples portch was Salomons, or the shoe of the Gibeonite ancient? Lighting
hereon, it comes to my mind to ask upon supposall that the cross were
truly ancient, what must we prefer a pair of old shoes for their antiquity
before a new pair which are fitter for the foot? But now, we may say by the
sign of the cross as is affirmed of the Wensdayes and Saterdayes fast, Apost
canon 68.
ordained by the Cano^ of the Apostles, it is not Apostolical, and so by
consequent not truly ancient, Epiphan. haeres. 75.
nisi nomine tenus only. and such is our first exception against the antiquity
of the cross, for that it is not immediate.

#Sect. 8. The second Exception against the Antiquity of the Cross.
THE second exception is against the mediat time, wherein it was borne, Sect. 8.
bred up, and brought to perfect stature, which is thus drawn forth by
writers. In the time of Tertul. de resurrect. Carn.
Tertullian the sign transeunt began to be used in Baptism somewhat after the
year 200. our Homil. ag peril. of Idolat. pa. 2
homily sets down 260. Into the Sacrament of the Lords Supper it entered
after the year 300. first vt signaret August. in Johan. tract 118.
Christi bona. after, vt ipsa elementa consecraret, which some Amalar. de
Ecclesiast. offic. li. 3. ca. 24.
asscribe to Augustine. And at the first, it was but a simple rite, till after
the year 1000. then it began to be used in odd numbers by the Microlog. cap.
14.
appointement of Gregory 7. according to his circle rule numero Deus impari
gaudet. whom the Council of Trent does cross. For whereas he Ibid. c. 17.
abroged the crossing twice with the host near the Challice, the Consil.
Trident. rit Celebrand missam.
Council does restore it again, as it was used before his time, as Amalarius
tells us. As for the cross permane^t or composed, though some by guess
refer it to the days of Tertullian, others with more probability to
Co^stantines time, yet for certain it was not known before the year Perk.
problem. in sign. Cruc.
400. The first that was set up in England was erected by King Beda histo
gent. Anglor.
Oswald in the place where he fought with Cadwalla, about the year 635. And
this cross wanted an Image by the space of many years, it being about the
year of the Lord 710. that the Synod. in Trull^. cap. 82.
Council of Constantinople changed the Agnus, because it came too near the
Jews into a cross, with the image of a man upon it: which now we call a
Crucifixe. Having calculated the crosses age, hear now the exceptions we make
against it. Paulus Iovius surmized that the latter end of the age 1400. and
the beginning of the age 1500 was a time fatal by the stars for the
alteration of religion. whereupon it fell out that about the year 1499. Ismael
surnamed Sophus brought in the way of Haly whereby the Persians are now
directed. putting down Hanmars interpretation. and about the year 1497. the
West Indies were discovered by Americus Vespitius, and taught a new religion.
and about the year 1515. Marthin Luther arose, Genebrard.
and began to reform the Church from Popery: Change fate of stars into the
providence of the Lord, and I think in like manner, the end of the age 200.
and the beginning of the age 300. to be fatal for the heaping up of
ceremonies, to the heaving out of the doctrine, which came to pass at last.
For the Church ceased to be a chaste virgin immediately after the death Eusebius.
histor. lib. 3. cap. 29.
of the Apostles: even as of old she ceased to be chaste immediately after the
death of the Elders who saw her deliverance out of Egypt. Judge. 2.
They who succeeded the Apostles (says Nicephor. i. 4. c. 1.
one) came greatly short of them: according to the beaten proverb, pauci
filij, Clemens Alexand l. stromat. in initio.
patribus similes. Papias was one of John's hearers, yet the error of the
Chiliastes sprang from him. He gave cause of error (says the story) to many
Ecclesiastical men, Eusebius. histor. l. 4. c. 36.
quia ad eius antiquitatem respexerunt. If it be not safe to believe an
Apostles hearer for his antiquity, then much less the crosses Fathers, who
drew near to Hieron.
Hieromes time, when the church drew near to her lees, and when the Augu. epi.
burthensomnes of the ceremonies made the estate of the Christians worse then
that of the Jews. I am told that Herman. Hamelman. de tradit. col. 460.461.50.
Bugenholgius upon Jonas collecteth the history of the ceremonies, showing how
they corrupted the church of God by little and little, even from the Apostles
days, and that in the age of the crosses rising common corruption was grown
to some height. To him accords one at Calfh. art. 4. fol. 96.
home, I know right well, that within the 200. years after Christ, there were
crept into the church many idle ceremonies, and the simplicity of Christ's
ordinance was refused. Each man as he had either credit or authority,
presumed of him self to add somewhat to Chapter his institution: and the flesh
delighting in her own devises, delivered the same with as strait a charge, as
if Christ him self had taken order for it. But see we some perticulars. There
began in this mixtage above mentioned, the Author l. de duplic. Mattyr. Ap.
Cypri. Rabban. l. 1. c. 27. Dionis. Ecclesiastic. Hierar. c. 2
exufflation of the baptized, looking toward the West into the Devils face.
There began in this age the Cypri. epist. 7. Ambros. de Sacra^ l. 1. c. 5.
consecration of the Font with oil and cross. There began in this age, the
Cypri. epi. Author. de unction. Chrismat. ap. eund.
oil in baptism, without the which none was thought to be well baptized.
There began in this age the reserving of the bread in the Sacrament, and the
eating of it at home in private. There began here about the Cypri. in epist. ad
Quintin.
exorcisme. the Tertul. de coron. milit
offering and praying for the dead. Tertul. ad vxor. l. 2.
Idem cont. Psychic.
Fasting on certain days, with opinion of necessity and satisfaction. The
Bishops Eusebius. hist l 7. c. 17.
throne, through the pride of Samosatenus. and the seeds of Otho Frifingens.
l. 4 c 5.
Monkerie through the example of Paulus Thaebeus: Anthony following proved
(they say) the first Master that gave rules for that kind of life. So (then)
amongst what weeds the cross grew up, and in what a dounged soil of many
other superstitions: so shall we admire the less to see him in Rabban. de
institut. cleric c. 27
Rabbanus days waited upon with salt, spittle, tapers, and diverse such like,
of which the surplice it self is one. Of this one writes how it was lately
brought in by the Pope, primis temporibus ( Walafrid. Strab. de reb.
ecclesiastic. c. 24.
says he) communi vestimento induti missas agebant sicut and hactenus: quidem
Orientalium facere perhibentur. Stephanus. a. constituit Sacerdotes and Levitas
vestibus sanctis in vsu quotidiano non vti, nisi in Ecclesia ta^tum. Statutum
est in Ecclesia Bracarensi, ne Sacerdos sine orario celebret missam. addiderunt
in vestibus sacris alij alia, vel ad imitationem eorum quibus veteres vtebantur
Sacerdotes, vel ad mysticae significationis expressionem.

#Sect. 9. The third Exception against the Antiquity of the Cross.
THE third exception which we have against the antiquity of the Cross,
bends against the persons of them who either begott it or bred it, or
preferred it in the church. Ptolomie is said to have killed the workmen of the
image of Diana, or secretly to have made them away, that so the image might be
esteemed (...) an image that came down from Jupiter. In like manner, the
authors of the cross and the first devisers of it, have been concealed as much
as might be, that so it self might seem to come from Christ. Draw we them
out of their corners wherein they lie hid, will they be found such as
Vincentius Lyrinensis does prescribe, when he gives the church this rule, we
must only depend upon those Fathers which are knowme to have continued evermore
both in the faith and in the communion of the Catholic Church. Now the
Fathers of the cross cannot abide this trial. For the begetters of this sign
were the Valentinian heretics, who Epiphan. herel.
wrested the same scriptures to it, and gave it the same effectiue power the
papists do now, as these words do witness, Irenae l. 1. c. 1.
Ventilabrum illud, Christi Crucem interpretatur esse, quae scilicet consumit
materialia omnia quemadmodum paleas ignis: immundat autem eos qui salvantur
sicut ventilabrum triticum. Let now the patrones of the cross go, and boast
of the antiquity of it: who if they be not papists, must needs be ashamed to
see their antiquity ascribe such a power unto it, as they must condemn, wrest
those Scriptures for it which they must confute, and send it out of such a
womb, as the memory whereof they must abhor. And in case they can harden
their foreheades to all this, good leave have they, to confront their own
Fathers in the faith, who boldly D. Fulke ag Bristo. motiuc. 46 p. 124.
say and affirm, that the Devil did in Valentinus as well sow the seeds of
Idolatry to the Cross, as he sowed in Carpocrates the seed of idolatry to
images. In the iugling of Marcus, making the wine to show like blood, the
seed of Transubstantiation. and in Tacianus (last of all) the seed of popish
single life, and of their superstitious abstayning from flesh. But whether
this be so or no, sure enough it is, that this heretic was the first that
used this sign, or made any Idem cont Rhem. Luk 24. sect. 5.
account thereof. because we hear no news at all of it, until we come to
him and his sect, in any ancient or authentical Writer, even as our D.
Willet. de cruc ar. 3 D Fulke ag. Saund. of imag. c. 13. p. 625. and in
reioynd. ag. Mart. art. 1 137. art. 4.161 art. 5 177.
Writers tell us.

Secondly, as Valentinus begatt the Cross, so was it Montanus that first gave
it credit, among Christians, not only for common use, but also for religious
in the Church, as all our Magdebu. centur. 3. c 10. in Tertul Herm^ Hamelma^.
de tradit in ape^d ad p. 1. Ioh. Dearing in epi. ad Heb lect. 2. Ioh. Crispin.
chronolo. in Sever. Imper. W. Whitaker. controver. 1. q 6. c. 12 Chemnit. exam.
p. 2. fol 84. D. Fulke reioyd. art. 1. p. 138. Mat. Surel. de ^eremo. missae c
8. W. Perk. problem. in sign cin. Abra. Sculter. in Medul. Athanas. cap. 1.
Writers do accord. The chief instrument under Montanus who was it but
Tertullian? A man so infamous after his fall, as that although Agrippinus
sucked first his error of rebaptization from him, yet he was ashamed to be
known of so much, because an enemy demonstrasse tantum eius primum sententiae
Tertullianum fuisse assentorem, Caesar Baron. Annal. Anno 217.
vicisse adversarios videri propemodum potuisset. Now, is it not Tertullian,
in whom we first hear of the Baptism Cross? Is it not Tertullian that is
the first gracer of it? For men confess themselves ashamed of all the rest.
If we must be ashamed of Tertullian too (as Baronius says we must) alas
(then) whether shall we cause our shame to go? Nos ab alienis demonstrationes
fidei non recipimus might one say once; whereas we D. Willet. vb sup.
receive a badge of our faith (for such is the cross) from the blackest, and
grossest heretics some of them that ever were. we feign would avoyde
Valentinus: we feign would avoyde Montanus, but these must be our Fathers in
the matter of the Cross, unless we would say, that the Gospel of Nichodemus
is our catechism: which makes mention indeed of a crosses sign that Christ
should make upon Abraham in hell; yea upon hell gates themselves to set them
open. And I am not ignorant that some of our writers refer the origin of the
cross eve^ to this fountain. Thirdly, as Valentinus did beget the cross,
Montanus christened it, so they were the vulgar people that bread it up. For
this let one of our Ioh. Reynol. co^fer. c. 8. divis. 4 p. 504.
writers be read, by whom (as also by the text of Tertul. de coron. milit.
Tertullian) this will appear. Chem^^it. in exam. in Decret. 4. de tradit. p.
90. Herman Hamelman. p. 1 de tradit. l. 1. col. 259
Tertullian having mentioned the cross and other rites and ceremonies (as one
eger to get passage for them, and continuance in the Church) grows to an
exhortation to use them still: the end of which he bewrays, as thoroughout
the whole tracte of his speech, so by the vpshott most of all. For when he
reasons that every faithful man, has power to bring in a rite si saluti
proficiat, disciplinae conducat, and that the people must receive every such
rite a quocunque traditore cens^tur, he shows plainly enough his intent was
to get credit to his Mr Montanus, that so his rites might be receaveth with
the more honor and estimation. But when he comes to this, mos iste habiturus
quandoque Apostoli authoritatem, now he bewrays too playnlie both that the
cross and the restof these rites were not as yet settled. and also that the
custom of the people was to be mean to setle them. As the^ we count the
rising of images base, because they Eusebius. histor. l. 7. c. 28.
came from a private custom of some men, who kept them in their houses: the
rising of prayer to saints base because it grew W. Perk. proble Interces. p. 90
ex consuetudine vulgi and ex privata quorunda^ devotione, which also grew out
of an opinion that they were present at their toumbes, and wheresoever they
would themselves, which Hieron. cont. Vigilant c. 2.
Hierome backed: and the rising of shaving base, because when people ware long
Perk. prob. tit. de res sacrae missae
hair and the priests shaved first for example of modesty, this grew at last
from a custom to a Isidor. de offic ecclesiast. l. 2. c. 4. Amalar. de offic.
l. 3. c 5.
signification, and after that to a superstitious ceremony, so must the rising
of the cross be held base, because from a private memorial such as the image
of Chapter was: and from an opinion that Chapter is present at this sign (an opinion
like to that of souls presence at their toumbes) he grew like the shaving from
a custom to a ceremony not only significant, but also superstitious. The
Mart. in reply. art 1.
papist him self disdayneth a ceremony which is begotten by a provincial
Council only: especially a ceremony which grows by a private custom,
Bellar. de pontific l. 4. c 18.
till paulatim vim obtineat legis: and a Herman Hamelma^. de tradit. apend ad
p. 1. col. 455.
Lutheran a chimicall baptism growing from a vulgar custom that was corrupt.
I ascend to the Fathers themselves: one of who^ imputes this to the Le^ten
fast, that at the first it was Eusebius histor l. 5. c. 26.
(...) another imputes this to the lights of divine service, because they
arose Hyeron. cont. Vigilant. c 3.
a quibusdam imperitis, qui zelum habebant, sed non secundum scientia^. another
August. epi ad Ianu (...) 19 c. 19.
excepteth against all rites in general, whose Origin is not illustrious but
they are doubtful for what cause they are brought up. another excepteth against
rites of vulgar beginning (how agreably to him self I speak not) as that he
spares not these words, Tertul. de veland. virgin.
veritati nemo praescribere potest, consuetudo praesertim quae initium ab
alique ignorantia sortita, in vsum per successione^ corroboratur, and ita ad
versus veritatem vindicatur. To come home to the cross it self, whereas
Martial alleges that diverse holy men and women, got diverse little pieces of
the cross enclosed them in gold and silver, hanged them about their necks (as
Helena, Mart. de cruc art. 6
Paulinus, Gregory) we here reply that a common and vulgar custom is not to
be cared for. I doubt not (says Calfh. art. 6 fol. 125
one of our writers) but these had a zeal of their own, and that they thought
to serve God, yet serving their fancy first they did offend against the Ma. of
God, and were occasion of fall to many that came after them. Fourthly, after
Valentinus had begotten the cross Montanus backed it, the people bread it up,
it was preferred by the Fathers (indeed) howbeit ill, as it usually comes to
pass in things received from vulgar custom as is to be seen in Images: the
private custom of which acceptam ecclesia Dei magis magisque adauxit: non modo
effigies and statuas, verum etiam baculos, and vestes, and lectos sanctorum
virorum conservans ad illorum memoriam sem piternam. As for their advancing of
it, consider first the root thereof, for it was either an D. Fulke ag. Saund.
of imag. c. 23. reioyn. to Mart. art. 1.
emulation of the foresaid heretics that first devised it, or a contention
against the heathen that did despise it: or an imitation Lactan. de vera
sapient. c. 16. August. de catechizan. rud. and de verb. Apo. sermon. 8.
of the Jews in their posts marked with the pascall blood, who were thought
to figure it: or a mistaking of Ezechtels sign which was thought to foreshew
it: or last of all, a certain kind of a magical superstition to have in it an
effectual Hospin. de re temp. tit. de cru.
(...) against the Devil, and against all evil, with other like humors (any
one of which, let any who ca^) make lawful. Next consider the top of that
height to which they advanced him, of which one of our writers thus: the
Fathers D. Fulk reioynd. ag Mart. art. 1. p 137.
cannot be justified in their speeches of the cross, and of the Ibi. p. 139
cross they speak more the^ they themselves can justify. Chysostom has his
hand deepest in this excess. Him nothing can excuse, saving an Beza epi.
Hyperbole only: to wit, such an D. Fulke ibid p. 132.
Hyperbole as we must understand in this like spreach of his, I had rather have
a piece of St Paul's chain, quam si quis me coelo condonet omni. What a speech
is this of Ambrose in epistola ad Romans cap. 8. signatos cruce in morte secunda
Diabolus tenere non audet. which some take Herman Hamel. de tradit p. 3. l. 3
col. 302
heynously. as also others Magdebu. Centur. 4. c. 4. tit de tradit. col. 302.
censure Prudentius and Ephreem as overlavishing in their speeches about the
cross. To omit particulars, all our D. Whita. controuer. 1 q. 6. page 443. D.
Fulke reioynd. pa. 145.146.
writers censure all the Fathers for the power which they ascribe unto the
cross against the Devil: for which they Perk. problem. tit. sign. cruc.
send us to these quotations Tertullian de resurrect. car. Lactant. de vera
relig. l 4. c. 27. Cyril. Cateches. 13. Origin. contra Cells. l. 3. Nazianz. ad
Nemes. Theodoret. in Petro and Thalasio. Eusebius. li. 8. cap. 7. Sulpit. epist.
ad Eusebius. Presbyter. Gregor. Dialog. l. 1. c. 1. Victor. de persecut. Vandal.
li. 2. Paulin. l. 2. de vit sanct. Martin. to which may be added that quotation
out of Augustine which Bellarmin.
Bellar. Suarez, and the rest of the Jesuits do alleadg to prove that this
power of the cross is in the judgment of the Fathers even ex opere operato.
But what say we to this, that according to Vincentius rule, this rite of
crossing was universal? Why to omit that this reason is popish which they in
like manner Durant. de rit. li. 1. c. 4 sect. 8.
urge for images, universally observed, we can give insta^ce in other things
which we our selves do now condemn though when time was they were with an
uniformity universal throughout the whole church kept. The exorcisme of
baptism has this testimony, that the church August de Ecclesiast. dogmat. 3^
vniformiter in vniverso mundo kept it. So that an adversary was thus pressed
August. de nupt. and co^cupiscent. l 2. c 18.
accusat ecclesia^ toto orb diffusam in qua vbique omnes baptizandi infantuli
no^ ob aliud exufflantur nisi vt ab ijs princeps munds mittatur for as. Hence
thus a papist against us all: Durant de rit. l. 1. c. 19 sect. 23.
hinc insignis. etc. here the notable impudency of the Calvinistes is
detected: who deride the custom of exorcizing and exufflation, kept and
continued from the Apostles them selves down to this times in the whole world
with one voice, and with one accord of mind and judgment: imitating Julian
(that impure Apostata) who as Gregory Nazian. orat. 4 witnesses, sufflationes
symbolicas in baptismo, in calumniam and risum trahebat. The thrice dipping in
baptism was also in ancienter times, the^ the sign of the cross can Zozom.
l. 6. c. 26. Hierom. advers Luciferian. v.
reach to, universally kept, which yet was after left of and Council. Toletan. 4
c 5. Greg. epist. 41.
abolished, when it grew to abuse by heretics. Cont. Vigilant.
Hierome says, per totas Orientis ecclesias, quando Eva^gelium legendum est,
accenduntur luminaria sole rutilante. Augustine has these words, hoc a
Patribus traditum, August. de verb. Apostolor. 23.
vniversa observat ecclesia, vt pro ijs qui defuncti sunt, cum ad ipsum
sacrificium suo loco commemoratur, oretur. Ambrose Tom. 1. exhortat. ad virgin.
speaks thus: Venit Paschae dies quo toto orb velantur virgins. who knows
not that the oil was universal, as well as the cross? yea, the salt and the
spitle when once they entered, and the ministering of the communion to infants,
with diverse rites and customs.

#Sect. 10. The 4. Exception against the Antiquity of the Cross, proving the
cross now used, not to be that the Fathers used.
THE fourth exception which we make against the antiquity of the cross,
bends against the cross it self of late times used, because it is not the
same which the ancient Fathers used. Baronius speaking of the Amulets
aunciently used, approves them only on this condition, Caesar Baron. annal.
anno 232.
sancta piaque maiorum haec fuit consuetudo, nisi aliqua accedente
superstitione labifactetur. Antonin. p. 4. tit. 11. c. 8. sect. 2.
Aquinas condemns the anointing of a Priest in time of necessity, though
aunciently used as a corruptela rather then consuetudo. This our exception then
is strong, even in the judgment of papists them selves as long as we are
able to prove that the sign of the cross, as very an Amulet as was the book
of the Gospel which Caecilia bore in her boosome: and the pieces of the
Gospel which women hanged about their necks in Chrysostom. in Mat. homil. 73.
Chrysostomes days: has degenerated to more superstition then at the first
was in it: and from the custom of the ancient Fathers has grown to be a
mere corruption. It is strong also even in the judgment of our selves. We
laugh at the papist, when he makes his Introit ancient by the Durant. de rit.
l. 2. c. 11. sect. 1.
singing of the ancient church before their assemblies: for as much as it is
nothing the same: they singing a Psalm of David's only, Beat. Rhenan. in
Tertul. de coron mili. ^
dum conveniebant Christiani in templum, after the manner of some reformed
churches now. We laugh at them also when they prove their Dedication of
churches by the ancient Durant. l. 1 ca. 24.
consecrating of them in Constantines time because it is nothing like, they
dedicating only with the word Eusebius. histor. l. 10. ca. 4.
and with prayer, as the reformed churches do. We laugh at them in like manner,
when they make their elevation ancient (whereby the priest lifts the bread,
and the bread only over his head) by the Harding answer to Jewel. art. 11.
ancient showing of the bread and of the cup, because it is nothing like, the
ancient showing being Iuel. in respon ibid.
only to procure revere^ce in coming to the communion, not to procure
adoration to the element: for which cause when the bread was a showing, there
was cried sancta sanctis, in which manner and to which end some churches
reformed Alexand. Ales. in pro em. leiturg Anglican.
retain it still. We laugh at them when they prove their pax by the ancient
kiss of the primitive church, because it was only a mutual kiss for a sign
of mutual love, even as Durant. de rit. l. 2. c. 54. sect. vlt.
some of them selves confess, and some of our Jewel art. 3. divis. 2.
Divines have proved. Last of all, we laugh at them when Durant. de rit. l. 2.
c. 38. sect. 6.
they go about to prove their round wafers by the round oblations of bread in
the old church called Coronae, because they are nothing the same, they being
the loaves which were offered by the people for the poor, and for the
sacramental element which then was an whole and a round Jewel. art. 11. P.
Morn. de Eucharist.
great loaf, such as the reformed churches do use at this day. In all these
we have severed our selves from the popish corruptelae, falsely hiding and
cloaking them selves under the name of ancient customs. What is the reason we
cannot do the like in the cross? Is it because it is a matter of little
moment? But Harding him self confesses the elevation to be a small matter,
which will not confess so of the cross, as no man else can, because it is an
Idol of it self not only a provoker to Idolatry as their elevation is. Is it
because it is more necessary then Pax or Wafer? The practice of our Church
has acknowledged the wafer to be more needful in the supper, and now
acknowledges the pax to be as needless. Howbeit our cross it self is
degenerated from ancient use, and is not now the same at this present which it
was to the Fathers. For the first use of it amongst the Fathers was a common
crossing ad omnem exitum and aditum, which seeing we have abolished, we have
abolished the first and the chiefest use to which the Fathers turned it. An
other chief use of the Fathers cross, we will likewise confess to be
unseasonable, which was to profess against the pagans. Now condemn we the
chiefest uses of the Fathers, and retain the very worst under pretense of
their antiquity, this is strange do we our selves abolish the cross in the
tollerablest uses without newfanglednes, and cannot our brethren omit it in the
worst, but they must be newfanglistes? this is hard. Howbeit, is the use of it
in baptism it self the same with the Fathers use? No, we are ashamed even of
that also, and have (therefore) coined a new use of our own, which yet is
little better then theirs whereof we are ashamed. I speak of the first Fathers
of the cross who used it in baptism, not to dedicate the child to God as we
do now that office they assigned to the Oil, Tertull. de resurrect. carnis.
Caro vngitur, vt anima consecretur* but to arm the soul with spiritual
defense, Cara signatur vt anima muniatur. Now what shuffling call you this, to
retain the use of that Oil which we have banished, and to banish the use of
the cross which we have retained. Or what partiality to take the crosses
deformity from him to make him gracious, to take the Oils beauty from him to
make him odious? or lastly, what chopping that the cross should be braved with
the Oils use, the oil be branded, whose use was more tolerable then the
crosses among the Fathers? Such is our second main exception against the
slander of newfanglednes, the antiquity of the sign of the cross from which
we swerue, it is no true and sound antiquity.

#Sect. 11. The third Apology against the slander of Newfanglednes in denial
of the Cross.
OUR third apology against the slander of Newfanglednes, is this, That though
antiquity did bind, Sect. 11.
and the antiquity of the cross were without all these exceptions, yet were
we not to be branded with this infamy, because a good part of antiquity
stands on our side. This a writer of ours affirms, D Fulk. cont Rhem Luke
14. sect. 5.
Neither was the sign of the Cross in any estimation with the Apostles, nor
with the faithful in their time. To which we add the primitive church that
next succeeded knew the sign of the cross as little as we our selves would
have it known. Now have not they the best part of antiquity, whose part is in
these times? and that by the confession of our Opposites? who to disparage the
antiquity of all imagerie, It is too young ( D. Bills. cont Apolog. p. 4. p.
315.
say they) to be Catholic, that began but of late: you must go nearer Christ
and his Apostles, if you will have it Catholic or ancient. The nearer (then)
that our antiquity draws to the time of Christ and to the Apostles, so much
the stronger, sounder, better, now it shall be evidently prooved to be as near
as may be. For what Nichodemus, what Iosephe (first)? 1. Sam. 21.9
Since David laid Goliahes sword behind the Arc, that was but an instrument
of a bodily victory: these, would they not have laid up the cross, or
preserved it at the least, if they had thought it (I say not such a sovereign
thing as the papists make of it) but such a true instrument or fit monument of
Christ his spiritual victory as it is held by some at home? They took down
the body, what the cross? they Doct. Willet. de cruc. art.
threw it away: at the least they regarded it not: so that the L. Act and mon.
in histor. eiue.
Cobham, who after suffered about the cross, yields it seems more to his
commissioners then he needed, when he told them he would lay up decently
wrapped the true cross whereon Christ dyed in case he had him. And was not the
hand of the Lord in this work, burying the true cross it self, as once he
buried Moses body in an unknown place, to prevent Idolatry, or to make it the
more inexcusable when in time it should break forth as since it has done? Oh
but he gave Bellarmin. de imag c. 27. argument. 3.
Helena power to find it as soon as it could be had in honor, which was when
paganism was abolished: so that he buried it in the mean season (indeed) to
save it from their contempt. See the facility of these men. Does the cross
want honor by the space of 300. years? It was to reserve him self to the
honor of the Christians of those times only. And although the christians of
the former ages were far more zealous, that was nothing, they would have
honored him, but the cross would not be honored by them. What did he scorn
them? No it was not his pleasure. So when Act. and mon in H. 8. p. 848.
Franciscus San Romanus refused to honor a certain cross that stood in the
way as he was going to the fire, there was presently a shout given among the
people, O the miraculous virtue, power, and the wisdom of the Cross, that
will not be honored by an heretic: but whose will and pleasure is to be
honored by Catholics only. Howbeit, as touching the invention of the cross,
by Helene, it is a true counterfeit: as appears not only by many sound
reasons which our Magdebur gens. ce^tur. 4. c. 13. col. 1438. Calsh ag. Mart
art. 8 fol. 152. D. Willet. de cruc. art. 1. John Reynold.
writers do allege, but also by the open confession of the canon it self,
Gelas. decret. de Apochriph. Mat. 24.14.
scripturae de inventione Crucis Dominicae, novellae quaedam relationes sunt,
and alia de inventione capitis Iohannis Baptistae. But to proceed. It is
written of the West Indies, that there was no footesteppe of religion found
amongst them because no cross, no Temple etc. whence may be concluded, that
the first times preached the Gospel to the nations without the use of any
crossing. For I make no question but the gospel was preached unto them in case
they were a people. Here at home the gospll was preached even from the
beginning (as many undoubted evidences show) whereas yet there were no crosses
in this land, until Augustine the Monk brought over his silver cross, which
was Beda histo. de gent Anglor. li. 1. cap 1 ^. D Fulk reioynd. art. 5 p. 177*
carried before him at his entrance together with an image which was painted in
a table. From Jews and Gentiles that had the gospel planted amongst them
without all crosses, come we to their next successors who professed it without
all crosses likewise. As for Martialis Abdias Iustini quaestiones, who^
Martial mustereth in this quarrel for the sign of the cross together, they
are Apocriphall says Mr Calfhill and not to be cared for, as Mr Beza with the
rest of our writers tell us. Martialis is found counterfeit by Eusebius,
Hieronimus, Genadius, who in their registers which of purpose they wrote of
Ecclesiastical writers, make at all no Calfh. art. 1. p. 27
mention of him. Abdias is branded by a Paulus 4. ap. Sixtum Senens. bibliothe.
l. 2 Bellarm. de. Eccles. triumphan. l. 1. c. ^0 Io. Molan de sid heret.
servand. l. 1 c. 6.
Pope and by papists themselves: and so Sixth. Sene^s. bibliothec. in prefat.
are the questions that are ascribed to Justinius Martyr, which cannot be his,
because Origin is cited in them who lived long after the^. they savor
something of Theodoret, but I will not presume to interpose my judgment. Now
these discarded, it will be found true what one of our Writers has, D. Fulkre
joined. ag. Mart. art. 5. fol. 177
As touching the credit of the old writers, who had all their errors, I like
well the counsel of Vincentius Lyrinensis, that we should still have recourse
for trial to the most ancient, in which we must needs account the writings
of the Apostles, both of most antiquity and of greatest authority. Wherefore
seeing the manner of blessing with the cross is not found either in the
writings of the Apostles, or in the most ancient Fathers. Justinius and Clemens
Alexandrinus: by Vancentius counsel, we may justly account for a corrupt
custom crept into the church, either by emulation of heretics, or in
contention against the pagans. But does not Justinius Martyr make mention of
the cross: of the cross whereon Christ dyed he makes mention, of the sign of
the cross we have no mention in him at all, nor in any other: till we come
down to the times of Valentinus, when it began to be used by heretics, and
unto Tertullians age when orthodox Christians first received it. Well then you
will grant that here your antiquity ends, some fourteen hundred years
ago? No, that we will not neither. Minut. Foelix in Octavio. 1 These. 3.8
Minutius Foelix lived long since, who has these words, Cruces nec colimus
nec optamus. which if our Governors would now speak and perform accordingly,
we would catch their words from their mouths as greedily as ever Benhadads
servantes did the words of Ahab: and upon their performance we should be as
glad as Benhadad him self, because if the cross were not cared for by them,
we should live, whereas now our life can scarce be termed a being alive. The
Emperor Theodosius is on our side: who made a law to void all P. Crinit. de
honest. discipli^. li 9 c. 9.
crosses, which the papists elude in vain, when they restrain him to crosses
only on the ground: else are all our D. Fulk ag Saund. of imag. c. 13 pa. 660.
Morn. confer. of Font Bleau. Zanch. de imag. Jew. aga. Harding etc.
writers vain: yea, the doctrine Homil. ag. peril of idolat. p. 2.
of our Church it self which is confirmed by act of Parliament, is not only
vain but false, which takes upon it to refute this cavil. Basil. in psalm. 45.
Basil inveigheth against the vanity of charecters, and what is the cross
better? In the days of the Author of the Questions Athanal. ad Antioch Q 16.
ad Antiochum, they used to dissolve the cross when they were suspected to
honor it. let us but dissolve these two cross lines now that the papists do
adore it, and we by our use grace this idol adored by them, and we are
releeved. If he say all the Fathers approved crossing, I answer of them, as D.
D. Fulk in reioynd.
Fulke of Cyprian once about anoyling, if they will do against them selves,
their own reasons, grounds and rules (which we have with us throughout this
treatise) what can I help it? Homil. ag peril of idolat. p. 2
Serenus Bishopp of Marciles, (is approved by our Church) who puts down all
images and all crosses out of the church. So are the Emperors of the East, who
were against the having of all images in the Church. So is Claudius of Taurinum
who pulled down the very images and the crosses that were established by law,
by which they were not honored but served for memorialls only and for
decency, as now our cross is said to be used. In the age ^100. the
professors of the truth (then termed despitefully Pet Cluni acens epist 1.
and 2.
Petrobrusiani) burned all the crosses that they could come by. The Bellarmin.
de imag. c. 26.
Waldenses who succeeded them, abhorred crosses. John Wicklife who followed
the^, allowed only a Tho. Waldem ^om. 3. ^it ^0.
cross spiritual. Act and mo. p. 735:
George Brown a disciple of his, thinks it as unfit to make a cross a
memorial of Christ, as for a child to make much of the halter or of the
gallouse, wherewith his father was hanged There was at the Bow in London in
the very room where some of the Martyrs were wont to be examined in the days
of Q. Marie (as I have received from them who know it) an ancient picture in a
glass window, well near worn out, and so not observed by the examiners, set
up by all likelihood by some of the scholars of Wicklife, the paynting was
this; A tree half withered: two Angels laboring at the feet to throw him
down. the one with a spade, the other with an axe or sith: at the top hunge
paxes, crosses, holy water, sprincles. etc. From this time downward there have
not wanted famous witnesses against the cross which have been mentioned Cap 6.
sect. 1.
elsewhere. Our late Writers be ours likewise: and all the Churches well
reformed. We are charged with a Corinthian fantasying of men's persons, and to
be carried away with an over great reverence toward men: which is in deed the
fault of our adversaries, who suffer them selves to be overswayed by the
present learning, credit, power, and authority of the L Bishopps and their
adherentes So was it objected not long since to the Count Ioh Crisp^^.
supplement in Marcell. 2.
Palatine, that his revence toward Master Calvine, carried him away: whereas
(indeed) it was their pretenced reverence toward Master Luther that carried
them. whereupon he protested that though the truth were scandalized under Mr
Calvines name, yet notwithstanding he would embrace it: not believing in Ste
Martine, nor in Ste James, (he meant Martine Luther and Iacobus And^eas, whom
the vbiquitaries servily followed) but in Christ Jesus only. I trust we shall
have leave given us (being unable to advise our selves) to seek to the advice
of those, whom God has honored with his special gifts, and raised up to
hold forth light to others. Now amongst these, as no sword fitter for David,
the^ that which had slain Goliath, so no writings to theirs, who have fought
against the Antichrist, and have slain him lived not these before the
controversy grew so hoot? Follow we (then) that good Cario ^e^ces ^hroni. p
336.
Theodosius, who makes trial by those Fathers, who were no parties in the
strife, but lived before the stuire began. If having these we cannot be heard,
what should we say else, but that we are used as Paulus Vergerius was at the
Council of Trent: being called into question for calling into question the
Legendes of Saint George and Christopher, he is able to cite Catholic Doctors
on his side: yea Paul the third Pope him self, who commanded that these
Legendes should be struck out, as false and forged. Marcellus Cervinus cannot
deny it. What then? For all this his judgment is he must not be held for a
good man that will preach any thing that comes near to Lutherans. So are we
dealt withal by some: No matter though we can cite our own Writers and other
Churches that are reformed, it is become a ruled case, nothing is good in any
Writer or in any Church, that seems to make for puritanes: neither can any
man be honest, or a good subject, that does but look toward them in their
desires of reformation. and hereupon we are thrust out from the Ministry as
he was from the Council. What should we say? but as the son of Barachias,
The Lord look down, behold, and judge. and so far of the sin of the
Ceremonies against this ninth commandment.

S. D. G.

The concupiscence of the Cross. Chapter 10.
THE last transgression of the cross is against this last co^maundment, in
that it feeds lust habitual, breeds lust actual: both of which are
forbidden in this precept. For whereas it wills us to fight against these
foresaid lusts; as we fight against enemies whom we besiedge, stopping all
passages of our senses whereby they may come by victual, the sign of the
cross not only serves for a porter that lets in, but even for a purveyer
also that carries in the out temptations that do nourish them in idolatry
and superstition. worthy are the words of Augustine to be considered,
Augustine. sermon. 3. de comun. vit ^leric. and epist. 109. ad Monach
Non solo tactu sed and aspectu appetitur and appetit foemina: Nec dicatis vos
animos habere pudicos, si habeatis oculos impudicos. quia impudicus oculus
impudici cordis est nuncius: and cum se invicem sibi etiam tacentelingua
conspectu mutuo corda nunciant impudica: and secundum concupiscentiam carnis
alterutro delectantur ardore, etiam intactis ab immunda violatione corporibus
fugit castitas ipsa de moribus. Add unto this, the admonition of a Council,
speaking of those that are not to marry, they must not only provide that no
women dwell with them, but also that they have not so much as any access to
the^: upon this reason, Council. Carthagi^ens. 1. c. ^
etiam occasiones amputandae sunt peccatorum and tollendae quibus subtilitas
Diaboli sub pretextu charitatis and dilectionis incautas animas velignaras
irretire consuevit Omit we not the Canon neither which tends to the very
same purpose, Decret. p. 1 distinct. 8. (...). 9.
Congruum est inde etiam corporaliter avelli vbi quisquis illecebris
deservivit. Nam and locus ipse hoc in aspecta me^tis apponit, quod saepe ibi
cogitavit vel gessit. And that the consort of our witnesses may be full, refuse
we not the admonition of a private and common man, who upon the experience of
stratonice causing her lovers pulse to beat as often as she came in sight,
gives this rule against concupiscence, Antoni^^ Gubert. Costan. poly. histor.
c. 8.
Nihil facilius quam amor recrudescit, and oculos and aures avertat qui
alicuius rei desyderium p^nere vult. What then? though we touch not the lips
of this Baall (the cross) as long as we feed our senses with his sight, our
hearts remain not pure and chaste, neither are the occasions done away,
wherewith Satan will insinuat him self into them (pretend the law what end
it will in the retayning and keeping of him) the sensual pulse will ever beat
as long as the senses are not turned from him: the very place it self
puts into the mind ill thoughts, where any wanton action of ours has been
committed: how much more then the representatio^ of the wanton action it self,
both which together in the cross are renewed unto the senses. But to speak
more particularly, the first way whereby the cross sturreth up concupiscence
is that occasion which an idol or image has, when it is placed in the church
though not adored: against which our own doctrine which is confirmed by act of
Parliament, alleges many reasons. The first is drawn from the original of
the image, and it has this ground, ^^om^^ ag. peril of idolat. p. 1.
what was ill at first rising, can never prove good or profitable after. Our
Opposites say the cross may be turned to good use howsoever it has been abused
heretofore. therefore must they not subscribe unto this homily, because the
rising of the cross was evil at first in Valentinus and Montanus, and here of
late it arising out of the ashes of the Antichristian cross, has according to
the homily, not since grown profitable, but has rather looked back toward
Sodom ever since, no whit breaking the Poets positio^, Ortus quaeque suos
repetunt. The second is drawn from the nature of an image, and it has this
ground, Ibid pa. 3. page 36.
good things do ever by little and little decay: ill things by little and little
increase: as the image was Pa. 50.
first painted. after it grew to be ingraved: and at first it was used but in
private houses: after it crept into Churches and temples: where at first it was
not worshipped, but shortly after it began to be adored: first by the people
that were ignorant: at last by learned men and all. None can deny but that all
this down right lights on the cross that does consider how from the
beginning he has increased by little and little, from heretics to christians:
from use private to public: from a sign to an Idol: and since that time
that it has been refined amongst us from a block offending the foot to a
stone crushing even the whole body, as is to be seen this day. The third
reason of the Homily, is drawn from the proanes of men to idolatry: For the
image is an Ibid pa. 3^ page 45.
harlot, and man is no otherwise bent to the worshipping of it (if he may have
it and see it) then he is bent to fornication in the company of a strumpet.
For a Page 46.
man given to lust to sit down by an harlot is to tempte God. so the setting
up of an image in the Church, and the sitting of people by it, is in this
proanes of man's nature nothing better then a temptation to idolatry. Now if
any will say (says this Homily) that this similitude proves nothing, yet
let Gods word, out of which it is taken, prove some thing with them. Does not
the word of God call idolatie fornication? does it not call a painted Image, a
strumpet with a painted face? be not the spiritual wickednesses of an Idols
enticing like the flattery of a wanton harlot? be not men and women as proane
to spiritual fornication as to carnal? It must needs follow therefore that
as it is the duty of the godly Page 48.
Magistrate, lovinge honesty and hating whoredom, to moove all strumpettes,
especially out of places notoriously suspected or resorted unto by naughty
packes, so after the example of the godly Kings Hezechias and Josias, to drive
away all spiritual harlottes (I mean Idolles and Images) specially out of
suspected places, Churches and Temples, which are dangerous for idolatry to
be committed unto images, when they are placed in them. Damascene has these
words of the holy Sacrament, Damas. de orthodoxfid. cap. 14.
Let us go to it with ardent desire, vt and oculis and labijs and frontibus
impositis divini carbonis participes efficiamur. Now, as a good sign ordained
by God is a fiery coal to inkindle love, when the senses are stricken by it:
so a sign evil ordained by man (such as is the sign of the cross) and an
harlot (such as is every image else) is not only a coal to heat, but also a
fire to inflame with lust, as it is in the Comoedie, accede ad ignem hunc,
calesces plus satis. The fourth reason, is drawn from the inveterate love
which men commonly bear unto their old customs: so that the people having
heretofore honored images (and the cross is an image that has been honored)
they will never be wayned from them: as long as they have them they will
honor them. This we see in the Jews (says the Page 2. p. 13.14.
homily) they have been so long envred to the rites and ceremonies that now
they cannot tell how to leave them: which if God abolished to take all
occasion from them, then how much more ought all Images to be abolished which
are no ordinances of the Lord but devises of man brought in thor^ugh blind
zeal and devotion? Here let me turn to our Opposites a little: who think
there is no need to suffer in the cause of the Ceremonies against papists as
yet: First the doctrine Pa. 2. p. 8.
of the homily is, we must follow the example of the ancient Fathers by name
of Epiphanius, who removed every Image out of the church as soon as they spied
it, because though yet they were not worshipped, yet they were likely in time
to breed lust and concupiscence to Idolatry. Secondly, the doctrine of our
Ibid. p. 13
church inhibiteth out of Euschius to keep an Image indifferently, that is in
a continued sequence of years and times without interruptio^. so that by it a
man must suffer, rather the^ suffer by his fault cerem. so deeply infected to
run on without interruption as now it is purposed these shall do. The first
Pa. 3. p. 27
reason of our homily is drawn from experience past and present. we see it
come to pass (says it) that the Christians entertayning the rites and
ceremonies of the heathen, fell to the heathens idolatry also: which Pa. 2. p.
19
Serenus foreseeing, threw all Images out of the church: which course if it had been pursued, all idolatry had been overthrown whereas their suffering in the
church by Gregory's means who commanded them to stand, though ne forbad them
to be worshipped, ensnared both the West and the East in a public adoring of
them, and that by law: as when Gregory and Leo the third made a decree in the
West, Irene the Empress a law in the East they should be worshipped. Hereby
came to pass which Serenus feared, and Gregory the first forbad in vain; so
that indeed it is impossible any long time to have images in public churches
and in temples without idolatry: as by the space of little more then one
hundred years, betwixt Gregory the 1. forbidding their worshipp, and
Gregory, Paul and Leo the 3. commanding their worship, most evidently
appears. All this being common to the cross, condemn we it rather then our
own church which thus Pa. 3. p. 4^
advises: It is truly said, the times past are schoolmaisters of wisdom to
us that follow and live after. Let us therefore of these latter days learn
this lesson from experience of ancient antiquity, that Idolatry cannot
possibly be separated from church images, but is an inseparable accident to
them: as a shaddowe follows the body when the sun shines, so idolatry
follows the having of images in the church. Finally, as idolatry is to be
abhorred, so are images (which cannot be long without idolatry) to be put away
and destroyed.

#Sect. 2. Three replies against the evidences of the Crosses Concupiscence.
AGAINST these evidences of the crosses concupiscence, there are three things
replied. First, that the material crosses only tempte, like Idols and
Images, and not the aereall, which now we call the sign of the cross. We
answer, It has been proved, that the cross aereall is an Image and an Idol,
as well as the material: and in some respects far worse. and all the reasons
whereby our Homily throws other Images out of the Church to prevent their
tempting, beat directly against this Cross. First ( Homil ag peril of Idolat
page 3. page 13.
says it) the Image is in the church a tempter, because it has heretofore
been worshipped: and the aereall sign of the cross has been worshipped, yea
even adored with higher honor then any other representation of Christ
material. Secondly, the Image cannot be placed in the Church without danger
of tempting, because though we worship him not, yet is he worshipped in
sundry places now in our time: so is this aereall cross. What if he were
not? For seeing the Homily casts out of the Church of God not only that
which makes love unto it self, but also that which makes love to other
things which it does countenance, the sign of the Cross must needs be
cashired, because though it tempt not to superstition toward it self, yet
does it toward the Idols of crosses material, whom it resembles unto the
people, and graceth before them. The third reason of the homily, proves the
image in the church to be a tempter, in respect of time to come: superstition
being an inseparable accide^t to the image that is in the church; so that
though the cross aereal for the present did not tempt, yet there is danger he
will stir and raise concupiscence in time to come Secondly, our Opposites
themselves will grant that the aereall cross partaketh of the inward
idolatry as well as the material does: we say it does more for that virtue,
yea admirable virtue which the Bellarmin de effect. sacra. c. 31.
papists repose in it ad producendos effectus spirituales: and for that
special help it has against the Devil, of which one thus, Ioh. Molan. de
decalog. ca 4. conclus. 3. Nota. 19.
ea adhibenda sunt remedia quae adversus Daemonum illusiones, vexationesque
ecclesiastica sanxit authoritas, vsusque firmavit, vti sunt signum Crucis, aqua
benedicta. etc. It being so, they must needs grant likewise, that it has a
power and virtue, to raise concupiscence toward inward idolatry: which is it
small? Confess. Eccles. Mansfel. ap. Conra. Schluilelba tom. 13. p. 558.
cum per Ceremonias Diabolus arcetur and quotidiani lapsus eluuntur vt docet
agmen Pontificium, tum vero in perniciosam idololatriam vertuntur, qua^ Deus
prohibuit, as one of the foreign Churches teaches. I needed not gone over
the seas for this, our own Church at home does Homil pa 3. page 98.
teach us, that Idolatry chiefly consists in the mind: and in Ibid p. 109
particular it tells us, that to ascribe a power of supernatural effects to
any creature (as the papists do to this sign) is such an Idolatry, as may
not be tolerated. yea D. Bills. ag Apolog. p. 4 p. 344.345.
our Opposites them selves are very large in their invectives against the idol
of the heart, when only God is not served as he should, how much more the^
should they inveigh against this sign, which does not only raise idolatrous
fancies of God, through conceaving and worshipping of him besides his word,
but also stir up idolatrous thoughts and cogitations toward it self: for
which cause, if not in it then in nothing, is August. de verb. dom secun. Math.
sermon. 6.
Augustines counsel to be followed, prius id agamus vt Idola in eorum cordibus
confringamus. Thirdly, the effects of the cross aereall bewray that he is a
tempter: which in the people (not well reformed from their old customs) are the
same which Ioh. Reynold de Idolotat. lib 2. ca. 3. lect 26. and 68.
our writers use to bring to prove the idolatry of the pagans toward their
images and their idols. The Tyrians bewrayed, they thought to have help by
the image of Apollo when they bound it fast with chains to keep it fast and
sure to their city against Alexander who the^ besieged it. The Athenians
bewrayed the like when they made an image to Victoria without wings to the end
she should not fly away from them. And the Sicilians when they co^playned they
had now no God in their cities to fly unto, because Verres had taken away
their Images. If the popishly addicted within this realm are not in like fear
to loose the power and presence of Chapter upon the loss of this sign, then are
we gulled, not only by our own experience, but also by the prudence of our
Reverend Fathers which has resolved that it cannot be removed without a
mischief: for that the people will not miss it nor by any means leave it:
which if it be true, then even in their own confession they chain it fast with
the Tyrians, clippe the wings of it from flying away with the Athenians, and
complain with the men of Sicilie in case it be taken from them against their
wills. The second reply to the premises is, that seeing they that be wise use
the sign of the cross well enough, it is indifferent, and so at the
Magistrates pleasure whether he will remove it or no. especially for the sake of
a few who are not to be regarded by him. To this our Homil. vb. sub pa. 3. p.
13.
homily first replyeth, that if it does hurt to any it must be remooved: that
though a man receive no hurt by it him self, yet that he must forbear and
remove it for other men's sakes, as Paul commands 1. Cor. 8. the Magistrate
him self not being excepted: touching whom it Ibid. 61.
demands, The good K. Hezechias did know well enough that the brazen serpent
was but a dead image, therefore him self took no hurt thereby through idolatry
to it: did he therefore let it stand, because himself took no hurt thereof?
and last of all, that there is danger to the most wise by every idol and by
every image in the Church: as we see in Page 50.
Solomon him self the wisest. Whereupon it is thus concluded, It is better
Page 51.
even for the wisest to regard this warning: He that loves danger, shall
perish therein, and let him that stands beware least he fall. rather then
wittinglie and willingly to lay a stumbling block for his own feet and
others. The third replye to the premises is, that though the sign of the
cross be a tempter, yet the concupiscence to which he tempts may be
preve^ted by other means, as by preaching, and by the autho. of the
Magistrate. First, this course is no other then that which Antich. does
prescribe, as does appear by the Council. Trident. sess. 25. decret. de imagine.
Council of Trent, although it grants it is superstition credere quod insit
in imaginibus aliqua virtus propter quam sint colendae, yet will it not have
them to be removed, but prescribes only the parish priest must remove the
superstition, but let alone the images. Secondly, God prescribes another
course: which is to remove all occasions of Idolatry and superstition, Zanch.
de imag. These 3 p. 355. Homil. vb. sup. p. 1. p. 4. and p. 3. page 12.
amongst which the very having of an image or an idol in the Church, is one
of the chiefest. Thirdly, our own doctrine of our church makes answer to this
objection: p. 3. p. 42.
affirming that neither the preaching of Bishops, nor the Decrees of Counsels,
nor the Laws of 8. Emperors in the East could ever remedy the idolatry or
the abuse of images, when once they were to be had in churches: upon the
experience whereof, and upon many other reasons which show that Ibid. p. 34 35.
preaching against the abuse, is insufficient; it flatly determines that in
the retayning of every Idol, and of every image in the church, there is a
danger Ibid p. 7.
unavoidable of superstition: and that there is not only a difficulty, but
also an page 36.
impossibility of any remedy in this behalf. and such is the first way
whereby the cross tempts to concupiscence: to wit, as an image and an
idol, when it is found in the service of God.

#Sect. 3. The second temptation the cross gives, is, that it makes men to
think it is the same in our use with the popish and superstitious cross.
THE second way whereby the sign of the cross tempts, is by that show
which he has to make men think he is the same in our use with the popish and
with the superstitious cross. Thamars habit whereby she is like a common
strumpet to be hired enlureth Judah, together with her sitting in place convient
for the sin. The cross, as used in our church, bears the habit of the
harlot, and sits in the very place where the spiritual fornication was wont
of old to be committed. which being also an holy place and religious,
augmenteth much our sin. The Council forbids any sacred person to be
present in such places, Council. Agathens. (...). 39.
vbi amatoria cantantur, aut obscoeni motus corporuns choreis and saltationibus
efferuntur: ne auditus aut obtutus sacris mysterijs deputati turpium
spectaculorum, atque verboru^ contagione polluantur. Are not the senses deputed
to holy sightes in baptism? have not the making of the cross and our signing
the infant with it, thereby to receive him into the church, and to dedicate him
to God a greater show of spiritual and the popish fornication then the sight
of dancing has of the bodily? and has not this a greater incitment to the
one, the^ that has to the other? What that the Council forbids every
tempting sight and spectacle at other times, and in other places, whereas this
is proposed in the time of Gods service it self, whereby it offends against
that Canon, Decret. p. 2. cause. 18. q. 2. c. 6.
Missas quoque publicas in Coenobijs sieri omnimodo prohibemus: ne in servorum
Dei recessibus and in eorum receptaculis vlla popularis conven tus praebeatur
occasio, vel mulierum fiat illis introitus, quia non expedit animabus little.
And for as much as it is in a sacrament where this tempter sits to enlure,
there may be very well applied against it, what once was spoken against
Severus, Synod. 5. Conftantinop. ar. 1
impudicitiam muliebrem non dignam divini baptismatis introduxit, and stare
fecit iuxta sacrum fontem. again, excaecatus est animi oculus, cum stat in
sacrificio sine sanguine quod dignis vtile fuit, non illi qui omnem intellectum
proijcit in intuitum mulierum; nesciens quod ex solo adspectu peccatum
contrahitur iuxta divinam scripturam. Secondly, as the show of our cross
tempts like an harlots habit in place convenient, so also like the paynting
of a woman's face: who for her self is honest. Now this cannot but Tertul. lib
de cult. foe miuar.
tentationibus viam aperire and permovere scandalum saltem in spiritu: So that
we may say of our cross, though of her self she were honest and lawful, what
was said against such paynting, simus and moribus ijsdem, si supersicie eadem,
Christianae pudicitiae non satis est esse, veru^ and videri. In regard of this
our seeming not to be chaste, and of this show of famenes with popish
unchastity, we answer to the^ who say the cross is indifferent per se what
was answered to the women that did stand upon the indifferency of their
paynting, omnia licent sed no^ omnia aedificant, facilius illicita timebit qui
licita verebitur. Again, when we are told it is peevish to fear a scandal by
the cross, we may well answer, what was to the^ likewise replied who laughed at
chose who feared such paynting would prove a snare, timor fundamentum salutis
est. praesumptio impedimentum timoris. qui saecurus agit, non possidet firmam
securitatem, at qui est sollicitus, is vere poterit esse saecurus. Last of all,
when it is said we use the cross without superstition, what hinders to
borrowe the answer which was given to them when they protested in like manner, we
use our paynting without all concupiscence of unchastity, as knows the Lord
who knows our hearts, probum tamen vestrum non apparet coram hominibus, that
so you might be probae etiam alijs both exemplo and testimonio, as ye ought to
have been. Thirdly, as the sign of the cross tempts like the habit of an
harlot, and the paynting of an honest woman, so also like the wanton carriage
between men and between women: an example whereof we have in him who was
Antonin. Gubert. Costam. Poly hist. c. 4.
censured even by the heathen them selves for kissing his wife before his
daughter. who will deny, but that this gesture was lawful enough, yet because
there was a show and a representation in it which would put ill thoughts into
the mind of a young and tender Virgin, therefore it was scandalous. Now a
show there is greater in our crossing, not of any lawful action, but of a
wanton dalliance.

#sect. 4. The third temptation of the cross is by renewing the spiritual
fornication and popish delight which it bred in former times of darkness.
THE third way whereby the sign of the cross tempts, is by calling unto
mind the spiritual fornication, and by renewing the popish delight which was
wont to be taken in it in former times of darkness: for that such a remembrance
is a tempter, and therefore ought to be removed, appears clearly by the
equity of Moses law: of which thus Augustine, August. sup. Levit. ad cap.
19. q. 74.
pecora inde credendum est iussa interfici, quia tali flagitio contaminata,
indignam refricant facti memoriam. Now the cross rubbeth up the memory of
cross idolatry both by word and by deed. We will begin with this latter
first. Know we not that the very expressing of the dalliances of adultery
upon a stage infecteth with thoughts at least involuntarie, which be forbidden
in this commandment? For we are forbidden by the Apostle (...) to any lust of
our former ignorance, to wit, Pet. 1.14.
as a H. Stepha^. in Thesau.
player is framed and fashioned to the gestures and words either of drunkenes
or of adultery, when he played them on the scaffold of the Theater. In regard
hereof the crosses superstition being a lust of former ignorance, we do ill,
as it seems to express the fashioning of it in a sacrament, a place which is
such (in respect of provoking to spiritual fornication) as is the stage in
respect of the bodily. Remember we here that which Cyprian spoke once against a
stage play, etiam Cypri. epistolar. lib. 2.
gestus in. quinat: adulterlum discitur etiam cum auditur. and it is a
provocation etiam exprimere impudicam Venerem. You will say, we have no purpose
to make the popish cross: but so the player has no purpose to commit the act
of adultery: his sin is in that he gestureth and expresses the dalliances
of it to the polluting of their thoughts, that hear and behold him. Now it
will seem very strange unto me, if our gesturing and expressing of the
crosses unchaste dalliance in the sacrament of Baptism be not granted to have,
even a greater and stranger tempting power then that of a player upon a stage,
seeing his spectators have a light in them to resist ill thoughts for that
they know the adultery which he expresses is a sin, which the beholders of
the cross in baptism want, in that they think the very popish use thereof is
pious and good. and as for the church it self wherein this gesturing is acted,
it tempts more then a stage, because it is the bed it self, which also
adorned with spiritual complement, has a greater force to enlure the^ a bed
decked with ornaments of Egypt. to give instance but in one: the countenance of
autho: Pro. 7.16.
the grace which the law does give it, the power that makes it to seem great
before the people, is it a small temptation to them? Sure, as Cyprian said once
of the stage play when it was by law authorized, the same may we now say of
this sign, it is malum publicae authoritatis Lenocinans ad vitia. So by deed
our cross rubbeth up the remembrance and the memory of the ancient cross
adulterous. Come we now to that memory which it does renew by word. Ephesians.
5.3.
for as the very name it self of the bodily fornication ought not to be heard
amongst the saints, so the very name it self of the popish adultery ought to
have been long since buried, which our cross not only keeps above ground, but
also on foot. Nullius rei atrocis aut vilis commemoratio melior est, quod in
facto reijcitur in dicto etiam reijciendum. and so by consequent in gestu.
Again, Tertul. li. de spectacu
vetustas horror expressa ad imaginem, veritatis action replicatur, ne
saeculis transcuntibus exolescat quod aliquando commissum est. Nunquam crimen
by these means temporibus obruitur. Nu^quam scelus oblivione sepelitur. It ca^
not be denied but that our cross commemorateth the popish cross, replicateth
in action the popish crossing, continues the memory of idolatry committed to
it, so that it cannot be forgotten. all which open a window to concupiscence
toward the same. In deed what force such commemoration and representation of
adultery has to open a window even to very Satan him self, this author
shows by the example of a christian woman possessed at a Theater, Satan
giving this reason why at that time he entered in to her, quia invenerat eam in
suo. No mervayle then, if diverse be possessed still with the crosses
superstition, since whom he finds at this replication, commemoratio^,
representation of the old popish crossing, he does (in a manner) find them in
suo. Our R. Hook li. 5. ca. 65.
adversaries talk how the sight of the cross works much by imagination upon
whose cell it beats. speak they not herein more truly then they be a ware
of? For the example of our crossing throughout the conceyt and apprehension of
the simple is much avaylable to breed in them an imagination, or rather an
image of a superstitious crossing, since a Math. Kellison in Survey. in epist.
to the King.
Jesuit him self affirms of the superiors example in general, that it
effects as much in the soul as the sight of Jacobs rods wrought in his
sheep which saw them. This effect of this imagination is foretold us by the
Apostle, he that sees thee using an Idolothious cross of Rome, will he not
begin to like the better both of Rome her self and of her idolatry, 1. Cor.
8.10
and of her idol of the cross by their example? When the concubine of Pope
Nicholas* had brought forth a child like a bear, his successor Martine, who
entertained the same concubine, commanded the arms of the Ioh. Crispin.
Chronolog. in Martin. 4.
Vrsini to be razed out, because the sight of a Bear in them had bred thorough
her imagination (as he supposed) this monster. So we must away with all the
arms and badges of popery, else the sight of them will bring forth popish
monsters again in the minds of the simple, in whose infected imagination,
what will not our example do?

#Sect. 5. The cross tempts alike to spiritual fornication as the presence
of a woman to bodily fornication.
Fifthly, the cross tempts to a concupiscence of a spiritual fornication, as
the scandalous presence of a woman (otherwise honest) tempts to the bodily.
Gualt. in Math. 5.
Spurina, perceaving that many women were tempted to lust at the view of his
beauty, mangled and deformed his face: which needed not, since he might have
forborne their company. or if he had any necessary business with them, the
fault was theirs not his. Indeed without necessary business, for him to have
presented him self before them, or for a beautiful woman now to present her
self before those who are in love with her, it is no less then a scandalum
datum, as the school Summa. Siluestri^s. in verb. scandal.
Divines determine. The Council. Turonic. 2 cap. 14.
Counsels also are of the same judgment, which forbid, that if a Bishop have
no wife of his own, that then no women shall be in his house upon this reason,
because in such case there is no necessary business for any woman in his house.
also they forbid unto Clerikes, Cap. 10.
Nullus deinceps Clericoru^ pro occasion necessitatis faciendae vestis aut
causa ordinandae domus extraneam mulierem in domo sua habere praesumat upon
this reason, because nihil opus est in domo serpentem includere pro vest. The
Decret pa 1. distinct. 23. cap. 3.
Canon law thinks the same, which prescribes to the Clerickes, Ne
spectaculis and pompis intersint: vt convivia publica fugiant: as also Viduarum
and Virginum frequentatione^. The Fathers walk in the same spirit, amongst
whom thus Hierome, Hieron. ad Neporian. and alibi vid distinct. 32 cap. 17.
Hospitiolum tuum aut raro aut nunquam mulierum pedes terant, quia non potest
toto cord cum Deo habitare, qui foeminarum accessibus co pulatur. Foemina
conscientiam secum paritur habitantis exurit nunquam de formis multerum
disputes: foeminae nomen tuum noverint, vultum nesciant: foeminam quam been
videris conversantem mente dilige, non corporali presentia. The practice of the
church has been answerable: for upon this cause in ancient time (as Durant. de
rit. lib. 2 ca 54. sect. vlt. Amala. de Ecclesiastic. offic. lib. 3. ca. 32
Amalarius testifies) men and women were severed in the church non solum ab
osculo carnali, sed etiam situ locali: ne Cyril. in prefat. Cateches.
salutis studium esset occasio perditionis. Thus Aagustine, August. ad psalm. 50.
M^lier long, libido prope. Further yet, The Turkeish Ioachim. Vadian.
women when they come abroad, cast a veil over their faces. a custom and
fashion used by them, because the light of nature tells them, that the scandal
which uses to come by sight it self, is by every convenient mean to be
prevented. As the custom of Turkey has made this veil of the women a mean
convenient to prevent scandal, so also the custom of the church of Beat.
Rhenan. in Tertul de veland. virgin.
Carthage made the veil of the Virgin when she came abroad to church a mean
convenient in that place for the very same purpose. Apply this to the cross we
may well: he is beautiful in the eyes of the popishly addicted he has no
necessary business that he should be presented to them: pretended necessity
such as was [pro veste] mentioned before will not dispense for the nourishing
of such a serpent, therefore the people must be severed from him and from the
Surplice. And the like after the example of Amalarius his days, and the cross
it self must be separated from them by every mean, whether generally
commanded such as the equity of destroying Canaans monuments does prescribe,
or particularly convenient such as the proportion of the Turkeish and Carthage
veil enioyneth to us. We are not ignorant we shall be hated as too pure and
peevish for this doctrine, but so at Carthage they were hated as too precise
who came with a veil into the church. Turtullian would take part with Tertul.
de Veland. Virgin.
us now, as then he took part with them. For these reasons of his, non de
integra conscientia venit studium placendi per decorem, quem naturaliter
invitatorem libidinis scimus ipsa concupiscentia non latendi non est pudica.
patitur aliquid quod virginis non est studium placendi viris. etc. may be thus
applied to the cross we think we cannot with a good conscience desire to
please the simple people with the sight of the crosses seemelines: which we
know by tried experience inciteth usually to a popish humor in the^: and our
serving of God suffers some thing as we suppose which is not chaste, when it
vnvayleth before their eyes a tempter to unchastity. To the same effect may
be applied what he has elsewhere, Tertul. de cult. Faeminar.
sancta foemina sit naturaliter speciosa, non adeo sit occasioni: certe si
fuerit non ignorare sed etiam impedi^e se debet. by proportion from whence
should we not stay and hinder the cross from that occasion which he gives of
superstition. But this is denied which though it be a matter of fact, and
therefore may be sufficiently proved by experience, yet let me reason with the
same Tertullian. When it was said to him, the stage plays were no accasions of
evil, he prooved it thus: Idem de spectacul.
Nemo ad voluptatem venit sine affectu: nemo affectum sine casibus suis
patitur: vbi voluptas ibi studium, per quod scilicet voluptas sapit. The same
reason may we use now. the popishly minded take more pleasure and delight in
the cross of Baptism, then the well instructed do, therefore they love it
with an other love, and bare a dear affection toward it of another kind,
which does not want his popish passions, how else could this delight of
theirs be savourie to them if they had not a months mind to that, wherein
they do delight so much? But what if the sign of the cross do not breed in
men the ill thoughts of popish concupiscence, does he not satisfy this
commandment, unless he fill the souls of men with thoughts of love
spiritual. This do all the ceremonies which God has ordained. who, because
he has not sanctified to so good a work this sign, therefore we may boldly
thus Idem ibid
conclude of it, An Christianus cogitabit de Deo positus illic vbi nihilest de
Deo? avertat Deus a suis, tantam voluptatis exitiosam Cupiditatem.

AMEN. S. D. C.
A Table of the contents of the several Chapters and sections of this second
part.
Of the Injustice of the Cross, Sect. 1. CAP. I. Objection answered: If our
Church were now in her first constitution, it were fit to remove the
Ceremonies: but being established, they are to be let alone. Sect. 2. Answer
to this objection: There is difficulty in the Removal of Ceremonies,
Therefore they are rather to be let alone. sect. 3. Answer to this objection,
The change of a Law brings dishonor of an Innovation, and extenuates the
laws authority. sect. 4. Second suit, that Ceremonies may neither be judged
good or indifferent in regard of circumstances being hurtful Sect. 5. 3. Suit,
that practiced commanding of Ceremonies be reformed for time to come, and the
church freed from diverse grievances: as that there be 2. Gods, etc. Sect. 6.
Diverse instances wherein the imposing and defense of Ceremonies, are found
grievous. sect. 7. The warrant of Ceremonies ought to be Reason and
Edification, neither Will nor Authority. Sect. 8. 4. Suite beseeches that
they may not be thought to offend against a law, who observe the intention of
it. Sect. 9. The Opposits in defense of Ceremonies, offend against ordinarium
jus. Sect. 10. Thirdly, Justice borrowed temper from Equanimitie which
dispenses on just cause. Fourthly, from forbearance, which passes by a
ceremonial transgression. Sect. 11. Imposition of Cerem. as now urged take
away Christian liberty. Sect 12. Ceremonies as now urged, take away liberty
of Conscience, sect. 13, Non-Conformitie is neither contempt nor scandal.
sect. 14. They that disobey or displease in unlawful ceremonies, do not
scandalize, sect. 15. The punishments inflicted for not conformity, are
greater then the faults committed, sect. 16. The Ius of the law of the land
whether comprehensive or extensive, does not justify our Opposites rigor
against us. sect. 17.
The Murder of the Cross, Sect. 1. CAHP. 6. THe soul murder of the Cross.
Sect. 2. Ceremonies may not be used in Relation, nor in Comparison, sect. 3.
Present Necessity pretended by the Opposites, makes not the Cross convenient,
sect. 4. Jnexpediencie of ceremo. makes not them guilty that only tolerate
them, confuted, sect 5. The second sort of Opposites confuted, affirming no
inconvenience in ceremonies nor any aptnes to breed scandal or offense, sect.
6. The Opposites confuted confessing hurt to follow of the ceremonies, yet
without their fault, sect. 7. The Cross is scandalum datum, notwithstanding
there be no intent to draw any sin thereby, sect. 8. The second exception of
elevating the scandal, confuted s^ct. 9. The third except on answered, viz.
That laws must not be changed for that a few are scandalized, sect. 10. The
Opposites op^^^ion thinking greater scandal would come upon the Removal,
confuted, sect. 11. A scandal of the Papists remooved, saying, If ceremonies
be remooved, it will harden them against us, and breed an hostile alienation of
their minds from our religion, sect. 12. The defense of tolleration of
ceremonies from Act. 15. confuted. sect. 13. The argument of tollerating
ceremonies drawn from Paul's putrefying, and the Jews observation of
Pentecost, confuted, sect. 14. The practice of the prime Church retayning Rites
to win them that were without, and to content them that were lately
converted, confuted, sect. 15. The second sort of men, whom ceremonies offend,
are Separistes, of whom more regard ought to be had then of a Turk or Jewe,
sect. 16. The third scandal given by ceremonies, is to the members within the
Church, sect. 18. The 4. scandal of the Cerem. is, that they offend all sorts
of men among the people sect. 18. The fifth scandal that ceremonies give, is
against the whole Church and Gospel which it professes, sect. 19. The third
murder of the cross is through homecontention, sect. 20. The objection of the
Opposites, that inferiors not yielding in small matters, be guilty of
contention against Superiors, answered. sect. 21. Ceremonies not only make the
contention of the church, but also nourish it: neither will the church be
quiet, so long as they continue. sect. 22. Conformity in ceremonies ought not
to hinder peace, though with diversity of ceremony, sect. 23. and 24. An
exact uniformity in ceremonies, has ever disquieted the church, and hindered
the growth of it, sect. 25.
The Adultery of the Cross. CHAP. VII. The wrong of the Cross. Sect. 1.
CAHP. VIII. Unjust manner of proceeding and ^th ex officio, etc. just causes of
complaint sect. 2. The violence of subscription justly complained of as most
unjust, sect. 3.
The Slander of the Cross, Sect. 1. CHAP. IX. Seekers of Reformation, neither
Donatistes, nor Anabaptists, with neither of whom they have any thing to do,
sect. 2. Defense of the Ministers against the imputation of schism, sheving
what schism is, sect. 3. Defense of the Ministers against the imputation of
sedition and faction, sect 4. Seekers of Reformation, no New fangelistes, no
haters of Antiquity, nor delighters in noviltie, etc. sect. 5. Aiust excuse
both in regard of the matter and manner of the cross, sect. 6. The second
exception proves that the cross is neither truly nor soundly ancient,
sect. 7. The second Exception against the Antiquity of the cross, sect. 8.
The third Exception against the Antiquity of cross sect. 9. The 4. Exception
against the Antiquity of the cross, proving the cross, now used, not to be
that the fathers used. sect. 10. A third Apology against the slander of
newfanglednes in denial of the Cross, sect. 11.
The Concupiscence of the Cross, Sect. 1. CHAP. X. Three replies against the
evidences of the crosses concupiscence, sect. 2. The second temptation the
Cross gives, is, that it makes men to think it is the same in our use with
the popish and superstitious cross sect. 3. The third temptation of the cross
is by renewing the spiritual fornication and popish delight which it bred in
former times of darkness, sect. 4. The cross tempts alike to spiritual
fornication, as the presence of a woman to bodily fornication, sect. 5.

An Alphabeticall Table of some of the principal matters contained in the
second part of this Treatise.
A.
ABsolute power ascribed to man in things indifferent, does equal him to God.
pa. 21 Abstinence from blood and strangled, is ceased, and the reason why, pa.
7. It was retained by the Apostles for a time only, during the weakness of the
Jews, pa. 69. Abstinence from flesh, though commanded for policy only and
not for religion, is to be condemned, as a kind of co^formitie to the
papists, pa. 34. Abstinence from washing for a week after Baptism is
abolished by the papists themselves, though it be as ancient as Tertullianus
time, pa. 120. Adherent Circumstances be in the churches disposition, so be not
inherent, pa. 76. The Administering of the communion to infants, is now disvsed,
though it be a rite as ancient as Cyprianus time, and had continued in the
Church above 600. years. pa. 120. In Africa men baptize them selves every
Epiphany* pa. 122.27. The Anointing of a Priest, in time of necessity, though
it was anciently used is a mere corruption, pa. 131. Antichrist gives more
liberty in his ceremonies, then our church does in hers, pa. 12. C. pa. 1. and
pa. 2. The Apostles, and the primitive church that followed them, added not one
Rite in the administration of any Sacrament, besides those mentioned in the
Evangelistes, pa. 124. Diverse traditions termed Apostolical, which rose long
after the Apostles times; pa. 126. An Appeal from the unmerciful Prelates,
cannot without great injustice, be denied to the poor Ministers, pa. 40.
B.
All Badges of popery, must be done away, pa. 142. Men Baptize themselves in
Africa every Epi-Phanie, page 122. The Bishopps being known parties against
the Ministers, are not competent Judges in their causes, pa. 40. their bowels
are very barren toward them, ibid. The Bishopps are held abroad, amongst
such as dare judge, little better then Adiaphoristes, and persecutours of their
brethren, page 110. Bishopps were at the first the beginners of this contention
about the ceremonies, pa. 89. Bishop Elmar joined Adiaphoristes and Satanistes
together, pa. 110. The Bishops please the papists well in their opposition to
the Ministers, pa. 112. they hold not now (as heretofore they were wont) their
authority over their brethren from the Prince or at his pleasure, but eve^
iure divino, which Q. Elizabeth would never endure, p. 115. they deprive,
unprison, and exco^m micate even their fellow laborers in the Gospel, when
they will not in every trifle condescend to their opinion, ibid. their
Authority it self is such as will divide and rent the church, as lamentable
experience shows, pa. 117. In Bohemia, and in Russia, the Communion is given
to Infantes, pa. 122. The Book of the Gospel is by some made a very Amulet,
pa. 131. Bowing to the name of Jesus, is condemned by the most learned of our
church, pa. 62. The Brazen serpent comes not near to the cross in
fruitfulnes of idolatry, pa. 61.
C.
The Ceremonies in controversy (to wit, the Cross and the Surplice) are
pretended to be small, and are avouched with very small proofs. and yet there
is no small ado about them, pa. 1.2. they are not to be accounted small, and
why, pa. 2. if they prevayle now, they will triumph more then ever before,
ibid. the superstition of them is exceeding great, and will be much greater if
they be any whit cou^tenanced, ibid. they were never established to continue,
but only tolerated for a season, page 3. they ought to be done away by the
Magistrate, ibid. they grow more and more intolerable on men that are less
able to brook them, pa. 4. their removal is looked for, and there is no
difficulty but in the continuing and perpetuating of them, ibid. they make
against faith and manners, and are not to be tolerated in a church, ibid. the
scandal and superstition of them, cannot die or be healed, so long as they live
and have rest, pa. 5. they have no means to maintain life, but the plasters,
drugges, and salves which the Bishops and their dependantes minister to them,
ibid. they are not only to be left languishing, but their breath is to be
stopped, as being humane presumptions, burdensome to the church, disvsed of al
churches of God save ours, in natute variable and vnco^maunded in the word, nay
contrary to the word, ibid. many parishes here at home have disvsed the^ with
the good co^tentement of the people, pa. 6. the doctrine would prosper better
if it were purged of these weeds, ibid. and pa. 68. they harden papists, p. 7.
their religious use is totally unlawful, page 9. they are popish knives
wherewith the simple hurt the^ selves, pa. 16. they inslave us to Antichrist, of
whom they are borrowed, and bring us under the yoke of bondage, p. 20. they
make our religion inferior to Antichrists, ibid. they impeach our christian
liberty diverse ways; pa. 21.22. they are the instruments of cruelty and
murder in Gods habitation, pa. 41. the sca^dal of the^ is not small, pa. 59.
they cannot be used in gods worship and service, but they must needs grow to be
worships in estimation, and parts of his service, p. 60. thereby we sca^dalize
the papists many ways, p. 62, they are a manifest blemish to our Church, page
67. they are sacrilegious, and draw in much mischief. pa. 68. they are
Idolothyrs, p. 69. they are as the bread of mourning, nay as gal and as
wormwood to our souls, pa. 70. they came not from heaven but from the land of
the uncircumcised, and are to be thrown away like a me^struous cloth, pa. 71.
they hinder the^ of the separat. from joining in communion and fellowship with
us, pa. 73. they make the Ministers unprofitable in the service of God and of
the church, pa. 74. they drive out good Preachers, and so are within the
censure of the Apostle, page 77. they are unwholesome to the soul, page 78.
they are Antichrists leaven, pa. 79. they are fetched from Rome, and are too
gross a feeding for them that be soule-sicke, ibid. they hurt the Gospel
many ways, ibid. they are a mean to reedifie popery, a root of bitterness to
defile many, and a stumpe of the popish tree remaining, to make it reflourish
again, page 80. they are the sinnewes of popery, they breed discord and
strife: they keep out and turn out Preachers, and are very scandalous in
diverse respects, ibid. they are trifling wares, and are to be cast into the
Sea, as being the occasion of much contention, pa. 90. they are the wares of
Rome, and no lawful traffic, ibid. they robb many a worthy and able minister,
pa. 101.102. they defame our Church before the papist. whose badges they are,
pa. 110. they disgrace us before our brethren of the reformed churches, ibid.
they stain the principal members of our church, making the very ancient vile,
ibid. when Ceremonies cease to be profitable, they are with out all sticking,
to be remooved, pa. 6. The Christians have of old bin slaundered to be
dangerous to the state, and all public evils have usually been thrown upon
their backs, page 119. Christian liberty must be maintained, pa. 7.
Circumstances make things sometimes convenient, and at other times
inconvenient, pa. 44 Conforming is a great deal more then tolerating, pa.
50.51.67. The Conformity of our Opposits edifieth the people to an unholy
kind of obedience, pa. 36 Conformity with Pagans and Idolaters, unlawful,
pa. 66. Conformity to our ceremonies controversed, is unlawful, pa. 70.
Contempt is not to be judged of, by a man's forbearing to do a thing commanded,
but by his other carriage, pa. 33.34. The Counsel of Laterane gives power to
the Pope to absolve subjects from their fidelity to their Princes, pa. 41.
The Cross is not a thing indifferent, pa. 8. it is an addition to Baptism.
pa. 19. it sells us to no little servitude, pa. 20. It is a meat unclean,
pa. 32. It has been a guide like Judas of all the wars which the crawling
frogs of the Dragons mouth have at any time raised in the world, pa. 41. It
has served for an Absolons sactifice to grace conspiracies and murtiners,
ibid. like a Saul it keeps the clothes of the executioners of the martyrs, p.
42. It has shed much precious blood which the earth will not cover, ibid. not
only the sign but the very name of it should be odious to us, ibid. It has
murdered many Ministers. ibid. and pa. 43. it is an instrument of offense, pa.
43. It is an harlot, and stirs up popish lust, page 56.140. it has been
more idolized the^ any of the popish images, p. 60. It is a grand idol of
popery, set up in the midst of our Church, whereas the very handmaides of it
should not be suffered so much as in the church porch or belfray, ibid. God
has accursed it to be a snare, and so it has prooved accordingly, pa. 61. the
soul of it being departed, what makes the dead carcass of it above ground
amongst us? ibid. It is a grand hallower and consecrator of all holy things and
actions, pa. 62. It is to be abolished as well as other Images, pa. 65. it must
be forborne to avoid al show of participatio^ with the papists in their
superstitious and idolatrous crossing, page 69. it is the mark of the Beast,
and Antic. enseigne, pa. 72. It gives witness of the faith of Antichrist, whose
mark it is, pa. 73. The people are exceedingly mad upon it, pa. 76.139. it is
a monument of idolatry, and a snare to infect the heart, pa. 77. It is a lay
man's book which deserves to be burnt ibid. it is an abominable Idol, an
Idolothyte. a monument of idolatry, p. 99. it has no better ground then many
other ceremo. now disvsed by the papists them selves, and has been worse
abused, pa. 121. It holds his antiquity by a very weak stringe, page 126. it
is no otherwise Apostolical, then the new porch which Herod erected was
Solomon's, or the shoe of the Gibeonite ancient, pa. 127. The age of it, ibid.
and 134. the first devisers of it have bin co^cealed as much as may be, pa.
128. It is a badge of our faith taken from the blackest and grossest heretics
that ever were, Q. pa. 1. It had a base beginning, and grew from a custom to a
ceremony, not only significant, but also superstitious Q. p. 2. it is not
only a provoker to idolatry, but an Idol. pa. 132. it is degenerated from
ancient use, and is not the same now which it was to the Fathers, ibid. It was
not known in the Apostles days, nor in the Primitive Church that next
succeeded them. page 133. it feeds lust habitual, and breeds lust actual.
Q. 4. p. 2. it is a Porter that lettch in, and a Purveiour that carries in the
Temptations, that do nourish men in Idolatry and superstition. ibid. it
increased by little and little. R. p. 1. it is a coal to heat, and a fire to
inflame lust. ibid. the aereall sign of it must be thrown out of the Church
upon the same grounds that other Images are R. p. 2. and pa. 139. it bears
the habit of a harlot, and sits in the very place where spiritual
fornication was wont of old to be committed. p. 140. it tempts like the
painting of a woman's face. ibi. it has in it the show of a wanton dalliance.
page 141. it rubbeth up the memory of Crosse-idolatry both by word and deed,
ibid. It breeds in the simple an imagination, or rather an image of a
superstitious crossing, page 142. It is beautiful in the eyes of such as are
popishly addicted, and has no necessary business to be presented to them, p.
143. The Cross whereon Christ died, was buried (as was Moses body) in an
unknown place, to prevent idolatry, pa. 133. the invention of it by Helene,
is a very counterfeit, ibid. There were no Crosses in England till Augustine
the Monk brought in his silver cross, pa. 133. It is as unfit to make a
Cross a memorial of Christ, as for a child to make much of the halter or the
gallowse wherewith his father was hanged, Q. 4. pa. 1. A Crozier staff in the
hands of the Bishop is required by law, as well as the cross in Baptism, pa.
109. Customs though never so ancient (if they be evil) are to be altered,
pa. 6.7.32.
D.
Dedication of churches, amongst the papists, is ridiculous, and nothing like
to that in Constantines time, pa. 132. The Disagreements of papists amongst
themselves, are greater then the differences amongst us, pa. 88. No
Dispensation is admittable against Gods law, pa. 48. Diversity of customs
spring from the diversity of men's wits, pa. 92. Doles at burialls are
defiled in popery, yet because the custom is ancient, and the use civil not
religious, they are suffered with us, p. 121 The Donatistes hold that the church
is pure without spot, and without wrinkle in this life, pa. 113. they hold that
the Magistrate may not compel to godliness, nor punish heretics, ibid. they
separated from their communion, all that were not of their opinion, eve^ in the
least points, pa. 115.
E.
Easter-dayes observation bred much controversy in the church, page 82. The
Eldership neither has not challenges to have any power to depose Princes, as
it is impudently and wickedly slau^dered by some, p. 114 The Elevation amongst
the papists is absurdly defended by the ancient showing of the bread and of
the cup, pa. 132. No Episcopal authority binds any Minister without the
warrant of the word, pa. 86. The Eucharist is not necessary to infants,
neither is it now administered unto them, although that custom continued in
the church about 600. years, pa. 121. The Exorcisme of Baptism is disvsed
though in former times it has been universally received, pa. 131.
F.
Fasting was equal and alike at all times in the primitive church, pa. 126.
The custom of not Fasting between Easter and Whitsontide is disvsed, though
ancient, pa. 120. The aucient Fathers had their errors, page 122. we are less
tied to them in ceremonies the^ in doctrine, and to their practice less then
to their judgment, ibid. The Fathers advaunced the cross upon a very slender
ground, Q. p. 2. they cannot be justified in their speeches concerning it,
ibid. they are censured by our Writers for ascribing to it power against the
Devil, pa. 131. Feasts at the sepulchers of the dead were altered, though
very ancient, pa. 7. Feaste-dayes of Saints are worthy to be abolished, and
why, page 34. The Forehead of a christian man must not in Baptism be defiled
with any sign devised by man, pa. 100. The Formalistes break more and far
more profitable Canons, then the silenced ministers, pa. 117.118. they take
shaftes out of the quiver of the papists and the Adiaphoristes, to throw them
at their fellows; which can not hurt but with the venime wherewith the enemy
himself has dressed them, pa. 120.
G.
Gedeons Ephod not to be suffered for fear of future danger, pa. 79.
H.
Our Hatred against superstitious ceremonies must be showed in outward
appearance, pa. 93. In Hieromes time the church drew near to her lees, and the
burthensomnes of the Ceremonies made the estate of the christians worse the^
the state of the Jews, pa. 128. Holy days were in ancient times left to men's
liberty, pa. 91. Holy water banished out of the church porch for the holiness
that was put in it, pa. 60. Our Homilies condemn Images in churches upon
diverse good grounds, and so by consequent our ceremonies, pa. 137. R. p. 1.
Honey and milk in Baptism, though they be as ancient as Tertullians time, are
abolished by the papists themselves, pa. 120. The Hugonotes were straungely
transformed in France by the Friars, who made the people believe they were
monsters with Asses cares, and swines faces, and the like, so are the silenced
Ministers amongst us dealt withal at this day by their Opposites, page 111.
Humane laws bind not the Conscience, pa. 21.31. the observation of them is
left free to us out of the case of contempt and scandal* pa. 31. The Hussites
that conformed in Boheme, esteemed better of the papists, their of their
sincere brethren, page 120.
I.
All Idolatrous Rites and Ceremonies are to be rooted out, pa. 66. Idolatry
cannot possible be separated from Church-Images, but is an inseparable accident
to them, pa. 138. Jewels borrowed from Egypt proved at last matter for the
making of a calfe, pa. 19. The Jews in Rome and in Franckforde, are counted
better then protestants, page 119. The Jewish ceremonies were not presently to
be left, but were to stay till the Gospel was preached, and the Jews
instructed to a leaving of them, pa. 69. The time of their funeral was the
time of the Temples destruction, after which they might not be used, ibid. and
page 71. Images in Churches offend the godly, and confirm the wicked in their
impiety, pa. 73. Jmages had a base beginning, Q. p. 2. they are to be put out
of the church, Q. p. 2. and R. p. 1. they are harlots, and temptations to
Idolatry, R. p. 1. they came into churches by degrees, ibid. they are devises
of man brought in through blind zeal and devotion, ibid. they are dangerous,
even to them that be most wise, page 139. their danger is unavoidable, page
140. The Imperfection of predecessors is by the successors to be perfected,
pa. 3. That which is Inexpedient and Jnconvenient, is sinful, page 44.
Inexpediencie is of two sorts, ibidem. Inferiors have liberty to examine the
laws and constitutions of their Superiors, page 11. The Israelites are a
plain president of man's pronenes to Idolatry and superstition, pa. 76.
K.
The Kings of Judah were not blessed of God, but when they purged the land of
Jury from all ceremonies not prescribed by Moses law, page 4. Kings have not
an unlimited and Pope-like Authority, pa. 113. 114. When Kings command that
which is good, Christ him self commands in them, pa. 114, Kings owe the
same reverence and obedience to the Word and Sacraments, that every private
man does, pa. 114. The custom of not Kneeling in prayer, between Easter and
Whitsontide, is disvsed, though it be very ancient, pa. 120.
L.
The Law of the land punishes not a bare omission of any part of the service
book, but only an obstinate kind of refusal of the form thereof, joined with
contempt, pa. 39. 109. To Leave Antiquity upon causes justifiable, was never
deemed unlawful, pa. 120. Our Leiturgie is more pressed then the book of God it
self: and the prayers thereof are so strictly observed, as that they are in a
manner turned into a Charm, pa. 19. Lighting of tapers at the monumentes of
Martyrs, forbidden by a Council, pa. 78.
M.
The Magistrate must wholly abolish popery, pa. 2. The Magistrates
commandment does not take away from the Ceremonies, the real hurt and
scandal of them, but does rather much increase it, pa. 26. The Magistrate
has no power to make Ceremonies lawful to be used, so long as they remain
scandalous and hurtful, ibid. The Magistrate, and the Minister be the Nurses
of Gods people, pa. 54. The godly Magistrate must drive away al Idols vnd
Images out of churches, R. p. 1. Malicious persons are not to be scandalized by
our doing of any thing that is unnecessary, pa. 57. 63. The Ministers which
conform not, are not refractarie, but ready to obey in all things, so far
forth as they may with a good conscience, pap. 34.35. they are deprived for
disvsing Rites which all Churches (except our own) have banished, page 39.
they are called from preaching of the Gospel by the violence and injustice of
the Prelates, page 48. they can no more be accused for troubling the Land,
then might Elias, or the Angel, page 81. their Apology, ibid. and pa. 82. 83.
etc. and 117.118. they are unjustly thrust from their Ministry, and from
their flocks, page 103. they are as far from the judgment and practice of
Donatistes and Anabaptists, as their accusers, page 113. Ministers, iure
divino, are all equal, and succeed the Apostles all alike, from whom they
receive like power, not only for preaching, but for binding and loosing, pa.
101. and 86. Ministering the Communion to Infantes, was in former times
universally observed as well as the cross, pa. 131. Mixture and medly of
ceremonies is no way to make peace, pa. 98. Monachisme, is falsely fathered
upon Elias, Elishah, John Baptist, and the Apostles, page 126.
N.
Names of Protestants and Puritanes, are names savouring of pernicious debate
and division, pa. 111. The Nativitie of our Lord, was about the point of the
Autumnall Equinoctial, pa. 121. Necessity does sometimes so alter a fact, as
that it takes away from it all reason of sinning, pa. 49. Necessity in rites
was never heard of in the church, till Antichrist began to usurp over the
liberty of christian men. pa. 91. Non-residents, pompous lords, and idle
ministers, are unprofitable to Gods church, page 83.
O.
The Occasion even of a passive scandal, must be removed by the Magistrate,
and disvsed by the Ministers, especially if it be a monument of Idolatry, that
has been, is, or is likely to be abused superstitiouslie, pa. 34. All
Occasions of contentions, which may lawfully be taken away, are to be
remooved, page 89. He that offends is faid to destroy, because he does that
which is apt to destroy, and of which destruction would ensue, were not men by
the Lord preserved, which is no thanks to him that gweth scandal, pa. 43.
Bare Omission of any thing commanded by the Magistrate, is no contempt, page
32. The Oath ex officio is against the law of nature, the Civil and the Canon
Law, page 104. It makes a breach upon the order which God has settled and
appointed in his providence, ibidem. It fights directly against Gods word,
page 105. It makes way to the Spanish Inquisition, and offends against the
contrary justice practiced of old, ibidem. It pervertech the duty of a
righteous Oath, and crosses the law and justice of all nations, times, and
Countries, ibid. It is against the law of this land, pa. 107. the Oath, to
which the Adulteress was put in Moses law, makes nothing for it, pa. 106.
Oil was heretofore as universally used as the cross, pa. 131.
P.
Pagans Rites, continued in the church, corrupt the christians doctrine, and
confirm the Pagans in their idolatry, pa. 73. The Papist must be healed like
the melancholic man, pa. 71. The Papist is the right Puritan, and the reasons
why, pa. 112. The Patrones of the ceremonies are negligent in diverse regardes,
pa. 55. Paul, though he circumcised Timothy, refused to circumcise Titus,
because he saw it would breed scandal, pa. 45. Paul was necessarily to use
the Ceremonies of the Jews to their edification, till such time as the
preaching of the Gospel had made their abolition manifest, pa. 46. Paul's
conformity in the Temple was held of diverse to have been not warrantable, pa.
70. yet our case and his are very different, p. 71. 72. The Pax of the papists
is very absurdly defended by the ancient kiss of the primitive church, pa.
132. Every show of Popery, is to be avoided, p. 63. Popish ceremonies far
worse then Jewish, pa. 70. Popish Rites are to be detested together with their
doctrine, pa. 93. The Practice of our Church induces an adoring of man, as if
he were God, or at least, a servitude to him, pa. 21. Prayer to Saints had a
base beginning, Q. p. z The Prelates sin in pressing the cerem. p. 77 The
Priests going up to the Communion table, to say some of the prayers, is
superstitious, page 34. The Princes authority is not infinite, but limited to
the rules of the scripture, pa. 10. 113. 114 Private circumstances have power
to make evil the private use of a thing, as well as general ones have power
to make the whole kind of it evil, pa. 15. The nickname of Puritan was
first brought up by the papists, of purpose, to make our religion odious, pa.
111. It serves for a color in every papists and Atheistes mouths, to rail
at Religion, and all honesty, under the name of Puritanisme, ibid. The
Puritanes are slaundered to be worse then papists, and more dangerous to be
tolerated in a common wealth: as if Christ Jesus were worse then Barrabas, page
119. Nothing is held good in any writer, or in any Church, that makes for
them, Q. 4. pa. 1. Puritanes are true Protestants, and they that be as badd as
papists be in some forte as bad as Turks, ibid. The nickname of Puritan,
while it staundreth us, it commends us, pa. 113.
R.
Receiving of the Lords Supper in time of meat, though it be as ancient as
Tertullians time, is abolished by the papists them selves; pa. 120. The first
Reconciliation between the papists and a church reformed, spedde very ill,
page 97. Reconciliation was never obtained by mixtures, but strife has always
insued, ibid. Reducing of popish ceremonies, is very scandalous, pa. 46.
Nothing more contrary to Religion, then old popish fashions, pa. 4. Resolution
in ceremonies, is no easy matter, there being commonly more controversy about
them, then about matters of faith, pa. 75. Rites are not to be multiplied or
increased, inasmuch as the Son of God has ordained sufficiently, or rather
perfectly. pa. 124. Rome the throne of Satan, and seat of Antichrist, the
Sodom and Egypt of our times, page 96. Rome is become an Egypt for spiritual,
and a Sodom for bodily fornication, pa. 99. Rome the stepmother of piety, pa.
112. Rome her self has suffered her Breviaries to be reformed, pa. 4. Some
Rubrickes and sentences in the Service Book cannot be salved, but by some
shifting gloss, which swarveth from the intent of the Book, and serves only
for a figge-leafe to cover the nakedness of it, pa. 51.
S.
Salt and spitle are the Crosses fellows in Baptism, pa. 8. they were
heretofore universal as well as the cross, page 131. The least Scandal is a
great sin, page 59. A Scandal is not prevented in a thing unnecessary,
unless for the abuses sake it be removed, as the brazen Serpent was, page 64.
The Scandal is not small which is given to the Separatistes by the slovenly
performance of Gods service by dumb dogs and sca^dalous ministers, with
Idolatrous attire, and Idolles them selves, pa. 74. He is a Schismatike which
breaks the unity of the church, as he is seditious that disturbeth the
peace of it, page 116. Our Service book is not that book of King Edw. to
which the law binds us, pa. 39. 109. Spiritual and carnal fornication go
vsuall^e together, pa. 99. A strange thing it is to see in one and the same
Prison, a papist committed for not co^forming him self to England, and an
Anti-papist (to wit a Preacher) punished for not conforming him self to Rome,
pa. 1. Subscription, like an Usher, steppeth in, and cries room for the
ceremonies, page 82. Subscription and Conformity be the evil spirits that
have divided Sichem, pa. 82. they are the make-bates of our church, pa. 90. The
Subscription required of the Ministers, is directly against the laws of the
land, p. 108. Suffering is as sure a sign of subjection, as obaying, pa. 33.
The Surplice and Coape are as bad as the idolatrous garments of the Chemarims,
pa. 82.
T.
Tertullian was a man very infamous after his fall, Q p. 1. Things of them
selves good may by reason of circumstances, become evil, pa. 8. 9. 15. Things
indifferent are to be left to the discretion of every man, pa. 15. the
observation of them i^ free, so that respect be had to the glory of God, and
the edification of out brethren, ^bid. Tolerating is only a permission of
theirs, void of doing and of approving which they do, page 50. It is an
involuntarie permission with grief and lamentation, pa. 67. A Transgression in
an aereall Cross, deserves but an aereall punishment, p. 37. Trin-immersion
was in Cyprianus time a tradition and order of the church yet does he allow
the omitting of it, and the using of Aspersion. C. p. 2. It is abolished by the
papists them selves, pa. 120. 132. Turkish women come not abroad but with a
veil over their faces, pa. 143.
V.
Valentinus, or rather the Devil in him, begat the cross; Montanus first
gave it credit amongst christians for religious use in the church, and the
common people bred it up, Q. p. 1. Variety of ceremonies no way impeacheth the
unity of faith, which may stand in diversity of Rites, pa. 91. 92. 94. 95.
The Virgins of Carthage wore vayles when they came abroad to church, pa. 143.
Uniformity in foreign Rites unlawful, p. 96. Uniformity to popish
ceremonies, whether in whole or in part, has continually (like a fury stepped
out of hell) set all on a flame and fiery combustion, pa. 97.
W.
The round Wafers of the papists are very ridiculously defended by the round
oblations of bread in the old church, pa. 132. There is Weakness in the
strongest during this lif^, and the reason why, pa. 75.
Y.
Yielding in popish ceremonies, is very dangerous, it is an evil example to
posterity: it confirms papists in their impiety: it offends our weak
brethren, etc. pa. 46. We may not Yield one iott in Gods matters, pa. 86. 87.
Z.
Zeal has her veil of holiness taken from her, and walks at this day
disguised (as it were) under an harlots habit, pa. 111.
Faults escaped in the printing of the second part.
PAge. 2. l. 4^. read abqui praestare^ pa. 8. l. ^9. delights and l. 21.
veriu^ pa. 6. l. 36. levitie pa. 10. l. 9. media p. 13. l. 3. renew and l. 15.
nutatque and p. 26. l. 12. and 16. Equanimitie p. 19. l. 27. and ^^a^some of p.
20. l. 14. to our and l. ^4. He^ter pa. (...), yes, by the etc. p. 22. l. 21.
liberate and l. 48. does it p. 35. l. 31. donum p. ^^. l. 9. ora^. and. l. 36.
ground and l. 39. fra^de p. 38. l. 48. the same Papists p. ^^. l. 28. want p.
40. l. 39. vere p. 41. l. 40. 180. p. 42. l. 12. ^onja^^ p. 45. l. 7. minus
rectum p. 46. l. 27. ^evi^e. p. 47. l. 18. rece^^^^ p. 51. l. 4. existinab^^
and l. 42. (...) p. 53. l. 7. parallel p. 54. l. 47. (...) l. 50 detotal^ p. 97.
l. 33. (...) p. 58. l. 1 condemned without ^uppo^^ante p. 59 (...) p. 6^. l. 2
(...) 62. l. 2. char^^ (...) p. 64. l. 7. we ill (...) p. 65. l. 14. (...) l.
36. (...) p. 70. l. (...) and l. 39. Jews p. 75. l. 2. qui^ p. 75. l. 35.
^^iam^^ (...) p. 78. l. 9. (...) pa. ^^. l. 2^. put ou^ (...) l. ^^ ditis^^^^
p. 89. l. ^^ otherwise they and l. 42. con^^^^ed p. ^0. l. 5. to men (...) l.
10. (...) p. 91. l. 10. (...) and. (...) p. 93. (...) and l. 14. habit^^ and l.
32. wore and l. ^7. combineth p. 94. l. 32. celebrent p. 95. l. 4. Germans p
96. l. 19. Ecclesia. p. 9^. l. ^. Monothelits and l. 16. loves p 99 l. 11.
spiritual tyranny p. 101 l. 25. put out who and l. vlt. read, laid p. 103.
l. 38. shecle p. 105. l. 20. be judged p 106. l. 4. put out in and l. 42 read
expedient p. 107. l. 33. fight p. 108. l. 10. offered and l. 13. comites and l.
16. proconsulis p. 1^9. l 2 without obstinacy p. 10 l. 40 purple and l vlt.
innote scere p. ^11. l. 6. slanders and l. 11. were and l 44 as far forth p
114. l. 34. a Cush p. 115. l 13. nego. p. 116. l. 27. Schismaticum and l. 44.
diversum and l. 48. objecta p. 117. l. 1. Sacramento p. 120 l 40. with the
Cross p. 121. l. 21. cruce and l. 47. for one or two p. 124. to the letter (r)
ad in the margin Pet. Martyr is. ^. Reg. 2. and l. 30 the Council p. 125. l.
7. inficianti p. 126. l. 4. confirm and in the margin l. 15. ad Lyc. p. 128.
l. 29. See then and l. 34. hactenus quidam Q. pa. 121. l. 50. received Q. p.
122. l. ^. a me^ne and l. 35. ecclesia and l. 48. speech page 131. l. 40.
labefactetur and l. 44. is as very p. 134. l. penult. Petrobusiani Q. p. 127.
l. 29. hot R. p. 138. l. 2. fifth p. 139. l. 9. have gone p. 149. l. is
convenient p. 141. l. 8. and 9. securus and l. 37. plays p. 142. l. 16.
vet^^tus p. 143. l. 16. pariter p. 144. l. 1. occasions and l. 10. yet does.

If any other thing not here observed, has escaped; I would pray thee (gentle
Reader) to pardon it, especially, literal faults, many of which being of no
great moment, I have purposely omitted.

FINIS.

